There is much talk of Fra Paolo sifting about the church and square,
where the gathering of the people shows a sprinkling of red-robed
senators; for the Padre Maestro Paolo, which is his title since he has
been Consultore to the Republic, is a great man now, with a greatness
that means something to the populace, to whom letters and sciences are
nothings. But the Consultore is the friend of Venice; he is _their_
friend--coming each day to talk to the people. "It is not true that
great trouble has come upon Venice, for Fra Paolo makes it all quite
plain, and he knows everything," they say; "our padre in San Marcuolo is
like a bimbo to him! The Jesuit Fathers went too soon, and might have
spared themselves the burning of their papers and their treasure. Santa
Maria!--what is it they are saying about Fra Paolo finding the die for
making money that the _padri_ left behind? What is a 'die,' Luigi? If
thou hadst had the sense to bring thy boat to clear away the rubbish,
instead of thinking there are only fish in the world, thou mightest have
had the luck to find it; it must be better than working lace bobbins all
the week for a handful of _soldi_ that wouldn't buy one macaroni!"

"Peace, then, with thy babble!"

"See, then, the holy water is quite safe; I saw our padre cross himself
by that first basin. Thou hast done well,--_hein_ Luigi,--to bring me
from Burano, if there are _no_ fish to-morrow at the Ave Maria; for now
we can sleep in peace! They told such tales of I Gesuiti, one thought
the devils were having a holiday--Santa Maria!"

"The women are worse for chattering," Luigi retorts, with a forcible
imprecation. "Here cometh the Consultore--hold thy tongue."

"No, no, Luigi; it is only a frate from the Servi; Fra Paolo is a great
man, with a robe like the Serenissimo; he might wear a crown if he
liked! Ah, to be great like that!"

But Fra Paolo and his secretary wore the grave garb of their order, to
the great disappointment of the younger women, who had been attracted by
the expectation of some pomp.

"Word hath reached the Contarini secretly from Rome," said one senator
to another, as the Consultore passed them, "that they have found
themselves a new diversion before the palace of the Vatican, and that
some of our great ones here are burned in effigy to instruct the
populace. A pile of Fra Paolo's writings doth light the funeral pyre;
and all that he hath written or _may hereafter write_ is placed upon the
Index."

"_Davvero_! his words would make me wrathful if I held the views of his
Holiness, who may well fear the incontrovertibility of his wit. But our
Consultore looketh a simple man to have been shown such honor!"

"He beareth honors bravely," the other answered, with due appreciation
of the humor; "but lately, when the master Galileo was before the Senate
with his telescope, he had a pretty tale of Gian Penelli and Ghetaldo,
wherewith in Padua Fra Paolo hath won the title of 'the miracle of the
century.'"

"I heard it not; some commission held me at the arsenal; San Marco be
thanked that it is over!"

"Ebbene, old Penelli--gouty so that he can scarce move--hath a visit
from our great mathematician Ghetaldo, who findeth with our magnificent
patron of letters a friar to whom Penelli showeth such honor--limping to
the door with him, as if he were a prince--that Ghetaldo, wrathful at
this foolish waste over a friar, asketh his name with scorn. And is not
better pleased when Penelli telleth that Fra Paolo is the 'miracle of
the age in every science.' 'So, I will prove it,' saith Penelli, 'for
verily the world knoweth the great Ghetaldo for a mathematician! Come,
then, with problems the most difficult thou canst prepare, on a day it
may please thee to name, and meet Fra Paolo at my table, without warning
to him.' _Ecco_! Penelli is subtle; great satisfaction and much labor on
the part of our mathematician. Enter Fra Paolo,--simple,
unadvised,--solves the propositions at a hearing. 'Miraculous!' cries
the superb Ghetaldo, gentle as a lamb! A friendship for life, and Fra
Paolo is the teacher! But it is more wonderful to hear the tales of how
he preacheth to the people here, in the Gesuiti. Let us follow, for he
giveth them not many minutes, for fear of wearying them. We need lift
our mantles high, for the pavement is like a market garden of Mazzorbo,
with broken bits from the women's baskets--Faugh!"

The splendid senators seldom mingled in such a crowd, except at guarded
distances, to make a pageant for it; it was picturesque, shabby,
malodorous, composed chiefly of young women with bright-eyed babies and
baskets emitting unctuous savors of _frittola_ and garlic; now and then
an old peasant who could not be tranquil until she had heard Fra Paolo
speak was escorted by a rebellious grandson, bribed to quiet by the
promise of a _soldo_ for his little game of chance; occasionally a man,
impatient to have done with it all and get out on the canal again, moved
restlessly from place to place; only here and there the dim light showed
a face pathetic in its questioning, to whom the answer meant life or
death.

"What hath a man of such rare powers and learning to do with these
simple ones--a man whose time is precious to the State?"

The noble senators withdrew a little from the crowd to watch the scene,
as they put the question to each other; their servants brought them
chairs within the shadow of a column.

They did not know that few are great enough in an age of superstition to
hold a conscience uncontrolled by traditions, and a primitive faith
simple as a child's, with the tenacity of a strong man; there had been
nothing in his labors at the Senate to call forth this most sacred side
of his reserved nature, and they did not understand that it was to this
he owed much of the marvelous poise of will and judgment which kept him
unspoiled in spite of intellectual gifts that would have ruined him
without his absolute dependence on the One Supreme. But on this sacred
side alone was there any entrance to his emotions.

Fra Paolo was not speaking from the pulpit; he stood beside a table that
had been placed in the nave, and the people gathered close about him, as
children near a father, while he opened a great vellum-bound volume with
massive golden clasps, which his secretary had brought from the library
of the Servi.

"Come nearer," he called to them simply, beckoning with his hand, "so
that all may hear; put the old people and the little ones nearest."

He looked around him, not smiling, but very quiet and patient, as if he
were waiting for the slight confusion to subside; for at first they
pushed each other rudely to get closer.

"There is room for all," he said, "in God's house;" and as he looked
into their faces each felt that it was a word to him, and held his
breath to listen--which suddenly seemed quite easy! The smaller children
nestled contentedly on their mothers' arms, munching some dainty brought
to keep them quiet, and fascinated by the low, clear voice, watched with
round, solemn eyes to see if he would smile; while two or three who were
tall enough to reach just over the edge of the table steadied themselves
by clutching it with their chubby hands, dropping their hold of their
mothers' mantles--for the pages were full of pretty colors, and the
voice of the padre was like a lullaby to keep them still, and they were
not afraid--at all.

Fra Paolo never gave the people many words, but sometimes they were
strong and beautiful, like an old poem, and in their own Venetian--not
in the Latin which had been made for the great ones.

"It was a wonderful book, written long ago," he told them; "before the
Bishop of Altinum fled with his people to Torcello and built the old
Duomo; before Venice began to be."

Many of them did not know there was _anything_ so old as that! They
looked at each other and began to think.

"And it was written for the comfort of every one who loveth God, our
Father, whatever his troubles may be. See what is written here for any
who fear that the consolations of our holy religion shall be taken away.
For that is what you fear?"

They looked at each other, hesitating. "Si, si--yes--" timidly. "No,
no," more bravely.

Fra Paolo smiled.

"No!" they said, distinctly.

"If any of you are afraid," Fra Paolo said, looking full into their
faces as they pressed nearer, "because the fathers of this church have
gone away and left you, there are words in this old book--written long
ago, before there was any Venice--to condemn those who would close the
churches. 'Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of
my pasture,' saith the Lord. 'Behold, I will visit upon them the evil of
their doings, saith the Lord.' 'Where is the flock that was given thee,
thy beautiful flock?'"

"And here are some words that are written for you--whom they have
deserted. 'Thus saith the Lord: again there shall be heard in this
place, _which ye say shall be desolate_, the voice of joy and the voice
of gladness; the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; and
of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the
Lord.' It is all very simple. Love God and pray to him, and be faithful
in your duty. And he will keep you happy and safe from harm."

The ringing treble of children's voices sounded through the open door of
the sacristy and distracted the attention of the congregation, who
turned to watch the choristers as they came in sight, by twos and twos,
chanting the canticle, "Praise the Lord of Hosts; for the Lord is good;
for His mercy endureth forever!"

While Fra Paolo slipped away unnoticed.


XXI

So life went on, and those who looked to see the people fail and falter
under this burden which the rebellion of their rulers had brought upon
them saw them, with unshaken confidence, still loyally upholding the
banner of Saint Mark. Preparations for war--marshaling of soldiers,
building of galleys, increased activities at the arsenal--enlarged the
industries and added a judicious vivacity to the life of the people.

There was no war declared; but it was a time when border-lands should be
looked to and bravery encouraged and the martial spirit developed; and
the ever politic Senate tickled the fancy of its pleasure-loving people
with the pomp of a fête, on the day when the newly created
general-in-chief of the armies of the Republic assembled, with fanfare
of trumpets and roaring of cannon, his splendidly appointed corps in the
Piazza, the people thronging the arcades, crowding the windows and
balconies, waving and shouting, as the stately escort of three hundred
nobles, in crimson robes, led the way to San Marco for solemn
dedication. And here, like a knight vowed to holiest service, the
general knelt before the altar, while the Patriarch blessed his sword.
"In defense of Venice and the right," with a memory of the old
battle-cry of the Republic.

  "Non nobis, Domine--sed tibi gloria!"

And the people, accepting as a favor the pageant which had been
cunningly devised to impress them, followed, thronging, up the giant
stairway, into the halls of the Council Chamber, into the stately
presence of the Serenissimo and the Signoria, to hear their latest
magnate profess his gratitude for the honor of his investiture and the
magnificence of his outfit, with solemn oaths of loyalty.

There was no war, though talk of it had little truce in those days; but
the cardinal nephews were busy in Ferrara and Ancona with the marshaling
of troops, and four of the princes of the Church had been appointed by
the Holy Father--vice-regent of the Prince of Peace--to superintend his
military operations and prepare his army of forty thousand infantry and
four thousand cavalry! Thus, in Venice, the spectacle of a
general-in-chief, with his splendid accoutrements, was timely and
inspiriting.

Meanwhile, in the palazzo Giustiniani the days dragged wearily, and knew
no sunshine; the Senator Marcantonio had been by special favor excused
from attendance in the Council Chamber; in his mind Venice was no longer
regnant; one thought absorbed him wholly through all that miserable
time--he had but one hope--everything centred in Marina.

When they had undressed her to apply restoratives a small, rough
crucifix had been taken from the folds of her robe near her heart; it
had belonged to Santa Beata Tagliapietra,--that devoted daughter of the
Church,--and the Lady Beata herself had given the precious heirloom out
of the treasures of the chapel of their house to her beloved Lady
Marina. Possibly she reflected, with a shudder, as she laid the relic on
the altar of the oratory of the palazzo Giustiniani, that the
remembrance of the constant dangers of Santa Beata had incited the Lady
Marina thus to peril her life. Of the long nights of vigil on the floor
of the oratory and of many other austerities which had filled those last
sad days since the quarrel with Rome had begun, the Lady Beata was
forced to give faithful account to the physicians who were summoned in
immediate consultation to the bedchamber of the Lady Marina. These
practices and the horror upon which she had dwelt ceaselessly would
sufficiently account for her condition, said the learned Professor
Santorio; and if she could but forget it there might be hope; meanwhile,
let her memory lie dormant--at present nothing must be done to rouse
her.

Perhaps already she had forgotten it; for the shock had been great and
life was at a very low ebb; had all memory gone from her of her life and
love? They thought she knew them, but she expressed no wish; she
scarcely spoke; lying listless and white under the heavy canopy of the
great carved bedstead, which had become the centre of every hope in
those two palaces on the Canal Grande, while the absorbing life of the
Ducal Palace, so little distant, was for Marcantonio as though it did
not exist. In that time of waiting--he knew not how long it was nor
what was passing--life was a great void to him, echoing with one
agonized hope; time had no existence, except as an indefinite point when
Marina should come back to him with her soul and heart in her eyes once
more.

He had gathered the few books from her oratory and boudoir, and at
intervals when he could control his thought he pored over them,
treasuring every faint pencil-line, every sentence blotted by tears, as
an indication of having specially occupied her. Now that he could no
longer discuss these moods, how eagerly he sought for the light she
would so gladly have given him in those past, happier days!

In vain he asked of the Lady Beata whether they had discussed these
thoughts together--whether Fra Francesco had brought her the little worn
volumes.

"My lord, I know not," she answered coldly, resolved in her own heart to
tell him nothing that he did not already know, since only now it had
pleased him to concern himself with that religious attitude which was
costing Marina so dearly. For the whole strength of the love she would
once have yielded him for the asking, the Lady Beata now lavished upon
Marina, in jealous devotion.

But he could not be angry with Fra Francesco, who had only been faithful
in sharing his belief with her, while he, her husband, had refused to
help her. "My God!" he groaned; "why are we blind until the anguish
comes!"

As he drearily paced the stately chambers--so empty without Marina--what
would he not have given to hear her voice again repeat those eager
questions he had been so willing to repress! How could it ever have
vexed him that she should wish to understand the question that was
occupying Venice! But now he remembered having grown less and less
patient with her as she had returned to this theme, until, in
self-defense, she had said with gentle dignity, yet half-surprised at
his irritation:

"Marco, have a little patience with me. Remember that our young nobles
are trained in knowledge of these laws of Venice from quite early
boyhood."

"It is part training, if thou wilt," he had answered lightly; "or in
these questions women are stupid--I know not. But these matters concern
them not." And after that, he remembered now with shame, she had
troubled him no more, and he had felt it a relief; for during the few
discussions they had had together he had been aware that they approached
the question from a radically different point of view. He had never
taken the trouble to comprehend her ground nor to give her reasons for
his own; he had simply made assertions, with a sense of irritation that
any repetition should be called for in a matter quite out of a woman's
province; for the women of Venice had no part in that salon influence on
politics which was ascribed to their sisters of France, and her attempts
to gain understanding for a personal judgment had chafed him like an
interference in his own special field. He, with his subtly trained
intellect and legal knowledge, could so easily have convinced her, he
told himself remorsefully; but he had not taken the trouble even to look
through her lens, while she had been so eager to understand his point of
view--and only that she might reach the truth!

Now he had much time to understand it all! He recalled a strange, hurt
look when her questions had ceased, but it had not troubled him then;
she would forget it,--would understand that he preferred to talk about
other things,--he had said to himself, and he had been careful in
gracious little ways to show her that he was not displeased. And she had
been wise and had vexed him no more; there had been no arguments on this
or any other theme. And then the days of strain had come and the labors
of the Council had absorbed him. Now he saw that she had been too proud
and strong to subject herself to repeated insinuations of inferiority of
understanding, as she had been too loving and dutiful to prolong the
contest. And so--he groaned aloud as his mistake revealed itself to him
in those long, unhappy hours--he had lost the dear opportunity of
leading her aright; for he contemplated but one possible issue of such
an attempt on his part; he had scorned her entreaty when she came to him
for understanding of a mystery that was killing her, and he had driven
her to take up the study alone, with the help of her father confessor,
who knew but one side of the vexed question, and that _not_ the side of
Venice!

He was sure that it was a matter of conscience and not of contest with
Marina, therefore she _must_ know; he should have realized that! How had
Fra Francesco met her questions? Had he told her it was a matter beyond
the comprehension of women? Or had he been patient with her difficulties
and solved them with terrible positiveness? Was it he who had brought
her these manuals on "Fasts and Penances," "The Use and Nature of the
Interdict," "The Duty of the Believer," which completed for her the
pictures of horror her faith had already outlined? Marcantonio had taken
in all their dread meaning in rapid glances. How could she believe those
terrible things he had seen in her eyes--those terrible, terrible
things!

Nay, how should she not believe them? And how implicitly she must have
believed them to have endured so much in hope of averting this doom!

"Marina! Carina!" his heart went out to her in a great wail of pity; a
woman--so tender, so young--kneeling at night in her chapel, alone with
the vision of the horror she was praying to avert; bearing the fasting
and the penance and the weakness, all alone, in the hope that God would
be merciful; gathering up her failing strength so bravely for that
thankless scene in the Senate. And he, her husband, who had never meant
that his love should fail her, could have spared her all this pain by a
little comprehension! Could she ever forgive him? And would she
understand some day? Might he reason it all out lovingly with her when
her strength came back to her--"For baby's sake!" that sweet, womanly,
natural plea which he had disregarded?

"Signor Santorio," he moaned, "if I might but reason with her, I might
cure her!"

"Nay," said Santorio, "not yet; the shadow hath not left her eyes. Let
her forget."

She had been growing stronger, they said, doing quite passively the
things they asked of her toward her restoration; she recognized them
all, but she expressed neither wish nor emotion, lying chiefly with
closed eyes in the cavernous depths of the great invalid chair where
they laid her each day, yet responding by some movement if they called
her name--rarely with any words; nothing roused her from that mood of
unbroken brooding.

"She will not forget," the great Santorio said in despair. "We must try
to rouse her. Let her child be brought."

The ghost of a smile flitted for an instant about her pale lips and over
the shadowy horror in her eyes, as Marcantonio leaned over her with
their boy in his arms. "Carina," he cried imploringly, "our little one
needeth thee!"

She half-opened her arms, but this wraith of the mother, he remembered,
frightened the child, who clung sobbing to his father.

Marina fell back with a cry of grief, struggling for the words which
came slowly--her first connected speech since her illness. "It is the
curse! It parts even mothers and children!"

A strange strength seemed to have come to her; a sudden light gleamed in
her eyes; she turned from one to the other, as if seeking some one in
authority to answer her question, and fixed upon Santorio's as the
strongest face.

"The official acts of a Pope are infallible?" she questioned, with
feverish insistence, after the first futile attempt to speak. "The Holy
Father who succeeds him may not undo his acts of mercy?"

"Yes, yes, it is true," Santorio assented, waiting eagerly for the
sequence.

A little color had crept into her cheeks; her hands were burning; they
grasped the physician's arm like a vise; the change was alarming.

"The edict cannot hurt my baby! Santissima Maria, thou hast saved him!"
she cried. "For he hath the special blessing of his Holiness Pope
Clement, and our Holy Father cannot reach him with this curse of
Venice!"

"We cannot keep her mind from it," said Santorio, aside to Marcantonio;
"it is essential to calm it with the right view--no argument, it might
induce the most dangerous excitement. Send for some bishop or theologian
who takes the right view; let him present it as a fact, and with
authority; her life depends upon it."

He leaned down to his patient in deep commiseration to tell her that all
was well--that Venice was under no ban, that God's blessing still
shielded her churches and her children; but she raised her eyes steadily
to his, and the strength of the belief, which he saw clearly written
within them, filled him with awe and hushed his speech. How was it
possible to make her understand!

"Nay," said Marina faintly, still holding him with her sad, solemn eyes,
"do not speak. Since Fra Francesco comes no more there is but one who
speaketh truth to me. It is the vision of my beautiful Mater Dolorosa of
San Donato, which leaveth me not."

There was a stir in the depths of the streets below--a noise of the
populace coming nearer, following along the banks of the Canal Grande,
as if the cause of their excitement were in some hurried movement on
its placid waters; the shouts and jeers of the strident voices were
broken by authoritative commands of the Signori della Notte--the
officers of police--and the tramp of their guards failing to create
order; and above the hubbub rose the cry, distinctly repeated again and
again--the cry of an angry populace, "Andè in malora! Andè in malora!"
("Curses go with you!")


XXII

Even Giustinian Giustiniani came and went heavily, asking for the latest
change before he returned to the Senate Chamber, and carrying with him
always a vision of that white, pleading face which had so wrought upon
his anger when he had seen it luminous with her hope for Venice. But now
his anger was transferred to her confessor who had bewitched her, to all
those Roman prelates who had paid her court--a mere child, not able to
defend herself nor to understand, killing herself for a question beyond
her! And Marcantonio, for love of her, useless and unmanned! It was more
than his senatorial pride could endure to find himself powerless under
such complications. To appease his wrath he denounced Fra Francesco
through the Bocca di Leone, but when the friar was sought for, by order
of the Ten, he was not found. Fra Paolo was appealed to, for he was the
friend of the gentle confessor; but he had not known his plans. "If his
conscience held him not, it was well for him to flee," he said, "and
best for Venice."

But when Fra Paolo was alone in his cell, which, in those days of
greatness, he would not exchange for quarters at the Ducal Palace though
the Senate pleaded, the memory of a confidential talk held since this
quarrel with Rome began brought a hint of the reason for this sudden
flight.

He was tender of conscience and strong of faith, this good Fra
Francesco; always sad, but never stern toward Fra Paolo's failure to
hold a belief implicit as his own in some doctrines of his beloved
Church which he held to be vital. Yet his reverence for Fra Paolo's
great knowledge and holy life made him unwilling to criticize where he
unconsciously questioned. It was the severest test of friendship to keep
his faith and affectionate devotion in one who was taking so prominent a
part in a movement opposing papal authority; but sometimes, when Fra
Paolo had uttered many things he would not have tolerated in any other
priest, Fra Francesco said only to himself, in great sadness, "It is God
who maketh men different; we do not know the why!"

The gentle friar sometimes wondered in himself that he could not openly
say to Fra Paolo when they met, after matins, the many things which had
lain hot in his heart through the night--for how _could_ it be right to
oppose the supreme authority? But when the placid face of his friend met
his, bathed in the fresh benediction of his altar service--new each
morning and never omitted--he forgot the horror with which he had been
reasoning that Fra Paolo was hastening the curse upon Venice.

But if Fra Paolo derived no added _finesse_ for his masterful thought
from the confidences he so often unconsciously invited from this
lifelong friend, his faith in the sincerity and spiritual depth of this
brother friar who, out of love for him, listened to much that pained
him, taught him to value at its highest this opportunity of the closest
scrutiny of his own motives, as he noted the impression of their talk on
a nature as sincere and spiritual as it was transparent.

But that night, when they had passed from the cloister into Fra Paolo's
study-cell, continuing as they walked the train of thought they had been
discussing, his listener soon became so distrait that Fra Paolo, who was
singularly conscious of unspoken moods, dropped the problem he was
unfolding and laid his hand upon his shoulder with the rare tenderness
expressed only where he hoped that he might serve.

"We were speaking of weighty matter and thy thoughts are not with me.
Tell me thy trouble."

"It is a question of responsibility--the burden of the confessional,"
Fra Francesco answered simply.

Fra Paolo drew back his hand, and his tone was a shade less tender.

"Of all that hath been reposed in thee under that sacred seal thou must
bear the burden alone."

"My brother, dost thou think I can forget my vow?" Fra Francesco
exclaimed, reproachfully. "I spake not of that which hath been reposed
in me, but of my duty growing out of that sacred office. It was for this
I wanted counsel, and I had sought thee before to pray thee to confess
me; but I know thy views and I ask thee not."

"Yet as brothers of one holy order thou mayest confide in me, if
perchance it may bring thee comfort. For us of the Servi it is our duty
of service."

Fra Francesco sat for a moment in silence. "Life is heavy," he said
slowly, "and hard to interpret. Yet I seem to feel that thou wilt
understand, though it be in the very matter of our difference. There is
one--highly placed and noble in spirit, and to the Church a most devoted
daughter--who cometh to me for teaching in this matter of the interdict.
She asketh of me all its meaning--what it shall bring to Venice?"

"Thou tell her, then, it shall bring naught. For if it be pronounced it
will be unjustly, and without due cause."

"Nay, Paolo, my brother; it is written in the nineteenth maxim of the
'Dictatus Papae' 'That none may judge the Pope.'"

"My brother, who gave thee thy conscience and thine intellect?" Fra
Paolo questioned sternly. "And hath He who gave them thee so taught thee
to yield them that it should be as if thou had'st not these gifts which,
verily, distinguish man from the animals--to whom instinct sufficeth?
Yet, if thou would'st have answer from one of our own casuists in whom
thou dost place thy trust, the Cardinal Bellarmino, in his second book
on the Roman Pontiffs, will teach thee that without prejudice to this
maxim of Gregory thou mayest refuse obedience to a command extending
beyond the jurisdiction of him who commands; as Gaetano in his first
treatise on the 'Power of the Pope,' will also tell thee. For the peace
of thine own mind, my brother, I would I might make thee understand!"

"Nay," answered Fra Francesco, not less earnestly. "Peace for him who
hath faith cometh not with one intellectual solution, nor another; but
with calm purpose to do the right, however it may be revealed."

"Which, as thou knowest, Francesco, Venice seeketh--and naught else. It
is a matter of law in which thou hast made no studies, and therefore
hard for thee. Now must I to the Council Chamber, but later I would
willingly show thee all the argument. But of this be sure. The Republic
will not offend against the liberty of the Holy Church; but she will
protect her own."

"Fearest thou not, dear friend," Fra Francesco questioned, greatly
troubled, "that thou mayest lead Venice o'erlightly to esteem this vow
of obedience which every loyal son of the Church oweth to the Holy
Father? My heart is sore for thee. I see not the matter as thou would'st
have me."

"Nay," said Fra Paolo quietly, "to each one his burden! If thy
conscience bears not out my teaching, thou art free from it. I interpret
the law by the grace which God hath given me; I, also, being free from
sin therein, if my understanding be not equal to the tasks wherein I
seem to feel God's guidance."

"Yet tell me, I pray thee, Paolo mio, and be not displeased by mine
insistence,--perchance it may help me to comprehend this mystery,--how
knowest thou the limit beyond which one may without sin, judge that the
Holy Father shall not command obedience of the sons of the Church?"

"I do not say, when it conflicts with that which is in itself against
the law of God," Fra Paolo answered him, "this limitation thou also
would'st admit; yet it may well-nigh seem to thee a blasphemy to suppose
so strange a case, though many of the early fathers do provide against
it. But, to take another case, when a command of the Sovereign Pontiff
doth conflict with the rule of the Prince in his realm, see'st thou not
what confusion should come if the Pope may revoke the laws of princes
and replace them by his own in the temporal affairs of their dominions?
And if it belong to his Holiness to judge which laws shall be revoked
and what may be legislated to replace the old laws, ultimately but one
power should everywhere reign--and that an ecclesiastical power. The
matter is simple."

Fra Paolo's searching gaze noted the flush of feeling in the face of his
friend, which was his only response.

"And thus will the Senate vote when the question shall come before
them?" Fra Francesco had asked, after a pause; for this conversation had
taken place in the earlier days of the struggle, while in many quarters
opinions were forming.

"There can be no accurate recital of the manner of a happening before it
hath taken place," the Teologo Consultore replied so placidly that his
tone conveyed as little reproach as information; yet Fra Francesco could
not again have put his question in any form.

Still he lingered, as if something more must be spoken, although Fra
Paolo had already sent to summon his secretary. "I also," he said,
asserting himself, with an effort which was always painful to his gentle
soul, "I also would be faithful to my conscience and my vow; that which
I believe--I can teach no other."

"More can one not ask of thee," Fra Paolo answered, suddenly unbending
from the stilted mood of his last words. "By the light that is given him
must each man choose his path."

"If," said Fra Francesco, speaking sorrowfully, "the blessed law of
silence were added to our vow, how would it save a man perplexity and
trouble! For that which one believeth must color his speech, though he
would fain speak little. Thy light is larger than mine own--I know it to
be so--and yet to me it bringeth no vision. I would it had been given us
to see and teach alike!"

"In this matter of the confessional," said Fra Paolo, returning and
speaking low, "if but thou didst believe with me that, _as a sacrament_,
it is oftenest unwise and best left unpractised, thy difficulties might
be fewer."

"Nay, Paolo mio, tempt me not. I would I might believe it, but my
conscience agreeth to my vow."

"As thou believest, so do; 'for whatsoever is not of faith is sin,'"
said Fra Paolo solemnly. "That was a strong word spoken of doctrine to
guard the conscience. I would I might scatter all the noble words of
that noble Apostle Paul among the people and the priests, in our own
tongue!"

"Sometimes thou seemest so like a rebel I know not why I come to thee in
trouble"--Fra Francesco looked at him with grieving eyes--"except that
in thine heart thou art indeed true."

"So help me God--it is my prayer!" Fra Paolo answered. "And for thee and
me alike, however we may differ, there is this other helpful word in
that same blessed book which they will not let the starving people
share--'God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it.' May God be with thee!"

"And Christ and the Holy Mother have thee in their keeping!" Fra
Francesco answered, with a yearning look in his loving face, in a tone
that lingered on the sweet word "mother" and almost seemed to hint of an
omission, as they clasped hands and parted.

This was the last time they had had speech together; but on the evening
of the day when Venice had declared her loyalty to her Prince by
unanimous vote, there was much animated talk of the matter in the
refectory. Fra Francesco had joined the group and listened silently. But
as the call to _compline_ rang through the cloisters and the friars
scattered, he had turned his face to Fra Paolo, who read thereon a very
passion of love, reproach, and pain which he could not forget. "When the
duties of the Council press me less," he thought, "I will seek him out
and reason with him."

But after that night the gentle friar was seen no more in Venice, and
inquiry failed to develop a reason for his flight. They missed him in
the Servi, where already they were beginning to gather up the pale
happenings of his convent life with the kindly recollection which tinged
them with a thread of romance, as his brothers of the order rehearsed
them in the cloistered ways where he would come no more; for to him some
ministry of beauty had always been assigned. The vines drooped for his
tending, they said; and the pet stork who wandered in the close
languished for his hand to feed the dainty morsel, and for his voice in
that indulgent teasing which had provoked its proudest preening.

But this, perhaps, was only fancy, or their way of recognizing a certain
grace they missed. But of the reason of his going, which most of them
connected in some way with this movement in Venice over which he had
often grieved, there was no open recognition among them--partly because
they feared that ubiquitous ear of the Senate, which penetrated unseen
through many closed doorways, partly because they realized how strange
it was that their own sympathies had not confessed his view of right.

Furtively, too, the friars watched Fra Paolo; for the adoration of the
gentle Fra Francesco for this idol of their order, from the day when
they had entered the convent as boys together, had formed a cloister
idyl--none the less that the response of the graver friar was not
equally demonstrative, though it was felt to be true; for it was a
marvel that two such opposite natures should hold so closely together
and that Fra Francesco, for all his gentleness, should apparently retain
opinions uninfluenced by the power and learning which all others
recognized.

Yet, from those early days, Fra Francesco had abated nothing of his
scrupulous and loving conservatism; never had he questioned a rule, nor
chosen the least, instead of the most, permitted in an act of humility;
and after his Church, the Madonna, and his patron saint, he expended the
devotion of his nature upon his friend with a just estimate of his power
and daring which filled his soul with anxious happiness. Often, in
those earlier days, when the echoes of Fra Paolo's triumphs had
penetrated to the refectory of the Servi, Fra Francesco had felt a
strange premonition which had kept him long on his knees before the
altar in the chapel. "Shield him, O Holy Mother, from danger," he had
prayed, "nor let him wander from the lowly path of obedience for pride
of that which thou permittest him to know!" And his day-dream of earthly
happiness was the spending of his friend's great gifts in the service of
the Holy Church, wherein he should ascend from honor to honor, enlarging
her borders and strengthening her rule, attaining at last to the supreme
position.

Weeks after Fra Francesco had disappeared from the convent a letter was
brought by the gastaldo of Nicolotti, Piero Salin, who, in spite of
opposition among the brothers, persisted in delivering it with his own
hand, though it was rare that any one outside his usual circle was
permitted to hold an interview with Fra Paolo; but Piero's masterful
ways had not left him, and when he willed to do a thing the wills of
others counted little. It was a pity--because the missive was
mysterious, crumpled with long carrying--and if a trusty member of their
own community had delivered it to Fra Paolo in his cell, there might
have been some revelation!

But there was none. Fra Paolo was only a little more grave and silent
than of wont; but often now he was so absorbed in government matters
that he took less part in the social life of the Servi.

So Piero, laughing at the ease with which he had carried his point for
nothing but the asking,--and it had to be done, since he had promised
Marina,--had his interview alone with Fra Paolo, and passed easily
through the group of disappointed friars, under those exquisitely
wrought arcades to his gondola, thanking them with nonchalance and
pressing them to avail themselves more often of the eager service of his
barcarioli, that the blessing of the Madonna might be upon their
traghetti, to the discomfiture of their rivals the Castellani. For Piero
was a faithful gastaldo and lost no opportunity of seeking favor for the
faction he represented, and there was a certain grace in his proffer,
since priests and friars paid no fares.

Fra Paolo left alone read the message which held the tragedy of a life.

"I could not stay in Venice, dear friend of my whole life, to see thee
guide our country into such sad error; for so to my heart it
seemeth--may God help us both!

"And when there was no longer hope that my little word might prevail to
hold any in that way which alone seemeth to me right--and thou, with thy
great gifts, art using them for State and not for Church, Paolo mio, not
for our Holy Church--I could not stay, because I love thee! I must have
been ever chiding thee had I remained, as if God had made me for no use
but to be a thorn in thy flesh--which I could not believe.

"But because He hath made thee great, He hath given thee thy conscience
for thy guide, as mine to me; which holdeth me from grief over-much, for
I know thee to be true and great.

"Therefore for peace, and not for gladness, have I left thee; for
reverence to the Holy Father, and for the better keeping of all my vows.

"If perchance, at the feet of the Holy Father, my prayers and penances
might, by miracle, avail to turn his wrath from Venice--it could not
hurt thee!

"Yet because of this wish, which only holdeth life in me,--so sore is my
heart at leaving Venice and thee and our dear home of the Servi,--well I
know that never more mine eyes shall see these places of my love--and
thee, my friend!

"If we learn by the way of pain, after this life God will forgive our
errors!

"FRANCESCO, thy brother of the Servi."


XXIII

As the cry of the populace rang down the Canal Grande, following the
retreating ranks of the Jesuits, who, bound by their greater vows to
Rome, had remained steadfast and refused obedience to the Senate's
mandate, the Lady Marina, roused by the excitement which they dreaded,
had started to her feet with a marvelous return of her former mental
power and a fullness of comprehension which sought for no explanations.
She stood for a moment panting with hot, unspoken speech, turning from
one to another, and then, with a sudden, great effort, repressed the
words she would have spoken, asking quietly, after a pause in which no
reference had been made to the expulsion of the confraternities:

"Which of the orders have gone? What more hath happened that I know
not?"

"Nay, the orders of the monks and of the friars have chiefly been
faithful to Venice," they told her, "and all is well. This society,
which for long hath been cause of much disorder in our Republic, it is
well that it leave Venice in peace."

She answered nothing, weighing their words silently. "Is it because they
are faithful to their vows, and to their Church?" she asked at length,
in quiet irony.

"Nay, but because they teach disobedience to princes and would thus
undermine the law of the land," Marcantonio hastened to explain,
grateful that she could at length discuss the question.
"Carina,--blessed be San Marco,--thou art like thyself! We will talk
together; we will make all clear to thee; thou shalt grieve no more,
carinissima!"

She put up her hand and touched his cheek with an answering caress--the
first through all these weary days. "I shall get well, Marco mio," she
said, with a sudden conviction that surprised them; but still there was
no smile in her eyes, and their hearts were sad, though the change that
had come over her was so extraordinary that they hoped much from the
explanation which the great Santorio had authorized.

But for whom should they send in this moment, when life and death hung
in the balance, to speak that authoritative word.

The Bishop of Aquileia, first and greatest of the Venetian bishops, had
incurred the displeasure of the Senate for refusing to perform the
duties of his office while the Republic remained under that fulminated
but unacknowledged censure, and a new prelate, of opinions approved by
the Most Serene Republic, sat in the vacated see. The Bishop of Vicenza
had likewise signified his sympathy with the Holy See; and in Brescia
their wandering prelate had scarcely yet received that strengthening
monition of the watching Senate which was to recall him from his
hiding-place and hold him steadfast in his cathedral service.

And for the Patriarch Vendramin, who had been summoned to Rome to
receive the benediction of the Supreme Pontiff, but had been forbidden
by the Senate to leave the Venetian domains, this episode, which was a
feature of the struggle known to the whole of Venice, placed him so
openly on the side of the Republic that it forbade his ministry with the
Lady Marina.

But there was one so jealously guarded from all interruption and fatigue
that strangers who came from far to see him were refused audience, by
order of the Senate, or were received for a few moments only in some
protected chamber of the Ducal Palace; for the springs of government
moved at his touch, the matters which occupied him were weighty, and for
these they would spare his strength. Yet again the Senate signified a
rare consideration for the Ca' Giustiniani by permitting the attendance
of their Teologo Consultore in the palazzo of the Lady Marina; for who
so well could minister to her diseased mind as he who had unanswerably
placed the question in its true light before all the Councils of the
Republic?

She stood with bowed head and clasped hands as he approached her, her
hair falling unbound, as in her maiden days, over the simply white robe
which she had preferred in her illness, discarding all her jewels and
all emblems of her state--pale as a vision, like a sad dream of the
beautiful Madonna del Sorriso which the Veronese had painted for that
altar of the Servi at which, each morning, Fra Paolo still dutifully
ministered.

"Peace be with thee and to thine house, my daughter," said the Padre
Maestro Paolo, spreading out his hands in priestly salutation as he
entered the oratory of the palazzo Giustiniani, where the Lady Marina
awaited him.

She had desired that the interview should take place in this chapel,
which she had not visited since her illness. A faint odor of desolation
stole through the dimness of the place to meet him--a breath from the
withered rose-petals which had dropped from the golden vases upon the
splendid embroidered altar-cloth and mingled with the dust of those many
days which had remained guiltless of Mass or service; the altar candles
were unlighted; the censer had lost its halo of mystic smoke.

"It were fitter to my mood, most Reverend Father, wert thou to scatter
penitential ashes before a desecrated altar which may send no incense of
praise to heaven."

"Nay, my daughter; love and faith may still minister, and God, the
Unchangeable, accept that service from every altar in Venice! 'The
sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit,' it is written in the Holy Book
which God hath granted for the comfort of His people. May peace indeed
bring thee its benediction--the more that thy need is great."

Was there some strange power of resistance in that fragile, drooping
figure which made it difficult to rehearse the argument for Venice with
his accustomed mastery?

She listened silently while the learned Counsellor patiently explained
that the sentence of Rome was unjust, therefore not incurred and not to
be observed by priests nor people; wherefore it was the duty of the
Prince to prevent its execution--of the Prince who, more than any
private citizen, is bound to fear God, to be zealous in the faith and
reverent toward the priests who are permitted to stand in the place of
Christ for the enforcement of his teaching only; but it is also the more
the duty of the Prince to eschew hypocrisy and superstition, to preserve
his own dignity, and maintain his state in the exercise of the true
religion.

But there was no acquiescence in her eyes.

"I thank thee, most Reverend Father, for thy patient teaching," she
said; "but I lack the learning to make it helpful. Fra Francesco was
more simple, and he hath taught me by no arguments; but he, for the
exercise of the true religion, hath found it needful to quit Venice, and
doth make his pilgrimage to Rome, barefooted, that he may pray the Holy
Father, of his grace, to lift this curse from our people."

"There is that in her face which maketh argument useless," Fra Paolo
said low to his friend Santorio, for he was himself no mean physician,
having contributed discoveries of utmost importance to the medical
science, "and there is a physical weakness combined with this mental
assertiveness which doth make it a danger to oppose her beliefs. Yet I
would I might comfort her, for her soul is tortured."

"It must be that thou shalt convince her!" Santorio pleaded with him.

Thus urged, Fra Paolo spoke again, in a tone that pity rendered
strangely near to tenderness. "I would not weary thee, my daughter,
having spoken the truth which I would fain have thee embrace for thine
own healing. Only this would I remind thee--that none may be excluded
from the Holy Catholic Church if he be not first excluded by his own
demerits from Divine Grace."

She answered nothing, but there was an unspoken argument in her face.

"See'st thou not that those terrors which thou dost fear shall not come
upon Venice, since she hath not sinned? It is this which, for thy peace,
we would have thee comprehend."

"My Father, there is but one whose teaching fitteth my reasoning," she
answered resolutely, "and he hath fled from Venice that he may be free
to believe and to practise his religion as our Holy Church doth require,
and to plead against our doom, where prayer may be heard, unhindered by
the cloud which keepeth us in Venice from God's favor. He, being a holy
man, hath taught me that the law of obedience to the Supreme Head of the
Church may not be transgressed--that our doom cometh not undeserved--and
my whole heart is sick with fear!"

"There is but One to whom is owed this supreme and inalterable
obedience, my daughter; we do not differ in our beliefs; yield it always
to him, most reverently and unreservedly," Fra Paolo answered solemnly.
"But upon this earth, it hath been taught us by our Lord himself, 'there
is none good--nay, not one.' The Head of the Church of God is God
himself, the only infallible and just. Thinkest thou that He would have
us obey a command conceived in error, with intention to exclude from
every benefit of our Holy Church, in the hour when they most need divine
comfort and protection, those who would faithfully do him service? Thus
read we not the love and mercy of our Heavenly Father!"

"Most Reverend Father," she cried, clasping her hands in extremity.
"How shall a weak, untaught woman reason with the Counsellor of Venice!
I know not where the words are written--but, somewhere, Fra Francesco
hath taught me, yet his soul is loving--there is a thought of the
vengeance of God, and it is terrible! Day and night there is no other
vision in my soul but this--of the _vengeance of God_, poured out upon
the disobedient. For this the blessed Mater Dolorosa of San Donato
weepeth ceaselessly. Love is for those who serve him; but
vengeance--here and hereafter--for those who disobey. Oh, my Father! for
every human soul in Venice--the helpless women, who have no power but
prayer, which is but insult while God's face is hidden--the little
children who have done no harm--Madre Beatissima, how can we bear it!"

"Nay, nay, my daughter, for our Father is righteous and merciful.
'Vengeance is mine,' he saith; '_I_ will repay.' He giveth no man charge
to bring his wrath upon us. He hath invested no human power with a
supremacy beyond that which abideth in every loving and faithful soul,
as to the things of the conscience. Thou, with thy love and faith and
pain, art at this moment very near to Him; be comforted, and cease not
to believe that He counteth all thy tears, and that thy prayers are dear
to Him."

"My Father," she confessed sadly, "it is a part of the shadow that it
hides my faith; night and day, with fast and penance, have I not ceased
to pray for Venice--and the answer hath been denied me. I could seek for
death, but for the horror that cometh after, at the Madonna dell'
Orto--the Tintoret--and that which the Michelangelo hath seen in
vision--Oh, my God!"

"My child, it is not God who faileth thee in answer to thy prayer; and
love and faith are yet strong and beautiful within thy soul; only a
human weakness is upon thee which cloudeth thy human reason, and for
this thy soul is dark. For reason, also, is of God's gift--lower than
faith and love, yet a very needful part of man while God leaveth him in
his human habitation. There hath come an answer to the prayer, though
thou see'st it not."

"Is it written, my father, in the cruel words of the interdict?" she
gasped.

"She is tortured out of reverence," Santorio exclaimed apart, and would
have hushed her.

But Fra Paolo, overhearing, said gently:

"For this I came, to hearken all thy trouble, if perchance I might give
thee rest. The answer to thy prayer is not written in those unjust
words. For they--mark well, it is here that thy reason faileth thee--for
they were uttered by a human will, striving to coerce obedience in a
matter beyond its province. The power which God hath given to priests
and princes is not arbitrary, but to be regulated by the law of God;
neither is obedience toward those in authority to be stolid and blind,
but yielded only when the command is within this divine law. The Holy
Father hath no power to command disobedience to the Prince in his
rightful realm,--which thus he seeketh to do."

She spread out her hands before her and half-turned away her head, as if
in deprecation of some sacrilege, growing very white.

"Is _this_ the answer, my Father?"

"It is the reason for the answer which hath come by unanimous conviction
into the soul of every man of the ruling body of Venice, and hath been
voiced by each, in his vote, with a fullness of consent which is of
God's sending. Thus are they nerved to declare the censure void--and
Venice is unharmed."

"Madre Beatissima! _thus_ hast thou answered me?"

"My daughter, may it not comfort thee to know that that which thou, in
faith and love, hast prayed for Venice--that in this struggle she should
hold God's favor unharmed--hath come to her, though the manner of the
benefit accord not with the manner of the grace which thou hast asked?"

"If my reason is clouded with terror," she said very slowly, as if her
strength were spent, "God hath vouchsafed me no other reason--but only
that which trembles at this broken law of obedience. My Father--I pray
thee--I am very weary----"


XXIV

The nuncio had declared that Venice no longer required his services and
had withdrawn, with every ceremony of punctilious and honorable
dismissal, to Rome, from whence the Venetian ambassador presently went
forth _without_ the customary compliments.

But if diplomatic relations were severed between Rome and Venice, there
were still chances for private communication which sometimes cast a
curious light upon the subject under discussion, but which made no
change in that irreproachable suavity of exterior or that invincibility
of purpose with which the Venetians held in check any attempt at
disaffection through Roman agency, or averted any schismatic movement
within their own dependencies.

To Sarpi, the Chief Counsellor, had been committed the censorship of the
press; and the supervision of those very papers which had been written
by friends of the Republic to scatter broadcast in defense of its
rights, formed not the least delicate part of his task. For the
government demanded that they should maintain a fine reserve in method,
and in spite of examples to the contrary freely given by their
opponents, would tolerate neither heresy nor coarseness. Every detail of
this world-renowned quarrel was conducted on the part of Venice with an
irreproachable dignity and diplomacy that raised it to the height of a
negotiation of State, and it formed no part of the policy of the
Republic to tolerate any disbelief in her own loyalty; the Venetians
should stand before the world as faithful sons of the Church, bearing
unmerited sentence of excommunication.

Then Rome, to make an end of the brilliant flow of pamphlets from
Sarpi's pen, would have lured him from Venice with flattering promises
of churchly preferment. "Nay," said he, "here lieth my duty; and my work
hath not deserved honest favor from a Pope who interpreteth the law with
other eyes than mine."

Meanwhile the schemes of the enemy were tireless for obtaining secret
influence within Venetian borders. Now it was a barefooted friar to be
watched for at Mantua, coming with powers plenipotentiary from his
Holiness over all the prelates of the rebellious realm; or it might be
this same friar, in lay disguise, still armed with those ghostly and
secret powers, for whom the trusted servants of Venice were to be on
guard. Or there were disaffected brothers, who had left their convents
and were roaming through the land inciting to rebellion, to whom it was
needful to teach the value of quiet, however summary the process. But
Venice, by a broad training in intrigue and cunning, joined to her
mastery of the finer principles of statesmanship, still remained
mistress of the springs of action and wore her outward dignity, and the
disappointments were for her adversaries. But this training was a costly
one, for it put a prize on daring, confused the colors of right, and
invariably laureled success--if it did no more specific harm to the
State.

Piero Salin had been secretly summoned by the Ten and given an
indefinite leave of absence from Venice, together with a large
discretionary power in the direction of his wanderings, with certain
other passes and perquisites which bespoke a curious confidence in one
who had been known for a successful and much dreaded bandit gondolier.
But if the government in its complicated labors had need of tools of
various tempers, it had also the wisdom to discern legitimate uses for
certain wild and lawless spirits when they were, like Piero, full of
daring and resource.

In the days when they had been dwellers under the same roof Piero had
never been able to disregard Marina's will, often as he had chafed under
the necessity of yielding to it; and now, since she was Lady of the
Giustiniani, it had not been otherwise in the rare instances when it had
pleased her to require anything of him. Yet it would have been
incongruous to charge Piero with over-sensitiveness on the side of
chivalry, though Marina's power over him was still as great as in those
old days when, being unable to shake himself free from her influence, he
had wished to marry her to make it less.

Piero was not introspective, but he doubtless knew that his ruling
passion was to achieve whatever purpose he might choose to set himself.
The Nicolotti knew it well when, a few months before, they had
unanimously elected him to rule over them--as their chief officers had
realized it when they had nominated him, without a dissenting voice, to
this position of gastaldo grande--a position of great honor fully
recognized by the government. So the rival faction of the Castellani
bore marvelous testimony to his mastery when they went over in
surprising numbers from along the _Giudecca_, and underwent the strange
ceremonial of baptism into the opposition party.

Yet when the rival factions of the people had thus conspired to make him
their chief it was Marina who had alone induced him to accept the honor.
To all his objections her answer had been ready:

"Nay, Piero, it is meet for thee; they need one strong and brave, of
whom they stand in dread, who knoweth their ways--"

"As much bad as good," Piero had interposed frankly, and not without
asseverations well known to gondoliers.

"It is well said," she had answered, with the comprehension born of her
intimate knowledge of the class; "and to keep them in order--verily,
none but thou canst do it."

Piero gave an expressive shrug, having had enough of compliment. "_En
avanti--c'è altro_!" he said, laughing. "The taxes are heavy, and their
Excellencies the tax-gatherers have less patience than the poor
gondoliers bring of _zecchini_ to the purse of the Nicolotti. But the
gastaldo hath as little liberty of delay, as their Excellencies leave
him to decline the burden--I might better make shipwreck in the Canale
Orfano."

It was in this canal that the victims of the Inquisition mysteriously
disappeared, and Marina had repressed a shudder while she answered,
"Thou wilt come to me, Piero, if the purse of the Nicolotti weighs
little; thou shalt not fail, for this, of wearing the honor of gastaldo
grande.

"Nay," she had added, quickly disposing of his awkward attempts at
thanks, "think not of it again; it is for my pleasure to see thee great
among the people, for I also and my father are of them. It is this that
I have always wished for thee."

So, chiefly because it had been Marina's will, Piero had waived his
unwillingness and become the central figure in the imposing ceremony of
the election of the gastaldo grande of the Nicolotti, who were, indeed,
almost nobles by antiquity and prestige, not only claiming among
themselves the coveted title of _nobili_, but, under the sanction of the
government, electing their gastaldo with a degree of ceremonial granted
only to high officials, and prescribed in very ancient books of the laws
of the traghetti. One of the ducal secretaries, having received official
notice of the vacancy of the office carried in person before the Senate
by the oldest man of the Nicolotti, came, in purple state, to preside
over the election when the bell of San Nicolò had tolled forth the
call--taking his seat among the twelve electoral presidents who, already
chosen by the people, awaited him, having sworn the inevitable oath of
impartiality and fealty to the Republic; they sat behind locked doors
until the election was brought to a close--in that solemn semblance of a
ducal election which could not fail to impress the people--with
complicated, time-using ballotings, and comings and goings of candidates
from adjoining chambers to express their views of the responsibilities
of the office, or to defend themselves against the freely invited
attacks of opponents or malcontents.

And for once Piero had uttered opinions, however clumsily, upon
"government" and "reform" from the pulpit of San Nicolò, in the
dignified and interested presence of a ducal secretary, the bancali, and
the disconcerting throng of gondoliers who were intolerant of speeches
and impatient for their vote; and he had retired shamefacedly, like an
awkward boy, while his jejune remarks were elaborately discussed by the
judges. And because his views--if he had any--had not been
over-luminously set forth in this his maiden oration, a party of zealous
advocates had nearly caused an uproar by their irrepressible shout of
"Non c'e da parlar', ma da fare!" which was, in truth, too sure an
indication of the temper of the people to be ignored. "We do not want
talking--but doing!"

And for once he had experienced a curious sensation which cowardly men
call "fear," but for which Piero had neither name nor tolerance, when
all the people who had been worrying him led him in triumph to the altar
and forced him down on his stubborn knees to take a solemn oath of
allegiance, his great bronzed hand, all unaccustomed to restraint,
resting meanwhile in the slippery silken clasp of the ducal secretary.

Here also had the gastaldo received, from those same patrician hands,
the unfurled banner of the Nicolotti, with the sacramental words:

"We consign to you the standard of San Nicolò, in the name of the Most
Serene Prince and as proof that you are the chief gastaldo and head of
the people of San Nicolò and San Raffaele."

And after that had come freedom of breath, with the Te Deum, without
which no ceremonial was ever complete in Venice, chanted by all those
full-throated gondoliers--a jubilant chorus of men's voices, ringing the
more heartily through the church for those unwonted hours of repression.

But when the doors had at last been thrown wide to the sunshine and the
babel of life which rose from the eager, thronging populace who had no
right of entrance on this solemn occasion--men who had no vote, women
and children who had all their lives been Nicolotti of the Nicolotti--a
Venetian must indeed have been stolid to feel no thrill of pride as the
procession, with great pomp, passed out of the church to a chorus of
bells and cannon and shouts of the people, proclaiming him their chosen
chief.

Piero Salin was a splendid specimen of the people--tall,
broad-shouldered, gifted by nature and trained by wind and wave to the
very perfection of his craft; positive, nonchalant, and masterful;
affable when not thwarted; of fewer words than most Venetians; an adept
at all the intricacies of gondolier intrigue, and fitted by intimate
knowledge to circumvent the _tosi_. Moreover, he was in favor with the
government, a crowning grace to other qualities not valueless in one of
this commanding position.

No wonder that the enthusiasm of the populace was wild enough to bring
the frankest delight to his handsome sun-bronzed face as they rushed
upon him in a frenzy of appreciation and bore him aloft on their
shoulders around the Piazza San Nicolò, almost dizzied with their haste
and the smallness of the circle opened to them in the little square by
the throng who pressed eagerly around him to grasp his hand--to wave
their banners, to shout themselves hoarse for the Nicolotti, for San
Nicolò and San Raffaele, for _Piero, gastaldo grande_, for Venezia, for
San Marco, with "Bravi," "Felicitazioni," and every possible childish
demonstration of delight.

Should not the Nicolotti--blessed be the Madonna!--always overcome the
Castellani with Piero at their head, in those party battles on the
bridges which had now grown to be as serious a factor in the lives of
the gondoliers of Venice as they were disturbing to the citizens at
large, and therefore the more to the glory of the combatants?

Was he not their own representative--elected by the very voice of the
people, as in those lost days of their freedom the doges had been? And
did not the rival faction so stand in awe of the new gastaldo that from
the moment of his nomination there had been disaffection in their ranks?

And now, as they shouted around him, many a sturdy red cap tossed his
badge disdainfully into the throng and snatched a black bonnet from the
nearest head to wave it aloft with cries of "the black cap! The
Nicolotti! Viva San Nicolò!"

And again, when Piero essayed to prove himself equal to his honors, his
few words dropped without sound upon the storm of vivas--"We do not want
talking for our gastaldo--but doing!"

Since this happening Piero had been indeed a great man among the
people--a popular idol, with a degree of power difficult to estimate by
one unfamiliar with the customs and traditions of Venice; holding the
key, practically, to all the traghetti of Venice, since even before this
sweeping disaffection of the Castellani the Nicolotti were invariably
acknowledged to be the more powerful faction, so that now it was a
trifling matter to coerce a rival offending traghetto; and gondoliers,
private and public, were, to say the least, courteous toward these
nobles of the Nicolotti, who were dealing with tosi as never before in
the history of Venice.

In truth, but for those unknown _observors_ in secret service to the
terrible Inquisition,--an army sixty thousand strong, one third of the
entire population of Venice,--impressed from nobles, gondoliers,
ecclesiastics, and people of every grade and profession, from every
quarter of the city, and charged to lose nothing of any detail that
might aid the dreaded chiefs of the Inquisition in their silent and
fearful work--the power of Piero would have been virtually limitless.
These three terrible unknown chiefs of the Inquisition were never named
among the people except with bated breath, as "i tre di sopra," _the
three above_, lest some echo should condemn the speakers. But the
unsought favor of the government was as much a check as an assistance to
Piero's schemes, bringing him so frequently into requisition for
official intrigues that he had less opportunity for counterplotting,
while his knowledge of State secrets which he might not compromise, of
the far-reaching vision of Inquisitorial eyes, and of the swift and
relentless execution of those unknown _osservatori_ who had been
unfaithful to their primal duty as spies, made him dare less where
others were concerned than he would have foretold before he had been
admitted to these unexpected official confidences; while for himself he
had absolutely no fears--having but one life to order or to lose, and
caring less for its length than for the freedom of its ruling while it
remained to him.

And still Marina was, as she had always been, the gentlest influence in
his reckless life,--to some slight extent an inspiring one,--steadying
his daring yet generous instincts into a course that was occasionally
nearer to nobility than he could ever have chanced upon without her, yet
never able to instil a higher motive power than came from pleasing her.

It was Piero who had escorted Fra Francesco to the borders of the Roman
dominions, guarding him from pitfalls and discovery until he was free to
undertake his barefooted penitential pilgrimage upon Roman soil; and
from no faith nor sympathy in the gentle friar's views, but only because
he was dear to Marina.

And through Piero's agents, established under threats as terrible as
those of the Ten themselves, had come the news which, from time to time,
he unfolded to her; while the same secret agent brought perhaps a rumor
which the gastaldo grande confided to the Ten, wherewith some convent
plotting was unmasked, or other news so greatly to the keeping of the
peace of the Serene Republic, that Piero might have bought therewith
propitiation for all those sins against it, of which the government was
happily in ignorance. Now it was a hint of a plot in embryo to seize
the arsenal, involving some members of distinction in the households of
resident ambassadors; or word of the whereabouts of that wandering,
barefooted emissary with plenary powers, who had hitherto eluded
Venetian vigilance.

It was Piero also--although he never confessed to it--who, out of
compassion for Marina's priestly proclivities when she lay critically
ill, had made it possible for the Jesuits to remove those coffers of
treasure which, in spite of strictest orders to the contrary,
accompanied them on their flight from Venice; it was not that he took
part against Venice in the quarrel, but that the penalty of exile seemed
to him sufficient, especially as Marina had a weakness for priests; and
he could be generous in his use of power, though a man less daring would
not have risked the freak. But there was a masterful pleasure in
outwitting the Signoria and the Ten, lessened only by the consciousness
that he must keep this triumph to himself, and Piero also knew how to
hold his tongue--for discretion was a needful grace in that strange time
of barbaric lawlessness shrouded in a more than Eastern splendor.

But even Piero sometimes quickened his step as he passed the beautiful
sea façade of the Ducal Palace, whose rose-tinted walls seemed made only
to reflect sunshine; for perchance he guessed the name of that victim
who hung with covered face between the columns, bearing in bold letters
on his breast, by way of warning, the nature of the crime for which he
paid such awful penalty--some crime against the State. "To-day," said
Piero to himself, "it is this poor devil who cried to me to shield him
when I was forced to denounce him to the Signoria; to-morrow, for some
caprice of their Excellencies--it may be Piero Salin!"

But the gastaldo relapsed easily into such philosophy as he knew. "By
the blessed San Marco and San Teodoro themselves!" he was ready to cry,
as he reached his gondola, "there must always be a last 'to-morrow'!"


XXV

Life had begun to move again, with slow, clogged wheels, in the Ca'
Giustiniani since that sudden favorable change had come to the Lady
Marina. Her husband was no longer excused from attendance in the Council
Halls of the Republic, and whether to quicken his interest in the
affairs of the government or because, in due course, the time had come
when a young noble so full of promise should take a prominent place in
her councils, he was now constantly called upon to fill important
offices in transient committees. Certainly there was some strange,
ubiquitous power in that watchful governmental eye; and in the Broglio
it had been whispered that if the young Senator were not held constant
by multiplied honors and responsibilities the home influence might be
fateful to the house of Giustiniani--a house too princely and too
important to Venice to be suffered to tolerate any sympathy with Rome.
Giustinian the elder, being pronounced in his patriotic partizanship,
had replaced the ambassador to his Most Catholic Majesty of Spain, whose
attempts at conciliation were so ludicrously inadequate that a court of
less astute diplomacy than Venice might have been tempted to withdraw
its embassy. Spain and Venice had been stepping through a stately dance,
as it were, decorous and princely,--though scarcely misleading,--an
interminable round of bows and dignified advances leading no whither,
since for a forward step there was a corresponding backward motion to
complete the _chassé_, and all in that gracious circle which flatters
the actor and the onlooker with a pleasurable sense of progress; but the
suspense as to the issue of this minuet was all on the side of Spain,
and Venice had patience to spare for these pretty time-filling paces
which presented such semblance of careless ease to the watching
embassies. England, with an understanding quickened by her own
experience, took a serious interest in the quarrel. But his Most
Christian Majesty of France was foremost among the princes in efforts to
hasten the conciliation of the disputants, and when Henry of France
offered to mediate between the powers, Venice said him not nay. For if
she would take no personal step toward conciliation, she yet held no
code by which the intercession of a monarch might seem to lessen her
dignity; and the coming of so princely an envoy as the Cardinal di
Gioiosa was celebrated with fêtes meet to grace the reception of so high
a dignitary of the Church of Rome.

Hence Venice, under the ban, suggested rather a lively tourney in some
field of cloth of gold, than an excommunicated nation in its time of
mourning; there were frequent interchanges of diplomatic
courtesies--receptions to special embassies which had lost nothing of
their punctilious splendor. There had always been time in Venice for
absolute decorum, and now there was not less than usual, since her
conduct had been denounced--though Venice and her prestige were
untarnished and the world was looking on!

Marcantonio, in spite of his deep home anxiety, was becoming more and
more absorbed in the affairs of a government which made such claims upon
him, and for the honor of his house, by all Venetian tradition, he must
give to the full that which was exacted of him. But he worked without
the brilliancy and enthusiasm of a few months past--as a man steadied by
some great sorrow, striving more strenuously to give of his best where
honor is concerned, because he is conscious that the heaviness of his
heart makes all duty irksome.

For Marina, with returning health,--the physicians spoke of her thus
since they had pronounced her out of danger,--had not fully returned to
him; it was less her whiteness and wanness that oppressed him than that
nameless change in the face and eyes which suggested a ceaseless,
passionate suppression of the deep, impassioned self, under the listless
exterior; there was an immeasurable loss in the sweetness of life to
them both, though never since the early days of their love had he been
so tender and patient, so eager to gladden her in little ways. But she
answered his love more often with a mute caress of her hand upon his
cheek than with smiles or words--yet with a touch that lingered, as if
to assure him that her love was not less, though she herself was
changed.

Something terribly real lay between them, of which it seemed better not
to speak, since all his efforts to change her point of view had failed.
It was utterly sad to have her so nearly herself again, and yet so far
from him. Life was hard for this young senator with his multiplied
honors, his wealth, and prestige. Marina had always given impetus to his
life; now it was he who watched and cared for her, while she seemed to
have no will for anything, yet had lost that old charming ingenuousness
which had underlain her power. He had promised himself, out of his new
pathetic yearning when she had begun to improve, that never again should
she know an ungratified wish, yet now he feared that she would give him
no opportunity of granting a request, so apathetic had she grown. But
one day, when he was trying to rouse her to express a desire, she laid
her hand eagerly on his, asking a thing so strange that unconsciously he
started away from her.

"Marco, mio, take me to Rome!"

For a moment, in spite of all that had gone before, the young Senator
was betrayed into a forgetfulness of his tender mood--it was so strange,
this request of a Lady of the Giustiniani, to choose Rome rather than
Venice at a time of contest; but her face and manner and speech were
luminous with hope; she was radiant again, as she had not been for many
months; yet the words escaped from him unintentionally and sternly:

"_To Rome_!"

"Yes, Marco, thou and I and the little one! We should be so happy again
in the palazzo Donatello, where baby came to us."

"Marina, a Giustinian abides by Venice. From the days when every man of
the Ca' Giustiniani--save only the priest, who might not take up
arms--laid down his life before Lepanto, none hath ever forsaken
Venice."

"It is not to forsake our Venice, Marco mio!" she cried, with growing
eagerness, "but to serve her--to plead with the Holy Father that he will
remove the curse and let all the prayers of Venice ascend again to the
Madre Beatissima, who listens no more! It is a service for a Giustinian
to render!"

Her whole soul pleaded in face and gesture, beautiful and compelling; he
felt her old power reasserting itself; he almost groaned aloud as he put
up his hand to shut out this beseeching vision of the wife whom he loved
before all things but honor--lest he, being among the trusted rulers of
his country, should fail to Venice out of the great joy of granting to
Marina the happiness she craved.

Not for an instant did the young Venetian noble question his duty, while
with head averted, lest Marina should guess his struggle, he invoked
that ever-present image of Venetia regnant, which all her children
recognize, to stay him from forgetting it until this temptation were
past and he could be strong again; but now he knew that he was weak from
an irrepressible yearning to clasp Marina in his arms and grant her
heart's desire--at whatever cost; he dared not touch her lest he should
yield.

The moment's silence intensified her eagerness and hope; he felt them
burning in her eyes, and would not meet their prayer again. But she
could not wait, and her hand, fluttering restlessly upon his shoulder,
crept up to touch his cheek, thrilling him unbearably, as if each
sensitive finger-tip repeated her urgency. He must yield if she kept it
there. He snatched her hand to his lips and dropped it quickly, nerving
himself to speak steadily, lest he should betray irresolution--so
covering the tenderness which would have atoned for the positive
refusal.

"Marina, a Venetian may not demean himself to ask forgiveness of the
Holy Father in a matter wherein Venice hath not sinned--but Rome."

"Marco, my beloved, if Venice were mistaken! If thou and I might save
her!"

Her voice broke in a sob of agony, and her husband gathered her in his
arms, struggling not to weep with her. "Carina--carinissima!" he
repeated soothingly; yet, as she grew calmer, brought despair again.

"Nay, Marina, no loyal senator may question the decision of his
government; thou presumest too far; but thine illness and thy suffering
have made thee irresponsible."

Then, grieving so to cross her in her weakness and pain, with all his
tenderness in his voice, he hastened to atone for the firmness of the
declaration which had sufficiently proved his staunchness.

"Marina, thou and I--were we not Giustiniani--more than all other
Venetians owe our loyalty in time of stress; and for love of thee,
beloved, shall Venice find me faithful in her need--I and all my
household true, and all my fortune hers in service, if need should
be--as thus I vowed, before them all, on that day when the Senate gave
thee to me and made thee the sweetest patrician lady in all the land. We
will not fail them, beloved!"

He clasped her close, holding her firmly, as if to infuse her with his
faith. "All blessings are for those who do the right, Marina; we need
not fear."

Never had she seen his face so inspired, so masterful, so tender; it was
a revelation. The whole of their beautiful love story was written on it,
mastering all the traditions of Venice, yet binding him more closely to
the service of his country.

For a moment she looked at him awestruck, longing to give the submission
which would bring her rest; it was not strange that she loved him so;
oh, if she might but acquiesce in his view of right! Madre Beatissima,
life was hard, and the way of right was the way of the cross--how many
holy women had found it so! One hand stole to the little crucifix
beneath her robe and pressed its roughened surfaces into her breast, for
she must not place the sweetness of this earthly love before the duty of
the heavenly one. "Santa Maria, save me!" she prayed, while, only for
one moment, she drooped her head to his shoulder and nestled close, that
he should know her heart was his, whatever came--_whatever came_.

Was it strange that her agony threatened her reason? In that one little
moment of comfort, which she yearned to hold free from suffering that
its remembrance might uphold her, the powerful vision of the
Tintoretto's awful _Judgment_ rose beckoningly before her. It was the
doom of Venice, and she alone--so impotent--recognized the danger.

The vision pursued her night and day. The River of the Wrath of God,
leaping up to meet those frowning skies of His most just anger, and
Venice--superb, disdainful--overwhelmed between; the cloud of
innumerable souls, tortured and writhing, fleeing from before the face
of the Holy One, no more than a mere film of whirling atoms,
falling--falling into an abyss of horrors--the dim, doomed shapes
wearing faces that had smiled into hers--With an inarticulate moan she
hid her face on her husband's shoulder.

"Marco," she whispered with an effort, for her strength was spent, "not
though it were a vision, revealed by the Madonna San Donato, thou
wouldest take me to Rome? Not though I could make thee comprehend what
it means for me--and thee?"

She waited breathlessly for his answer, with pulses that seemed to pause
for the momentous decision, not daring to look at him lest she should
falter and retract; for never again would she ask this question, which,
even now, she had put in the form of an assertion.

"Nay, Marina, the Madonna asketh naught of thee but that which gracious
women must give--submission to their princes--in which, beloved, thou
seemest to fail; and duty to thy Church, in which thou, having ever been
before all others, art now neglectful. For from the altar of your home
no Masses ascend, no fragrance of flowers nor praise. Venice is more
faithful in that which she commands, and we, carina, may not longer
disregard her will without suspicion of disloyalty. Since Fra Francesco
is no longer here, I will apply for some new ministrant. Hast thou a
wish in this choice of a priest for the service of our oratory?"

She had started away from him almost resentfully, that he could charge
her--whose fealty to her Church was killing her--with neglect of any
duty it imposed; but, out of her larger love, she understood him better
than he knew her, and she forgave him and nestled back again. He had not
been brought up to place the requirements of the Church before the
commands of Venice,--few patricians were in those days,--she could not
make him realize the awful restrictions of that ban which, by her strict
teaching, made it impossible for the faithful to worship in Venice while
it remained unwithdrawn; yet he could count it as non-existent!

She was glad that she had felt the tumult of his heart while he answered
her so calmly; it made her realize what it cost him to deny her prayer;
it assured her that a staunch sense of duty underlay his strength;
pitilessly it assured her also that he would not change, and the very
firmness which came between them made her love and admire him the more.
In the midst of her pain she was proud that he also had conscience on
his side, however misguided it seemed to her. Why did the good Madonna
permit these differences? How was it possible for Marco, with his quick,
intellectual grasp, not to comprehend the truth--not to see the terrors
that Venice had brought upon herself! He was suffering also, but only
because she suffered; never would he understand her agony; the rudest,
crudest weight of the cross she must lift alone, weary and spent with
the bitter struggle.

She summoned all her strength to answer him as though the words were
easily spoken. "Since it is not Fra Francesco, whom we love," she said,
"I know no other; choose thou, my Marco."

His face flushed with pleasure that her resistance seemed conquered.
"And when we have found our confessor, shall we go together--thou and
the little one and I," he asked brightly, "to the Island of Sant' Elenà,
which thou lovest, and we ourselves bring flowers to deck our chapel?
For it hath been long since Mass was said therein."

"Yes, Marco mio," she answered to the love in his voice, struggling to
repress every accent of dissent; for in her heart she told herself that
the chapel of the palazzo Giustiniani was his, not hers, since their
faith was divided; "and for me only, not for him, to worship there is
sin. And the beautiful day together, alone on the island with the
flowers--it is the gift of the Holy Mother to help me endure!"

And her husband, as he left her, carried with him a smile that satisfied
him.

But, turning in the doorway for another glance--so sweet it was to have
her all his own again--a pang shot through him, for the glory was gone
from her face--or was it the shadow that made it so wan and gray?--and
no smile hid the questioning anguish of her eyes. Nay, he himself was
fanciful, for it was too far to see, and he could not shake off the
sadness of the days that were past. But he must teach himself to forget
them. For Marina had smiled at him, radiantly, as in the sweet, old
days; and together they would deck the chapel for a benediction!


XXVI

Fra Paolo was fast becoming a centre of romance, so many were the
attempts from suspicious quarters to manage private interviews which the
Senate had thought necessary to frustrate; and the fact that he was
known to have declined the escort of guards which the Senate urged upon
him as means of safety endowed him with a sort of heroic halo in the
eyes of the lesser multitude. "Fate largo a Fra Paolo," they called in
the Merceria if the people pressed him too closely--"Make way for Fra
Paolo!"--and a strange youthfulness, as of satisfied affections, was
beginning to grow upon his calm face. He had had no cravings, feeling
that duty sufficed; yet, through this absolute yielding of himself to
express the message with which his life was charged, his heart had
warmed within him, and now, unsought, the people loved him, magnifying
the interest of every minor happening of his life and zealously
gathering anecdotes of the days before he was great.

A group of his brother friars were strolling back and forth under the
fretted colonnades of the greater court of the Servi one evening before
vespers, a glow of relish on their genial, cowled faces, rehearsing the
tale of Fra Paolo's unconventional slippers; for it was the hour of
small gossip, and the day had been warm.

"They were scarlet, like an eminence's," explained Fra Giulio, who had
secured this choice bit for the entertainment of his special cronies;
"for all colors are one to Fra Paolo, who hath no distinction for
trifles."

"Because he spendeth himself in scheming for honors that belong
elsewhere," interposed a disaffected brother who had strolled up and
joined the group uninvited; he belonged to another chapter of the Servi,
and had but recently come among them; honors had passed him by and
duties attracted him less, and he had made no friends within the
convent, though he professed great interest in all that concerned Fra
Paolo, and had even offered to wait upon him in chapel or in his cell.

"Thou, Fra Antonio, seek thine own friends!" Fra Giulio retorted, with
unusual asperity; "for this tale is too good for thine hearing, being
another triumph for Fra Paolo in the days when he was only a frate of
the Servi."

"_Ebbene_, and then?" urged the eager auditors, crowding around the
speaker, for the incongruity of the grave padre, in his frayed and rusty
gown attempting to usurp a decoration, lent interest to the petty
happening.

"_Ebbene_, and then his Eminence of Borromeo--for it seemeth that only
the illustrious play parts in this farce"--Fra Giulio continued with
keen enjoyment, "his Eminence of Borromeo hath explained at Rome that
Fra Paolo was innocent of contempt of rule."

"Verily, the fault might have been counted to one who hath no sins of
the body to atone for!" sneered Fra Antonio, who could not be converted
to the prevailing tone of admiration for this abnormal being who walked
among them not as other men, and toward whom his own attitude was a
singular compound of obsequiousness and cynicism. "Even the slippers of
your saint can do no wrong," he added venomously.

"But thou, in canonized shoes, couldst walk but wearily, Fra Antonio,
lest they should lead thee in unwonted ways!" one of the party retorted
maliciously.

"Fra Paolo hath fear of no man, and that which he declareth he knoweth,"
said another of the frati, lowering his voice and glancing about him
furtively. "And it hath chanced to him, more than once, to be wiser than
the Serenissimo and the Ten themselves--may San Marco have other uses
for his ears! But the day that our famous Signor Bragadin was summoned
from his palace on the Giudecca to make his promised gold for the
Signoria, I stood with the crowd in the Merceria to see him pass, with
his two black dogs and their golden collars looking for all the world
like powers of evil! And our gold-maker himself going to the Senate like
a noble, with his friends the Cornaro and the Dandolo in crimson
robes--the people thronging to see him pass!"

"Ay, Bragadin was a saintly man!" one of them retorted mockingly. "Dost
remember the tale how that he fooled the worshipful Signoria to leave
him a week in peace, that he might take the blessed sacrament quietly,
finding therein 'a holy joy' that should fit him to proceed to the
service of Venice--looking, meanwhile, for means of escape?"

"_Davvero_! but this was the hour of his highest favor, and I followed
with the rest of the crowd till there was scarce breathing space under
the clock tower, where the _Magi_ were just coming forth to salute the
Madonna and the Bambino at the stroke of the day; and the people were
shouting so one could not hear the bell for cries of 'Gold! gold!
Bragadin!'

"We surged back against the doorway of the 'Nave d'Oro,' the people
struggling with each other lest they should lose the sight as he passed
through the Piazza, and suddenly there came a voice,--cold, and
scornful, and low, but no man lost the words,--'Thou art wearied in the
multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the
monthly prognosticators stand up and save thee from these things that
shall come upon thee!' The people stopped their pushing and looked
aghast to see who spake, but I could have sworn it was Fra Paolo's
voice. I caught a glimpse of him standing quietly just inside the 'Nave
d'Oro,' while the other signori who go there to ridotto were out in the
Merceria to see the show; and I made haste away lest the crowd should
object to my habit for being like Fra Paolo's--they were so crazy for
Bragadin, following in the footsteps of the Signoria, like good
Venetians!"

"Who told the saying to the Signoria, when it might have crushed Fra
Paolo?" Fra Giulio questioned jealously.

"It may well have been his Excellency the Signor Donato, who was of the
Council in those days, but a man too strong to have a mind to the folly
of the others, and who walked about the chamber giving sign of much
displeasure while Bragadin made his gold. And the next day Fra Paolo is
commanded before the Signoria to meet the Provveditor of the Mint--being
the only man who hath dared speak his mind before the Signoria had
proved the worthlessness of Bragadin's promise. And our fine gold-maker
exchangeth his palace for a prison; for the test of the crucible is all
too easy for Fra Paolo, who speaketh naught that he knoweth not."

"Santa Maria! here cometh the 'bride,'" some one exclaimed warningly;
for none of Fra Paolo's friends had the courage for frivolity in his
grave presence, harmless as it might appear in his absence, and this
watchword was often heard in the cloister as he approached.

He was conversing earnestly with his secretary, Fra Fulgenzio, evidently
on business of the Senate, having remained in the convent all day,
contrary to his usual custom; Fra Fulgenzio had been to and fro with
messages, and once had returned from the Ducal Palace escorting several
grave personages who had gone to Fra Paolo's cell for some conference,
which gave rise to pleasant comment in the convent--since the
Serenissimo could not dispense with the personal service of its
Consultore for a single day, and every honor shown to Fra Paolo was dear
to the hearts of the Servi.

Fra Paolo paused only for a moment as he passed the group to exchange a
greeting, but his keen, quiet glance took in every expression, from the
affectionate smile of old Fra Giulio to the jealous discontent of Fra
Antonio, whose gaze drooped before him while he hastened to give the
accustomed sign of reverence due to one so high in authority.

Fra Paolo considered him seriously for a moment before resuming his
stroll. "Fra Antonio," he said, in his passionless voice, "the head of
the Roman Chapter hath made inquiry for thee, and knew naught of thy
presence here. Thou wilt soon be recalled. That thou doest--do quickly."

A sudden pallor overspread the features of Fra Antonio, who staggered
and would have fallen, as he made an effort to steal away unobserved,
had not the others come to his assistance.

"What is thy sudden ailment?" one of them asked him roughly, for he was
no favorite.

But before the trembling friar could steady his voice or choose his
words he was forgotten, for the evening bells began to chime for
vespers, and as the brothers came flocking through the cloisters the
great bell at the entrance gate on the Fondamenta dei Servi sent back
the special deep-toned call, which took precedence of every order within
the convent. Those who had already reached the chapel streamed back in
wild confusion to answer the summons which filled the court with
clanging echoes, while the silvery notes of the chapel chimes sounded
faintly in the pauses of the deeper reverberations--like the voice of a
timid child crying to be comforted when it does not understand.

In the excitement that followed Fra Antonio was forgotten by all but Fra
Giulio, who had been watching him closely as he made his way with
difficulty toward the low, arched passage which led in the direction of
the dormitory.

"Lean on me," said Fra Giulio, who stood barring the way.

"Nay," replied the other, who seemed scarcely able to stand, "I must
needs reach my cell; a sudden illness hath overtaken me."

But Fra Giulio, usually so compassionate that he was called "woman
hearted," did not move.

"Later a remedy shall be brought thee," he answered coldly. "Thou
hearest the great summons which none of our order may disobey; it is
rare and solemn to hear that call. Something of moment hath chanced.
_Ecco_, now we shall know!" he added in a tone of relief, as Fra
Gianmaria appeared from under the convent entrance, whither he had gone
to receive the Chief of the Ten, who now entered the great court with
him in formal state, with a secretary and attendants and an officer of
the guards.

The tumultuous crowd began to range itself in orderly groups at the
command of the superior, and Fra Antonio controlled himself with a
supreme effort as a body of palace guards, in brilliant uniforms,
scattered themselves among the black-robed friars. The heavy gates
closed behind them, and the dismal tolling of the bell ended in a
silence through which the heart-beats of Fra Antonio sounded in his ears
louder and more ominous than the harsh tones of the summons had done a
moment before.

Who were those two terrible gondoliers all in black, who stood by the
water-entrance on the Fondamenta? Was it the shadow of their great black
hats that darkened their features like masks? Why were they there?

He glanced stealthily at the faces of the friars; they were more full of
interest than dread, while the eyes of the little choristers who stood
robed for chapel service shone with delight. Evidently to all that
community the interruption was an event filled with possibilities of
excitement that was welcomed as breaking the monotony of the daily
round. Perhaps no one had noticed those gondoliers! Only Father
Gianmaria, the Superior, and the Senator Giustinian Giustiniani, the
Chief of the Ten, were stern and angry; and Fra Paolo stood between
them--calm and inscrutable as ever.

Now, thought Fra Antonio, before the curiosity of the friars had been
satisfied,--while no one was thinking of him,--he must escape! But at
every passage leading out of the court a scarlet coat stood guard, save
only before the low doorway of the dormitory stair. Fra Giulio's eyes
were fixed earnestly, adoringly, upon his beloved Fra Paolo, and he had
moved a little way from the wall.

Fra Antonio stole softly in behind him, breathlessly anxious. He was
already under the archway when his unsteady foot stumbled in a hollow of
the worn brick pavement just within the opening--in another moment he
should be safe! But a voice, meant for him alone, leaped through all
that crowd and petrified him with horror; it was filled with a sarcastic
grace as it offered the courtesy.

"Whoever hath need to leave this cloister before the Inquiry of Venice
is satisfied, shall be served by the gondola of the _Piombi_--which
waits."

I Piombi! Those prisons under the leads where the heat was slow
torture--this was the meaning of the masked gondoliers!

Surely it was the Chief of the Ten who had spoken! Fra Antonio trembled
from head to foot; but was he not already far enough within the narrow,
winding passage to be hidden from the cruel gaze of that man of power?
Half an inch might make the difference between life and death; he folded
his black gown closer about him--stealthily--so that it might not
rustle, watching the faint shadow on the pavement in agony--what if his
hand had been seen as he passed it behind him to gather up the folds!

Those words could not be meant for him; they were merely a general
order; there were twenty men--forty men in that company more wicked than
he! He could not turn back and face them to glide into his place again;
it would be certain death; but when the Chief of the Ten or Father
Gianmaria should begin to speak, he must go on.

He lifted one foot to be ready; a great sweat broke out on his
forehead--would this silence never end? He dared not stir until there
should be words to hold the crowd; for if he should be caught----

Were they speaking?--His heart thumped so that he could not hear. Santa
Maria!--death could not be worse!

"Thou art summoned; they are calling thee," said Fra Giulio, close
beside him, in a low, hard voice that changed to one more compassionate
as the friar turned his livid face toward him. "I know not thy fault,
but Fra Paolo will plead for thee; for thou art ill, verily."

"Fra Paolo is no man of mercy."

"Nay, but of justice. He will not remember thy discourtesies."

"_Discourtesies_!" ay, it was true; Fra Giulio did not know--nobody
knew; he would take courage and plead to be forgiven his manifold
"discourtesies" toward this idol of the Servi; it was for this that he
was summoned! The palace guards were approaching the low passage, and
the extremity of his need steadied him; he rallied all his powers for a
last effort, and, shaking off their touch, advanced into the court--his
face, withered and pain-stricken, might have plead for him but for the
strange hardness of the lines.

"It was a sudden malady that bade me seek my cell," he gasped. "I knew
not that your Excellency had need of me."

He was a ghastly thing in his fear.

The inexorable Chief of the Ten surveyed him in silence for a brief
moment that seemed unending.

"Ay, Fra Antonio, we _have_ need of thee--more than another. For word
hath reached Venice, privately, from special friendly sources in Rome,
that thou art come hither charged with a message of vital import to a
trusted servant of the Republic. Thou hast leave of the Signoria to
declare it in this presence."

Fra Antonio opened his dry lips and framed some words of which he heard
no echo.

"The Inquiry of Venice is satisfied," said the Chief. "Thou art the man
whom we seek. Conduct him to the gondola of the Piombi."

Fra Antonio fell upon his knees in wild supplication as the guards
gathered around him, but the Father Superior detained them with a
prohibitory motion.

"I crave your Excellency's pardon. For the better ruling of this
community and the clearing of all the innocent among our brotherhood, I
have summoned hither every soul under my rule. That no scandal may
arise, your Excellency will permit that the charge under which this
arrest is made be declared."

Assent was given by an impatient gesture.

"Fra Antonio, while he hath been a recipient of our hospitality," said
the Superior, "is described by trustworthy advices from our Chapter in
Rome, but just received, as a person who hath designs upon the life of a
member of this community."

"It is a false scandal," cried Fra Antonio, who had found his voice at
last. "I shall not be condemned without proof!"

"The truth is known," said Fra Paolo, leaning toward him and speaking
low. "It were better for thee to confess--or depart in silence."

But the man was beside himself with fear; he caught at his last,
desperate chance of favor, dragging himself to the feet of Fra Paolo and
pouring out an abject tale of petty jealousies and offenses for which he
obsequiously craved pardon of this "idol of the convent," protesting,
with horrible oaths, that he was guilty of nothing more.

The rare shade of compassion that had softened Fra Paolo's face when he
gave his warning, deepened to a glory and his eyes shone with a grace
that was like love, as he raised the wretched man and strove to arrest
his torrent of words. "_God_ heareth thee, my brother," he said
pleadingly; "have pity on thine own soul. Kneel to Him alone in thy
great need. But spend not thy strength with trifles that demean us both.
If thine heart hath aught against me, I forgive it."

Then turning to the Chief he besought that the trial should be
short--"For the man is ill, and I would have quiet speech with him."

"For the honor of the Servi, let the matter be dispatched, and let proof
be brought," the Superior demanded, surprised and displeased at any
softness in Fra Paolo, whose dominant note was justice, rather than
mercy.

"We will grant him the favor of a farewell collation ere he taketh leave
of his entertainers," said the Giustinian. "Let the refection be
brought."

The friars exchanged glances of astonishment and dismay as a dish of
fruit and of white bread were brought forward by two of the ducal
guards, on a costly salver wrought with the arms of Venice. It was like
the simple refreshment they had often carried to Fra Paolo's cell when
he had been absorbed by some train of thought, which, according to his
wont, he would not suspend for any hour of sleep or meals until the
problem had been conquered. Fra Giulio trembled; he would have said
those were the very grapes he had chosen to tempt Fra Paolo's slender
appetite,--white, with the veins of purple,--all as he had left them on
his desk that day, with the plate of fine white bread, when the midday
meal was served--but in no lordly dish.

A faint cry escaped Fra Antonio, and he put his hands before his face.

There was a moment of breathless silence; but no compassion anywhere
upon all those strained and eager faces, except in the eyes of Fra
Paolo, which seemed divine in pity, as he drew nearer the guilty man and
put his arm about him to steady him.

"These," said the Chief of the Ten, "fine grapes and wheaten bread,
exquisitely flavored with a most precious powder, thou shalt presently
enjoy in this presence,--with the compliments of the Signoria, who have
most carefully considered this repast,--unless thou dost instantly make
frank and full confession of thy deed and thine accomplices.

"And if more be to thy taste," the cruel voice went on, for no answer
came, "since in these matters thou hast a consummate knowledge--thou art
permitted, by grace of the Signoria, to use the contents of this packet,
which hath been found within the lining of thy cassock. This powder hath
a marvelous power to still the blood which floweth over-swiftly----"

"We have proof more than sufficient for the arrest, your Excellency,"
interposed the officer of the guards, as he gave the signal. "And no
deposition can be taken here, for the man hath fainted from his fright."

But almost unnoticed the guards bore their burden from the cloister to
the gondola of the prisons of the Piombi; for it had taken but a moment
to complete the unfinished tale in the minds of the listeners, and with
one accord they were gathering about Fra Paolo, eager to express their
loyalty, their indignation, their gratitude for his escape.

The court was in a tumult. "Fra Paolo!" "_Our_ Fra Paolo!" mingled with
bursts of vehement condemnation and rapid questions. "Our Consultore!"
"And because he is necessary to Venice!"

The chimes of the chapel sounding joyously broke in upon these
demonstrations, and two little choristers came running back to tell them
that, by order of Fra Gianmaria, a Te Deum for the safety of Fra Paolo
would be sung, in lieu of the interrupted vesper service.

"The Signoria hath had warnings without end," the Chief of the Ten was
explaining hastily to Father Gianmaria, as they strolled toward the
chapel. "The Holy Father wanteth him out of Venice, since he hath been
Consultore--for the man is a marvel! But he would rather have him alive
than dead--as the learned Scioppius hath explained, not long since, to
Fra Paolo himself! And this whole plot hath been unveiled to us by one
who watcheth secretly in Rome for the interest of Venice, since there
hath been no open communication. It was hatched in the Orsini palace, in
that holy city, not unknown to some of their Eminences; the chief
accomplices are friars--we have the names of the other two; and Piero
Salin is on the watch. The stakes are high for the friars' game--five
thousand _scudi_ apiece and a promise of Church preferment; but Piero
Salin hath ways of doing his duty! The Senate will send orders for the
better protection of its Consultore; meanwhile let him not venture forth
without two ducal guards."

"Your Excellency knoweth that Fra Paolo will have no state."

"A cowl over their saintly faces, if it please his fancy! It is the
order of the Senate, waiting better plans of safety--a suite in the
Ducal Palace or a house connected therewith by some guarded passage.
Warning hath been sent us most urgently, by friends of the Republic, of
a great price and absolution for him who may bring Fra Paolo to
Rome--alive or dead!"


XXVII

These days had been important in the Senate. In the deliberations prior
to the departure of di Gioiosa the concessions which Rome had
persistently asked had been so persistently and diplomatically declined
that even the wily cardinal dared no longer press them; and it seemed at
last that there was to be truce to the cautious and subtle word-weighing
of months past, as di Gioiosa, suddenly realizing that he held the
ultimatum of the Republic, had taken his departure for Rome in the
night--conceiving it easier, perhaps, to confess his partial defeat to
the dignified Signoria by proxy. So he made the announcement through a
gentleman of his household the next morning, while he was already
journeying toward the expectant Pope, to whom he carried bitter
disappointment; and the heart of the cardinal himself had been scarcely
less set upon those points of amelioration which he had not obtained. It
was a blow to his diplomacy and to his churchman's pride; for the terms
which the cardinal was empowered to offer were scarcely less haughty
than was the attitude which Venice had assumed throughout the quarrel.

His Holiness had wished that Venice, as a first step, should cancel the
"Protest" which she had widely published, declaring the interdict
invalid.

But Venice, with cool logic, had declined to accede to this; since the
protest, being based upon the censures, was practically annulled by
their withdrawal--which must therefore first take place. And, although
by this same logic she was led to declare that no act on the part of the
Republic would then be necessary to void her protest, she consented to
give a writing to that effect, so soon as the censures should have been
withdrawn.

The Pope requested that all who had left Venice on account of the
interdict should, upon its withdrawal, return and be reinstated in their
former privileges--making a special point of including the Jesuits.

But here, also, Venice made and kept to her amendment; all should
return, with full privilege and favor--save only the Jesuits, who had in
various ways rendered themselves obnoxious to the government.

The revocation of those laws which the Pope demanded was not to be
thought of, since this would be questioning the right of Venice to make
laws; neither was their suspension possible, for the laws were just. But
his Holiness might rest assured that they would be used in moderation
and Christian piety only--as they had ever been.

The real concession--the only one--was in the case of the ecclesiastical
prisoners--the Abbot of Nervessa and the Canon of Vicenza--whom his
Holiness persisted in claiming. But Monsieur du Fresne, the French
Ambassador, suggested that the Republic should, "without prejudice to
her right of jurisdiction over criminal ecclesiastics," _give_ these
prisoners to the ambassador as a mark of special favor to his king, the
mediator, who might then consign them to the Pope if he chose--they
being his to deal with.

Venice, with her powers of subtle reasoning, gladly embraced this way
out of the difficulty which had first appeared insuperable. "So to
_give_ them," she said, appeased, "confirms rather than questions our
authority, since no one may 'give' to another that over which he
exercises no dominion."

It was not Venice, but France, who was to request that the interdict be
withdrawn, that she might not seem to other nations to be under the ban;
for the Republic did not acknowledge that this condition of disfavor had
gone into effect; she could not therefore personally request the Pope to
change an attitude which put only himself in the wrong. But when there
was a hint of "absolution," which the cardinal in his zeal would also
ask the Holy Father to pronounce, Venice was silent from displeasure.
She had done no wrong; she would neither ask nor accept absolution.

The Senate might indeed be weary of these interminable discussions and
unending compliments, and glad of a respite in which to turn to other
matters. But there were no idle hours in that august assembly, though it
might chance that some whimsical phase of statesmanship lightened, by
way of entr'acte, the severity of their deliberations. They were,
possibly, not unpleasantly aware of the irony of the situation when a
letter from their governor in Constantinople announced "the extreme
solicitude of the Turkish Government for the life and welfare of the
Holy Father," who had so furthered their interests by widely inciting
discord among the nations of Christianity that, seeing therein a mark of
the special favor of Allah, the sultan had ordered prayers and
processions for the continued welfare of his Holiness!

The singular jealousy of the Venetians for the solidarity of their
government, with their no less singular jealousy of individual
aggrandizement, together with the rare perception of mental
characteristics that was fostered by the daily culture of the councils
in which every noble took his part, led them constantly to ignore their
selfish hopes in order to choose the right man for the place. These
sentiments, acting and reacting upon each other, had secured their
political prosperity; but a disaffection was beginning to make itself
felt in the Senate which led ultimately to over-limitations of power and
such multiplied checks and suspicions that noble living and wise ruling
became impossible.

It was a time of suppressed excitement, and there had been a grave
discussion as to the growing power of the Ten, against which some of the
senators had dared to express themselves openly; for many of these
strong men were beginning to feel that their government weighed upon
them like a Fate, crushing all liberty and individuality; and of secret
trials without defense there were tragic memories haunting the annals of
that grave tribunal.

But so great were the complications of the involved Venetian machine--so
many were the mysteries and fears environing the daily life of these
patricians--that each felt the actual to be safer than the untried
unknown, and surrendered the hope of change, tightening the cords that
upheld the government as their only means of safety.

For there was an under side to all this gold-tissued splendor that was
sometimes laid bare to the people, in spite of the deftness with which
the Signoria stood tirelessly ready to cover up the flaws; and a recent
sad travesty of justice was one of the weird happenings of this time.

Not long since a formal _decree of pardon_ had been solemnly declared
and published throughout Venetia, at which the people stood aghast. For
the man to whom this clemency was graciously extended had been condemned
and executed between the columns of San Marco and San Teodoro, ten years
before--standing accused of conspiracy against the State. There had been
many murmurings when the name of this old patrician, holding honorable
office in service of the Republic, had been erased from the Golden Book;
and he had suffered his ignominious death protesting that the charge was
false, and that all who had aided in his condemnation should die before
the year was out. His dying words had proved a grim prophecy, which,
encouraged by the pressure of the senators, induced the Signoria to
order a re-investigation of his case, whereby the _manes_ of this
dishonored servant of the State were re-instated in that serene favor
now so worthless.

And to-day the people gathered in gloomy silence while the great bell of
the campanile tolled the call to the solemn funeral pageant by which the
Republic offered reparation over the exhumed body of the victim. The
senators, wrapped in mourning cloaks, surrounded the bust of the man
they desired to honor as it was carried in triumph to the church where
the tomb was prepared; and the three _avvogadori_, who had the keeping
of the Golden Book, bore it on a great cushion behind the marble effigy,
the leaf bound open where the name was re-inscribed. Here also walked
the domestics of the re-habilitated noble of Venice--the hatchments that
had been doomed to oblivion freshly embroidered upon their sleeves above
their tokens of crêpe. The Doge and the Signoria all took part in this
tragic confession of wrong, doing penance unflinchingly for the sins of
their predecessors; for Venice could be munificent in reparation, not
shrinking from her own humiliation to appease outraged justice and
confirm her power, and there was nothing lacking that might add
impressiveness to the pageant.

But the people looked on gloomy and unappeased, filled with a horror
which the funeral pomp did little to quiet; they did not follow as the
_cortège_ descended the steps of the Piazzetta to embark in the waiting
gondolas that had been lavishly provided by the Republic. Santissima
Maria! they wanted to get back to their own quarters on the Giudecca and
breathe a little sunshine! What did one noble matter, less or more? "But
it's a gloomy barcarolle that a dead man sings!"

"And one that hath not died his own death!" a woman answered under her
breath, as she crossed herself with a shudder.

The wind inflated the empty folds of the crimson robe that draped the
bier, carrying it almost into the water, as the gondolas glided away
from the Piazzetta.

"San Marco save us! he wanted none of their pomp," said an onlooker
scornfully. "The ten good years of his life and a quiet grave in San
Michele--the Signoria would buy them dear, to give them to _him_
to-day!"

Yet if some had died unjustly, there was not less need of ceaseless
vigilance against unceasing intrigue, within and without that body which
held the power; and one morning the Senate was thrown into a state of
great agitation by disclosures from one of the brothers of the Frari,
indubitably confirmed by the papers which he delivered into the hands of
the Doge.

"It is beyond belief!" Giustinian Giustiniani exclaimed to the Lady
Laura, "how Spain findeth method to make traitors in Venice itself! It
is a nation treacherous to the core, and it were beyond the diplomacy of
any government,--save only ours,--to maintain relations on such a basis
of fraud."

"What is there of new to chide them for?" she asked with keen interest.

"Is not the old enough to make one wrathful! Boastful threats of arms
against the Republic if she yield not obedience to the Holy Father, with
secret promises of armed assistance to his Holiness to keep him firm in
his course, at the very moment of her cringing attempts at mediation
lest France should carry off the glory!--and because Spain hath neither
men to spare for Rome, nor courage to declare against the Republic, nor
diplomacy to bring anything to an issue!"

"Nay, now them art returned to Venice forget the disturbing ways of
Spain," the Lady Laura answered, with an attempt at conciliation. "I am
glad that thy mission in that strange land hath come to an end."

"Ay, but the ways of Spain do make traitors of us all!" Giustinian
exclaimed hotly. "When a senator of the Republic hath such amity for the
ambassador of his Most Catholic Majesty, forsooth, that at vespers and
at matins, in the Frari, they must use the self-same kneeling stool--a
tenderness and devotion beautiful to see in men so great; for it is aye
one, and aye the other, and never both who tell their beads at
once--that, verily, some brother of the Frari doth take cognizance of a
thing so rare and saintly and bringeth word thereof to the Serenissimo,
_with matter of much interest found within the prie-dieu_."

"Giustinian!"

"Ay, these minutes of the noble Senator, who acteth so well the spy for
favor of Spain, would do honor to a ducal secretary, for accuracy of
information concerning weighty private matters before the Council! And
due acknowledgment of so rare a courtesy doth not fail us in the very
hand of the ambassador himself, for this letter also was intercepted!
This frate who hath brought the information verily deserveth honor for
so great a service!"

"And the others?"

"Is there more than one treatment for a traitor?" Giustinian exclaimed,
with increasing temper. "And for the ambassador--it hath already been
courteously signified to him that the air of Venice agreeth not well
with one of his devotional tendencies."

"Tell me the name of the traitor," the Lady Laura urged, coming close
and laying her hand upon his shoulder.

"Nay," said her husband, shaking off her touch impatiently, "my anger
doth unlock my speech to a point I had not dreamed, for the matter may
be held before the Inquisition! But it is a name unknown to thee, and
new to this dignity, which he weareth like a clown! The freedom is still
too great for this entry to the Senate; the serrata hath done its work
too lightly if it leave space for one parvenu! To-morrow, when thou
takest the air in thy gondola, my Lady Laura, thou shalt look between
the columns of the Ducal Palace and know whatever the State will declare
to thee of that which concerneth the government alone! The times are
perilous."

"They will be better when the interdict is removed----"

"Ay--no--one knows not; it is a matter too grave for women and too
little for the Republic to grieve about. His Holiness would have us on
our knees, weeping like naughty infants, and abjectly craving his pardon
for daring to make our own laws and uphold our prince!"

"Giustinian, there is more to it than that."

"Ay, there _is_ more, if it setteth the women up to preach to us and to
expound the laws of the Republic--a knowledge in which I knew not that
they held the mastery! Take not the tone of Marina, who hath come near
to killing herself and making half a fool of Marcantonio."

"Nay, Marco is true to Venice and swerveth not. And for our
daughter--she hath suffered till it breaks my heart to look into her
face, poor child! And thou, Giustinian, wert little like thyself, when
she lay almost dying! The Signor Nani hath confessed to me that in Rome
there was much intriguing for her favor--of which she suspected naught.
It was a harm to them that they went to Rome; I would not have had it
so."

"Ay, thou would'st not have had it so; thou would'st have had it all
thine own way!" retorted Giustinian, who was becoming impossible to
please, now that the paths of government were growing more thorny and
exacting, and the Lion showed no sign of climbing to his portal. "That
father confessor of hers hath much to answer for. Keep the little one
well out of the way of their craft--dost thou hear? He is to be trained
for Venice, after the ways of the Ca' Giustiniani. And Marcantonio--who
knows?"

He had drifted into his favorite reverie, and wandered abstractedly out
upon the balcony looking longingly toward the rose-colored palace where
his every ambition centred; but he felt the glittering, jeweled eyes of
the patron saint of Venice glare upon him mockingly from his vantage
point upon the column, while the very twist of the out-thrust tongue
insinuated a personal message of malice and defeat.


XXVIII

Venice was flooded with moonlight. The long line of palaces down the
Canal Grande shone back from the breast of the water, starred with
lights, repeated again and again in the rippling surface.

A ceaseless melody filled the air, braided of sounds familiar only to
this magic city--echoes of laughter from balconies high in air, silvery
tintinnabulations falling like drippings of water from speeding oars,
franker bursts of merriment from the open windows of the palaces, low
murmured tones of lovers in content from gliding gondolas, hoarse shouts
of quick imperious orders from gondoliers to offending gondoliers, as
they passed--apostrophes to liquid names of guardian saints, too
melodious for denunciations, hurled back with triple expletives and
forgotten the next moment in friendly parsiflage; here and there a
strain of ordered music, in serenade, from a group of friendly gondolas
swaying only with the tranquil movement of the water; or the mysterious
tone of a violin, uttering a soul prayer meant for some single listener,
which yet steals tremblingly forth upon the night air--more passionate,
more beautiful and true than that other human voice which breaks the
quiet of a neighboring calle with some monotonous love song of the
people.

And far away, perhaps, in the quainter squares of the more primitive
island villages--in Burano or Chioggia--before the Duomo, some reader
lies at full length in the brilliant moonlight under the banner of San
Marco, his "Boccaccio" open before him, repeating in a half-chant,
monotonous and droning, some favorite tale from the well-worn pages to
listeners who pause in groups in their evening stroll and linger until
another story is begun; this time it is some strophe from the
"Gerusalemme," to which a passing gondolier may chant the answering
strain--for this is the very poem of the people, echoing familiarly from
lip to lip, and tales from the Tasso are not seldom wrought into the
ebony carvings of their barks. Meanwhile the younger men and maidens, on
a neighboring fondamenta, keep step to the music of some strolling
player who lives, content, on the trifling harvest of these moonlight
festivities.

In the great Piazza of San Marco, with its hundreds of lights and its
hurrying throng, life is gayer than in the day. Crowds come and go under
the arcades, loiter at the tables closely set before the brilliant
cafes, or stroll with laughter and snatches of song and free Venetian
banter where there is less restraint, up and down the broad space of the
Piazza, between the colonnade and the burnished Eastern magnificence of
San Marco, beyond the reach of the yellow lamp flames--their laughing
faces grotesque and weird in the white glare of the moon. But under the
shadow of the Broglio and those great columns of the Ducal Palace there
are only slow-moving figures here and there, wrapped in cloaks, and dark
under the low, unlighted arches, talking in undertones which even the
watchful Lion--so near, so cunning--does not always overhear.

But in the calles, half in moonlight and half in shadow, night wears a
more poetic air of mystery and quiet; and if a fear but come in passing
some dread spot of tragic memory, a gentle Virgin at every turning, with
a dingy, flickering flame beneath her image, is waiting to grant her
grace--for is not Venice the Virgin City? And on the splendid palaces in
the broad canals the watching Madonna stands glorified in exquisite
sculpture and cunningest blendings of color,--ofttimes a crown of light
above her, or rays of stars, symbolic, beneath her feet,--casting her
benediction far out on the water, which, ever in motion, repeats it in
shimmering, widening circles--all-embracing--in which the stars of
heaven shine, tangled and confused with these stars of a paradise in
which earth has so large a part.

Yet in the glory and charm of this Venetian night how should there be
space for sorrow or thought of care, or cause for the tears which
brimmed the eyes of the Lady Marina, as she sat in her sculptured
balcony at the bend of the Canal Grande, watching for the coming of
Marcantonio, who lingered late at the Senate when every moment was
precious to her!

Ever since her husband had left her she had sat with her little one
gathered convulsively in her arms, showering upon him a tenderness so
passionate and so unlike herself in its uncontrolled expression, that
the child, wondering and afraid, was but half-beguiled by the rare treat
of the music and the lights of the Canal Grande, and clamored for his
nurse.

And now he was gone, with a kiss upon his sweet, round baby-mouth that
was like a benediction and a dirge in which a whole heart of wild mother
love sobbed itself out in renunciation--but to him it was only strange.
And she herself had hushed the grieving quiver of his lip, and quickly
filled his dimpled hands with flowers to win the farewell caress of that
dancing smile which irradiated his face like an April sunbeam, parting
the pink lips over a vision of pearly infant teeth.

Below, in the chapel, her maidens were decking it as for a festa with
vines and blossoms which she and Marco had brought that day--that
heavenly day--from the beautiful island of Sant' Elenà, wandering alone,
like rustic lovers, over the luxuriant flower-starred meadows and
through the cloistered gardens of its ancient convent, lingering awhile
in the chapel of the Giustiniani, while he rehearsed the deeds of those
of his own name who slept there so tranquilly under their marble
effigies--primate, ambassadors, statesmen, and generals; ay, and more
than these--lovers, mothers, and little ones!

And now, while she sat alone in this holy moonlight, the voices of her
maidens came in sounds of merriment through the fretted stonework of the
great window, and a sweet odor of altar candles and incense mingled with
the breath of the blossoms that was wafted up to her; for to-morrow, for
the first time since her illness, there would be matins in the chapel
of the palazzo, and Marcantonio had assured her that the new father
confessor was much like Fra Francesco--coming, also, from the convent of
the Servi, that he might seem nearer to her who had so loved the gentle
confessor.

Ay, she had loved him, with a holy reverence, for his goodness and
gentleness and faith; for his inflexible grasp of duty, according to his
views of right; for his teachings, which she could understand and which
she believed the Holy Mother had taught him--for his self-denial and
suffering.

And now, for a few moments, she forgot herself--forgot to watch for
Marco, her thoughts busied with the sad tale of Fra Francesco, which
Piero, always _in viaggio_ for business of the Senate, had told her but
a few days before--news that had reached him from the frontier. The
gentle confessor had indeed completed his pilgrimage, barefooted, to
Rome, but had gained no favor with the Holy Father; having at first been
welcomed as a deserter from the enemy's camp, flattered, and plied with
questions, to which Fra Francesco gave no answers--wishing no harm to
Venice nor to any who sat in the councils of the Republic. Whereupon his
lodgings had been changed and all communications with the brothers of
the Servite chapel in Rome had been forbidden. And again, and more than
once, he had been brought forth to be questioned; and again there had
been nothing told of that which they sought, for they asked him of his
friends, and his heart was true. But it was told that he had used
strange words. "Each man is answerable to his own soul and to God for
that which he believeth. He answereth not for the faith of another
man--nor shall he bring danger upon his friend--who hath also his
conscience and God for judge of his faith and actions."

"But what of Fra Paolo?" he had been asked; "How doth he defend himself
for leading thus the cause of Venice against Rome?"

"Am I my brother's keeper?" the gentle Fra Francesco had answered; and
had said no more.

"Thou shalt at least show us how one may obtain speech with him, for the
furtherance of his soul's salvation--apart from the vigilance of the
Senate, and without suspicion in the convent that the message cometh
from Rome, else were it not received in that unholy city."

And in this also Fra Francesco was obdurate. And then, for disobedience
to authority, acknowledged lawful by his own submission, came
prison--wherein he languished, always obdurate,--and death,--perhaps
from discontent or homesickness, one knows not; or from failure of his
plans; or--there was a question of torture, but one knows not if it were
true.

"No, no, it was not true!" Marina had exclaimed, quivering, when Piero
had told her the story. "It is wicked to say these things--and they are
not true!"

But now, alone--apart from all the brightness about her, from every hope
of happiness except those few brief hours with Marco--she did not know
if it might not be true; her heart was too sad to deny any pain that had
been or that might be; but Fra Francesco's sad and gentle eyes seemed to
smile upon her through whatever distance might be between them--of
this, or of any other world--without reproach for those who had bidden
him suffer, and charging her to keep her faith.

"If it be true," she said, "the end of pain is reached, and he hath won
his happiness.--Why cometh not my Marco?"

A gondola of the Nicolotti detached itself from a group of serenaders
just above the palace, was caught for a few moments among the _pali_
before the Ca' Giustiniani, and then floated leisurely down toward the
Piazzetta. She noted it idly while she sat waiting for Marco, for in the
gondola there was a graceful figure, closely wrapped, clasping her
mantle yet more closely with a hand that was white and slender enough
for one of the nobility; yet the gondolier wore the black sash of the
Nicolotti with the great hat of a bravo shading his face. "It is some
intrigue," she said, almost unconsciously, in the midst of her sad
dreaming.

"Oh, Marco, thou art come! It hath been long without thee."

"The Senate is but just dismissed," he answered, smiling fondly at the
eagerness which gave to her pale face a passing flush of health. "But
why is the Lady Beata not with thee?" he questioned abruptly.

"She is in the chapel, making it fair with flowers."

"Thou knowest it, Marina?"

"She came to me with a question but a little while ago, when Marconino
was with me--and I wished to be alone. Marco, he was so beautiful! And
the day has been a dream; I wished for no one but for thee alone."

He held her hand in a mute caress, but with preoccupation, while his
eyes wandered back to the Piazzetta searchingly.

"It is strange," he muttered to himself, still watching from the end of
the balcony. "It was an echo of the Lady Beata's voice that startled me,
crossing the Piazzetta saying two words only--'In Padua.'"

Then rousing himself, he turned brightly to his wife. "Carina, I have
news for thee, for the time hath been momentous for us in Venice. Di
Gioiosa hath gone forward, these many days, with terms from Venice; and
soon, it is thought, there will be peace."

_Terms_ from Venice to Rome!--but the words did not move her from her
resolve to let no shadow of their difference mar the beauty of this
night.

She looked at him wearily. "It is ever the same," she said, "through
this long, dreary year--ever the same! Let us forget it all for this one
night. Let us talk together of our Marconino!"

And as if there had been no questions--no interdict--no pain--while the
night sounds died into silence and the moon withdrew her glamor and left
them alone to the solemn mystery of the starlight, they sat and talked
together of love and their little one and their hopes for him, and of
things that lie too deep for utterance--save by one to one--far into
that beautiful Venetian night, with the odor of flowers and incense
blown up to them on the breath of the sea.


XXIX

The yellow lamp flames were burning late in the cabinet of Girolamo
Magagnati, who took less note of the difference between evening hours
and those of early dawn since there was no longer in his household a
beloved one to guard from weariness. Nay, the night was rather the time
in which he might forget himself and plunge more whole-heartedly into
his schemes of work--financial or creative. For the world was surely on
the eve of discoveries important to his art, and it would be well if he
might secure them, before his working days should pass, for the
Stabilimento Magagnati.

Piero Salin stood in the doorway as he glanced up from the drawings that
littered his table--the dark oak table which had seemed a centre of
cheer to Girolamo, when, in this very chamber, his child had made a
radiance for him in which the lines of his life shone large and
satisfying.

Girolamo never seemed to remember that this son-in-law was a great man
among the people; to him he was only Piero Salin, barcariol; the single
token of the old man's favor was that in his thought he no longer added
the despicable word _toso_; and it was a proof that he was mellowing
with the years, for Girolamo never forgot this unwelcome and
dishonorable past, and Piero was always ill at ease in his presence.

"Messer Magagnati," he began awkwardly, twirling his black cap in his
hand rather after the fashion of a gondolier than of the Chief of the
Nicolotti, "I must crave, by dawn of the morrow, the blessing of San
Nicolò--of holy memory."

"Enter," said Girolamo, with a reluctance not wholly concealed by his
attempt at courtesy, for he felt the moments to be the more precious
that the dawn was near; but the invocation of the sailor's patron saint
portended a journey. "Verily, Piero, thy comings and goings have been,
of late, so frequent that one learns the wisdom of not mourning
over-much when thou dost crave an ave at the shrine of San Nicolò. May
he grant thee favoring breezes! Thou art in favor with the Ten, they
tell me."

Piero shrugged his shoulders. "Favor or disfavor," he said, "it is but
the turning of the head--and both may lead to that place of unsought
distinction between San Marco and San Teodoro, if the orders of their
Excellencies bring not the end they sought. But it matters little--a
candle flame is better blown out than dying spent."

"And whither art thou bent on the morrow?"

"Nay, Messer Girolamo, that is not mine own secret. But this word would
I leave with thee; if, perchance, I return not before many days, seek me
on the border-land--at the point nearest Roman dominions." He had come
close to the old merchant, and uttered the last words in a tone very low
and full of meaning.

Girolamo started. "On the border-land of Rome!" he echoed. "This mission
of thine is then weighty; and thou fearest----"

"Nay, I fear naught," said Piero haughtily. "But the times are perilous;
and later, if thou would'st seek me, thou hast the clew. But of the
mission, to which I am sworn in secrecy, let it not be known that I have
so much as named it--it would argue ill for me and thee. And the clew is
for thy using only. Meanwhile, forget that I have spoken. The Ave Maria
will soon waken the fishers of Murano. _Addio_!"

But he still waited as if he had not uttered all his mind. Girolamo
studied his face closely.

"There is more," he said. "Speak!"

"By the Holy Madonna of San Donato!" said Piero, casting off his
restraint with a sudden impulse, "if I come not back, I would have thee
know that if ever there came a chance to me to serve Marina--the Lady
Marina of the Giustiniani--I, Piero, barcariol or gastaldo, would serve
her as a soldier may serve a saint. For she hath been good to the
Zuanino. Ay, though it cost me my life, I would serve her like a saint
in heaven!" he repeated. Then, flushed with the shame of such unwonted
speech and confession, he hastened to the door, and his steps were
already resounding on the stone floor of the passage when Girolamo
recovered from his astonishment sufficiently to follow him into the
shadow and command him to stop.

"Thou hast seen my daughter--thou hast news of her?"

"Ay, yestere'en, at the Ave Maria, I spoke with her, in Santa Maria
dell' Orto, coming upon her kneeling before the great picture of Jacopo
Robusti--she, saint enough already to wear a gloria and looking as if
the heart of her were worn away from grief! She hath need of thee daily,
for her love for thee is great, and death not far."

"Tell it plainly!" commanded Girolamo, hastening after the retreating
figure and violently grasping his arm to detain him. "Have I failed to
her in aught? She is soul of my soul! Maledetto! why dost thou break my
heart?"

"Look to thine other son-in-law!" Piero retorted wrathfully; "him of the
crimson robe who sits in the Councils of Venice, and findeth no cure for
thy daughter--dying of terror beside him."

"It is a base slander!" cried old Girolamo, trembling with anger and
fear. "Never was wife more beloved and petted! Marcantonio hath no
thought, save for Marina and Venice!"

"Ay, 'for Marina and Venice,'" was the scornful answer, "_but Venice
first_. Splendor and gifts and the pleasing of every whim, if he could
but guess it--gold for her asking, and her palace no better than a cross
for her dwelling; for the one thing she needeth for her peace and life
he giveth not!"

"What meanest thou?" cried Girolamo, furiously. "Hath he not spent a
fortune on physicians--sparing nothing, save to torment her no more,
since their skill is but weariness to her! She is eating her heart out
for this quarrel with Rome--which no man may help, and it is but
foolishness for women to meddle with; and she hath ever been too much
under priestly sway. Why earnest thou hither this night?"

"For this cause and for no other," said Piero solemnly, "that thou
mightest find me, if need should be for any service to her. And to swear
to thee, by the Madonna and every saint of Venice, that I would give my
life for her!"

But old Girolamo grew the angrier for Piero's professions of loyalty.
"Shall her father do less than thou?" he questioned, wrathfully. "On the
morrow will I go to her, and leave her no more until she forgets."

"By all the saints in heaven, and every Madonna in Venice, and our Lady
of every traghetto!" Piero exclaimed, as he wrenched himself away from
Girolamo's angry grasp, while the old man staggered against the wall,
still holding a bit of cloth from the gondolier's cloak in his closed
hand, "I am vowed to my mission before this dawn! What I have spoken is
for duty to thine house, and not in anger--though I could color my
stiletto in good patrician blood and die for it gaily, if that would
help her!"

But Girolamo could not yet find his voice, and Piero, with his hand on
the latch of the great iron gates of the water-story, turned and called
back: "Women are not like men, and Marina is like no other woman that
ever was born in Venice. Whether it be the priests that have bewitched
her--may the Holy Madonna have mercy, and curse them for it!--or whether
she be truly the Blessed Virgin of San Donato come to earth again, one
knows not. But, Messer Magagnati,"--and the voice came solemnly from the
dark figure dimly outlined against the gray darkness beyond the iron
bars,--"thy daughter is dying for this curse of the Most Holy
Father--'il mal anno che Dio le dia!' (may heaven make him suffer for
it!)--and she hath no peace in Venice. _She will never forget nor
change_. If thy love be great, as thou hast said, thou wilt find some
way to help her. _For in Venice she hath no peace_."

The old merchant, dazed by Piero's hot words, was a pitiful figure,
standing, desolate, behind the closed bars of his gate, the night wind
lifting his long beard and parting the thin gray locks that flowed from
under his cap, while he called and beckoned impotently to Piero to
return, repeating meanwhile mechanically, with no perception of their
meaning, those strange words of Piero's--"_In Venice she hath no
peace_." He stood, peering out into the gray gloom and listening to the
lessening plash of the oar, until the gondola of the gastaldo was
already far on the way to San Marco, where sat the Ten.

But it was not of Piero's mission he was thinking, but of his
child--saying over and over again those fateful words, "In Venice she
hath no peace." Had Piero said that?

Suddenly the entire speech recurred to him--insistent, tense with
meaning. She could not live in Venice. Marina had no peace in Venice.
She would never forget nor change. She had need of him--of her father's
love; and if he loved enough, _he would find a way_!

Chilled and heart-sick he turned, and with no torch and missing the
voice which had guided him through the long, dark passage, he groped his
way to his cabinet and sat down to confront a graver problem than any he
had ever conquered with Marina's aid. He _would_ find a way--but "it
must not be in Venice!" How could they leave Venice? Were they not
Venetians born, and was not Venice in trouble? To leave her now were to
deny her. _It could not be_!

He put the argument many times, feverishly at first, then more
calmly--coming always to the same conclusion, "it could not be." It was
a comfort to reach so sensible and positive a decision. To-morrow he
would go to his daughter, and meanwhile he must continue his work; he
needed to reassert his power, for he had been strangely shaken.

He drew the scattered papers together, but the lines, blurred and
confused, carried no meaning; the fragments of broken glass in the
little trays beside him were a dull, untranslucent gray, and written all
over papers and fragments, in vivid letters that burned into his brain,
were those other terrible words of Piero's which he had tried in vain to
forget--"Thy daughter is dying for this curse." _Marina--dying_!

How should Piero know more about Marina than her own father knew? Did he
profess to be a physician that one should credit his every word? What
did he mean by his impudent boast of "dying for her, if need should be!"
Had she not her husband and father to care for her? Her husband "who was
denying her the only thing that could give her life and peace," Piero
had said.--What was the matter with his insulting words, that he could
not forget them?--Had she not her father, who was going to her on the
morrow, when he had matured his plans, and would do whatever she
wished--"in Venice"? Her father "who loved her, as his own soul"--that
was what he had said to Piero, with the memory of all those dear years
when they had been all in all to each other, in this home.

Was it for hours or moments only that he sat in torture--enduring,
reasoning, placing love against pride, Marina against Venice, Venice
against a father's weakness, duty to the Republic before the need of
this only child who was "soul of his soul"?

The last of his race--inheriting the traditions and passionate
attachments of that long line of loyal men who had founded and built up
the stabilimento which was the pride of Murano; of the people, yet
ennobled by the proffer of the Senate, and grandsire to the son of one
of the highest nobles of the Republic--what was there left in life for
him away from Venice? How should he bear to die dishonored and
disinherited by the country which he had deserted in her hour of
struggle? For never any more might one return who should desert Venice
for Rome!

And those panes of brilliant, crystal clarity which he had dreamed of
adding to the honors of the Stabilimento Magagnati--so strong that a
single sheet might be framed in the great spaces of the windows of the
palaces and show neither curve nor flaw--so pure that their only trace
of color should come from a chance reflection which would but lend added
charm--these might not be the discovery of his later days, though the
time was near in which this gift _must_ come to Venice. He had not
dreamed that he could ever say, while strength yet remained to think and
plan, "The house of Magagnati has touched its height, and others may
come forward to do the rest for Venice."

And the secret lay so near--scarcely eluding him!

It was no mere empty jealousy, nor trivial wish for fame, nor greed of
recompense--of which he had enough--that forced the veins out on the
strong forehead of this master-worker, as he struggled with this
question of surrendering all for his daughter's peace. It was the art in
which his ancestors had taken the lead from the earliest industrial
triumphs of the Republic--an art in which Venice stood first--and in his
simple belief it was not less to their glory than the work of a Titian
or a Sansovino. In this field he wrought whole-hearted, with the passion
of an artist who has achieved, and his place and part in the Republic,
as in life, was bounded for him by his art. "To stand with folded
hands--always, hereafter, to be unnecessary to Venice!"

How should one who had not been born in Venice ever guess the strange
fascination of that magic city for her sons, or dream with what a
passion the blood of generations of Venetian ancestry surged in one's
veins, compelling patriotism, so that it was not possible to do aught
with one's gifts and life that did not enhance the greatness of so fair
a kingdom! It was the wonderful secret of the empire of Venice that here
the pride of self was counted only as a factor in the superior pride of
her dominion.

Marina had been proud of his cabinet, and he took the little antique
lamp she used to hold for him and unlocked the door with a tremulous
hand, standing unsteadily before it and trying to hearten himself, as he
ruthlessly flashed the light so that each fantastic bit came out in
perfect beauty, glowing with the wonderful coloring of transparent gems.

But suddenly those fearful words of Piero's played riot among them,
obliterating every trace of beauty, every claim of Venice, every
question as to his own judgment or Marina's reasoning--even the ignominy
of the secret flight. "_Thy daughter dying_!"

The letters blazed like stars, gleaming among his papers--glittering
around the chair where Marina used to sit, climbing up into the air,
closing nearer to him--wavering, writhing lines of living fire, tracing
those awful words he could not forget----

"My God!" he cried, "is not Marina more than all!" There was no longer
anything in life that he willed to do but to win peace for her,
according to her whim.

"Stino!" he shrieked, with a voice louder than the clang of the rude
iron bell whose rope had broken in his impetuous hand.

"Light me a fire in the brazier, and burn me this rubbish!" he commanded
of the foreman who entered, aghast at the imperious summons, and yet
more amazed at the destruction of those precious pages over which his
master had spent days of brooding; but he ventured no protest.

"And here," said Girolamo, with a look of relief, as the last paper
shrivelled and curled into smoke, "are the keys of these cabinets--thou
knowest their contents, and that they are precious. And here shalt thou
remain, as master, until my return--keeping all in order, as thou
knowest how, and loyally serving the interest of the stabilimento. All
moneys which I may send for thou shalt instantly remit by trusty
messenger."

"How long doth the Master remain away?"

"So long as it may please the Lady Marina, who hath need of change. And
if I return not," Girolamo resumed, after a moment's pause which gave
solemnity to his words, "my will shall be found filed with the
Avvogadori del Commun; and thou, Stino, shalt answer to the summons they
will send thee--if I come no more."

"Master!" cried the faithful Stino, greatly troubled, for these
preparations filled him with dread, and were strange indeed for so old a
man who had never yet left Venice for a night. "Life is other than we
know it away from Venice; and the heart of us goes mourning for the
sight and sound of the sea and the color of our skies!"

"Nay, Stino, I have said it," his master answered, unmoved by his
imploring eyes.

"When goest thou--that all may be ready?"

"Now; ere the dawn!" Girolamo cried with sudden resolution. "I would say
my Ave Maria in the chapel of the Lady Marina. Rouse the gondolier, and
lift the curtain that I may see how soon the day cometh."

"Master, dear Master," said Stino tenderly, as he drew the heavy
draperies aside. "Already the sun is high, and the household hath been,
these many hours, awake."

"So!" Girolamo answered with deep gravity, for the battle had been
longer than he had dreamed, yet with his habitual control. "I knew not
the time--my thoughts held me. Stino, if I return not, may the saints
bless thee for all thou hast been to me since the Lady Marina hath dwelt
in the palazzo Giustiniani. And in my will thou art not forgotten."

As Girolamo issued from his own portal, closely followed by Stino and
the other superintendents of the great stabilimento who were filled with
foreboding at this sudden and surprising decision of their good master,
several gondolas wearing the colors of the Giustiniani floated into the
waterway from the broad lagoon; and with them, like a flock of sea-birds
in their habits of gray and their cowls of white, came the sisters of
San Donato, returning from that early chanted Mass at the palazzo
Giustiniani which had been a dream of the Lady Marina's happier days.

The young Senator had urged his boatmen to feverish speed, and his own
gondola was far in advance of the train. He bounded from his bark the
moment it neared the steps, and, rushing blindly toward the dwelling,
encountered his father-in-law on the threshold.

"She is here--Marina?" he questioned, half crazed with grief; and,
forgetful of the usual courtesies, would have pushed him aside to enter.
"I have come with her maidens and her child to take her home. Let me go
to her!"

And, as Girolamo stood, dumb and dazed, "I beseech thee--conceal her
not!"

Looking into each other's faces for one anguished moment, they knew,
without need of further speech, that she had gone from them both.

Girolamo gave a great and bitter cry, "My son!" folding his arms about
the younger man in measureless grief and compassion.

And when they could trust their footsteps they went desolately into the
house together.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Nay," Girolamo had answered to every argument. "It is for thee to
remain in Venice with her child, that the Signoria be not wroth with the
Ca' Giustiniani, and for me to seek and care for her--mayhap, if heaven
be merciful, to bring her to thee again! She cannot be far to seek."

"In Padua!" cried Marcantonio, with sudden conviction. "They will sleep
in Padua to-night. It _was_ the voice of the Lady Beata!"


XXX

"Art thou sure, Marina?"

"Ay, Piero, though it were death to me; and death were sweeter----"

Her hair lay like a wreath of snow across her forehead, from stress of
the night's vigil, her lip trembled like a grieved child's, but in her
exquisite face there was the grace of a spirit strong and tender.

He helped her silently into the gondola and steered it carefully between
the pali which rose like a scattered sheaf, glowing with the colors of
the Giustiniani, in the water before her palace. And thus, in the early
dawn--unattended, with the sadness of death in her pallid face--the lady
of the Giustiniani floated away from her beautiful home--away from
happiness and love--into a future cheerless and dim as the dawn lights
that were faintly tinging the sea. For the day was breaking, full of
gloom, under a sky of clouds, and the wind blew chill from across the
Lido.

She sat with her gray mantle shrouding her face, and neither of them
spoke, while the gondola, under Piero's deft guidance, quickly gained
the steps of the Piazzetta and passed on to San Giorgio. Then she
touched his arm entreatingly.

"Oh, let us wait one moment before we lose sight of the palazzo! Madre
Beatissima, have them in thy keeping!"

She stretched out her hands unconsciously, with a gesture of petition,
and her mantle slipped back, exposing her pallid, pain-stricken face and
her whitened tresses.

Piero was startled at the havoc the night had made, for he had seen her
only the day before, in answer to her summons, when she had been far
more like herself.

"Santa Maria!" he exclaimed, crossing himself, and awkward under the
unaccustomed sense of an overwhelming compassion. "The Holy Mother must
shrive me for breaking my vow, for if San Marco and San Teodoro would
give me a place between them before the matins ring again--mistaking me
for a traitor--I cannot take thee from Venice. We will return," and
already the gondola was yielding to his stroke. "Let Marcantonio bring
thee himself to Rome."

"Piero, thou hast sworn to me! Thou shalt abide by thy promise!" she
cried, seizing the oar in her trembling hand.

"Ay, Marina, I have sworn to thee," he answered, with slow pauses, "and
by our Holy Mother of San Giorgio, I will serve thee like a saint in
heaven. Yet I would thou wert in thy home again--already thou hast
broken thy heart for love of it."

The gondolas of the people were gathering about the steps of the
palaces, bringing their burdens for the day's ongoings in those
luxurious homes; the bells were calling to early Mass; the stir of life
was beginning in the city; soon, in her own palace, her little one would
wake, and Marco--She stood with straining eyes, yearning for the chance
of a face in her palace window--the bare last chance of another sight of
his dear face. She did not know that Piero was watching
her--compassionate and comprehending--while she was struggling to
outlive the agony for the very love's sake which made it so keen.

It was the only sweetness left in life for her, that this cruel parting
was yet for Marco's sake; that she might still plead with the Holy
Father for this desperate need of which Marco seemed unconscious--since,
in a vision never to be forgotten, the blessed Madre of San Donato had
confided this mission to her. She could bear everything to win such a
blessing for her beloved ones, only she must reach Rome--surely the
Madre Beatissima would let her live to reach the Holy City!

The tide was brimming the canals, rising over the water steps; the
growing light gleamed coldly on the polished marbles of her palace,
burnishing the rich gold fretwork of frieze and tracery--but not any
face of any dear one responded to her hungry longing, watching for her
in the deep spaces of the windows, in token of the love from which she
was fleeing.

This also--this last longing--she must surrender!

Her white face grew brave again; she sat down and drew her veil--the
ample _fazzuolo_ of the Muranese--more closely about her. "I am ready,"
she said, and turned her face resolutely forward.

As they rounded San Giorgio, turning into the broad Giudecca, a shoal of
little boats came over the water from Murano.

"They are the nuns of San Donato!" she said in amazement, and drawing
her veil closer. "Piero, canst thou not ask their whither?"

It was so strange, on this morning of all others, to see them turn in
the direction of Ca' Giustiniani; there came a vision of her chapel,
which her maidens were decking--of the dear altar, at which she should
kneel no more--and she held her breath to hear the answer.

"Will the most Reverend Mother bless the boat of a gondolier of the
people; and his sister, who hath been ill and craveth the morning air?"
Piero, who had discarded every emblem of his office, and wore only the
simple dress of the Nicolotti, put the question easily, without fear of
recognition. "And there is no great trouble in the city which calleth
these illustrious ladies so early from Murano?"

"Nay; but the Senator Giustiniani hath prayed us for a grace to his
sweet lady, for the chapel hath been closed while she hath been too ill
for service; and to-day it will be opened, dressed with flowers, and
we--because she loveth greatly our Madonna of San Donato and hath shown
bounty, with munificent gifts, to all the parish--will chant the matins
in her oratory."

They gave the benediction and passed.

While Marcantonio, with his tender thought for Marina fresh in his
heart, was waking to find only her note of farewell.

"Only because I love thee, Marco mio, I have the strength to leave thee.
And it is the Madonna who hath called me. Forgive, and forget not thy
sad Marina."

"Marina--" Piero began awkwardly, for argument was not his forte, and
Marina had always conquered him. "'Chi troppo abbraccia nulla stringe,'
one gains nothing who grasps too much. Thou wast ever one for duty, and
if the Senator Marcantonio will not take thee to Rome----"

"No, Piero, he cannot; he is one of the rulers of Venice."

"Thou, then--his wife----"

How could he venture to counsel her, of whose will and wisdom he had
always stood in awe? It seemed to Piero that he had already delivered an
oration; yet he felt that there was more to say, but his thoughts grew
confused in seeking for expression, and it was a relief to him to
communicate his uncertainty to the motion of his gondola.

The unsteady movement said more to her than words, for Piero was an
unfailing stroke.

"It is the men only of whom the Republic hath need," she explained,
unflinchingly; "but for the women there is no conflict of duty--the Holy
Church is first. 'Prayers for the women and deeds for the men'--thou
hast seen it written."

"And thy father?" Piero questioned, unconvinced, recalling the interview
of a few hours before.

A quick, tender light flashed and passed in her eyes; a ray of color
trembled on her cheek. "I shall grieve him," she said, "but he will
forgive, for ever hath he bidden me choose the right." Her voice broke
and she was silent, while she sought for some token in the folds of her
robe. "Thou wilt take him this when thou returnest, that he may know I
hold him dear."

"Marina!" he pleaded, growing eloquent, with a last desperate effort,
"thou wast ever an angel to the Zuanino--thou canst not leave thine own
bimbo!"

She did not answer immediately, but she clasped and unclasped her hands
passionately. "He is safe," she said at last, very low and struggling
for control. "He hath the blessing of the Holy Father, given when it
might avail; and the little ones are ever in the care of the Blessed
Mother. It is not for my baby that I needs must go--but for Marco and my
father, and for Venice. Santissima Maria, because thou sendest me, shalt
thou not grant the strength!"

There was a silence between them while they floated on, for Piero had
many things to think of. He was accustomed to accomplish whatever he
undertook, for he was not a man to fail from lack of resource, nor to be
overcome by fears and scruples. By means of his passes and his favor
with the government he could reach the borders of the Venetian dominions
without suspicion, from whence he would escort Marina to the nearest
convent and place her in safety with the Mother Superior, to whom he
would confide the story of her distinguished guest and secure for her
the treatment due to a Venetian princess; which, under the
circumstances, would be an easy matter, as no member of a noble Venetian
house espousing the side of Rome would be met with any but the most
flattering reception. To provide Marina with companionship, Piero had
confided her intended flight to the Lady Beata Tagliapietra, being sure
of her devotion; and she would be waiting for them at Padua with two
trusted gondoliers and whatever might be needful from the wardrobe of
the Lady of the Giustiniani. The fact that he had broken his promise of
secrecy did not trouble him, since it was in Marina's service, which
made the action honorable; and were it not so, the little perjury was
well atoned for by a keg of oil anonymously sent to the traghetto of San
Nicolò è San Raffaele, "pel luminar al Madonna";[8] and Piero had much
faith in anonymous gifts, for confessions were not always convenient for
an officer of his dignity. But it was perhaps too much to expect that
these poor little traghetto lamps should be more than dimly luminous,
since the oil was so largely provided by fines for delinquencies!

  [8] To light the Madonna.

With an easy conscience, also, he had helped himself to the requisite
funds for their journey, amply estimated, from the treasury of the
Nicolotti, which was in his keeping; and his reasoning savored of
Venetian subtlety, with a hint of his toso training. Had not the Lady of
the Giustiniani offered to guarantee the funds necessary for the
assessments of the state, when Piero, doubtful of their resources, would
have declined the position of gastaldo grande, cumbered as it was with
the uncomfortable requirement that the chief should be personally
responsible for all dues and taxes levied upon the traghetti? Piero was
not the first gastaldo who had wished to escape an honor that weighed so
heavily, and a very serious penalty was already decreed for such
contempt of office by that tribunal tireless in vigilance.

So, without compunction, Piero had taken the needful, sure that when he
returned Marina's husband or her father would repay it.

_Could_ he return--after helping a patrician to escape from Venice into
the heart of the country with which the Republic was at war? It looked
doubtful even to Piero, with his indomitable temperament, but he wasted
no sentiment upon this question; for if he might not return there were
other countries in which a man could live. Or, should he be pursued and
lighted upon by the far-seeing eye of the Ten, he could die but once and
get into trouble no more! He crossed himself decorously as he dismissed
the matter; but it was not an event that he could change by pondering.

There was another question that interested him more keenly at this
moment; when Messer Girolamo should know that his daughter was not in
Venice, could he fail to comprehend the hint he had given a few hours
before, and would he not follow them to Rome, as Piero devoutly hoped,
for he wished to leave Marina in her father's care. It was not easy to
predict what Messer Girolamo might do--the case had been too doubtful
for a more explicit confession, and Piero had been wise in his
generation.

He turned now to Marina with the question: "If thou hadst told thy
father of thy wish mayhap he might have come with thee?"

She shook her head sadly and made no answer, but after awhile she said,
"He is like the others. They cannot understand the need, for to them the
Madonna hath not revealed the desperate state of Venice."

"Yet thou knowest, Marina, that already the great cardinal--but lately
come from France--hath started for Rome to make up this quarrel?"

"That is what the Senate will not understand!" she cried, with flashing
eyes. "The Holy Father will have submission and penance, in place of
embassies and pomp. One must go to him quite simply, from the people,
saying, 'We have sinned; have mercy upon Venice!' Piero, thou knowest
that awful vision of the Tintoret? It is Venice that he hath painted in
her doom--the great floods bursting in upon her--all the agony and the
anguish and the desolation of God's wrath! Santa Maria! I cannot bear
it!" She closed her eyes, shuddering and sick with terror.

"It was the way with Jacopo," said Pietro irreverently. "He was full of
freaks, and some demon hath tormented him. He was a man like others--not
one for a revelation."

"Hush, Piero!" she implored; "it breaks my heart! This also may be
counted against Venice, for it is the Holy Madonna who hath granted me
the vision."

If Piero was silent he was only restrained by deference to Marina from
invoking the aid of every saint in the calendar, in copious malediction,
on this miserable Jacopo who had so increased the trouble in Marina's
eyes--since women had such foolish faith in pictures.

"Jacopo Robusti, posing for a seer, and foretelling the end of the
world, like a prophet or a saint! _Goffone_!"[9] Piero was paddling
furiously. "Jacopo, of the Fondamenta del Mori--not better than
others--with that boastful sentence blazoned on his door!--'The coloring
of Titian, with the drawing of Angelo!'"

  [9] Great fool!

But he forgot even his resentment against Jacopo in his anxiety as he
watched Marina, asking himself if it would be possible for her to pray
herself back into healthful life again, even in the dominions of the
Holy Father; for he realized that nothing could help her but this one
thing on which her heart was set--while he was yet, if possible, more
utterly without sympathy for the fear that moved her than her father or
Marcantonio had been. But if the one woman in Venice had but one desire,
however desperate and incomprehensible,--"_Basta_! It is enough," said
Piero to himself,--she should not die with it unfulfilled, if he could
compass it.

Yet, at the thought of death his heart sank. "It was the Madonna which
thou beheldest in thy vision--not the cross?" he asked her quickly,
making the fateful sign as he spoke, to avert this dread presage of
death, and afraid of her answer; for Marina was failing before his eyes,
and doubtless, in her vision, there had been some apparition of a cross;
and even the less devout among the gondoliers were still dominated by
some of the superstitions which gave a picturesque color to the habits
of the people.

But she, too earnest in her faith to take any note of a less serious
mood, answered simply:

"It was the very Madonna herself, as thou knowest her in San Donato, who
came to me in the palazzo one night when I slept not, and gave me the
mission to save Venice,--scarce able to speak for her great sadness,
and the tears dropping, as thou knowest her in San Donato,--commanding
me to go before the Holy Father and pray for mercy to Venice. She it was
who told me that our prayers pass not up beyond the clouds which hang
above a city under doom of interdict. Oh, Piero, hasten; for my strength
is little, and Rome is far!"

When the Lady of the Giustiniani had sent for Piero to meet her in Santa
Maria dell' Orto, to ask him to manage her escape to Rome, it had not
been possible to refuse her; all his attempts at reasoning were in vain.
"I must go," she said, with that invincible persistence which he never
could combat. "If thou wilt not help me, I go alone." She was kneeling
before the terrible "Judgment" of the Tintoret, and the face she had
lifted to him in appeal was white with agonized comprehension.

The journey had been long and wearisome; all day they had been slowly
toiling against the tide; and long since Piero had summoned to his aid a
trusted gondolier who had been ordered to follow them at a little
distance, and who, at a sign from the gastaldo, had silently left his
bark to drift and taken his place at the other end of the gondola in
which the fugitives were making their way to Padua.

They had passed the domain of the Laguna Morta, weird and
half-forbidding, with tangles of sea-plants and upspringing wild fowl
calling to each other with hoarse cries across the marshes--with armies
of water beetles zigzagging in the shallows, and crabs and lizards
crawling upon the scattered sand heaps among the coarse sea-grasses,
while small fish brought unexpected dimples to the deeper pools that lay
between. And the mingled odor of waters fresh and salt was broken into a
breath now pungent and pleasant, now almost noisome, as the light breeze
stirred the shallows of this strange domain which was neither land nor
sea. Yet even here the pale sea-holly and the evening primrose made
redeeming spots of beauty, with their faint hues of violet and yellow;
and a distant water-meadow shimmered like the sea, with the tender blue
of the spreading lavender.

They had passed Fusina, and the lagoon lay silvery, like a trail of
moonlight behind them--Venice in the distance, opalesque, radiant, a
city of dreams. The clouds above them, beautiful with changing sunset
lights, were no longer mirrored on a still lagoon, but mottled the
broken surfaces of the river with hues of bronze and purple, between the
leaves of the creeping water-plants which clogged the movement of the
oars; for they had exchanged the liquid azure pavement of their "Città
Nobilissima" for the brown tide of the Brenta. On the river's brink the
rushes were starred with lilies and iris and ranunculus, and the
fragrance of sheeted flowers from the water-meadows came to them fresh
and delicious, mingled with the salt breath of the sea, while
swallows--dusky, violet-winged--circled about their bows, teasing their
progress with mystic eliptical flight--like persistent problems
perpetually recurring, yet to be solved by fate alone.

It was the hour of the Ave Maria, and Marina roused herself from her sad
reverie. The clouds piled themselves in luminous masses and drifted
into the hollows of the wonderful Euganean hills, and a crimson sunset
tinged peaks and clouds with glory, as Padua with its low arcaded
streets, and San Antonio--cousin to San Marco in minarets and Eastern
splendor--and the Lion of Saint Mark upon his lofty column, closed the
vista of their weary day. The chimes of Venice were too far for sound,
but from every campanile of this quaint city the vesper bells, solemn
and sweet, pealed forth their call to prayer--as if no threat of Rome's
displeasure made a discord in their harmony.


XXXI

Piero had watched all night before the little inn of the "Buon Pesce,"
impatient to meet and conquer his fate, while above, in an upper room,
the ladies Marina and Beata tried to sleep; but before the dawn they
were off again, down by the way of the brown, rolling river, taking the
weary length to Brondolo and the sea.

There were two gondolas now, and the men in each pulled as if the prize
of a great regatta awaited them--Nicolotti against Castellani--and
silently, saving voice and strength for a great need.

It might have seemed a pleasure party, save for the stress of their
speed, as they swept by the groves of poplar and catalpa, which bordered
the broad flood, to the sound of the waters only and the song of the
birds in the wood; water-lilies floated in the pools along the shore;
currents of fragrance were blown out to them on wandering winds; and in
the felze, as they were nearing Brondolo, Marina and the Lady Beata,
soothed by the gliding motion and the monotonous plash of the oars into
the needed sleep which the night had failed to bring them, were unaware
of the colloquy between Piero and his gondolier.

"Antonio!" Piero called cautiously to the man who was rowing behind the
felze, "I have somewhat to say to thee; are there those within thy
vision who may hear our speech?"

"Padrone, no; but the time is short for speaking much, for we reach the
lock with another turn of the Brenta."

"May the blessed San Nicolò send sunshine to dazzle the jewels in the
eyes of Messer San Marco till we are safe beyond it and out of
Chioggia!" Piero exclaimed fervently. "And thou, Antonio, swear me again
thy faith--or swear it not, as thou wilt. But thou shalt choose this
moment whom thou wilt serve; and it shall go ill with thee if thou keep
not thy troth."

"By San Marco and San Teodoro," Antonio responded readily, crossing
himself devoutly as he spoke, "I swear to do thy bidding, Messer
Gastaldo."

"And thou wilt die for the people against the nobles if need should be?"

"If thou leadest, Gastaldo Grande."

"Hast thou a pouch beneath thy stiletto where thou mayest defend with
thy life what I shall give thee?"

Antonio displayed it silently.

"This for the need of the cause in thy hand," said Piero, passing him a
purse of gold. "But gold is worthless to this token which shall win thee
the hearing of the bancali, and the aid of every loyal son of San
Nicolò, and shall be proof that thou bearest my orders and my trust."

The trust was great--the bancali were the governing board of the
traghetti.

Antonio unfastened his doublet and secured the precious token under his
belt.

"Command then, caro padrone."

"Slacken thy pace, for this may be our last speech together. Are those
who follow true as thou?"

"Messer Gastaldo," Antonio answered with reluctance, "by signs which be
but trifles to relate,--by a word dropped in Padua, and not for mine
ear,--one of them--I know not which--hath, perchance, affair with a
master mightier than thou." He made the usual gesture which indicated
the Three of that terrible Inquisition whose name was better left
unsaid--a sign much used in Venice where the very walls had ears.

It was a blow to Piero, but he wasted no words.

"They then--both--are apart from this and all my counsel. It shall be
for thee alone, Antonio."

"So safer, Messer Gastaldo. I listen--and forget, save as it shall serve
thee."

"First, then, Antonio; I have sworn to escort the Lady of the
Giustiniani in safety to Rome, from which naught shall keep me--save if
the Ten have other plans, the Madonna doth forgive the broken vow!"

It was a strange admission from a man stalwart and fearless like Piero,
but he made it without shame, as a soldier acquiescing in destiny.

"Santissima Maria!" Antonio ejaculated with unusual fervor and crossing
himself in full realization of the meaning.

"At Brondolo a brig is waiting--orange and yellow of sail, device of a
blazing sun; a hunchback, with doublet of orange above the mast for
luck, and a fine figure of a _gobbo_ upon the deck--a living
hunchback--by which thou shalt know it for mine, and bound to my order
whether it come by me or by my token. If we reach and board her it shall
be well--and Rome, so will it heaven, before us all! But if the dreaded
ones are on the search and overtake us----"

Again the sign.

The tragedy of the situation was in his face as he looked steadily at
Antonio, who did not flinch.

"Thy duty, then, Antonio, shall lie elsewhere. Thou must escape, unseen,
while they lay hands upon the lady and me, whom first they will secure
before they give thee a thought."

Antonio instantly touched his stiletto, and looked his question with a
fearless glance.

"Nay," said the gastaldo scornfully, and drawing a line quickly about
his own throat. "Thou wilt serve me better with thy head in its place.
Thou shalt return to Venice--by Fusina or Brondolo, as thy wit shall
serve thee--leaving the precious gondolieri to prove whether their
silken sashes be badges of men or traitors! Art thou listening?"

"Command me, padrone!"

"Within two days, if I be free, the bancali shall have news of me.
Listen well, Antonio,"--again the hand and eyes went up with the dreaded
unmistakable sign,--"if thou seest THEM seize me before thou takest
leave, wait no longer than to plan with the bancali to come and demand
my release. Thou shalt tell the bancali that I sent thee; thou shalt
tell them there are affairs of moment for the Nicolotti which shall go
hard for the traghetti if I be not there to work them--Art listening,
Antonio?" he questioned feverishly.

Antonio's eyes were fastened upon his. "Padrone, yes!" he answered
breathlessly.

"With my token thou canst command the loyalty of every Nicolotto--is it
thine oar that made that rustle?--and perchance, if there were a rising
of the traghetti to demand aught of the Signoria--come nearer,
Antonio!--the Castellani also, if they willed to join with their
traghetti in asking for justice--would not serve under my token the less
heartily for the word, confided low to their bancali--dost
understand?--_that if their taxes and their fines oppress them_, these
also, I being free, will pay this year to the maledetto Avvogadoro del
Commun."

Antonio gravely bowed his head in assent.

"This at thy discretion--thou understandest, Antonio--and so that no
violence come from the massing of the people, but only the proof of its
will and of the numbers who make the demand. Only--if it be not granted,
they shall make a stand at the traghetti and _fight_----"

"Padrone, yes!"

"For--thou dost mark me, Antonio?--this Lady of the Giustiniani hath
been a saint among the people; she hath given them much in gifts--she
hath given almost her life in prayers and penances, that heaven may
avert its wrath from Venice, which she in truth believeth the Holy
Father--may the saints make him suffer for it!--hath brought upon the
people by his curse--may heaven forbid! And she, being now noble, hath
preferred the cause of the _people_ to the cause of the _nobles_, and
bringeth upon her the displeasure of the Signoria by her flight to
Rome. For--see it well, Antonio!--if the Senate hold the Lady of the
Giustiniani for fault in this,"--Piero paused and uttered the last words
with a slow, mysterious emphasis, while Antonio listened with an
intensity that missed no shading of meaning,--"_it will be the cause of
the people against the nobles_."

"If they harm her not," he resumed in his usual tone, after a moment's
pause, "my fate shall be avenged in the judgment and command of the
bancali of the Nicolotti only. They shall not risk the people's good for
the poor life of one leader!"

"Padrone!" Antonio cried, with flashing eyes. "Commandi altro?" ("Hast
thou other commands?")

"None, save that if I return not--and not otherwise--thou shalt seek
with my token the Master Girolamo Magagnati; thou shalt tell him of this
my confidence, holding nothing back; and thou shalt pray him, of his
honor, to discharge the debt which may be found lacking in the treasury
of the Nicolotti,--since the moneys have been taken for the need of the
lady on her journey,--the which, if I return, I have means, and more, to
repay."

The two men grasped hands and looked into each other's eyes for a brief
recording moment, having each touched that _best_ in the other which was
not shown to all men, and so begotten trust each in each.

"By the Holy Madonna and San Nicolò, I will not fail!" Antonio promised,
and in a moment had seized his oar again and was springing forward on
the bridge of his gondola, as if his thoughts were light and rhythmic as
his motions.

They sped on with a few swift, silent strokes--then, "Brondolo!" he
cried brightly; but a sudden desperate steadying of resolution was felt
in the fierce stroke which sent the gondola forward with a jerk.

The fishing-skiffs of Chioggia fluttered like gaudy butterflies before
them, dipping their wings of orange and crimson and every conceivable
sunset tint to catch the breeze; and the air was suddenly vibrant with
sounds of traffic and busy life. Men called to each other with song and
jest from heavily laden barks, while they waited the hour of sailing; or
lay at ease on the top of their wares, smoking luxurious draughts of
content from their comrade pipes,--lords of their craft, though their
couch was but a pile of cabbages or market produce,--exchanging some
whimsical comment upon the affairs of busier neighbors which brimmed
these frequent hours of _dolce far niente_ with unflagging interest.

And there, among the lighter shipping, was the brig bound to the order
of the gastaldo grande, with the yellow sails and device of the rising
sun--with the gobbo in orange doublet on the masthead for good luck, and
the gobbo on the deck to make it sure. Piero turned and looked for it,
as they passed the lock. And there too----

"_Corpo di San Marco_!" ejaculated Antonio under his breath, for he
stood higher than Piero upon the bridge of the gondola and facing
forward.

There, full in sight, and riding proudly at anchor, the beautiful curves
of her swan-like prows made cannon proof with plates of shining
steel,--and below, in lieu of figurehead to promise victory, those
letters of dread omen, C.D.X.,--with thirty oars-men from the arsenal
of Venice, to ensure her speed, each ready at his oar-lock to wield his
oar, with a band of marksmen trained to finest tempered arms to quell
the resistance which no Venetian would dare offer with those letters on
the prow; the gold and scarlet banner of San Marco, for good fortune, at
her masthead; the wind swelling her impatient sail, as the curb but
frets the steed--_the galley of the Ten was not waiting without a
purpose_!

The shock of the boats as they passed through the lock had roused the
sleepers rudely, and Piero had time but for a swift glance of command to
Antonio, bidding him escape, when a gondola bearing the ducal colors
floated out from the sea of small waiting craft and saluted them
courteously. The dignified signor who addressed them wore the violet
robe and stole of a secretary of the Doge, and his face was the face of
that secretary in whose silken hand the gastaldo's had lain prisoned
when he took the oath of office!

Resistance was impossible.

"Messer Gastaldo," said the secretary suavely, "it hath pleased those
who have ever the welfare of Venice at heart to provide for the most
noble Lady of the Giustiniani an escort which better fitteth her rank
than the size of thy _barchetta_ permitteth, and a dwelling more
honorable than the 'Osteria del Buon Pesce,' where, in company of the
Lady Beata Tagliapietra, she hath passed the night."

The secretary paused and placidly noted the effect of his words upon
Piero, who could have gnashed his teeth for anger at those talking walls
of Venice which had betrayed him--so cautiously had he told his secret
to the Lady Beata only, in that short moonlight stroll!

At a sign from the secretary a second gondola, wearing the ducal livery
and filled with the gorgeous costumes of the palace guards, came out
from the floating mass and approached the gondola of the people, where
the Lady Marina sat trembling like a frightened fawn.

There was a struggle among the lesser craft to draw closer to this
dramatic centre; they jostled each other unceremoniously; a splash, like
a falling oar, was heard, but scarce noted in the absorbing interest of
the moment; only a bare-legged boy jumped off from a tiny fishing-skiff
near which the oar had floated, and swam with it to to the gondola from
which it had fallen--since it was this boat which was making the
carnival for them! Piero, alone, had slightly turned his head and noted
that no one now stood on the _ponte piede_ behind the felze of his
gondola.

"The galley waits to receive the noble ladies to whom I am commissioned
_by those who have sent me_ to offer my respectful homage," said the
secretary, bowing low before the felze. "The noble ladies will proceed
thither in the ducal gondola which attends them. And thou, Messer
Gastaldo, wilt graciously aid me in their escort--since, verily, they
owe much to thy chivalry."

It was a pleasant scene for the onlookers.

But the Lady Marina sat motionless, and gave neither word nor sign in
response to the invitation of the ducal secretary.

"Shall the pleasure of the lady of this noble house not be consulted?"
Piero questioned, struggling to cover his defiance under a tone of
deference.

But his answer was only in the secretary's eyes,--smiling,
imperious,--more defiant than his own impotent will; and in the courtly
waiting attitude, which had not changed, and which seemed unbearably to
lengthen out the passing seconds.

The Lady Beata, winding compassionate arms around her friend, had raised
her veil, whispering words of tenderness.

But there was no recognition in the glance that met hers--only the
immeasurable pathos of a hopeless surrender; the fervent passion of
Marina's will and faith had made all things seem possible of
achievement, though Venice was against her, for had not the mission been
given her in a vision by the Holy Madonna of San Donato--Mother of
Sorrows--and was not the issue sure? And yielding all thought of self
she had braced every faculty to accomplish the holy task of which she
alone felt the urgency. But the overtaxed heart and brain could endure
no longer thwarting; their activity and unquestioning purpose had been
her only power; and the moment she ceased to struggle will and reason
fled together.

Pitifully acquiescent, she went with them unresisting.

       *       *       *       *       *

A haze that was not luminous hung in the sky; night was creeping on
without a sunset, as they battled their way up the Giudecca against the
current which rushed like a boiling torrent around San Giorgio--the blue
calm of the waters turned to a frenzied, foam-lashed green.

The men rowed fast, with tight-furled sail, but the storm came faster;
ranks of threatening clouds were hurrying from the east, gathering like
armies of vengeful spirits, darker, closer about them, shutting off
every breath of air; an oppression, throbbing with nameless fears, was
upon them--a hush, as if life had ceased; then the scorching, withering
torment of a fierce sirocco, and the moan of the wind, like a soul in
pain.

Marina grew faint and wide-eyed for terror, but they could not soothe
her by word or touch; she sat with clasped hands, gasping for breath,
listening to the low, long boom on the shores of the Lido, like muffled
thunder, ceaselessly recurring--the terrible noise of the great waves
beating against the sea-walls--beating and breaking in fury, tossing
their spray high in air and whirling it in clouds, like rain mists, far
across the lagoon. Would the barriers stand--or yield and leave them to
their doom? Were the great waters of the Adriatic uprising in vengeance
to overwhelm this city in her sin? Boom upon boom sounded through all
the voices of the storm. Santa Maria! was it this that the Tintoretto
had foretold!

A dazzling, frenzied flash of light,--a vast peal of thunder that was
like the wrath of a mighty, offended God,--then darkness, and a torrent
of rain--the waters in the shifting path of the wind leaping up to meet
the waters from the sky!

The vesper bells of Venice came sobbing through the storm, tossed and
broken by the tornado into a wraith of a dirge; and now, by some
fantastic freak of nature, as the winds rose higher, the iron tongues
from every campanile--for a brief moment of horror--came wrangling and
discordant, as if tortured by some demon of despair.

  "_Ave Maria, Gratia plena_!"

the women cried together, falling on their knees, while the men toiled
and struggled to hold the invincible galley of the Ten outside the
whirling path of the storm--advancing and retreating at the will of the
elements, against which their own splendid, human strength was like the
feeble, untaught effort of a helpless infant.

"_Mater Dei, Ora pro nobis peccatoribus, nunc et in hora mortis
nostrae_."

The words rose in a wail between the gusts.

For measureless moments, mighty as hours, they battled between San Marco
and San Giorgio, tossed to and fro--now nearer the haven of the great
white dome, now--as a lightning flash unveiled San Marco--near enough to
see a cloud of frightened doves go whirling over the flood which swept
the Piazza from end to end and poured out under the great gates of the
Ducal Palace into the lagoon.

"_Summa Parens clementia--nocte surgentes_----"


XXXII

A Day momentous for Venice--or was it Rome?--had come and passed; it
chronicled the right of the Crown to make its own laws within its own
realm, without reference to ecclesiastical claims which had hitherto
been found hampering; it defined the limits of Church and State, as no
protest had hitherto done.

But Venice was calm in her triumph as she had been unmoved in disaster,
and would not reflect the jubilant tone of the cardinal when he had
returned from Rome empowered to withdraw the censures upon the terms
stipulated by the Republic.

Yet, at this latest moment, the cardinal mediator, from lack of
discretion, had come near to failure; for the terms being less favorable
than he had desired to obtain for the Holy Father, he could not resist
attempting to win some little further grace before pronouncing the final
word, when the Signoria, weary of temporizing, told him plainly that his
Holiness must come at once to a decision, or Venice would forget that
she had so far yielded as to listen to any negotiations.

There was no pageant at the close of this long drama of which the
princes of Europe had been interested spectators. Venice sat smiling and
unruffled under her April skies when the ducal secretary escorted the
two famous prisoners from the dungeons of the Palace to the residence of
the French ambassador, and there, _without prejudice to the Republic's
right of jurisdiction over criminal ecclesiastics_, explicitly
stipulated, bestowed this gift--so fitting for the gratification of a
"Most Christian Majesty"--upon the representative of France, who must
indeed have breathed more freely when this testimonial of favor, with
its precious burden of nameless crimes, had been consigned by him to one
who waited as an appointee of the Pope.

The Doge and the Signoria sat in their accustomed places in their
stately Assembly Chamber when the cardinal came with congratulations
upon the withdrawal of the interdict, and the words of the Serenissimo,
as he gave the promised parchment, were few and dignified.

"I thank the Lord our God that his Holiness hath assured himself of the
purity of our intentions and the sincerity of our deeds."

And the writing of that parchment, sealed with the seal of Saint Mark,
stood thus:

"Essendo state levate le Censure è restate parimente rivocato il
Protesto." ("The censures having been taken off the protest remains
equally revoked.")

It was whispered low that the cardinal, under his cape, made the sign of
the cross and murmured a word of absolution. But if the Signoria
suspected his intention there was no movement of acquiescence; only,
when the short ceremony of the passing of the document was completed,
they observed the usual forms of courtesy with which the audience of so
princely an envoy is closed when his mission is accomplished.

If Paul V had surrendered with reluctance his hope of a sumptuous
ceremony in San Pietro, where delegates of penitent Venetians should
kneel in public and confess and be graciously absolved--if the Cardinal
di Gioiosa had indulged flattering visions of a procession of priests
and people to the patriarchal church in the Piazza, with paeans of
joy-bells and shouts of gladness that Venice was again free to resume
her worship, and that her penitent people were pardoned sons of the
Church--he was doomed to disappointment. The cardinals of Spain and
France, attended only by their households, celebrated Mass in the ducal
chapel of San Marco; and the people came and went--as they did before
and after, through that day and all the days since the interdict had
been pronounced, in this and all the churches of Venice--and scarcely
knew that their doom was lifted, as they had hardly realized that the
curse had ever penetrated from those distant doors of San Pietro to the
sanctuary of San Marco!

But the world knew and never forgot how that stately court of Venice had
met the thunder of the Vatican and lessened its power forever.

The cause had been won in moderation and dignity upon a basis of civil
justice that was none the less accredited because the Teologo Consultore
who sat in chancelor's robes behind the throne was a zealous advocate of
the primitive principles of Christianity, and defended, without fear of
obloquy or death, the right of the individual conscience to interpret
for itself the laws of right,--as founded upon the words of
Christ,--because the extraordinary keenness, fineness, and breadth of
his masterly mind enabled him to conceive with unusual definiteness the
limits of civil and spiritual authority, and to ascribe the overgrowth
of error upon the Church he loved to the misconception and weakness of
human nature. He did not place Venice, the superb,--with her pride and
pomp and power and intellectual astuteness, with her faults and
worldliness and her magnificent statesmanship,--against the _spiritual_
kingdom of Christ's Church on earth and declare for Venice _against_ the
Church.

But he weighed in the clear poise of his brain the Book of the Divine
Law--which none knew better than he--with the laws of the princes of
this world--which also few knew better--and declared that _One_, lowly
and great, had defined the limits of the Church's jurisdiction when He
said, "My kingdom is not of this world."

But in Rome the reasoning was not so simple, and threats of vengeance
pursued this "terrible friar," whose bold judgments had ruled the
councils of rebellious Venice.

But though peace was declared with Rome the labors of the Senate were
scarcely lessened; there were still adjustments to be made which were
not whispered abroad--there were embassies to be dissolved and
appointed, gifts to be voted, honors to be heaped upon the head of the
man whose counsels had led to such results, and in whose person the
Senate now united the three offices of the Counsellors to the Doge,
making Fra Paolo sole Teologo Consultore.

It was the first time in the history of the Republic that such honors
had been voted, for Venice was not wont to be over-generous in
recognition of individual service; and this friend of statesmen,
scholars, and princes temporal and spiritual, preserved the greatness of
his simplicity unspoiled in prosperity and power--as was possible only
to a spirit ruled by inflexible principle and faith.

When the Senate voted him a palace near San Marco he preferred his
simple quarters among his brethren of the Servi. When, in proof of their
appreciation, they doubled his salary and would have trebled it
again--"Nay," said he, "it is but my duty that I have done. May the
honorable words of the Senate's recognition but hold before me that
which, by God's help, I may yet accomplish"; and he would take but so
much as he might bestow in charity and gifts to his convent, having for
himself no need nor tastes that were not met by the modest provision of
his order.

And when, having refused to go to Rome for reconciliation--being not
penitent--or for preferment, which would not come without penitence, Fra
Paolo still pursued, unmoved, the quiet tenor of his daily round, from
convent to palace, without pause or tremor, in spite of continued
warning;--"My life," he said, "is in the hands of God. My duty hath he
confided to mine own effort."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Lady Marina was a guest in the Ducal Palace, detained under
surveillance, yet treated with much honor; her friends might see her in
the presence of the ducal guards who watched within the doors of her
sumptuous chambers, but she was not free to go to her own, who had
guarded her with such laxity that in striving to reach the court of the
enemy she had imperiled the dignity of the Republic by her silent
censure. Marcantonio had trembled more when, the morning after the
storm, news had reached him that the fugitive was in the keeping of the
Signoria, than if the message had announced her death. What might he not
expect of their jealousy!

But a ducal secretary had received him with courtesy and conducted him
at once into the audience chamber of the Doge, who bade him send for her
maidens that she might be cared for tenderly, for her stay at the Palace
would be indefinite. It was a royal command, against which pleading or
rebellion were alike useless.

"Most Serene Prince!" cried Marcantonio in agony, "I beseech thee leave
me that gift which a gracious Senate once so generously bestowed! I have
never swerved in loyalty--though my heart was nigh to breaking that I
might not grant her prayer!"

But one in attendance spoke quickly; for the face of the good Leonardo
Donato was full of compassion, and he might not be trusted to serve the
higher interests of the Republic.

"It is of the clemency of the Serenissimo," said that inflexible voice,
"that the Lady Marina reaps not the penalty of her flight and of her
disloyalty to the State, since she hath sought to place her private
judgment beyond the wisdom of the rulers of Venice."

The figure stood motionless in the shadow of a column, muffled in a long
black mantle, a black beretta partially concealing the face.

There was an icy inflection in the tones which sent a chill to
Marcantonio's heart as he listened. One of the Chiefs of the Ten was
always a member of the still more dreaded Inquisition, whose identity
was never known, and the passionless voice held a hint of indisputable
authority--was his suffering wife to rely upon the mercy of the most
puissant member of this terrible commission!

"Take my life for hers!" he implored, so beside himself with grief and
terror that he disclosed his fear for Marina; "and bid her return to
care for our little one."

"Not so," said the emotionless voice; "the Lady Marina hath disproved
her right to care for a noble of Venice. It would be to imperil his
loyalty to leave the child under his mother's influence."

"My God!" cried Marcantonio bitterly; "take me to her and let us die
together--if the Republic may grant us so much grace!"

Again the Doge would have spoken compassionate words, but the other
interposed:

"The State hath little use for the lady's life--save in her keeping. And
she herself, perchance, hath less. For so hath her strange whim wrought
upon her that she knoweth naught of that which passeth around her, and
one face to her is like another."

The young Senator turned from the cruel speaker to the Doge in mute
appealing agony. The old man grasped his hand in a steadying clasp.

"Let us go to her," said Leonardo, very low, when he could command his
voice. "She is like a lovely child--resisting nothing. It is some
shock--it will pass."

       *       *       *       *       *

And now there came a day when the proud heart of Venice was stirred to
its core, for a messenger dashed breathless into the Council Chamber--an
excited, protesting throng of the populace surging in through the open
door behind him. "Fra Paolo! Il caro Padre! Morto!"

"_Dead_!" They started to their feet with ready imprecations. Fra Paolo,
who had left them an hour before, with the Signor Malipiero and his
devoted secretary! They exchanged glances of terrible comprehension--the
triumph of Venice was avenged upon the faithful servant of the State!

The Consiglio broke up in confusion.

"Eccellentissimi," the messenger explained to the horror-stricken
questioners, "they were five,--rushing out from the dark of the convent
wall against him when he came alone down the steps of the Ponte della
Pugna,--the villains held the others down. And Fra Paolo lay dead on the
Fondamenta--stabbed in many places, as if one would cut him in bits--and
the stiletto still in his forehead! And they sent me----"

"'Alone'? you ask me, Illustrissimi?--Santissima Vergine! the whole city
pouring in to the cries of those that found him; and the murderers off
before one could touch them, and never a guard near! They carried him
into the Servi.--And the people--furious--are storming the palazzo of
the nuncio as I pass; and some one cries that the envoy is off to the
Lido, with his fine friends, who start for Rome. A thousand devils!--May
the good San Nicolò send them to feed the fishes!"

The Senate, to testify its honor, grief, and sympathy for the beloved
Counsellor, had instantly adjourned, and its members repaired in great
numbers to the convent to make personal inquiries, returning to a new
session prolonged through the night; for Fra Paolo, who had fainted from
loss of blood on his pallet in the Servite cell, had recovered
consciousness and hovered between life and death--his humble bed
attended by the most famous physicians and surgeons whom the Republic
could summon to her aid. The secretaries, meanwhile, were busy in
preparing resolutions of affection by which to honor him in the sight of
the Venetian people; letters of announcement to foreign courts, as if he
had been of the blood royal; proclamations of reward for the persons of
the criminals, alive or dead, which, before the day had dawned, the
Signori della Notte had affixed to the doors of San Marco, along the
Rialto, on the breast of Ser Robia, that all might read. And for means
of bringing the offenders to justice they plotted and schemed as none
but Venetians could do.

It was three days since the storm, and the gastaldo had not yet been
released, he also was simply detained, without ignominy or discomfort in
rooms set apart for prisoners of State before they had been brought to
trial; for the events of these days had been too absorbing to permit of
an examination of his case. And now, in the gray dawn which broke upon
that night of anxiety and excitement, alternating between hope and fear
as frequent messengers, each guarded by a detachment of palace guards,
appeared with fresh news from the convent, the weary senators strolled
up and down in the great chambers opening on the sea façade of the Ducal
Palace discussing the event in a more desultory way--its meaning, its
dangers, the achievements of the great man who might, even now, be
receiving the viaticum in the convent of the Servi.

He was first named with terms of endearment strange upon the lips of
that stately assembly--"Il caro Padre," "Teologo amato di Venezia"--yet
the guards had failed to seize those villains who lay in wait at the
Ponte della Pugna! The bridges and traghetti must be closely
watched.--Ah--the gastaldo grande!

"Hath one yet been named _Condottiere_ for this frontier service?"
questioned one of the older senators, among a group of the more
important men who had detached themselves from the others and strolled
out into the great loggia on the sea façade for a reviving breath of the
morning air. "For such an employ there is none like Piero Salin for
daring and intrigue; and the assassins may linger long in hiding on the
route to Rome."

And so they first remembered Piero in these crowded days and discussed
his fault with a degree of leniency that would have been foreign to the
traditions of Venice had he not been needed for important secret
service.

Meanwhile, Fra Paolo was still the theme among the senators at large in
the Council Chamber. "Il miracolo del suo secolo," they called him, as
they rehearsed the opinions of the learned men of their age in every
field of science.

"It cannot be from knowledge, acquired as all men learn, that he taketh
this position in such varied sciences," said the Senator Morosini; "for
a life-time doth suffice to few men for such attainment in one field as
he hath reached in all. It must be that the marvel of his mind doth hold
some central truth which maketh all science cognate."

"Else were he not 'friend and master' to Galileo of Padua."

"And it is told that Acquapendente, who hath been summoned by the
Signoria to bestow his skill, hath learned of him some matters which he
taught in the medical school of Bologna. The world hath not his equal
for learning."

"By the blessed San Marco!" ejaculated one under his breath, who had
been idly leaning on the balustrade, as he crossed himself and looked
furtively around to note whether he had been overheard.

But the others of the group, keenly alive to danger, had instantly
joined him.

"Was this some new intrigue?" "Was the night not already full with
horror?" they questioned of each other, thrilled with dread and
superstition.

Dawn was growing over the water, and the gray and oily surface of the
lagoon was closely dotted with gondolas, distinct and black in the
morning twilight; they came sweeping on from San Nicolò and
Castello--black and red, breast to breast--gathering impetus as they
neared the Piazzetta, in numbers which must have left every traghetto of
Venice deserted; Nicolotti and Castellani--_allies_, since they never
had been friends! It was some intrigue of the people, or some favor they
had come to ask--_to-day_, when the Senate might not spare one thought
for disorder among the masses!

Weary and overwrought, after their night of sorrowful labor, they looked
at each other in consternation.

"It is their gastaldo whom they are come to seek," a secretary of the
Ten confided by inspiration to his Chief, as an old man, wearing the
robe of a bancalo, was escorted from the landing by a band of gondoliers
with black and crimson sashes, who disappeared under the entrance to the
palace courtyard.

"Let him be summoned and honorably discharged; he hath done no harm that
may be compared with the disaffection of the traghetti."

"Rather, let them receive him back, appointed by the Senate to honor, as
Condottiere of the border forces"; a second Chief hastened to respond,
for the moment was grave, "and the command will most excellently fit the
gastaldo."

"And for the Lady of the Giustiniani, it matters little--Rome or
Venice," said an old senator, compassionately, as he followed his
colleagues into the Council Chamber. "She hath so spent herself in
grieving that she knoweth naught. For the Senator Marcantonio hath
vainly sought to teach her that the interdict hath been lifted; yet even
this she comprehendeth not."

"We are come, your Excellencies, for news of our Gastaldo Grande, whose
presence is verily needful for the traghetti," said the white-haired
bancalo, when an audience had been granted him.

"How many of you have come as escort?" the secretary questioned
carelessly.

"Eccellenza, we are enough," the bancalo answered fearlessly, and with a
significant pause, "_to prove the will of the people--as well Nicolotti
as Castellani_. And to escort our Gastaldo Grande with honor, since it
hath pleased your excellencies to receive him--_as a guest_--in the
Ducal Palace."

He was the eldest of the officers of the traghetti, accustomed to
respect, upheld by the united forces of the people; this man of the
people and this mouthpiece of the nobles measured each other fearlessly
as they looked into each other's faces--each coolly choosing his phrases
to carry so much as the other might count wise.

"It is well," said the secretary of the Ten, after a brief private
conference with his Chiefs, "that ye are come in numbers to do him
honor. Since the Senate hath need of his brave service and hath named
Piero Salin, for exigencies of the Republic, Condottiere, with honors
and men of artillery to do him service."

And so it chanced, that because of the stress of the time, Piero Salin
floated off in triumph to Murano, named General of the Border Forces,
with secret orders from the Ten.


XXXIII

The great bell in the tower of the arsenal told twelve of the day, and
already the broader waters near the rios which led to the high
machicolated walls surrounding this famous Venetian stronghold were
crowded with gondolas of the people and barges from the islands filled
with men, women, and children, jubilant with holiday speech and
brilliant in gala colors; for this was one of those perpetually
recurring festas which so endeared this City of the Sea to its
pleasure-loving people.

This splendid ceremony of inspection by the Doge was a day of annual
triumph, for nowhere in all the world was there such an arsenal, and
nowhere such an army of workmen,--thirty-five thousand men trained to
the cunning from father to son in lifelong service,--with sailors,
sixteen thousand more, who should presently make a brave review within
those battlemented walls, to tickle the fancy of the Serenissimo and his
guests. For these pageants of Venice were not guiltless of timely hints
to the onlookers of the futility of opposition to a naval force so great
and so admirably controlled; and well might the Republic be proud of the
foundry, the docks, the galleys, which the Doge and the Signoria came
each year in state to visit, with all the nobles of the Maggior
Consiglio and many of the high officials.

This year it was to be a fête more magnificent than usual, for the
households of the ambassadors were bidden to the banquet which was
prepared in the Great Hall of the arsenal--the attractions of which were
invitingly rehearsed, as the speakers leaned across from gondola to
gondola, to exchange their pleasant bits of gossip with dramatic
exaggerations. "And the gondolas of the ambassadors! Santa Maria! the
Signori, 'i provveditori alle pompe' have nothing to say, for there is a
dispensation! the velvets and satins and golden fringes--it will be a
true glimpse of the _paradiso_!"

"And the great Signor medico, Acquapendente, will be made this day
Cavalière of the Republic, since he hath had the wonderful fortune to
save the life of our Padre Maestro Paolo; for it is well known there was
little hope of matins or vespers more for him, the night the _maledetti
bravi_ left the stiletto in his face!"

"And thou, Giuseppe!" cried a smiling mother from Mazzorbo, proudly
indicating her boy as an object of interest, and pushing him into a more
prominent position--"the bambino hath seen it with his own eyes, since
he is prentice at the metal graver's shop of Messer Maffeo Olivieri on
the Rialto; thou, tell us, Giuseppe, of this great goblet of graven
silver which the Master Olivieri hath ready for the presentation, by
order of the Signoria. È bello, ah? _Bellissimo_! And the Lion of San
Marco on the crown of it--_è vero_ Giuseppe?--with wings--_magnifico_!
And jewels of rubino in the eyes of it; and a tongue----"

"Cosi!" interposed Giuseppe, with dramatic effectiveness, thrusting out
his own with relish. "_Thus_!"

"Ma c'è altro!" cried a gondolier from Murano. "There is more yet! For
the magnificent galley which the little one of the Ca' Giustiniani--he
that is grandson to our Messer Girolamo Magagnati--hath given to the
Republic will be floated out from the basin of the arsenal and
christened this day!"

The spirits of the light-hearted crowd effervesced in a jubilant cheer.

"_I Giustiniani_!"

On every page of the history of Venice the name of the Giustiniani stood
brilliantly forth, and the stained and tattered banners in the great
hall of the arsenal were so many laurel leaves for this patrician house,
keeping the memory of the brilliant victory of Lepanto green in the
hearts of the Venetians. It was a Giustinian, "Gonfalonière," _standard
bearer_, who had brought the glorious news on his triumphant galley, the
solemn Lion of San Marco waving his banner above the drooping crescent
of the Turk from every green wreathed mast. It was this Giustinian who
had been carried in triumph on the shoulders of the people, before the
Doge and the Signoria--who had been the hero when that solemn Mass, in
honor of the victory, had been offered up in the ducal chapel--when the
Rialto and the Merceria, for the extravagant joy of Venice, were draped
in blue and scarlet and gold, bound laurel wreaths and decorated with
the art treasures of Titian and Giorgone. It was a name which the people
were accustomed to honor. "I Giustiniani!" they shouted.

There was a sudden hush, for the bells of the Campanile of San Marco
had given the signal, and there was a great stir before the Piazza--a
train of gondolas was sweeping into line far down the Canal Grande; the
guards on the watch-towers of the arsenal were full of animation; the
gondolas of the orderlies were buzzing like bees about the barge of the
grand admiral, who awaited the coming of the Doge, in all his
magnificence of satin ceremonial robes. He was like a noble to-day, this
man of the people. _Viva San Marco_!

The moment was approaching; orderlies glided back and forth among the
excited people, prescribing their distance; the raft of small craft
shifted its position and presently a salute was fired from all the
cannon of the arsenal; the Doge, in his great State barge, was near.

The people shouted themselves hoarse when the smoke cleared away and
revealed the splendid train of private barges from Venice; there were
banners of the Republic and streaming pennons of the nobles; the
gondoliers wore the colors of their house, and were welcomed by the
people on these days of pageant as a distinct addition to the glories of
the festa--though on other days the barcarioli of the traghetti poured
out full vials of contempt upon their sashes of rose and silver and the
blazonry of arms upon their silken sleeves.

The gondolas and barges of the people drifted back again, close about
the train of magnates from Venice.

"I Giustiniani," they shouted; "il Marconino!"

There was a movement on one of the splendid barges bearing the colors of
the Giustiniani; a little child was caught up and held for a moment
high in the air; he waved his tiny hands gleefully--it was such
beautiful play!

"It is the grandson of Messer Girolamo Magagnati, of the Stabilimenti!"
they cried from the barges of Murano, surging nearer in the waterway.
"He belongs to us--to the people!" for the story was well known, and the
people of Venice were not less proud than the nobles who ruled them.
"Viva Messer Magagnati!"

The group upon the deck parted and disclosed an old man with bowed head
and faltering movements, supported by the young Senator Giustiniani, who
gravely recognized their salute; but there was no answering smile upon
his face; and Girolamo Magagnati, who had proudly confronted the
senators in their Council Chamber when he had declined their proffer of
nobility, in this day of triumph scarcely raised his eyes.

The mothers on the barges lifted their little ones in their arms and
taught them to call a name--"Il Marconino!" they ventured, in hesitant,
treble tones.

But now the splendid moment was near. The admiral, in his crimson robes
of state, had mounted to his place on the Doge's barge, and all the
floating crowd had fallen into ordered position, in a hush of vibrant
suspense, as, with slow majesty and grace, one by one the galleys of
Venice came forth in procession from the great basin of the arsenal,
sweeping round from the Punta della Motta into the lagoon, and passing
the Signoria with a salute. And now the great bell sounded again from
the arsenal tower, and was answered from the Campanile of San Marco,
and the suppressed excitement of the eager spectators burst forth in
cries of greeting to the _Marconino_--just set afloat--as she came
gracefully around in front of the Doge's barge, full manned and
saluting, magnificently equipped, the colors of the Giustiniani waving
below the crimson banner of San Marco, with its regnant Lion, and on her
prow the beautiful sculptured figure of a little child.

"_Il Marconino! Il Marconino_!"

There was a brief moment of confusion from the coming and going of
barges,--a short delay which brimmed their excitement to the fever
pitch,--then the waters cleared again of their floating craft, and the
Senator Marcantonio Giustiniani stepped forth on the deck to christen
the gift of his child.

The people looked, and would have shouted--but forebore--gazing
awestruck.

As he stood, firmly planted upon the prow, the crimson drapery of his
senator's robe parted and disclosed the firm young vigor of his limbs,
in their silken hose, and his very attitude showed power. But he wore
the face of a young Greek god who had lightly dreamed that he could
fashion Life out of grace and sunshine, and had waked to carve Endurance
out of Agony.

The child, held high in his arms, was radiant in the sunshine, its
rosebud mouth parting over pearly teeth in dimpling glee, the breeze
lifting the light rings of hair that caressed his soft, round throat,
the hands waving in childish ecstasy and grace. As they stood, just over
the beautiful bust of the "Marconino" which Vittorio had carved upon the
prow, child and father were an embodiment of the play of the crested
foam over the deep trouble of the waves beneath.

"Was it thus that the nobles took their triumphs?" the people questioned
low of each other. "And where was the Lady Marina, the daughter of
Messer Magagnati--_their_ lady, who had been good to the people?"

"She was there--within," some one answered, "she was not strong--the
salutes were too much for her. She was waiting within, with her
maidens."

"To miss such a beautiful festa! Santa Maria!"--the strong peasant
mothers, clasping their infants in their arms, with prattling,
barefooted children clinging to their mantles--so glad for this glimpse
of holiday--looked again at the beautiful, stern face of this father who
had youth and gifts and wealth, his seat in the Consiglio, his boy in
his arms--but no smile for the people pressing around him ready to shout
his name, and they crossed themselves with a nameless yearning and
dread.

But the nobles, with more understanding, looked upon him and forgot
their jealousy.

For the Lady Marina was within, waiting with her maidens in a private
chamber of the arsenal until the hour of the banquet, when her presence
had been required by the Signoria. Only so much had her father--the
giver of the gift--and Marcantonio, on this day of honor to his
name--been able to obtain of the imperious Republic. There were rumors
afloat, questions were asked, and the body of nobles must bear witness
to the clemency of the State, who could be gracious in forgiving. If the
Lady of the Giustiniani might not have the custody of her child, it was
not that because of her transgressions they would refuse her any grace
or honor.

Meanwhile Giustinian Giustiniani, standing proudly erect among the
nobles of the Doge's suite, searched the crowd for further homage, and
wondered at the silence when the charming figure of the baby Marconino
danced in his father's arms--a very embodiment of life and glee.

It was over in a moment, and the crowd of smaller barges fell back in
disorder, for the Doge was passing through the gates of the arsenal; the
galleys were returning back by San Pietro in Castello, and that which
was to follow of the glories of the day was only for the great ones now
gathering behind that charmèd gate, where the golden chair was waiting
in which the Serenissimo should make his royal progress. There was
nothing more for the people until the hour of the Ave Maria should call
the stately procession forth on its homeward way.

But the brilliant memories of this morning would gladden many a less
golden day--Viva San Marco! Their voluble tongues were suddenly
unloosed, and those who had been favored with near glimpses of the
heroes of the day became centres of animated discussion. Life was good
in Venice! "And thou, Nino, forget not that the Madonna hath been
'gentile' to thee! Thou shalt tell thy little ones, when thou art old,
that thou hast this day seen, with thine own eyes, the Marconino, who
hath given the great galley to the Republic!"

The banquet was over, and there was a stir among the Signoria when the
infant Giustinian was called for that he might receive the thanks of
the Republic for his princely gift; and a murmur of admiration circled
from lip to lip as the blooming child was brought into the banquet hall.
All eyes were now turned upon the Lady Marina, who had hitherto remained
surrounded by her household and inconspicuous among the group of noble
Venetian ladies who gave distinction to this festa.

It was Marcantonio who, with a tenderness that was pathetic and a touch
that was a caress, led her down from her place and folded the little
one's hand in hers. He would have led her to the throne; but a gesture
that was scarcely more than a glance conveyed a command he dared not
disobey.

They looked to see a flush of pride on her beautiful face as, in answer
to the Doge's summons, she came slowly forward, with the tiny hand of
the boy clasped in hers--his unsteady, childish footsteps echoing
unevenly on the marble pavement between her measured movements. But she
walked as in a dream, as if she were no longer one of this bright
company, yet strangely beautiful to see, with a face like some noble
spirit,--pale and grieving,--and in her eyes a great trouble that was
full of dignity and love. Over the dark velvet of her robe the
bountiful, white waves of her hair streamed like a bridal veil,
wreathing her brows and her young, pathetic face with silken rings of
drifted snow.

But before she had reached the dais prepared for the Signoria at the end
of the great hall she paused, as if unable to proceed further, swaying
slightly and throwing out her hands to steady herself; a sudden change
swept over her face, and for a moment it seemed that she would fall; the
child, losing hold of her hand, clung sobbing to her skirts, hiding his
pretty head.

Her husband sprang to her aid, tenderly supporting her, but as instantly
she seemed to recover her strength, smiling upon him graciously, while
she gently disengaged herself from his hold, leaving the little one with
him, and gliding rapidly forward, looked around her with unrecognizing
eyes.

It had pleased the whim of the Republic to make some ecclesiastical
parade on this festa of Venice which followed so closely upon the
prosaic closing scene of the quarrel with Rome, wherein no churchly pomp
had been permitted; and as Marina's bewildered gaze steadied itself upon
the noble group of the Signoria, with whom to-day, in great state, sat
the Patriarch of Venice with mitre and hierarchical robes and all the
attendant group of Venetian bishops, a look of intense relief suddenly
flashed over the trouble in her eyes--as if that which she had sought
with such long suffering no longer eluded her.

"Madre Beatissima!" she cried, clasping her crucifix closely to her
breast, and raising her eyes to heaven, "I thank thee!"

The light grew upon her face.

As her whole life had been merged in this struggle which had only
conquered her overwrought heart and brain when she had felt that the
Madonna had deserted her and delivered her to the wrath of Venice, so
now, in her hallucination,--since the Madonna had brought her to
Rome,--her faith and power of speech suddenly returned, and she rallied
all her strength to fulfil her mission.

In that great and sumptuous Hall, flaunting and gay with banners which
chronicled the victories and the power of the Republic--in the
impregnable stronghold of the realm, under the astonished gaze of the
entire Venetian court and the brilliant throng of the households of
nobles and ambassadors who looked down from the circling galleries,
expectant and awestruck under the spell of so strange a vision--this
pale, slight champion of a desperate spiritual struggle, with no host to
help her save her prayers and faith, with no standard but the cross
clasped to her breast, knelt at the feet of the Patriarch, while the
sunset light through the broad western window made a radiance where she
knelt--as if Heaven at last had smiled upon her.

"Oh, Holy Father!" she implored, "have mercy upon Venice! Forgive her
unfaithfulness, because she hath meant no sin!

"The Madonna hath granted me to reach Rome at last, because she hath
laid her command upon me in a vision and it could not fail. But all
those, my loved ones, have I lost by the weary way; and save for her
mercy I could not have reached thee.

"With prayers and penance have I striven--and ceased not--since the
anguish of thy displeasure came upon Venice. Oh, Holy Father! for all
the mothers who understand and grieve, and for our innocent little ones,
and for all those, our beloved, who are good and noble--and yet know not
the hard way of submission, because the Lord hath taught them some other
way--lift thy wrath from Venice, that our Heavenly Father hide not his
face in clouds too heavy for our prayers to reach him!

"It is the will of the Madonna San Donato--thou canst not refuse to lift
the doom!"

The words leaped over each other like a torrent--impetuous, passionate,
as if the moments for speech were few.

"These do I bring--and these, for an offering!" she cried, feverishly
unclasping the lustrous pearls from her throat and girdle and laying
them at the feet of the Patriarch. "And all the dear happiness of my
life have I given, that I might reach thee with this prayer for Venice!
Oh, Holy Father, accept my sacrifice!"

She reverently pressed the hem of the priestly robe to her lips, and
those who knew of her flight from Venice understood that she fancied she
had reached the Roman Court and was kneeling in the presence of the
Sovereign Pontiff; but in their amazement that she alone, who was dying
from the grief of it, did not know that the interdict had been removed,
it had not seemed possible to answer her.

But there was no room for anger as they listened--though her plea was a
judgment on the court of Venice--for her voice thrilled them with its
unearthly sadness, and, looking into her beautiful, spirit face, they
saw that all her consciousness was merged in her intense realization of
the utmost terror of the curse, and in her one burning hope--to which
all things else were as nothing and in which she herself was wholly
lost.

The Patriarch, moved with immeasurable compassion, raised her tenderly.
"My daughter," he said, in a voice that trembled with feeling, "Venice
is restored to favor. The Interdict is removed!"

Through the stern assembly a wave of sympathy surged irresistibly,
impelling them to comfort this lovely, grieving lady, distraught by
anguished brooding. Scarcely knowing that their emotion expressed itself
in words, they caught up the Patriarch's answer and echoed it from group
to group--from gallery to gallery--until it gathered impetus and rolled
like a Hallelujah Chorus through the vast, vaulted chamber.

"Venice is restored to favor; the Interdict is removed!"

The light grew upon her face.

How should it seem strange to her that her prayer at the feet of the
Holy Father had wrought this pardon for Venice--was it not for this that
the blessed Madonna of San Donato had sent her? She had promised
blessing for sacrifice!

