It was decided that the bridge should be in the form of an arch made of
steel girders, the central span being five hundred feet. The work was
begun in October, 1904. First a pair of 'shear legs' was erected on the
southern side opposite the place where the railway from Buluwayo ended.
This is a mechanical contrivance of the nature of a crane, capable of
being raised and lowered, and is formed of two or more poles standing
some yards apart at their feet, but joined together at their heads, to
support a revolving pulley. To save the loss of time and great
inconvenience of crossing the river above the falls, it became necessary
to find some means of spanning this narrow gorge before beginning to
build the bridge. This was accomplished by firing a sky-rocket from the
northern cliff-top with a length of light string attached. To the end of
the string a slightly stouter cord was tied; then a strong rope, and
finally a wire cable two inches thick. Thus, that which could not be
done all at once, was done by degrees. The wire cable, being passed over
the pulley on the shear legs, was fastened on the other side of the
gorge to the top of a steel tower, thirty-six feet high.

From this thin aerial railway hung the 'cage' in which the workmen would
cross and recross, and do a great deal of the bridge-building work,
being raised and lowered to the required position by the shear legs.
Some feet above the two-inch rope ran an electric wire with a motor
engine which propelled the car backwards and forwards. Thus we may
almost say that the first conveyance across the Zambesi was an electric
tram. And the passengers (particularly on the first journey) were not
pleased with the trip. They shrank with pardonable terror when they
found themselves suspended over that awful gulf by a slender cord that
swayed against the sky. But use soon changed all this.

The bridge was begun from both sides at once. In the rocky sides of the
cliffs excavations were made to receive the four upright columns from
which the arch would spring. On beds of concrete poured into these
excavations was bolted an iron plate upon which the foot of the 'post'
would hinge, so as to allow movement when the iron girders expanded or
contracted with the change of temperature. The 'posts' are one hundred
and five feet tall, and the arch which springs from their feet rises to
a height of ninety feet at the centre. As the two ends grew towards each
other across the abyss, it was found that the weight would require
support before the girders met in the middle. To build a scaffolding
would of course have been impossible; so the following means were
adopted. Into the rocky ground on both sides of the river, two holes
were bored, each thirty feet deep and thirty feet apart, their bottom
ends being connected by another boring. A strong wire rope was then
threaded down one hole and up through the other, to be carried over the
cliff-top and passed under the bridge-end as it hung in mid-air. As the
weight increased the ropes were added to, while, as a further
precaution, the ground between the two holes was loaded with five
thousand tons of railway irons. The wire ropes successfully played their
parts until April 1st, 1905, but when the central girder was ready to
take its place, it was found to be an inch and a quarter too long. It
had expanded in the heat; but after a night's cooling it contracted to
the right size, and was successfully inserted.

One of the principal difficulties in the erection of this bridge has
been the trouble of getting the material to the spot. From Darlington to
the Victoria Falls is eight thousand miles of ocean, bush, and desert,
and sometimes long delay was caused by the railway being washed away by
floods. But once there was interruption from another cause. Many of the
English workmen were unable to stop on account of the climate, and they
were constantly drenched by the spray, until in many cases natives had
to be employed in their stead. These natives were housed in a little
settlement of nicely built huts, lighted by electricity. One day,
however, the electric wires caused a fire which destroyed the entire
'town' with astonishing rapidity.

The bridge was opened in August, 1905, on the occasion of the visit of
the British Association. The roadway over it is thirty feet wide,
affording room for a double set of rails, and the panting trains have
already begun to cross its web-like span, gliding into sight from the
cliff-top on one side, only to disappear the next moment on the other in
a green wilderness of ferns and tropic flowers.

[Illustration: "A native lay at the foot of a tree."]


ROUND THE CAMP-FIRE.

By HAROLD ERICSON.

IV.--A FIGHT WITH A RHINOCEROS.


It was now Vandeleur's turn to tell his camp-fire story, and he looked
so long and so dreamily into the embers before he began that Denison
laughed and said, 'Don't go to sleep, old chap, before you begin!'

Vandeleur laughed also, good-naturedly.

       *       *       *       *       *

I'm not a bit sleepy (he said) but when I think of Umkopo, one of the
best and most faithful friends I ever possessed, it makes me thoughtful.
Umkopo, as the name suggests, had something to do with the Zulus or
Matabeles. His was an extraordinary career, and I may have more to tell
you about him in another yarn; but for the present I will merely tell
you this, that, though he looked scarcely more like a 'nigger' than any
of us three, yet, as a matter of fact, I never for some time really
doubted that he was a young Matabele, simply because it never occurred
to me to doubt it under the circumstances. He was a boy of about
seventeen when I first met him--a straight, well-made chap of about
Bobby's size and weight, black-haired and dark-skinned, but not so dark
as the ordinary run of Mashonaland natives, about as dark, let us say,
as you and I are at the end of a shooting trip somewhere in the
equatorial regions.

Well, I was off some years ago upon a rhinoceros-hunting trip and at the
moment in actual pursuit of a huge beast of greyish tint, a rare colour;
this was an animal who had given me the slip many times, and I was most
anxious to secure him. I was encamped somewhere within the district
which he had chosen as his home, but for a week or two I had not been
able to hit upon his tracks.

Now this was during the time of the first Matabele war, and I was, as a
matter of fact, within the war-zone. I joined in the fighting a month or
two later, finding that men were wanted on the British side, but at this
time I was only hunting.

One day, prowling about the jungle with a Kaffir to carry my cartridges
and a spare rifle, I suddenly came upon an unexpected sight.

A young man, apparently a native, lay by a pool of water at the foot of
a tree, breathing, as it seemed to me, his last breath. He moaned a
little when he saw us approaching, and made a feeble effort to rise and
reach the club which lay at his side.

Finding that he was not going to be attacked, he gave up the effort, and
lay breathing heavily.

'He is ill,' said I to the Kaffir; 'ask him whether he is in pain, and
what ails him.'

The Kaffir knew something of the Bantu-Matabele dialect, and spoke to
the man, who replied in gasps.

'He say,' the Kaffir reported, 'want food; drank bad water, poisoned by
Matabeles; better now, but want eat.'

This was a need which was easily supplied. I had plenty of food with me,
biscuits and tinned tongue, which I had brought for my lunch. I gave him
this, and something to drink. He ate and drank greedily, which nearly
choked him. He looked gratefully at me, and I placed him in a sitting
posture with his back to a tree, and gave him a couple of prunes, which
were evidently a novelty to him, and afforded him great delight.

The Kaffir, who rejoiced in the name of Billy, conversed with the young
fellow from time to time, and suddenly Billy burst out laughing; a piece
of rude behaviour which greatly shocked him the next moment, for he
placed his hand over his mouth and looked very ashamed of himself.

'What is it, Billy?' I asked him.

'He say his people call him "White Witch,"' said Billy. 'He say, "I
t'ink I white man like your master."'

Billy again burst out laughing, and again stifled the laugh in shocked
surprise at his own rudeness.

I gazed at the sick youth with new curiosity and interest. I examined
his features: there was nothing of the low-caste negro type about him,
that was clear; but then it often happens that a Zulu or a Matabele is
born with features which resemble those of a higher type of humanity.

'Ask him why they call him "White Witch,"' said I.

After a long talk with our new friend, Billy apparently gave up the
attempt to solve this mystery.

'No understand,' he told me; 'he talk nonsense--much nonsense; not tell
any truth.'

'What's his name?' I next asked.

'Umkopo,' said Billy. 'Dat not white man name--dat Matabele name.'

Billy looked so disgusted, and was clearly so displeased that a nigger
should put forward a claim to white man's blood, that I decided to worry
the sick man no more at present with questions--at least, he should
answer only one more.

'How came he here? ask him,' said I.

'He been see Lobengula at Bulawayo,' said Billy. 'Lobengula chase him
away into the jungle because he say bad words.'

'What kind of bad words?' I asked, in some surprise.

'Bad words: he say Lobengula not fight white people; white people eat
him up.'

Umkopo, then, thought I, was like one of the prophets, who prophesied
evil things which were unwelcome to the king.

'Lobengula chase him into jungle; much men run after him. Umkopo hide,
drink bad water, nearly die, then no food.'

It was clear that the poor lad could not be left where he was in his
present weak state; he must return with us to camp, which was two or
three miles away at the edge of this jungle.

But Umkopo, though he did his best to rise to his feet, and walk with us
when invited to do so, proved far too weak. He almost fell in attempting
to stand up, and was obliged to cling to the tree-trunk in order to
prevent himself from sudden collapse.

'We shall have to carry him, Billy,' said I. 'Collect poles and
branches, and we will make a litter for the poor chap.'

Billy was evidently gravely displeased to be asked to do so much for a
mere Matabele: he collected materials with his nose in air. 'Who going
to carry nigger?' he asked.

And when I replied that, naturally--there being no one else--he and I
would do so, I thought Billy would have a fit.

Nevertheless, the Kaffir was obliged to swallow his feelings, for, when
I had finished the litter, I took up Umkopo in my arms--I am fairly
strong, as you know--and laid him in it, and bade the disgusted Billy
catch hold of one end while I took the other.

As for Umkopo himself, he looked very gratefully in my face, but he did
not seem in the least overpowered by the fact that a white man was
condescending to act as bearer to him. This circumstance seemed to weigh
much more heavily upon Billy than upon him; but then Billy was
influenced by the feeling of disgust that he, should be called upon to
take so much trouble for the sake of a mere native.

We got Umkopo back to camp in safety, Billy making a great show of
weariness; and here I had a comfortable couch made for the invalid
within the _zareeba_. He lay at his ease for a day or two, living upon
antelope flesh and the best of everything, and even drinking, at my
special request, several doses of a tonic which I had brought with me,
in case of sickness. The faces he made over it were something too weird
to describe.

Under this treatment Umkopo soon picked up strength, and we became great
friends, he and I. I endeavoured to teach him a few English words, and
one day--to my great astonishment and interest--he rattled off a
sentence which I had not taught him, but which was certainly a species
of English. It sounded like this: 'Whenima gooboy nannagiv mejam on
Sundays.'

It was an obvious attempt to say, 'When I'm a good boy, Nanna gives me
jam on Sundays'--a sentence which not only told a tale of its own, but
also gave a fellow a pretty wide field 'to think in.'

After this discovery, I began to take a very great and special interest
in Umkopo, and taught him all the English I could. He was with me for a
fortnight, and grew much attached to me. He was, of course, a bit of a
savage, but there was something very attractive about him, and I grew
both fond of and interested in him. This interest and fondness for a
nigger greatly offended Billy, my chief Kaffir. None of my Kaffirs liked
Umkopo, for all were jealous of him, I suppose; but Billy was
particularly bitter against him, and once or twice I was obliged to
reprimand him severely.

This uncomfortable state of affairs ended in a kind of tragedy, and I
will just tell you of this and of its upshot before passing on to the
rhinoceros adventure, which is the real part of this yarn.

(_Concluded on page 154._)


THE SHEPHERD MOON.


  I love to wait till the red sun hides,
  When from the dusk the Shepherd Moon glides;
  And by twos and threes around him peep
  His flock of little white starry sheep.

  All night they ramble so far and high,
  Their pasture wide is the dark blue sky;
  Then the Shepherd Moon goes on his way,
  And leads them back to the folds of Day.


PEEPS INTO NATURE'S NURSERIES.

V.--THE LIFE-HISTORY OF THE FRESH-WATER MUSSEL.


Most readers of _Chatterbox_ must have seen the fresh-water mussel in
its native element. Let those who have not, search in the shallow water
of the nearest river or brook till they are successful. When the stream
is clear you may often see them lying on the bottom; in deeper water,
you may catch them if you go out armed with a big, long-handled rake;
plunge this into the water, drag it along the bottom, and carefully haul
up the entangled mud and weed. Sooner or later your search should be
rewarded. I have caught hundreds this way. Some of them were not more
than an inch and a half long, and when placed in a glass jar were so
transparent, that I could watch the beating of the heart through the
shell. Indeed, I have two such little beauties before me, on my study
table, as I write. One has partly buried himself in the mud, the other
is lying on the surface. But, when full-grown, this transparency passes
away, and they attain a perfectly huge size--six inches long at any
rate!

Once upon a time, no doubt, the ancestors of these creatures lived in
the sea; then they migrated to the rivers, creeping farther and farther
up into fresh water, till at last their descendants have got so used to
this element that they can live only in fresh water. Now, when animals
gradually change their mode of life in this way, they at the same time
undergo a great many structural and constitutional changes--some slight,
some profound--and among these the most important are changes in the
provision for the young. There is, as you know, a constant migration
going on among the more active animals between the sea and the river,
which is entirely on account of the needs of the young. Thus, salmon
leave the sea yearly and undertake perilous journeys up the rivers,
solely that they may lay their eggs there: while eels, on the other
hand, as we have seen, are impelled by instinct to pursue exactly the
opposite course, and to brave all dangers, that they may provide a
nursery for their young in the deepest depths of the ocean.

