In such wares ornament is rare, and consists mainly of (a) incised
dots, dashes, or lines, in simple rectilinear patterns (chevrons,
zigzags, lozenges), often enhanced by a white chalky filling (V, Figs 5-
8); (b) ridges or bosses modelled in the clay surface, or adhering to
it. The forms are plump and globular, often round-bottomed or
standing on short feet. Rims are absent or ill-developed; necks
actually prolonged into trough-spouts or long beaks; handles are very
simple and short. Vases are sometimes modelled like animals, or have
human faces or breasts (V, Figs. 1-4).

These wares begin in the Stone Age, and seem to predominate in the
early and middle Bronze Age. Locally they may have lasted even later,
but the use of the potter's wheel spread rapidly in the early Bronze
Age.

B.
Hand-made wares of light-coloured clay, with painted decoration,
usually in black or reddish-brown. The paint is generally without
glaze, but sometimes is decayed and easily washes off.

The forms and ornaments resemble those of class A, but are less rude
and more varied. Distinct rims and standing-bases appear, and spouts
give place to a pinched lip.

C.
Hand-made wares of black or other dark clay, with painted decoration
in white or ochre. These fabrics are rather rare, and the paint is
easily washed off. The forms follow those of class B.

Classes B and C seem to begin early in the Bronze Age, and are
gradually replaced by the corresponding wheel-made fabrics of class
D.

D.
Wheel-made pottery begins in the Bronze Age, and is distinguished by
its symmetrical forms, and by the texture of the inner surface,
especially about the rim and base, where the potter's fingers have
grazed the whirling clay. Self-coloured wares still occur, and are
sometimes elegant ('bucchero' ware); but the improved furnaces now
permit general use of light-coloured clays, suited to painted
decoration. Glazed paint is still rare, and may be taken as probable
token of date not earlier than the end of the Bronze Age. The glaze-
painted wares of the Greek island-world occasionally wandered to the
mainland a little earlier than this, but not far from the coast. On
wheel-made pottery the ornament is either (a) applied while the pot
is on the wheel, and consequently limited to lines and bands
following the plane of rotation, or (b) added afterwards, free-hand,
usually between such bands, and especially on the neck and shoulder.

Simple rectilinear schemes are commonest (panels, lozenges, and
triangles, enriched with lattice and chequers) (V, Figs. 9, 10, 11, 12);
with these in the Early Iron Age appear little targets of concentric
circles drawn mechanically with compasses (V, Figs. 13-15); also, by
degrees, birds (V, Fig. 16), animals, and simple plant designs
(rosettes, lotus, palmette), and occasionally human figures. But as a
rule, the mainland pottery is very simply decorated, and insular
imports are rare, except within the area within Greek colonization.

In the Later Iron Age or Historic Period, from the seventh century
onward, the pot-fabrics of Asia Minor rapidly assimilate two main
classes of foreign fashions, Greek and Oriental.

E.
The Oriental types (mainly from Syria) are all plump and heavy
looking, usually in coarse buff or cream-coloured ware, almost
without paint. The Greek forms are more graceful, varied, and
specialized; light-coloured clays predominate, with simple bands of
black ill-glazed paint, absorbed by the inferior clays.

After Alexander's time the Greek and the Oriental forms became
confused; the general level of style and execution falls, painted
decoration almost disappears, and the outer surface is often ribbed
by uneven pressure of the fingers on the whirling clay. This fashion
is a sign of late Hellenistic or Graeco-Roman date.

F.
Meanwhile, the black-glazed Greek (mainly Athenian) wares spread
widely for table use, and were imitated locally from the fourth
century onwards. The clay is pale or reddish (genuine Greek fabrics
are usually quite red within) and the glaze thick, black, and of a
brilliant glassy smoothness. Imitations are of all degrees of
inferiority.

G.
Other late fabrics have smooth ill-glazed surfaces, of various red,
brown, or chocolate tints, over hard-baked dull-fractured paste not
unlike modern earthenware, but usually dark-coloured. These wares
begin in the Hellenistic period, and go on into the Roman and early
Byzantine Ages. They have sometimes a little ornament in a hard white
or cream 'slip' which stands up above the surface of the vase. These
fabrics are all for table use, or for tomb-furniture, and are usually
of small size.

H.
Pottery with vitreous glaze like modern earthenware only appears on
Byzantine and Turkish sites. There a few late Greek and Roman fabrics
of glazed ware, mostly of dark brown and olive-green tints; but they
are rare, and usually found in tombs. The earlier glazes are applied
directly to the clay; later a white or coloured slip is applied
first, and a clear siliceous glaze over this.

3. Inscriptions and Monuments.

A. Hittite Civilization. (See figures, Illustration VI: Hittite
Inscriptions, etc.)

(1) From 2000 B.C. onwards baked clay tablets with cuneiform (or
wedge-shaped) writing (Illustration VI, Fig. 1) to be found anywhere
in Eastern Asia Minor, within the Halys bend and south of it, in
Southern Cappadocia, in Cilicia, and in North Syria up to the
Euphrates.

(2) 1000-700 B.C. probably: inscriptions generally cut on stone, dark
and hard (black basalt), or on the living rock, in hieroglyphic
writing. The hieroglyphs are either cut in relief (VI, Fig. 4) or
incised (VI, Fig. 2). Found in the same region and sporadically west
of the Halys.

(3) From 1400 B.C. and 900 B.C. onwards monuments and sculpture.
Human figures are short and thick, generally wearing boots with toes
turned up (VI, Fig. 3.) Found in the same regions as the inscriptions
and also west of the Halys to the sea.

B. Lydian inscriptions.

From about 500 B.C. Letters mostly like Greek capitals (sometimes
reversed); (Illustration IV, at bottom).

C. Lycian inscriptions and monuments.

From about 500 B.C. inscriptions, sometimes with a Greek translation.
(IV, at bottom.)

Monuments, mostly with inscriptions, are generally tombs in stone,
built to imitate wood, with the ends of beams projecting or showing.

D. Greek antiquities.

(1) Early period to 323 B.C. the great Greek colonies on the seaboard
and in the coast valleys really formed an outlying part of Greece,
and for them the section on Greece should be consulted.

(2) Periods of Seleucid and Pergamene rule, 323-130 B.C.
Inscriptions of these periods to be found mostly in the coastal
region, rarely on the plateau. Chiefly royal ordinances, thank
offerings, municipal honorary inscriptions, decrees, covenants, and
the like.

(3) Graeco-Roman period, 130 B.C.-A.D. 400.
Language of inscriptions remains normally Greek, though the lettering
gradually assumes a different character from century to century,
steadily deteriorating. The Phrygian language, written in Greek
letters, survives for several centuries in epitaphs, part of the
inscription often being in Greek.

Latin inscriptions are not common except in Roman colonies during the
earlier centuries of their existence. Elsewhere they are chiefly
official documents of various kinds (e.g. imperial ordinances,
milestones usually of columnar shape with the Emperor's titles,
boundary stones, &c.), or expressions of homage to Emperors, honorary
inscriptions to governors and other officials, dedications, epitaphs,
&c. Sometimes a Greek version is added.

Latin inscriptions of the Republican period (recording decrees of the
Senate) are extremely rare.


[ILLUSTRATION VI: HITTITE INSCRIPTIONS, ETC.]


CHAPTER IV


CYPRUS

[The traveller will find the _Catalogue of the Cyprus Museum_, by J.
L. Myres and M. Ohnefalsch-Richter (Oxford, 1899) indispensable for
the study of Cypriote Antiquities. Reference may also be made to
Myres, _Catalogue of the Cesnola Collection of Antiquities from
Cyprus_ (New York, 1914). They contain numerous illustrations of
types, and make diagrams for the present section unnecessary.]

The principal classes of ancient remains are as follows:

Settlements.
These are usually much devastated by the removal of building
materials to more recent habitations; or are obscured by modern towns
and villages on the same site. All foundations in squared masonry, or
composed of unusually large stones, should be noted and protected as
far as possible. The frequent presence of large building stones, and
especially of architectural fragments, in recent house-walls probably
indicates the neighbourhood of an ancient building: and all
reconstructions and fresh foundation-trenches should be kept under
observation. The present Antiquity Law provides for the inspection
and custody of ancient remains so exposed: the Curator of Ancient
Monuments is charged with the supervision of all buildings and
monuments above ground; the Keeper of Antiquities for the custody of
movable objects, and for the registration of those already in private
possession. Taking into consideration the utility of good building
material to the present owners of such sites, active co-operation to
preserve ancient masonry is not to be expected, unless local
patriotism and expectation of traffic from tourists can be enlisted
in support of Government regulations. Architectural fragments found
in reconstruction are often best preserved by arranging that they
shall be built conspicuously into one of the new walls, well above
ground-level, or transferred to the nearest church or school-house.

Sanctuaries
usually consist of a walled enclosure containing numerous pedestals
and bases of votive statues and other monuments. Usually only the
foundation-walls are of stone, as the same sun-dried brick was
commonly used in ancient as in modern times for the superstructure.
Such sites are often vary shallow, and when they occur in the open
country are liable to be disturbed by ploughing, when the smaller
statuettes and terra-cotta figures may be turned up in considerable
numbers. As most of our knowledge of the sculpture, as well as of the
religious observances, of ancient Cyprus is derived from such sites,
all such indications should be reported at once to the Keeper of
Antiquities, and arrangements made for the site to be examined with a
view to excavation before it is cultivated further. The sculpture on
these sites begins usually in the seventh century B.C.; before that
period terra-cotta figures were in use as far back as the ninth or
tenth century. Figures of 'Mixed Oriental' style, resembling Assyrian
or Egyptian work, give place about 500 B.C. to a provincial Greek
style, which passes gradually into Hellenistic and Graeco-Roman. The
material is almost invariably the soft local limestone, and the
workmanship is often clumsy; but even the coarser examples should be
treated carefully, as they were sometimes completed in colours which
are easily destroyed by too vigorous washing. The first cleaning
should be with gently running water only.

Tombs
are of all periods, and are found not only around historical sites
and actual ruins, but also in localities where the settlement to
which they belonged has wholly disappeared. Though simple graves were
always in use among the poorest folk, the commonest form of tomb at
all periods is a rock-cut chamber entered by a door in one side, to
which access is given by a shaft or sloping passage (_dromos_) cut
likewise in the rock. The earliest are but a few feet from the
surface, just deep enough to ensure a firm roof to the chamber; later
the depth is as much as 12 or 15 feet. Occasionally the chamber, and
even the passage, is built of masonry and roofed with stone slabs or
a corbel vault, and the simple door-slab gives place to a stone door,
hinged, or sliding in a grooved frame. Cremation was occasionally
practised in the Hellenistic Age, but the regular custom was to bury
the body; during the Bronze Age in a sitting or a contracted posture,
in all later periods lying at full length. Stone coffins
(_sarcophagi_), with a lid, were used occasionally by the rich from
the sixth century onwards, and wooden coffins in the Graeco-Roman
period. There is always as rich a tomb-equipment as the mourners
could afford, of personal ornaments, wreaths, provisions, weapons,
and other gear, especially pottery; and terra-cotta figures of men,
animals, furniture, and other objects for the use of the deceased. In
Graeco-Roman tombs pottery is supplemented or replaced by glass
vessels, and coins are frequent, and are important evidence of date.
Most of our knowledge of Cypriote arts and industries comes from this
tomb-equipment, which should therefore if possible be preserved
entire and kept together, tomb by tomb; not neglecting the skeletons
themselves, which are of value to indicate changes in the island
population. The position of tombs was often marked by gravestones
above ground; these remain scattered in the surface soil, or
collected to block the entrances to later tombs. They are frequently
inscribed. A very common form in Greco-Roman times is the _cippus_, a
short column, like an altar.

Pottery and other objects
from tombs, and also from settlements, is classified as follows:

Stone Age: not clearly represented in Cyprus; but some of the
earliest tombs (with rude varieties of red hand-made ware) contain no
metallic objects, and may belong to the latest neolithic period.
Stone implements are very rare, and should be carefully recorded,
with a note of the spot where they were found.

Bronze Age, early period (before 2000 B.C.): polished red ware,
hand-made, sometimes with incised ornament filled with white powder.

Bronze Age, middle period (2000-1500 B.C.): polished red ware, and
also white hand-made ware with painted linear ornament in dull black
or brown.

Bronze Age, late period (1500-1200 B.C.): degenerate polished red
and painted white ware; wheel-made white ware with painted ornament
in glazed black or brown, of the 'Late Minoan' or 'Mycenaean' style
introduced from the Aegean; various hand-made wares of foreign
styles, probably from Syria or Asia Minor.

In these periods, weapons, implements, and ornaments are of copper
(with bronze in the 'late' period); gold occurs rarely; terra-cotta
figures are few and rude; engraved seals are cylindrical like those
of Babylonia.

Early Iron Age: wheel-made pottery, either white or bright red,
with painted geometrical ornament in black (supplemented on the white
ware with purple-red); there is also a black fabric imitating
metallic forms.

The early period (1200-1000 B.C.) marks the transition from bronze
to iron implements, with survival of Mycenaean decoration on the
pottery, and replacement of cylindrical by conical seals.

The middle period (1000-750 B.C.) has purely geometrical
decoration: terra-cotta figures are modelled rudely by hand, and
painted like the pottery.

The late period (750-500 B.C.) shows foreign influences from Greece
and from Phoenicia or Egypt, competing with and enriching the native
geometrical style. Scarab seals, blue-glaze beads, and other personal
ornaments, and silver objects, appear. Terra-cotta figures stamped in
a mould occur side by side with modelled.

Hellenic Age, with increasing influence of Greek arts and
industries.

Early or Hellenic period (500-300 B.C.): the native pottery
degenerates, and Greek vases and terra-cottas are imported and
imitated; jewellery of gold and silver is fairly common and of good
quality; with engraved seals set in signet rings: the bronze mirrors
are circular, with a handle-spike.

Middle or Hellenistic period (300-50 B.C.): the native pottery is
almost wholly replaced by imitations of forms from other parts of the
Greek world, especially from Syria and Asia Minor: large handled
wine-jars (_amphorae_) are common: terra-cottas and jewellery also
follow Greek styles: coloured stones are set in rings and ear-rings.

Late or Graeco-Roman period (50 B.C.-A.D. 400): pottery is partly
replaced by vessels of blown glass: clay lamps, red-glazed jugs, so
called 'tear-bottles' of spindle-shapes, ear-rings of beads strung on
wire, bronze rings and bracelets, circular mirrors without handles,
and bronze coins are characteristics.

Byzantine Age (after A.D. 400): Christian burial in surface graves
supersedes the use of rock-hewn tombs: funerary equipment goes out of
use, except a few personal ornaments, which are of mean appearance,
and may bear Christian symbols. Domestic pottery is coarse,
ungraceful, and frequently ribbed on the outside. Clay lamps have
long nozzles, and Christian symbols. Glass becomes clumsy and less
common; and glazed bowls and cups come into use. Occasional rich
finds of silver plate (salvers, cups, spoons, &c.) and personal
ornaments, have been made among Byzantine ruins.

On mediaeval and later sites, various glazed fabrics of pottery are
found, and occasionally examples of the glazed and painted jugs,
plates, and tiles known to collectors as 'Rhodian' or 'Damascus'
ware.

Inscriptions
occur on settlement-sites, in sanctuaries and associated with tombs:
usually cut on slabs or blocks of soft limestone, though marble and
other harder stones were used in Hellenistic and Roman times. Besides
the ordinary Greek (see Illustration IV), and Roman alphabets the
Phoenician alphabet (see Illustrations X and XI) was in use at Kition
(Larnaca), in the great sanctuaries at Idalion (Dali), and
occasionally elsewhere; and from early times until the fourth century
a syllabary peculiar to Cyprus, often very rudely hewn, in irregular
lines, on ill-shaped blocks. Such 'Cypriote inscriptions' (see
accompanying Illustration VII) are of great value and interest, and
have been often overlooked among building material drawn from old
sites. In all doubtful cases, a 'squeeze' should be made by one of
the methods described in the first part of this volume and submitted
to the Keeper of Antiquities. The stamped inscriptions on the handles
of wine-jars are worth preserving, as evidence for the course of
trade.

Coins
were issued in Cyprus from the sixth century onward; first in silver;
later (in the fourth century B.C.) occasionally in gold, and from the
fourth century commonly in copper. A Ptolemaic coinage succeeded in
the third century that of the local rulers; the Roman coinage, with
inscriptions sometimes in Greek, sometimes in Latin, lasts from
Augustus to the beginning of the third century. Coins of the
Byzantine Emperors and of the Lusignan Kings are common.

[ILLUSTRATION VII: BILINGUAL (GREEK AND CYPRIOTE) DEDICATION TO
DEMETER AND PERSEPHONE FROM CURIUM.]


 CHAPTER V


 CENTRAL AND NORTH SYRIA

[See the diagrams of flint implements, Illustration II; of pottery
and weapons, &c., VIII & IX; of alphabets, X & XI.]

The following notes are to be accepted as only a rough and imperfect
guide, since no part of Syria, north of Palestine, has been widely or
minutely explored, and the archaeology of the earliest period, in
Central Syria, for example, is almost unknown.

The periods into which the archaeological history of Syria should be
divided are roughly, as follows:

    I. Neolithic and Chalcolithic Age, to about 2000 B.C.
   II. Bronze Age or Early Hittite, to about 1100 B.C.
  III. Iron Age or Late Hittite, to about 550 B.C.
   IV. Persian Period, to about 330 B.C.
    V. Hellenistic Period, to about 100 B.C.
   VI. Roman Period.
  VII. Byzantine Period.


I. Neolithic.

No purely Neolithic sites yet known, but lowest strata of remains at
Sakjegozu and Sinjerli, on the Carchemish citadel, and in certain
kilns at Yunus near by, and also pot-burials among house remains are
of this Age. (But see Chapter VIII, Mesopotamia, whose Neolithic
period is similar.)

Stone implements:
as in Greece, including obsidian of very clear texture, probably of
inner Asiatic, not Aegean production. Bone needles and other
implements.

Pottery.
Four varieties have been observed: (1) buff ground with simple linear
decoration applied direct on the gritty body-clay in lustreless
pigments, black, chocolate-brown, or red, according to the firing;
(2) greenish-buff face, hand-polished, with polychrome varnish
decoration of vandykes and other geometric motives; (3) monochrome,
black to grey, not burnished, but sometimes decorated with incised
linear patterns; (4) plain red or buff (e.g. large urns in which
Neolithic burials were found on the Carchemish citadel). All pottery
hand-made.

Figurines:
rude clay and stone figurines are likely to occur, but have as yet
been found very rarely in Neolithic strata.

Copper implements:
traces observed at Carchemish: to be looked for.


II. Bronze Age (Early Hittite).

(a) Early period to about 1500 B.C.
Cist-graves made of rough stone slabs, near crude brick houses.
Conjunction of such slabs with bricks would be an indication of an
early Bronze Age site. Rare pot-burials survive.

Implements.
Spear-heads of long tapering form rounded sharply at the base which
has long tang (IX, Fig. 5): poker-like butts (IX, Fig. 2): knives
with curved tangs: 'toggle' pins: all bronze (but a silver toggle-pin
has been found) (IX, Figs. 1,8).

Pottery.
All wheel-made but rough: light red or buff faced of reddish clay:
decoration rare and only in simple zigzags or waves in reddish-brown
pigment: long-stemmed vases of 'champagne-glass' form are common (VIII,
Fig. 4): rarely a creamy slip is applied to the red clay.

(b) Later period.
Cist-graves apart from houses, in cemeteries.

Implements.
Long narrow celts often riveted: spear-heads, leaf-shaped or
triangular (IX, Figs. 3, 6, 10): axe-heads with socket, swelling
blade and curved cutting edge: pins both 'toggle' and unpierced,
straight and bent over.

Pottery.
Wheel-made, well potted, and commonly _ring-burnished_, the process
beginning at the base of a vase and climbing spirally: little painted
decoration: face usually dusky brown over pinkish body clay, but red
and yellow-white faced wares also found: shapes, mostly bowls, open
and half closed: ring feet, but no handles to vases: only
occasionally lug-ears (IX, Figs. 1,2,3,5,6). Rims well turned over
belong to the latest period, in which elaborate ring-burnishing is
common.

Beads, &c.
Diamond-shaped, with incised decoration, in clay or stone, common.
Pendants, &c., of shell, lapis lazuli, cornelian, crystal. Cylinders,
of rude design like Babylonian First Dynasty, in stone and bone.
Spindle-whorls in steatite and clay.

[ILLUSTRATION VIII: SYRIAN POTTERY]


III. Iron Age (Late Hittite).

To this belong the mass of 'Hittite' remains in Syria. Graves are
unlined pits, with urn burials, the corpse having been cremated.
Cylinders, &c., showing traces of fire, will belong to this Age.

Implements and weapons.
Arrow-heads of bronze: spear-heads of bronze and iron: axes, knives,
and picks of iron (miniature models occur in graves): daggers of
iron. _Fibulae_, of bronze, semicircular and triangular (as in Asia
Minor) (IX, Figs. 4, 9, 11): plain armlets of bronze: pins, spatulae,
&c., of bronze: thin applique ornaments. Bronze bowls (gilt) with
gadroon or lotus ornament (moulded) in later period. Steatite
censers, in form of a cup held by a human hand, are not uncommon (IX,
Fig. 7).

Pottery.
Tall narrow-mouthed urns, bath-shaped vessels, and bell-kraters
common (VIII, Fig. 10): trefoil-mouth _oenochoae_ and _hydriae_; also
_amphorae_ (VIII, Fig. 7).

In earlier period, white or drab slipped surface with geometric
patterns (rarely rude birds) in black. In later period, pinkish glaze
with geometric patterns in black-brown, concentric circles being a
common motive. Tripod bowls in unslipped 'kitchen' ware (VIII, Fig.
8). Blue or greenish glazed albarelli, with white, brown, or yellow
bands, occur (as in Rhodes).

Figurines.
Drab clay, painted with red or black bands and details. Two types:
(a) Horsemen; (b) Goddesses of columnar shape, often with flower
headdresses, and sometimes carrying a child.

Seals, &c.
Scarabs with designs of Egyptian appearance: cylinders, steatite or
(more commonly) glazed paste, lightly and often scratchily engraved:
hard stone seals finely engraved: flattened spheroids in steatite
with Hittite symbols on both faces, inscriptions being often garbled.

Inscriptions.
Most of those in Hittite script, both relieved and incised, found in
Syria, are of this Age, but chiefly of the earlier part of it (cf.
Illustration VI). Those in Semitic characters begin in this Age; and
to its later part (8th-7th cents.) belong important Aramaic
inscriptions, e.g. the Bar-Rekub monuments of Sinjerli (Shamal). See
tables of letter-forms appended to Palestine section, Illustrations X
& XI.


IV. Persian Period.

 Imported Egyptian and Egypto-Phoenician objects (bronze bowls as in
Age III: scarabs: figure-amulets), Rhodian (pottery), Attic (coins,
small black-figure vases, &c.).

Weapons and implements.
Iron. Long swords: spearheads, socketed, often with square or diamond
mid-rib: short double-edged daggers with round pommels: chapes
(bronze) with moulded or beaten relief-work: knives, small and
slightly curved: arrow-heads (usually bronze and triangular): horse-
bits (usually bronze) with heavy knobbed side-bars: ear-rings, wire
armlets and pins (generally plain) of bronze: _fibulae_ as in Age
III: circular mirrors, plain, of bronze: anklets of heavy bronze:
kohl-pots, bronze, of hollow cylindrical form, with plain sticks.

Pottery.
As in Age II, plain, polished, rarely ring-burnished, but of less
careful workmanship (VIII, Fig. 9.) Glazed albarelli, 'pilgrim-
bottles', aryballi, &c., (as in Age III) common. White-yellow slipped
ware with bands of black survives rarely from Age III.

Stone vessels.
Bowls on inverted cup-shaped feet not uncommon (VIII, Fig. 11).

Beads and seals.
Eye-beads in mosaic glass, and other glass beads (hard stone and
bronze more rarely): conoid seals in hard crystalline stones, usually
engraved with figure praying to the Moon-god: also soft stone, glass
and paste conoids. Scarabs and scaraboids in paste. Cylinders become
scarce.


V. Hellenistic. VI. Roman. VII. Byzantine.

Most of the characteristic Syrian products of all these Periods do
not differ materially from those found in other East Mediterranean
lands, e.g. Greece and Asia Minor. The change to Persian (Sassanian)
types comes in the late seventh century A.D.

Two classes of objects, examples of the first of which are mostly of
Age III, but may be Persian, Hellenistic, or even Roman, are very
commonly met with in Syria:

1. Figurines,
single or in pairs or threes, of bronze or terra-cotta, representing
cult-types. Most common is a standing god with peaked cap, short
tunic, and arm raised in act of smiting: a seated goddess also
common: figures of animals, especially a bull; and phallic objects
(these mainly Roman).

2. Glass
plain (iridescent from decay), ribbed, or moulded, in great variety
of forms-bowls, jugs, cups, &c. Mostly late Hellenistic, Roman, and
Byzantine, and especially common and of fine quality in the Orontes
valley.

Parti-coloured glass (with white or yellow bands and threads) is
earlier (Persian Period). Painted and enamelled glass with gilt or
polychrome designs is later (ninth to fifteenth century, Arab).

[ILLUSTRATION IX: SYRIAN WEAPONS, ETC.]


CHAPTER VI


PALESTINE

[See the diagrams of flint implements, Illustrations II; pottery,
XII; alphabets, XIV & XV.]


I. General Principles.

1. Study of the pottery of the country, not merely from books but
from actual specimens, is an absolutely essential preliminary.
Without an acquaintance with this branch of Palestinian archaeology,
so thorough that any sherd presenting the least character can be
immediately assigned to its proper period, no field research of any
value can be carried out. (See further V below.)

2. A knowledge of the various Semitic alphabets is necessary for
copying inscriptions. Unless the traveller be also acquainted with
the languages he had better be cautious about copying Semitic
inscriptions; without such knowledge he runs the risk of confusing
different Semitic letters, which often closely resemble one another.
He should, however, be able to make squeezes and photographs.

The following are the languages and scripts which may be found in
Palestinian Epigraphy.

Egyptian, in Hieroglyphics.              Greek.
Babylonian Cuneiform.                    Latin.
Assyrian Cuneiform.                      Arabic, in Cufic script.
Hebrew, in ancient script.               Arabic, in modern script.
Hebrew, in square character.             Armenian (in mosaic
Phoenician.                                pavements, also graffiti
Moabite.                                   in Church of Holy
Aramaic.                                   Sepulchre).

Tables of the chief alphabetic and numeral forms of the West Semitic
scripts are given in Illustrations X & XI; for the Greek, see
Illustration IV.

3. The traveller should have had practice in making measured drawings
of buildings.

4. For some branches of work a good knowledge of Arabic is
indispensable--not the miserable pidgin jargon usually spoken by
Europeans, nor yet the highly complex literary language, which is
unintelligible to the ordinary native, but the colloquial of the
country, spoken grammatically and properly pronounced. Work done
through dragomans is never entirely satisfactory, because it requires
the unattainable condition that the dragoman should be as much a
scientific student of anthropology and of archaeology as the
traveller himself.

5. The student for whom these pages are written should not attempt
any excavation, unless he has been trained under a practical
excavator, and has learnt how work, which is essentially and
inevitably destructive of evidence, can be made to yield profitable
fruit. There is plenty of work that can be done on the surface of the
ground without excavation.

[Illustrations X & XI: Table of West Semitic Alphabets & Numerals.]

II. Sites of Towns and Villages.

1. Nomenclature.
The sites of ancient towns and villages are usually conspicuous in
Palestine, and are recognized in the local nomenclature. They are
denoted by the words _tall_, plural _tulul_, meaning 'mound', and
_khirbah_, plural _khirab_ meaning 'ruin'. These words are commonly
spelt in English _tell_ and _khirbet_ (less correctly _khurbet_) and
we use these more familiar forms here. As a rule, though not
invariably, the sense of these terms is distinguished. A tell is a
site represented by a mound of stratified accumulation, the result of
occupation extending over many centuries, and easily recognizable
among natural hillocks by its regular shape, smooth sides, and flat
top. A khirbet is a field of ruins in which there is little or no
stratification. Nearly all the sites of the latter type are the
remains of villages not older than the Byzantine or Roman period.

