Such is the encouraging example of Bréguet, who was at first only a
workman. And to this he owes his being the best judge of good workmen,
as he was the best friend to them. He sought out such everywhere, even
in other countries; gave them the instruction of a master of the art;
and treated them with the kindness of a father. They were indebted to
him for their prosperity, and he owed to them the increase of fortune
and of fame. He well understood the advantages of a judicious division
of labour, according to the several capabilities of artisans. By this
means, he was able to meet the demand for pieces of his workmanship,
not less remarkable for elegance and beauty than for extreme accuracy.
It may indeed be said, that Bréguet's efforts gave a character to
French horology that it has never lost. So much may one man do in his
day and generation to give an impetus to an important branch of
national industry.


SAINT ELIZABETH OF BOHEMIA.


         'Would that we two were lying
           Beneath the church-yard sod,
         With our limbs at rest in the green earth's breast,
           And our souls at home with God!'[4]

    I never lay me down to sleep at night
      But in my heart I sing that little song:
      The angels hear it, as, a pitying throng,
    They touch my burning lids with fingers bright,
    Like moonbeams--pale, impalpable, and light.
      And when my daily pious tasks are done,
      And all my patient prayers said one by one,
    God hears it. Seems it sinful in His sight
    That round my slow burnt-offering of quenched will,
    One quivering human sigh creeps windlike still?
    That when my orisons in silence fail,
    Lingers one tremulous note of human wail?
    Dear lord--spouse--hero--martyr--saint! erelong
    I think God will forgive my singing that poor song.

    A year ago, I bade my little son
      Bear on a pilgrimage a sacred load
      Of alms; he cried out, fainting on the road,
    'Mother, O mother, would that this were done!'
    Him I reproved with tears, and said: 'Go on,
      Nor feebly sink ere half thy task be o'er.'
      Would not God say to me the same, and more?
    I will not sing that song. Thou, dearest one,
    Husband--no, _brother_--stretch thy steadfast hand
    Across the void! Mine grasps it. Now I stand,
    My woman-weakness nerved to strength divine.
    We'll quaff life's aloe-cup as though 'twere wine,
    Each to the other; journeying on apart,
    Till at heaven's golden doors we two leap heart to heart.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] From Kingsley's _Saint's Tragedy_. Elizabeth, Princess of Bohemia,
the most sincere among the mistaken devotee saints of the middle ages,
renounced her royal state, her husband and children, and spent her
life in the sternest asceticism, and in the most self-denying acts of
charity.


A MAN-OF-WAR, OR A MAN OF PEACE.


It will probably be remembered that, a few years ago, a great
excitement was caused by the discovery of vast deposits of guano upon
the island of Ichaboe, situated on the west coast of Africa. The
remarkable fertilising qualities of guano gave it great value as an
article of commerce, and a large number of vessels were despatched
from various ports to take in cargoes at the island. It was computed
that at one time not less than 500 vessels were lying off Ichaboe, and
as there was no settled authority to regulate the trade of the place,
a scene of indescribable confusion and tumult soon presented itself.
The crews of several of the ships having established themselves upon
the table-land at the top of the island (the island being little more
than a huge rock, rising with almost perpendicular cliffs from the
ocean), a dispute arose between them and their captains, which soon
proceeded to open mutiny on the part of the men. The only access to
their position being by long ladders, the men set their masters at
defiance, and held possession of their stronghold, which was
inaccessible, except by permission of the mutineers. The captains
despatched a vessel to the Cape of Good Hope, for the purpose of
laying a complaint before the governor, and soliciting his aid. The
governor was about to despatch a man-of-war--the only remedy that is
generally thought of in such cases--when a good, devoted man, a
missionary at Cape Town, named Bertram, hearing of the affair,
represented to the governor his earnest desire to spare the effusion
of blood, and his conviction that, if he were allowed to proceed to
the island, he could bring the quarrel to an amicable settlement. Mr
Bertram obtained the consent of the authorities, and the order for the
sailing of the man-of-war was suspended. He proceeded to Ichaboe, and
being rowed ashore, began to ascend one of the lofty ladders. Two
seamen, well armed, who had guard above, shouted to know who he was
and what he wanted. 'A friend, who wants to speak to you,' was the
reply. The guards seeing a single man, unarmed, climbing fearlessly
towards them, permitted him to ascend. He called the men round him,
spoke kindly but faithfully to them, heard their complaints, and
undertook to negotiate for them. He did this with so much tact and
judgment, that a reconciliation was soon effected, and harmony
restored between the captains and their crews. Mr Bertram remained ten
days with the men on the summit of the island, employing the time to
the best advantage in preaching and teaching amongst them. It was only
on the plea of urgent duty that the men would permit him to leave
them. They clustered round him, as he was about to descend from
amongst them for the last time; each was eager to wring him by the
hand, and tears rolled down many a weather-beaten cheek as he bade
them a last adieu. 'God bless you, sir!' they exclaimed; 'you have
been our true friend; would that you could stay amongst us, for we
feel that you have done us good.' It will be well for nations when
they have more faith in the power of a man of peace, and less in that
of a man-of-war.--_Bond of Brotherhood_.


NOTE TO INTENDING EMIGRANTS.


In reply to numerous correspondents who make inquiry respecting the
most suitable fields for emigration, we have again to intimate, that
we cannot assume the responsibility of privately advising individuals
on the important step of emigrating to one place in preference to
another. Every one is best acquainted with his own desires, abilities,
and necessities, and should, with the general assistance of public
opinion and the press, be able to make up his mind whether he should
or should not emigrate, or what distant land will be to him most
answerable and agreeable. With the view of doing all in our power to
assist in forming this resolution, we have lately had prepared, under
our own inspection, a series of cheap and accessible Manuals on the
subject of Emigration; containing, we believe, all desirable
information for those who are disposed to emigrate; and a perusal of
which may possibly obviate the necessity of seeking private counsel on
any point. The Manuals may be had from any of the ordinary agents for
supplying this Journal; they separately refer to AUSTRALIA, AMERICA,
NEW ZEALAND, the CAPE, and PORT NATAL; and in addition, there is one
devoted to general considerations and directions. The whole, however,
may be obtained bound in a single volume.


_Price 4s. 6d. Cloth, Lettered,_

THE EMIGRANT'S MANUAL.

A complete MANUAL for EMIGRANTS, embracing the latest and most
trustworthy information, in One Volume. It may also be had in Parts,
each referring to a distinct FIELD OF EMIGRATION.

AUSTRALIA, 1_s._--NEW ZEALAND, CAPE of GOOD HOPE, &c. 1_s._--BRITISH
AMERICA, and UNITED STATES of AMERICA, 1_s._--EMIGRATION in its
PRACTICAL APPLICATION to INDIVIDUALS and COMMUNITIES, 1_s._

