where feodary clearly means confederate, associate. According to some,
the word signifies one who holds land by the same tenure as the rest of
mankind; whilst Mr. Knight, in a note on _Henry IV_. Part i. Act i.
endeavors to show that it includes both the companion and the feudal
vassal.

"To owe" is frequently used by Shakspeare in the sense of to possess, to
own, as in Act i. Sc. 5. where Lucio says:

  "But when they weep and kneel,
  All their petitions are as freely theirs
  As they themselves would _owe_ them."

So also in the following instances:--

  "The slaughter of the prince that _ow'd_ that crown."

  _Richard III._, Act. iv. Sc. 4.

  "What art thou, that keepst me out from the house I
  _owe_?"

  _Comedy of Errors_, Act iii. Sc. 1.

  "Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst _owe_."

  _Sonnet_ lxx.

Further examples will be found in _A Lover's Complaint_, the last line
but two; _Pericles_, Act v. Sc. 1.; _Twelfth Night_, Act. i Sc. 5.,
_Love's Labour's Lost_, Act i. Sc. 2.; _King John_, Act ii. Sc. 1.;
_King Lear_, Act i. Sc. 4.

As the passage is allowed to be obscure, this attempt to explain its
meaning is submitted with great deference to the opinions of your
readers.

Arun.


_Mildew in Books_ (Vol. ii., p. 103.).--In answer to B. I mention that
the following facts connected with mildew in books have been elicited.

The mildew referred to is that which shows itself in the form of
roundish or irregular brown spots.

It is usually most abundant in those parts which are most exposed to the
air.

In making a microscopic examination of the spots, I ascertained that
there was no new structure present; but in manipulating I found that
these spots absorbed water more rapidly than the rest of the paper.

On applying litmus, these spots were found to have a powerful acid
reaction.

On submitting the matter to a chemical friend, he ascertained that the
acid in question was the sulphuric, or oil of vitriol. Experiments were
then made with a dilute solution of this acid on {237} clean paper, and
spots were produced similar to those of mildew.

The acid does not naturally exist in paper, and its presence can only be
accounted for by supposing that the paper has been bleached by the fumes
of sulphur. This produces sulphurous acid, which, by the influence of
atmospheric air and moisture, is slowly converted into sulphuric, and
then produces the mildew. As this may be shown to be an absolute
_charring_ of the fibres of which the paper is composed, it is to be
feared that it cannot be cured. After the process has once commenced, it
can only be checked by the utmost attention to dryness, moisture being
indispensable to its extension, and vice versâ.

I do not know whether these facts are generally known, but they would
seem to be very important to paper-makers.

T.I.


_Pilgrims' Road to Canterbury_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.).--Your correspondent
PHILO-CHAUCER, I presume, desires to know the old route to Canterbury. I
should imagine that at the time of Chaucer a great part of the country
was uncultivated and uninclosed, and a horse-track in parts of the route
was probably the nearest approximation to a road. At the present day,
crossing the London road at Wrotham, and skirting the base of the chalk
hills, there is a narrow lane which I have heard _called_ "the Pilgrims'
road," and this, I suppose, is in fact the old Canterbury road; though
how near to London or Canterbury it has a distinct existence, and to
what extent it may have been absorbed in other roads, I am not able to
say. The title of "Pilgrims' road" I take to be a piece of modern
antiquarianism. In the immediate vicinity of this portion there are some
druidical remains: some at Addington, and a portion of a small circle
tolerably distinct in a field and lane between, I think, Trottescliffe
and Ryarsh. In the absence of better information, you may perhaps make
use of this.

S.H.


_Abbé Strickland_ (Vol. ii, p. 198.), of whom I.W.H. asks for
information, is mentioned by _Cox_, in his _Memoirs of Sir Robert
Walpole_, t. i. p. 442., and t. iii. p. 174.

D. ROCK.


_Etymology of Totnes._--The Query of J.M.B. (Vol. i., p 470.) not having
been as yet answered, I venture to offer a few notes on the subject;
and, mindful of your exhortation to brevity, compress my remarks into
the smallest possible compass, though the details of research which
might be indulged in, would call for a dissertation rather them a Note.

That Totnes is a place of extreme antiquity as a British town cannot be
doubted; first, from the site and character of its venerable hill
fortress; secondly, from the fact that the chief of the four great
British and Roman roads, the Fosse-way, commenced there--"The ferthe of
thisse is most of alle that tilleth from Toteneis ... From the
south-west to north-east into Englonde's end;" and, thirdly, from the
mention of it, and the antiquity assigned to it by our earliest annals
and chronicles. Without entering into the question of the full
authenticity of Brute and the _Saxon Chronicle_, or the implicit
adoption of the legendry tales of Havillan and Geoffry of Monmouth, the
concurring testimony of those records, with the voice of tradition, the
stone of the landing, and the fact that the town is seated at the head
of an estuary the most accessible, the most sheltered, and the best
suited of any on the south-western coast for the invasion of such a
class of vessels as were those of the early navigators, abundantly
warrant the admission that it was the landing-place of some mighty
leader at a very early period of our history.

And now to the point of the etymology of _Totenais_, as it stands in
Domesday Book. We may, I think, safely dismiss the derivation suggested
by Westcote, on the authority of Leland, and every thing like it derived
from the French, as well as the unknown tongue which he adopts in
"Dodonesse." That we are warranted in seeking to the Anglo-Saxon for
etymology in this instance is shown by the fact, that the names of
places in Devon are very generally derived from that language; e.g.
taking a few only in the neighbourhood of Totnes--Berry, Buckyatt,
Dartington, Halwell, Harberton, Hamstead, Hempstin, Stancombe.

First, of the termination _ais_ or _eis_. The names of many places of
inferior consequence in Devon end in _hays_, from the Ang.-Saxon _heag_,
a hedge or inclosure; but this rarely, if ever, designates a town or a
place beyond a farmstead, and seems to have been of later application as
to a new location or subinfeudation; for it is never found in Domesday
Book. In that ancient record the word _aisse_ is often found alone, and
often as a prefix and as a terminal; e.g., Aisbertone, Niresse,
Aisseford, Aisselie, &c. This is the Ang.-Saxon _Aesc_, an ash; and it
is uniformly so rendered in English: but it also means a ship or boat,
as built of ash. _Toten_, the major of the name, is, I have no doubt,
the genitive of _Tohta_, "dux, herzog," a leader or commander. Thus we
have _Tohtanoesc_, the vessel of the leader, or the commander's
ship,--commemorating the fact that the boat of some great invader was
brought to land at this place.

S.S.S


_Ædricus qui Signa fundebat_ (Vol. ii., p. 199), must surely have been a
bell-founder: signum is a very common word, in mediæval writings, for a
"bell."

D. ROCK


_Fiz-gig_ (Vol. ii, p. 120).--I had expected that your Querist C.B.
would have received an {238} immediate reply to his Query as to the
meaning of _fiz-gig_, because the word is in Johnson's _Dictionary_,
where he may also see the line from Sandys' _Job_, in which it caught
his attention.

You may as well, therefore, tell him two things,--that _fiz-gig_ means a
fish-cart and that Querists should abstain from soliciting your aid in
all cases where a common dictionary would give them the information they
want.

H.W.


_Guineas_ (Vol. ii., p. 10.).--The coin named in the document quoted by
A.J.H. is the _Guiennois_ a gold piece struck at Guienne by Edward III.,
and also by his son the Black Prince. It is not likely that the
Guiennois was the original of the name given to the new gold coin of
Charles II., because it could have had no claim to preference beyond the
_Mouton_, the _Chaise_, the _Pavillon_, or any other old Anglo-Gallic
coin. I think we may rest contented with the statement of Leake (who
wrote not much more than half a century after the event), and who says
that the _Guinea_ was so called from the gold of which it was made
having been brought from Guinea by the African Company, whose stamp of
an elephant was ordered to be impressed upon it.

J.C. Witton.


_Numismatics._--My thanks are due to Mr. J.C. Witton (Vol. ii., p. 42.)
for his replies to my Numismatic Queries, though I cannot coincide with
his opinion on Nos. 1. and 3.

No ancient forger would have taken the pains to cut a die to strike lead
from; and my specimen, from its sharpness, has clearly never been in
circulation: why may it not have been a proof from the original die?

Of No. 2. I have since been shown several specimens, which had before, I
suppose, escaped my notice.

On the coin of Macrinus, the letter below the S.C. now clearly appears
to be an [Greek: eta], but the one above is not a [Greek: Delta], but
rather an L or inverted T. It cannot stand for [Greek: Lykabas], as on
the Egyptian coinage, as Macrinus was slain by his soldiers the year
after his accession.

The Etruscilla, even under a powerful magnifier, betrays no trace of
ever having been plated and has all the marks by which numismatists
determine the genuineness of a coin. The absence of S.C., I must remind
Mr. W., is not uncommon on _third_ brass, though of course it always
appears on the first and second.

I need go no farther than the one just mentioned of Tiberius, which has
no S.C., and I possess several others which are deficient in this
particular, a Severus Alexander, Elagabalus, &c. After Gallienus it
never appears.

E.S.T.


_Querela Cantabrigiensis_ (Vol. ii, p. 168.).--Dr. Peter Barwick, in the
life of his brother, Dr. Jno. Barwick (Eng. Edit. Lond. 1724, 8vo.),
after describing the treatment of the University by Cromwell, adds (p.
32.) "But Mr. Barwick, no inconsiderable part of this tragedy, together
with others of the University, groaning under the same yoke of tyranny,
and each taking a particular account of the sufferings of his own
college, gave a distinct narrative of all these barbarities, and under
the title of _Querela Cantabrigiensis_, or the _University of
Cambridge's Complaint_, got it printed by the care of Mr. R---- B----,
bookseller of _London_ who did great service to his King and country, by
printing, and dispersing in the most difficult times, books written in
defence of the royal cause." See also _Biog. Brit._, article "Barwick".

John I. Dredge.


_Ben Johnson_ (Vol. ii., p. 167.)--So the name was spelt by most of his
contemporaries. The poem mentioned by N.A.B. is printed in the
_Underwoods_, Gifford's edition, ix., 68; but the MS. may contain
variations worthy of notice. I should doubt its being autograph, not
merely because the poet spelt his name without the _h_, but because the
verses in question are only part of his _Eupheme_.

J.O. Halliwell.


_Barclay's "Argenis"._--Since I sent you a Query on this subject, I have
heard of _one_ translation, by Miss Clara Reeve, the authoress of _The
Old English Baron_ and other works. She commenced her literary career, I
believe, by a translation of this work, which she published in 1772,
under the title of _The Phoenix_.

Jarltzberg.


_Hockey_ (Vol. i., p. 457.).--I have not observed that this has been yet
noticed: if such be the case, permit me to refer to a letter of the poet
Cowper, dated 5th Nov., 1785 (5th vol. _Works_, edit. by Southey, p.
174.) in which, alluding to that day, he says,

    "The boys at Olney have likewise a very entertaining sport which
    commences annually upon this day; they call it _hockey_, and it
    consists in dashing each other with mud, and the windows also,
    so that I am forced to rise now and then and to threaten them
    with a horsewhip, to preserve our own."

F.R.A.


_Praed's Poetical Works_ (Vol. ii., p. 190.).--Your Cambridge
correspondent, Mr. Cooper, will be glad to know that Praed's _poems_ are
published in a collected form; _Poetical Works of Winthrop Mackworth
Praed, now first collected by Rufus W. Griswold; New York_, 1844. This
collection contains some thirty-six pieces. The longest poems, "Lillian"
and "The Troubadour," each in two cantos, display passages of great
beauty and exquisite musical flow. Among the charades, five in number,
"Sir Harry, he charged at Agincourt", is not to be found.

W.M. Kingsmill.

       *       *       *       *       * {239}


MISCELLANEOUS

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

We announced, after the last Annual Meetings of the Shakspeare Society,
that it had been determined to publish a complete set of the Plays of
one of Shakspeare's most prolific and interesting contemporaries, Thomas
Heywood; and that the first volume of such collection, containing Six
Plays, was then ready. A further contribution towards this collection,
containing _The Royal King and Loyal Subject_, which has not been
reprinted since the old edition of 1637, and his very popular drama, _A
Woman killed with Kindness_, has just been issued, with an Introduction
and Notes by J. Payne Collier, Esq., the zealous and indefatigable
Director of the Society, and will, we are sure, be welcomed by every
lover of our early drama. The Shakspeare Society will, indeed, do good
service to the cause of our early literature if it prove the means of
securing us, a uniform series of the works of such of our Elizabethan
dramatists as do not stand sufficiently high in the opinion of the
uninitiated, to tempt the publishing world to put forth their
productions in a collected form.

We have received the following Catalogues:--John Petheram's (94. High
Holborn) Catalogue, Part CXV. (No. 9. for 1850), of Old and New Books;
Cole's (15. Great Turnstile) List, No. XXVIII., of Useful Second-hand
Books.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

Diurnal Readings, 1 vol. 8vo.

Scottish Poems collected by Pinkerton, 2 vols. sm. 8vo., 1792.

ODD VOLUMES

Bell's Shakspeare's Plays and Poems. Vol. I.

Ivimey's History of the Baptists. Vol. II.

Edwards' Gangræna. Parts II. and III.

Asiatic Annual Register. Vol. VII. for 1805.

Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. Bell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES", 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notices to Correspondents.

Nocab _is informed that the Prelate to whom he refers was created a D.D.
by the late Archbishop of Canterbury. It certainly is not necessary that
the recipient of such a degree should have previously taken that of M.A.
or B.A._

H.I.G., _Northampton. The Editor would be happy to insert the Question
of this Correspondent, relating to the Epistles of St. Paul, but he
apprehends that the discussion to which it would give rise would, in
order to its being of any use, require more space than could be
afforded, and involve a good deal of criticism and argument not suited
to these columns._

A.B. _(Bradpole) will find a notice of the line "Incidis in Scyllam",
&c., which is taken from Gualter de Lisle's Alexandriad, in Notes and
Queries, Vol. ii., p. 86._

