Hence, it is clear that, should any one think to make use of
quotations from this work for controversial purposes, a certain degree
of caution will be necessary. The context of the passage, and the date
and the authorship of the original work, may all need to be taken into
account; while it must also be borne in mind that the religious terms,
such as "heaven" and "sin," which have to be employed in English, do
not always correspond exactly to the Buddhist conception.

Of the numerous Buddhist works which have now been translated from
some eight or ten eastern languages, the greater number, when regarded
purely as literature, occupy a very low level. At times they are so
remarkably dull and silly that the reader is inclined to ask why they
were ever translated. But the one redeeming feature in the voluminous
compositions of Buddhist writers is the boundless compassion which
they consistently inculcate.

The insertion of a passage in these pages does not necessarily imply
that the compiler accepts in its entirety the teaching it conveys.
Concerning that oft-repeated injunction, not to kill any living
creature whatsoever, we can hardly doubt that there are many cases in
which to take life, provided it is taken painlessly, not only is not
on the whole an unkindness, but is an act of beneficence. If we
sometimes give to this injunction the sense of extending our sympathy
to the lowest sentient being, and not causing pain to living creatures
while they live, we shall perhaps not be doing violence to the spirit
of mercy by which it was prompted. There are many passages in Buddhist
works which advocate preference for the spirit over the letter, or the
exercise of judgment in accepting what we are taught.

A few passages, though not many, have been included more because they
are striking or poetical than for the sake of their moral teaching.

As the references given are mostly to the Oriental origins, it is only
fair to insert here a list of the English and French translations
which have been principally used in compiling this book. The following
works comprise most of those which have proved directly of service for
the purpose--"Sacred Books of the East," namely:

     Vol. 10. Dhammapada, by F. Max Muller; and Sutta-Nipata, by V.
     Fausboll.

     Vol. 11. Buddhist Suttas, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Vol. 13. Vinaya Texts, part 1, by T. W. Rhys Davids and H.
     Oldenberg.

     Vol. 17. Vinaya Texts, part 2, by T. W. Rhys Davids and H.
     Oldenberg.

     Vol. 19. Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Vol. 20. Vinaya Texts, part 3, by T. W. Rhys Davids and H.
     Oldenberg.

     Vol. 21. Saddharma-pundarika, by H. Kern.

     Vol. 35. Questions of King Milinda, part 1, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Vol. 36. Questions of King Milinda, part 2, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Vol. 49. Buddhist Mahayana Texts, by E. B. Cowell, F. Max Muller,
     and J. Takakusu.

     "Sacred Books of the Buddhists," namely:
     Vol. 1. Jatakamala, by J. S. Speyer.
     Vol. 2. Dialogues of the Buddha, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     The Jataka, or Stories of the Buddha's Former Births, translated
     under the editorship of Professor E. B. Cowell.

     Buddhism of Tibet, by L. A. Waddell.

     Buddhism in Translations, by H. C. Warren.

     Travels of Fa-hien, by James Legge.

     Selected Essays, by F. Max Muller.

     Buddhist Birth Stories, or Jataka Tales, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Hibbert Lectures for 1881, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Buddhism, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Abstract of Four Lectures on Buddhist Literature in China, by Rev.
     S. Beal.

     Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Texts from the Buddhist Canon known as Dhammapada, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Udanavarga, by W. W. Rockhill.

     Lalita Vistara, by Rajendralala Mitra.

     Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal, by Rajendralala Mitra.

     Mahavamsa, by L. C. Wijesinha.

     Attanagalu-vansa, by James D'Alwis.

     Archaeological Survey of Southern India (new series of reports),
     vol. 1, by James Burgess, with translations by Georg Buhler.

     Archaeological Survey of Western India, vol. 4, by James Burgess.

     Sutta-Nipata, by Sir M. Coomara Swamy.

     Katha Sarit Sagara, by C. H. Tawney.

     Grammar of the Tibetan Language, by A. Csoma de Koros.

     Nagananda: a Buddhist Drama, by Palmer Boyd.

     Buddhaghosa's Parables, by Capt. T. Rogers.

     Light of Asia, by Sir Edwin Arnold.

     Ancient Proverbs and Maxims from Burmese Sources, by James Gray.

     Jinalankara, or Embellishments of Buddha, by James Gray.

     We-than-da-ya: a Buddhist Legend, by L. Allan Goss.

     The English Governess at the Siamese Court, by Mrs. A. H.
     Leonowens.

     The Catechism of the Shamans, by C. F. Neumann.

     View of the History, Literature, and Religion of the Hindoos, by
     Rev. W. Ward.

     Horace Sinicae: Translations from the Popular Literature of the
     Chinese, by Rev. Robert Morrison.

     Contemporary Review for February, 1876.

     Cornhill Magazine for August, 1876.

     The Buddhist, vol. 1.

     Journal of Pali Text Society for 1886.

     Journal of Buddhist Text Society of India, vols. 1, 3, 4 and 5.

     Journal of Royal Asiatic Society, new series, vol. 2; also vol. for
     1894.

     Journal of Ceylon Branch of Royal Asiatic Society, No. 2.

     Journal of Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. 36.

     Transactions of Asiatic Society of Japan, vol. 22.

     Journal of American Oriental Society, vol. 4.

     Journal Asiatique, septieme serie, vols. 17, 19 and 20.

     Lalita Vistara, by P. E. Foucaux.

     La Guirlande Pricieuse des Demandes et des Responses, by P. E.
     Foucaux.

     Sept Suttas Palis, tires du Dighanikaya, by P. Grimblot.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ESSENCE OF BUDDHISM.


All beings desire happiness; therefore to all extend your
benevolence.--Mahavamsa.

Because he has pity upon every living creature, therefore is a man
called "holy."--Dhammapada.

Like as a mother at the risk of her life watches over her only child,
so also let every one cultivate towards all beings a boundless
(friendly) mind.--Metta-sutta.

Hurt not others with that which pains yourself.--Udanavarga.

I cannot have pleasure while another grieves and I have power to help
him.--Jatakamala.

With pure thoughts and fulness of love, I will do towards others what
I do for myself.--Lalita Vistara.

If you desire to do something pleasing to me, then desist from hunting
forever! The poor poor beasts of the forest, being ... dull of
intellect, are worthy of pity for this very reason.--Jatakamala.

You will generously follow the impulse of pity, I hope.--Jatakamala.

    For that they hated this poor slender boy,
    That ever frowned upon their barbarous sports,
    And loved the beasts they tortured in their play,
    And wept to see the wounded hare, or doe,
    Or trout that floundered on the angler's hook.

--Lloyd "Nichiren."

Good men melt with compassion even for one who has wrought them
harm.--Kshemendra's Avadana Kalpalata.

Though a man with a sharp sword should cut one's body bit by bit, let
not an angry thought ... arise, let the mouth speak no ill
word.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Them who became thy murderers, thou forgavest.--Lalita Vistara.

Overcome evil by good.--Udanavarga.

Conquer your foe by force, and you increase his enmity; conquer by
love, and you reap no after-sorrow.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

This great principle of returning good for evil.--Sutra of Forty-two
Sections.

The member of Buddha's order ... should not intentionally destroy the
life of any being, down even to a worm or an ant.--Mahavagga.

Whether now any man kill with his own hand, or command any other to
kill, or whether he only see with pleasure the act of killing--all is
equally forbidden by this law.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

My teaching is this, that the slightest act of charity, even in the
lowest class of persons, such as saving the life of an insect out of
pity, that this act ... shall bring to the doer of it consequent
benefit.--T'sa-ho-hom-king.

He came to remove the sorrows of all living
things.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

"Now (said he) I will see a noble law, unlike the worldly methods
known to men, ... and will fight against the chief wrought upon man by
sickness, age, and death."--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

To a righteous man death must bring gladness. For no fear of mishap
exists for him who is devoted to a holy life.--Jatakamala.

He lives only to be a help to others.--Questions of King Milinda.

Why should we cling to this perishable body? In the eye of the wise, the
only thing it is good for is to benefit one's fellow-creatures.--Katha
Sarit Sagara.

Is not all I possess, even to my very body, kept for the benefit of
others?--Nagananda.

All men should cultivate a fixed and firm determination, and vow that what
they once undertake they will never give up.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Rather will I fall headlong into hell ... than do a deed that is
unworthy.--Jataka.

May my body be ground to powder small as the mustard-seed if I ever
desire to (break my vow)!--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Happy is he that is virtuous--Dhammapada.

To make an end of selfishness is happiness.--Udanavarga.

There is no happiness except in righteousness.--Attanagalu-vansa.

Full of love for all things in the world, practicing virtue in order
to benefit others--this man only is happy.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

He that loveth iniquity beckoneth to misfortune.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Watch your thoughts.--Dhammapada.

Control your tongue.--Dhammapada.

Have a strict control over your passions.--Story of Sundari and Nanda.

The higher life maketh he known, in all its purity and in all its
perfectness.--Tevijja-sutta.

So imbued were they with lovingkindness that all the birds and animals
loved them and harmed them not.--Sama Jataka (Burmese version).

Compassionate and kind to all creatures that have
life.--Brahma-jala-sutta.

    The birds and beasts and creeping things--'tis writ--
    Had sense of Buddha's vast embracing love,
    And took the promise of his piteous speech.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

He cherished the feeling of affection for all beings as if they were
his only son.--Lalita Vistara.

    Closely as cause and effect are bound together,
    So do two loving hearts entwine and live--
    Such is the power of love to join in one.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

                That thou mayst know--
    What others will not--that I love thee most
    Because I loved so well all living souls.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Always give in charity to people of good conduct.--Jatakamala.

With every desire to do good, the ignorant and foolish only succeed in
doing harm.... 'Tis knowledge crowns endeavor with success.--Jataka.

There is no sweet companion like pure charity.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Almsgiving, it is said, constitutes the value of riches.--Jatakamala.

Good is restraint in all things.--Dhammapada.

Unselfishness, true, and self-control.--Jataka.

The religious mendicant, wisely reflecting, is patient under cold and
heat, under hunger and thirst, ... under bodily sufferings, under
pains however sharp.--Sabbasava-sutta.

Though a man conquer a thousand thousand men in battle, a greater
conqueror still is he who conquers himself.--Udanavarga.

Root out the love of self.--Jataka.

The man of honor should minister to his friends ... by liberality,
courtesy, benevolence, and by doing to them as he would be done
by.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Practice the art of "giving up."--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Speak not harshly to anybody.--Dhammapada.

May I speak kindly and softly to every one I chance to
meet.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Offensive language is harsh even to the brutes.--Suttavaddhananiti.

Courtesy is the best ornament. Beauty  without courtesy is like a
grove without flowers.--Buddha-charita.

He knew not the art of hypocrisy.--Jatakamala.

Let a man say that which is right, not that which is unrighteous, ...
that which is pleasing, not that which is unpleasing, ... that which
is true, not that which is false.--Subhasita-sutta.

As he who loves life avoids poison, so let the sage avoid
sinfulness.--Udanavarga.

He sees danger in even the least of those things he should
avoid.--Tevijja-sutta.

Sin easily develops.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

May I never do, nor cause to be done, nor contemplate the doing of,
even the most trivial sin!--Attanagalu-vansa (conclusion).

Let not one who is asked for his pardon withhold it.--Mahavagga.

'T is wrong to conquer him who sues for mercy.--Lalita Vistara.

Let none out of anger or resentment wish harm to
another.--Metta-sutta.

Let us then live happily, not hating those who hate us. In the midst
of those who hate us, let us dwell free from hatred.--Dhammapada.

For hatred does not cease by hatred at any time; hatred ceases by
love; this is an old rule.--Dhammapada.

(To the) self-reliant there is strength and
joy.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Let him not grieve for that which is lost.--Attadanda-sutta.

Not from weeping or grieving will any obtain peace of
mind.--Salla-sutta.

At first my sorrowing heart was heavy; but now my sorrow has brought
forth only profit.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Give to him that asketh, even though it be but a little.--Udanavarga.

He delights in giving so far as he is able.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Your guileless heart loves to exercise its
charity.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Always intent on bringing about the good and the happiness of
others.--Jatakamala.

Earnestly practice every good work.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If they may cause by it the happiness of others, even pain is highly
esteemed by the righteous, as if it were gain.--Jatakamala.

When pure rules of conduct are observed, then there is true
religion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Wherein does religion consist?

In (committing) the least possible harm, in (doing) abundance of good,
in (the practice of) pity, love, truth, and likewise purity of
life.--Pillar Inscriptions of Asoka.

(Not superstitious rites, but) kindness to slaves and servants,
reverence towards venerable persons, self-control with respect to
living creatures, ... these and similar (virtuous actions are the
rites which ought indeed to be performed.)--Rock Inscriptions of
Asoka.

The practice of religion involves as a first principle a loving,
compassionate heart for all creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Shall we in worshipping slay that which hath life? This is like those
who practice wisdom, and the way of religious abstraction, but neglect
the rules of moral conduct.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

How can a system requiring the infliction of misery on other beings be
called a religious system?... To seek a good by doing an evil is
surely no safe plan.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    Unto the dumb lips of his flock he lent
    Sad pleading words, showing how man, who prays
    For mercy to the gods, is merciless.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

I then will ask you, if a man, in worshipping ... sacrifices a sheep, and
so does well, wherefore not his child, ... and so do better? Surely ...
there is no merit in killing a sheep!--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

                    Nor [shall one] lay
    Upon the brow of innocent bound beasts
    One hair's weight of that answer all must give
    For all things done amiss or wrongfully.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

    Doing no injury to any one,
    Dwell in the world full of love and kindness.

--Questions of King Milinda.

    Ministering to the worthy, doing harm to none,
    Always ready to render reverence to whom it is due.
    Loving righteousness and righteous conversation,
    Ever willing to hear what may profit another.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    Scrupulously avoiding all wicked actions;
    Reverently performing all virtuous ones;
    Purifying his intention from all selfish ends:
    This is the doctrine of all the Buddhas.

--Siau-chi-kwan.

Instruct yourself (more and more) in the highest
morality.--Nagarjuna's "Friendly Epistle."

Cultivate compassion.--Visuddhi-Magga.

May my thoughts, now small and narrow, expand in the next existence,
that I may understand the precepts ... thoroughly, and never break
them or be guilty of trespasses.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Religion he looks upon as his best ornament.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The sinner is never beautiful.--Lalita Vistara.

Use no perfume but sweetness of thoughts.--Siamese Buddhist Maxim.

Wealth and beauty, scented flowers and ornaments like these, are not
to be compared for grace with moral rectitude!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He who ... cannot feel joy to see merit in others is stained with the
darkness of sin.--Story of Pratiharyya.

Ask not of (a person's) descent, but ask about his
conduct--Sundarikabharadvaja-sutta.

The young man Vasettha said: "When one is virtuous and full of (good)
works, in this way he becomes a Brahman."--Vasettha-sutta.

Not by birth does one become low caste, not by birth a Brahman; by his
deeds he becomes low caste, by his deeds he becomes a
Brahman.--Vasala-sutta.

Whosoever strikes, or by words annoys, mother or father, brother or
sister, ... let us know such as a "base-born."--Vasala-sutta.

Causing destruction to living beings, killing and mutilating, ...
stealing and speaking falsely, fraud and deception, ... these are
(what defile a man).--Amagandha-sutta.

Whosoever ... harms living beings, ... and in whom there is no
compassion for them, let us know such as a "base-born."--Vasala-sutta.

In whom there is truth and righteousness, he is blessed, he is a
Brahman.--Dhammapada.

Whoso hurts not (living) creatures, whether those that tremble or
those that are strong, nor yet kills nor causes to be killed, him do I
call a Brahman.--Vasettha-sutta.

Whoso is (entirely) divested of sin, as is the heaven of mire and the
moon of dust, him do I call a Brahman.--Udanavarga.

Him I call indeed a Brahman who, though he be guilty of no offense,
patiently endures reproaches, bonds, and stripes.--Dhammapada.

We will patiently suffer threats and blows at the hands of foolish
men.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Who, though he be cursed by the world, yet cherishes no ill-will
towards it.--Sammaparibbajaniya-sutta.

Persecutions and revilings, murders and numberless imprisonments,
these hast thou suffered in thousands from the world, verily
delighting in long-suffering.--Lalita Vistara.

At the end of life the soul goes forth alone; whereupon only our good
deeds befriend us.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The wrongdoer, devoid of rectitude, ... is full of anxiety when death
arrives.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

He who has done what is right is free from fear.--Udanavarga.

No fear has any one of me; neither have I fear of any one: in my
good-will to all I trust.--Introduction to the Jataka.

Our deeds, whether good or evil, ... follow us as
shadows.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

    He who now gives in charity
    Shall surely reap where he has given;
    For whosoever piously bestows a little water
    Shall receive return like the great ocean.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Covetous desire is the greatest (source of) sorrow. Appearing as a
friend, in secret 'tis our enemy.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

That which is given in charity is rich in returns; therefore charity is
a true friend; although it scatters it brings no
remorse.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He who stints the profit he has made, his wealth will soon be spent
and lost.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The (real) treasure is that laid up ... through charity and piety,
temperance and self-control.... The treasure thus hid is secure, and
passes not away. Though he leave the fleeting riches of the world,
this a man carries with him--a treasure that no wrong of others, and
no thief, can steal.--Nidhikanda-sutta.

Think of all sentient beings as thy children.--Tenets of the Soto
Sect.

Though exalted, forget not the lowly.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Be kind to all that lives.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Filled with compassion for all creatures.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Of all possessions, contentedness is the best by far.--Nagarjuna's
"Friendly Epistle."

A contented mind is always joyful.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Let us then live happily, though we call nothing our own.--Dhammapada.

    Not the whole world, ... the ocean-girt earth,
    With all the seas and the hills that girdle it,
    Would I wish to possess with shame added thereto.

--Questions of King Milinda.

Let none be forgetful of his own duty for the sake of
another's.--Dhammapada.

The faults of others are easily seen; one's own faults are difficult
to see.--Udanavarga.

Self-examination is painful.--Pillar Inscriptions of Asoka.

A man winnows his neighbor's faults like chaff: his own he hides, as a
cheat the bad die from the gambler.--Dhammapada.

She orders her household aright, she is hospitable to kinsmen and
friends, a chaste wife, a thrifty housekeeper, skilful and diligent in
all her duties.--Sigalovada-sutta.

The wife ... should be cherished by her husband.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Were I not ready to suffer adversity with my husband as well as to
enjoy happiness with him, I should be no true wife.--Legend of
We-than-da-ya.

It is better to die in righteousness than to live in
unrighteousness.--Loweda Sangrahaya.

Better to fling away life than transgress our convictions of
duty.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Better for me to die battling (with the temper) than that I should
live defeated.--Padhana-sutta.

The loving Father of all that lives.--Tsing-tu-wan.

Our loving Father, and Father of all that breathes.--Daily Manual of
the Shaman.

Even so of all things that have ... life, there is not one that (the
Buddhist anchorite) passes over; ... he looks upon all with ...
deep-felt love. This, verily, ... is the way to a state of union with
God.--Tevijja-sutta.

    Doubts will exist as long as we live in the world.
    Yet, pursuing with joy the road of virtue,
    Like the man who observes the rugged path along the precipice, we ought
    Gladly and profitably to follow it.

--Siau-chi-kwan.

To feed a single good man is infinitely greater in point of merit,
than attending to questions about heaven and earth, spirits and
demons, such as occupy ordinary men.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

What is goodness? First and foremost the agreement of the will with
the conscience.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

If you remove (from conduct) the purpose of the mind, the bodily act
is but as rotten wood. Wherefore regulate the mind, and the body of
itself will go right.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Keep watch over your hearts.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

Let no evil desire whatever arise within you.--Cullavagga.

So soon as there springs up within him an angry, malicious thought,
some sinful, wrong disposition, ... he puts it away, removes it,
destroys it, he makes it not to be.--Sabbasava-sutta.

With not a thought of selfishness or covetous
desire.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Covetousness and anger are as the serpent's
poison.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

They who do evil go to hell; they who are righteous go to
heaven.--Dhammapada.

