The merchants are much alarmed at this step of the Company, fearing it
will prevent, in a great degree, the remittances from their
correspondents by so much or near it as the sales of the teas amount to;
for it is beyond a doubt, that the people in America, if they admit the
teas, (which I much doubt,) will be tempted to purchase them with the
very money arising from the sales of muslins, callicoes, Persians, &c.,
bought of the Company instead of sending it to the merchants in England,
and thereby tend to encrease the distress which is already too severely
felt, for want of remittances. And I should not be surprized at the
merchants forming a resolution similar to that of the dealers, viz., not
to purchase anything from a Company who are interfering so essentially
with their trade, and striking at the root of their interests. I am of
opinion, if a proper application was made to the ministry, aided by a
petition from the American merchants, it might produce a relaxation of
that disagreeable and fatal duty of 3d. pr lb., and in case of success
I could almost promise that in the course of six months there would be
exported not less than one million of pounds of tea, and further, that
the usual annual export would be upon an average four millions of pounds
of teas. This mode would relieve the Company from its present load, and
place the correspondence and connection in its usual and natural
channel. But admitting that the ministry would not comply with such a
request, is it not too hasty a resolution before answers are come from
America if they will receive the teas through the channel of the
merchants, and particularly when they see the drawback is encreased from
14 to 24 pr cent. ad valorem, and thereby they are enabled to introduce
that article cheaper from hence than from Holland.

It is well known to every gentleman conversant in trade, that on account
of some disagreeable Acts of Parliament passed here, the people of
America formed a resolution, which was too generally adhered to, not to
import any goods from hence. This resolution continued for two years.
However, the merchants of New York, (who are men of understanding and
liberal principles,) foreseeing the fatal consequences that attend
England & the Provinces by a continuance of dis-union with the
mother-country, summoned a meeting of the principal inhabitants of the
town, and then came to a compromise with the people, that in case they
would agree to admit all other goods, they promised not to import any
teas from England, under very severe penalties, until the Act imposing a
duty of 3d. pr lb. was repealed, and the several captains of ships in
the trade were enjoined upon pain of forfeiting the good esteem of the
inhabitants to comply therewith. The like resolutions were agreed to in
Philadelphia & South Carolina.

There is another difficulty which occurs to me in this business, and
that is, there is not so much specie in the country as would pay for the
quantity said is intended to be exported. The Company should be very
cautious who they appointed to receive the produce of the sales, for
should the contractor for money have that power, who are the general
drawers of bills, it would enable them to make a monopoly of the ready
specie, and to make exchange advance 25 pr ct., to the loss of the
remitter.

Thus have I stated the principal objections to the measure, and in
compliance with my promise, I shall give you my opinion relative to its
introduction, & the proper modes of sale, admitting the Company
persevere in their resolutions of exporting the teas on their own
account.

A ship should be hired by the Company, capable of carrying the quantity
they intend to export, and at so much pr month. She should call in the
first place at Boston, and there land 300 chests, under the care of one
of the Company's own clerks; from thence to New York, and there land 300
chests, in the like manner as at Boston; from thence to Philadelphia,
and there land 300 chests, as before, and from thence to Carolina, and
there land 100 chests, under the care of the clerk of the Company, all
of which may be performed in the course of three months from her sailing
from hence, until her arrival at her last destined port, provided the
people in the different Provinces don't disturb the voyage upon the
arrival of the teas. Public notice should be given in the papers of each
Province at least one month preceding the sale, and the following
valuation prices affixed for the buyers to bid upon, subject to the
allowances, as limited in your own sales: Boston, @ 2s., lawful money,
pr lb.; New York, 2s. 9d., currency; Philadelphia, 2s. 3d., currency;
Charles Town, South Carolina, 10s. pr lb., currency. These prices are
for Boheas. The several clerks of the Company can with ease correspond
with each other, as there is a constant and regular communication by
post, so that if there should be an over quantity at one place, and a
deficiency at another, it may be supplied. The clerks should have
directions to pay the proceeds of the sales to some eminent merchant at
each Province, who should be a person well acquainted with the article,
and one who has great weight with the other merchants and people, both
as to esteem, rank and property; this merchant to remit the money by
good bills of exchange, which he must guarantee, and a security given
here for such a trust.

Great care should be had to regulate the sale by the consumption of each
Province, and not to be held at the same time, but to follow each other
by the distance of a fortnight, so that in case there should be more
buyers at one Province than the quantity will furnish, they may have an
opportunity of writing or going to the next sale at another Province.

I fear there may be an opposition made by some of the Provinces upon a
surmise that Government is aiding in this plan, and mean to establish
principle and right of taxation, for the purpose of a revenue, which at
present is very obnoxious, as such great care should be had not to
employ either paymaster, collector, or any other gentleman under the
immediate service of the Crown, to receive the money.


                                          Garlick Hill, 1st July, 1773.

Gentlemen:

In compliance with your desire, we have reflected on the business &
expence which will attend the sale of and remitting for such teas as the
East India Company may ship to North America, and considering that none
but gentlemen of known property, integrity and of experience in trade
can, with propriety and safety to the Company, be employed therein, we
humbly conceive that five pr cent. commission, and one pr cent. for
truckage, warehouse rent, brokerage, and other incidental charges,
making in the whole six pr cent. on the gross sales, is as little as the
business can be transacted for. And we further beg leave to suggest that
no person ought to be employed who will not give security to the
Company, in London, for faithfully following such instructions, as they
may from time to time receive from them, for remitting to the Company
all monies which they may receive on account of teas sold, first
deducting the above six pr cent., together with such freight and duties
as they may have paid on account thereof, and interest thereon, till
reimbursed, such remittances to be made in bills of exchange, within two
months after receiving the money, which bills, to be drawn upon their
security in London, payable sixty days after sight, or in specie, at the
Company's risk and expence; if in bills of exchange, the security to be
obliged to accept and pay them. Should the Company determine to ship
teas on their own account and risk to North America, we presume to
recommend to their service, Benjamin Faneuil, Junr., Esqr., & Joshua
Winslow, Esqr.,[31] of Boston, _jointly_, to transact their business,
for whom we are ready to give security to the amount of ten thousand
pounds for their performance of the before mentioned conditions, and in
like manner a security of two thousand pounds for John Butler, Esqr., of
Halifax, in Nova Scotia, who we also beg leave to recommend to the
Company's service. We are, with great respect, gentlemen,

                    Your obe't, hum^e serv'ts,
                                                    WATSON & RASHLEIGH.

  To the Hon'ble the Committee
  of Warehouse, &c., &c., &c.

[Illustration: Signature, J. Winslow]


                                                  London, July 2, 1773.

Gentlemen:

If it should be agreeable to you to consign to the house of Richard
Clarke & Sons, of Boston, New England, this summer or fall, I would beg
leave to propose to you, that I will find security to the amount of two
or three hundred chests, that in eight months after the sale of them in
America, the accounts shall be forwarded you, and the money for the net
proceedings paid to your order within that time, you allowing our house
five pr cent. commission on the sales, and one pr cent. for storage &
other charges, the freight and American duty to be chargeable on the
teas besides, & we to be free from the risk of fire or any other
accident that may occur before the delivery of the tea.

  I am, with the greatest respect, gentlemen,
                               Your most obed't, hum. ser't,
                                                       JONATHAN CLARKE.


To the Hon'ble Directors, &c., &c.

                                                 London, July 5, 1773.

Sirs:

The terms which I had the honor to converse with you upon, relative to
the sale of teas in America, I take leave to recapitulate as necessary,
to understand each other, viz.: You expect that the houses here who
recommend their friends abroad, and are in consequence appointed as
your factors to dispose of that article, should stipulate that it be
sold agreeable to such orders as you may think proper to give for that
purpose, and that the factors pay the cartage, warehouse rent,
brokerage, and other charges incidental to the sale, and remit the net
proceeds in two months from the last, prompt, in good bills of exchange
or bullion, for the whole of which service they are to retain a
commission of 6 pr cent. on the gross sales, the Company to be at the
risk and expence of shipping the tea out, to pay duty and entry abroad,
and to be also at the risk and expence of sending bullion home, which
terms I do agree to in behalf of those which I shall recommend, whose
names are at the foot. And as it seems prudent to guard against accident
by death, as well as that the Company be secured against the neglect &
misconduct of its servants in this business, I do hereby, for myself and
my house, here guarantee the safety of the houses named as above, for
the execution of this business, and also that such bills of exchange, as
they shall remit on the above account, shall be good.

The agents in this business hope to be indulged with giving their ships
in the trade the freight of the tea out, in preference to others.

  I am, with the highest respect, sirs,
                   Your most obed't & most hum. serv't,
                                                         WILLIAM KELLY.

To the Hon'ble the Com^tee of Warehouses, &c., &c., &c.

                      _For New York:_

                 Messrs. Abraham Lott & Co.[32]
                 Messrs. Hugh & Alex^r Wallace.

Mr. Lott has been a merchant of reputation there about 18 years, and
Public Treasurer of the Province about 7 years. The latter is a house of
long standing and of great credit, and is well known to many gentlemen
here, particularly Messrs. Bourdieu & Chollet.

                      _For Boston:_

                  John Erving, Jun^r.[33]
                  Henry Lloyd.[34]

Both men of fortune and established characters as merchants.

                      _For Philadelphia:_

                 Messrs. Francis Tilghman.
                 Messrs. Reese Meredith & Son.

Both houses of great credit & established reputation.

P.S.--Mr. Kelly, on consideration, thinks that one month from the last
prompt, will be too short a time for limiting the remittances to be
made, and therefore has taken the liberty to put down two.

                                                 London, 6 July, 1773.

Sir:

Mr. Kelly will give the Committee my proposals for doing the Company's
business in Virginia, and if they require further knowledge of me,
Messrs. Harris & Co., and Mr. John Blackburn, will give them it. I am,
sir,

                                   Your hum. serv't,
                                                  Benj. Harrison.


  Mr. Wm. Settle, Clerk,
    to the Committee of Warehouses.


Hon'ble Gentlemen:

Pursuant to your request, I beg leave to lay before you the proposal of
my friend, Henry White, Esqr., of New York, for the sale of what teas
you may think proper to commit to his charge, and in justice to my
friend, I think it my duty to declare that there is no gentleman more
capable of transacting this business, seeing from his long experience in
that branch, that his consequence as a merchant of fortune he will be
capable of advancing the interest of the Company in the sale thereof, as
well as silencing any prejudices that may arise from the mode of its
introduction, viz.:

That the money arising from the sale of such teas shall be paid into the
hands of your treasurer in three months immediately following the receit
thereof, first deducting 6 pr cent. in lieu of all charges consequent to
their landing, save the duty of 3d. pr lb. and freight, and I hereby
engage to join myself with one or two more gentlemen of fortune in a
bond for the faithful performance of the above covenant.

    I am, with all due respect, hon'ble gentlemen,
                   Your most obedient, &c., &c., &c., &c.,
                                                        JOHN BLACKBURN.

  Scots Yard,
    Tuesday, 6 July, 1773.

N.B.--The firm of Mr. White's house is the Hon'ble Henry White, Esqr.,
at New York.


To the Hon'ble Directors, &c., &c., &c.


Sir:

Your letter of the 30th ultimo, addressed to the chairman of the East
India Comp^y, having been read in a Committee of Warehouses, they
desire you will please to meet them at this house tomorrow, at twelve of
the clock at noon, relative to the exportation of tea to America.

                                I am, sir,
                                          Your most ob. serv't,
                                                            WM. SETTLE.

  East India House,
    7th July, 1773.

Samuel Wharton, Esqr.


TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMMITTEE OF WAREHOUSES FOR THE HON'BLE THE EAST INDIA
COMPANY.

_The Petition of Walter Mansell,[35] of the City of London, Merchant,
respectfully sheweth:_

That your petitioner, having received certain information of the Hon'ble
East India Company's intention to export large quantities of teas to His
Majesty's American Colonies, your petitioner therefore humbly begs leave
to acquaint this Committee, that he and his partner, Thos. Corbett, now
resident there have long carried on considerable business as merchants,
in Charles Town, South Carolina, where your petitioner has been resident
himself for near 20 y^rs and flatters himself that he is well acquainted
with the trade of that and the neighbouring Provinces. That your
petitioner has at a very considerable expence erected and built large
and commodious brick warehouses, for the reception of all kind of
merchandize, in Charles Town, and has a ship of his own, of the burthen
of two hundred tons, constantly employed in the Carolina trade only;
that your petitioner humbly hopes and doubts not, but that this Hon'ble
Com^tee will upon the strictest enquiry into his character and
circumstances, being possessed of houses and lands, in Charles Town, of
upwards of £500 sterling pr an., and from his American connections find
him not unworthy of their countenance and favor.

Your petitioner therefore humbly presumes to offer his services to this
Hon'ble Comm^tee to transact as their agent any business relative to the
exportation to and sale of their teas in South Carolina, or elsewhere in
the Colonies of America, as they shall think fitting to commit to his
care and management.

                                                         WALTER MANSELL.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hon'ble Sirs:

We take the liberty of recommending Messrs. Willing, Morris & Co.,[36]
of Philadelphia, to be your agents there for any quantity of tea you
may please to consign them for sale, and which they will dispose of in
the best manner they can for the benefit of the Com^y on the following
terms:

The tea to be sold at two months prompt, to be paid for on delivery, and
the money to be paid at the exchange, which shall be current at that
time, into the Company's treasury within three months after it is
received from Philadelphia. Willing, Morris & Co. to be allowed 5 pr
cent. for commission, and 1 pr cent. for warehouse room and all other
charges, except freight & duty.

Messrs. Peter & John Berthon are ready to become joint securities with
us for Messrs. Willing, Morris & Co.

              We are, very respectfully,
                   Your honors most obed^t humble servants,
                                             ROBERTS, BAYNES & ROBERTS.

  King's Arms Yard, July 8th, 1773.
    To the Hon'ble the Com^tee &c., &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                  London, 8 July, 1773.

To the Hon'ble Committee of Warehouses.

Gentlemen:

We beg leave to recommend Messrs. James & Drinker, of Philadelphia, to
be one of your agents at the disposal of teas, which you may think
proper to send to Philadelphia, undertaking that they shall dispose of
such teas in no other manner than as you direct, on condition of your
allowing them 5 pr cent. for commission, for selling and making
remittance, and 1 pr cent. for truckage, warehouse rent or any charge
whatever; should any teas get damaged on board of ships, any expence
arising on them to be allowed by the Company. We do also engage, that in
two months after the prompt day, remittance in bills or specie, shall be
made to the Company, provided the teas are cleared, the specie to be at
the risk of the Company, they paying the charges attending it. We
further agree, that in case any bills are protested, we will pay the
Company the amount of them in two months after they become due. And we
are willing to enter into bond for the performance of the agreements,
provided the Directors think proper to allow the teas to be sent to any
other port, if the Pensilvanians refuse to admit the duty to be paid, or
to consume them in that country, in the latter case, our bond to be
void.

                           We are, &c., &c.,

                                                          PIGOU & BOOTH.


  We beg leave to solicit the }
  freight to Pensilvania.     }

       *       *       *       *       *

Gentlemen:

Having been informed that the Directors of the East India Company
propose shipping teas to some of the American Colonies, to be there sold
by agents on the Company's account, and as I apprehend South Carolina
may be fixed upon as one of them, I beg leave to propose Mr. Roger
Smith, of South Carolina, for whose solidity I am willing to become
responsible.

If the intended plan takes effect, and you do _give_ me the honor to
admit of my application, I shall be ready to attend you on the business
whenever you may be pleased to give me notice thereof. I have the honor
to be, gentlemen,

                                Your most obd^t h'ble serv^t
                                                          JOHN NUTT.
  New Broad Street Buildings,
  14^th July, 1773.

  To the chairman and deputy chairman
  of the Hon'ble East India Company.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sirs:

We beg leave to tender you the services of Mr. Samuel Chollet, merchant,
in Charlestown, South Carolina, and Messrs. Hugh and Alexander
Wallace,[37] merchants, in New York, for the sale of such teas as you
may think proper to send there, being persons in every respect well
qualified to dispose of them to the best advantage.

We are willing to enter into such covenants as may be required for the
security of the consignments & the remittances of the sales, on the same
terms as are to be granted to other houses on the Continent of America,
provided we are allowed a proper consideration for such guarantee.

  We have the honor to be, sirs,
                      Your most obed^t hble. serv^ts.
                                                    BOURDIEU & CHOLLET.

Lime Street, July 15, 1773.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                London, 15th July, 1773.

Gentlemen:

Hearing that you are going to appoint agents in America for the sale of
your teas, permit us to propose our partner, Mr. Daniel Stephenson, of
Blandensburgh, Maryland, as one (should you adopt this measure,) and we
flatter ourselves, that from his long residence & connexions in Virginia
& Maryland, in business, that he will be thought an eligible person, &
for his responsibility, we are ready to give the security of our house,
should he be appointed on the same terms as the other gentlemen. We
apprehend his present situation is well calculated for this measure,
being at a proper distance between New York & James River, & near the
centre of the Maryland business.

  We are, respectfully, gentm^n your most odb^t servants,
                                                    GALE, FEARON & CO.


To the Committee of Warehouses.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

Upon considering the exportation of teas by the Company, having no
direction or power from our correspondents at Boston or New York, to
make terms, we decline offering any recommendation in the present state
of the affair, at the same time think our thanks are due to you, for
your readiness in attending to any propositions we might make. We are,
respectfully,

                                 Your most ob^t serv^ts
                                                   DAVISON & NEWMAN.

  Fenchurch Street, July 15, 1773.
  Edw^d Wheeler, Esq^r deputy chairman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

The Committee of Warehouses of the East India Company desire you will
meet them at this house, on Thursday next, at twelve o'clock at noon,
relative to the exportation of tea to America. I am, sir,

                                     Your most obd^t serv^t
                                                            WM. SETTLE.

East India House, 17th July, 1773.


  TO BROOK WATSON,
     JONATHAN CLARKE,
     FREDE'K PIGOU, Junr.,
     GILBERT BARKLEY,
     GEORGE BROWNE,
     ROBERTS, BAYNES & ROBERTS,
     MR. BERTHON,
     WILLIAM KELLY,
     GREENWOOD & HIGGINSON,
     SAMUEL WHARTON,
     JNO. BLACKBURN,
     BENJN. HARRISON,
     WALTER MANSELL,
     JOHN NUTT,
     DAVISON & NEWMAN,
     BORDIEU & CHOLLETT,
     GALE, FEARON & CO.


Gentlemen:

In consequence of my conversation this day, with the gentlemen of the
Committee of Warehouses, relative to the rate of exchange from Boston, I
beg leave to confirm the offer I made, of abiding by the standard
exchange of £133 6s. 8d. currency for £100 sterling, upon an allowance
of 2-1/2 pr cent., with the proviso of the intended exportation being
made by way of experiment, that is not exceeding 500 chests to Boston,
before the success thereof is known.

                              I am, gentlemen,
                                        Your h'ble serv't,
                                                           WM. PALMER.

Devonshire Square, 22 July, 1773.

To the Hon'ble the Court of Directors, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sirs:

It is so perfectly contrary to all mercantile usage, to fix a certain
rate of exchange for commission business, that we must beg leave to
decline making any further proposals for your intended consignments to
New York and Carolina, because the revolutions in all exchanges cannot
be foreseen. We have known the New York exchange at 168 & 190, at
present it is 177-1/2, the par between Philadelphia and New York is, as
160 at the former, to 170-2/3 at the latter.

If you should hereafter adopt the regular and usual mercantile form--of
receiving your remittances at the current exchange of the place at the
time of remitting, we shall be obliged to you for your consignments to
Messrs. Hugh and Alexander Wallace, of New York, and Samuel Chollett, of
Charlestown, South Carolina, for whom we will become security for the
usual commission of guarantee of 2-1/2 pr cent.

                    We are, sirs,
                           Your most obd^t h'ble serv^ts
                                                  BOURDIEU & CHOLLET.

Lime Street, July 23^rd 1773.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

The Committee of Warehouses of the East India Company desire you will
meet them at this house tomorrow morning, at eleven o'clock, relative to
the exportation of tea to America.

                           I am, sir,
                                   Your most obd^t servant,
                                                            WM. SETTLE.

East India House, 29^th July, 1773.

  TO WALTER MANSELL,
     WILLIAM PALMER,
     BROOK WATSON,
     JONATHAN CLARKE,
     JOHN BLACKBURN,
     FREDERICK PIGOU, Junr.,
     WILLIAM KELLY,
     SAMUEL WHARTON,
     GILBERT BARKLEY,
     GEORGE BROWNE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

I am directed by the Comm^tee to acquaint you that the Court of
Directors of the E.I.C. have agreed to ship for _Boston_ three hundred
chests of tea, and consign to your correspondents an equal proportion
thereof, of which please to inform them.

Shall be obliged to you to acquaint me the firm of your correspondents
at _Boston_. I am, sir,

                                 Your most hum. serv^t
                                                    WM. SETTLE.

East India House, 4^th Aug^t 1773.

  TO JONATHAN CLARKE, }
     WM. PALMER,      } Esq^rs. Boston.
     BROOKE WATSON,   }

     JOHN BLACKBURN,      }
     WM. KELLY,           } Esq^rs. New York.
     FRED'K PIGOU, Jun^r. }

     GEO. BROWNE,    }
     GILBERT BARKLY, }
     FRED'K PIGOU,   } Esq^rs. Philadelphia.
     SAM'L WHARTON,  }

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

At foot you have the firm of our correspondents at Boston, which we gave
into the Com^tee of Warehouses for partaking of the India Com^y's Tea
consignments, and for whom we are ready to give security.

  Benj^m Faneuil, Jun^r,               }  Esq^rs of Boston,
  Joshua Winslow, late of Nova Scotia, }               jointly.

  Security--Brook Watson, Rob^t Rashleigh,
  Watson & Rashleigh.

  London, 4^th Aug^t 1773.
  Mr. Wm. Settle.

Security offered for Mr. Gilbert Barkly,--Wm. Ross, Esq^r.--No. 24
Austin Fryars.

       *       *       *       *       *

Securities offered for Walter Mansell,--Henry Laurens, Fludyer Street,
Carolina Merchants; William Barrett, Old Palace Yard.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

The firm of the house I have recommended to the Court of Directors for
New York, is Pigou & Booth, and at Philadelphia, Messrs. James &
Drinker, as agents for the disposal of teas. I am, sir,

                                    Your most hum. ser^t
                                                   FRED'K PIGOU, Jun^r

  Mark Lane, 4 Aug^t
  Mr. Wm. Settle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

I was favored with your letter of yesterday, _last_ night _after_ ten
o'clock, acquainting me that the Court of Directors of the E.I.C. had
agreed to ship for Philadelphia six hundred chests of tea, and consign
to my correspondents an equal proportion thereof, you will be pleased to
inform the Directors that I gave notice to my brothers, Thomas & Isaac
Wharton, (the persons whom I recommended,) by the last night's New York
mail, of the resolution of the Court of Directors to ship the above
quantity of teas to Philadelphia. I am, sir,

                            Your most hum. serv't,
                                                  SAM'L WHARTON.

Argyle Street, Aug^t 5, 1773.

Mr. Wm. Settle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Browne's compliments to Mr. Settle, and begs leave to inform him
that the address of the house at Philadelphia, whom he recommends for an
agent for the sale of tea, is Jonathan Browne, merchant, at
Philadelphia.

Aug^st 5, 1773.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

Last evening I had the pleasure to receive yours of yesterday,
mentioning the resolution of the Court of Directors of the Hon'ble East
India Company relative to the exportation of tea to New York, and
desiring me to acquaint you with the firm of my correspondent there,
which is Abraham Lott & Co. I am, sir,

                                              Yours, &c.,

                                                        WILLIAM KELLY.

Crescent, 5^th Aug^t 1773.

Mr. Wm. Settle.


MR. PALMER'S OPINION IN WHAT MODE TO SHIP TEA TO AMERICA.

