They are most excellent. The hills, the character of the roads, the
railroad crossings, the trolley lines, are all marked with the greatest
accuracy. Even the awkward corners where trolleys are to be met are
marked, and the various rules and regulations of the villages which must
be passed are also given.

These four maps give trips to Mt. Vernon, to Bronx Park, and to New
Rochelle, over roads and byways with which the present writer is
thoroughly familiar, and the accuracy of these charts cannot be too highly
commended.

With such guides as these in hand, a wheelman can make delightful, safe,
and speedy trips.

Our young readers would do well to secure copies of _The Times_
supplement, and obtain these excellent maps.

The League of American Wheelmen has very generously decided to let the
general public have the benefit of its road books, and they will put them
on the market, we understand, as soon as they are published.

    G.H.R.


LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


The Editor takes pleasure in acknowledging the pleasant letters received
from Laura Van C. and Theodore S.

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is always delighted to hear of any good
books, and thanks Theodore for his recommendation of "In Mythland" and
"Hans Brinker."

The Editor also wishes to thank Mr. Davis, of Bayonne, for his kind
letter, and to tell him that if he will look at No. 3 of THE GREAT
ROUND WORLD, page 46, he will find a fuller account of terminal buds,
and the rings formed on trees.

It was hoped that the readers of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD would have
remembered the previous article on the subject, and therefore the later
one was not so explanatory.

Mr. Davis has very kindly sent us an account of the kite represented in
our No. 9. We take great pleasure in publishing his statement. He says:

"I will tell you about Mr. William A. Eddy's kite, or rather about Mr.
Hargrave's, whose invention was the kite represented in your late issue.

"Mr. Lawrence Hargrave, of Australia, began in 1892 some experiments in
kite flying. His first attempt was with cylindrical surfaces. Not
succeeding as well as he had expected, he changed his plans, and in 1893
perfected the kite as represented in your issue. He sent photographs to
the Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893, where Mr. Eddy saw them. On
his return to Bayonne, Mr. Eddy made several kites from the photographic
pattern, and flew them a few days afterward. These undoubtedly were the
first Hargrave kites flown outside of Australia. This is a powerful kite,
but it requires a very strong wind to raise it.

"Mr. Eddy's kites are of a nearly plane surface, slightly convex in front,
and without tails. His experiments with them are revealing wonderful facts
regarding atmospheric electricity."


    DEAR MR. EDITOR:

    THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is very interesting, I think,
    when you commence it. I think as another little girl thinks,
    that the inventions made nowadays are wonderful; indeed, if I
    could I would like to talk to the people up in Mars, if there
    are any to talk to. My teacher's name is Miss Davis, and she
    reads THE GREAT ROUND WORLD to us.

                                   Yours truly,
                                                  LAURA VAN C.
    TROY, OHIO, February 13, 1897.


    DEAR MR. EDITOR:

    I have a book by the name of "In Mythland." I like it so much
    that I thought I would write and tell you about it, so as other
    children seven years old like me would know of it, and could
    read it. Mother reads THE GREAT ROUND WORLD to me every
    week, and I like it very much. Mother is reading me a book
    called "Hans Brinker; or, The Silver Skates." A story of life in
    Holland. By Mary Mapes Dodge. My book has many pictures of
    Holland in it.

