)

As for the "Doncaster Daggers" and "Hatfield Rats," also inquired after, I
have no information, although those places are in the same neighbourhood.

W. H. L.

_Effects of the Vox Regalis of the Queen Bee_ (Vol. vii., p. 499.).--Dr.
Bevan, than whom there is probably no better authority on apiarian matters,
discredits this statement of Huber. No other naturalist appears to have
witnessed these wonderful effects. Dr. Bevan however states, that when the
queen is

    "Piping, prior to the issue of an after-swarm, the bees that are near
    her remain still, with a slight inclination of their heads, but whether
    impressed by fear or not seems doubtful."--Bevan _On the Honey Bee_, p.
    18.

CHEVERELLS.

_Seneca and St. Paul_ (Vol. vii., p. 500.).--

    "The fourteen letters of Seneca to Paul, _which are printed_ in the old
    editions of Seneca, are apocryphal."--Dr. W. Smith's _Dict. of
    Mythology_, &c.

    "SENECA, Opera, 1475, fol. The second part contains only his letters,
    and _begins with the correspondence of St. Paul and Seneca_."--Ebert's
    _Bibl. Dict._

B. H. C.

_Hurrah_ (Vol. vi., p. 54.; Vol. vii., p. 595.).--Wace's _Chronicle of the
Norman Conquest_, as it appears in Mr. Edgar Taylor's translation, pp. 21,
22, mentions the war-cries of the various knights at the battle of Val des
Dunes. Duke William cries "Dex aie," and Raol Tesson "_Tur aie_;" on which
there is a note that M. Pluquet reads "Thor aide," which he considers may
have been derived from the ancient Northmen. Surely this is the origin of
our modern _hurrah_; and if so, perhaps the earliest mention of our English
war-cry.

J. F. M.

_Purlieu_ (Vol. vii., p. 477.).--The etymology of this word which Dr.
Johnson adopted is that which many others have approved of. The only other
derivation which appears to have been suggested is from _perambulatio_.
Blount, _Law Dict._, s. voc., thus explains:

    "_Purlue_ or _Purlieu_ (from the Fr. _pur_, i. e. _purus_, and _lieu_,
    locus) is all that ground near any forest, which being made forest by
    Henry II., Richard I., or King John, were, by _perambulation_, granted
    by Henry III., severed again from the same, and became _purlue_, i. e.
    pure and free from the laws and ordinances of the forest. Manwood, par.
    2., For. Laws, cap. 20.; see the statute 33 Edw. I. stat. 5. And the
    perambulation, whereby the _purlieu_ is deafforested, is called
    _pourallee_, i. e. _perambulatio_. 4 Inst. fol. 303."

(See also Lye, Cowel, Skinner, and especially Minshæus.)

B. H. C.

_Bell Inscriptions_ (Vol. vi., p. 554.).--In Weever's _Ancient Funeral
Monuments_ (London, 1631) are the following inscriptions:

 "En ego campana nunquam denuncio vana;
  Laudo Deum verum, plebem voco, congrego clerum.
  Defunctos plango, vivos voco, fulmina frango.
  Vox mea, vox vitæ, voco vos ad sacra, venite,
  Sanctos collaudo, tonitrus fugo, funera claudo."
      .    .    .    .    .    .
 "Funera plango, fulgura frango, Sabbatha pango,
  Excito lentos, dissipo ventos, paco cruentos."

There is also an old inscription for a "holy water" vessel:

 "Hujus aquæ tactus depellit Demonis actus.
  Asperget vos Deus cum omnibus sanctis suis ad vitam æternam.
          Sex operantur aqua benedicta.
  Cor mundat, Accidiam fugat, venalia tollit,
  Auget opem, removetque hostem, phantasmata pellit."

At page 848. there is a beautiful specimen of an old font in the church of
East Winch, in the diocese of Norwich.

CLERICUS (D).

Dublin.

_Quotation from Juvenal_ (Vol. vii., pp. 166. 321.).--My copy of this poet
being unfortunately without notes, I was not aware that there was authority
for "abest" in this passage; but my argument still remains much the same,
as regards quoters {634} having retained for their own convenience a
reading which most editors have rejected. I observe that Gifford, in his
translation, takes _habes_ as the basis of his version in both the passages
mentioned.

May I ask if it is from misquotation, or variation in the copies, that an
even more hackneyed quotation is never given as I find it printed, Sat. 2.
v. 83.: "Nemo repente _venit_ turpissimus?"

J. S. WARDEN.

_Lord Clarendon and the Tubwoman_ (Vol. vii., pp. 133. 211.).--Your
correspondent L. has not proved this story to be fabulous: it has usually
been told of the wife of Sir Thomas Aylesbury, great-grandmother of the two
queens, and, for anything we know yet of _her_ family, it may be quite
true.

J. S. WARDEN.

_Rathe_ (Vol. vii., p. 512).--I can corroborate the assertion of Anon.,
that this word is still in use in Sussex, though by no means frequently.
Not long since I heard an old woman say, "My gaeffer (meaning her husband)
got up quite _rathe_ this morning."

In the case of the early apple it is generally pronounced _ratheripe_.

See also Cooper's excellent _Sussex Glossary_, 2nd edit. 1853.

M.

_Old Booty's Case_ (Vol. iii., p. 40.).--The most authentic report of this
case is, I think, in one of the London Gazettes for 1687 or 1688. I read
the report in one of these at the British Museum several years ago. It
purported to be given only a few days after the trial had taken place.

H. T. RILEY.

       *       *       *       *       *


Miscellaneous.

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

CIRCLE OF THE SEASONS. 12mo. London, 1828. (Two Copies.)

JONES' ACCOUNT OF ABERYSTWITH. Trevecka, 8vo. 1779.

M. C. H. BROEMEL'S FEST-TANZEN DER ERSTEN CHRISTEN. Jena, 1705.

COOPER'S ACCOUNT OF PUBLIC RECORDS. 8vo. 1832. Vol. I.

PASSIONAEL EFTE DAT LEVENT DER HEILIGEN. Basil, 1522.

KING ON ROMAN COINS.

LORD LANSDOWNE'S WORKS. Vol. I. Tonson. 1736.

JAMES BAKER'S PICTURESQUE GUIDE TO THE LOCAL BEAUTIES OF WALES. Vol. I.
4to. 1794.

WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY. Vol. II. 4to. 1832.

WALKER'S PARTICLES. 8vo. old calf, 1683.

WARNER'S SERMONS. 2 Vols. Longman, about 1818.

AUTHOR'S PRINTING AND PUBLISHING ASSISTANT. 12mo., cloth. 1842.

SANDERS' HISTORY OF SHENSTONE IN STAFFORDSHIRE. J. Nichols, London. 1794.
Two Copies.

HERBERT'S CAROLINA THRENODIA. 8vo. 1702.

THEOBALD'S SHAKSPEARE RESTORED. 4to. 1726.

SERMONS BY THE REV. ROBERT WAKE, M.A. 1704, 1712, &c.

HISTORY OF ANCIENT WILTS, by Sir R. C. HOARE. The last three Parts.

*** Correspondents sending Lists of Books Wanted are requested to send
their names.

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, carriage free, to be
sent to Mr. Bell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notices to Correspondents.

_Being anxious to include as many Replies as possible in our present
Number, in order that they may be found in the same Volume with the_
Queries _to which they relate, we have omitted for this week our usual_
PHOTOGRAPHIC CORRESPONDENCE, _as well as our_ NOTES ON BOOKS, _and several
interesting articles, which are in type_.

MR. LYTE'_s_ Treatment of Positives _shall appear next week_.

C. MANSFIELD INGLEBY.--_The passage_---

 "The soul's dark cottage," &c.

_is from Waller. See some curious illustrations of it in our_ 3rd Vol., pp.
154, 155.

W. EWART. _We should he glad to have an opportunity of looking at the
collection of Epithets to which our correspondent refers_.

JARLTZBERG'_s Query in our next. His other articles shall have early
attention_.

JUVENIS. _We must repeat that we cannot undertake the invidious task of
recommending our Correspondents where to purchase their photographic
apparatus and materials. Our advertising columns give ample information.
The demand for cheap apparatus, if it becomes general, will be sure to be
supplied_.

_Errata_.--P. 569. col. 1. l. 45., for "oo_yddes_" read "Ov_yddes_." P. 548
col. 2. l. 47, for "1550" read "1850."

