23:28. And he knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are far brighter
than the sun, beholding round about all the ways of men, and the bottom
of the deep, and looking into the hearts of men, into the most hidden
parts.

23:29. For all things were known to the Lord God, before they were
created:  so also after they were perfected he beholdeth all things.

23:30. This man shall be punished in the streets of the city, and he
shall be chased as a colt:  and where he suspected not, he shall be
taken.

23:31. And he shall be in disgrace with all men, because he understood
not the fear of the Lord.

23:32. So every woman also that leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an
heir by another:

23:33. For first she hath been unfaithful to the law of the most High:
and secondly, she hath offended against her husband:  thirdly, she hath
fornicated in adultery, and hath gotten her children of another man.

23:34. This woman shall be brought into the assembly, and inquisition
shall be made of her children.

23:35. Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring
forth no fruit.

23:36. She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her infamy shall
not be blotted out.

23:37. And they that remain shall know, that there is nothing better
than the fear of God:  and that there is nothing sweeter than to have
regard to the commandments of the Lord.

23:38. It is great glory to follow the Lord:  for length of days shall
be received from him.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 24


Wisdom praiseth herself:  her origin, her dwelling, her dignity, and her
fruits.

24:1. Wisdom shall praise her own self, and shall be honoured in God,
and shall glory in the midst of her people,

24:2. And shall open her mouth in the churches of the most High, and
shall glorify herself in the sight of his power,

24:3. And in the midst of her own people she shall be exalted, and
shall be admired in the holy assembly.

24:4. And in the multitude of the elect she shall have praise, and
among the blessed she shall be blessed, saying:

24:5. I came out of the mouth of the most High, the firstborn before
all creatures:

24:6. I made that in the heavens there should rise light that never
faileth, and as a cloud I covered all the earth:

24:7. I dwelt in the highest places, and my throne is in a pillar of a
cloud.

24:8. I alone have compassed the circuit of heaven, and have penetrated
into the bottom of the deep, and have walked in the waves of the sea,

24:9. And have stood in all the earth:  and in every people,

24:10. And in every nation I have had the chief rule:

24:11. And by my power I have trodden under my feet the hearts of all
the high and low:  and in all these I sought rest, and I shall abide in
the inheritance of the Lord.

24:12. Then the creator of all things commanded, and said to me:  and he
that made me, rested in my tabernacle,

24:13. And he said to me:  Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thy
inheritance in Israel, and take root in my elect.

24:14. From the beginning, and before the world, was I created, and
unto the world to come I shall not cease to be, and in the holy
dwelling place I have ministered before him.

24:15. And so was I established in Sion, and in the holy city likewise
I rested, and my power was in Jerusalem.

24:16. And I took root in an honourable people, and in the portion of
my God his inheritance, and my abode is in the full assembly of saints.

24:17. I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress tree on
mount Sion.

24:18. I was exalted like a palm tree in Cades, and as a rose plant in
Jericho:

24:19. As a fair olive tree in the plains, and as a plane tree by the
water in the streets, was I exalted.

24:20. I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon, and aromatical balm:  I
yielded a sweet odour like the best myrrh:

24:21. And I perfumed my dwelling as storax, and galbanum, and onyx,
and aloes, and as the frankincense not cut, and my odour is as the
purest balm.

24:22. I have stretched out my branches as the turpentine tree, and my
branches are of honour and grace.

24:23. As the vine I have brought forth a pleasant odour:  and my
flowers are the fruit of honour and riches.

24:24. I am the mother of fair love, and of fear, and of knowledge, and
of holy hope.

24:25. In me is all grace of the way and of the truth, in me is all
hope of life and of virtue.

24:26. Come over to me, all ye that desire me, and be filled with my
fruits.

24:27. For my spirit is sweet above honey, and my inheritance above
honey and the honeycomb.

24:28. My memory is unto everlasting generations.

24:29. They that eat me, shall yet hunger:  and they that drink me,
shall yet thirst.

24:30. He that hearkeneth to me, shall not be confounded:  and they that
work by me, shall not sin.

24:31. They that explain me shall have life everlasting.

24:32. All these things are the book of life, and the covenant of the
most High, and the knowledge of truth.

24:33. Moses commanded a law in the precepts of justices, and an
inheritance to the house of Jacob, and the promises to Israel.

24:34. He appointed to David his servant to raise up of him a most
mighty king, and sitting on the throne of glory for ever.

A most mighty king. . .Viz., Christ, who by his gospel, like an
overflowing river, has enriched the earth with heavenly wisdom.

24:35. Who filleth up wisdom as the Phison, and as the Tigris in the
days of the new fruits.

24:36. Who maketh understanding to abound as the Euphrates, who
multiplieth it as the Jordan in the time of harvest.

24:37. Who sendeth knowledge as the light, and riseth up as Gehon in
the time of the vintage.

24:38. Who first hath perfect knowledge of her, and a weaker shall not
search her out.

Who first hath perfect knowledge of her. . .Christ was the first that
had perfect knowledge of heavenly wisdom.

24:39. For her thoughts are more vast than the sea, and her counsels
more deep than the great ocean.

24:40. I, wisdom, have poured out rivers.

24:41. I, like a brook out of a river of a mighty water; I, like a
channel of a river, and like an aqueduct, came out of paradise.

24:42. I said:  I will water my garden of plants, and I will water
abundantly the fruits of my meadow.

24:43. And behold my brook became a great river, and my river came near
to a sea:

24:44. For I make doctrine to shine forth to all as the morning light,
and I will declare it afar off.

24:45. I will penetrate to all the lower parts of the earth, and will
behold all that sleep, and will enlighten all that hope in the Lord.

24:46. I will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy, and will leave it to
them that seek wisdom, and will not cease to instruct their offspring
even to the holy age.

24:47. See ye that I have not laboured myself only, but for all that
seek out the truth.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 25


Documents of wisdom on several subjects.

25:1. With three things my spirit is pleased, which are approved before
God and men:

25:2. The concord of brethren, and the love of neighbours, and man and
wife that agree well together.

25:3. Three sorts my soul hateth, and I am greatly grieved at their
life:

25:4. A poor man that is proud:  a rich man that is a liar:  an old man
that is a fool, and doting.

25:5. The things that thou hast not gathered in thy youth, how shalt
thou find them in thy old age?

25:6. O how comely is judgment for a grey head, and for ancients to
know counsel!

25:7. O how comely is wisdom for the aged, and understanding and
counsel to men of honour!

25:8. Much experience is the crown of old men, and the fear of God is
their glory.

25:9. Nine things that are not to be imagined by the heart have I
magnified, and the tenth I will utter to men with my tongue.

25:10. A man that hath joy of his children:  and he that liveth and
seeth the fall of his enemies.

25:11. Blessed is he that dwelleth with a wise woman, and that hath not
slipped with his tongue, and that hath not served such as are unworthy
of him.

25:12. Blessed is he that findeth a true friend, and that declareth
justice to an ear that heareth.

25:13. How great is he that findeth wisdom and knowledge! but there is
none above him that feareth the Lord.

25:14. The fear of God hath set itself above all things:

25:15. Blessed is the man, to whom it is given to have the fear of God:
he that holdeth it, to whom shall he be likened?

25:16. The fear of God is the beginning of his love:  and the beginning
of faith is to be fast joined unto it.

25:17. The sadness of the heart is every plague:  and the wickedness of
a woman is all evil.

25:18. And a man will choose any plague, but the plague of the heart:

25:19. And any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman:

25:20. And any affliction, but the affliction from them that hate him:

25:21. And any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.

25:22. There is no head worse than the head of a serpent:

25:23. And there is no anger above the anger of a woman.  It will be
more agreeable to abide with a lion and a dragon, than to dwell with a
wicked woman.

25:24. The wickedness of a woman changeth her face:  and she darkeneth
her countenance as a bear:  and sheweth it like sackcloth.  In the midst
of her neighbours,

25:25. Her husband groaned, and hearing he sighed a little.

25:26. All malice is short to the malice of a woman, let the lot of
sinners fall upon her.

25:27. As the climbing of a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is
a wife full of tongue to a quiet man.

25:28. Look not upon a woman's beauty, and desire not a woman for
beauty.

25:29. A woman's anger, and impudence, and confusion is great.

25:30. A woman, if she have superiority, is contrary to her husband.

25:31. A wicked woman abateth the courage, and maketh a heavy
countenance, and a wounded heart.

25:32. Feeble hands, and disjointed knees, a woman that doth not make
her husband happy.

25:33. From the woman came the beginning of sin, and by her we all die.

25:34. Give no issue to thy water, no, not a little:  nor to a wicked
woman liberty to gad abroad.

25:35. If she walk not at thy hand, she will confound thee in the sight
of thy enemies.

25:36. Cut her off from thy flesh, lest she always abuse thee.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 26


Of good and bad women.

26:1. Happy is the husband of a good wife:  for the number of his years
is double.

26:2. A virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband, and shall fulfil the
years of his life in peace.

26:3. A good wife is a good portion, she shall be given in the portion
of them that fear God, to a man for his good deeds.

26:4. Rich or poor, if his heart is good, his countenance shall be
cheerful at all times.

26:5. Of three things my heart hath been afraid, and at the fourth my
face hath trembled:

26:6. The accusation of a city, and the gathering together of the
people:

26:7. And a false calumny, all are more grievous than death.

26:8. A jealous woman is the grief and mourning of the heart.

26:9. With a jealous woman is a scourge of the tongue which
communicateth with all.

26:10. As a yoke of oxen that is moved to and fro, so also is a wicked
woman:  he that hath hold of her, is as he that taketh hold of a
scorpion.

26:11. A drunken woman is a great wrath:  and her reproach and shame
shall not be hid.

26:12. The fornication of a woman shall be known by the haughtiness of
her eyes and by her eyelids.

26:13. On a daughter that turneth not away herself, set a strict watch:
lest finding an opportunity she abuse herself.

26:14. Take heed of the impudence of her eyes, and wonder not if she
slight thee.

26:15. She will open her mouth as a thirsty traveller to the fountain,
and will drink of every water near her, and will sit down by every
hedge, and open her quiver against every arrow, until she fail.

26:16. The grace of a diligent woman shall delight her husband, and
shall fat his bones.

26:17. Her discipline is the gift of God.

26:18. Such is a wise and silent woman, and there is nothing so much
worth as a well instructed soul.

26:19. A holy and shamefaced woman is grace upon grace.

26:20. And no price is worthy of a continent soul.

26:21. As the sun when it riseth to the world in the high places of
God, so is the beauty of a good wife for the ornament of her house.

26:22. As the lamp shining upon the holy candlestick, so is the beauty
of the face in a ripe age,

26:23. As golden pillars upon bases of silver, so are the firm feet
upon the soles of a steady woman.

26:24. As everlasting foundations upon a solid rock, so the
commandments of God in the heart of a holy woman.

26:25. At two things my heart is grieved, and the third bringeth anger
upon me.

26:26. A man of war fainting through poverty, and a man of sense
despised:

26:27. And he that passeth over from justice to sin, God hath prepared
such an one for the sword.

26:28. Two sorts of callings have appeared to me hard and dangerous:  a
merchant is hardly free from negligence:  and a huckster shall not be
justified from the sins of the lips.

From negligence. . .That is, from the neglect of the service of God:
because the eager pursuit of the mammon of this world, is apt to make
men of that calling forget the great duties of loving God above all
things, and their neighbours as themselves.--Ibid.  A huckster. . .Or, a
retailer of wine.  Men of that profession are both greatly exposed to
danger of sin themselves, and are too often accessary to the sins of
others.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 27


Dangers of sin from several heads:  the fear of God is the best
preservative.  He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it.

27:1. Through poverty many have sinned:  and he that seeketh to be
enriched, turneth away his eye.

27:2. As a stake sticketh fast in the midst of the joining of stones,
so also in the midst of selling and buying, sin shall stick fast.

27:3. Sin shall be destroyed with the sinner.

27:4. Unless thou hold thyself diligently in the fear of the Lord, thy
house shall quickly be overthrown.

27:5. As when one sifteth with a sieve, the dust will remain:  so will
the perplexity of a man in his thoughts.

27:6. The furnace trieth the potter's vessels, and the trial of
affliction just men.

27:7. As the dressing of a tree sheweth the fruit thereof, so a word
out of the thought of the heart of man.

27:8. Praise not a man before he speaketh, for this is the trial of
men.

27:9. If thou followest justice, thou shalt obtain her:  and shalt put
her on as a long robe of honour, and thou shalt dwell with her:  and she
shall protect thee for ever, and in the day of acknowledgment thou
shalt find a strong foundation.

27:10. Birds resort unto their like:  so truth will return to them that
practise her.

27:11. The lion always lieth in wait for prey:  so do sins for them that
work iniquities.

27:12. A holy man continueth in wisdom as the sun:  but a fool is
changed as the moon.

27:13. In the midst of the unwise keep in the word till its time:  but
be continually among men that think.

27:14. The discourse of sinners is hateful, and their laughter is at
the pleasures of sin.

27:15. The speech that sweareth much shall make the hair of the head
stand upright:  and its irreverence shall make one stop his ears.

27:16. In the quarrels of the road is the shedding of blood:  and their
cursing is a grievous hearing.

27:17. He that discloseth the secret of a friend loseth his credit, and
shall never find a friend to his mind.

27:18. Love thy neighbour, and be joined to him with fidelity.

27:19. But if thou discover his secrets, follow no more after him.

27:20. For as a man that destroyeth his friend, so is he that
destroyeth the friendship of his neighbour.

27:21. And as one that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so hast thou
let thy neighbour go, and thou shalt not get him again.

27:22. Follow after him no more, for he is gone afar off, he is fled,
as a roe escaped out of the snare because his soul is wounded.

27:23. Thou canst no more bind him up.  And of a curse there is
reconciliation:

And of a curse there is reconciliation. . .That is, it is easier to
obtain a reconciliation after a curse, than after disclosing a secret.

27:24. But to disclose the secrets of a friend, leaveth no hope to an
unhappy soul.

27:25. He that winketh with the eye forgeth wicked things, and no man
will cast him off:

27:26. In the sight of thy eyes he will sweeten his mouth, and will
admire thy words:  but at the last he will writhe his mouth, and on thy
words he will lay a stumblingblock.

27:27. I have hated many things but not like him, and the Lord will
hate him.

27:28. If one cast a stone on high, it will fall upon his own head:  and
the deceitful stroke will wound the deceitful.

27:29. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it:  and he that setteth a
stone for his neighbour, shall stumble upon it:  and he that layeth a
snare for another, shall perish in it.

27:30. A mischievous counsel shall be rolled back upon the author, and
he shall not know from whence it cometh to him.

27:31. Mockery and reproach are of the proud, and vengeance as a lion
shall lie in wait for him.

27:32. They shall perish in a snare that are delighted with the fall of
the just:  and sorrow shall consume them before they die.

27:33. Anger and fury are both of them abominable, and the sinful man
shall be subject to them.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 28


Lessons against revenge and quarrels.  The evils of the tongue.

28:1. He that seeketh to revenge himself, shall find vengeance from the
Lord, and he will surely keep his sins in remembrance.

28:2. Forgive thy neighbour if he hath hurt thee:  and then shall thy
sins be forgiven to thee when thou prayest.

28:3. Man to man reserveth anger, and doth he seek remedy of God?

28:4. He hath no mercy on a man like himself, and doth he entreat for
his own sins?

28:5. He that is but flesh, nourisheth anger, and doth he ask
forgiveness of God?  who shall obtain pardon for his sins?

28:6. Remember thy last things, and let enmity cease:

28:7. For corruption and death hang over in his commandments.

In his commandments. . .Supply the sentence out of the Greek thus:
Remember corruption and death, and abide in the commandments.

28:8. Remember the fear of God, and be not angry with thy neighbour.

28:9. Remember the covenant of the most High, and overlook the
ignorance of thy neighbour.

28:10. Refrain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins.

28:11. For a passionate man kindleth strife, and a sinful man will
trouble his friends, and bring in debate in the midst of them that are
at peace.

28:12. For as the wood of the forest is, so the fire burneth, and as a
man's strength is, so shall his anger be, and according to his riches
he shall increase his anger.

28:13. A hasty contention kindleth a fire and a hasty quarrel sheddeth
blood and a tongue that beareth witness bringeth death.

28:14. If thou blow the spark, it shall burn as a fire:  and if thou
spit upon it, it shall be quenched:  both come out of the mouth.

28:15. The whisperer and the double tongue is accursed:  for he hath
troubled many that were at peace.

28:16. The tongue of a third person hath disquieted many, and scattered
them from nation to nation.

28:17. It hath destroyed the strong cities of the rich, and hath
overthrown the houses of great men.

28:18. It hath cut in pieces the forces of people, and undone strong
nations.

28:19. The tongue of a third person hath cast out valiant women, and
deprived them of their labours.

28:20. He that hearkeneth to it, shall never have rest, neither shall
he have a friend in whom he may repose.

28:21. The stroke of a whip maketh a blue mark:  but the stroke of the
tongue will break the bones.

28:22. Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so many as
have perished by their own tongue.

28:23. Blessed is he that is defended from a wicked tongue, that hath
not passed into the wrath thereof, and that hath not drawn the yoke
thereof, and hath not been bound in its bands.

28:24. For its yoke is a yoke of iron:  and its bands are bands of
brass.

28:25. The death thereof is a most evil death:  and hell is preferable
to it.

28:26. Its continuance shall not be for a long time, but it shall
possess the ways of the unjust:  and the just shall not be burnt with
its flame.

28:27. They that forsake God shall fall into it, and it shall burn in
them, and shall not be quenched, and it shall be sent upon them as a
lion, and as a leopard it shall tear them.

28:28. Hedge in thy ears with thorns, hear not a wicked tongue, and
make doors and bars to thy mouth.

28:29. Melt down thy gold and silver, and make a balance for thy words,
and a just bridle for thy mouth:

28:30. And take heed lest thou slip with thy tongue, and fall in the
sight of thy enemies who lie in wait for thee, and thy fall be
incurable unto death.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 29


Of charity in lending money, and justice in repaying.  Of alms, and of
being surety.

29:1. He that sheweth mercy, lendeth to his neighbour:  and he that is
stronger in hand, keepeth the commandments.

And he that is stronger in hand. . .That is, he that is hearty and
bountiful in lending to his neighbour in his necessity.

29:2. Lend to thy neighbour in the time of his need, and pay thou thy
neighbour again in due time.

29:3. Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him:  and thou shalt
always find that which is necessary for thee.

29:4. Many have looked upon a thing lent as a thing found, and have
given trouble to them that helped them.

29:5. Till they receive, they kiss the hands of the lender, and in
promises they humble their voice:

29:6. But when they should repay, they will ask time, and will return
tedious and murmuring words, and will complain of the time:

29:7. And if he be able to pay, he will stand off, he will scarce pay
one half, and will count it as if he had found it:

29:8. But if not, he will defraud him of his money, and he shall get
him for an enemy without cause.

29:9. And he will pay him with reproaches and curses, and instead of
honour and good turn will repay him injuries.

29:10. Many have refused to lend, not out of wickedness, but they were
afraid to be defrauded without cause.

29:11. But yet towards the poor be thou more hearty, and delay not to
shew him mercy.

29:12. Help the poor because of the commandment:  and send him not away
empty handed because of his poverty.

29:13. Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend:  and hide it not
under a stone to be lost.

29:14. Place thy treasure in the commandments of the most High, and it
shall bring thee more profit than gold.

29:15. Shut up alms in the heart of the poor, and it shall obtain help
for thee against all evil.

29:16. Better than the shield of the mighty, and better than the spear:

29:17. It shall fight for thee against thy enemy.

29:18. A good man is surety for his neighbour:  and he that hath lost
shame, will leave him to himself.

29:19. Forget not the kindness of thy surety:  for he hath given his
life for thee.

29:20. The sinner and the unclean fleeth from his surety.

29:21. A sinner attributeth to himself the goods of his surety:  and he
that is of an unthankful mind will leave him that delivered him.

29:22. A man is surety for his neighbour:  and when he hath lost all
shame, he shall forsake him.

29:23. Evil suretyship hath undone many of good estate, and hath tossed
them as a wave of the sea.

29:24. It hath made powerful men to go from place to place round about,
and they have wandered in strange countries.

29:25. A sinner that transgresseth the commandment of the Lord, shall
fall into an evil suretyship:  and he that undertaketh many things,
shall fall into judgment.

29:26. Recover thy neighbour according to thy power, and take heed to
thyself that thou fall not.

29:27. The chief thing for man's life is water and bread, and clothing,
and a house to cover shame.

29:28. Better is the poor man's fare under a roof of boards, than
sumptuous cheer abroad in another man's house.

29:29. Be contented with little instead of much, and thou shalt not
hear the reproach of going abroad.

29:30. It is a miserable life to go as a guest from house to house:  for
where a man is a stranger, he shall not deal confidently, nor open his
mouth.

29:31. He shall entertain and feed, and give drink to the unthankful,
and moreover he shall hear bitter words.

29:32. Go, stranger, and furnish the table, and give others to eat what
thou hast in thy hand.

29:33. Give place to the honourable presence of my friends:  for I want
my house, my brother being to be lodged with me.

29:34. These things are grievous to a man of understanding:  the
upbraiding of houseroom, and the reproaching of the lender.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 30


Of correction of children.  Health is better than wealth.  Excessive
grief is hurtful.

30:1. He that loveth his son, frequently chastiseth him, that he may
rejoice in his latter end, and not grope after the doors of his
neighbours.

30:2. He that instructeth his son shall be praised in him, and shall
glory in him in the midst of them of his household.

30:3. He that teacheth his son, maketh his enemy jealous, and in the
midst of his friends he shall glory in him.

30:4. His father is dead, and he is as if he were not dead:  for he hath
left one behind him that is like himself.

30:5. While he lived he saw and rejoiced in him:  and when he died he
was not sorrowful, neither was he confounded before his enemies.

30:6. For he left behind him a defender of his house against his
enemies, and one that will requite kindness to his friends.

30:7. For the souls of his sons he shall bind up his wounds, and at
every cry his bowels shall be troubled.

30:8. A horse not broken becometh stubborn, and a child left to himself
will become headstrong.

30:9. Give thy son his way, and he shall make thee afraid:  play with
him, and he shall make thee sorrowful.

30:10. Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow, and at the last thy
teeth be set on edge.

30:11. Give him not liberty in his youth, and wink not at his devices.

30:12. Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat his sides while he
is a child, lest he grow stubborn, and regard thee not, and so be a
sorrow of heart to thee.

30:13. Instruct thy son, and labour about him, lest his lewd behaviour
be an offence to thee.

30:14. Better is a poor man who is sound, and strong of constitution,
than a rich man who is weak and afflicted with evils.

30:15. Health of the soul in holiness of justice, is better than all
gold and silver:  and a sound body, than immense revenues.

30:16. There is no riches above the riches of the health of the body:
and there is no pleasure above the joy of the heart.

30:17. Better is death than a bitter life, and everlasting rest, than
continual sickness.

30:18. Good things that are hidden in a mouth that is shut, are as
messes of meat set about a grave.

30:19. What good shall an offering do to an idol?  for it can neither
eat, nor smell:

30:20. So is he that is persecuted by the Lord, bearing the reward of
his iniquity:

30:21. He seeth with his eyes, and groaneth, as an eunuch embracing a
virgin, and sighing.

30:22. Give not up thy soul to sadness, and afflict not thyself in thy
own counsel.

30:23. The joyfulness of the heart, is the life of a man, and a never
failing treasure of holiness:  and the joy of a man is length of life.

30:24. Have pity on thy own soul, pleasing God, and contain thyself:
gather up thy heart in his holiness:  and drive away sadness far from
thee.

30:25. For sadness hath killed many, and there is no profit in it.

30:26. Envy and anger shorten a man's days, and pensiveness will bring
old age before the time.

30:27. A cheerful and good heart is always feasting:  for his banquets
are prepared with diligence.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 31


Of the desire of riches, and of moderation in eating and drinking.

31:1. Watching for riches consumeth the flesh, and the thought thereof
driveth away sleep.

31:2. The thinking beforehand turneth away the understanding, and a
grievous sickness maketh the soul sober.

31:3. The rich man hath laboured in gathering riches together, and when
he resteth he shall be filled with his goods.

31:4. The poor man hath laboured in his low way of life, and in the end
he is still poor.

31:5. He that loveth gold, shall not be justified:  and he that
followeth after corruption, shall be filled with it.

31:6. Many have been brought to fall for gold, and the beauty thereof
hath been their ruin.

31:7. Gold is a stumblingblock to them that sacrifice to it:  woe to
them that eagerly follow after it, and every fool shall perish by it.

31:8. Blessed is the rich man that is found without blemish:  and that
hath not gone after gold, nor put his trust in money nor in treasures.

31:9. Who is he, and we will praise him?  for he hath done wonderful
things in his life.

31:10. Who hath been tried thereby, and made perfect, he shall have
glory everlasting.  He that could have transgressed, and hath not
transgressed:  and could do evil things, and hath not done them:

31:11. Therefore are his goods established in the Lord, and all the
church of the saints shall declare his alms.

31:12. Art thou set at a great table?  be not the first to open thy
mouth upon it.

31:13. Say not:  There are many things which are upon it.

31:14. Remember that a wicked eye is evil.

31:15. What is created more wicked than an eye?  therefore shall it weep
over all the face when it shall see.

31:16. Stretch not out thy hand first, lest being disgraced with envy
thou be put to confusion.

31:17. Be not hasty in a feast.

31:18. Judge of the disposition of thy neighbour by thyself.

31:19. Use as a frugal man the things that are set before thee:  lest if
thou eatest much, thou be hated.

31:20. Leave off first, for manners' sake:  and exceed not, lest thou
offend.

31:21. And if thou sittest among many, reach not thy hand out first of
all, and be not the first to ask for drink.

31:22. How sufficient is a little wine for a man well taught, and in
sleeping thou shalt not be uneasy with it, and thou shalt feel no pain.

31:23. Watching, and choler, and gripes, are with an intemperate man:

31:24. Sound and wholesome sleep with a moderate man:  he shall sleep
till morning, and his soul shall be delighted with him.

31:25. And if thou hast been forced to eat much, arise, go out, and
vomit:  and it shall refresh thee, and thou shalt not bring sickness
upon thy body.

31:26. Hear me, my son, and despise me not:  and in the end thou shalt
find my words.

31:27. In all thy works be quick, and no infirmity shall come to thee.

31:28. The lips of many shall bless him that is liberal of his bread,
and the testimony of his truth is faithful.

31:29. Against him that is niggardly of his bread, the city will
murmur, and the testimony of his niggardliness is true.

31:30. Challenge not them that love wine:  for wine hath destroyed very
many.

31:31. Fire trieth hard iron:  so wine drunk to excess shall rebuke the
hearts of the proud.

31:32. Wine taken with sobriety is equal life to men:  if thou drink it
moderately, thou shalt be sober.

31:33. What is his life, who is diminished with wine?

31:34. What taketh away life?  death.

31:35. Wine was created from the beginning to make men joyful, and not
to make them drunk.

31:36. Wine drunken with moderation is the joy of the soul and the
heart.

31:37. Sober drinking is health to soul and body.

31:38. Wine drunken with excess raiseth quarrels, and wrath, and many
ruins.

31:39. Wine drunken with excess is bitterness of the soul.

31:40. The heat of drunkenness is the stumblingblock of the fool,
lessening strength and causing wounds.

31:41. Rebuke not thy neighbour in a banquet of wine:  and despise him
not in his mirth.

31:42. Speak not to him words of reproach:  and press him not in
demanding again.


Ecclesiasticus Chapter 32


Lessons for superiors and inferiors.  Advantages of fearing God, and
doing nothing without counsel.

32:1. Have they made thee ruler?  be not lifted up:  be among them as one
of them.

32:2. Have care of them, and so sit down, and when thou hast acquitted
thyself of all thy charge, take thy place:

32:3. That thou mayst rejoice for them, and receive a crown as an
ornament of grace, and get the honour of the contribution.

32:4. Speak, thou that art elder:  for it becometh thee,

32:5. To speak the first word with careful knowledge, and hinder not
music.

32:6. Where there is no hearing, pour not out words, and be not lifted
up out of season with thy wisdom.

32:7. A concert of music in a banquet of wine is as a carbuncle set in
gold.

32:8. As a signet of an emerald in a work of gold:  so is the melody of
music with pleasant and moderate wine.

32:9. Hear in silence, and for thy reverence good grace shall come to
thee.

32:10. Young man, scarcely speak in thy own cause.

32:11. If thou be asked twice, let thy answer be short.

32:12. In many things be as if thou wert ignorant, and hear in silence
and withal seeking.

32:13. In the company of great men take not upon thee:  and when the
ancients are present, speak not much.

32:14. Before a storm goeth lightning:  and before shamefacedness goeth
favour:  and for thy reverence good grace shall come to thee.

32:15. And at the time of rising be not slack:  but be first to run home
to thy house, and there withdraw thyself, and there take thy pastime.

32:16. And do what thou hast a mind, but not in sin or proud speech.

32:17. And for all these things bless the Lord, that made thee, and
that replenisheth thee with all his good things.

32:18. He that feareth the Lord, will receive his discipline:  and they
that will seek him early, shall find a blessing.

32:19. He that seeketh the law, shall be filled with it:  and he that
dealeth deceitfully, shall meet with a stumblingblock therein.

32:20. They that fear the Lord, shall find just judgment, and shall
kindle justice as a light.

32:21. A sinful man will flee reproof, and will find an excuse
according to his will.

32:22. A man of counsel will not neglect understanding, a strange and
proud man will not dread fear:

32:23. Even after he hath done with fear without counsel, he shall be
controlled by the things of his own seeking.

32:24. My son, do thou nothing without counsel, and thou shalt not
repent when thou hast done.

32:25. Go not in the way of ruin, and thou shalt not stumble against
the stones:  trust not thyself to a rugged way, lest thou set a
stumblingblock to thy soul.

32:26. And beware of thy own children, and take heed of them of thy
household.

32:27. In every work of thine regard thy soul in faith:  for this is the
keeping of the commandments.

In faith. . .That is, follow sincerely thy soul in her faith and
conscience.

