"I decided to watch him," the ranchman told me, "and see if he would
play up to his big talk. When we left our ponies, half a mile from the
camp, I pretended to argue with 'Cap' White, told him he ought to leave
young Thomas with the horses and not get such a boy as that all shot
up. 'Cap' caught my point and begged him to stay, but, of course, he
wouldn't hear of it. 'I'll stick to Brunner,' says he.

"'All right,' says I, 'come on.'

"When we started afoot, we trailed out single file, and I noticed that
old man Thomas waited for the boy and me to pass him, dropping in right
behind his son. 'Cap' was in front, then Bruce, then Paden Tolbert, then
Ryder and Kelso, and then I and the Thomases. The old man was at the
tail of the procession.

"Old man Thomas was the kind that you never think about one way or the
other. You said to yourself that he would do his share, whatever it
amounted to, and you wouldn't have to bother about him. That's your
notion of him, ain't it?"

It _was_ my notion of the older Thomas. I don't think a more commonplace
looking man ever lived. Brunner told me that he had not changed in
fourteen years.

"'Young Henry swells around and talks big; the old man he says nothing
and chaws tobacco,' That's the way people size 'em up around here."
Brunner thus confirmed my own impression of the pair.

"What a man can see out of the back of his head," Brunner went on, "is a
lot different from what comes in front of his eyes. He feels a lot that
don't make a sound and that ain't visible. I did see, out of the corner
of my eye, that young Henry Thomas was dropping behind me little by
little, but I didn't see why it was he moved up again. I know why,
though. The old man had ordered him up--not in words, you understand,
for I could have heard a whisper in the still dawn, the way we were
snaking it over the trail. From that time on, every foot of the way, the
old man drove the boy. You ask me how, and I can't tell you. There
wasn't a word, not a motion that I could see, but all the time it was
one man driving the other as plain as could be. And it wasn't easy. I
felt that young Henry was worse than balky, that he would have broke
through the bushes and run off screaming if that old man had taken his
eyes off of him for ten seconds.

"A quarter of a mile it was, and we went slow--twenty feet forward
picking our way, then the eight of us would stop to listen. If you ever
get a chance, ask young Henry how long that trail was. If he don't stop
to think, he'll tell you we crawled through the bushes for five miles,
but if he remembers his part as the hero of the fight, he'll say, 'Oh,
we sneaked a hundred yards or so before lighting into Queen's bunch.'"

The trail from above ended in a briar tangle fifty feet up the hill
from the ledge on which four of the five outlaws slept. The fifth man,
posted as a sentry, was on the lower trail, somewhere out of sight of
the party led by "Cap" White. When the deputies came up to the briars,
therefore, they could see no one. As soon as the four sleepers came out
of shelter, however, White's men could cover them with their guns.

What had to be done, obviously, was to rouse the four outlaws without
revealing the presence of the deputies above. It could be done by some
one in the woods below the ledge. But the outpost was down there to
reckon with. They could not all be trapped merely by waiting, for they
would come out, after waking, one by one; and White wanted the whole
bunch.

It was decided that three men should be sent, by a round-about trail,
down to the creek; that they should follow it up until they got opposite
to the ledge; and that they should then rouse the sleeping men. They
were also to find the sentry and capture him. The risk was that the
sentry might discover the three first and spoil the chance to take him.
The detail might be dangerous, though with luck it should prove easy.

Brunner was assigned to lead the three. Young Thomas and Kelso were
named by White as the other two, but Brunner, who had been aware of that
duel on the trail, said he preferred the old man to Jim Kelso.

They beat back for a short distance, then, separating, dropped down the
steep hillside to the creek. In open order, they went forward quietly,
slowly; they might come upon 'Kep' Queen's outpost at any turn. Now and
then they came in sight of one another. Each time Brunner saw that the
old man was edging closer to his son. Still there was no word
spoken--only a grim old man's gray eyes were fixed upon a young man's
shifting, over-bright eyes, and the young man moved on, cautiously.

Brunner held close to the creek bank; the old man was twenty yards away
and moving farther out as he approached his son. So they advanced,
abreast, until they came out upon the trail leading up to the ledge.
Then Brunner saw old man Thomas run, with short, noiseless steps, to
young Henry's side and point up the trail. Hidden from both and out of
sight of what had attracted the old man's attention, Brunner yet knew
what was happening. Farther up the trail was the sentry, half asleep in
the chill dawn.

Brunner saw, as he himself came up cautiously, that the old man was
whispering to young Henry. He grasped the boy's arm, half-shoving him
forward and pointing with his rifle. The youngster moved a step, then
turned with a look of utter panic on his face. His father's eyes glared;
a sort of savage anger blazed on his face. From his grip on young
Henry's arm, the old man's hand sprang to the boy's throat. There was
one fierce, terrible shake, a sort of gurgling scream that expressed
terror, and protest, too, but which was scarcely audible to Brunner,
twenty feet away. In the tone of a man enraged to the point of madness,
old man Thomas snapped out:

"Go on, you confounded whelp!"

Young Henry shook himself free, his terror replaced by a sudden,
resentful anger. Fifty yards away the sentry nodded, his back against a
tree and his gun across his lap. Brunner saw the man now, and stepped
aside to cover him as young Henry approached. But there was no need of
that. The boy was swift and noiseless; before the outlaw could wake or
move, his gun was in Henry's hand, and he heard the command, "hands up!"

The sentry was quick-witted. He couldn't shoot, but he could yell.
Brunner, however was ready for that. He began to bawl a reveler's song,
popular with cowboys on a spree, and old man Thomas joined him. From
above, it sounded as if a drunken riot had broken out, in which the
outpost's warning shout became only a meaningless discord. The babel
brought the four sleeping men out of their blankets. They listened a
moment, then stepped out in view of the posse in the briars.

As Brunner came up, old man Thomas turned to face him. On his seamed
face the sweat had almost dried, but when he shoved his hat up with his
forearm, his sleeve came away from his forehead damp. The compelling
glitter in the gray eyes turned to a challenging stare. Brunner met it,
then glanced up the trail towards young Thomas and his captive.

"He got him all right," said Brunner.

"Yes," the old man triumphed, "my boy got him. He captured 'Kep' Queen
himself."

"I reckon you've heard young Henry's story of how he got 'Kep' Queen,"
Brunner finished. "If you've ever talked with him when he was out of
sight of the old man, I know you have. What I've told you to-night is
what old man Henry could tell if he wanted to. But he never will. As I
said awhile ago, 'young Henry swells around and talks big; the old man
he says nothing and chaws tobacco.'"


EDITORIAL

THE TRUTH OF ORCHARD'S STORY

