To the writers of this reign we must add APICIUS COELIUS, who has left a
book De Re Coquinaria [of Cookery].  There were three Romans of the name
of Apicius, all remarkable for their (250) gluttony.  The first lived in
the time of the Republic, the last in that of Trajan, and the
intermediate Apicius under the emperors Augustus and Tiberius.  This man,
as Seneca informs us, wasted on luxurious living, sexcenties sestertium,
a sum equal to 484,375 pounds sterling.  Upon examining the state of his
affairs, he found that there remained no more of his estate than centies
sestertium, 80,729l. 3s. 4d., which seeming to him too small to live
upon, he ended his days by poison.


FOOTNOTES:


[284]  Intramural interments were prohibited at Rome by the laws of the
Twelve Tables, notwithstanding the practice of reducing to ashes the
bodies of the dead.  It was only by special privilege that individuals
who had deserved well of the state, and certain distinguished families
were permitted to have tombs within the city.

[285]  Among the Romans, all the descendants from one common stock were
called Gentiles, being of the same race or kindred, however remote.  The
Gens, as they termed this general relation or clanship, was subdivided
into families, in Familias vel Stirpes; and those of the same family were
called Agnati.  Relations by the father's side were also called Agnati,
to distinguish them from Cognati, relations only by the mother's side.
An Agnatus might also be called Cognatus, but not the contrary.

To mark the different gentes and familiae, and to distinguish the
individuals of the same family, the Romans had commonly three names, the
Praenomen, Nomen, and Cognomen.  The praenomen was put first, and marked
the individual.  It was usually written with one letter; as A. for Aulus;
C. Caius; D. Decimus: sometimes with two letters; as Ap. for Appius; Cn.
Cneius; and sometimes with three; as Mam. for Mamercus.

The Nomen was put after the Praenomen, and marked the gens.  It commonly
ended in ius; as Julius, Tullius, Cornelius.  The Cognomen was put last,
and marked the familia; as Cicero, Caesar, etc.

Some gentes appear to have had no surname, as the Marian; and gens and
familia seem sometimes to be put one for the other; as the Fabia gens, or
Fabia familia.

Sometimes there was a fourth name, properly called the Agnomen, but
sometimes likewise Cognomen, which was added on account of some
illustrious action or remarkable event.  Thus Scipio was named Publius
Cornelius Scipio Africanus, from the conquest of Carthage.  In the same
manner, his brother was called Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus.  Thus
also, Quintus Fabius Maximus received the Agnomen of Cunctator, from his
checking the victorious career of Hannibal by avoiding a battle.

[286]  A.U.C. 474.

[287]  A.U.C. 490.

[288]  A.U.C. 547.

[289]  A.U.C. 304.

[290]  An ancient Latin town on the Via Appia, the present road to
Naples, mentioned by St. Paul, Acts xxviii. 15, and Horace, Sat. i. 5, 3,
in giving an account of their travels.

[291]  A.U.C. 505.

[292]  Cybele; first worshipped in Phrygia, about Mount Ida, from whence
a sacred stone, the symbol of her divinity, probably an aerolite, was
transported to Rome, in consequence of the panic occasioned by Hannibal's
invasion, A.U.C. 508.

[293]  A.U.C. 695.

[294]  A.U.C. 611.

[295]  A.U.C. 550.

[296]  A.U.C. 663.

[297]  A.U.C. 707.

[298]  These, and other towns in the south of France, became, and long
continued, the chief seats of Roman civilization among the Gauls; which
is marked by the magnificent remains of ancient art still to be seen.
Arles, in particular, is a place of great interest.

[299]  A.U.C. 710.

[300]  A.U.C. 713.

[301]  A.U.C. 712.  Before Christ about 39.

[302]  A.U.C. 744.

[303]  A.U.C. 735.

[304]  See before, in the reign of AUGUSTUS, c. xxxii.

[305]  A.U.C. 728.

[306]  A.U.C. 734.

[307]  A.U.C. 737.

[308]  A.U.C. 741.

[309]  A.U.C. 747.

[310]  A.U.C. 748.

[311]  Ostia, at the mouth of the Tiber, about thirteen miles from the
city, was founded by Ancus Martius.  Being the port of a city like Rome,
it could not fail to become opulent; and it was a place of much resort,
ornamented with fine edifices, and the environs "never failing of pasture
in the summer time, and in the winter covered with roses and other
flowers."  The port having been filled up with the depositions of the
Tiber, it became deserted, and is now abandoned to misery and malaria.
The bishopric of Ostia being the oldest in the Roman church, its bishop
has always retained some peculiar privileges.

[312]  The Gymnasia were places of exercise, and received their name from
the Greek word signifying naked, because the contending parties wore
nothing but drawers.

[313]  A.U.C. 752.

[314]  The cloak and slippers, as distinguished from the Roman toga and
shoes.

[315]  A.U.C. 755.

[316]  This fountain, in the Euganian hills, near Padua, famous for its
mineral waters, is celebrated by Claudian in one of his elegies.

[317]  The street called Carinae, at Rome, has been mentioned before;
AUGUSTUS, c. v.; and also Mecaenas' house on the Esquiline, ib. c. lxxii.
The gardens were formed on ground without the walls, and before used as a
cemetery for malefactors, and the lower classes.  Horace says--

    Nunc licet Esquiliis habitare salubribus, atque
    Aggere in aprico spatiari.--Sat. 1. i. viii. 13.

[318]  A.U.C. 757.

[319]  A.U.C. 760.

[320]  A.U.C. 762.

[321]  Reviving the simple habits of the times of the republic; "nec
fortuitum cernere cespitem," as Horace describes it.--Ode 15.

[322]  A.U.C. 765.

[323]  The portico of the temple of Concord is still standing on the side
of the Forum nearest the Capitol.  It consists of six Ionic columns, each
of one piece, and of a light-coloured granite, with bases and capitals of
white marble, and two columns at the angles.  The temple of Castor and
Pollux has been mentioned before: JUL. c. x.

[324]  A.U.C. 766.

[325]  A.U.C. 767.

[326]  Augustus interlards this epistle, and that subsequently quoted,
with Greek sentences and phrases, of which this is one.  It is so
obscure, that commentators suppose that it is a mis-reading, but are not
agreed on its drift.

[327]  A verse in which the word in italics is substituted for cunctando,
quoted from Ennius, who applied it to Fabius Maximus.

[328]  Iliad, B. x.  Diomede is speaking of Ulysses, where he asks that
he may accompany him as a spy into the Trojan camp.

[329]  Tiberius had adopted Germanicus.  See before, c. xv.  See also
CALIGULA, c. i.

[330]  In this he imitated Augustus.  See c. liii. of his life.

[331]  Si hanc fenestram aperueritis, if you open that window, equivalent
to our phrase, "if you open the door."

[332]  Princeps, principatus, are the terms generally used by Suetonius
to describe the supreme authority vested in the Caesars, as before at the
beginning of chap. xxiv., distinguished from any terms which conveyed of
kingly power, the forms of the republic, as we have lately seen, still
subsisting.

[333]  Strenas; the French etrennes.

[334]  "Tiberius pulled down the temple of Isis, caused her image to be
thrown into the Tiber, and crucified her priests."--Joseph. Ant. Jud.
xviii. 4.

