Having once had an introduction that entitles to recognition, it is the
duty of the person to recall himself or herself to the recollection of
the older person, if there is much difference in age, by bowing each
time of meeting, until the recognition becomes mutual. As persons
advance in life, they look for these attentions upon the part of the
young. Persons who have large circles of acquaintance, often confuse the
faces of the young whom they know with the familiar faces which they
meet and do not know, and from frequent errors of this kind, they get
into the habit of waiting to catch some look or gesture of recognition.


HOW TO AVOID RECOGNITION.

If a person desires to avoid a bowing acquaintance with a person who has
been properly introduced, he may do so by looking aside, or dropping the
eyes as the person approaches, for, if the eyes meet, there is no
alternative, bow he must.


ON PUBLIC PROMENADES.

Bowing once to a person upon a public promenade or drive is all that
civility requires. If the person is a friend, it is in better form, the
second and subsequent passings, should you catch his or her eye, to
smile slightly instead of bowing repeatedly. If an acquaintance, it is
best to avert the eyes.


A SMILING BOW.

A bow should never be accompanied by a broad smile, even when you are
well acquainted, and yet a high authority well says: "You should never
speak to an acquaintance without a smile in your eyes."


DEFERENCE TO ELDERLY PEOPLE.

A young lady should show the same deference to an elderly lady that a
gentleman does to a lady. It may also be said that a young man should
show proper deference to elderly gentlemen.


WORDS OF SALUTATION.

The words commonly used in saluting a person are "Good Morning," "Good
Afternoon," "Good Evening," "How do you do" (sometimes contracted into
"Howdy" and "How dye do,") and "How are you." The three former are most
appropriate, as it seems somewhat absurd to ask after a person's health,
unless you stop to receive an answer. A respectful bow should accompany
the words.


SHAKING HANDS.

Among friends the shaking of the hand is the most genuine and cordial
expression of good-will. It is not necessary, though in certain cases it
is not forbidden, upon introduction; but when acquaintanceship has
reached any degree of intimacy, it is perfectly proper.


ETIQUETTE OF HANDSHAKING.

An authority upon this subject says: "The etiquette of handshaking is
simple. A man has no right to take a lady's hand until it is offered. He
has even less right to pinch or retain it. Two young ladies shake hands
gently and softly. A young lady gives her hand, but does not shake a
gentleman's unless she is his friend. A lady should always rise to give
her hand; a gentleman, of course, never dares to do so seated. On
introduction in a room, a married lady generally offers her hand; a
young lady, not. In a ball-room, where the introduction is to dancing,
not to friendship, you never shake hands; and as a general rule, an
introduction is not followed by shaking hands, only by a bow. It may
perhaps be laid down that the more public the place of introduction, the
less handshaking takes place. But if the introduction be particular, if
it be accompanied by personal recommendation, such as, 'I want you to
know my friend Jones,' or if Jones comes with a letter of presentation,
then you give Jones your hand, and warmly, too. Lastly, it is the
privilege of a superior to offer or withhold his or her hand, so that an
inferior should never put his forward first."

When a lady so far puts aside her reserve as to shake hands at all, she
should give her hand with frankness and cordiality. There should be
equal frankness and cordiality on the gentleman's part, and even more
warmth, though a careful avoidance of anything like offensive
familiarity or that which might be mistaken as such.

In shaking hands, the right hand should always be offered, unless it be
so engaged as to make it impossible, and then an excuse should be
offered. The French give the left hand, as nearest the heart.

The mistress of a household should offer her hand to every guest invited
to her house.

A gentleman must not shake hands with a lady until she has made the
first move in that direction. It is a mark of rudeness not to give his
hand instantly, should she extend her own. A married lady should always
extend her hand to a stranger brought to her house by a common friend,
as an evidence of her cordial welcome. Where an introduction is for
dancing there is no shaking of hands.


THE KISS.

This is the most affectionate form of salutation, and is only proper
among near relations and dear friends.


THE KISS OF FRIENDSHIP.

The kiss of friendship and relationship is on the cheeks and forehead.
In this country this act of affection is generally excluded from public
eyes, and in the case of parents and children and near relations, it is
perhaps unnecessarily so.


KISSING IN PUBLIC.

The custom which has become quite prevalent of women kissing each other
whenever they meet in public, is regarded as vulgar, and by ladies of
delicacy and refinement is entirely avoided.


THE KISS OF RESPECT.

The kiss of respect--almost obsolete in this country--is made on the
hand. The custom is retained in Germany and among gentlemen of the most
courtly manners in England.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER V.

Etiquette of Calls.


There are calls of ceremony, of condolence, of congratulation and of
friendship. All but the latter are usually of short duration. The call
of friendship is usually of less formality and may be of some length.


MORNING CALLS.

"Morning calls," as they are termed, should not be made earlier than 12
P.M., nor later than 5 P.M.

A morning call should not exceed half an hour in length. From ten to
twenty minutes is ordinarily quite long enough. If other visitors come
in, the visit should terminate as speedily as possible. Upon leaving,
bow slightly to the strangers.

In making a call be careful to avoid the luncheon and dinner hour of
your friends. From two until five is ordinarily the most convenient time
for morning calls.


EVENING CALLS.

It is sometimes more convenient for both the caller and those called
upon that the call should be made in the evening. An evening call should
never be made later than nine o'clock, nor be prolonged after ten,
neither should it exceed an hour in length.


RULES FOR FORMAL CALLS.

The lady of the house rises upon the entrance of her visitors, who at
once advance to pay their respects to her before speaking to others. If
too many callers are present to enable her to take the lead in
conversation, she pays special attention to the latest arrivals,
watching to see that no one is left alone, and talking to each of her
guests in succession, or seeing that some one is doing so.

A lady who is not in her own house does not rise, either on the arrival
or departure of ladies, unless there is some great difference of age.
Attention to the aged is one of the marks of good breeding which is
never neglected by the thoughtful and refined.

It is not customary to introduce residents of the same city, unless the
hostess knows that an introduction will be agreeable to both parties.
Strangers in the place are always introduced.

Ladies and gentlemen who meet in the drawing-room of a common friend are
privileged to speak to each other without an introduction; though
gentlemen generally prefer to ask for introductions. When introduced to
any one, bow slightly, and enter at once into conversation. It shows a
lack of good breeding not to do so.

When introductions are given, it is the gentleman who should be
presented to the lady; when two ladies are introduced, it is the younger
who is presented to the older.

A lady receiving gives her hand to a stranger as to a friend, when she
wishes to bestow some mark of cordiality in welcoming a guest to her
home, but a gentleman should not take the initiatory in handshaking. It
is the lady's privilege to give or withhold, as she chooses.

A gentleman rises when those ladies with whom he is talking rise to take
their leave. He also rises upon the entrance of ladies, but he does not
offer seats to those entering, unless in his own house, or unless
requested to do so by the hostess, and then he does not offer his own
chair if others are available.

A call should not be less than fifteen minutes in duration, nor should
it be so long as to become tedious. A bore is a person who does not know
when you have had enough of his or her company, and gives more of it
than is desirable. Choose a time to leave when there is a lull in the
conversation, and the hostess is not occupied with fresh arrivals. Then
take leave of your hostess, bowing to those you know as you leave the
room, not to each in turn, but let one bow include all.

Calls ought to be made within three days after a dinner or tea party, if
it is a first invitation; and if not, within a week. After a party or a
ball, whether you have accepted the invitation or not, you call within
a week.

A lady who has no regular reception day will endeavor to receive callers
at any time. If she is occupied, she will instruct her servant to say
that she is engaged; but a visitor once admitted into the house must be
seen at any inconvenience.

A lady should never keep a caller waiting without sending to see whether
a delay of a few minutes will inconvenience the caller. Servants should
be instructed to return and announce to the person waiting that the lady
will be down immediately. Any delay whatever should be apologized for.

If, on making a call, you are introduced into a room where you are
unknown to those assembled, at once give your name and mention upon whom
your call is made.

In meeting a lady or gentleman whose name you cannot recall, frankly say
so, if you find it necessary. Sensible persons will prefer to recall
themselves to your memory rather than to feel that you are talking to
them without fully recognizing them. To affect not to remember a person
is despicable, and reflects only on the pretender.

Gentlemen, as well as ladies, when making formal calls, send in but one
card, no matter how many members of the family they may wish to see. If
a guest is stopping at the house, the same rule is observed. If not at
home, one card is left for the lady, and one for the guest. The card
for the lady may be folded so as to include the family.


RULES FOR SUMMER RESORTS.

At places of summer resort, those who own their cottages, call first
upon those who rent them, and those who rent, in turn, call upon each
other, according to priority of arrival. In all these cases there are
exceptions; as, where there is any great difference in ages, the younger
then calling upon the older, if there has been a previous acquaintance
or exchange of calls. If there has been no previous acquaintance or
exchange of calls, the older lady pays the first call, unless she takes
the initiative by inviting the younger to call upon her, or by sending
her an invitation to some entertainment, which she is about to give.
When the occupants of two villas, who have arrived the same season, meet
at the house of a common friend, and the older of the two uses her
privilege of inviting the other to call, it would be a positive rudeness
not to call; and the sooner the call is made, the more civil will it be
considered. It is equally rude, when one lady asks permission of another
to bring a friend to call, and then neglects to do it, after permission
has been given. If the acquaintance is not desired, the first call can
be the last.


CALLS MADE BY CARDS.

Only calls of pure ceremony--such as are made previous to an
entertainment on those persons who are not to be invited, and to whom
you are indebted for any attentions--are made by handing in cards; nor
can a call in person be returned by cards. Exceptions to this rule
comprise P.P.C. calls, cards left or sent by persons in mourning, and
those which announce a lady's day for receiving calls, on her return to
town, after an absence.


RECEPTION DAYS.

Some ladies receive only on certain days or evenings, which are once a
week, once a fortnight, or once a month as the case may be, and the time
is duly announced by cards. When a lady has made this rule it is
considerate, on the part of her friends, to observe it, for it is
sometimes regarded as an intrusion to call at any other time. The reason
of her having made this rule may have been to prevent the loss of too
much time from her duties, in the receiving of calls from her friends.


CALLS AFTER BETROTHAL.

When a betrothal takes place and it is formally announced to the
relatives and friends on both sides, calls of congratulation follow. The
bridegroom that is to be, is introduced by the family of the proposed
bride to their connections and most intimate friends, and his family in
return introduce her to relatives and acquaintances whom they desire her
to know. The simplest way of bringing this about is by the parents
leaving the cards of the betrothed, with their own, upon all families on
their visiting list whom they wish to have the betrothed pair visit.


THE CARDS AND CALLS OF STRANGERS.

Strangers arriving are expected to send their cards to their
acquaintances, bearing their direction, as an announcement that they are
in the city. This rule is often neglected, but, unless it is observed,
strangers may be a long time in town without their presence being known.


RETURNING A FIRST CALL.

A first call ought to be returned within three or four days. A longer
delay than a week is considered an intimation that you are unwilling to
accept the new acquaintance, unless some excuse for the remissness is
made.


FORMING ACQUAINTANCE.

In an event of exchange of calls between two ladies, without meeting,
who are known to each other only by sight, they should upon the first
opportunity, make themselves acquainted with one another. The younger
should seek the older, or the one who has been the recipient of the
first attention should introduce herself, or seek an introduction, but
it is not necessary to stand upon ceremony on such points. Ladies
knowing each other by sight, bow, after an exchange of cards.


THE FIRST CALL.

When it becomes a question as to who shall call first, between old
residents, the older should take the initiatory. Ladies, who have been
in the habit of meeting for sometime without exchanging calls, sometimes
say to each other: "I hope you will come and see me!" and often the
answer is made: "Oh, you must come and see me first!" That answer could
only be given, with propriety, by a lady who is much the older of the
two. The lady who extends the invitation makes the first advance, and
the one who receives it should at least say: "I thank you--you are very
kind," and then accept the invitation or not, as it pleases her. It is
the custom for residents to make the first call upon strangers.


CALLS OF CONGRATULATION.

Calls of congratulation are made when any happy or auspicious event may
have occurred in the family visited--such as a birth, marriage, or any
piece of good fortune. Such visits may be made either similar to the
morning or the evening call. Such visits may also be made upon the
appointment of friends to any important office or honored position, or
when a friend has distinguished himself by a notable public address or
oration.


P.P.C. CALLS.

When persons are going abroad to be absent for a considerable period, if
they have not time or inclination to take leave of all their friends by
making formal calls, they will send to each of their friends a card with
the letters P.P.C. written upon it. They are the initials of "Pour
Prendre Conge"--to take leave--and may with propriety stand for
"presents parting compliments." On returning home, it is customary that
friends should first call upon them. A neglect to do so, unless for
some good excuse, is sufficient cause to drop their acquaintance. In
taking leave of a family, you send as many cards as you would if you
were paying an ordinary visit.


VISITS OF CONDOLENCE.

Visits of condolence should be made within a week after the event which
occasioned them; but if the acquaintance be slight, immediately after
the family appear at public worship. A card should be sent in, and if
your friends are able to receive you, your manners and conversation
should be in harmony with the character of your visit. It is deemed
courteous to send in a mourning card; and for ladies to make their calls
in black silk or plain-colored apparel. It denotes that they sympathize
with the afflictions of the family, and a warm, heartfelt sympathy is
always appreciated.


EVENING VISITS.

Evening visits are paid only to those with whom we are well acquainted.
They should not be frequent, even where one is intimate, nor should they
be protracted to a great length. Frequent visits are apt to become
tiresome to your friends or acquaintances, and long visits may entitle
you to the appellation of "bore."

If you should happen to pay an evening visit at a house where a small
party had assembled, unknown to you, present yourself and converse for a
few minutes with an unembarrassed air, after which you may leave,
pleading as an excuse that you had only intended to make a short call.
An invitation to stay and spend the evening, given for the sake of
courtesy, should not be accepted. If urged very strongly to remain, and
the company is an informal gathering, you may with propriety consent to
do so.


KEEP AN ACCOUNT OF CALLS.

A person should keep a strict account of ceremonial calls, and take note
of how soon calls are returned. By doing so, an opinion can be formed as
to how frequently visits are desired. Instances may occur, when, in
consequence of age or ill health, calls should be made without any
reference to their being returned. It must be remembered that nothing
must interrupt the discharge of this duty.


CALLS OF CEREMONY AMONG FRIENDS.

Among relatives and friends, calls of mere ceremony are unnecessary. It
is, however, needful to make suitable calls, and to avoid staying too
long, if your friend is engaged. The courtesies of society should be
maintained among the nearest friends, and even the domestic circle.


"ENGAGED" OR "NOT AT HOME."

If a lady is so employed that she cannot receive callers she should
charge the servant who goes to answer the bell to say that she is
"engaged" or "not at home." This will prove sufficient with all
well-bred people.

The servant should have her orders to say "engaged" or "not at home"
before any one has called, so that the lady shall avoid all risk of
being obliged to inconvenience herself in receiving company when she has
intended to deny herself. If there are to be exceptions made in favor of
any individual or individuals, mention their names specially to the
servant, adding that you will see them if they call, but to all others
you are "engaged."

A lady should always be dressed sufficiently well to receive company,
and not keep them waiting while she is making her toilet.

A well-bred person always endeavors to receive visitors at whatever time
they call, or whoever they may be, but there are times when it is
impossible to do so, and then, of course, a servant is instructed
beforehand to say "not at home" to the visitor. If, however, the servant
admits the visitor and he is seated in the drawing room or parlor, it is
the duty of the hostess to receive him or her at whatever inconvenience
it may be to herself.

When you call upon persons, and are informed at the door that the
parties whom you ask for are engaged, you should never insist in an
attempt to be admitted, but should acquiesce at once in any arrangements
which they have made for their convenience, and to protect themselves
from interruption. However intimate you may be in any house you have no
right, when an order has been given to exclude general visitors, and no
exception has been made of you, to violate that exclusion, and declare
that the party should be at home to you. There are times and seasons
when a person desires to be left entirely alone, and at such times there
is no friendship for which she would give up her occupation or her
solitude.


GENERAL RULES REGARDING CALLS.

A gentleman in making a formal call should retain his hat and gloves in
his hand on entering the room. The hat should not be laid upon a table
or stand, but kept in the hand, unless it is found necessary from some
cause to set it down. In that case, place it upon the floor. An umbrella
should be left in the hall. In an informal evening call, the hat,
gloves, overcoat and cane may be left in the hall.

A lady, in making a call, may bring a stranger, even a gentleman, with
her, without previous permission. A gentleman, however, should never
take the same liberty.

No one should prolong a call if the person upon whom the call is made is
found dressed ready to go out.

A lady should be more richly dressed when calling on her friends than
for an ordinary walk.

A lady should never call upon a gentleman except upon some business,
officially or professionally.

Never allow young children, dogs or pets of any sort to accompany you in
a call. They often prove disagreeable and troublesome.

Two persons out of one family, or at most three, are all that should
call together.

It is not customary in cities to offer refreshments to callers. In the
country, where the caller has come from some distance, it is exceedingly
hospitable to do so.

Calls in the country may be less ceremonious and of longer duration,
than those made in the city.

A person making a call should not, while waiting for a hostess, touch an
open piano, walk about the room examining pictures, nor handle any
ornament in the room.

If there is a stranger visiting at the house of a friend, the
acquaintances of the family should be punctilious to call at an early
date.

Never offer to go to the room of an invalid upon whom you have called,
but wait for an invitation to do so.

In receiving morning calls, it is unnecessary for a lady to lay aside
any employment, not of an absorbing nature upon which she may happen to
be engaged. Embroidery, crocheting or light needle-work are perfectly in
harmony with the requirements of the hour, and the lady looks much
better employed than in absolute idleness.

A lady should pay equal attention to all her guests. The display of
unusual deference is alone allowable when distinguished rank or
reputation or advanced age justifies it.

A guest should take the seat indicated by the hostess. A gentleman
should never seat himself on a sofa beside her, nor in a chair in
immediate proximity, unless she specially invites him to do so.

A lady need not lay aside her bonnet during a formal call, even though
urged to do so. If the call be a friendly and unceremonious one, she
may do so if she thinks proper, but not without an invitation.

A gentleman caller must not look at his watch during a call, unless, in
doing so, he pleads some engagement and asks to be excused.

Formal calls are generally made twice a year; but only once a year is
binding, when no invitations have been received that require calls in
return.

In calling upon a person living at a hotel or boarding-house, it is
customary to stop in the parlor and send your card to the room of the
person called upon.

When a person has once risen to take leave, he should not be persuaded
to prolong his stay.

Callers should take special pains to make their visits opportune. On the
other hand, a lady should always receive her callers, at whatever hour
or day they come, if it is possible to do so.

When a gentleman has called and not found the lady at home, it is
civility on the part of the lady, upon the occasion of their next
meeting, to express her regret at not seeing him. He should reciprocate
the regret, and not reply unthinkingly or awkwardly: "Oh, it made no
particular difference," "it was of no great consequence," or words to
that effect.

After you have visited a friend at her country seat, or after receiving
an invitation to visit her, a call is due her upon her return to her
town residence. This is one of the occasions when a call should be made
promptly and in person, unless you have a reason for wishing to
discontinue the acquaintance; even then it would be more civil to take
another opportunity for dropping a friend who wished to show a civility,
unless her character has been irretrievably lost in the meantime.


NEW-YEAR'S CALLS.

The custom of New-Year's calling is prevalent in all cities, and most
villages in the country, and so agreeable a custom is it, that it is
becoming more in favor every year. This is the day when gentlemen keep
up their acquaintanceship with ladies and families, some of whom they
are unable to see, probably, during the whole year. Of late it has been
customary in many cities to publish in one or more newspapers, a day or
two before New Years, a list of the ladies who will receive calls on
that day, and from this list gentlemen arrange their calls. For
convenience and to add to the pleasure of the day, several ladies
frequently unite in receiving calls at the residence of one of their
number, but this is usually done when only one or two members of a
family can receive. Where there are several members of a family, who can
do so, they usually receive at their own home.

Gentlemen call either singly, in couples, by threes or fours and
sometimes even more, in carriages or on foot, as they choose. Calls
commence about ten o'clock in the morning, and continue until about nine
in the evening. When the gentlemen go in parties, they call upon the
lady friends of each, and if all are not acquainted, those who are,
introduce the others. The length of a call is usually from five to
fifteen minutes, but it is often governed by circumstances, and may be
prolonged to even an hour.

Refreshments are usually provided for the callers, and should always be
offered, but it is not necessary that they should be accepted. If not
accepted, an apology should be tendered, with thanks for the offer. The
refreshments may consist of oysters, raw or scalloped, cold meats,
salads, fruits, cakes, sandwiches, etc., and hot tea and coffee.

When callers are ushered into the reception-room, they are met by the
ladies, when introductions are given, and the callers are invited to
remove their overcoats, but it is optional with them whether they do so
or not. It is also optional with them whether they remove their gloves.
When gentlemen are introduced to ladies in making New-Year's calls, they
are not thereby warranted in calling again upon any of these ladies,
unless especially invited to do so. It is the lady's pleasure whether
the acquaintance shall be maintained.

In making New-Year's calls, a gentleman leaves one card, whatever may be
the number of ladies receiving with the hostess. If there is a basket at
the door, he leaves a card for each of the ladies at the house,
including lady guests of the family, provided there are any. The
New-Year's card should not differ from an ordinary calling card. It
should be plain, with the name engraved, or printed in neat script. It
is not now considered in good taste to have "Happy New Year" or other
words upon it, unless it may be the residence of the gentleman, which
may be printed or written in the right hand corner, if deemed desirable.
A gentleman does not make calls the first New-Year's after his marriage,
but receives at home with his wife.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER VI.

Etiquette of Visiting.


Some of the social observances pertaining to visiting away from one's
own home, and accepting the hospitalities of friends, are here given,
and are applicable to ladies and gentlemen alike.


GENERAL INVITATIONS.

No one should accept a general invitation for a prolonged visit. "Do
come and spend some time with me" may be said with all earnestness and
cordiality, but to give the invitation real meaning the date should be
definitely fixed and the length of time stated.

A person who pays a visit upon a general invitation need not be
surprised if he finds himself as unwelcome as he is unexpected. His
friends may be absent from home, or their house may be already full, or
they may not have made arrangements for visitors. From these and other
causes they may be greatly inconvenienced by an unexpected arrival.

It would be well if people would abstain altogether from this custom of
giving general invitations, which really mean nothing, and be scrupulous
to invite their desired guests at a stated time and for a given period.


LIMIT OF A PROLONGED VISIT.

If no exact length of time is specified, it is well for visitors to
limit a visit to three days or a week, according to the degree of
intimacy they may have with the family, or the distance they have come
to pay the visit, announcing this limitation soon after arrival, so that
the host and the hostess may invite a prolongation of the stay if they
desire it, or so that they can make their arrangements in accordance.
One never likes to ask of a guest, "How long do you intend to remain?"
yet it is often most desirable to know.


TRUE HOSPITALITY.

Offer your guests the best that you have in the way of food and rooms,
and express no regrets, and make no excuses that you have nothing better
to give them.

Try to make your guests feel at home; and do this, not by urging them in
empty words to do so, but by making their stay as pleasant as possible,
at the same time being careful to put out of sight any trifling trouble
or inconvenience they may cause you.

Devote as much time as is consistent with other engagements to the
amusement and entertainment of your guests.


DUTIES OF THE VISITOR.

On the other hand, the visitor should try to conform as much as possible
to the habits of the house which temporarily shelters him. He should
never object to the hours at which meals are served, nor should he ever
allow the family to be kept waiting on his account.

It is a good rule for a visitor to retire to his own apartment in the
morning, or at least seek out some occupation or amusement of his own,
without seeming to need the assistance or attention of host or hostess;
for it is undeniable that these have certain duties which must be
attended to at this portion of the day, in order to leave the balance of
the time free for the entertainment of their guests.

If any family matters of a private or unpleasant nature come to the
knowledge of the guest during his stay, he must seem both blind and
deaf, and never refer to them unless the parties interested speak of
them first.

The rule on which a host and hostess should act is to make their guests
as much at ease as possible; that on which a visitor should act is to
interfere as little as possible with the ordinary routine of the house.

It is not required that a hostess should spend her whole time in the
entertainment of her guests. The latter may prefer to be left to their
own devices for a portion of the day. On the other hand, it shows the
worst of breeding for a visitor to seclude himself from the family and
seek his own amusements and occupations regardless of their desire to
join in them or entertain him.

You should try to hold yourself at the disposal of those whom you are
visiting. If they propose to you to ride, to drive or walk, you should
acquiesce as far as your strength will permit, and do your best to seem
pleased at the efforts made to entertain you.

You should not accept invitations without consulting your host. You
should not call upon the servants to do errands for you, or to wait upon
you too much, nor keep the family up after hours of retiring.

If you have observed anything to the disadvantage of your friends, while
partaking of their hospitality, it should never be mentioned, either
while you are under their roof or afterwards. Speak only of what
redounds to their praise and credit. This feeling ought to be mutual
between host and guest. Whatever good is observed in either may be
commented upon, but the curtain of silence must be drawn over their
faults.

Give as little trouble as possible when a guest, but at the same time
never think of apologizing for any little additional trouble which your
visit may occasion. It would imply that you thought your friends
incapable of entertaining you without some inconvenience to themselves.

Keep your room as neat as possible, and leave no articles of dress or
toilet around to give trouble to servants.

A lady guest will not hesitate to make her own bed, if few or no
servants are kept; and in the latter case she will do whatever else she
can to lighten the labors of her hostess as a return for the additional
exertion her visit occasions.


INVITATIONS TO GUESTS.

Any invitation given to a lady guest should also include the hostess,
and the guest is justified in declining to accept any invitation unless
the hostess is also invited. Invitations received by the hostess should
include the guest. Thus, at all places of amusement and entertainment,
guest and host may be together.


FORBEARANCE WITH CHILDREN.

A guest should not notice nor find fault with the bad behavior of the
children in the household where visiting, and should put up with any of
their faults, and overlook any ill-bred or disagreeable actions on their
part.


GUESTS MAKING PRESENTS.

If a guest wishes to make a present to any member of the family she is
visiting, it should be to the hostess, or if to any of the children, to
the youngest in preference, though it is usually better to give it to
the mother. Upon returning home, when the guest writes to the hostess,
she expresses her thanks for the hospitality, and requests to be
remembered to the family.


TREATMENT OF A HOST'S FRIENDS.

If you are a guest, you must be very cautious as to the treatment of the
friends of your host or hostess. If you do not care to be intimate with
them, you must be careful not to show a dislike for them, or that you
wish to avoid them. You must be exceedingly polite and agreeable to
them, avoiding any special familiarity, and keep them at a distance
without hurting their feelings. Do not say to your host or hostess that
you do not like any of their friends.


LEAVE-TAKING.

Upon taking leave, express the pleasure you have experienced in your
visit. Upon returning home it is an act of courtesy to write and inform
your friends of your safe arrival, at the same time repeating your
thanks.

A host and hostess should do all they can to make the visit of a friend
agreeable; they should urge him to stay as long as it is consistent with
his own plans, and at the same time convenient to themselves. But when
the time for departure has been fully fixed upon, no obstacle should be
placed in the way of leave-taking. Help him in every possible way to
depart, at the same time giving him a cordial invitation to renew the
visit at some future period.

          "Welcome the coming, speed the parting, guest,"

expresses the true spirit of hospitality.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER VII.

Visiting and Calling Cards.


An authentic writer upon visiting cards says: "To the unrefined or
underbred, the visiting card is but a trifling and insignificant bit of
paper; but to the cultured disciple of social law, it conveys a subtle
and unmistakable intelligence. Its texture, style of engraving, and even
the hour of leaving it combine to place the stranger, whose name it
bears, in a pleasant or a disagreeable attitude, even before his
manners, conversation and face have been able to explain his social
position. The higher the civilization of a community, the more careful
it is to preserve the elegance of its social forms. It is quite as easy
to express a perfect breeding in the fashionable formalities of cards,
as by any other method, and perhaps, indeed, it is the safest herald of
an introduction for a stranger. Its texture should be fine, its
engraving a plain script, its size neither too small, so that its
recipients shall say to themselves, 'A whimsical person,' nor too large
to suggest ostentation. Refinement seldom touches extremes in
anything."


CALLING CARDS.

A card used in calling should have nothing upon it but the name of the
caller. A lady's card should not bear her place of residence; such cards
having, of late, been appropriated by the members of the demi-monde. The
street and number always look better upon the card of the husband than
upon that of the wife. When necessary, they can be added in pencil on
the cards of the wife and daughter. A business card should never be used
for a friendly call. A physician may put the prefix "Dr.," or the affix
"M.D.," upon his card, and an army or navy officer his rank and branch
of service.


WEDDING CARDS.

Wedding cards are only sent to those people whom the newly married
couple desire to keep among their acquaintances, and it is then the duty
of those receiving the cards to call first on the young couple.

An ancient custom, but one which has been recently revived, is for the
friends of the bride and groom to send cards; these are of great variety
in size and design, and resemble Christmas or Easter cards but are
usually more artistic.


CHRISTMAS AND EASTER CARDS.

A very charming custom that is coming into vogue is the giving or
sending of Easter and Christmas cards. These are of such elegant designs
and variety of colors that the stationer takes great pride in
decorating his shop windows with them; indeed some of them are so
elegant as to resemble oil paintings. Books and other small offerings
may accompany cards as a token of remembrance.


CARDS TO SERVE FOR CALLS.

A person may make a card serve the purpose of a call, and it may either
be sent in an envelope, by messenger or left in person. If left in
person, one corner should be turned down. To indicate that a call is
made on all or several members of the family; the card for the lady of
the house is folded in the middle. If guests are visiting at the house,
a card is left for each guest.


ENCLOSING A CARD IN AN ENVELOPE.

To return a call made in person with a card inclosed in an envelope, is
an intimation that visiting between the parties is ended. Those who
leave or send their cards with no such intention, should not inclose
them in an envelope. An exception to this rule is where they are sent in
return to the newly married living in other cities, or in answering
wedding cards forwarded when absent from home. P.P.C. cards are also
sent in this way, and are the only cards that it is as yet universally
considered admissible to send by post.


SIZE AND STYLE OF VISITING OR CALLING CARDS.

A medium sized is in better taste than a very large card for married
persons. Cards bearing the name of the husband alone are smaller. The
cards of unmarried men should also be small. The engraving in simple
writing is preferred, and without flourishes. Nothing in cards can be
more commonplace than large printed letters, be the type what it may.
Young men should dispense with the "Mr." before their names.

 [Illustration: CALLING CARDS.]


CORNERS OF CARDS TURNED DOWN.

The signification of turning down the corners of cards are:

          _Visite_--The right hand upper corner.
          _Felicitation_--The left hand upper corner.
          _Condolence_--The left hand lower corner.
              _P.P.C._    }
          _To Take Leave_ } The right hand lower corner.
          Card, right hand end turned down--_Delivered in Person._


CARD FOR MOTHER AND DAUGHTER.

The name of young ladies are sometimes printed or engraved on their
mother's cards; both in script. It is, of course, allowable, for the
daughter to have cards of her own.

Some ladies have adopted the fashion of having the daughter's name on
the same card with their own and their husband's names.


GLAZED CARDS.

Glazed cards are quite out of fashion, as are cards and note paper with
gilt edges. The fashion in cards, however, change so often, that what is
in style one year, may not be the next.


P.P.C. CARDS.

A card left at a farewell visit, before a long protracted absence, has
"P.P.C." (Pour Prendre Conge) written in one corner. It is not necessary
to deliver such cards in person, for they may be sent by a messenger, or
by post if necessary. P.P.C. cards are not left when the absence from
home is only for a few months, nor by persons starting in mid-summer for
a foreign country, as residents are then supposed to be out of town.
They are sent to or left with friends by ladies just previous to their
contemplated marriage to serve the purpose of a call.


CARDS OF CONGRATULATION.

Cards of congratulation must be left in person, or a congratulatory
note, if desired, can be made to serve instead of a call; excepting
upon the newly married. Calls in person are due to them, and to the
parents who have invited you to the marriage. When there has been a
reception after the ceremony, which you have been unable to attend, but
have sent cards by some member of your family, your cards need not again
represent you until they have been returned, with the new residence
announced; but a call is due to the parents or relatives who have given
the reception. When no wedding cards are sent you, nor the card of the
bridegroom, you cannot call without being considered intrusive. One
month after the birth of a child the call of congratulation is made by
acquaintances.


LEAVE CARDS IN MAKING FIRST CALL.

In making the first calls of the season (in the autumn) both ladies and
gentlemen should leave a card each, at every house called upon, even if
the ladies are receiving. The reason of this is that where a lady is
receiving morning calls, it would be too great a tax upon her memory to
oblige her to keep in mind what calls she has to return or which of them
have been returned, and in making out lists for inviting informally, it
is often the card-stand which is first searched for bachelors' cards, to
meet the emergency. Young men should be careful to write their street
and number on their cards.


LEAVE CARDS AFTER AN INVITATION.

After an invitation, cards must be left upon those who have sent it,
whether it is accepted or not. They must be left in person, and if it
is desired to end the acquaintance the cards can be left without
inquiring whether the ladies are at home.

Gentlemen should not expect to receive invitations from ladies with whom
they are only on terms of formal visiting, until the yearly or autumnal
call has been made, or until their cards have been left to represent
themselves.


CARDS IN MEMORIAM.

These are a loving tribute to the memory of the departed; an English
custom rapidly gaining favor with us; it announces to friends the death,
of which they might remain in ignorance but for this mark of respect:

 [Illustration:
                       George A. Custer

                Lieutenant-Colonel Seventh Cavalry,
              Brevet Major-General United States Army,
                     Born December 5th, 1839,
                      Harrison County, Ohio,
              Killed, with his entire Command, in the
                    Battle of Little Big Horn,
                       June 25th, 1876.

             *       *       *       *       *

          Oh, Custer--Gallant Custer! man fore-doomed
          Go ride, like Rupert, spurred and waving-plumed,
                 Into the very jaws of death.]


CARDS OF CONDOLENCE.

Cards of condolence left by mere acquaintances must be returned by
"mourning cards" before such persons feel at liberty to make a call.
When the bereaved are ready to receive calls (instead of the cards) of
their acquaintances, "mourning cards" in envelopes, or otherwise, are
returned to all those who have left their cards since the death, which
was the occasion of the cards being left. Intimate friends, of course,
do not wait for cards, but continue their calls, without regard to any
ceremonious observances made for the protection of the bereaved.
Acquaintances leaving cards should inquire after the health of the
family, leaving the cards in person.


MOURNING CARDS.

On announcement of a death it is correct to call in person at the door;
to make inquiries and leave your card, with lower left hand corner
turned down. Unless close intimacy exists, it is not usage to ask to see
the afflicted. Cards can be sent to express sympathy, but notes of
condolence are permissible only from intimate friends.


A BRIDEGROOM'S CARD.

When only the family and the most intimate friends of a bride and
bridegroom have been included in the invitation for the marriage, or
where there has been no reception after the marriage at church, the
bridegroom often sends his bachelor card (inclosed in an envelope) to
those of his acquaintances with whom he wishes to continue on visiting
terms. Those who receive a card should call on the bride, within ten
days after she has taken possession of her home. Some persons have
received such a card as an intimation that the card was to end the
acquaintance. This mistake shows the necessity of a better understanding
of social customs.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER VIII.

Conversation.


The character of a person is revealed by his conversation as much as by
any one quality he possesses, for strive as he may he cannot always be
acting.


IMPORTANCE OF CONVERSING WELL.

To be able to converse well is an attainment which should be cultivated
by every intelligent man and woman. It is better to be a good talker
than a good singer or musician, because the former is more widely
appreciated, and the company of a person who is able to talk well on a
great variety of subjects, is much sought after. The importance,
therefore, of cultivating the art of conversation, cannot easily be
over-estimated. It should be the aim of all intelligent persons to
acquire the habit of talking sensibly and with facility upon all topics
of general interest to society, so that they may both interest others
and be themselves interested, in whatever company they may chance to be
thrown.


TRAINING CHILDREN.

The training for this should be commenced in early childhood. Parents
should not only encourage their children to express themselves freely
upon everything that attracts their attention and interests them, but
they should also incite their faculties of perception, memory and close
observation, by requiring them to recount everything, even to its
minutest details, that they may have observed in walking to and from
school, or in taking a ride in a carriage or in the cars. By training a
child to a close observation of everything he meets or passes, his mind
becomes very active, and the habit having once been acquired, he becomes
interested in a great variety of objects; sees more and enjoys more than
one who has not been so trained.


CULTIVATING THE MEMORY.

A good memory is an invaluable aid in acquiring the art of conversation,
and the cultivation and training of this faculty is a matter of
importance. Early youth is the proper time to begin this training, and
parents and teachers should give special attention to the cultivation of
memory. When children are taken to church, or to hear a lecture, they
should be required to relate or to write down from memory, such a digest
of the sermon or lecture as they can remember. Adults may also adopt
this plan for cultivating the memory, and they will be surprised to find
how continued practice in this will improve this faculty. The practice
of taking notes impairs rather than aids the memory, for then a person
relies almost entirely in the notes taken, and does not tax the memory
sufficiently. A person should also train himself to remember the names
of persons whom he becomes acquainted with, so as to recall them
whenever or wherever he may subsequently meet them. It is related of a
large wholesale boot and shoe merchant of an eastern city, that he was
called upon one day by one of his best customers, residing in a distant
city, whom he had frequently met, but whose name, at the time, he could
not recall, and received his order for a large bill of goods. As he was
about to leave, the merchant asked his name, when the customer
indignantly replied that he supposed he was known by a man from whom he
had purchased goods for many years, and countermanding his order, he
left the store, deaf to all attempts at explanation. Though this may be
an extreme case, it illustrates the importance of remembering the names
of people when circumstances require it.


HENRY CLAY'S MEMORY OF NAMES.

One secret of Henry Clay's popularity as a politician was his faculty of
remembering the names of persons he had met. It is said of him that if
he was once introduced to a person, he was ever afterwards able to call
him by name, and recount the circumstances of their first meeting. This
faculty he cultivated after he entered upon the practice of law in
Kentucky, and soon after he began his political life. At that time his
memory for names was very poor, and he resolved to improve it. He
adopted the practice, just before retiring at night, of recalling the
names of all the persons he had met during the day, writing them in a
note book, and repeating over the list the next morning. By this
practice, he acquired in time, his wonderful faculty in remembering the
names of persons he had become acquainted with.


WRITING AS AN AID TO CORRECT TALKING.

To converse correctly--to use correct language in conversation--is also
a matter of importance, and while this can be acquired by a strict
attention to grammatical rules, it can be greatly facilitated by the
habit of writing down one's thoughts. In writing, strict regard is, or
should be, paid to the correct use of language, and when a person, from
constant writing, acquires the habit of using correct language, this
habit will follow him in talking. A person who is accustomed to much
writing, will always be found to use language correctly in speaking.


REQUISITES FOR A GOOD TALKER.

To be a good talker then, one should be possessed of much general
information, acquired by keen observation, attentive listening, a good
memory, extensive reading and study, logical habits of thought, and have
a correct knowledge of the use of language. He should also aim at a
clear intonation, well chosen phraseology and correct accent. These
acquirements are within the reach of every person of ordinary ability,
who has a determination to possess them, and the energy and perseverance
to carry out that determination.


VULGARISMS.

In conversation, one must scrupulously guard against vulgarisms.
Simplicity and terseness of language are the characteristics of a well
educated and highly cultivated person. It is the uneducated or those who
are but half educated, who use long words and high-sounding phrases. A
hyperbolical way of speaking is mere flippancy, and should be avoided.
Such phrases as "awfully pretty," "immensely jolly," "abominably
stupid," "disgustingly mean," are of this nature, and should be avoided.
Awkwardness of attitude is equally as bad as awkwardness of speech.
Lolling, gesticulating, fidgeting, handling an eye-glass or watch chain
and the like, give an air of _gaucherie_, and take off a certain
percentage from the respect of others.


LISTENING.

The habit of listening with interest and attention is one which should
be specially cultivated. Even if the talker is prosy and prolix, the
well-bred person will appear interested, and at appropriate intervals
make such remarks as shall show that he has heard and understood all
that has been said. Some superficial people are apt to style this
hypocrisy; but if it is, it is certainly a commendable hypocrisy,
directly founded on that strict rule of good manners which commands us
to show the same courtesy to others that we hope to receive ourselves.
We are commanded to check our impulses, conceal our dislikes, and even
modify our likings whenever or wherever these are liable to give
offense or pain to others. The person who turns away with manifest
displeasure, disgust or want of interest when another is addressing him,
is guilty not only of an ill-bred, but a cruel act.


FLIPPANCY.

In conversation all provincialism, affectations of foreign accents,
mannerisms, exaggerations and slang are detestable. Equally to be
avoided are inaccuracies of expression, hesitation, an undue use of
foreign words, and anything approaching to flippancy, coarseness,
triviality or provocation. Gentlemen sometimes address ladies in a very
flippant manner, which the latter are obliged to pass over without
notice, for various reasons, while inwardly they rebel. Many a worthy
man has done himself an irreparable injury by thus creating a lasting
prejudice in the minds of those whom he might have made his friends, had
he addressed them as though he considered them rational beings, capable
of sustaining their part in a conversation upon sensible subjects.
Flippancy is as much an evidence of ill-breeding as is the perpetual
smile, the wandering eye, the vacant stare, and the half-opened mouth of
the man who is preparing to break in upon the conversation.


BE SYMPATHETIC AND ANIMATED.

Do not go into society unless you make up your mind to be sympathetic,
unselfish, animating, as well as animated. Society does not require
mirth, but it does demand cheerfulness and unselfishness, and you must
help to make and sustain cheerful conversation. The manner of
conversation is as important as the matter.


COMPLIMENTS.

Compliments are said by some to be inadmissible. But between equals, or
from those of superior position to those of inferior station,
compliments should be not only acceptable but gratifying. It is pleasant
to know that our friends think well of us, and it is always agreeable to
know that we are thought well of by those who hold higher positions,
such as men of superior talent, or women of superior culture.
Compliments which are not sincere, are only flattery and should be
avoided; but the saying of kind things, which is natural to the kind
heart, and which confers pleasure, should be cultivated, at least not
suppressed. Those parents who strive most for the best mode of training
their children are said to have found that it is never wise to censure
them for a fault, without preparing the way by some judicious mention of
their good qualities.


SLANG.

All slang is vulgar. It lowers the tone of society and the standard of
thought. It is a great mistake to suppose that slang is in any manner
witty. Only the very young or the uncultivated so consider it.


FLATTERY.

Do not be guilty of flattery. The flattery of those richer than
ourselves or better born is vulgar, and born of rudeness, and is sure
to be received as emanating from unworthy motives. Testify your respect,
your admiration, and your gratitude by deeds more than words. Words are
easy but deeds are difficult. Few will believe the former, but the
latter will carry confirmation with them.


SCANDAL AND GOSSIP.

Scandal is the least excusable of all conversational vulgarities. Envy
prompts the tongue of the slanderer. Jealousy is the disturber of the
harmony of all interests. A writer on this subject says: "Gossip is a
troublesome sort of insect that only buzzes about your ears and never
bites deep; slander is the beast of prey that leaps upon you from its
den and tears you in pieces. Slander is the proper object of rage;
gossip of contempt." Those who best understand the nature of gossip and
slander, if the victims of both, will take no notice of the former, but
will allow no slander of themselves to go unrefuted during their
lifetime, to spring up in a hydra-headed attack upon their children. No
woman can be too sensitive as to any charges affecting her moral
character, whether in the influence of her companionship, or in the
influence of her writings.


RELIGION AND POLITICS.

Religion and politics are topics that should never be introduced into
general conversation, for they are subjects dangerous to harmony.
Persons are most likely to differ, and least likely to preserve their
tempers on these topics. Long arguments in general company, however
entertaining to the disputants, are very tiresome to the hearers.


SATIRE AND RIDICULE.

Young persons appear ridiculous when satirizing or ridiculing books,
people or things. Opinions to be worth the consideration of others
should have the advantage of coming from mature persons. Cultivated
people are not in the habit of resorting to such weapons as satire and
ridicule. They find too much to correct in themselves to indulge in
coarse censure of the conduct of others, who may not have had advantages
equal to their own.


TITLES.

In addressing persons with titles always add the name; as "what do you
think of it, Doctor Hayes?" not "what do you think of it, Doctor?" In
speaking of foreigners the reverse of the English rule is observed. No
matter what the title of a Frenchman is, he is always addressed as
_Monsieur_, and you never omit the word _Madame_, whether addressing a
duchess or a dressmaker. The former is "_Madame la Duchesse_," the
latter plain "_Madame_." Always give a foreigner his title. If General
Sherman travels in Europe and is received by the best classes with the
dignity that his worth, culture and position as an American general
demand, he will never be called Mr. Sherman, but his title will
invariably precede his name. There are persons who fancy that the
omission of the title is annoying to the party who possesses it, but
this is not the ground taken why the title should be given, but because
it reveals either ignorance or ill-breeding on the part of those
omitting it.


CHRISTIAN NAMES.

There is a class of persons, who from ignorance of the customs of good
society, or from carelessness, speak of persons by their Christian
names, who are neither relations nor intimate friends. This is a
familiarity which, outside of the family circle, and beyond friends of
the closest intimacy, is never indulged in by the well-bred.


INTERRUPTION.

Interruption of the speech of others is a great sin against
good-breeding. It has been aptly said that if you interrupt a speaker in
the middle of a sentence, you act almost as rudely as if, when walking
with a companion, you were to thrust yourself before him and stop his
progress.


ADAPTABILITY IN CONVERSATION.

The great secret of talking well is to adapt your conversation, as
skillfully as may be, to your company. Some men make a point of talking
commonplace to all ladies alike, as if a woman could only be a trifler.
Others, on the contrary, seem to forget in what respects the education
of a lady differs from that of a gentleman, and commit the opposite
error of conversing on topics with which ladies are seldom acquainted,
and in which few, if any, are ever interested. A woman of sense has as
much right to be annoyed by the one, as a woman of ordinary education by
the other. If you really wish to be thought agreeable, sensible,
amiable, unselfish and even well-informed, you should lead the way, in
_tete-a-tete_ conversations, for sportsmen to talk of their shooting, a
mother to talk of her children, a traveler of his journeys and the
countries he has visited, a young lady of her last ball and the
prospective ones, an artist of his picture and an author of his book. To
show any interest in the immediate concerns of people is very
complimentary, and when not in general society one is privileged to do
this. People take more interest in their own affairs than in anything
else you can name, and if you manifest an interest to hear, there are
but few who will not sustain conversation by a narration of their
affairs in some form or another. Thackeray says: "Be interested by other
people and by their affairs. It is because you yourself are selfish that
that other person's self does not interest you."


CORRECT USE OF WORDS.

The correct use of words is indispensable to a good talker who would
escape the unfavorable criticism of an educated listener. There are many
words and phrases, used in some cases by persons who have known better,
but who have become careless from association with others who make
constant use of them. "Because that" and "but that" should never be used
in connection, the word "that" being entirely superfluous. The word
"vocation" is often used for "avocation." "Unhealthy" food is spoken of
when it should be "unwholesome." "Had not ought to" is sometimes heard
for "ought not to;" "banister" for "baluster;" "handsful" and
"spoonsful" for "handfuls" and "spoonfuls;" "it was him" for "it was
he;" "it was me" for "it was I;" "whom do you think was there?" for "who
do you think was there?"; "a mutual friend" for "a common friend;" "like
I did" instead of "as I did;" "those sort of things" instead of "this
sort of things;" "laying down" for "lying down;" "setting on a chair"
for "sitting on a chair;" "try and make him" instead of "try to make
him;" "she looked charmingly" for "she looked charming;" "loan" for
"lend;" "to get along" instead of "to get on;" "cupalo" instead of
"cupola;" "who" for "whom"--as, "who did you see" for "whom did you
see;" double negatives, as, "he did not do neither of those things;"
"lesser" for "least;" "move" instead of "remove;" "off-set" instead of
"set-off," and many other words which are often carelessly used by those
who have been better taught, as well as by those who are ignorant of
their proper use.


SPEAKING ONE'S MIND.

Certain honest but unthinking people often commit the grievous mistake
of "speaking their mind" on all occasions and under all circumstances,
and oftentimes to the great mortification of their hearers. And
especially do they take credit to themselves for their courage, if their
freedom of speech happens to give offense to any of them. A little
reflection ought to show how cruel and unjust this is. The law restrains
us from inflicting bodily injury upon those with whom we disagree, yet
there is no legal preventive against this wounding of the feeling of
others.


UNWISE EXPRESSION OF OPINION.

Another class of people, actuated by the best of intentions, seem to
consider it a duty to parade their opinions upon all occasions, and in
all places without reflecting that the highest truth will suffer from an
unwise and over-zealous advocacy. Civility requires that we give to the
opinions of others the same toleration that we exact for our own, and
good sense should cause us to remember that we are never likely to
convert a person to our views when we begin by violating his notions of
propriety and exciting his prejudices. A silent advocate of a cause is
always better than an indiscreet one.


PROFANITY.

No gentleman uses profane language. It is unnecessary to add that no
gentleman will use profane language in the presence of a lady. For
profanity there is no excuse. It is a low and paltry habit, acquired
from association with low and paltry spirits, who possess no sense of
honor, no regard for decency and no reverence or respect for beings of a
higher moral or religious nature than themselves. The man who habitually
uses profane language, lowers his moral tone with every oath he utters.
Moreover, the silliness of the practice, if no other reason, should
prevent its use by every man of good sense.


PUBLIC MENTION OF PRIVATE MATTERS.

Do not parade merely private matters before a public or mixed assembly
or to acquaintances. If strangers really wish to become informed about
you or your affairs, they will find the means to gratify their curiosity
without your advising them gratuitously. Besides, personal and family
affairs, no matter how interesting they may be to the parties
immediately concerned, are generally of little moment to outsiders.
Still less will the well-bred person inquire into or narrate the private
affairs of any other family or individual.


OSTENTATIOUS DISPLAY OF KNOWLEDGE.

In refined and intelligent society one should always display himself at
his best, and make a proper and legitimate use of all such acquirements
as he may happen to have. But there should be no ostentatious or
pedantic show of erudition. Besides being vulgar, such a show subjects
the person to ridicule.


PRUDERY.

Avoid an affectation of excessive modesty. Do not use the word "limb"
for "leg." If legs are really improper, then let us, on no account,
mention them. But having found it necessary to mention them, let us by
all means give them their appropriate name.


DOUBLE ENTENDRES.

No person of decency, still less of delicacy, will be guilty of _double
entendre_. A well-bred person always refuses to understand a phrase of
doubtful meaning. If the phrase may be interpreted decently, and with
such interpretation would provoke a smile, then smile to just the degree
called for by such interpretation, and no more. The prudery which sits
in solemn and severe rebuke at a _double entendre_ is only second in
indelicacy to the indecency which grows hilarious over it, since both
must recognize the evil intent. It is sufficient to let it pass
unrecognized.


INDELICATE WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS.

Not so when one hears an indelicate word or expression, which allows of
no possible harmless interpretation. Then not the shadow of a smile
should flit across the lips. Either complete silence should be preserved
in return, or the words, "I do not understand you," be spoken. A lady
will always fail to hear that which she should not hear, or, having
unmistakably heard, she will not understand.


VULGAR EXCLAMATIONS.

No lady should make use of any feminine substitute for profanity. The
woman who exclaims "The Dickens!" or "Mercy!" or "Goodness!" when she is
annoyed or astonished, is as vulgar in spirit, though perhaps not quite
so regarded by society, as though she had used expressions which it
would require but little stretch of the imagination to be regarded as
profane.


WIT.

You may be witty and amusing if you like, or rather if you can; but
never use your wit at the expense of others.

          "Wit's an unruly engine, wildly striking
            Sometimes a friend, sometimes the engineer;
           Hast thou the knack? pamper it not with liking;
            But if thou want it, buy it not too dear.
                Many affecting wit beyond their power
                Have got to be a dear fool for an hour."--HERBERT.


DISPLAY OF EMOTIONS.

Avoid all exhibitions of temper before others, if you find it impossible
to suppress them entirely. All emotions, whether of grief or joy, should
be subdued in public, and only allowed full play in the privacy of your
own apartments.


IMPERTINENT QUESTIONS.

Never ask impertinent questions. Some authorities in etiquette even go
so far as to say that _all_ questions are strictly tabooed. Thus, if you
wished to inquire after the health of the brother of your friend, you
would say, "I hope your brother is well," not, "How is your brother's
health?"


THE CONFIDENCE OF OTHERS.

Never try to force yourself into the confidence of others; but if they
give you their confidence of their own free will, let nothing whatever
induce you to betray it. Never seek to pry into a secret, and never
divulge one.


USE OF FOREIGN LANGUAGE.

Do not form the habit of introducing words and phrases of French or
other foreign languages into common conversation. This is only allowable
in writing, and not then except when the foreign word or phrase
expresses more clearly and directly than English can do the desired
meaning. In familiar conversation this is an affectation, only
pardonable when all persons present are particularly familiar with the
language.


PRETENSES.

Avoid all pretense at gentility. Pass for what you are, and nothing
more. If you are obliged to make any little economies, do not be ashamed
to acknowledge them as economies, if it becomes necessary to speak of
them at all. If you keep no carriage, do not be over-solicitous to
impress upon your friends that the sole reason for this deficiency is
because you prefer to walk. Do not be ashamed of poverty; but, on the
other hand, do not flaunt its rags unmercifully in the faces of others.
It is better to say nothing about it, either in excuse or defense.


DOGMATIC STYLE OF SPEAKING.

Never speak dogmatically or with an assumption of knowledge or
information beyond that of those with whom you are conversing. Even if
you are conscious of this superiority, a proper and becoming modesty
will lead you to conceal it as far as possible, that you may not put to
shame or humiliation those less fortunate than yourself. If they
discover your superiority of their own accord, they will have much more
admiration for you than though you forced the recognition upon them. If
they do not discover it, you cannot force it upon their perceptions, and
they will only hold you in contempt for trying to do so. Besides, there
is the possibility that you over-estimate yourself, and instead of being
a wise man you are only a self-sufficient fool.


FAULT-FINDING.

Do not be censorious or fault-finding. Long and close friendship may
sometimes excuse one friend in reproving or criticising another, but it
must always be done in the kindest and gentlest manner, and in nine
cases out of ten had best be left undone. When one is inclined to be
censorious or critical, it is well to remember the scriptural
injunction, "First cast the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt
thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother's eye."


CONVERSING WITH LADIES.

A gentleman should never lower the intellectual standard of his
conversation in addressing ladies. Pay them the compliment of seeming to
consider them capable of an equal understanding with gentlemen. You
will, no doubt, be somewhat surprised to find in how many cases the
supposition will be grounded on fact, and in the few instances where it
is not, the ladies will be pleased rather than offended at the delicate
compliment you pay them. When you "come down" to commonplace or
small-talk with an intelligent lady, one of two things is the
consequence; she either recognizes the condescension and despises you,
or else she accepts it as the highest intellectual effort of which you
are capable, and rates you accordingly.


HOBBIES.

People with hobbies are at once the easiest and most difficult persons
with whom to engage in conversation. On general subjects they are
idealess and voiceless beyond monosyllables. But introduce their special
hobby, and if you choose you need only to listen. There is much profit
to be derived from the conversation of these persons. They will give you
a clearer idea of the aspects of any subject or theory which they may
have taken to heart, than you could perhaps gain in any other way.

The too constant riding of hobbies is not, however, to be specially
recommended. An individual, though he may be pardoned in cultivating
special tastes, should yet be possessed of sufficiently broad and
general information to be able to converse intelligently on all
subjects, and he should, as far as possible, reserve his hobby-riding
for exhibition before those who ride hobbies similar to his own.


THINGS TO BE AVOIDED.

It must be remembered that a social gathering should never be made the
arena of a dispute. Consequently every subject liable to provoke a
discussion should be avoided. Even slight inaccuracy in a statement of
facts or opinions should rarely be remarked on in conversation.

Do not permit yourself to lose your temper in society, nor show that you
have taken offense at a supposed slight.

If anyone should assume a disagreeable tone of voice or offensive manner
toward you, never return it in company, and, above all, do not adopt the
same style of conversation with him. Appear not to notice it, and
generally it will be discontinued, as it will be seen that it has failed
in its object.

Avoid all coarseness and undue familiarity in addressing others. A
person who makes himself offensively familiar will have few friends.

Never attack the character of others in their absence; and if you hear
others attacked, say what you can consistently to defend them.

If you are talking on religious subjects, avoid all cant. Cant words and
phrases may be used in good faith from the force of habit, but their use
subjects the speaker to a suspicion of insincerity.

Do not ask the price of articles you observe, except from intimate
friends, and then very quietly, and only for some good reason.

Do not appear to notice an error in language, either in pronunciation or
grammar, made by the person with whom you are conversing, and do not
repeat correctly the same word or phrase. This would be as ill-bred as
to correct it when spoken.

Mimicry is ill-bred, and must be avoided.

Sneering at the private affairs of others has long ago been banished
from the conversation of well-mannered people.

Never introduce unpleasant topics, nor describe revolting scenes in
general company.

Never give officious advice. Even when sought for, give advice
sparingly.

Never, directly or indirectly, refer to the affairs of others, which it
may give them pain in any degree to recall.

Never hold your companion in conversation by the button-hole. If you are
obliged to detain him forcibly in order to say what you wish, you are
pressing upon him what is disagreeable or unwelcome, and you commit a
gross breach of etiquette in so doing.

Especially avoid contradictions, interruptions and monopolizing all
conversation yourself. These faults are all intolerable and very
offensive.

To speak to one person in a company in ambiguous terms, understood by
him alone, is as rude as if you had whispered in his ear.

Avoid stale and trite remarks on commonplace subjects; also all egotism
and anecdotes of personal adventure and exploit, unless they should be
called out by persons you are conversing with.

To make a classical quotation in a mixed company is considered pedantic
and out of place, as is also an ostentatious display of your learning.

A gentleman should avoid talking about his business or profession,
unless such matters are drawn from him by the person with whom he is
conversing. It is in bad taste, particularly, to employ technical or
professional terms in general conversation.

Long arguments or heated discussions are apt to be tiresome to others,
and should be avoided.

It is considered extremely ill-bred for two persons to whisper in
society, or to converse in a language with which all persons are not
familiar.

Avoid talking too much, and do not inflict upon your hearers
interminably long stories, in which they can have but little interest.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER IX.

Dinner Giving and Dining Out.


Dining should be ranked among the fine arts. A knowledge of dinner-table
etiquette is all important in many respects; but chiefly in this: that
it is regarded as one of the strong tests of good breeding. Dinners are
generally looked upon as entertainments for married people and the
middle aged, but it is often desirable to have some young unmarried
persons among the guests.


WHOM TO INVITE.

Those invited should be of the same standing in society. They need not
necessarily be friends, nor even acquaintances, but, at dinner, as
people come into closer contact than at a dance, or any other kind of a
party, those only should be invited to meet one another who move in the
same class of circles. Care must, of course, be taken that those whom
you think agreeable to each other are placed side by side around the
festive board. Good talkers are invaluable at a dinner party--people who
have fresh ideas and plenty of warm words to clothe them in; but good
listeners are equally invaluable.


INVITATIONS.

Invitations to dinner parties are not usually sent by post, in cities,
and are only answered by post where the distance is such as to make it
inconvenient to send the note by hand. They are issued in the name of
the gentleman and lady of the house, from two to ten days in advance.
They should be answered as soon as received, without fail, as it is
necessary that the host and hostess should know who are to be their
guests. If the invitation is accepted, the engagement should, on no
account, be lightly broken. This rule is a binding one, as the
non-arrival of an expected guest produces disarrangement of plans.
Gentlemen cannot be invited without their wives, where other ladies than
those of the family are present; nor ladies without their husbands, when
other ladies are invited with their husbands. This rule has no
exceptions. No more than three out of a family should be invited, unless
the dinner party is a very large one.


MANNER OF WRITING INVITATIONS.

The invitations should be written on small note paper, which may have
the initial letter or monogram stamped upon it, but good taste forbids
anything more. The envelope should match the sheet of paper. The
invitation should be issued in the name of the host and hostess. The
form of invitations should be as follows:

 [Illustration:
          Mr. and Mrs. Potter request the pleasure of Mr.
          and Mrs. Barton's company at dinner on Thursday,
          the 13th of October at 5 o'clock.]

An answer should be returned at once, so that if the invitation is
declined the hostess may modify her arrangements accordingly.


INVITATION ACCEPTED.

An acceptance may be given in the following form, and may be sent either
by post or messenger:

 [Illustration:
          Mr. and Mrs. Barton have much pleasure in
          accepting Mr. and Mrs. Potter's invitation for
          October 13th.]


INVITATION DECLINED.

The invitation is declined in the following manner:

 [Illustration:
          Mr. and Mrs. Barton regret that a previous
          engagement (_or whatever the cause may be_)
          prevents their having the pleasure of accepting
          Mr. and Mrs. Potter's invitation at dinner for
          October 13th.]

Or,

 [Illustration:
          Mr. and Mrs. Barton regret exceedingly that owing
          to (_whatever the preventing cause may be_), they
          cannot have the pleasure of dining with Mr. and
          Mrs. Potter on Thursday, October 13th.]

Whatever the cause for declining may be, it should be stated briefly,
yet plainly, that there may be no occasion for misunderstanding or hard
feelings.


INVITATION TO TEA-PARTY.

The invitation to a tea-party may be less formal. It may take the form
of a friendly note, something in this manner:

 [Illustration:
          Dear Miss Summer:

          We have some friends coming to drink tea with us
          to-morrow: will you give us the pleasure of your
          company also? We hope you will not disappoint us.]


FAILING TO FILL AN ENGAGEMENT.

When it becomes absolutely necessary to break an engagement once made
for dinner or tea, a note must be sent at once to the hostess and host,
with full explanation of the cause, so that your place may be supplied,
if possible.


PUNCTUALITY.

The hour generally selected in cities is after business hours, or from
five to eight o'clock. In the country or villages it may be an hour or
two earlier. To be punctual at the hour mentioned is obligatory. If you
are too early you are in the way; if too late you annoy the hostess,
cause impatience among the assembled guests, and perhaps spoil the
dinner. Fifteen minutes is the longest time required to wait for a tardy
guest.


THE SUCCESS OF A DINNER.

A host and hostess generally judge of the success of a dinner by the
manner in which conversation has been sustained. If it has flagged
often, it is considered proof that the guests have not been congenial;
but if a steady stream of talk has been kept up, it shows that they have
smoothly amalgamated, as a whole. No one should monopolize conversation,
unless he wishes to win for himself the appellation of a bore, and be
avoided as such.


THE TABLE APPOINTMENTS.

A snow-white cloth of the finest damask, beautiful china, glistening or
finely engraved glass, and polished plate are considered essential to a
grand dinner. Choice flowers, ferns and mosses tastefully arranged, add
much to the beauty of the table. A salt-cellar should be within the
reach of every guest. Napkins should be folded square and placed with a
roll of bread upon each plate. The dessert is placed on the table amidst
the flowers. An _epergne_, or a low dish of flowers, graces the centre;
stands of bon-bons and confectionery are ranged on both sides of the
table, which complete the decorations of the table. The name of each
guest, written upon a card and placed one on each plate, marks the seat
assigned.


ASSIGNING PARTNERS FOR DINNER.

The number at a dinner should not be less than six, nor more than twelve
or fourteen. Then the host will be able to designate to each gentleman
the lady whom he is to conduct to the table; but when the number exceeds
this limit it is a good plan to have the name of each couple written
upon a card and enclosed in an addressed envelope, ready to be handed to
the gentleman by the servant, before entering the drawing-room, or left
on a tray for the guests to select those which bear their names.

If a gentleman finds upon his card the name of a lady with whom he is
unacquainted, he requests the host to present him immediately after he
has spoken with the hostess, also to any members of the family with whom
he is not acquainted.


INTRODUCTIONS.

All the guests should secure introductions to the one for whom the
dinner is given. If two persons, unknown to each other, find themselves
placed side by side at a table, they may enter into conversation without
an introduction.


ARRANGEMENTS OF GUESTS AT THE TABLE.

When dinner is announced, the host offers his right arm to the lady he
is to escort to the table. The others follow, arm in arm, the hostess
being the last to leave the drawing-room. Age should take the precedence
in proceeding from the drawing-room to the dining-room, the younger
falling back until the elder have advanced. The host escorts the eldest
lady or the greatest stranger, or if there be a bride present,
precedence is given to her, unless the dinner is given for another
person, in which case he escorts the latter. The hostess is escorted
either by the greatest stranger, or some gentleman whom she wishes to
place in the seat of honor, which is at her right. The host places the
lady whom he escorts at his right. The seats of the host and hostess may
be in the middle and at opposite sides of the table, or at the opposite
ends. Husbands should not escort their wives, or brothers their sisters,
as this partakes of the nature of a family gathering.


DINNER A LA RUSSE.

The latest and most satisfactory plan for serving dinners is the dinner
_a la Russe_ (the Russian style)--all the food being placed upon a side
table, and servants do the carving and waiting. This style gives an
opportunity for more profuse ornamentation of the table, which, as the
meal progresses, does not become encumbered with partially empty dishes
and platters.


DUTIES OF SERVANTS.

The servants commence, in passing the dishes, one upon the right of the
host and one upon the right of the hostess. A master or mistress should
never censure the servants at dinner, however things may go wrong.
Servants should wear thin-soled shoes that their steps may be
noiseless, and if they should use napkins in serving (as is the English
custom) instead of gloves, their hands and nails should be faultlessly
clean. A good servant is never awkward. He avoids coughing, breathing
hard or treading on a lady's dress; never lets any article drop, and
deposits plates, glasses, knives, forks and spoons noiselessly. It is
considered good form for a servant not to wear gloves in waiting at
table, but to use a damask napkin, with one corner wrapped around the
thumb, that he may not touch the plates and dishes with the naked hand.


SOUP.

Soup is the first course. All should accept it even if they let it
remain untouched, because it is better to make a pretense of eating
until the next course is served, than to sit waiting, or compel the
servants to serve one before the rest. Soup should not be called for a
second time. A soup-plate should never be tilted for the last spoonful.


FISH.

Fish follows soup and must be eaten with a fork, unless fish knives are
provided. If fish knives are not provided, a piece of bread in the left
hand answers the purpose as well, with the fork in the right hand. Fish
may be declined, but must not be called for a second time.


THE SIDE DISHES.

After soup and fish come the side dishes, which must be eaten with the
fork, though the knife is used in cutting meats and anything too hard
for a fork.


GENERAL RULES REGARDING DINNER.

When the plate of each course is set before you, with the knife and fork
upon it, remove the knife and fork at once. This matter should be
carefully attended to, as the serving of an entire course is delayed by
neglecting to remove them.

Greediness should not be indulged in. Indecision must be avoided. Do not
take up one piece and lay it down in favor of another, or hesitate.

Never allow the servant, or the one who pours, to fill your glass with
wine that you do not wish to drink. You can check him by touching the
rim of your glass.

Cheese is eaten with a fork and not with a knife.

If you have occasion to speak to a servant, wait until you can catch his
eye, and then ask in a low tone for what you want.

The mouth should always be kept closed in eating, and both eating and
drinking should be noiseless.

Bread is broken at dinner. Vegetables are eaten with a fork.

Asparagus can be taken up with the fingers, if preferred. Olives and
artichokes are always so eaten.

Fruit is eaten with silver knives and forks.

You are at liberty to refuse a dish that you do not wish to eat. If any
course is set down before you that you do not wish, do not touch it.
Never play with food, nor mince your bread, nor handle the glass and
silver near you unnecessarily.

Never reprove a waiter for negligence or improper conduct; that is the
business of the host.

When a dish is offered you, accept or refuse at once, and allow the
waiter to pass on. A gentleman will see that the lady whom he has
escorted to the table is helped to all she wishes, but it is
officiousness to offer to help other ladies who have escorts.

If the guests pass the dishes to one another, instead of being helped by
a servant, you should always help yourself from the dish, if you desire
it at all, before passing it on to the next.

A knife should never, on any account, be put into the mouth. Many
people, even well-bred in other respects, seem to regard this as an
unnecessary regulation; but when we consider that it is a rule of
etiquette, and that its violation causes surprise and disgust to many
people, it is wisest to observe it.

Be careful to remove the bones from fish before eating. If a bone
inadvertently should get into the mouth, the lips must be covered with
the napkin in removing it. Cherry stones and grape skins should be
removed from the mouth as unobtrusively as possible, and deposited on
the side of the plate.

Never use a napkin in place of a handkerchief for wiping the forehead,
face or nose.

Pastry should be eaten with a fork. Every thing that can be cut without
a knife should be eaten with the fork alone. Pudding may be eaten with a
fork or spoon.

Never lay your hand, or play with your fingers, upon the table. Do not
toy with your knife, fork or spoon, make crumbs of your bread, or draw
imaginary lines upon the table cloth.

Never bite fruit. An apple, peach or pear should be peeled with a knife,
and all fruit should be broken or cut.


WAITING ON OTHERS.

If a gentleman is seated by the side of a lady or elderly person,
politeness requires him to save them all trouble of procuring for
themselves anything to eat or drink, and of obtaining whatever they are
in want of at the table, and he should be eager to offer them what he
thinks may be most to their taste.


PRAISING DISHES.

A hostess should not express pride regarding what is on her table, nor
make apologies if everything she offers you is not to her satisfaction.
It is much better that she should observe silence in this respect, and
allow her guests to eulogize her dinner or not, as they deem proper.
Neither is it in good taste to urge guests to eat, nor to load their
plates against their inclination.


MONOPOLIZING CONVERSATION.

For one or two persons to monopolize a conversation which ought to be
general, is exceedingly rude. If the dinner party is a large one, you
may converse with those near you, raising the voice only loud enough to
be distinctly heard by the persons you are talking with.


PICKING TEETH AT THE TABLE.

It is a mark of rudeness to pick your teeth at the table, and it should
always be avoided. To hold your hand or napkin over your mouth does not
avoid the rudeness of the act, but if it becomes a matter of necessity
to remove some obstacle from between the teeth, then your open mouth
should be concealed by your hand or napkin.


SELECTING A PARTICULAR DISH.

Never express a preference for any dish or any particular portion of a
fowl or of meat, unless requested to do so, and then answer promptly,
that no time may be wasted in serving you and others after you.


DUTIES OF HOSTESS AND HOST.

Tact and self-possession are demanded of the hostess, in order that she
may perform her duties agreeably, which are not onerous. She should
instruct her servants not to remove her plate until her guests have
finished. If she speaks of any omission by which her servants have
inconvenienced her guests, she must do it with dignity, not betraying
any undue annoyance. She must put all her guests at their ease, and pay
every possible attention to the requirements of each and all around her.
No accident must disturb her; no disappointment embarrass her. If her
precious china and her rare glass are broken before her eyes, she must
seem to take but little or no notice of it.

The host must aid the hostess in her efforts. He should have ease and
frankness of manner, a calmness of temper that nothing can ruffle, and a
kindness of disposition that can never be exhausted. He must encourage
the timid, draw out the silent and direct conversation rather than
sustain it himself.

No matter what may go wrong, a hostess should never seem to notice it to
the annoyance of her guests. By passing it over herself, it will very
frequently escape the attention of others. If her guests arrive late,
she should welcome them as cordially as if they had come early, but she
will commit a rudeness to those who have arrived punctually, if she
awaits dinner for tardy guests for more than the fifteen minutes of
grace prescribed by custom.


RETIRING FROM THE TABLE.

When the hostess sees that all have finished, she looks at the lady who
is sitting at the right of the host, and the company rise, and withdraw
in the order they are seated, without precedence. After retiring to the
drawing-room, the guests should intermingle in a social manner. It is
expected that the guests will remain from one to three hours after
dinner.


ACCEPTING HOSPITALITY A SIGN OF GOOD-WILL.

As eating with another under his own roof is in all conditions of
society regarded as a sign of good-will, those who partake of proffered
hospitalities, only to gossip about and abuse their host and hostess,
should remember, that in the opinion of all honorable persons, they
injure themselves by so doing.


CALLS AFTER A DINNER PARTY.

Calls should be made shortly after a dinner party by all who have been
invited, whether the invitation be accepted or not.


RETURNING HOSPITALITY.

Those who are in the habit of giving dinner parties should return the
invitation before another is extended to them. Society is very severe
upon those who do not return debts of hospitality, if they have the
means to do so. If they never entertain anyone because of limited means,
or for other good reasons, it is so understood, and it is not expected
that they should make exceptions; or if they are in the habit of giving
other entertainments and not dinners, their debts of hospitality can be
returned by invitations to whatever the entertainment might be. Some are
deterred from accepting invitations by the feeling that they cannot
return the hospitality in so magnificent a form. It is not the costly
preparations, nor the expensive repast offered which are the most
agreeable features of any entertainment, but it is the kind and friendly
feeling shown. Those who are not deterred from accepting such
invitations for this reason, and who enjoy the fruits of friendliness
thus shown them, must possess narrow views of their duty, and very
little self-respect, if, when an opportunity presents itself in any way
to reciprocate the kind feeling manifested, they fail to avail
themselves of it. True hospitality, however, neither expects nor desires
any return.


EXPENSIVE DINNERS NOT THE MOST ENJOYABLE.

It is a mistake to think that in giving a dinner, it is indispensable to
have certain dishes and a variety of wines, because others serve them.
Those who entertain frequently often use their own discretion, and never
feel obliged to do as others do, if they wish to do differently. Some of
the most enjoyable dinners given are those which are least expensive. It
is this mistaken feeling that people cannot entertain without committing
all sorts of extravagances, which causes many persons, in every way well
qualified to do incalculable good socially, to exclude themselves from
all general society.


WINES AT DINNERS.

The _menu_ of a dinner party is by some not regarded as complete, unless
it includes one or more varieties of wine. When used it is first served
after soup, but any guest may, with propriety, decline being served.
This, however, must not be done ostentatiously. Simply say to the
waiter, or whoever pours it, "not any; thank you." Wine, offered at a
dinner party, should never be criticized, however poor it may be. A
person who has partaken of wine, may also decline to have the glass
filled again.

If the guests should include one or more people of well-known temperance
principles, in deference to the scruples of these guests, wines or
liquors should not be brought to the table. People who entertain should
also be cautious as to serving wines at all. It is impossible to tell
what harm you may do to some of your highly esteemed guests. It may be
that your palatable wines may create an appetite for the habitual use of
wines or stronger alcoholic liquors; or you may renew a passion long
controlled and entombed; or you may turn a wavering will from a
seemingly steadfast resolution to forever abstain. This is an age of
reforms, the temperance reform being by no means the least powerful of
these, and no ladies or gentlemen will be censured or misunderstood if
they neglect to supply their dinner table with any kind of intoxicating
liquor. Mrs. ex-President Hayes banished wines and liquors from her
table, and an example set by the "first lady of the land" can be safely
followed in every American household, whatever may have been former
prevailing customs. It is safe to say that no "mistress of the White
House" will ever set aside the temperance principles established by Mrs.
Hayes.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER X.

Table Manners and Etiquette.


It is of the highest importance that all persons should conduct
themselves with the strictest regard to good breeding, even in the
privacy of their own homes, when at table, a neglect of such observances
will render one stiff and awkward in society. There are so many little
points to be observed, that unless a person is habitually accustomed to
observe them, he unconsciously commits some error, or will appear
awkward and constrained upon occasions when it is important to be fully
at ease. To be thoroughly at ease at such times is only acquired by the
habitual practice of good manners at the table, and is the result of
proper home training. It is the duty of parents to accustom their
children, by example as well as by precept, to be attentive and polite
to each other at every meal, as well as to observe proper rules of
etiquette, and if they do so, they need never fear that they will be
rude or awkward when they go abroad. Even when persons habitually eat
alone, they should pay due regard to the rules of etiquette, for by so
doing they form habits of ease and gracefulness which are requisite in
refined circles; otherwise they speedily acquire rude and awkward habits
which they cannot shake off without great difficulty, and which are at
times embarrassing to themselves and their friends. In private families
it should be observed as a rule to meet together at all meals of the day
around one common table, where the same rules of etiquette should be
rigidly enforced, as though each member of the family were sitting at a
stranger's table. It is only by this constant practice of the rules of
good behaviour at home, that good manners become easy when any of them
go abroad.


THE BREAKFAST.

At the first meal of the day, even in the most orderly households, an
amount of freedom is allowed, which would be unjustifiable at any other
meal. The head of the house may look over his morning paper, and the
various other members may glance over correspondence or such books or
studies as they are interested in. Each may rise and leave the table
when business or pleasure dictates, without awaiting for the others or
for a general signal.

The breakfast table should be simply decorated, yet it may be made very
attractive with its snowy cloth and napkins, its array of glass, and its
ornamentation of fruits and flowers. Bread should be placed upon the
table, cut in slices. In eating, it must always be broken, never cut,
and certainly not bitten. Fruit should be served in abundance at
breakfast whenever practicable. There is an old adage which declares
that "fruit is gold in the morning, silver at noon, and lead at night."


LUNCHEON.

In many of our large cities, where business prevents the head of the
family from returning to dinner until a late hour, luncheon is served
about midday and serves as an early dinner for children and servants.
There is much less formality in the serving of lunch than of dinner. It
is all placed upon the table at once, whether it consists of one or more
courses. Where only one or two are at luncheon, the repast is ordinarily
served on a tray.


DINNER.

The private family dinner should be the social hour of the day. Then
parents and children should meet together, and the meal should be of
such length as to admit of the greatest sociality. It is an old saying
that chatted food is half digested. The utmost good feeling should
prevail among all. Business and domestic cares and troubles should be,
for the time, forgotten, and the pleasures of home most heartily
enjoyed. In another chapter we have spoken at length upon fashionable
dinner parties.


THE KNIFE AND FORK.

The knife and fork were not made for playthings, and should not be used
as such when people are waiting at the table for the food to be served.
Do not hold them erect in your hands at each side of your plate, nor
cross them on your plate when you have finished, nor make a noise with
them. The knife should only be used for cutting meats and hard
substances, while the fork, held in the left hand, is used in carrying
food into the mouth. A knife must never, on any account, be put into the
mouth. When you send your plate to be refilled, do not send your knife
and fork, but put them upon a piece of bread, or hold them in your hand.


GREEDINESS.

To put large pieces of food into your mouth appears greedy, and if you
are addressed when your mouth is so filled, you are obliged to pause,
before answering, until the vast mouthful is masticated, or run the risk
of choking, by swallowing it too hastily. To eat very fast is also a
mark of greediness, and should be avoided. The same may be said of
soaking up gravy with bread, scraping up sauce with a spoon, scraping
your plate and gormandizing upon one or two articles of food only.


GENERAL RULES ON TABLE ETIQUETTE.

Refrain from making a noise when eating, or supping from a spoon, and
from smacking the lips or breathing heavily while masticating food, as
they are marks of ill-breeding. The lips should be kept closed in eating
as much as possible.

It is rude and awkward to elevate your elbows and move your arms at the
table, so as to incommode those on either side of you.

Whenever one or both hands are unoccupied, they should be kept below
the table, and not pushed upon the table and into prominence.

Do not leave the table before the rest of the family or guests, without
asking the head, or host, to excuse you, except at a hotel or boarding
house.

Tea or coffee should never be poured into a saucer to cool, but sipped
from the cup.

If a person wishes to be served with more tea or coffee, he should place
his spoon in his saucer. If he has had sufficient, let it remain in the
cup.

If by chance anything unpleasant is found in the food, such as a hair in
the bread or a fly in the coffee, remove it without remark. Even though
your own appetite be spoiled, it is well not to prejudice others.

Always make use of the butter-knife, sugar-spoon and salt-spoon, instead
of using your knife, spoon or fingers.

Never, if possible, cough or sneeze at the table.

At home fold your napkin when you are done with it and place it in your
ring. If you are visiting, leave your napkin unfolded beside your plate.

Eat neither too fast nor too slow.

Never lean back in your chair, nor sit too near or too far from the
table.

Keep your elbows at your side, so that you may not inconvenience your
neighbors.

Do not find fault with the food.

The old-fashioned habit of abstaining from taking the last piece upon
the plate is no longer observed. It is to be supposed that the vacancy
can be supplied, if necessary.

If a plate is handed you at the table, keep it yourself instead of
passing it to a neighbor. If a dish is passed to you, serve yourself
first, and then pass it on.

The host or hostess should not insist upon guests partaking of
particular dishes; nor ask persons more than once, nor put anything on
their plates which they have declined. It is ill-bred to urge a person
to eat of anything after he has declined.

When sweet corn is served on the ear, the grain should be pared from it
upon the plate, instead of being eaten from the cob.

Strive to keep the cloth as clean as possible, and use the edge of the
plate or a side dish for potato skins and other refuse.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER XI.

Receptions, Parties and Balls.


Morning receptions, as they are called, but more correctly speaking,
afternoon parties, are generally held from four to seven o'clock in the
afternoon. Sometimes a sufficient number for a quadrille arrange to
remain after the assemblage has for the most part dispersed.


THE DRESS.

The dress for receptions is, for men, morning dress; for ladies,
demi-toilet, with or without bonnet. No low-necked dress nor short
sleeves should be seen at day receptions, nor white neck-ties and dress
coats.

The material of a lady's costume may be of velvet, silk, muslin, gauze
or grenadine, according to the season of the year, and taste of the
wearer, but her more elegant jewelry and laces should be reserved for
evening parties.


THE REFRESHMENTS.

The refreshments for "morning receptions" are generally light,
consisting of tea, coffee, frozen punch, claret punch, ices, fruit and
cakes. Often a cold collation is spread after the lighter refreshments
have been served, and sometimes the table is set with all the varieties,
and renewed from time to time.


INVITATIONS.

Invitations to a reception are simple, and are usually very informal.
Frequently the lady's card is sent with the simple inscription, "At Home
Thursday, from four to seven." No answers are expected to these
invitations, unless "R.S.V.P." is on one corner. One visiting card is
left by each person who is present, to serve for the after call. No
calls are expected from those who attend. Those who are not able to be
present, call soon after.


MUSICAL MATINEES.

A _matinee musicale_ partakes of the nature of a reception, and is one
of the most difficult entertainments attempted. For this it is necessary
to secure those persons possessing sufficient vocal and instrumental
talent to insure the success of the entertainment, and to arrange with
them a programme, assigning to each, in order, his or her part. It is
customary to commence with a piece of instrumental music, followed by
solos, duets, quartettes, etc., with instrumental music interspersed, in
not too great proportions. Some competent person is needed as
accompanist. It is the duty of the hostess to maintain silence among her
guests during the performance of instrumental as well as vocal music. If
any are unaware of the breach of good manners they commit in talking or
whispering at such times, she should by a gesture endeavor to acquaint
them of the fact. It is the duty of the hostess to see that the ladies
are accompanied to the piano; that the leaves of the music are turned
for them, and that they are conducted to their seats again. When not
intimately acquainted with them, the hostess should join in expressing
gratification.

The dress at a musical matinee is the same as at a reception, only
bonnets are more generally dispensed with. Those who have taken part,
often remain for a hot supper.


PARTIES IN THE COUNTRY.

Morning and afternoon parties in the country, or at watering places, are
of a less formal character than in cities. The hostess introduces such
of her guests as she thinks most likely to be mutually agreeable. Music
or some amusement is essential to the success of such parties.


SUNDAY HOSPITALITIES.

In this country it is not expected that persons will call after informal
hospitalities extended on Sunday. All gatherings on that day ought to be
informal. No dinner parties are given on Sunday, or, at least, they are
not considered as good form in good society.


FIVE O'CLOCK TEA, COFFEE AND KETTLE-DRUMS.

Five o'clock tea, coffee and kettle-drums have recently been introduced
into this country from England. For these invitations are usually
issued on the lady's visiting card, with the words written in the left
hand corner.

 [Illustration:
           _Five o'clock tea,
           Wednesday, October 6._]

Or, if for a kettle-drum:

 [Illustration:
           _Kettle-drum,
           Wednesday, October 6._]

No answers are expected to these invitations, unless there is an
R.S.V.P. on the card. It is optional with those who attend, to leave
cards. Those who do not attend, call afterwards. The hostess receives
her guests standing, aided by other members of the family or intimate
friends. For a kettle-drum there is usually a crowd, and yet but few
remain over half an hour--the conventional time allotted--unless they
are detained by music or some entertaining conversation. A table set in
the dining-room is supplied with tea, coffee, chocolate, sandwiches,
buns and cakes, which constitute all that is offered to the guests.

There is less formality at a kettle-drum than at a larger day reception.
The time is spent in desultory conversation with friends, in listening
to music, or such entertainment as has been provided.

Gentlemen wear the usual morning dress. Ladies wear the _demi-toilet_,
with or without bonnets.

At five o'clock tea (or coffee), the equipage is on a side table,
together with plates of thin sandwiches, and of cake. The pouring of the
tea and passing of refreshments are usually done by some members of the
family or friends, without the assistance of servants, where the number
assembled is small; for, as a rule, the people who frequent these social
gatherings, care more for social intercourse than for eating and
drinking.


MORE FORMAL ENTERTAINMENTS.

Evening parties and balls are of a much more formal character than the
entertainments that have been mentioned. They require evening dress. Of
late years, however, evening dress is almost as much worn at grand
dinners as at balls and evening parties, only the material is not of so
diaphanous a character. Lace and muslin are out of place. Invitations to
evening parties should be sent from a week to two weeks in advance, and
in all cases they should be answered immediately.


BALLS.

The requisites for a successful ball are good music and plenty of people
to dance. An English writer says, "The advantage of the ball is, that it
brings young people together for a sensible and innocent recreation, and
takes them away from silly, if not from bad ones; that it gives them
exercise, and that the general effect of the beauty, elegance and
brilliancy of a ball is to elevate rather than to deprave the mind." It
may be that the round dance is monopolizing the ball room to a too great
extent, and it is possible that these may be so frequent as to mar the
pleasure of some persons who do not care to participate in them, to the
exclusion of "square" and other dances. America should not be the only
nation that confines ball room dancing to waltzes, as is done in some of
our cities. There should be an equal number of waltzes and quadrilles,
with one or two contra dances, which would give an opportunity to those
who object (or whose parents object) to round dances to appear on the
floor.


PREPARATIONS FOR A BALL.

There should be dressing-rooms for ladies and gentlemen, with a servant
or servants to each. There should be cards with the names of the invited
guests upon them, or checks with duplicates to be given to the guests
ready to pin upon the wraps of each one. Each dressing-room should be
supplied with a complete set of toilet articles. It is customary to
decorate the house elaborately with flowers. Although this is an
expensive luxury, it adds much to beautifying the rooms.


THE MUSIC.

Four musicians are enough for a "dance." When the dancing room is small,
the flageolet is preferable to the horn, as it is less noisy and marks
the time as well. The piano and violin form the mainstay of the band;
but when the rooms are large enough, a larger band may be employed.


THE DANCES.

The dances should be arranged beforehand, and for large balls programmes
are printed with a list of the dances. Usually a ball opens with a
waltz, followed by a quadrille, and these are succeeded by galops,
lancers, polkas, quadrilles and waltzes in turn.


INTRODUCTIONS AT A BALL.

Gentlemen who are introduced to ladies at a ball, solely for the purpose
of dancing, wait to be recognized before speaking with ladies upon
meeting afterwards, but they are at liberty to recall themselves by
lifting their hats in passing. In England a ball-room acquaintance
rarely goes any farther, until they have met at more balls than one; so,
also, a gentleman cannot, after being introduced to a young lady, ask
her for more than two dances during the same evening. In England an
introduction given for dancing purposes does not constitute
acquaintanceship. With us, as in Continental Europe, it does. It is for
this reason that, in England, ladies are expected to bow first, while on
the Continent it is the gentlemen who give the first marks of
recognition, as it should be here, or better still, simultaneously, when
the recognition is simultaneous. It is as much the gentleman's place to
bow (with our mode of life) as it is the lady's. The one who recognizes
first should be the first to show that recognition. Introductions take
place in a ball room in order to provide ladies with partners, or
between persons residing in different cities. In all other cases
permission is asked before giving introductions. But where a hostess is
sufficiently discriminating in the selection of her guests, those
assembled under her roof should remember that they are, in a certain
sense, made known to one another, and ought, therefore, to be able to
converse freely without introductions.


RECEIVING GUESTS.

The custom of the host and hostess receiving together, is not now
prevalent. The receiving devolves upon the hostess, but it is the duty
of the host to remain within sight until after the arrivals are
principally over, that he may be easily found by any one seeking him.
The same duty devolves upon the sons, who, that evening, must share
their attentions with all. The daughters, as well as the sons, will look
after partners for the young ladies who desire to dance, and they will
try to see that no one is neglected before they join the dancers
themselves.


AN AFTER-CALL.

After a ball, an after-call is due the lady of the house at which you
were entertained, and should be made as soon as convenient--within two
weeks at the farthest. The call loses its significance entirely, and
passes into remissness, when a longer time is permitted to elapse. If it
is not possible to make a call, send your card or leave it at the door.
It has become customary of late for a lady who has no weekly reception
day, in sending invitations to a ball, to inclose her card in each
invitation for one or more receptions, in order that the after-calls
due her may be made on that day.


SUPPER.

The supper-room at a ball is thrown open generally at twelve o'clock.
The table is made as elegant as beautiful china, cut-glass and an
abundance of flowers can make it. The hot dishes are oysters, stewed,
fried, broiled and scalloped, chicken, game, etc., and the cold dishes
are such as boned turkey, _boeuf á la mode_, chicken salad, lobster
salad and raw oysters. When supper is announced, the host leads the way
with the lady to whom he wishes to show especial attention, who may be
an elderly lady, or a stranger or a bride. The hostess remains until the
last, with the gentleman who takes her to supper, unless some
distinguished guest is present, with whom she leads the way. No
gentleman should ever go into the supper-room alone, unless he has seen
every lady enter before him. When ladies are left unattended, gentlemen,
although strangers, are at liberty to offer their services in waiting
upon them, for the host and hostess are sufficient guarantees for the
respectability of their guests.


THE NUMBER TO INVITE.

Persons giving balls or dancing parties should be careful not to invite
more than their rooms will accommodate, so as to avoid a crush.
Invitations to crowded balls are not hospitalities, but inflictions. A
hostess is usually safe, however, in inviting one-fourth more than her
rooms will hold, as that proportion of regrets are apt to be received.
People who do not dance will not, as a rule, expect to be invited to a
ball or dancing party.


DUTIES OF GUESTS.

Some persons may be astonished to learn that any duties devolve upon the
guests. In fact there are circles where all such duties are ignored.

It is the duty of every person who has at first accepted the invitation,
and subsequently finds that it will be impossible to attend, to send a
regret, even at the last moment, and as it is rude to send an acceptance
with no intention of going, those who so accept will do well to remember
this duty. It is the duty of every lady who attends a ball, to make her
toilet as fresh as possible. It need not be expensive, but it should at
least be clean; it may be simple, but it should be neither soiled nor
tumbled. The gentlemen should wear evening dress.

It is the duty of every person to arrive as early as possible after the
hour named, when it is mentioned in the invitation.

Another duty of guests is that each one should do all in his or her
power to contribute to the enjoyment of the evening, and neither
hesitate nor decline to be introduced to such guests as the hostess
requests. It is not binding upon any gentleman to remain one moment
longer than he desires with any lady. By constantly moving from one to
another, when he feels so inclined, he gives an opportunity to others to
circulate as freely; and this custom, generally introduced in our
society, would go a long way toward contributing to the enjoyment of
all. The false notion generally entertained that a gentleman is expected
to remain standing by the side of a lady, like a sentinel on duty, until
relieved by some other person, is absurd, and deters many who would
gladly give a few passing moments to lady acquaintances, could they but
know that they would be free to leave at any instant that conversation
flagged, or that they desired to join another. In a society where it is
not considered a rudeness to leave after a few sentences with one, to
exchange some words with another, there is a constant interchange of
civilities, and the men circulate through the room with that charming
freedom which insures the enjoyment of all.

While the hostess is receiving, no person should remain beside her
except members of her family who receive with her, or such friends as
she has designated to assist her. All persons entering should pass on to
make room for others.


SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR GENTLEMEN.

A gentleman should never attempt to step across a lady's train. He
should walk around it. If by any accident he should tread upon any
portion of her dress, he must instantly beg her pardon, and if by
greater carelessness he should tear it, he must pause in his course and
offer to escort her to the dressing-room so that she may have it
repaired.

If a lady asks any favor of a gentleman, such as to send a servant to
her with a glass of water, to take her into the ball-room when she is
without an escort, to inquire whether her carriage is in waiting, or any
of the numerous services which ladies often require, no gentleman will,
under any circumstances, refuse her request.

A really well-bred man will remember to ask the daughters of a house to
dance, as it is his imperative duty to do so; and if the ball has been
given for a lady who dances, he should include her in his attentions. If
he wishes to be considered a thorough-bred gentleman, he will sacrifice
himself occasionally to those who are unsought and neglected in the
dance. The consciousness of having performed a kind and courteous action
will be his reward.

When gentlemen, invited to a house on the occasion of an entertainment,
are not acquainted with all the members of the family, their first duty,
after speaking to their host and hostess, is to ask some common friend
to introduce them to those members whom they do not know. The host and
hostess are often too much occupied in receiving to be able to do this.


DUTIES OF AN ESCORT.

A lady's escort should call for her and accompany her to the place of
entertainment; go with her as far as the dressing-room, return to meet
her there when she is prepared to go to the ball-room; enter the latter
room with her and lead her to the hostess; dance the first dance with
her; conduct her to the supper-room, and be ready to accompany her home
whenever she wishes to go. He should watch during the evening to see
that she is supplied with dancing partners. When he escorts her home she
should not invite him to enter the house, and even if she does so, he
should by all means decline the invitation. He should call upon her
within the next two days.


GENERAL RULES FOR BALLS.

A young man who can dance, and will not dance, should stay away from a
ball.

The lady with whom a gentleman dances last is the one he takes to
supper. Therefore he can make no engagement to take out any other,
unless his partner is already engaged.

Public balls are most enjoyable when you have your own party. The great
charm of a ball is its perfect accord and harmony. All altercations,
loud talking and noisy laughter are doubly ill-mannered in a ball-room.
Very little suffices to disturb the whole party.

In leaving a ball, it is not deemed necessary to wish the lady of the
house a good night. In leaving a small dance or party, it is civil to do
so.

The difference between a ball and an evening party is, that at a ball
there must be dancing, and at an evening party there may or may not be.
A London authority defines a ball to be "an assemblage for dancing, of
not less than seventy-five persons."

Common civility requires that those who have not been present, but who
were among the guests invited, should, when meeting the hostess the
first time after an entertainment, make it a point to express some
acknowledgment of their appreciation of the invitation, by regretting
their inability to be present.

When dancing a round dance, a gentleman should never hold a lady's hand
behind him, or on his hip, or high in the air, moving her arm as though
it were a pump handle, as seen in some of our western cities, but should
hold it gracefully by his side.

Never forget ball-room engagements, nor confuse them, nor promise two
dances to one person. If a lady has forgotten an engagement, the
gentleman she has thus slighted must pleasantly accept her apology.
Good-breeding and the appearance of good temper are inseparable.

It is not necessary for a gentleman to bow to his partner after a
quadrille; it is enough that he offers his arm and walks at least half
way round the room with her. He is not obliged to remain beside her
unless he wishes to do so, but may leave her with any lady whom she
knows.

Never be seen without gloves in a ball-room, or with those of any other
color than white, unless they are of the most delicate hue.

Though not customary for a married couple to dance together in society,
those men who wish to show their wives the compliment of such unusual
attention, if they possess any independence, will not be deterred from
doing so by their fear of any comments from Mrs. Grundy.

The sooner that we recover from the effects of the Puritanical idea that
clergymen should never be seen at balls, the better for all who attend
them. Where it is wrong for a clergyman to go, it is wrong for any
member of his church to be seen.

In leaving a ball room before the music has ceased, if no members of the
family are in sight, it is not necessary to find them before taking your
departure. If, however, the invitation is a first one, endeavor not to
make your exit until you have thanked your hostess for the
entertainment. You can speak of the pleasure it has afforded you, but it
is not necessary that you should say "it has been a grand success."

Young ladies must be careful how they refuse to dance, for unless a good
reason is given, a gentleman is apt to take it as evidence of personal
dislike. After a lady refuses, the gentleman should not urge her to
dance, nor should the lady accept another invitation for the same dance.
The members of the household should see that those guests who wish to
dance are provided with partners.

Ladies leaving a ball or party should not allow gentlemen to see them to
their carriages, unless overcoats and hats are on for departure.

When balls are given, if the weather is bad, an awning should be
provided for the protection of those passing from their carriages to the
house. In all cases, a broad piece of carpet should be spread from the
door to the carriage steps.

Gentlemen should engage their partners for the approaching dance, before
the music strikes up.

In a private dance, a lady cannot well refuse to dance with any
gentleman who invites her, unless she has a previous engagement. If she
declines from weariness, the gentleman will show her a compliment by
abstaining from dancing himself, and remaining with her while the dance
progresses.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER XII.

Etiquette of the Street.


The manners of a person are clearly shown by his treatment of the people
he meets in the public streets of a city or village, in public
conveyances and in traveling generally. The true gentleman, at all
times, in all places, and under all circumstances, is kind and courteous
to all he meets, regards not only the rights, but the wishes and
feelings of others, is deferential to women and to elderly men, and is
ever ready to extend his aid to those who need it.


THE STREET MANNERS OF A LADY.

The true lady walks the street, wrapped in a mantle of proper reserve,
so impenetrable that insult and coarse familiarity shrink from her,
while she, at the same time, carries with her a congenial atmosphere
which attracts all, and puts all at their ease.

A lady walks quietly through the streets, seeing and hearing nothing
that she ought not to see and hear, recognizing acquaintances with a
courteous bow, and friends with words of greeting. She is always
unobtrusive, never talks loudly, or laughs boisterously, or does
anything to attract the attention of the passers-by. She walks along in
her own quiet, lady-like way, and by her pre-occupation is secure from
any annoyance to which a person of less perfect breeding might be
subjected.

A lady never demands attention and favors from a gentleman, but, when
voluntarily offered, accepts them gratefully, graciously, and with an
expression of hearty thanks.


FORMING STREET ACQUAINTANCES.

A lady never forms an acquaintance upon the street, or seeks to attract
the attention or admiration of persons of the other sex. To do so would
render false her claims to ladyhood, if it did not make her liable to
far graver charges.


RECOGNIZING FRIENDS IN THE STREET.

No one, while walking the streets, should fail, through pre-occupation,
or absent-mindedness, to recognize friends or acquaintances, either by a
bow or some form of salutation. If two gentlemen stop to talk, they
should retire to one side of the walk. If a stranger should be in
company with one of the gentlemen, an introduction is not necessary. If
a gentleman meets another gentleman in company with a lady whom he does
not know, he lifts his hat to salute them both. If he knows the lady, he
should salute her first. The gentleman who accompanies a lady, always
returns a salutation made to her.


A CROWDED STREET.

When a gentleman and lady are walking in the street, if at any place, by
reason of the crowd, or from other cause, they are compelled to proceed
singly, the gentleman should always precede his companion.


INTRUSIVE INQUIRIES.

If you meet or join or are visited by a person who has any article
whatever, under his arm or in his hand, and he does not offer to show it
to you, you should not, even if it be your most intimate friend, take it
from him and look at it. That intrusive curiosity is very inconsistent
with the delicacy of a well-bred man, and always offends in some degree.


THE FIRST TO BOW.

In England strict etiquette requires that a lady, meeting upon the
street a gentleman with whom she has acquaintance, shall give the first
bow of recognition. In this country, however, good sense does not insist
upon an imperative following of this rule. A well-bred man bows and
raises his hat to every lady of his acquaintance whom he meets, without
waiting for her to take the initiative. If she is well-bred, she will
certainly respond to his salutation. As politeness requires that each
salute the other, their salutations will thus be simultaneous.


ALWAYS RECOGNIZE ACQUAINTANCES.

One should always recognize lady acquaintances in the street, either by
bowing or words of greeting, a gentleman lifting his hat. If they stop
to speak, it is not obligatory to shake hands. Shaking hands is not
forbidden, but in most cases it is to be avoided in public.

 [Illustration: GENTLEMAN MEETING A LADY.]


BOWING TO STRANGERS WITH FRIENDS.

If a gentleman meets a friend, and the latter has a stranger with him,
all three should bow. If the gentleman stops his friend to speak to him,
he should apologize to the stranger for detaining him. If the stranger
is a lady, the same deference should be shown as if she were an
acquaintance.


DO NOT LACK POLITENESS.

Never hesitate in acts of politeness for fear they will not be
recognized or returned. One cannot be too polite so long as he conforms
to rules, while it is easy to lack politeness by neglect of them.
Besides, if courtesy is met by neglect or rebuff, it is not for the
courteous person to feel mortification, but the boorish one; and so all
lookers-on will regard the matter.


TALKING WITH A LADY IN THE STREET.

In meeting a lady it is optional with her whether she shall pause to
speak. If the gentleman has anything to say to her, he should not stop
her, but turn around and walk in her company until he has said what he
has to say, when he may leave her with a bow and a lift of the hat.


LADY AND GENTLEMAN WALKING TOGETHER.

A gentleman walking with a lady should treat her with the most
scrupulous politeness, and may take either side of the walk. It is
customary for the gentleman to have the lady on his right hand side, and
he offers her his right arm, when walking arm in arm. If, however, the
street is crowded, the gentleman must keep the lady on that side of him
where she will be the least exposed to crowding.


OFFERING THE ARM TO A LADY.

A gentleman should, in the evening, or whenever her safety, comfort or
convenience seems to require it, offer a lady companion his arm. At
other times it is not customary to do so unless the parties be husband
and wife or engaged. In the latter case, it is not always advisable to
do so, as they may be made the subject of unjust remarks.


KEEPING STEP.

In walking together, especially when arm in arm, it is desirable that
the two keep step. Ladies should be particular to adapt their pace as
far as practicable, to that of their escort. It is easily done.


OPENING THE DOOR FOR A LADY.

A gentleman should always hold open the door for a lady to enter first.
This is obligatory, not only in the case of the lady who accompanies
him, but also in that of any strange lady who chances to be about to
enter at the same time.


ANSWERING QUESTIONS.

A gentleman will answer courteously any questions which a lady may
address to him upon the street, at the same time lifting his hat, or at
least touching it respectfully.


SMOKING UPON THE STREETS.

In England a well-bred man never smokes upon the streets. While this
rule does not hold good in this country, yet no gentleman will ever
insult a lady by smoking in the streets in her company, and in meeting
and saluting a lady he will always remove his cigar from his mouth.


OFFENSIVE BEHAVIOR.

No gentleman is ever guilty of the offense of standing on street corners
and the steps of hotels or other public places and boldly scrutinizing
every lady who passes.


CARRYING PACKAGES.

A gentleman will never permit a lady with whom he is walking to carry a
package of any kind, but will insist upon relieving her of it. He may
even accost a lady when he sees her overburdened and offer his
assistance, if their ways lie in the same direction.


SHOUTING.

Never speak to your acquaintances from one side of the street to the
other. Shouting is a certain sign of vulgarity. First approach, and then
make your communication to your acquaintance or friend in a moderately
loud tone of voice.


TWO GENTLEMEN WALKING WITH A LADY.

When two gentlemen are walking with a lady in the street they should not
be both upon the same side of her, but one of them should walk upon the
outside and the other upon the inside.


CROSSING THE STREET WITH A LADY.

If a gentleman is walking with a lady who has his arm, and they cross
the street, it is better not to disengage the arm, and go round upon the
outside. Such effort evinces a palpable attention to form, and that is
always to be avoided.


FULFILLING AN ENGAGEMENT.

When on your way to fill an engagement, if a friend stops you on the
street you may, without committing a breach of etiquette, tell him of
your appointment, and release yourself from any delay that may be
occasioned by a long talk; but do so in a courteous manner, expressing
regret for the necessity.


WALKING WITH A LADY ACQUAINTANCE.

A gentleman should not join a lady acquaintance on the street for the
purpose of walking with her, unless he ascertains that his company would
be perfectly agreeable to her. It might be otherwise, and she should
frankly say so, if asked.


PASSING BEFORE A LADY.

When a lady wishes to enter a store, house or room, if a gentleman
accompanies her, he should hold the door open and allow her to enter
first, if practicable; for a gentleman must never pass before a lady
anywhere if he can avoid it, or without an apology.


SHOPPING ETIQUETTE.

In inquiring for goods at a store or shop, do not say to the clerk or
salesman, "I want" such an article, but, "Please show me" such an
article, or some other polite form of address.

You should never take hold of a piece of goods or an article which
another person is examining. Wait until it is replaced upon the counter,
when you are at liberty to examine it.

It is rude to interrupt friends whom you meet in a store before they
have finished making their purchases, or to ask their attention to your
own purchases. It is rude to offer your opinion unasked, upon their
judgment or taste, in the selection of goods.

It is rude to sneer at and depreciate goods, and exceedingly
discourteous to the salesman. Use no deceit, but be honest with them, if
you wish them to be honest with you.

Avoid "jewing down" the prices of articles in any way. If the price does
not suit, you may say so quietly, and depart, but it is generally best
to say nothing about it.

It is an insult for the salesman to offensively suggest that you can do
better elsewhere, which should be resented by instant departure.

Ladies should not monopolize the time and attention of salesmen in small
talk, while other customers are in the store to be waited upon.

Whispering in a store is rude. Loud and showy behaviour is exceedingly
vulgar.


ETIQUETTE FOR PUBLIC CONVEYANCES.

In street cars, omnibuses and other public street conveyances, it should
be the endeavor of each passenger to make room for all persons entering,
and no gentleman will retain his seat when there are ladies standing.
When a lady accepts a seat from a gentleman, she expresses her thanks in
a kind and pleasant manner.

A lady may, with perfect propriety, accept the offer of services from a
stranger in alighting from, or entering an omnibus or other public
conveyance, and should always acknowledge the courtesy with a pleasant
"Thank you, sir," or a bow.

Never talk politics or religion in a public conveyance.

Gentlemen should not cross their legs, nor stretch their feet out into
the passage-way of a public conveyance.


AVOID CUTTING.

No gentleman will refuse to recognize a lady after she has recognized
him, under any circumstances. A young lady should, under no provocation,
"cut" a married lady. It is the privilege of age to first recognize
those who are younger in years. No young man will fail to recognize an
aged one after he has met with recognition. "Cutting" is to be avoided
if possible. There are other ways of convincing a man that you do not
know him, yet, to young ladies, it is sometimes the only means available
to rid them of troublesome acquaintances. "Cutting" consists in
returning a bow or recognition with a stare, and is publicly ignoring
the acquaintance of the person so treated. It is sometimes done by words
in saying, "Really I have not the pleasure of your acquaintance."


AVOIDING CARRIAGES.

For a lady to run across the street to avoid an approaching carriage is
inelegant and also dangerous. To attempt to cross the street between the
carriages of a funeral procession, is rude and disrespectful. The
foreign custom of removing the hat and standing in a respectful attitude
until the melancholy train has passed, is a commendable one to be
followed in this country.


KEEP TO THE RIGHT.

On meeting and passing people in the street, keep to your right hand,
except when a gentleman is walking alone; then he must always turn aside
to give the preferred side of the walk to a lady, to anyone carrying a
heavy load, to a clergyman or to an old gentleman.


SOME GENERAL SUGGESTIONS.

If a gentleman is walking with two ladies in a rain storm, and there is
but one umbrella, he should give it to his companions and walk outside.
Nothing can be more absurd than to see a gentleman walking between two
ladies holding an umbrella which perfectly protects himself, but half
deluges his companions with its dripping streams.

Never turn a corner at full speed or you may find yourself knocked down,
or may knock down another, by the violent contact. Always look in the
way you are going or you may chance to meet some awkward collision.

A young lady should, if possible, avoid walking alone in the street
after dark. If she passes the evening with a friend, provision should be
made beforehand for an escort. If this is not practicable, the person at
whose house she is visiting should send a servant with her, or some
proper person--a gentleman acquaintance present, or her own husband--to
perform the duty. A married lady may, however, disregard this rule, if
circumstances prevent her being able to conveniently find an escort.

A gentleman will always precede a lady up a flight of stairs, and allow
her to precede him in going down.

Do not quarrel with a hack-driver about his fare, but pay him and
dismiss him. If you have a complaint to make against him, take his name
and make it to the proper authorities. It is rude to keep a lady waiting
while you are disputing with a hack-man.

 [Illustration]

 [Illustration: SUMMER AFTERNOON, CENTRAL PARK.]


CHAPTER XIII.

Etiquette of Public Places.


All well-bred persons will conduct themselves at all times and in all
places with perfect decorum. Wherever they meet people they will be
found polite, considerate of the comfort, convenience and wishes of
others, and unobtrusive in their behavior. They seem to know, as if by
instinct, how to conduct themselves, wherever they may go, or in
whatever society they may be thrown. They consider at all times the
fitness of things, and their actions and speech are governed by feelings
of gentleness and kindness towards everybody with whom they come into
social relations, having a due consideration for the opinions and
prejudices of others, and doing nothing to wound their feelings. Many
people, however, either from ignorance, thoughtlessness or carelessness,
are constantly violating some of the observances of etiquette pertaining
to places of public assemblages. It is for this reason that rules are
here given by which may be regulated the conduct of people in various
public gatherings, where awkwardness and ostentatious display often call
forth unfavorable criticism.


CONDUCT IN CHURCH.

A gentleman should remove his hat upon entering the auditorium.

When visiting a strange church, you should wait in the vestibule until
an usher appears to show you to a seat.

A gentleman may walk up the aisle either a little ahead of, or by the
side of a lady, allowing the lady to first enter the pew. There should
be no haste in passing up the aisle.

People should preserve the utmost silence and decorum in church, and
avoid whispering, laughing, staring, or making a noise of any kind with
the feet or hands.

It is ill-mannered to be late at church. If one is unavoidably late, it
is better to take a pew as near the door as possible.

Ladies always take the inside seats, and gentlemen the outside or head
of the pew. When a gentleman accompanies a lady, however, it is
customary for him to sit by her side during church services.

A person should never leave church until the services are over, except
in some case of emergency.

Do not turn around in your seat to gaze at anyone, to watch the choir,
to look over the congregation or to see the cause of any disturbing
noise.

If books or fans are passed in church, let them be offered and accepted
or refused with a silent gesture of the head.

It is courteous to see that strangers are provided with books; and if
the service is strange to them, the places for the day's reading should
be indicated.

It is perfectly proper to offer to share the prayer-book or hymn-book
with a stranger if there is no separate book for his use.

In visiting a church of a different belief from your own, pay the utmost
respect to the services and conform in all things to the observances of
the church--that is, kneel, sit and rise with the congregation. No
matter how grotesquely some of the forms and observances may strike you,
let no smile or contemptuous remark indicate the fact while in the
church.

When the services are concluded, there should be no haste in crowding up
the aisle, but the departure should be conducted quietly and decorously.
When the vestibule is reached, it is allowable to exchange greetings
with friends, but here there should be no loud talking nor boisterous
laughter. Neither should gentlemen congregate in knots in the vestibule
or upon the steps of the church and compel ladies to run the gauntlet of
their eyes and tongues.

If a Protestant gentleman accompanies a lady who is a Roman Catholic to
her own church, it is an act of courtesy to offer the holy water. This
he must do with the ungloved right hand.

In visiting a church for the mere purpose of seeing the edifice, one
should always go at a time when there are no services being held. If
people are even then found at their devotions, as is apt to be the case
in Roman Catholic churches especially, the demeanor of the visitor
should be respectful and subdued and his voice low, so that he may not
disturb them.


INVITATION TO OPERA OR CONCERT.

A gentleman upon inviting a lady to accompany him to opera, theatre,
concert or other public place of amusement, must send his invitation the
previous day. The lady must reply immediately, so that if she declines,
there shall yet be time for the gentleman to secure another companion.

It is the gentleman's duty to secure good seats for the entertainment,
or else he or his companion may be obliged to take up with seats where
they can neither see nor hear.


CONDUCT IN OPERA, THEATER OR PUBLIC HALL.

On entering the hall, theater or opera house the gentleman should walk
side by side with his companion unless the aisle is too narrow, in which
case he should precede her. Upon reaching the seats, he should allow her
to take the inner one, assuming the outer one himself.

A gentleman should, on no account, leave the lady's side from the
beginning to the close of the performance.

If it is a promenade concert or opera, the lady may be invited to
promenade during the intermission. If she declines, the gentleman must
retain his position by her side.

There is no obligation whatever upon a gentleman to give up his seat to
a lady. On the contrary, his duty is solely to the lady whom he
accompanies. He must remain beside her during the evening to converse
with her between the acts, and to render the entertainment as agreeable
to her as possible.

During the performance complete quiet should be preserved, that the
audience may not be prevented from seeing or hearing. Between the acts
it is perfectly proper to converse, but it should be done in a low tone,
so as not to attract attention. Neither should one whisper. There should
be no loud talking, boisterous laughter, violent gestures, lover-like
demonstrations or anything in manners or speech to attract the attention
of others.

It is proper and desirable that the actors be applauded when they
deserve it. It is their only means of knowing whether they are giving
satisfaction.

The gentleman should see that the lady is provided with a programme, and
with libretto also if they are attending opera.

In passing out at the close of the performance the gentleman should
precede the lady, and there should be no crowding or pushing.

If the means of the gentleman warrant him in so doing, he should call
for his companion in a carriage. This is especially necessary if the
evening is stormy. He should call sufficiently early to allow them to
reach their destination before the performance commences. It is unjust
to the whole audience to come in late and make a disturbance in
obtaining seats.

The gentleman should ask permission to call upon the lady the following
day, which permission she should grant; and if she be a person of
delicacy and tact, she will make him feel that he has conferred a real
pleasure upon her by his invitation. Even if she finds occasion for
criticism in the performance, she should be lenient in this respect, and
seek for points to praise instead, that he may not feel regret at taking
her to an entertainment which has proved unworthy.


REMAIN UNTIL THE PERFORMANCE CLOSES.

At a theatrical or operatic performance, you should remain seated until
the performance is concluded and the curtain falls. It is exceedingly
rude and ill-bred to rise and leave the hall while the play is drawing
to a close, yet this severely exasperating practice has of late been
followed by many well-meaning people, who, if they were aware of the
extent to which they outraged the feelings of many of the audience, and
unwittingly offered an insult to the actors on the stage, would shrink
from repeating such flagrantly rude conduct.


CONDUCT IN PICTURE-GALLERIES.

In visiting picture-galleries one should always maintain the deportment
of a gentleman or a lady. Make no loud comments and do not seek to show
superior knowledge in art matters by gratuitous criticism. If you have
not an art education you will probably only be giving publicity to your
own ignorance. Do not stand in conversation before a picture, and thus
obstruct the view of others who wish to see rather than talk. If you
wish to converse with any anyone on general subjects, draw to one side,
out of the way of those who want to look at the pictures.


CONDUCT AT CHARITY FAIRS.

In visiting a fancy fair make no comments on either the article or their
price, unless you can praise. If you want them, pay the price demanded,
or let them alone. If you can conscientiously praise an article, by all
means do so, as you may be giving pleasure to the maker if she chances
to be within hearing. If you have a table at a fair, use no unladylike
means to obtain buyers. Not even the demands of charity can justify you
in importuning others to purchase articles against their own judgment or
beyond their means.

Never appear so beggarly as to retain the change, if a larger amount is
presented than the price. Offer the change promptly, when the gentleman
will be at liberty to donate it if he thinks best, and you may accept it
with thanks. He is, however, under no obligation whatever to make such
donation.

Be guilty of no loud talking or laughing, and by all means avoid
conspicuous flirting in so public a place.

As a gentleman must always remove his hat in the presence of ladies, so
he should remain with head uncovered, carrying his hat in his hand, in a
public place of this character.


CONDUCT IN AN ARTIST'S STUDIO.

If you have occasion to visit an artist's studio, by no means meddle
with anything in the room. Reverse no picture which stands or hangs with
face to the wall; open no portfolio without permission, and do not alter
by a single touch any lay-figure or its drapery, piece of furniture or
article of _vertu_ posed as a model. You do not know with what care the
artist may have arranged these things, nor what trouble the
disarrangement may cost him.

Use no strong expression either of delight or disapprobation at anything
presented for your inspection. If a picture or a statue please you, show
your approval and appreciation by close attention, and a few quiet, well
chosen words, rather than by extravagant praise.

Do not ask the artist his prices unless you really intend to become a
purchaser; and in this case it is best to attentively observe his works,
make your choice, and trust the negotiation to a third person or to a
written correspondence with the artist after the visit is concluded. You
may express your desire for the work and obtain the refusal of it from
the artist. If you desire to conclude the bargain at once you may ask
his price, and if he names a higher one than you wish to give, you may
say as much and mention the sum you are willing to pay, when it will be
optional with the artist to maintain his first price or accept your
offer.

It is not proper to visit the studio of an artist except by special
invitation or permission, and at an appointed time, for you cannot
estimate how much you may disturb him at his work. The hours of daylight
are all golden to him; and steadiness of hand in manipulating a pencil
is sometimes only acquired each day after hours of practice, and may be
instantly lost on the irruption and consequent interruption of visitors.

Never take a young child to a studio, for it may do much mischief in
spite of the most careful watching. At any rate, the juvenile visitor
will try the artist's temper and nerves by keeping him in a constant
state of apprehension.

If you have engaged to sit for your portrait never keep the artist
waiting one moment beyond the appointed time. If you do so you should in
justice pay for the time you make him lose.

A visitor should never stand behind an artist and watch him at his work;
for if he be a man of nervous temperament it will be likely to disturb
him greatly.


GENTLEMEN PASSING BEFORE LADIES.

Gentleman having occasion to pass before ladies who are already seated
in lecture and concert rooms, theaters and other public places, should
beg pardon for disturbing them; passing with their faces and never with
their backs toward them.


WHERE GENTLEMEN MAY KEEP THEIR HATS ON.

At garden parties and at all assemblies held in the open air, gentlemen
keep their hats on their heads. If draughts of cold air, or other
causes, make it necessary for them to retain their hats on their heads,
when in the presence of ladies within doors, they explain the necessity
and ask permission of the ladies whom they accompany.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER XIV.

Etiquette of Travelling.


There is nothing that tests the natural politeness of men and women so
thoroughly as traveling. We all desire as much comfort as possible and
as a rule are selfish. In these days of railroad travel, when every
railway is equipped with elegant coaches for the comfort, convenience
and sometimes luxury of its passengers, and provided with gentlemanly
conductors and servants, the longest journeys by railroad can be made
alone by self-possessed ladies with perfect safety and but little
annoyance. Then, too, a lady who deports herself as such may travel from
the Atlantic to the Pacific, from Maine to the Gulf of Mexico, and meet
with no affront or insult, but on the contrary receive polite attentions
at every point, from men who may chance to be her fellow-travelers. This
may be accounted for from the fact that, as a rule in America, all men
show a deferential regard for women, and are especially desirous of
showing them such attentions as will render a long and lonesome journey
as pleasant as possible.


DUTIES OF AN ESCORT.

However self-possessed and ladylike in all her deportment and general
bearing a lady may be, and though capable of undertaking any journey,
howsoever long it may be, an escort is at all times much more pleasant,
and generally acceptable. When a gentleman undertakes the escort of a
lady, he should proceed with her to the depot, or meet her there, a
sufficient time before the departure of the train to attend to the
checking of her baggage, procure her ticket, and obtain for her an
eligible seat in the cars, allowing her to choose such seat as she
desires. He will then dispose of her packages and hand-baggage in their
proper receptacle, and make her seat and surroundings as agreeable for
her as possible, taking a seat near her, or by the side of her if she
requests it, and do all he can to make her journey a pleasant one.

Upon arriving at her destination, he should conduct her to the ladies'
waiting-room or to a carriage, until he has attended to her baggage,
which he arranges to have delivered where the lady requests it. He
should then escort her to whatever part of the city she is going and
deliver her into the hands of her friends before relaxing his care. On
the following day he should call upon her to inquire after her health.
It is optional with the lady whether the acquaintance shall be prolonged
or not after this call. If the lady does not wish to prolong the
acquaintance, she can have no right, nor can her friends, to request a
similar favor of him at another time.


THE DUTY OF A LADY TO HER ESCORT.

The lady may supply her escort with a sum of money ample to pay all the
expenses of the journey before purchasing her ticket, or furnish him the
exact amount required, or, at the suggestion of her escort, she may
allow him to defray the expenses from his own pocket, and settle with
him at the end of the journey. The latter course, however, should only
be pursued when the gentleman suggests it, and a strict account of the
expenses incurred must be insisted on.

A lady should give her attendant as little trouble and annoyance as
possible, and she should make no unnecessary demands upon his good
nature and gentlemanly services. Her hand-baggage should be as small as
circumstances will permit, and when once disposed of, it should remain
undisturbed until she is about to leave the car, unless she should
absolutely require it. As the the train nears the end of her journey,
she will deliberately gather together her effects preparatory to
departure, so that when the train stops she will be ready to leave the
car at once and not wait to hurriedly grab her various parcels, or cause
her escort unnecessary delay.


A LADY TRAVELING ALONE.

A lady, in traveling alone, may accept services from her
fellow-travelers, which she should always acknowledge graciously.
Indeed, it is the business of a gentleman to see that the wants of an
unescorted lady are attended to. He should offer to raise or lower her
window if she seems to have any difficulty in doing it herself. He may
offer his assistance in carrying her packages upon leaving the car, or
in engaging a carriage or obtaining a trunk. Still, women should learn
to be as self-reliant as possible; and young women particularly should
accept proffered assistance from strangers, in all but the slightest
offices, very rarely.


LADIES MAY ASSIST OTHER LADIES.

It is not only the right, but the duty of ladies to render any
assistance or be of any service to younger ladies, or those less
experienced in traveling than themselves. They may show many little
courtesies which will make the journey less tedious to the inexperienced
traveler, and may give her important advice or assistance which may be
of benefit to her. An acquaintance formed in traveling, need never be
retained afterwards. It is optional whether it is or not.


THE COMFORT OF OTHERS.

In seeking his own comfort, no passenger has a right to overlook or
disregard that of others. If for his own comfort, he wishes to raise or
lower a window he should consult the wishes of passengers immediately
around him before doing so. The discomforts of traveling should be borne
cheerfully, for what may enhance your own comfort may endanger the
health of some fellow-traveler.


ATTENDING TO THE WANTS OF OTHERS.

See everywhere and at all times that ladies and elderly people have
their wants supplied before you think of your own. Nor is there need for
unmanly haste or pushing in entering or leaving cars or boats. There is
always time enough allowed for each passenger to enter in a gentlemanly
manner and with a due regard to the rights of others.

If, in riding in the street-cars or crossing a ferry, your friend
insists on paying for you, permit him to do so without serious
remonstrance. You can return the favor at some other time.


READING WHEN TRAVELLING.

If a gentleman in traveling, either on cars or steamboat, has provided
himself with newspapers or other reading, he should offer them to his
companions first. If they are refused, he may with propriety read
himself, leaving the others free to do the same if they wish.


OCCUPYING TOO MANY SEATS.

No lady will retain possession of more than her rightful seat in a
crowded car. When others are looking for accommodations she should at
once and with all cheerfulness so dispose of her baggage that the seat
beside her may be occupied by anyone who desires it, no matter how
agreeable it may be to retain possession of it.

It shows a great lack of proper manners to see two ladies, or a lady
and gentleman turn over the seat in front of them and fill it with their
wraps and bundles, retaining it in spite of the entreating or
remonstrating looks of fellow-passengers. In such a case any person who
desires a seat is justified in reversing the back, removing the baggage
and taking possession of the unused seat.


RETAINING POSSESSION OF A SEAT.

A gentleman in traveling may take possession of a seat and then go to
purchase tickets or look after baggage or procure a lunch, leaving the
seat in charge of a companion, or depositing traveling-bag or overcoat
upon it to show that it is engaged. When a seat is thus occupied, the
right of possession must be respected, and no one should presume to take
a seat thus previously engaged, even though it may be wanted for a lady.
A gentleman cannot, however, in justice, vacate his seat to take another
in the smoking-car, and at the same time reserve his rights to the first
seat. He pays for but one seat, and by taking another he forfeits the
first.

It is not required of a gentleman in a railway car to relinquish his
seat in favor of a lady, though a gentleman of genuine breeding will do
so rather than allow the lady to stand or suffer inconvenience from poor
accommodations.

In the street cars the case is different. No woman should be allowed to
stand while there is a seat occupied by a man. The inconvenience to the
man will be temporary and trifling at the most, and he can well afford
to suffer it rather than to do an uncourteous act.


DISCRETION IN FORMING ACQUAINTANCES.

While an acquaintance formed in a railway car or on a steamboat,
continues only during the trip, discretion should be used in making
acquaintances. Ladies may, as has been stated, accept small courtesies
and favors from strangers, but must check at once any attempt at
familiarity. On the other hand, no man who pretends to be a gentleman
will attempt any familiarity. The practice of some young girls just
entering into womanhood, of flirting with any young man they may chance
to meet, either in a railway car or on a steamboat, indicates
low-breeding in the extreme. If, however, the journey is long, and
especially if it be on a steamboat, a certain sociability may be
allowed, and a married lady or a lady of middle age may use her
privileges to make the journey an enjoyable one, for fellow-passengers
should always be sociable to one another.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER XV.

RIDING AND DRIVING.


One of the most exhilarating and enjoyable amusements that can be
indulged in by either ladies or gentlemen is that of riding on
horseback, and it is a matter of regret that it is not participated in
to a greater extent than it is. The etiquette of riding, though meagre,
is exact and important.


LEARNING TO RIDE.

The first thing to do is to learn to ride, and no one should attempt to
appear in public until a few preliminary lessons in riding are taken.
Until a person has learned to appear at ease on horseback, he or she
should not appear in public. The advice given in the old rhyme should be
kept in mind, viz:

          Keep up your head and your heart,
            Your hands and your heels keep down;
          Press your knees close to your horse's sides,
            And your elbows close to your own.


THE GENTLEMAN'S DUTY AS AN ESCORT.

When a gentleman contemplates riding with a lady, his first duty is to
see that her horse is a proper one for her use, and one that she can
readily manage. He must see that her saddle and bridle are perfectly
secure, and trust nothing of this kind to the stable men, without
personal examination. He must be punctual at the appointed hour, and not
keep the lady waiting for him clad in her riding costume. He should see
the lady comfortably seated in her saddle before he mounts himself; take
his position on the lady's right in riding, open all gates and pay all
tolls on the road.

 [Illustration]


ASSISTING A LADY TO MOUNT.

The lady will place herself on the left side of the horse, standing as
close to it as possible, with her skirts gathered in her left hand, her
right hand upon the pommel, and her face toward the horse's head. The
gentleman should stand at the horse's shoulder, facing the lady, and
stooping, hold his hand so that she may place her foot in it. This she
does, when the foot is lifted as she springs, so as to gently aid her in
gaining the saddle. The gentleman must then put her foot in the stirrup,
smooth the skirt of her riding habit, and give her the reins and her
riding whip.


RIDING WITH LADIES.

In riding with one lady, a gentleman takes his position to the right of
her. When riding with two or more, his position is still to the right
unless one of them needs his assistance or requests his presence near
her. He must offer all the courtesies of the road, and yield the best
and shadiest side to the ladies. The lady must always decide upon the
pace at which to ride. It is ungenerous to urge her or incite her horse
to a faster gait than she feels competent to undertake.

If a gentleman, when riding alone, meets a lady who is walking and
wishes to enter into conversation with her, he must alight and remain on
foot while talking with her.


ASSISTING A LADY TO ALIGHT FROM HER HORSE.

After the ride, the gentleman must assist his companion to alight. She
must first free her knee from the pommel, and be certain that her habit
is entirely disengaged. He must then take her left hand in his right,
and offer his left hand as a step for her foot. He then lowers his hand
slowly and allows her to reach the ground gently without springing. A
lady should not attempt to spring from the saddle.


DRIVING.

The choicest seat in a double carriage is the one facing the horses, and
gentlemen should always yield this seat to the ladies. If only one
gentleman and one lady are riding in a two-seated carriage, the
gentleman must sit opposite the lady, unless she invites him to a seat
by her side. The place of honor is on the right hand of the seat facing
the horses. This is also the seat of the hostess, which she never
resigns. If she is not driving, it must be offered to the most
distinguished lady. A person should enter a carriage with the back to
the seat, so as to prevent turning round in the carriage. A gentleman
must be careful not to trample upon or crush a lady's dress. In driving,
one should always remember that the rule of the road in meeting and
passing another vehicle is to keep to the right.


ASSISTING LADIES TO ALIGHT.

A gentleman must first alight from a carriage, even if he has to pass
before a lady in doing so. He must then assist the ladies to alight. If
there is a servant with the carriage, the latter may hold open the door,
but the gentleman must by all means furnish the ladies the required
assistance. If a lady has occasion to leave the carriage before the
gentleman accompanying her, he must alight to assist her out, and if she
wishes to resume her seat, he must again alight to help her to do so.

In assisting a lady to enter a carriage, a gentleman will take care that
the skirt of her dress is not allowed to hang outside. A carriage robe
should be provided to protect her dress from the mud and dust of the
road. The gentleman should provide the lady with her parasol, fan and
shawl, and see that she is comfortable in every way, before he seats
himself.


TRUSTING THE DRIVER.

While driving with another who holds the reins, you must not interfere
with the driver, as anything of this kind implies a reproof, which is
very offensive. If you think his conduct wrong, or are in fear of danger
resulting, you may delicately suggest a change, apologizing therefor.
You should resign yourself to the driver's control, and be perfectly
calm and self-possessed during the course of a drive.


CHAPTER XVI.

Courtship and Marriage.


The correct behavior of young men toward young ladies, and of young
ladies toward young men, during that portion of their lives when they
are respectively paying attention to, and receiving attention from, one
another, is a matter which requires consideration in a work of this
nature.


A GENTLEMAN'S CONDUCT TOWARD LADIES.

Young people of either sex, who have arrived at mature age, and who are
not engaged, have the utmost freedom in their social intercourse in this
country, and are at liberty to associate and mingle freely in the same
circles with those of the opposite sex. Gentlemen are at liberty to
invite their lady friends to concerts, operas, balls, etc., to call upon
them at their homes, to ride and drive with them, and make themselves
agreeable to all young ladies to whom their company is acceptable. In
fact they are at liberty to accept invitations and give them _ad
libitum_. As soon, however, as a young gentleman neglects all others,
to devote himself to a single lady, he gives that lady reason to suppose
that he is particularly attracted to her, and may give her cause to
believe that she is to become engaged to him, without telling her so. A
gentleman who does not contemplate matrimony should not pay too
exclusive attention to any one lady.


A LADY'S CONDUCT TOWARD GENTLEMEN.

A young lady who is not engaged may receive calls and attentions from
such unmarried gentlemen as she desires, and may accept invitations to
ride, to concerts, theatres, etc. She should use due discretion,
however, as to whom she favors by the acceptance of such invitations. A
young lady should not allow special attention from anyone to whom she is
not specially attracted, because, first, she may do injury to the
gentleman in seeming to give his suit encouragement; and, secondly, she
may keep away from her those whom she likes better, but who will not
approach her under the mistaken idea that her feelings are already
interested. A young lady should not encourage the addresses of a
gentleman unless she feels that she can return his affections. It is the
prerogative of a man to propose, and of a woman to accept or refuse, and
a lady of tact and kind heart will exercise her prerogative before her
suitor is brought to the humiliation of an offer which must result in a
refusal.

No well-bred lady will too eagerly receive the attentions of a
gentleman, no matter how much she admires him; nor, on the other hand,
will she be so reserved as to altogether discourage him. A man may show
considerable attention to a lady without becoming a lover; and so a lady
may let it be seen that she is not disagreeable to him without
discouraging him. She will be able to judge soon from his actions and
deportment, as to his motive in paying her his attentions, and will
treat him accordingly. A man does not like to be refused when he makes a
proposal, and no man of tact will risk a refusal. Neither will a
well-bred lady encourage a man to make a proposal, which she must
refuse. She should endeavor, in discouraging him as a lover, to retain
his friendship. A young man of sensibilities, who can take a hint when
it is offered him, need not run the risk of a refusal.


PREMATURE DECLARATION.

It is very injudicious, not to say presumptuous, for a gentleman to make
a proposal to a young lady on too brief an acquaintance. A lady who
would accept a gentleman at first sight can hardly possess the
discretion needed to make a good wife.


THOROUGH ACQUAINTANCE AS A BASIS FOR MARRIAGE.

Perhaps there is such a thing as love at first sight, but love alone is
a very uncertain foundation upon which to base marriage. There should be
thorough acquaintanceship and a certain knowledge of harmony of tastes
and temperaments before matrimony is ventured upon.


PROPER MANNER OF COURTSHIP.

It is impossible to lay down any rule as to the proper mode of courtship
and proposal. In France it is the business of the parents to settle all
preliminaries. In England the young man asks the consent of the parents
to pay addresses to their daughter. In this country the matter is left
almost entirely to the young people.

It seems that circumstances must determine whether courtship may lead to
engagement. Thus, a man may begin seriously to court a girl, but may
discover before any promise binds them to each other, that they are
entirely unsuited to one another, when he may, with perfect propriety
and without serious injury to the lady, withdraw his attentions.

Certain authorities insist that the consent of parents must always be
obtained before the daughter is asked to give herself in marriage. While
there is nothing improper or wrong in such a course, still, in this
country, with our social customs, it is deemed best in most cases not to
be too strict in this regard. Each case has its own peculiar
circumstances which must govern it, and it seems at least pardonable if
the young man should prefer to know his fate directly from the lips of
the most interested party, before he submits himself to the cooler
judgment and the critical observation of the father and mother, who are
not by any means in love with him, and who may possibly regard him with
a somewhat jealous eye, as having already monopolized their daughter's
affections, and now desires to take her away from them altogether.


PARENTS SHOULD EXERCISE AUTHORITY OVER DAUGHTERS.

Parents should always be perfectly familiar with the character of their
daughter's associates, and they should exercise their authority so far
as not to permit her to form any improper acquaintances. In regulating
the social relations of their daughter, parents should bear in mind the
possibility of her falling in love with any one with whom she may come
in frequent contact. Therefore, if any gentleman of her acquaintance is
particularly ineligible as a husband, he should be excluded as far as
practicable from her society.


A WATCHFUL CARE REQUIRED BY PARENTS.

Parents, especially mothers, should also watch with a jealous care the
tendencies of their daughter's affections; and if they see them turning
toward unworthy or undesirable objects, influence of some sort should be
brought to bear to counteract this. Great delicacy and tact are required
to manage matters rightly. A more suitable person may, if available, be
brought forward, in the hope of attracting the young girl's attention.
The objectionable traits of the undesirable suitor should be made
apparent to her without the act seeming to be intentional; and if all
this fails, let change of scene and surroundings by travel or visiting
accomplish the desired result. The latter course will generally do it,
if matters have not been allowed to progress too far and the young girl
is not informed _why_ she is temporarily banished from home.


AN ACCEPTABLE SUITOR.

Parents should always be able to tell from observation and instinct just
how matters stand with their daughter; and if the suitor is an
acceptable one and everything satisfactory, then the most scrupulous
rules of etiquette will not prevent their letting the young couple
alone. If the lover chooses to propose directly to the lady and consult
her father afterward, consider that he has a perfect right to do so. If
her parents have sanctioned his visits and attentions by a silent
consent, he has a right to believe that his addresses will be favorably
received by them.


REQUIREMENTS FOR A HAPPY MARRIAGE.

Respect for each other is as necessary to a happy marriage as that the
husband and wife should have an affection for one another. Social
equality, intellectual sympathy, and sufficient means are very important
matters to be considered by those who contemplate matrimony.

It must be remembered that husband and wife, after marriage, have social
relations to sustain, and perhaps it will be discovered, before many
months of wedded life have passed, when there is a social inequality,
that one of the two have made a sacrifice for which no adequate
compensation has been or ever will be received. And so both lives become
soured and spoiled, because neither receives nor can receive the
sympathy which their efforts deserve, and because their cares are
multiplied from a want of congeniality. One or the other may find that
the noble qualities seen by the impulse of early love, were but the
creation of an infatuated fancy, existing only in the mind where it
originated.

Another condition of domestic happiness is intellectual sympathy. Man
requires a woman who can make his home a place of rest for him, and
woman requires a man of domestic tastes. While a woman who seeks to find
happiness in a married life will never consent to be wedded to an idler
or a pleasure-seeker, so a man of intelligence will wed none but a woman
of intelligence and good sense. Neither beauty, physical characteristics
nor other external qualifications will compensate for the absence of
intellectual thought and clear and quick comprehensions. An absurd idea
is held by some that intelligence and domestic virtues cannot go
together; that an intellectual woman will never be content to stay at
home to look after the interests of her household and children. A more
unreasonable idea has never been suggested, for as the intellect is
strengthened and cultured, it has a greater capacity of affection, of
domesticity and of self-sacrifice for others.

Mutual trust and confidence are other requisites for happiness in
married life. There can be no true love without trust. The
responsibility of a man's life is in a woman's keeping from the moment
he puts his heart into her hands. Without mutual trust there can be no
real happiness.

Another requisite for conjugal happiness is moral and religious
sympathy, that each may walk side by side in the same path of moral
purpose and social usefulness, with joint hope of immortality.


PROPOSALS OF MARRIAGE.

Rules in regard to proposals of marriage cannot be laid down, for they
are and should be as different as people. The best way is to apply to
the lady in person, and receive the answer from her own lips. If courage
should fail a man in this, he can resort to writing, by which he can
clearly and boldly express his feelings. A spoken declaration should be
bold, manly and earnest, and so plain in its meaning that there can be
no misunderstanding. As to the exact words to be used, there can be no
set formula; each proposer must be governed by his own ideas and sense
of propriety in the matter.


DO NOT PRESS AN UNWELCOME SUIT.

A gentleman should evince a sincere and unselfish affection for his
beloved, and he will show as well as feel that her happiness must be
considered before his own. Consequently he should not press an unwelcome
suit upon a young lady. If she has no affection for him, and does not
conceive it possible even to entertain any, it is cruel to urge her to
give her person without her love. The eager lover may believe, for the
time being, that such possession would satisfy him, but the day will
surely come when he will reproach his wife that she had no love for him,
and he will possibly make that an excuse for all manner of unkindness.


A LADY'S FIRST REFUSAL.

It is not always necessary to take a lady's first refusal as absolute.
Diffidence or uncertainty as to her own feelings may sometimes influence
a lady to reply in the negative, and after-consideration cause her to
regret that reply.

Though a gentleman may repeat his suit with propriety after having been
once repulsed, still it should not be repeated too often nor too long,
lest it should degenerate into importuning.

No lady worthy any gentleman's regard will say "no" twice to a suit
which she intends ultimately to receive with favor. A lady should be
allowed all the time she requires before making up her mind; and if the
gentleman grows impatient at the delay, he is always at liberty to
insist on an immediate answer and abide by the consequences of his
impatience.


A LADY'S POSITIVE REFUSAL.

A lady who really means "no" should be able to so say it as to make her
meaning unmistakable. For her own sake and that of her suitor, if she
really desires the suit ended her denial should be positive, yet kind
and dignified, and of a character to let no doubt remain of its being
final.


TRIFLING WITH A LADY.

A man should never make a declaration in a jesting manner. It is most
unfair to a lady. He has no right to trifle with her feelings for mere
sport, nor has he a right to hide his own meaning under the guise of a
jest.


A DOUBTFUL ANSWER.

Nothing can be more unfair or more unjustifiable than a doubtful answer
given under the plea of sparing the suitor's feelings. It raises false
hopes. It renders a man restless and unsettled. It may cause him to
express himself or to shape his conduct in such a manner as he would not
dream of doing were his suit utterly hopeless.


HOW TO TREAT A REFUSAL.

As a woman is not bound to accept the first offer that is made to her,
so no sensible man will think the worse of her, nor feel himself
personally injured by a refusal. That it will give him pain is most
probable. A scornful "no" or a simpering promise to "think about it" is
the reverse of generous.

In refusing, the lady ought to convey her full sense of the high honor
intended her by the gentleman, and to add, seriously but not
offensively, that it is not in accordance with her inclination, or that
circumstances compel her to give an unfavorable answer.


UNLADYLIKE CONDUCT TOWARD A SUITOR.

It is only the contemptible flirt that keeps an honorable man in
suspense for the purpose of glorifying herself by his attentions in the
eyes of friends. Nor would any but a frivolous or vicious girl boast of
the offer she had received and rejected. Such an offer is a privileged
communication. The secret of it should be held sacred. No true lady
will ever divulge to anyone, unless it may be to her mother, the fact of
such an offer. It is the severest breach of honor to do so. A lady who
has once been guilty of boasting of an offer should never have a second
opportunity for thus boasting.

No true-hearted woman can entertain any other feeling than that of
commiseration for the man over whose happiness she has been compelled to
throw a cloud, while the idea of triumphing in his distress, or abusing
his confidence, must be inexpressibly painful to her.


THE REJECTED SUITOR.

The duty of the rejected suitor is quite clear. Etiquette demands that
he shall accept the lady's decision as final and retire from the field.
He has no right to demand the reason of her refusal. If she assign it,
he is bound to respect her secret, if it is one, and to hold it
inviolable. To persist in urging his suit or to follow up the lady with
marked attentions would be in the worst possible taste. The proper
course is to withdraw as much as possible, from the circles in which she
moves, so that she may be spared reminiscences which cannot be otherwise
than painful.


PRESENTS AFTER ENGAGEMENT.

When a couple become engaged, the gentleman presents the lady with a
ring, which is worn on the ring-finger of the right hand. He may also
make her other small presents from time to time, until they are married,
but if she has any scruples about accepting them, he can send her
flowers, which are at all times acceptable.


CONDUCT OF THE FIANCEE.

The conduct of the _fiancee_ should be tender, assiduous and
unobtrusive. He will be kind and polite to the sisters of his betrothed
and friendly with her brothers. Yet he must not be in any way unduly
familiar or force himself into family confidences on the ground that he
is to be regarded as a member of the family. Let the advance come rather
from them to him, and let him show a due appreciation of any confidences
which they may be pleased to bestow upon him. The family of the young
man should make the first advances toward an acquaintance with his
future wife. They should call upon her or write to her, and they may
with perfect propriety invite her to visit them in order that they may
become acquainted.


THE POSITION OF AN ENGAGED WOMAN.

An engaged woman should eschew all flirtations, though it does not
follow that she is to cut herself off from all association with the
other sex because she has chosen her future husband. She may still have
friends and acquaintances, she may still receive visits and calls, but
she must try to conduct herself in such a manner as to give no offense.


POSITION OF AN ENGAGED MAN.

The same rules may be laid down in regard to the other party to the
contract, only that he pays visits instead of receiving them. Neither
should assume a masterful or jealous altitude toward the other. They are
neither of them to be shut up away from the rest of the world, but must
mingle in society after marriage nearly the same as before, and take the
same delight in friendship. The fact that they have confessed their love
for each other, ought to be deemed a sufficient guarantee of
faithfulness; for the rest let there be trust and confidence.


THE RELATIONS OF AN ENGAGED COUPLE.

A young man has no right to put a slight upon his future bride by
appearing in public with other ladies while she remains neglected at
home. He is in future her legitimate escort. He should attend no other
lady when she needs his services; she should accept no other escort when
he is at liberty to attend her. A lady should not be too demonstrative
of her affection during the days of her engagement. There is always the
chance of "a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip;" and over-demonstrations
of love are not pleasant to be remembered by a young lady, if the man to
whom they are given by any chance fails to become her husband. An
honorable man will never tempt his future bride to any such
demonstration. He will always maintain a respectful and decorous
demeanor toward her.

No young man who would shrink from being guilty of a great impropriety,
should ever prolong his visits beyond ten o'clock, unless it be the
common custom of the family to remain up and to entertain visitors to a
later hour, and the visit paid is a family one and not a _tete-a-tete_.
Two hours is quite long enough for a call; and the young man will give
evidence of his affection no less than his consideration, by making his
visits short, and, if need be, making them often, rather than by
prolonging to unreasonable hours.


LOVERS' DISPUTES.

Neither party should try to make the other jealous for the purpose of
testing his or her affection. Such a course is contemptible; and if the
affections of the other are permanently lost by it, the offending party
is only gaining his or her just deserts. Neither should there be
provocation to little quarrels for the foolish delight of
reconciliation. No lover will assume a domineering attitude over his
future wife. If he does so, she will do well to escape from his thrall
before she becomes his wife in reality. A domineering lover will be
certain to be more domineering as a husband.


BREAKING AN ENGAGEMENT.

Sometimes it is necessary to break off an engagement. Many circumstances
will justify this. Indeed anything which may occur or be discovered
which shall promise to render the marriage an unsuitable or unhappy one
is, and should be accepted as, justification for such rupture. Still,
breaking an engagement is always a serious and distressing thing, and
ought not to be contemplated without absolute and just reasons. It is
generally best to break an engagement by letter. By this means one can
express himself or herself more clearly, and give the true reason for
his or her course much better than in a personal interview. The letter
breaking the engagement should be accompanied by everything, in the way
of portraits, letters or gifts, that has been received during the
engagement. Such letters should be acknowledged in a dignified manner,
and no efforts should be made or measures be taken to change the
decision of the writer, unless it is manifest that he or she is greatly
mistaken in his or her premises. A similar return of letters, portraits
and gifts should be made.

Many men, in taking retrospective glances, remember how they were
devoted to women, the memory of whom calls up only a vague sort of
wonder how they ever could have fallen into the state of infatuation in
which they once were. The same may be said of many women. Heart-breaking
separations have taken place between young men and young women who have
learned that the sting of parting does not last forever. The heart,
lacerated by a hopeless or misplaced attachment, when severed from the
cause of its woe, gradually heals and prepares itself to receive fresh
wounds, for affection requires either a constant contemplation of, or
intercourse, with its object, to keep it alive.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER XVII.

Etiquette of Weddings.


The circumstances under which weddings take place are so varied, and the
religious forms observed in their solemnization so numerous, that to lay
down rules applicable to all cases would be a matter of great
difficulty, if not an impossibility. Consequently only those forms of
marriage attended with the fullest ceremonies, and all the attendant
ceremonials will here be given, and others may be modeled after them as
the occasion may seem to require. After the marriage invitations are
issued, the _fiancee_ does not appear in public. It is also _de rigueur_
at morning weddings, that she does not see the bridegroom on the
wedding-day, until they meet at the altar.


THE BRIDEMAIDS AND GROOMSMEN.

Only relatives and the most intimate friends are asked to be
bridemaids--the sisters of the bride and of the bridegroom, where it is
possible. The bridegroom chooses his best man and the groomsmen and
ushers from his circle of relatives and friends of his own age, and from
the relatives of his _fiancee_ of a suitable age. The dresses of the
bridemaids are not given unless their circumstances are such as to make
it necessary.


THE BRIDAL COSTUME.

The most approved bridal costume for young brides is of white silk, high
corsage, a long wide veil of white tulle, reaching to the feet, and a
wreath of maiden-blush roses with orange blossoms. The roses she can
continue to wear, but the orange blossoms are only suitable for the
ceremony.


COSTUMES OF THE BRIDEGROOM AND USHERS.

The bridegroom and ushers, at a morning wedding, wear full morning
dress, dark blue or black frock coats, or cut-aways, light neckties, and
light trousers. The bridegroom wears white gloves. The ushers wear
gloves of some delicate color.


PRESENTS OF THE BRIDE AND BRIDEGROOM.

Where the bride makes presents to the bridemaids on her wedding-day,
they generally consist of some articles of jewelry, not costly, and
given more as a memento of the occasion than for their own intrinsic
worth. The bridegroom sometimes gives the groomsmen a scarf pin of some
quaint device, or some other slight memento of the day, as a slight
acknowledgment of their services.


CEREMONIALS WHEN THERE ARE NO USHERS OR BRIDEMAIDS.

When there are no bridemaids or ushers the marriage ceremonials at the
church are as follows: The members of the bride's family proceed to the
church before the bride, who follows with her mother. The bridegroom
awaits them at the church and gives his arm to the bride's mother. They
walk up the aisle to the altar, the mother falling back to her position
on the left. The father, or relative representing him, conducts the
bride to the bridegroom, who stands at the altar with his face turned
toward her as she approaches, and the father falls back to the left. The
relatives follow, taking their places standing; those of the bride to
the left, those of the groom to the right. After kneeling at the altar
for a moment, the bride, standing on the left of the bridegroom, takes
the glove off from her left hand, while he takes the glove off from his
right hand. The service then begins. The father of the bride gives her
away by bowing when the question is asked, which is a much simpler form
than stepping forward and placing his daughter's hand in that of the
clergyman. Perfect self-control should be exhibited by all parties
during the ceremony.

The bride leaves the altar, taking the bridegroom's right arm, and they
pass down the aisle without looking to the right or left. It is
considered very bad form to recognize acquaintances by bows and smiles
while in the church.

The bride and bridegroom drive away in their own carriage, the rest
following in their carriages.


INVITATIONS TO THE CEREMONY ONLY.

When the circle of friends on both sides is very extensive, it has
become customary of late to send invitations to such as are not called
to the wedding breakfast, to attend the ceremony at church. This stands
in the place of issuing cards. No one must think of calling on the newly
married couple who has not received an invitation to the ceremony at
church, or cards after their establishment in their new home.


THE LATEST CEREMONIALS.

The latest New York form for conducting the marriage ceremony is
substantially as follows:

When the bridal party has arranged itself for entrance, the ushers, in
pairs march slowly up to the altar and turn to the right. Behind them
follows the groom alone. When he reaches the altar he turns, faces the
aisle, and watches intently for the coming of his bride. After a slight
interval the bridemaids follow, in pairs, and at the altar turn to the
left. After another brief interval, the bride, alone and entirely
veiled, with her eyes cast down, follows her companions. The groom comes
forward a few steps to meet her, takes her hand, and places her at the
altar. Both kneel for a moment's silent devotion. The parents of the
bride, having followed her, stand just behind her and partly to the
left. The services by the clergyman now proceed as usual.

While the bride and bridegroom are passing out of the church, the
bridemaids follow slowly, each upon the arm of an usher, and they
afterward hasten on as speedily as possible to welcome the bride at her
own door, and to arrange themselves about the bride and groom in the
reception room, half of the ladies upon her side and half upon his--the
first bridemaid retaining the place of honor.


THE USHERS' DUTIES.

The ushers at the door of the reception room offer themselves as escorts
to parties, who arrive slowly from the church, conducting them to the
bridal party, and there presenting them by name. This announcement
becomes necessary when two families and two sets of friends are brought
together for the first time. If ladies are present without gentlemen,
the ushers accompany them to the breakfast or refreshment room, or
provide them with attendants.

At the church the ushers are the first to arrive. They stand by the
inner entrance and offer their arms to escort the ladies, as they enter,
to their proper seats in the church. If a lady be accompanied by a
gentleman, the latter follows the usher and the lady to the seat shown
her. The ushers, knowing the two families, understand where to place the
nearer, and where the remoter relatives and friends of the bridal party,
the groom's friends being arranged upon the right of the entrance, and
the bride's upon the left. The distribution of guests places the father
(or guardian) of the bride at the proper place during the ceremony.


ANOTHER FORM OF CHURCH CEREMONIALS.

The ceremonials for the entry to the church by the bridal party may be
varied to suit the taste. Precedents for the style already described are
found among the highest social circles in New York and other large
cities, but there are brides who prefer the fashion of their
grandmothers, which is almost strictly an American fashion. In this
style, the bridemaids, each leaning upon the arm of a groomsman, first
pass up the aisle to the altar, the ladies going to their left, and the
gentlemen to their right. The groom follows with the bride's mother, or
some one to represent her, leaning on his arm, whom he seats in a front
pew at the left. The bride follows, clinging to the arm of her father
(or near relative), who leads her to the groom. The father waits at her
left and a step or two back of her, until asked to give her away, which
he does by taking her right hand and placing it in that of the
clergyman. After this he joins the mother of the bride in the front pew,
and becomes her escort while they pass out of the church.

In case there are no bridemaids, the ushers walk into church in pairs,
just in advance of the groom, and parting at the altar, half of them
stand at one side and half at the other. While the clergyman is
congratulating the bride, they pass out in pairs, a little in advance of
the wedded couple.


WEDDINGS AT HOME.

Weddings at home vary but little from those at church. The music, the
assembling of friends, the _entree_ of the bridal party to the position
selected, are the same. An altar of flowers, and a place of kneeling can
be easily arranged at home. The space behind the altar need be no wider
than is allowed for the clergyman to stand. The altar is generally only
a fender or railing entirely wound and concealed by greenery or
blossoms. Other floral accessories, such as the marriage-bell,
horseshoe, or white dove, etc., can be arranged with ease by a skillful
florist, if desired.

When the marriage ceremony is concluded, the party turn in their places
and face their friends, who proceed to congratulate them. If space be
required, the kneeling stool and floral altar may be removed, a little
later, without observation.


THE EVENING WEDDING.

If the wedding occur in the evening, the only difference in the
ceremonials from those in the morning is that the ushers or groomsmen
wear full evening dress, and the bridal pair retire quietly to dress for
their journey before the dancing party disperses, and thus leave
unobserved. At the morning wedding only bridemaids, ushers and relatives
remain to witness the departure of the pair.


"AT HOME" RECEPTIONS.

When the newly married couple commence life in a home of their own, it
is customary to issue "at home" cards for a few evenings, at an early
date after the wedding, for informal receptions. Only such persons are
invited as the young couple choose to keep as friends, or perhaps only
those whom they can afford to retain. This is a suitable opportunity to
carefully re-arrange one's social list, and their list of old
acquaintances may be sifted at the time of the beginning of
housekeeping. This custom of arranging a fresh list is admitted as a
social necessity, and nobody is offended.


CALLS.

All guests and friends who receive "at home" invitations, or who are
invited to the church, are required by etiquette to call upon the family
of the bride, or to leave their cards, within ten days after the
wedding.


THE WEDDING RING.

All churches at present use the ring, and vary the sentiment of its
adoption to suit the customs and ideas of their own rites. A jeweled
ring has been for many years the sign and symbol of betrothal, but at
present a plain gold circlet, with the date of the engagement inscribed
within, is generally preferred. The ring is removed by the groom at the
altar, passed to the clergyman and used in the ceremony. A jeweled ring
is placed upon her hand by the groom on the way home from the church, or
as soon after the service as is convenient. It stands guard over its
precious fellow, and is a confirmation of the first promise.


THE MARRIAGE CEREMONIALS OF A WIDOW.

The marriage ceremonials of a widow differ from that of a young lady in
not wearing the veil and orange blossoms. She may be costumed in white
and have her maids at the altar if she pleases. This liberty, however,
has only been given her within a few years. On her wedding cards of
invitation, her maiden name is used as a part of her proper name; which
is done in respect to her parents. Having dropped the initials of her
dead husband's name when she laid aside her mourning, she uses her
Christian name. If she has sons or unmarried daughters at the time she
becomes again a wife, she may prefix the last name of her children to
her new one on all ceremonious occasions in which they are interested in
common with herself. This respect is really due them, and etiquette
permits it, although our social usages do not command its adoption. The
formalities which follow the marriage of a widow can seldom be regulated
in the same manner as those of a younger bride. No fixed forms can be
arranged for entertainments, which must be controlled by circumstances.


INVITATIONS.

Wedding invitations should be handsomely engraved in script. Neither Old
English nor German text are admissible in invitations. The following is
given as the latest form for invitations:

 [Illustration:
              Mr. & Mrs. Theodore Grosser
          _request your presence at the marriage
                   of their daughter_,
                 =Miss Felicia Grosser=
                          _to_
                =Mr. Julius C. Forsyth=,
            _on Wednesday, September 5th, at_
                     _12 o'clock._
                 _St. Luke's Church,_
                     _Cass Avenue._]

This invitation requires no answer. Friends living in other towns and
cities receiving it, inclose their cards, and send by mail. Residents
call on the family within the prescribed time, or as soon after as
possible.

The invitation to the wedding breakfast is enclosed in the same
envelope, generally conveyed on a square card, the same size as the
sheet of note paper which bears the invitation for the ceremony after it
has been once folded across the middle. The following is one of the
adopted forms:

 [Illustration:
                 _At Home,_
          _Wednesday, September 5th,_
           _from 12 until 3 o'clock._
              _20 Main Avenue._]

The separate cards of the bride and groom are no longer necessary.

The card of admission to the church is narrower, and is plainly engraved
in large script, as follows:

 [Illustration:
            _St. Luke's Church,_
          _Ceremony at 12 o'clock._]

Generally only half an hour intervenes between the ceremony and the
reception.


DUTIES OF THOSE INVITED.

People who receive "At Home" wedding invitations, are expected to
acknowledge them as soon as received, and never fail to accept, unless
for some very good reason. Guests invited to the house, or to a marriage
feast following the ceremony, should not feel at liberty to decline from
any whim or caprice.


REQUIREMENTS OF THE BRIDEMAIDS AND USHERS.

Bridesmaids and ushers should allow nothing but illness or some
unavoidable accident to prevent them from officiating, thus showing
their appreciation of the friendship which has caused their selection to
this honored position. If by reason of sudden affliction, some one of
the bridemaids or ushers is prevented from attending, a substitute
should, if possible, be provided immediately. The reasons for this,
however, should be well understood, that no opportunity may be given for
uncharitable comments.


BRIDAL PRESENTS.

When bridal presents are given, they are sent to the bride previous to
the day of the marriage ceremony. As the universal bridal present has
fallen into disuse, this custom is not now considered obligatory, and if
immediate friends and relatives desire to make presents, it should be
spontaneous, and in no sense considered obligatory. These presents are
not put on exhibition as formerly, but are acknowledged by the bride in
a private note to the donor. It is not now considered in good form to
talk about these contributions.


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CEREMONIES.

In weddings at churches a master of ceremonies is often provided, who is
expected to be at the church as soon as the doors are opened. He
arranges beforehand for the spreading of a carpet from the church door
to the pavement, and if the weather be inclement, he sees that an
awning is also spread. He also sees that a white ribbon is stretched
across the main aisle of the church, far enough back from the altar to
afford sufficient room for all invited guests to occupy the front pews
of the main aisle. Sometimes an arch of flowers extends over the aisle,
so as to divide those who come in wedding garments, from those who do
not. The organist should be early at his post, and is expected to play
during the arrival of guests. The order of the religious part of the
marriage ceremony is fixed by the church in which it occurs.


THE WEDDING FEES.

There is no prescribed fee for performing the marriage ceremony. It is
regulated according to the means and liberality of the bridegroom, but
no less amount than five dollars should be given under any
circumstances.


THE CONGRATULATIONS.

At wedding receptions, friends who congratulate the newly married couple
should address the bride first, if they have any previous acquaintance
with her, then the bridegroom, then the bridemaids, and after that the
parents and family of the bride and groom. They should give their good
wishes to the bride and congratulate the bridegroom. If they are
acquainted with the bridegroom and not with the bride, let them address
him first and he will introduce them to his bride.


THE BRIDAL TOUR.

The honeymoon of repose, exempt from all claims of society, is now
prescribed by the dictates of common sense and fashion, and the same
arbiters unite in condemning the harrassing bridal tour. It is no longer
_de rigueur_ to maintain any secrecy as to their plans for traveling,
when a newly married couple depart upon a tour.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER XVIII.

Home Life and Etiquette.


Home is the woman's kingdom, and there she reigns supreme. To embellish
that home, to make happy the lives of her husband and the dear ones
committed to her trust, is the honored task which it is the wife's
province to perform. All praise be to her who so rules and governs in
that kingdom, that those reared beneath her roof "shall rise up and call
her blessed."


A HOME.

After marriage one of the first requirements for happiness is a home.
This can seldom be found in a boarding house or at a hotel, and not
always beneath the parental roof of either husband or wife. It will
oftenest be found in a house or even a cottage apart from the immediate
association of relatives or friends, acquaintances or strangers, and
here husband and wife may begin in reality, that new life of which they
have had fond dreams; and upon their own actions must depend their
future welfare.


HOME COMPANIONSHIP.

 [Illustration]

Husband and wife should remember, when starting out upon their newly
wedded life, that they are to be life companions, that the affection
they have possessed and expressed as lovers must ripen into a life-long
devotion to one another's welfare and happiness, that the closest
friendship must be begotten from their early love, and that each must
live and work for the other. They must seek to be congenial companions
to each other, so that every hour they pass together will be mutually
enjoyable. They should aim to have the same tastes so that what one
enjoys will be alike enjoyable to the other, and what is distasteful to
one shall be no less so to the other. Each should yield in matters where
it is right to yield, and be firm only where duty is concerned. With a
firm trust in one another they should ever abide, that each may say to
the world, "I possess one on whose character and heart I can lean as
upon a rock."


CONDUCT OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

Let neither ever deceive the other, or do anything to shake the other's
confidence, for once deceived, the heart can never wholly trust again.
Fault-finding should only be done by gentle and mild criticism, and then
with loving words and pleasant looks. Make allowances for one another's
weaknesses, and at the same time endeavor to mutually repress them. For
the sake of mutual improvement the husband and wife should receive and
give corrections to one another in a spirit of kindness, and in doing so
they will prepare themselves for the work God gives the parents of
training lives for usefulness here and hereafter. Their motto should be
"faithful unto death in all things," and they must exercise forbearance
with each other's peculiarities.

Let both preserve a strict guard over their tongues, that neither may
utter anything rude, contemptuous or severe, and guard their tempers,
that neither may ever grow passionate or become sullen or morose in one
another's presence. They should not expect too much from each other; if
either offends, it is the part of the other to forgive, remembering that
no one is free from faults, and that we are all constantly erring.

If, perchance, after they have entered upon the stern realities of life,
they find, that they have made a mistake, that they are not well mated,
then they must accept the inevitable and endure to the end, "for better
or for worse;" for only in this way can they find consolation for
having found out, when too late, that they were unfitted for a life-long
companionship. A journalist has said: "No lessons learned by experience,
however sharply taught and sadly earned, can enlighten the numbed senses
which love has sent to sleep by its magic fascination; and things as
plain as the sun in heaven to others are dark as night, unfathomable as
the sea, to those who let themselves love before they prove."


DUTIES OF THE WIFE TO HER HUSBAND.

The wife should remember that upon her, to the greatest extent, devolves
the duty of making home happy. She should do nothing to make her husband
feel uncomfortable, either mentally or physically, but on the other hand
she should strive to the utmost of her ability to do whatever is best
calculated to please him, continually showing him that her love,
plighted upon the altar, remains steadfast, and that no vicissitudes of
fortune can change or diminish it.

She should never indulge in fits of temper, hysterics, or other habits
of ill-breeding, which, though easy to conquer at first, grow and
strengthen with indulgence, if she would retain her husband as her lover
and her dearest and nearest friend. She should be equally as neat and
tidy respecting her dress and personal appearance at home as when she
appears in society, and her manners towards her husband should be as
kind and pleasing when alone with him as when in company. She should
bear in mind that to retain the good opinion of her husband is worth
far more than to gain the good opinion of hundreds of the devotees of
society, and that as she possesses the love and confidence of her
husband, so will she receive the respect and esteem of all his friends.

She should be careful not to confide to another any small
misunderstandings or petty quarrels between herself and husband, should
any occur. This is the surest method of widening any breach of harmony
that may occur between husband and wife, for the more such
misunderstandings are talked about, and the more advice she receives
from her confidants, there is less probability that harmonious relations
will be speedily resumed.


THE WIFE A HELPMATE.

A wife should act openly and honorably in regard to money matters,
keeping an exact account of her expenditures, and carefully guarding
against any extravagances; and while her husband is industriously at
work, she should seek to encourage him, by her own frugality, to be
economical, thrifty, enterprising and prosperous in his business, that
he may be better enabled, as years go by and family cares press more
heavily on each, to afford all the comforts and perhaps some of the
luxuries of a happy home. No condition is hopeless when the wife
possesses firmness, decision and economy, and no outward prosperity can
counteract indolence, folly and extravagance at home. She should consult
the disposition and tastes of her husband, and endeavor to lead him to
high and noble thoughts, lofty aims, and temporal comfort; be ever
ready to welcome him home, and in his companionship draw his thoughts
from business and lead him to the enjoyment of home comforts and
happiness. The influence of a good wife over her husband may be very
great, if she exerts it in the right direction. She should, above all
things, study to learn the disposition of her husband, and if,
perchance, she finds herself united to a man of quick and violent
temper, the utmost discretion, as well as perfect equanimity on her own
part is required, for she should have such perfect control over herself
as to calm his perturbed spirits.


A HUSBAND'S DUTIES.

It must not be supposed that it devolves upon the wife alone to make
married life and home happy. She must be seconded in her noble efforts
by him who took her from her own parental fireside and kind friends, to
be his companion through life's pilgrimage. He has placed her in a new
home, provided with such comforts as his means permit, and the whole
current of both their lives have been changed. His constant duty to his
wife is to be ever kind and attentive, to love her as he loves himself,
even sacrificing his own personal comfort for her happiness. From his
affection for her, there should grow out a friendship and fellowship,
such as is possessed for no other person. His evenings and spare moments
should be devoted to her, and these should be used for their
intellectual, moral and social advancement.

The cares and anxieties of business should not exclude the attentions
due to wife and family, while he should carefully keep her informed of
the condition of his business affairs. Many a wife is capable of giving
her husband important advice about various details of his business, and
if she knows the condition of his pecuniary affairs, she will be able to
govern her expenditures accordingly.

It is the husband's duty to join with his wife in all her endeavors to
instruct her children, to defer all matters pertaining to their
discipline to her, aiding her in this respect as she requires it. In
household matters the wife rules predominant, and he should never
interfere with her authority and government in this sphere. It is his
duty and should be his pleasure to accompany her to church, to social
gatherings, to lectures and such places of entertainment as they both
mutually enjoy and appreciate. In fact he ought not to attend a social
gathering unless accompanied by his wife, nor go to an evening
entertainment without her. If it is not a fit place for his wife to
attend, neither is it fit for him.

While he should give his wife his perfect confidence in her
faithfulness, trusting implicitly to her honor at all times and in all
places, he should, on his part, remain faithful and constant to her, and
give her no cause of complaint. He should pass by unnoticed any
disagreeable peculiarities and mistakes, taking care at the proper time,
and without giving offense, to remind her of them, with the idea of
having her correct them. He should never seek to break her of any
disagreeable habits or peculiarities she may possess, by ridiculing
them. He should encourage her in all her schemes for promoting the
welfare of her household, or in laudable endeavors to promote the
happiness of others, by engaging in such works of benevolence and
charity as the duties of her home will allow her to perform.

The husband, in fact, should act toward his wife as becomes a perfect
gentleman, regarding her as the "best lady in the land," to whom, above
all other earthly beings, he owes paramount allegiance. If he so
endeavors to act, his good sense and judgment will dictate to him the
many little courtesies which are due her, and which every good wife
cannot fail to appreciate. The observance of the rules of politeness are
nowhere more desirable than in the domestic circle, between husband and
wife, parents and children.

 [Illustration]


CHAPTER XIX.

Home Training.


Our earliest and best recollections are associated with home. There the
first lessons of infancy are learned. The mother's heart is the child's
first school-room. The parents' examples are first imitated by the
child, whose earliest impressions are gained from them. In no way are
evil habits more effectually propagated than by example, and therefore
parents should be what they wish their children to be.


THE MOTHER'S INFLUENCE.

To the mother belongs the privilege of planting in the hearts of her
children those seeds of love, which, nurtured and fostered, will bear
the fruit of earnest and useful lives. It is she who must fit them to
meet the duties and emergencies of life, and in this work of training
she keeps her heart fresh and young, and thereby insures the growth of
those powers with which nature has endowed her.

As the faculties of man, woman or child are brought into active
exercise, so do they become strengthened, and the mother, in doing her
work in the training of her children, grows in wisdom, in knowledge and
in power, thus enabling her the better to perform her duties.


PARENTS SHOULD SET GOOD EXAMPLES.

As children first acquire knowledge and habits from the examples of
their parents, the latter should be circumspect in all their actions,
manners and modes of speech. If you wish your children's faces illumined
with good humor, contentment and satisfaction, so that they will be
cheerful, joyous and happy, day by day, then must your own countenance
appear illumined by the sunshine of love. Kind words, kind deeds and
loving looks are true works of charity, and they are needed in our home
circle.

          Never a tear bedims the eye,
            That time and patience can not dry;
          Never a lip is curved with pain,
            That can not be kissed into smiles again.

Your children will form habits of evil speaking if they hear you deal
lightly with the reputation of another--if they hear you slander or
revile your neighbor. If you wish your child to show charity toward the
erring, you must set the example by the habitual exercise of that virtue
yourself. Without this your teaching will be of but little avail. If you
take pleasure in dwelling upon the faults of others, if you refuse to
cover over their infirmities with the mantle of charity, your example
will nullify your teaching, and your admonitions will be lost.


COURTESIES IN THE HOME CIRCLE.

Mothers should early train their children to regard all the courtesies
of life as scrupulously toward each other as to mere acquaintances and
strangers. This is the only way in which you can secure to them the
daily enjoyment of a happy home. When the external forms of courtesy are
disregarded in the family circle, we are sure to find contention and
bickering perpetually recurring. Rudeness is a constant source of
bickering. Each will have his own way of being rude, and each will be
angry at some portion of the ill-breeding of all the rest, thus
provoking accusations and retorts. Where the rule of life is to do good
and to make others happy, there will be found the art of securing a
happy home. It is said that there is something higher in politeness than
Christian moralists have recognized. In its best forms, none but the
truly religious man can show it, for it is the sacrifice of self in the
habitual matters of life--always the best test of our principles--together
with a respect for man as our brother, under the same great destiny.


EARLY MORAL TRAINING.

The true test of the success of any education is its efficiency in
giving full use of the moral and intellectual faculties wherewith to
meet the duties and the struggles of life, and not by the variety of
knowledge acquired. The development of the powers of the mind and its
cultivation are the work of a teacher; moral training is the work of
the mother, and commences long before one word of precept can be
understood. Children should be early taught to regard the rights of
others, that they may early learn the rights which property confers and
not entertain confused ideas upon this subject.


FORMATION OF HABITS.

Virtue is the child of good habits, and the formation of habits may be
said to almost constitute the whole work of education. The mother can
create habits which shall mold character and enable the mind to maintain
that habitual sense of duty which gives command over the passions, and
power to fight temptation, and which makes obedience to principle
comparatively easy, under most circumstances. The social and domestic
life are marred by habits which have grown into a second nature. It is
not in an occasional act of civility that the charm of either home or
society consists, but in continued practice of courtesy and respect for
the rights and feelings of those around us. Whatever may be the precepts
for a home, the practices of the fireside will give form to the habits.
Parents who indulge in gossip, scandal, slander and tale-telling, will
rear children possessing the same tastes and deteriorating habits. A
parent's example outlines the child's character. It sinks down deep into
his heart and influences his whole life for good or for evil. A parent
should carefully avoid speaking evil of others, and should never exhibit
faults requiring the mantle of charity to cover. A parent's example
should be such as to excite an abhorrence of evil speaking, of tattling
and of uncharitable construction of the motives of others. Let the
mother begin the proper training of her children in early life and she
will be able to so mold their characters that not only will they acquire
the habit of bridling the tongue, but they will learn to avoid the
presence of the slanderer as they do a deadly viper.


POLITENESS AT HOME.

Genuine politeness is a great fosterer of domestic love, and those who
are habitually polished at home are those who exhibit good manners when
abroad. When parents receive any little attention from their children,
they should thank them for it. They should ask a favor only in a
courteous way; never reply to questions in monosyllables, or indulge in
the rudeness of paying no attention to a question, for such an example
will be surely followed by the children. Parents sometimes thoughtlessly
allow their children to form habits of disrespect in the home circle,
which crop out in the bad manners that are found in society.


HOW TO REPROVE.

Parents should never check expressions of tenderness in their children,
nor humiliate them before others. This will not only cause suffering to
little sensitive hearts, but will tend to harden them. Reproof, if
needed, should be administered to each child singly and alone.


CHEERFULNESS AT THE TABLE.

Children should not be prohibited from laughing and talking at the
table. Joyousness promotes the circulation of the blood, enlivens and
invigorates it, and sends it to all parts of the system, carrying with
it animation, vigor and life. Controversy should not be permitted at the
table, nor should any subjects which call forth political or religious
difference. Every topic introduced should be calculated to instruct,
interest or amuse. Business matters, past disappointments and mishaps
should not be alluded to, nor should bad news be spoken of at the table,
nor for half an hour before. All conversation should be of joyous and
gladsome character, such as will bring out pleasant remarks and
agreeable associations. Reproof should never be administered at the
table, either to a child or to a servant; no fault found with anything,
and no unkind word should be spoken. If remarks are to be made of absent
ones, they should be of a kind and charitable nature. Thus will the
family table be the center of pleasant memories in future years, when
the family shall have been scattered far and near, and some, perhaps,
have been laid in their final resting-place.


TRAIN CHILDREN FOR SOME OCCUPATION.

Chancellor Kent says: "Without some preparation made in youth for the
sequel of life, children of all conditions would probably become idle
and vicious when they grow up, from want of good instruction and habits,
and the means of subsistence, or from want of rational and useful
occupations. A parent who sends his son into the world without educating
him in some art, science, profession or business, does great injury to
mankind, as well as to his son and his own family, for he defrauds the
community of a useful citizen, and bequeaths to it a nuisance. That
parent who trains his child for some special occupation, who inspires
him with a feeling of genuine self-respect, has contributed a useful
citizen to society."


BAD TEMPER.

Dread an insubordinate temper, and deal with it as one of the greatest
evils. Let the child feel by your manner that he is not a safe companion
for the rest of the family when he is in anger. Allow no one to speak to
him at such times, not even to answer a question. Take from him books,
and whatever he may have, and place him where he shall feel that the
indulgence of a bad temper shall deprive him of all enjoyment, and he
will soon learn to control himself.


SELFISHNESS.

Selfishness that binds the miser in his chains, that chills the heart,
must never be allowed a place in the family circle. Teach the child to
share his gifts and pleasures with others, to be obliging, kind and
benevolent, and the influence of such instruction may come back into
your own bosom, to bless your latest hours.


HOME MAXIMS FOR TRAINING CHILDREN.

Remember that children are men and women in miniature, and though they
should be allowed to act as children, still our dealings with them
should be manly and not morose. Remember also that every word, tone and
gesture, nay, even your dress, makes an impression.

Never correct a child on suspicion, or without understanding the whole
matter, nor trifle with a child's feelings when under discipline.

Be always mild and cheerful in their presence, communicative, but never
extravagant, trifling or vulgar in language or gesture. Never trifle
with a child nor speak beseechingly when it is doing wrong.

Always follow commands with a close and careful watch, until the thing
is done, allowing no evasion and no modification, unless the child ask
for it, and it be expressly granted.

Never reprove children severely in company, nor hold them up to
ridicule, nor make light of their failings.

Never speak in an impatient, pitiful manner, if you have occasion to
find fault.

Never say to a child, "I don't believe what you say," nor even imply
your doubts. If you have such feelings, keep them to yourself and wait;
the truth will eventually be made plain.

Never disappoint the confidence a child places in you, whether it be a
thing placed in your care or a promise.

Always give prompt attention to a child when he speaks, so as to
prevent repeated calls, and that he may learn to give prompt attention
when you call him.

Never try to impress a child with religious truth when in anger, or talk
to him of God, as it will not have the desired effect. Do it under more
favorable circumstances.

At the table a child should be taught to sit up and behave in a becoming
manner, not to tease when denied, nor to leave his chair without asking.
A parent's wish at such time should be a law from which no appeal should
be made.

Even in sickness gentle restraint is better for a child than indulgence.

There should never be two sets of manners, the one for home and the
other for company, but a gentle behavior should be always required.

 [Illustration]

 [Illustration:     MUSIC.
          "A protection against vice,
           An incentive to virtue."]


CHAPTER XX.

Home Culture.


The work of home culture should be made a matter of great importance to
every one, for upon it depends the happiness of earthly homes, as well
as our fitness for the enjoyment of the eternal home in heaven. The
sufferings endured here, friend for friend, parents for children,
unrequited sacrifices, cares and tears, all tend to discipline us, and
prepare us for the recompense which eternity brings.


CULTIVATE MORAL COURAGE.

Moral courage will be cultivated in your children as they observe that
you say and do whatever you conscientiously believe to be right and
true, without being influenced by the views of others; thus showing them
that you fear nothing so much as failing to do your duty. Perhaps this
may be difficult to do, but every mother can at least show her
appreciation of moral courage when she sees it exhibited by others, and
in this way incite its growth in the souls of her children. Moral
courage is a rare endowment, and those who possess it are able to act
with perfect independence of the opinions of others, and govern
themselves only by the laws of propriety, uprightness and charity.


THE PERNICIOUS INFLUENCE OF INDOLENCE.

If you would preserve your children from the pernicious influence of
indolence and all its corrupting tendencies, you must be earnest in
purpose, active, energetic and fervent in spirit. Earnestness sharpens
the faculties; indolence corrodes and dulls them. By the former we rise
higher and higher, by the latter we sink lower and lower. Indolence
begets discontent, envy and jealousy, while labor elevates the mind and
character. Cultivate in your children habits of thought which will keep
their minds occupied upon something that will be of use or advantage,
and prevent them from acquiring habits of idleness, if you would secure
their future well-being.

It has been said that he who performs no useful act in society, who
makes no human being happier, is leading a life of utter selfishness--a
life of sin--for a life of selfishness is a life of sin. There is
nowhere room for idleness. Work is both a duty and a necessity of our
nature, and a befitting reward will ever follow it. To foster and
encourage labor in some useful form, is a duty which parents should urge
upon their children, if they should seek their best good.


SELF-RESPECT.

It is the mother's duty to see that her children protect themselves from
the many pit-falls which surround them, such as malice, envy, conceit,
avariciousness, and other evils, by being clad in the armor of
self-respect; and then they will be able to encounter temptation and
corruption, unstained and unpolluted. This feeling of self-respect is
something stronger than self-reliance, higher than pride. It is an
energy of the soul which masters the whole being for its good, watching
with a never-ceasing vigilance. It is the sense of duty and the sense of
honor combined. It is an armor, which, though powerless to shield from
sorrows that purify and invigorate, yet will avert all hostile
influences that assail, from whatever source they come. The mother
having once made her children conscious that always and everywhere they
carry with them such an angel to shield, warn and rescue them, may let
them go out into the world, and fear nothing from the wiles and
temptations which may beset them.


RESULTS OF GOOD-BREEDING IN THE HOME CIRCLE.

The laws of good-breeding in no place bear more gratifying results than
in the home circle. Here, tempered with love, and nurtured by all kindly
impulses, they bear the choicest fruit. A true lady will show as much
courtesy, and observe the duties of politeness as unfailingly, toward
every member of her family as toward her most distinguished guest. A
true gentleman will feel bound to exercise courtesy and kindness in his
intercourse with those who depend upon him for protection and example.
Children influenced by such examples at home, will never fail to show to
their elders the respect due them, to their young companions the same
consideration for their feelings which they expect to meet with in
return, nor to servants that patience which even the best too often
require. In such a home peace and good will are the household gods.


FAULT-FINDING AND GRUMBLING.

The oil of civility is required to make the wheels of domestic life run
smoothly. The habit of fault-finding and grumbling indulged in by some,
is an exceedingly vexatious one, and will, in time, ruffle the calmest
spirit and the sweetest temper. It is the little annoyances,
perplexities and misfortunes which often render life a burden; the
little omission of minor duties and the committing of little faults that
perpetually scourge us and keep the heart sore. Constant fault-finding,
persistent misrepresentations of motives, suspicions of evil where no
evil was intended, will complete the work in all but the finest and most
heroic natures. They alone can stand the fiery test, coming out purer
and stronger for the ordeal. Children who habitually obey the
commandment, "Be kind to one another," will find in mature life, how
strong the bonds of affection may be that bind the members of the
household together.


FAMILY JARS NOT TO BE MADE PUBLIC.

Whatever may be the family disagreements, they should never be made
known outside of the home circle, if it can be avoided. Those who expose
the faults of the members of their family are severely judged by the
world, and no provocation can be a good excuse for it. It is exceedingly
vulgar, not to say unchristianlike, for the members of the same family
to be at enmity with one another.


YIELDING TO ONE ANOTHER.

One of the greatest disciplines of human life, is that which teaches us
to yield our wills to those who have a claim upon us to do so, even in
trifling, every-day affairs; the wife to the husband, children to
parents, to teachers and to one another. In cases where principle is
concerned, it is, of course, necessary to be firm, which requires an
exercise of moral courage.


CONFLICTING INTERESTS.

Conflicting interests are a fruitful source of family difficulties. The
command of Christ to the two brothers who came to Him with their
disputes, "Beware of covetousness," is as applicable among members of
the same family now, as it was when those words were spoken. It is
better that you have few or no business transactions with any one who is
near and dear to you, and connected by family ties. In business
relations men are apt to be very exact, because of their habits of
business, and this exactness is too often construed by near friends and
relatives as actuated by purely selfish motives. Upon this rock many a
bark of family love has been wrecked.


RELIGIOUS EDUCATION.

It is well to remember that every blessing of our lives, every joy of
our hearts and every ray of hope shed upon our pathway, have had their
origin in religion, and may be traced in all their hallowed, healthful
influences to the Bible. With the dawn of childhood, then, in the
earliest days of intelligence, should the mind be impressed and stored
with religious truth, and nothing should be allowed to exclude or efface
it. It should be taught so early that the mind will never remember when
it began to learn; it will then have the character of innate, inbred
principles, incorporated with their very being.


OBEDIENCE.

If you would not have all your instructions and counsels ineffectual,
teach your children to obey. Government in a family is the great
safeguard of religion and morals, the support of order and the source of
prosperity. Nothing has a greater tendency to bring a curse upon a
family than the insubordination and disobedience of children, and there
is no more painful and disgusting sight than an ungoverned child.


INFLUENCE OF EXAMPLE.

Never forget that the first book children read is their parents'
example--their daily deportment. If this is forgotten you may find, in
the loss of your domestic peace, that while your children well know the
right path, they follow the wrong.

Childhood is like a mirror, catching and reflecting images all around
it. Remember that an impious, profane or vulgar thought may operate upon
the heart of a young child like a careless spray of water upon polished
steel, staining it with rust that no efforts can thoroughly efface.

Improve the first ten years of life as the golden opportunity, which may
never return. It is the seed time, and your harvest depends upon the
seed then sown.


THE INFLUENCE OF BOOKS.

