  Did you ever look
  In Mr. Tooke,
  For Homer's gods and goddesses?
  The males in the air,
  So big and so bare,
  And the girls without their bodices.

  There was Jupiter Zeus,
  Who play'd the deuce,
  A rampant blade and a tough one;
  But Denis bold,
  Stole his coat of gold,
  And rigg'd him out in a stuff one,

  Juno, when old,
  Was a bit of a scold,
  And rul'd Jove _jure divino_;
  When he went gallivaunting,
  His steps she kept haunting,[4]
  And she play'd, too, the devil with Ino.

  Minerva bright
  Was a blue-stocking wight,
  Who lodg'd among the Attics;
  And, like Lady V.
  From the men did flee,
  To study the mathematics.

  Great Mars, we're told,
  Was a grenadier bold,
  Who Vulcan sorely cuckold;
  When to Rome he went,
  He his children sent
  To a she-wolf to be suckled.

  _Midas_.

  Sol, the rat-catcher,[5]
  Was a great body-snatcher,
  And with his bow and arrows
  He _Burked_, through the trees,
  Master Niobes,
  As though they had been cock sparrows.

  Diana, his sister,
  When nobody kiss'd her,
  Was a saint, (at least a semi one,)
  Yet the vixen Scandal
  Made a terrible handle
  Of her friendship for Eudymion.

  Full many a feat
  Did Hercules neat,
  The least our credit draws on;
  Jesting Momus, so sly,
  Said, "'Tis all my eye,"
  And he call'd him Baron Munchausen.

  Fair Bacchus's face
  Many signs did grace,
  (They were not painted by Zeuxis:)
  Of his brewing trade
  He a mystery made,[6]
  Like our Calverts and our Meuxes.

  There was Mistress Venus,
  (I say it between us,)
  For virtue cared not a farden:
  There never was seen
  Such a drabbish quean
  In the parish of Covent Garden.

  Hermes cunning
  Poor Argus funning,
  He made him drink like a buffer;
  To his great surprise
  Sew'd up all his eyes,
  And stole away his heifer.

  A bar-maid's place
  Was Hebe's grace,
  Till Jupiter did trick her;
  He turn'd her away,
  And made Ganimede stay
  To pour him out his liquor.

  Ceres in life
  Was a farmer's wife,
  But she doubtless kept a jolly house;
  For Rumour speaks,
  She was had by the Beaks
  To swear her son Triptolemus.[7]

  Miss Proserpine
  She thought herself fine,
  But when all her plans miscarried,
  She the Devil did wed,
  And took him to bed,
  Sooner than not be married.

  But the worst of the gods,
  Beyond all odds,
  It cannot be denied, oh!
  Is that first of matchmakers,
  That prince of housebreakers,
  The urchin, Dan Cupido.

           _New Monthly Magazine_.

    [4] "I'll search out the haunts
        Of your fav'rite gallants,
        And into cows metamorphose 'em."

    [5] Apollo Smintheus. He destroyed a great many rats in Phrygia,
    and was probably the first "rat-catcher to the King."--_Vet.
    Schol_.

    [6] "Mystica vannus Isacchi." This was either a porter-brewer's
    dray, or more probably the _Van_ of his druggist.--_Scriblerus_.

    [7] There is some difference of opinion concerning this fact:
    the lady, like so many others in her interesting situation,
    passed through the adventure under an _alias_. But that Ceres
    and Terra were the same, no reasonable person will doubt: and
    there can be no _serious_ objection to the little _trip_ being
    thus ascribed to the goddess in question.--_Scriblerus_.

       *       *       *       *       *


"THE SEASON" IN TOWN.


_Theodore_.--I don't know how you could prevent people from living half
the year in town.

_Tickler_.--I have no objection to their living half the year in town,
as you call it, if they can live in such a hell upon earth, of dust,
noise, and misery. Only think of the Dolphin water in the solar
microscope!

_Theodore_.--I know nothing of the water of London personally.

_Odoherty_.--Nor I; but I take it, we both have a notion of its brandy
and water.

_Tickler_.--'Tis, in fact, their duty to be a good deal in London. But
I'll tell you what I do object to, and what I rather think are evils of
modern date, or at any rate, of very rapid recent growth. First, I
object to their living those months of the year in which it is _contra
bonos mores_ to be in London, not in their paternal mansions, but at
those little bastardly abortions, which they call watering-places--their
Leamingtons, their Cheltenhams, their Brighthelmstones.

_Theodore_.--Brighton, my dear rustic Brighton!

_Odoherty_.--Synopicé.

_Shepherd_.--What's your wull, Sir Morgan? It does no staun' wi' me.

_Theodore_.--A horrid spot, certainly--but possessing large
conveniences, sir, for particular purposes. For example, sir, the
balcony on the drawing-room floor commonly runs on the same level all
round the square--which in the Brighthelmstonic dialect, sir, means a
three-sided figure. The advantage is obvious,

_Shepherd_.--Och, sirs! och, sirs! what wull this world come to!

_Theodore_.--The truth is, sir, that people _comme il faut_ cannot well
submit to the total change of society and manners implied in a removal
from Whitehall or Mayfair to some absurd old antediluvian chateau, sir,
boxed up among beeches and rooks. Sir, only think of the small Squires
with the red faces, sir, and the grand white waistcoats down to their
hips--and the dames, sir, with their wigs, and their simpers, and their
visible pockets--and the damsels, blushing things in white muslin, with
sky-blue sashes and ribbons, and mufflers and things--and the sons, sir,
the promising young gentlemen, sir--and the doctor, and the lawyer--and
the parson. So you disapprove of Brighton, Mr. Tickler?

_Tickler_.--Brighthelmstone, when I knew it, was a pleasant fishing
village--what like it is now, I know not; but what I detest in the great
folks of your time, is, that insane selfishness which makes them prefer
any place, however abominable, where they can herd together in their
little exquisite coteries, to the noblest mansions surrounded with the
noblest domains, where they cannot exist without being more or less
exposed to the company of people not exactly belonging to their own
particular sect. How can society hang together long in a country where
the Corinthian capital takes so much pains to unrift itself from the
pillar? Now-a-day, sir, your great lord, commonly speaking, spends but a
month or six weeks in his ancestral abode; and even when he is there, he
surrounds himself studiously with a cursed town-crew, a pack of St.
James's Street fops, and Mayfair chatterers and intriguers, who give
themselves airs enough to turn the stomachs of the plain squirearchy and
their womankind, and render a visit to the castle a perfect nuisance.

_Theodore (aside to Mullion.)_--A prejudiced old prig!

_Tickler_.--They seem to spare no pains to show that they consider the
country as valuable merely for rent and game--the duties of the
magistracy are a bore--county meetings are a bore--a farce, I believe,
was the word--the assizes are a cursed bore--fox-hunting itself is a
bore, unless in Leicestershire, where the noble sportsmen, from all the
winds of heaven cluster together, and think with ineffable contempt of
the old-fashioned chase, in which the great man mingled with gentle and
simple, and all comers--sporting is a bore, unless in a regular
_battue_, when a dozen lordlings murder pheasants by the thousand,
without hearing the cock of one impatrician fowling-piece--except indeed
some dandy poet, or philosopher, or punster, has been admitted to make
sport to the Philistines. In short, every thing is a bore that brings
the dons into personal collision of any kind with people that don't
belong to the world.

_Odoherty_.--The world is getting pretty distinct from the nation, I
admit, and I doubt if much love is lost between them.--_Blackwood's
Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE HOPKINSONIAN JOKE.


My friend Hertford, walking one day near his own shop in Piccadilly,
happened to meet one Mr. Hopkinson, an eminent brewer, I believe--and
the conversation naturally enough turned upon some late dinner at the
Albion, Aldersgate Street--nobody appreciates a real city dinner better
than Monsieur le Marquess--and so on, till the old brewer mentioned,
_par hazard_, that he had just received a noble specimen of wild pig
from a friend in Frankfort, adding, that he had a very particular party,
God knows how many aldermen, to dinner--half the East India direction, I
believe--and that he was something puzzled touching the cookery. "Pooh!"
says Hertford, "send in your porker to my man, and he'll do it for you
_à merveille_." The brewer was a grateful man--the pork came and went
back again. Well, a week after my lord met his friend, and, by the way,
"Hopkinson," says he, "how did the boar concern go off?"--"O,
beautifully," says the brewer; "I can never sufficiently thank your
lordship; nothing could do better. We should never have got on at all
without your lordship's kind assistance."--"The thing gave satisfaction
then, Hopkinson?"--"O, great satisfaction, my lord marquess.--To be sure
we did think it rather queer at first--in fact, not being up to them
there things, we considered it as deucedly stringy--to say the truth, we
should never have thought of eating it cold."--"Cold!" says Hertford;
"did you eat the ham cold?"--"O dear, yes, my lord, to be sure we
did--we eat it just as your lordship's gentleman sent it."--"Why, my
dear Mr. Alderman," says Hertford, "my cook only prepared it for the
spit." Well, I shall never forget how the poor dear Duke of York
laughed!--_Ibid_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GATHERER.


    A snapper up of unconsidered trifles.
                      SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


SEALING WAX AND WAFERS.


Francis Rousseau, a native of Auxerres, who travelled a long time in
Persia, Pegu, and other parts of the East Indies, and who, in 1692,
resided at St. Domingo, was the inventer of sealing-wax. A lady, of the
name of Longueville, made this wax known at court, and caused Louis
XIII. to use it; after which it was purchased and used throughout Paris.
By this article Rousseau, before the expiration of a year, gained 50,000
livres. The oldest seal with a red wafer ever yet found, is on a letter
written by Dr. Krapf, at Spires, in the year 1624, to the government at
Bareuth.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was in company some time since with George Colman, "the younger," as
the old fellow still styles himself. It was shortly after the death of
Mrs. ----, the wife of a popular actor, and at that time an unpopular
manager. Some one at table observed that, "Mr. ---- had suffered a loss
in the death of his wife, which he would not soon be able to make
up."--"I don't know how that may be," replied George, drily, "but to
tell you the truth, I don't think he has _quarrelled_ with his loss
yet."--_Monthly Mag_.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHERIDAN.


Bob Mitchell, one of Sheridan's intimate friends, and once in great
prosperity, became--like a great many other people, Sheridan's
creditor--in fact Sheridan owed Bob nearly three thousand pounds--this
circumstance amongst others contributed so very much to reduce Bob's
finances, that he was driven to great straits, and in the course of his
uncomfortable wanderings he called upon Sheridan; the conversation
turned upon his financial difficulties, but not upon the principal cause
of them, which was Sheridan's debt; but which of course, as an able
tactician, he contrived to keep out of the discussion; at last, Bob, in
a sort of agony, exclaimed--"I have not a guinea left, and by heaven I
don't know where to get one." Sheridan jumped up, and thrusting a piece
of gold into his hand, exclaimed with tears in his eyes--"It never shall
be said that Bob Mitchell wanted a guinea while his friend Sheridan had
one to give him."--_Sharpe's Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *


LINES


_On the window of Thorny Down Inn, about seven miles from Blandford, on
the Salisbury road_.

  Death, reader, pallid death!! with woe or bliss
  Will shortly be thy lot. Think then, my friend,
  Ere yet it be too late--what are thy hopes
  And what thy anxious fears--when the thin veil
  That keeps thy soul from seeing Israel's GOD
  Shall drop.    (Signed) [Greek: parepidemos].
                          RURIS.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Lord Ellenborough was Lord Chief Justice, a labouring bricklayer
was called as a witness; when he came up to be sworn his lordship said
to him--

"Really, witness, when you have to appear before this court, it is your
bounden duty to be more clean and decent in your appearance."

"Upon my life," said the witness, "if your lordship comes to that, I'm
thinking I'm every bit as well dressed as your lordship."

"How do you mean, sir," said his lordship, angrily.

"Why, faith," said the labourer, "_you_ come here in _your_ working
clothes and _I'm_ come in _mine_."--_Sharpe's Mag_.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRIENDSHIP.


Dr. Johnson most beautifully remarks, that "When a friend is carried to
his grave, we at once find excuses for every weakness, and palliations
of every fault; we recollect a thousand endearments, which before glided
off our minds without impression, a thousand favours unrepaid, a
thousand duties unperformed, and wish, vainly wish for his return, not
so much that we may receive as that we may bestow happiness, and
recompense that kindness which before we never understood."

       *       *       *       *       *


HOT TUESDAY.


Derham, in his _Physico-Theology,_ says, "July 8th, 1707, (called for
some time after the _hot Tuesday,_) was so excessively hot and
suffocating, by reason there was no wind stirring, that divers persons
died, or were in great danger of death, in their harvest work.
Particularly one who had formerly been my servant, a healthy, lusty
young man, was killed by the heat; and several horses on the road
dropped down and died the same day."

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *

_LIMBIRD'S EDITIONS_.

CHEAP and POPULAR WORKS published at the MIRROR OFFICE in the Strand,
near Somerset House.

The ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS. Embellished with nearly 150
Engravings. Price 6s. 6d. boards.

The TALES of the GENII. Price 2s.

The MICROCOSM. By the Right Hon. G. Canning. &c. Price 2s.

PLUTARCH'S LIVES, with Fifty Portraits, 2 vols. price 13s. boards.

COWPER'S POEMS, with 12 Engravings, price 3s. 6d. boards.

COOK'S VOYAGES, 2 vols. price 8s. boards.

The CABINET of CURIOSITIES: or, Wonders of the World Displayed. Price
5s. boards.

BEAUTIES of SCOTT. 2 vols. price 7s. boards.

The ARCANA of SCIENCE for 1828. Price 4s. 6d.