A report had been spread that the Japanese warship _Naniwa_ was about to
land her marines and take possession of the Hawaiian Government
buildings and custom-house.

The news soon reached Admiral Beardslee, who is in command of the
cruiser _Philadelphia_.

Since the _Philadelphia_ has been in port the Admiral has held weekly
drills of the crews of his own ship, and also of the _Marion_, which has
long been on the Hawaiian station.

At the time the news reached him, the crews were ashore drilling.

The Admiral sent an order for them to hurry back to their ships and be
in readiness to prevent any such action on the part of the Japanese.

When the Japanese minister heard of the matter, he made light of it, and
declared that there had never been any idea of landing marines from the
Japanese warship.

The people of Honolulu say that the report was true nevertheless, and
that the prompt action of Admiral Beardslee prevented it from being
carried out.

It seems that the Japanese minister in Hawaii is maintaining that he has
not yet received any reply to his letter to the Hawaiian Government.

He absolutely declines to regard Mr. Cooper's letter, which was
published in the papers before it reached him, as a reply to his
official communication.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prince Henry of Orleans has arrived safely at the court of Menelik of
Abyssinia, and has been received by him.

Menelik is described by Prince Henry as an intelligent, good-humored
man, of about forty years of age. His skin is dark, but not nearly so
black as has been stated.

The Prince found him an agreeable person, much interested in foreign
affairs, and he asked so many intelligent questions about the government
of foreign countries that his visitor was astonished. This savage
monarch knew all about the struggle between Japan and China, and
realized the immense progress the Japanese had made since the war.

Menelik questioned the Prince about the French President, and seemed
fully acquainted with everything concerning him. He had also heard of
the Prince's voyages, and was extremely interested in his Chinese trip,
asking many questions about the way the people lived in China, their
manufactures and their food.

This information is particularly interesting when we realize that
Menelik is the king of a savage nation. There are no schools or books in
his country, no manufactories or railroads,--indeed, little civilization
of any kind.

In the heart of the wilderness this man has made himself familiar with
the doings of the outer world, and has made his power felt among the
great nations.

The friendship of this savage is necessary to the great Powers of
Europe, and he is well aware of this fact, and is striving to make his
knowledge of practical value for the advancement of his people.

[Illustration]

It is toward Africa that the Powers of Europe are turning their
attention at the present day. England, France, Germany, and Italy are
all seeking to plant colonies there, and gather its riches for
themselves.

For years the various countries have had their way in Africa and have
pursued their conquests practically unchecked.

The few savage tribes that have resisted have been mastered with more or
less difficulty, and the country has been settled by the conquerors.

No nation had been met with that was strong enough to check the onward
march of Europe, until Menelik, Negus of Abyssinia, defeated the
Italians at the battle of Adowa, and showed Europe that he, at least,
intended to bring the conquerors to terms.

Since this battle all the nations interested in Africa have been seeking
the friendship of this swarthy monarch.

England finds it necessary to make a friend of him, lest in her wars
with the Mahdi's followers, in the Soudan, she have Menelik also against
her.

France and Italy both need the alliance of this powerful king, else they
will not be able to maintain the colonies they have already established.

Most of the African rulers have been won over with presents of beads and
gaudy ornaments, but Menelik belongs to a different class. He has
studied and tried to fathom the intricacies of European government, and
if he gives his friendship to the nations that are suing for it, it will
be in exchange for benefits much more substantial than the Europeans
have been accustomed to give.

       *       *       *       *       *

Steady progress has been made with the Tariff Bill, and it is expected
that it will be passed within a very few days.

An attempt has been made to put a provision against Trusts in the bill.

The proposed clause would make it unlawful for people to combine
together to restrain free competition or to increase the market price of
materials. All materials unfairly increased in price are to be forfeited
to the United States, and it is to be the duty of the Attorney-General
to enforce all laws against Trusts, and to do all in his power to
suppress them.

It is thought that it will be difficult to add this clause to the bill,
but every effort will be made to accomplish it.

Mr. Sherman expressed himself very strongly on the subject of Trusts the
other day.

He said that in his belief the question of Trusts was the most important
one before the nation to-day.

He said that the Trust Law was not strong enough in its present form,
and that he was in favor of making all combinations that restrained
trade unlawful.

He declared that even if the effect of Trusts was to lower prices, he
considered them injurious to the public good, because they prevented
competition and drove the smaller men out of business.

The Tobacco Trust trial has resulted in a disagreement of the jury.

       *       *       *       *       *

A wonderful diving-bell is being tried in the Great Lakes.

We described the method of using diving-bells in a previous number, but
this new invention is built on an entirely different plan, and can
accomplish results never before dreamed of.

The kind formerly made could not withstand the pressure of the water at
any very great depth. No machine had been invented capable of bearing
this strain until the new Smith bell was tried.

This bell has worked successfully in two hundred feet of water, and it
is claimed can withstand the pressure at a much greater depth.

The most remarkable thing about the bell is that it can move about under
the water, instead of merely being let down to remain in one place like
an ordinary diving-bell.

Attached to its cage are four long arms, which can be moved about at
will by the persons in the bell.

With the aid of these arms the huge machine can move from place to place
like a great spider.

The arms can also be drawn together like pincers, and made to grip
objects and carry them up to the surface.

The interior of the bell is lighted by electricity. Outside it carries a
large headlight, which enables those in the bell to see around them for
a distance of a hundred feet.

Experiments have been made in the Great Lakes with this bell, and its
first practical work has been to locate the exact position of the
steamer _Pewabic_, which was wrecked in Lake Michigan thirty-two years
ago.

Many attempts have been made to find this steamer because she was laden
with a cargo of copper ingots, and had besides a large sum of money on
board, the two together amounting to about $140,000.

All attempts had, however, been unsuccessful until the Smith bell was
used. The steamer was found lying in one hundred and sixty feet of
water.

To prove the truth of the find, portions of the wreck were brought to
the surface.

The success in Lake Michigan has determined the owner of the diving-bell
to try and raise the North German Lloyd steamer _Elbe_, which was
wrecked off the coast of England in 1895.

The owners of the _Elbe_ have already spent about fifty thousand dollars
in efforts to recover their vessel.

The position of the ship was located by divers, who, at a depth of one
hundred and seventy-one feet, found the upper works of the steamer.
These men, however, declare that it is utterly impossible to raise the
ship.

The _Elbe_ had a valuable cargo and a large amount of gold on board. The
owners of the diving-bell are determined to make the effort to raise her
and secure for themselves the immense reward offered.

They intend to remove the cargo first and then raise the hull, if it is
possible to do so.

They are very hopeful of success, and say that the task does not appear
to them any more difficult than the raising of the cargo of the
_Pewabic_ which latter task they are sure of accomplishing.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 24th of June there was a celebration in Halifax, Nova Scotia, of
the four hundredth anniversary of the discovery of the mainland of
America.

A tablet was placed in the Parliament building in honor of John Cabot,
who four hundred years ago sailed from Bristol, England, and finally
reached the shores of Newfoundland.

An endeavor was made to make the celebration a general one throughout
Canada and the United States, but this was found to be impracticable.
Cabot's voyage could not be made of the same importance as that of
Columbus.

The foundation-stone of a monument to Cabot was laid in his native town
of Bristol on the same day that the celebration took place in Halifax.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lieutenant Peary has started on another Polar expedition, and feels
hopeful that this time he will be able to reach the Pole.

His plans for his trip are much the same as those of Dr. Nansen; that is
to say, he will establish little colonies of Eskimos at certain
distances along his route, leaving supplies with each colony, which he
can fall back on in case of need.

He intends to keep up a constant communication with these settlements by
means of dogs and sledges, so that he will not be entirely cut off from
the world as previous explorers have been.

Lieutenant Peary has obtained five years' leave of absence from the Navy
Department. He will therefore have plenty of time for his experiment. He
says that if he fails the first time he will keep on trying until he
succeeds in reaching the Pole.

There is a story that one of the men who expect to go north with
Lieutenant Peary has a scheme for reaching the Pole on a bicycle.

This seems to be the strangest use thus far suggested for the bicycle.

Mr. Lee, who is the inventor of this novel plan, was with Lieutenant
Peary on his last trip.

He says that there are miles and miles of smooth surface in the Polar
regions that could easily be covered on a wheel.

According to his statement the water freezes smoothly, and the salt
crystals that form on the top of the ice make the surface like a
gravelled path, and there is consequently no danger that the wheel would
slip.

He says that where the snow covers the ice it is pounded so hard by the
winds that the crust is quite solid enough to bear the weight of a man.

In his opinion a wheelman would find no difficulty in travelling over
it.

He thinks wheeling to the Pole is the simplest and most practical plan
that has yet been proposed.

If he goes with Lieutenant Peary, Mr. Lee declares that he will take his
wheel along with him and make the experiment. He thinks that a man could
wheel to the Pole and back from the north of Greenland in one week.

The great difficulty in the way of his scheme is that it would not be
safe for one man to make the trip alone.

He thinks that at least half a dozen ought to start together. In those
far northern lands the fewer white men there are in a party the better
its chance of success, because they require so much more food than the
Eskimos, and it has to be of a more dainty character. Where provisions
are so scarce, this is a serious consideration.

Mr. Lee says that the present pneumatic tires would not be of the
slightest use, as rubber cracks and splits with the extreme cold. He has
a plan for a new kind of tire that could withstand the climate.

       *       *       *       *       *

We saw an account the other day of a new sport for the wheel, which is
being indulged in by the cyclists of England and France.

It is called bicycle duelling, and consists of fighting mock duels on
the wheel.

It is said by those who have witnessed it to be a very interesting
sport.

The contestants are masked; use foils with buttons on the points, and
fight according to the strict rules of fencing. The game is won by
touching the adversary over the heart with the sheathed point of the
foil.

In fencing, a man has to keep his eye closely on his adversary, and
dares not allow his attention to be distracted for a moment. It is
therefore absolutely necessary that those who engage in a bicycle duel
should be expert riders.

The mimic battle begins by the two riders circling slowly round each
other, waiting for an opportunity to dash in and strike a blow.

This circling continues for a few moments until one darts forward--the
foils clash, and the aggressor passes swiftly on, only to turn and
recommence the circling until he sees another opportunity.

They fight in this way, back and forth, round and round, until the final
touch is given; then the cyclist who is touched is obliged to dismount,
as a sign that he has been defeated.

This pastime is particularly popular in France, where fencing forms a
part of every young man's education.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have had several inquiries about the George Junior Republic at
Freeville, and are pleased to say that the young citizens are being
received there in as large numbers as the funds will permit.

It might interest our readers to know that any one sending $15 to Mr.
A.G. Agnew, Treasurer of the George Junior Republic, 7 Nassau Street,
New York, can give a ten-weeks' holiday to one poor little lad of the
streets.

It is a very small amount of money to do so much good with, and it is to
be hoped that people who have $15 to spare will send it to the Junior
Republic to help the good work along.

                                                G.H. ROSENFELD.


INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


RECORDING THERMOMETER.--This is a very interesting little machine,
especially so at this time of year when the temperature is a constant
subject for thought.

[Illustration: Thermometer]

It is a recording thermometer, and consists of a thermometer and a
recording disk. By means of cleverly arranged mechanism the rise and
fall of the mercury is used as the motor power, and registers the
changes in temperature on an indicator card. Other simple mechanism
works a rotary drum by which this indicator card is carried.


[Illustration: Pencil Sharpener]

PENCIL SHARPENER.--This is another helpful little contrivance, a pencil
sharpener. There are already numberless things of the kind, some of
which answer for a time, some not at all, and all being made for the
purpose of sharpening the pencil to a kind of regulation point. For my
own part I have always preferred a good sharp knife, or the simple
reason that I could then make exactly the kind of point suited to the
work to be done. The purpose of the new pencil sharpener is evidently
the same. This contrivance is a small and handy block for holding the
pencil in position for the knife, and has a cutting guide which will be
a joy to people who are awkward in using the knife.


COLORED PHOTOGRAPHY.--The State Department has received a specimen from
Paris of Mr. Villedieu Chassaigne's work in colored photography.

The claim made by Mr. Chassaigne is that he can photograph objects in
their exact colors.

The coloring process is applied after the picture has been developed and
the print made.

A colorless liquid is then applied to the print, and after that it is
washed again in blue, green, and red liquids. After each application the
print is wiped dry. The various parts of the picture choose their
original colors, and the result is an exact representation of the object
photographed.

Several pictures have been brought over by Mr. Anthony, of New York.
Among them were several portraits in which the flesh tints and the
colors of the clothing were beautifully rendered. A view of the _Jardin
d'Acclimatation_ in Paris showed a group of storks, the red coloring of
their legs and beaks being distinctly visible.

The liquids which produce these results are to be put on the market on
July 1st.

It is but fair to say that there are some doubts as to the success of
this process.

A Chassaigne photograph was sent to the State Department, which persons
who have seen it claim is a very crude affair, and cannot be pronounced
a success, as it only resembles a very poorly tinted photograph.

These persons declare that the Chassaigne photographs are not nearly as
fine as those of Kurz, of New York. These latter are obtained by making
three negatives of a subject--one which photographs only the yellows,
one the reds, and the third the blues in a picture.

By carefully printing the three negatives, one on the top of the other,
excellent colored pictures can be produced.


KITCHEN CABINET.--A new cabinet for the kitchen has been designed which
is a very handy thing for use.

It is arranged to contain all the sugars and spices and various nice
things that are required in cooking.

On one side is a large receptacle for coffee, with a mill fixed half-way
down, so the coffee is not only stored, but is always ready for
grinding.

On the other side is another bin for flour, which is provided with a
sifter.

By turning a handle the flour falls to the drawer at the bottom, sifted
and ready for use.

There are handy drawers for sugars and tea, and at the bottom a large
place for bread.

A clock is fixed into the top of the cabinet, and completes the very
useful little case.

                                                G.H.R.

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
NATURAL HISTORY
STORIES.

A Series of True Stories

BY
JULIA TRUITT BISHOP.

Attractively Illustrated by Barnes.

       *       *       *       *       *

These stories will be issued in parts. Price, 10 cents each. Subscription
price (12 numbers), $1.00. Part 1. issued as supplement to GREAT ROUND
WORLD NO. 20.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =Author's Preface.=

    The stories published in this little volume have been issued
    from time to time in the Philadelphia _Times_, and it is at the
    request of many readers that they now greet the world in more
    enduring form. They have been written as occasion suggested,
    during several years; and they commemorate to me many of the
    friends I have known and loved in the animal world. "Shep" and
    "Dr. Jim," "Abdallah" and "Brownie," "Little Dryad" and
    "Peek-a-Boo." I have been fast friends with every one, and have
    watched them with such loving interest that I knew all their
    ways and could almost read their thoughts. I send them on to
    other lovers of dumb animals, hoping that the stories of these
    friends of mine will carry pleasure to young and old.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON,=
     =3 & 5 West 18th Street.=

       *       *       *       *       *

      =KLEMMS'=
=RELIEF PRACTICE MAPS.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=LIST OF MAPS.=

