This work is a legal treatise consisting of a scholarly discussion of the
doctrines advanced by Justice Harlan during his service as a member of the
Supreme Court of the United States. The book opens with a brief biography
of the jurist, emphasizing the important events of his career to furnish a
basis for the study of his theories. The author then takes up such topics
as the "Suability of States," the "Impairment of the Obligation Contracts,"
"Due Process of Law," "Interstate and Foreign Commerce," "Equal Protection
of the Laws," the "Jurisdiction of Courts," "Miscellaneous Topics," and
"Judicial Legislation."

The author finds that in the treatment of these important legal questions
Harlan measures up to the standard of an able jurist. Replying to those who
have charged him with emphasizing too greatly the letter of the law, the
writer says that such a contention is based on ignorance or prejudice. "No
one who so interpreted the Eleventh Amendment," says the author, "as to
maintain that a suit against the officer of a State in his official
capacity was not a suit against a State could have held to the strict
letter of the law." The author further contends that this criticism of the
jurist arises from the fact that he did not believe in equivocation.

The interpretation of the laws relating to the Negro, the point on which he
dissented from the majority of the members of the court, should have been
given more prominence in this discussion. The discriminations against the
Negroes are treated in connection with the chapters on "Interstate and
Foreign Commerce" and "Equal Protection of the Laws." The Fourteenth
Amendment is treated along with such miscellaneous topics as "Direct
Taxation," "Copyrights," "Insular Cases," "Interstate Comity," and "Labor
Legislation." Stating Justice Harlan's theory as to the position the Negro
should occupy in this country, however, the author writes very frankly.
Harlan, he thought, believed that they should occupy the position that
historically they were intended to occupy by the Thirteenth and Fourteenth
Amendments. He believed that the law should be interpreted as it was meant
and not as the court thought expedient and wise. "Though it may be true
that his relation to the negro in political matters may have made him more
violent in his dissents, any one who will look fairly at the question must
conclude that his doctrine was legally correct. And as time passes, and as
both classes become better educated and broader in their views, it may be
said that the tendency of the court is likely to be to interpret the laws
largely as he thought they should have been interpreted, that is, as
historically they were meant."

C. B. WALTER.


_Reconstruction in Georgia, Economic, Social, Political, 1865--1872._ By
C. Mildred Thompson, Ph.D. Longmans, Green, and Company, New York, 1915.
Pp. 418.

The appearance of C. M. Thompson's Reconstruction in Georgia arouses further
interest in the study of that period which has been attracting the
attention of various investigators in the leading universities of the
United States. These writers fall into different groups. Coming to the
defense of a section shamed with crime, some have endeavored to justify the
deeds of those who resorted to all sorts of schemes to rid the country of
the "extravagant and corrupt Reconstruction governments." Lately, however,
the tendency has been to get away from this position. Yet among these
writers we still find varying types, many of whom have for several reasons
failed to write real history. Some have not forsaken the controversial
group, not a few have tried to explain away the truth, and others going to
the past with their minds preoccupied have selected only those facts which
support their contentions.

What has this author in question done? In this readable and interesting
work the writer has shown considerable improvement upon historical writing
in this field. She has endeavored to deal not only with the political but
also with the economic and social phases of the history of this period. One
gets a glance at the State before the war, the transition from slavery to
freedom, the problems of labor and tenancy, the commercial revival, the
social readjustment, political reorganization, military rule, State
economy, reorganized Reconstruction, agriculture, education, the
administration of justice, the Ku Klux disorder, and the restoration of
home rule.

This research leads the author to conclude that the seven years of the
history of the State from 1865 to 1872 marked only the beginning of the
social and economic transformation that has taken place since the war. This
upheaval broke up the large plantation system, removed from power the
"slave oligarchy," and exalted the yeomanry of moderate means, the
uplanders now in control in the South. When the Democratic rule replaced
Republicanism "one set of abnormal influences were put at rest," economic
and social problems becoming the all-engrossing topics, and politics a
diversion rather than a matter of self-preservation. The race problem then
aroused began in another age, and not being settled, has been bequeathed to
a later generation. Emancipation itself would have aroused racial
antagonism but Republican Reconstruction increased it a hundred fold. This
was the most enduring contribution of Congressional interference.

Politically Reconstruction in Georgia was a failure. The greatest political
achievement of the period was the enfranchisement of the Negro, but this
was soon undone, the Southern white man having no freedom of choice--"he
had to be a democrat, whether or no." Although establishing the Negro in
freedom the government failed to establish him in political and social
equality with the whites. "But still," says the author, "the race problem
and the cry of Negro! Negro! the slogan of political demagogues who magnify
and distort a very real difficulty in playing upon the passions of the less
educated whites--rise to curtail freedom of thought and act."

Out of this mass of material examined one would expect a more unbiased
treatment. The work suffers from some of the defects of most Reconstruction
writers, although the author has endeavored to write with restraint and
care. One man is made almost a hero while another is found wanting. The
white Southerner could not but be a Democrat but no excuse is made for the
Negro who had no alternative but to ally himself with those who claimed to
represent his emancipator. The State was at one time bordering on economic
ruin because the Negroes became migratory and would not comply with their
labor contracts. Little is said, however, about the evils arising from the
attitude of Southern white men who have never liked to work and that of
those who during this period, according to the author, formed roving bands
for plundering and stealing. But we are too close to the history of
Reconstruction to expect better treatment. We are just now reaching the
period when we can tell the truth about the American Revolution. We must
yet wait a century before we shall find ourselves far enough removed from
the misfortunes and crimes of Reconstruction to set forth in an unbiased
way the actual deeds of those who figured conspicuously in that awful
drama.


NOTES

"That the idea of a 'Secretary of Peace' for the United States is no new
thing was brought out in the course of a paper by P. Lee Phillips, read by
President Allen C. Clark before the Columbia Historical Society, which met
at the Shoreham Hotel last night.

"In the course of the paper, entitled 'The Negro, Benjamin Banneker,
Astronomer and Mathematician,' it was brought out that Banneker, who was a
free Negro, friend of Washington and Jefferson, published a series of
almanacs, unique in that they were his own work throughout. In the almanac
for 1793 one of the articles from Banneker's pen was 'A Plan of Peace
Office for the United States,' for promoting and preserving perpetual
peace. This article was concise and well written, and contains most of the
ideas set forth today by advocates of peace. Banneker took a 'crack' at
European military ideas, and advocated the abolishment in the United States
of military dress and titles and all militia laws. He laid down laws for
the construction of a great temple of peace in which hymns were to be sung
each day.

"Mr. Phillips's paper brought out that Banneker helped in one of the early
surveys of the District of Columbia."--_Washington Star._

This dissertation will be brought out in the Annual Publication of the
Columbia Historical Society.


Professor Alain Leroy Locke, of Howard University, has published an
interesting prospectus of his lectures on the race problem.


Professor A. E. Jenks, of the University of Minnesota, has contributed to
the _American Journal of Sociology_ an elaborate paper on the legal status
of the miscegenation of the white and black races in the various
commonwealths.


Miss L. E. Wilkes, of the Washington Public Schools, has been lecturing on
"_Missing Pages of American History."_ This is a summary of her work
treating the Negro soldier from the Colonial Period through the War of
1812. The treatise will be published in the near future.


In the Church Missionary Review has appeared "_A Survey of Islam in
Africa,"_ by G. T. Manley.


An article entitled "_The Bantu Coast Tribes of East Africa Protectorate,"_
by A. Werner, has been published in the _Journal_ of the Royal
Anthropological Institute. In the same _Journal_ has appeared also "_The
Organization and Laws of Some Bantu Tribes in East Africa."_


_Ashanti Proverbs_, translated by R. Sutherland Rattray, with a preface by
Sir Hugh Clifford, has been published by Milford in London.


A. Werner has published in London "_The Language Families of Africa,"_ a
concise and valuable textbook of the classification, philology, and grammar
of the languages.


_The German African Empire_, by A. F. Calvert, has appeared over the imprint
of Werner Laurie.


_The History of South Africa from 1795 to 1872_, by G. McCall Theal, has
been published in London by Allen and Unwin. This is a fourth and revised
edition of a work to be completed in five volumes.


_"The Tropics,"_ by C. R. Enock, has been brought out by Grant Richards.
This is a description of all tropical countries. It contains some valuable
information but is chiefly concerned with advancing the theory that it is
essential to study the capabilities of a country so as to develop all of
its industries. The contention of the author is that the economic
independence of each country is its safeguard from war and that
commercialism is ruin.


The Methodist Book Concern has announced _"Pioneering on the Congo,"_ by
John Springer.


Hodder and Stoughton have published _"Mary Slessor of Calabar: Pioneer
Missionary."_ This is an account of a factory girl who distinguished
herself as a missionary and was later appointed head of a native court.


_French Memories of Eighteenth Century America_, by Charles H. Sherrill,
has been published by Scribners. He failed to take into account the many
references of French travelers to the Negroes and slavery.


In the second number of _Smith College Studies in History_ appears Laura
J. Webster's _Operations of the Freedmen's Bureau in South Carolina._


About the middle of July the Neale Publishing Company will bring out _The
New Negro, His Political, Civil and Mental Status_, by Dean William
Pickens, of Morgan College.


Professor Sherwood, of La Crosse, Wisconsin, has for some time been making
researches into _Paul Cuffee._


AN INTERESTING COMMENT

_Dear Sir:_

It was very good of you to mail me a copy of the Journal of Negro History.
I had seen a copy of this publication, I believe, at the library of the
Institute of Jamaica. The second number is certainly an impressive issue
indicative of the changed point of view. The so-called literature on
slavery and the negro is, in the main, rather a hindrance than a help. The
expression of mere personal opinion is of exceedingly slight value in the
furtherance of any good cause. What the world needs is not mere knowledge
but a better understanding of the facts and experience already available.
When a race has reached a point where it realizes its own place in history,
and the value of a critical analysis of its historical experience, a
measurable advance has been made towards the attainment of a genuine
progress. All values are relative. True history concerns itself with any
and all achievements and not merely with political changes or military
events. Most of the so-called historical disquisitions delivered annually
before the American Historical Association fall seriously short in this
respect. Ever since Green wrote his first real history of the English
people the old-time historian has lost caste among men who are seriously
concerned with the urgent solution of present-day problems. Unquestionably,
a true political history is of real value, but the social history of
mankind is infinitely more important.

The Journal of Negro History seems to meet the foregoing requirements for a
social history of the negro race rather than a mere increase in the already
voluminous so-called history of the political aspects of slavery
reconstruction or reorganization during recent times. The article on the
negro soldier in the American revolution is excellent. The prerequisite for
a genuine race progress is race pride. For this reason the past
achievements of the negro in this or any other country, individually or
collectively, are of the utmost teaching value. It is a far cry,
apparently, from the very recent high and well deserved promotion of a
negro to a commanding position in the army, back to the days of the service
rendered by negro soldiers in the Revolution, but in its final analysis it
is all a chain of connected events. Where so much has been done and is
being achieved the outlook for the future must needs be encouraging.
Progress is only made by struggling, and the best results are those
achieved against apparently insuperable difficulties. Race progress and
race pride are practically equivalent terms. Individuals and races fail in
proportion as they permit discouraging circumstances or conditions to
control their destinies. A true philosophy of history never fails to bring
home the conviction that lasting success is attained only through the ages
by persistent effort in the right direction. The negro race has reason to
be proud of its achievements, but I am sure that the future progress will
rest largely upon a better understanding of the negro's place in history.
Just as in the case of individuals, so in the case of races, it is, first
and last, a question of finding our place in the world. Variation in type
is absolutely essential to the highest development of the human species. It
is not, therefore, the duty of any one race to follow blindly in the
footsteps of another. It is for each race to seek for the best traits
peculiarly its own, and to leave absolutely nothing undone, in season and
out, to develop those particular traits to the highest possible degree. In
other words, it is not for the negro to try to be as near as he can to a
white man, even in his innermost thoughts and aspirations, but to interpret
the lessons of his own life through the philosophy of negro history and to
be true to the moral and spiritual ideals of his race and his ancestors, be
they what they may.

Very truly yours,

F. L. HOFFMAN,
_Statistician_.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY

VOL. I--JUNE, 1916--No. 3

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY


CONTENTS


C. E. PIERRE: The Work of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
   Foreign Parts among the Negroes in the Colonies

ALICE DUNBAR-NELSON: People of Color in Louisiana, Part I

WILLIAM T. McKINNEY: The Defeat of the Secessionists in Kentucky in 1861

J. KUNST:
  Notes on Negroes in Guatemala During the Seventeenth Century;
  A Mulatto Corsair of the Sixteenth Century

DOCUMENTS:
  TRAVELERS' IMPRESSIONS OF SLAVERY IN AMERICA FROM 1750 TO 1800:
    Burnaby's View of the Situation in Virginia;
    General Treatment of Slaves Among the Albanians--Consequent Attachment
      of Domestics.--Reflections on Servitude by an American Lady;
    Impressions of an English Traveler;
    Abbé Robin on Conditions in Virginia;
    Observations of St. John De Crèvecoeur;
    Impressions of Johann D. Schoepf;
    Extracts from Anburey's Travels Through North America;
    Vindication of the Negroes: A Controversy;
    Sur L'état Général, Le Genre D'industrie, Les Moeurs, Le Caractère,
      Etc. Des Noirs, Dans Les États-unis;
    Slavery as Seen by Henry Wansey;
    Esclavage Par La Rochefoucauld-liancourt;
    Observations Sur L'esclavage Par La Rochefoucauld-liancourt;
    What Isaac Weld Observed in Slave States;
    John Davis's Thoughts on Slavery;
    Observations of Robert Sutcliff;
  SOME LETTERS OF RICHARD ALLEN AND ABSALOM JONES TO DOROTHY RIPLEY:
    Letter from an African Minister, Resident in Philadelphia Addressed
      to Dorothy Ripley.
    Letter from an African, resident in Philadelphia, to Dorothy Ripley

REVIEWS OF BOOKS:
     CLAYTON'S _The Aftermath of the Civil War, in Arkansas_;
     EVANS'S _Black and White in the Southern States_;
     SAYERS'S _Samuel Coleridge-Taylor--Musician. His Life and Letters_;
     BAILEY'S _Race Orthodoxy in the South and Other Aspects of the Negro
       Problem_;

NOTES


THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY


VOL. I--OCTOBER, 1916--No. 4


THE WORK OF THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL IN FOREIGN PARTS
AMONG THE NEGROES IN THE COLONIES


The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts was
organized in London in the year 1701. During the eighteenth century the
British Colonies of the New World constituted the principal field of
missionary endeavor for this organization. There were then in North America
250,000 settlers, whole colonies of whom were living in heathenism while
others were adhering to almost every variety of strange faiths. The work of
proselyting these people was too important to be intrusted to individual
enterprise and too extensive to be successfully prosecuted by the heads of
the Church only. The ministrations of the Established Church were then
limited to a few places in Virginia, New York, Maryland and the cities of
Boston and Philadelphia. To supply this deficiency the Society endeavored
to use missionaries as a direct means to convert the heathen of all races,
whether Europeans, Indians or Negroes. There were cruel masters who
objected to the conversion of their slaves,[1] but that any race should be
denied the message of salvation because of its color was ever repudiated by
the Society. From the very beginning of this work the conversion of the
Negroes was as important to the Society as that of bringing the whites or
the Indians into the church. Such dignitaries of the church, as Rev. Thomas
Bacon and Bishops Fleetwood, Lowth, Sanderson and Wilson, ever urged this
duty upon their brethren at home and abroad.[2]

The first really effective work of the Society was done in South Carolina.
Reverend Mr. Thomas of Goose Creek Parish in that State early instructed
the Indian and Negro slaves of his vicinity. He directed his attention to
the Negroes in 1695 and ten years later counted among his communicants
twenty blacks, who with several others "well understanding the English
tongue," could read and write. He further said, in 1705: "I have here
presumed to give an account of one thousand slaves so far as they know of
it and are desirous of Christian knowledge and seem willing to prepare
themselves for it, in learning to read, for which they redeem the time
from their labor. Many of them can read the Bible distinctly and great
numbers of them were learning when I left the province."[3]

This work, however, had not proceeded without much opposition. The
sentiment as to the enlightenment of the blacks was largely that of the
youth who resolved never to go to the holy table while slaves were
received there. Others felt like the lady who inquired: "Is it possible
that any of my slaves should go to heaven, and must I see them there?"[4]
The earnest workers sent out by the Society, however, did not cease to
labor in behalf of the Negroes and the number of masters willing to have
their slaves instructed gradually increased. Among these liberal owners
were John Morris, of St. Bartholomew's, Lady Moore, Captain David Davis,
Mrs. Sarah Baker at Goose Creek, Landgrave Joseph Morton and his wife of
St. Paul's, the Governor and a member of the Assembly, Mr. and Mrs.
Skeen,[5] Mrs. Haigue and Mrs. Edwards. So successful were the efforts of
Mrs. Haigue and Mrs. Edwards that they were formally thanked by the
Society for their care and good example in instructing the Negroes of whom
no less than twenty-seven prepared by them, including those of another
planter, were baptized by the Reverend E. Taylor of St. Andrew's within
two years.[6]

Other less liberal masters refused to allow their slaves to attend Mr.
Taylor for instruction, but some of them were induced to teach the blacks
the Lord's Prayer. The result even from this was so successful that there
came to the church more Negroes than could be accommodated. So great was
their desire for instruction that had it not been for the opposition of
their owners, almost all of them would have been converted. "So far as
the missionaries were permitted," says one, "they did all that was
possible for their evangelization, and while so many professed Christians
among the planters were lukewarm, it pleased God to raise to himself
devout servants among the heathen, whose faithfulness was commended by the
masters themselves. In some of the congregations the Negroes or blacks
constituted one half of the communicants."[7]

This interest of the clergy in the Negroes of South Carolina continued in
spite of opposition. Rev. Mr. Guy, of St. Andrew's Parish, said that he
baptized "a Negro man and a Negro woman" in 1723, and Rev. Mr. Hunt,
minister of St. John's Parish, reported in that same year that "a slave, a
sensible Negro, who can read and write and comes to church, is a Catechumen
under probation for Baptism which he desires."[8] A new impetus too was
given the movement about 1740. Influenced by such urgent addresses as those
of Dr. Brearcroft, and Bishops Gibson, Wilson and Seeker, the workers of
the Society were aroused to proselyting more extensively among the Negroes.
In 1741 the Bishop of Canterbury expressed his gratification at the large
number of Negroes who were then being brought into the church.[9]

A decided step forward was noted in 1743. That year a school for Negroes
was opened by Commissary Garden and placed in charge of Harry and Andrew,
two colored youths, who had been trained as teachers at the cost of the
Society. This establishment was a sort of training school for bright young
blacks who felt called to instruct their fellow countrymen. For adults who
labored during the day it was an evening school. It was successfully
conducted for more than twenty years. In 1763 the institution was for some
unknown reason closed after being conducted in the face of many
difficulties and obstructions, although this was the only educational
institution in that colony for its 50,000 blacks.[10]

Some good results were obtained by the missionaries of the Society of
North Carolina, but difficulties were also encountered there. The chief
trouble seems to have been that missionaries of that colony were
"frustrated by the slave owners who would by no means permit" their Negroes
to be baptized, "having a false notion that a christened slave is by law
free."[11] "By much importunity," says an investigator, Mr. Ransford of
Chowan (in 1712) prevailed on Mr. Martin to let him baptize three of his
Negroes, two women and a boy. "All the arguments I could make use of,"
said he, "would scarce effect it till Bishop Fleetwood's sermon (in 1711)
... turned ye scale."[12] Mr. Rumford succeeded, however, in baptizing
upwards of forty Negroes in one year. In the course of time, when the
workers overcame the prejudice of the masters, a missionary would sometimes
baptize fifteen to twenty-four in a month, forty to fifty in six months,
and sixty to seventy in a year.[13] Reverend Mr. Newman, a minister in
North Carolina, reported in 1723 that he had baptized two Negroes who could
say the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and gave good
sureties for their further information.[14] According to the report of Rev.
C. Hall, the number of conversions there among Negroes for eight years was
355, including 112 adults, and "at Edenton the blacks generally were
induced to attend service at all these stations, where they behaved with
great decorum."[15]

In the Middle and Southern Colonies these missionaries had the cooperation
of Dr. Thomas Bray. In 1696 he was sent to Maryland by the Bishop of
London to do what he could toward the conversion of adult Negroes and the
education of their children.[16] Bray's most influential supporter was M.
D'Alone, the private secretary of King William. D'Alone gave for the
maintenance of the cause a fund, the proceeds of which were first used to
employ catechists, and later to support the Thomas Bray Mission after the
catechists had failed to give satisfaction. At the death of this
missionary the task was taken up by certain of his followers known as the
"Associates of Dr. Bray."[17] They extended their work beyond the bounds
of Maryland. These benefactors maintained two schools for the benefit of
Negroes in Philadelphia. About the close of the French and Indian War,
Rev. Mr. Stewart, a missionary in North Carolina, found there a school for
the education of Indians and Negroes conducted by "Dr. Bray's
Associates."[18]

Georgia too was not neglected. The extension of the work of Dr. Bray's
associates into the colony made an opening there for taking up the
instruction of Negroes. The Society joined with these workers for
supporting a schoolmaster for Negroes in 1751 and an improvement in the
slaves was soon admitted by their owners.[19] In 1766 Rev. S. Frink, a
missionary toiling in Augusta, found that he could neither convert the
Indians nor the whites, who seemed to be as destitute of religion as the
former, but succeeded in converting some Negroes.[20]

In Pennsylvania the missionary movement found less obstacles to the
conversion of Negroes than to that of the Indians. In fact, the
proselyting of Negroes in the colony was less difficult than in some other
parts of America. The reports of the missionaries show that slaves were
being baptized there as early as 1712.[21] About this time a Mr. Yeates,
of Chester, was commended by the Rev. G. Ross "for his endeavors to train
up the Negroes in the knowledge of religion."[22] Moved by the appeal of
the Bishop of London, other masters permitted the indoctrination of their
slaves in the principles of Christianity. At Philadelphia the Rev. G. Ross
baptized on one occasion 12 adult Negroes, "who were examined before the
congregation and answered to the admiration of all who heard them.... The
like sight had never been seen before in that church."[23] Rev. Mr.
Beckett, minister in Sussex County, Pennsylvania, said in 1723 that he had
admitted two Negro slaves and that many Negroes constantly attended his
services.[24] The same year Rev. Mr. Bartow baptized a Negro at West
Chester.[25] Rev. Mr. Pugh, a missionary at Appoquinimmick, Pennsylvania,
said, in a letter written to the Society in 1737, that he had received a
few blacks and that the masters of the Negroes were prejudiced against
their being Christians.[26] Rev. Richard Locke christened eight Negroes in
one family at Lancaster in 1747 and another Negro there the following
year.[26a] In 1774 the Rev. Mr. Jenney reported that there was "a great
and daily increase of Negroes in this city who would with joy attend upon
a catechist for instruction"; that he had baptized several, but was unable
to add to his other duties; and the Society, ever ready to lend a helping
hand to such pious undertakings, appointed the Rev. W. Sturgeon as
catechist for the Negroes at Philadelphia.[27] The next to show diligence
in the branch of the work of the Society was Mr. Neill of Dover. He
baptized as many as 162 within 18 months.[28]

The operations of the Society did not seem to cover a large part of New
Jersey. The Rev. Mr. Lindsay wrote of the baptizing of a Negro at Allerton
in 1736.[29] The reports from the missions of New Brunswick show that a
large number of Negroes had attached themselves to the church. This
condition, however, did not obtain in all parts of that colony. Yet
subsequent reports show that the missionary spirit was not wanting in that
section. The baptism of black children and the accession of Negro adults
to the church were from time to time reported from that field.[30]

The most effective work of the Society among Negroes of the Northern
colonies was accomplished in New York. In that colony, the instruction of
the Negro and Indian slaves to prepare them for conversion, baptism, and
communion was a primary charge oft repeated to every missionary and
schoolmaster of the Society. In addition to the general efforts put forth
in the colonies, there was in New York a special provision for the
employment of sixteen clergymen and thirteen lay teachers mainly for the
evangelization of the slaves and the free Indians. For the Negro slaves a
catechizing school was opened in New York City in 1704 under the charge of
Elias Neau. This benevolent man, after several years' imprisonment because
of his Protestant faith, had come to New York to try his fortunes as a
trader. As early as 1703 he called the attention of the Society to the
great number of slaves in New York "who were without God in the world, and
of whose souls there was no manner of care taken"[31] and proposed the
appointment of a catechist to undertake their instruction. He himself
finally being prevailed upon to accept this position, obtained a license
from the Governor, resigned his position as elder in the French church and
conformed to the Established Church of England, "not upon any worldly
account but through a principle of conscience and hearty approbation of
the English liturgy."[32] He was later licensed by the Bishop of London.

Neau's task was not an easy one. At first he went from house to house, but
afterwards arranged for some of the slaves to attend him. He succeeded,
however, in obtaining gratifying results. He was commended to the Society
by Rev. Mr. Vesey in 1706 as a "constant communicant of our church, and a
most zealous and prudent servant of Christ, in proselyting the miserable
Negroes and Indians among them to the Christian Religion, whereby he does
great service to God and his church."[33] Further confidence in him was
attested by an act of the Society in preparing at his request "a Bill to
be offered to Parliament for the more effectual Conversion of the Negro
and other Servants in the Plantations, to compell Owners of Slaves to
cause children to be baptized within 3 months after their birth and to
permit them when come to years of discretion to be instructed in the
Christian Religion on our Lord's day by the Missionaries under whose
ministry they live."[34]

Neau's school suffered greatly in 1712 because of the prejudice engendered
by the declaration that instruction was the main cause of the Negro riot
in that city. For some days Neau dared not show himself, so bitter was the
feeling of the masters. Upon being assured, however, that only one Negro
connected with the school had participated in the affair and that the most
criminal belonged to the masters who were openly opposed to educating
them, the institution was permitted to continue its endeavors, and the
Governor extended to it his protection and recommended that masters have
their slaves instructed.[35] Yet Neau had still to complain thereafter of
the struggle and opposition of the generality of the inhabitants, who were
strongly prejudiced with a horrid motive thinking that Christian knowledge
"would be a means to make the slave more cunning and apter to
wickedness."[36] Not so long thereafter, however, the support of the best
people and officials of the community made his task easier. Neau could say
in 1714 that "if the slaves and domestics in New York were not instructed
it was not his fault."[37] The Governor, the Council, Mayor, the Recorder
and the Chief Justice informed the Society that Neau had performed his
work "to the great advancement of religion in general and the particular
benefit of the free Indians, Negro slaves, and other Heathens in those
parts, with indefatigable zeal and application."[38]

Neau died in 1722. His work was carried on by Mr. Huddlestone, Rev. Mr.
Whitmore, Rev. Mr. Colgan, Rev. R. Charlton, and Rev. S. Auchmutty. From
1732 to 1740 Mr. Charlton baptized 219 slaves and frequently thereafter
the number admitted yearly was from 40 to 60.[39] The great care exercised
in preparing slaves for the church was rewarded by the spiritual knowledge
which in some cases was such as might have put to shame many persons who
had had greater advantages. Rev. Mr. Auchmutty, who served from 1747 to
1764, reported that there was among the Negroes an ever-increasing desire
for instruction and "not one single Black" that had been "admitted by him
to the Holy Communion" had "turned out bad or been in any shape a disgrace
to our holy Profession."[40]

The interest in the enlightenment of Negroes too extended also to other
parts of the colony. In 1737 Rev. Mr. Stoupe wrote of baptizing four black
children at New Rochelle.[41] Mr. Charlton had taken upon himself at New
Windsor the task of instructing these unfortunates before he entered upon
the work in New York City. At Staten Island too he found it both practical
and convenient "to throw into one the classes of his white and black
catechumens."[42] Rev. Charles Taylor, a schoolmaster at that place, kept
a night school "for the instruction of Negroes, and of such as" could not
"be spared from their work in the day time."[43] Rev. J. Sayre, of
Newburgh, followed the same plan of coeducation of the races in each of
the four churches under his charge.[44] Rev. T. Barclay, an earnest worker
among the slaves in Albany, reported in 1714 "a great forwardness" among
them to embrace Christianity "and a readiness to receive
instruction."[45] He found much opposition among certain masters, chief
among whom were Major M. Schuyler and his brother-in-law Petrus
Vandroffen. Sixty years later came the report from Schenectady that there
were still to be found several Negro slaves of whom 11 were sober, serious
communicants.[46]

These missionaries met with more opposition than encouragement in New
England. The Puritan had no serious objection to seeing the Negroes saved,
but when the conversion meant the incorporation of the undesirable class
into the state, then so closely connected with the church, many New
Englanders became silent. This opposition, however, was not effective
everywhere. From Bristol, Rev. J. Usher wrote in 1730 that several Negroes
desired baptism and were able "to render a very good account of the hope
that was in them," but he was forbidden by their masters to comply with
the request. Yet he reported the same year that among others he had in his
congregation "about 30 Negroes and Indians," most of whom joined "in the
public service very decently."[47] At Newtown, where greater opposition
was encountered, Rev. J. Beach seemed to have baptized by 1733 many
Indians and a few Negroes.[48] The Rev. Dr. Cutler, a missionary at
Boston, wrote to the Society in 1737 that among those he had admitted to
his church were four Negro slaves.[49] Endeavoring to do more than to
effect nominal conversions, Doctor Johnson, while at Stratford, had
catechetical lectures during the summer months of 1751, attended by many
Negroes and some Indians, as well as whites, "about 70 or 80 in all." And
said he: "As far as I can find, where the Dissenters have baptized 2, if
not 3 or 4 Negroes or Indians, I have four or five communicants."[50] Dr.
Macsparran conducted at Narragansett a class of 70 Indians and Negroes
whom he frequently catechized and instructed before the regular
service.[51] Rev. J. Honyman, of Newport, had in his congregation more
than 100 Negroes who "constantly attended the Publick Worship."[52]

It appears then that the Negroes were instructed by the missionaries in
all of the colonies except some remote parts of New England, Virginia and
Maryland. The Established Church had workers among the white persons in
those colonies but they did not always direct their attention to the
slaves. This does not mean, however, that the slaves in those parts were
entirely neglected. There were at work other agencies to bring them to
the light. And so on it continued until the outbreak of the Revolution,
when the work of these missionaries was impeded and in most cases brought
to a close.

C. E. PIERRE


FOOTNOTES:


[1] "An Account of the Endeavor Used by the S.P.G.," pp. 6-12; Meade,
"Sermons of Rev. Thomas Bacon," pp. 31 _et seq._

[2] Special Report of U. S. Commission of Ed., 1871, pp. 300 _et seq._

[3] _Journal_, Vol. I, May 30, July 18, and Aug. 15, 1707; Special Report
of the U. S. Com. of Ed., 1871, p. 363.

[4] Pascoe, "Classified Digest of the Records of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts," p. 15.

[5] Ibid., 15.

[6] In 1713 this churchman wrote his supporters:

     "As I am a minister of Christ and of the Church of England, and a
     Missionary of the most Christian Society in the whole world, I think
     it my indispensable and special duty to do all that in me lies to
     promote the conversion and salvation of the poor heathens here, and
     more especially of the Negro and Indian slaves in my own parish,
     which I hope I can truly say I have been sincerely and earnestly
     endeavoring ever since I was a minister here where there are many
     Negro and Indian slaves in a most pitifull deplorable and perishing
     condition tho' little pitied by many of their masters and their
     conversion and salvation little desired and endeavored by them. If
     the masters were but good Christians themselves and would but
     concurre with the ministers, we should then have good hopes of the
     conversion and salvation at least of some of their Negro and Indian
     slaves. But too many of them rather oppose than concurr with us and
     are angry with us, I am sure I may say with me for endeavouring as
     much as I doe the conversion of their slaves.... I cannot but honour
     Madame Haigue.... In my parish a very considerable number of Negroes
     ... were very loose and wicked and little inclined to Christianity
     before her coming among them I can't but honor her so much ... as to
     acquaint the Society with the extraordinary pains this gentle woman
     and one Madm. Edwards, that came with her, have taken to instruct
     those negroes in the principles of the Christian Religion and to
     instruct and reform them; And the wonderful successe they have met
     with, in about a half a year's time in this great and good work. Upon
     these gentle women's desiring me to come and examine these negroes
     ... I went and among other things I asked them, Who Christ was. They
     readily answered. He is the Son of God and Saviour of the world and
     told me that they embraced Him with all their hearts as such, and I
     desired them to rehearse the Apostles' Creed, and the Ten
     Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, which they did very distinctly
     and perfectly. 14 of them gave me so great satisfaction, and were so
     very desirous to be baptized, that I thought it my duty to baptize
     them and therefore I baptized these 14 last Lord's Day. And I doubt
     not but these gentlewomen will prepare the rest of them for Baptism
     in a short Time." _Journal_, Vol. II, Oct. 6, 1713; A. Mss., Vol.
     VIII, pp. 356-7; Pascoe, "Digest of Records of S.P.G.," p. 15.

[7] _Journal_, II, 328; XIV, 48; XX, 132-133; XVI, 165-166.

[8] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1723, p. 46.

[9] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," 16.

[10] Meriwether, "Education in South Carolina," p. 123; McCrady, "South
Carolina," etc., p. 246; Dalcho, "An Historical Account of the Protestant
Episcopal Church in South Carolina," pp. 156, 157, 164.

[11] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," p. 22.

[12] Ibid., 22.

[13] Ibid., 23.

[14] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1723, p. 47.

[15] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," p. 22.

[16] Smyth, "Works of Franklin," V, 431.

[17] Wickersham, "History of Education in Pennsylvania," p. 249.

[18] Bassett, "Slavery and Servitude in North Carolina," p. 226.

[19] _Journal_, Vol. XI, pp. 305 and 311.

[20] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," p. 28.

[21] _Journal_, Vol. XVII, p. 97.

[22] Ibid., II, 251.

[23] _Journal_, IX, 87.

[24] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1723, p. 47.

[25] Ibid., 1737, 50.

[26] Ibid., 1737, p. 41.

[26a] Pennsylvania Magazine of History, XXIV, 467, 469.

[27] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," p. 38.

[28] Ibid., 39.

[29] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1736.

[30] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," 55.

[31] Ibid., 56.

[32] Ibid., 57, and "Special Report of U.S. Com. of Ed.," 1871, 362;
and "An Account of the Endeavors Used by the S.P.G.," pp. 6-12.

[33] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," p. 58.

[34] Ibid., _Journal_, I, Oct. 20, 1710.

[35] "Special Report of U.S. Com. of Ed.," 1871, p. 362.

[36] Pascoe, "Digest, etc.," p. 59.

[37] _Journal_, III, Oct. 15, 1714.

[38] Humphreys, "Historical Account of the S.P.G.," 243.

[39] Pascoe, "Digest, etc.," p. 65.

[40] Ibid., 66.

[41] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1737.

[42] Pascoe, "Digest, etc.," p. 68.

[43] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1723, p. 50.

[44] _Journal_, XIX, 452-453.

[45] Ibid., January 21, 1715.

[46] Pascoe, "Digest of the Records of the S.P.G.," p. 67.

[47] Ibid., 46.

[48] Ibid., 47.

[49] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1737 and 1738, p. 39.

[50] Ibid., p. 40.

[51] _Proceedings of the S.P.G._, 1723, 51.

[52] Ibid., 1723, p. 52.


PEOPLE OF COLOR IN LOUISIANA


PART I


The title of a possible discussion of the Negro in Louisiana presents
difficulties, for there is no such word as Negro permissible in speaking of
this State. The history of the State is filled with attempts to define,
sometimes at the point of the sword, oftenest in civil or criminal courts,
the meaning of the word Negro. By common consent, it came to mean in
Louisiana, prior to 1865, slave, and after the war, those whose complexions
were noticeably dark. As Grace King so delightfully puts it, "The
pure-blooded African was never called colored, but always Negro." The _gens
de couleur_, colored people, were always a class apart, separated from and
superior to the Negroes, ennobled were it only by one drop of white blood
in their veins. The caste seems to have existed from the first introduction
of slaves. To the whites, all Africans who were not of pure blood were
_gens de couleur_. Among themselves, however, there were jealous and
fiercely-guarded distinctions: "griffes, briqués, mulattoes, quadroons,
octoroons, each term meaning one degree's further transfiguration toward
the Caucasian standard of physical perfection."[1]

Negro slavery in Louisiana seems to have been early influenced by the
policy of the Spanish colonies. De las Casas, an apostle to the Indians,
exclaimed against the slavery of the Indians and finding his efforts of no
avail proposed to Charles V in 1517 the slavery of the Africans as a
substitute.[2] The Spaniards refused at first to import slaves from Africa,
but later agreed to the proposition and employed other nations to traffic
in them.[3] Louisiana learned from the Spanish colonies her lessons of
this traffic, took over certain parts of the slave regulations and imported
bondmen from the Spanish West Indies. Others brought thither were Congo,
Banbara, Yaloff, and Mandingo slaves.[4]

People of color were introduced into Louisiana early in the eighteenth
century. In 1708, according to the historian, Gayarré, the little colony of
Louisiana, at the point on the Gulf of Mexico now known as Biloxi, in the
present State of Mississippi, had been in existence nine years. In 1708,
the population of the colony did not exceed 279 persons. The land about
this region is particularly sterile, and the colonists were little disposed
to undertake the laborious task of tilling the soil. Indian slavery was
attempted but found unprofitable and exceedingly precarious. So Bienville,
lacking the sympathy of De las Casas for the Indians, wrote his government
to obtain the authorization of exchanging Negroes for Indians with the
French West Indian islands. "We shall give," he said, "three Indians for
two Negroes. The Indians, when in the islands, will not be able to run
away, the country being unknown to them, and the Negroes will not dare to
become fugitives in Louisiana, because the Indians would kill them."[5]

Bienville's suggestion seems not to have met with a very favorable
reception. Yet, in 1712, the King of France granted to Anthony Crozat the
exclusive privilege for fifteen years of trading in all that immense
territory which, with its undefined limits, France claimed as Louisiana.
Among other privileges granted Crozat were those of sending, once a year, a
ship to Africa for Negroes.[6] When the first came, is not known, but in
1713 twenty of these Negro slaves from Africa are recorded in the census of
the little colony on the Mississippi.[7]

In 1717 John Law flashed meteor-wise across the world with his huge scheme
to finance France out of difficulty with his Mississippi Bubble. Among
other considerations mentioned in the charter for twenty-five years, which
he obtained from the gullible French government, was the stipulation that
before the expiration of the charter, he must transport to Louisiana six
thousand white persons, and three thousand Negroes, not to be brought from
another French colony. These slaves, so said the charter, were to be sold
to those inhabitants who had been two years in the colony for one half cash
and the balance on one year's credit. The new inhabitants had one or two
years' credit granted them.[8] In the first year, the Law Company
transported from Africa one thousand slaves, in 1720 five hundred, the same
number the next March, and by 1721 the pages of legal enactments in the
West Indies were being ransacked for precedents in dealing with this
strange population. But of all these slaves who came to the colony by June,
1721, but six hundred remained. Many had died, some had been exported. In
1722, therefore, the Mississippi Company was under constraint to pass an
edict prohibiting the inhabitants of Louisiana from selling their slaves
for transportation out of the colony, to the Spaniards, or to any other
foreign nation under the penalty of the fine of a thousand livres and the
confiscation of the Negroes.[9]

But already the curse of slavery had begun to show its effects. The new
colony was not immoral; it may best be described as unmoral. Indolence on
the part of the masters was physical, mental and moral. The slave
population began to lighten in color, and increase out of all proportion to
the importation and natural breeding among themselves. La Harpe comments in
1724 upon the astonishing diminution of the white population and the
astounding increase of the colored population.[10] Something was
undoubtedly wrong, according to the Caucasian standard, and it has remained
wrong to our own day.[11] The person of color was now, in Louisiana, a
part of its social system, a creature to be legislated for and against, a
person lending his dark shade to temper the inartistic complexion of his
white master. Now he began to make history, and just as the trail of his
color persisted in the complexion of Louisiana, so the trail of his
personal influence continued in the history of the colony, the territory
and the State.

Bienville, the man of far-reaching vision, saw the danger menacing the
colony, and before his recall and disgrace before the French court, he
published, in 1724, the famous Black Code.[12] This code followed the
order of that of the West Indies but contains some provisions to meet
local needs. The legal status of the slave was that of movable property of
his master. Children born of Negro parents followed the condition of their
mother. Slaves were forbidden to carry weapons. Slaves of different
masters could not assemble in crowds by day or night. They were not
permitted to sell "commodities, provisions, or produce" without permission
from their masters, and had no property which did not belong to their
masters. Neither free-born blacks nor slaves were allowed to receive gifts
from whites. They could not exercise such public functions as arbitrator
or expert, could not be partners to civil or criminal suits, could not
give testimony except in default of white people, and could never testify
against their masters. If a slave struck his master or one of the family
so as to produce a bruise or shedding blood in the face, he had to be put
to death. Any runaway slave who continued to be so from the day his master
"denounced" him suffered the penalty of having his ears cut off and being
branded on his shoulder with a fleur-de-lis. For a second offence the
penalty was to hamstring the fugitive and brand him on the other shoulder.
For the third such offence he suffered death. Freed or free-born Negroes
who gave refuge to fugitive slaves had to pay 30 livres for each day of
retention and other free persons 10 livres a day. If the freed or
free-born Negroes were not able to pay the fine, they could be reduced to
the condition of slaves and sold as such.

The slaves were socially ostracized. Marriage of whites with slaves was
forbidden, as was also the concubinage of whites and manumitted or
free-born blacks with slaves. The consent of the parents of a slave to his
marriage was not required. That of the master was sufficient, but a slave
could not be forced to marry against his will.

There were, however, somewhat favorable provisions which made this code
seem a little less rigorous. The slaves had to be well fed and the masters
could not force them to provide for themselves by working for their own
account certain days of the week and slaves could give information against
their owners, if not properly fed or clothed. Disabled slaves had to be
sent to the hospital. Husbands, wives, and their children under the age of
puberty could not be seized and sold separately when belonging to the same
master. The code forbade the application of the rack to slaves, under any
pretext, on private authority, or mutilation of a limb, under penalty of
confiscation of the slave and criminal prosecution of the master. The
master was allowed, however, to have his slave put in irons and whipped
with rods or ropes. The code commanded officers or justices to prosecute
masters and overseers who should kill or mutilate slaves, and to punish the
murder according to the atrocity of the circumstance.

Other provisions were still more favorable. The slaves had to be instructed
in the Catholic religion. Slaves appointed by their masters as tutors to
their children were held set free. Moreover, manumitted slaves enjoyed the
same rights, privileges and immunities that were enjoyed by those born
free. "It is our pleasure," reads the document, "that their merit in having
acquired their freedom shall produce in their favor, not only with regard
to their persons, but also to their property, the same effects that our
other subjects derive from the happy circumstance of their having been born
free."[13]

From the first appearance of the _gens de couleur_ in the colony of
Louisiana dates the class, the _gens de couleur libres_. The record of
the legal tangles which resulted from the attempts to define this race in
Louisiana is most interesting. Up to 1671, all Creoles, Mulattoes, free
Negroes, etc., paid a capitation tax. In February 12 of that year, M. de
Baas, Governor-General of Martinique, issued an order exempting the
Creoles. Those Mulattoes who were also designated as Creoles claimed the
same exemption and resisted paying the tax. M. Patoulet, Intendent,
rendered a decision in 1683 and said: "The Mulattoes and free Negroes
claimed to be exempt from the capitation tax: I have made them pay without
difficulty. I decide that those Mulattoes born in vice should not receive
the exemption, and that for the free Negro, the master could give him
freedom but could not give him the exemption that attaches to the whites
originally from France."[14] The next year, the Mulattoes refused to pay,
and the successor of Minister Patoulet, M. Michel Begou, asked for a law to
compel them.[15] In 1696, an agreement was reached exempting the Mulattoes
and Creoles, leaving only the free black subject to the tax.[16] But in
1712, a M. Robert, in a decision on a subject, again included the
Mulattoes, without, however, mentioning the Creoles, so that only the free
Negroes and Mulattoes paid.[17] Thus they were held as a class apart. A
free Negro woman, Magdelaine Debern, further contested the matter, and in
1724, in the colony of Louisiana, won a decision exempting free Negroes and
Mulattoes, and again placing them on the same footing with the Creole. The
Creoles had a decided advantage, however, because through the favor of
those in authority, there was always a disposition to exalt them.[18]

It is in the definition of the word Creole that another great difficulty
arises. The native white Louisianian will tell you that a Creole is a white
man, whose ancestors contain some French or Spanish blood in their veins.
But he will be disputed by others, who will gravely tell you that Creoles
are to be found only in the lower Delta lands of the state, that there are
no Creoles north of New Orleans; and will raise their hands in horror at
the idea of being confused with the "Cajans," the descendants of those Nova
Scotians whom Longfellow immortalized in Evangeline. Sifting down the mass
of conflicting definitions, it appears that to a Caucasian, a Creole is a
native of the lower parishes of Louisiana, in whose veins some traces of
Spanish, West Indian or French blood runs.[19] The Caucasian will shudder
with horror at the idea of including a person of color in the definition,
and the person of color will retort with his definition that a Creole is a
native of Louisiana, in whose blood runs mixed strains of everything
un-American, with the African strain slightly apparent. The true Creole is
like the famous gumbo of the state, a little bit of everything, making a
whole, delightfully flavored, quite distinctive, and wholly unique.

From 1724 to the present time, frequent discussions as to the proper name
by which to designate this very important portion of the population of
Louisiana waged more or less acrimoniously.[20] It was this Creole element
who in 1763 obtained a decision from Louis XV that all mixed bloods who
could claim descent from an Indian ancestor in addition to a white
outranked those mixed bloods who had only white and African ancestors.[21]
In Jamaica, in 1733, there was passed a law that every person who could
show that he was three degrees removed from a Negro ancestor should be
regarded as belonging to the white race, and could sit as a member of the
Jamaica Assembly.[22] In Barbadoes, any person who had a white ancestor
could vote. These laws were quoted in Louisiana and influenced legislation
there.[23]

Gov. Perier succeeded Bienville as Governor of Louisiana. His task was not
a light one; the colony staggered under "terror of attack from the Indians,
sudden alarms, false hopes, anxious suspense, militia levies, colonial
paper, instead of good money, industrial stagnation, the care of homeless
refugees, and worst of all, the restiveness of the slaves. The bad effects
of slave-holding began to show themselves." Many of the slaves had been
taken in war, and were fierce and implacable. Some were of that fiercest of
African tribes, the Banbaras. A friendliness, born of common hatred and
despair, began to show itself between the colored people and the fierce
Choctaw Indians surrounding the colony, when Gov. Perier planned a
master-stroke of diplomacy. Just above New Orleans lived a small tribe of
Indians, the Chouchas, who, not particularly harmful in themselves, had
succeeded in inspiring the nervous inhabitants of the city with abject
fear. Perier armed a band of slaves in 1729 and sent them to the Chouchas
with instructions to exterminate the tribe. They did their work with an
ease and dispatch that should have been a warning to their white masters.
In reporting the success of his plan Perier said: "The Negroes executed
their mission with as much promptitude as secrecy. This lesson taught them
by our Negroes, kept in check all the nations higher up the river."[24]
Thus, by one stroke the wily Governor had intimidated the tribes of
Indians, allayed the nervous fears of New Orleans, and effected a state of
hostility between the Indians and the Africans, who were beginning to be
entirely too friendly with each other. Then Perier used the slaves to make
the entrenchments about the city. Thus we have the first instance of the
arming of the Negro in Louisiana for the defense of the colony. On the 15th
of January, 1730, Gov. Perier sent a boat containing twenty white men and
six Africans to carry ammunition to the Illinois settlement up the
Mississippi river whence tales of massacre and cruelty by the Indians
filtered down.[25]

The arming of the slaves in defense of the whites gave impetus to the
struggle for their own freedom. In the massacre of the French by the
Natchez, at the village of that name, over three hundred women and slaves
were kept as prisoners, and in January of the same year which witnessed the
massacre of the Chouchas, the French surprised the Natchez Indians with the
intention of recovering their women and slaves, and avenging the death of
their comrades. Some of the Africans who had been promised their freedom if
they allied themselves with the Natchez Indians, fought against their
erstwhile masters, others were loyal, and helped the French. The battle
became an issue, as it were, between the slaves. Over one hundred of them
were recovered from the Indians.[26]

The first tribute we have paid to the black man as a soldier in Louisiana
was paid by Gov. Perier in this war in his dispatch to the French
government. "Fifteen negroes," he wrote, "in whose hands we had put
weapons, performed prodigies of valor. If the blacks did not cost so much,
and if their labors were not so necessary to the colony, it would be better
to turn them into soldiers, and to dismiss those we have, who are so bad
and so cowardly that they seem to have been manufactured purposely for this
colony."[27]

But the tiger had tasted blood. Perier's cruel logic was reactionary. Since
he had used blacks to murder Indians in order to make bad blood between the
races, the Indians retaliated by using blacks to murder white men. In
August of that same fateful year, the Chickasaws, who had given asylum to
the despoiled Natchez in order to curb the encroachments of the white men,
stirred the black slaves to revolt. We have noted before the prevalence of
the Banbara Negroes in the colony. It was they who planned the rebellion.
Their plan was, after having butchered the whites, to establish a Banbara
colony, keeping as slaves for themselves all blacks not of their nation.
The conspiracy was discovered by the hints of a woman in the revolt before
it had time to ripen, and the head of the revolt, a powerful black named
Samba with eight of his confederates was broken on the wheel, and the woman
hanged.[28]

Gov. Perier's administration did not lack interest. The next year, in 1731,
we find him still struggling with his old enemies, the Natchez. His
dispatches mention that a crew under one De Coulanges, with Indians and
free blacks had been massacred by the Indians. One dispatch has the
greatest interest for us, because of the expression "free blacks"[29] used.
Here is one of the great mysteries of the person of color in Louisiana.
Whence the free black? We are told explicitly that up to this time all
Negroes imported into Louisiana were slaves from Africa, for the West
Indian migration did not occur until a half century later. This dispatch
from Gov. Perier recalls articles in the Black Code of 1724, where explicit
directions are given for the disposition of the children of free blacks.
In the regulations of police under the governorship of the Marquis of
Vandreuil, 1750, there is an article regulating the attitude of free
Negroes and Negresses toward slaves. Here is the very beginning of that
aristocracy of freedom so fiercely and jealously guarded until this day, a
free person of color being set as far above his slave fellows as the white
man sets himself above the person of color. Three explanations for this
aristocracy seem highly probable: Some slaves might have been freed by
their masters because of valor on the battlefield, others by buying their
freedom in terms of money, and not a few slave women by their owners
because of their personal attractions. It makes little difference in this
story which of the three or whether all of the three were contributors to
the rise of this new class. It existed as early as 1724, twelve years after
the first recorded slave importation. It was in 1766 that some Acadians,
complaining of their treatment to the Governor Ulloa, represented that
Negroes were freemen while they were slaves.

Bienville returned to the colony as its governor in 1733, after an absence
of eight years, and it is recorded that in 1735, when he reviewed his
troops near Mobile while making preparations for an Indian war, he found
that his army from New Orleans consisted of five hundred and forty-four
white men, excluding the officers, and forty-five Negroes commanded by free
blacks.[30] Here we note free black officers of Negro troops in 1735. If
not actually the first regular Negro troops to appear in what is now the
United States, they were certainly the first to be commanded by Negro
officers.

The engagement with the Choctaw Indians was not altogether successful for
the French. Disaster succeeded disaster, and the day closed with the French
army deeply humiliated, and making a retreat as dignified as possible under
the circumstances. A number of the French officers, as Gayarré tells us,
stood under the shade of a gigantic oak discussing the defeat, and with
them Simon, a free black, the commander of the troop of Negroes. He was
deeply vexed because his troops had not stood fire, and expressed himself
with so much freedom and disgust, that the French officers kept bantering
him without mercy at the timidity of his soldiers, soothing their own
wounded pride by laughing at his mortification. Stung to the heart, Simon
finally exclaimed wrathfully, "A Negro is as brave as anybody and I will
show it to you." Seizing a rope which was dangling from one of the tents,
he rushed headlong toward one of the horses which were quietly slaking
their thirst under the protection of the Indian muskets. To reach a white
mare, to jump on her back with the agility of a tiger, and to twist around
her head and mouth the rope with which to control her, was the affair of an
instant. But that instant was enough for the apparently sleeping Indian
village to show itself awake, and to flash forth into a hail of bullets.
Away dashed Simon toward the Indian village, and back to the French camp
where he arrived safe amid the cheering acclamations of the troops, and
without having received a wound from the shots of the enemy.[31] This feat
silenced at once the jests of the French officers, of which Simon thought
himself the victim.[32]

The beginning of the Revolutionary war in 1776 found Louisiana a Spanish
province and the natives of the colony beginning to tolerate and even to
like their erstwhile hated Spanish masters. Don Bernardo de Galvez was
governor of the colony. His administration has a peculiar interest to us,
because it was during his rule that the Court of Madrid, fully alive to the
policy of extending the agriculture of Louisiana, issued a decree
permitting the introduction of Negroes into Louisiana by French vessels,
from whatever ports they might come.[33] This was the beginning of the
rapid migration from the West Indian islands.

While Andrew Jackson was still a child, Louisiana had a deliverer from the
British in the person of this brave Gov. Galvez. The strategical importance
of the Mississippi River and of New Orleans was at once apparent to the
British commanders, and Louisiana, being neutral territory, offered a most
fascinating field of operation. Galvez, in July, 1777, had secured
declaration of neutrality from the 25,000 or more Creeks, Choctaws and
Chickasaws, but even this did not seem to satisfy the combatants. New
Orleans was at the mercy of first the American troops and then the British.
The mediation of Spain between France and England having been rejected in
the courts of Europe, Spain decided to join France in the struggle against
Great Britain. So on May 8, 1779, Spain formally declared war against Great
Britain, and on July 8 authorized all Spanish subjects in America to take
their share in the hostilities against the English. No news could be more
welcome to the dashing young Galvez, to whom a policy of neutrality was
decidedly distasteful. He decided to forestall the attack on New Orleans,
which he had learned was to be made by the British, by attacking first, and
on August 26 gathered his little army together. From New Orleans, as
Gayarré tells, were 170 veteran soldiers, 330 recruits, 20 carabiniers, 60
militiamen, and 80 free blacks and mulattoes. On the way up the river, they
were reinforced by 600 men from the coast of "every condition and color,"
besides 160 Indians.[34]

On the march, the colored men and Indians were ordered to keep ahead of the
main body of troops, at a distance of about three quarters of a mile, and
closely to reconnoitre the woods. In capturing the two forts of Baton Rouge
and Natchez, which were held by the British, Galvez found a considerable
number of Negro slaves who had been armed by the British. Many of these
he set free. In his dispatch to his government at Madrid, Galvez reports
that the companies of free blacks and mulattoes, who had been employed in
all the false attacks, and who, as scouts and skirmishers, had proved
exceedingly useful, behaved on all occasions with as much valor and
generosity as the white soldiers.[35] But not alone were the exploits of
Galvez's little army celebrated in history. Poetry added her laurel
wreath to its crown. Julien Poydras de Lalande, known to all Louisianians
as Poydras, celebrated the victory in a poem, "The God of the Mississippi,"
wherein the brave deeds of the army, white and colored, are hailed in
French verse, lame and halting, it may be in places, but impartial in
its tribute.

The close of the Revolutionary war found the colony partially paralyzed as
to industry. During the Spanish domination the indigo industry declined,
tobacco was difficult to raise, and the production of cotton was not then
profitable. Sugar raising was the only other industry to which they could
turn. In 1751 the Jesuit fathers had received their first seed, or rather
layers, from Santo Domingo and from that time sugar-cane had been grown
with more or less success. But it was a strictly local industry. The
Louisianians were poor sugar-makers. The stuff was badly granulated and
very moist, and when in 1765 an effort was made to export some of the sugar
to France, it was so wet that half of the cargo leaked out of the ship
before it could make port. It was just at this psychological moment, in
1791 to 1794, when the planters of the lower Delta saw ruin staring them in
the face, that there came to the rescue of the colony a man of color, one
of the refugees from Santo Domingo, where the blacks had risen in 1791.
From the failure of this abortive attempt to emulate the spirit of the
white man, refugees flew in every direction, and Louisiana welcomed them,
if not exactly with open arms, at least with more indifference than other
colonies. And these black refugees were her saviors. For they had been
prosperous sugar-makers, and the efforts to make marketable sugar in
Louisiana, which had ceased for nearly twenty-five years, were revived. Two
Spaniards, Mendez and Solis, erected on the outskirts of New Orleans, the
one a distillery, the other a battery of sugar-kettles, and manufactured
rum and syrup. Still, the efforts were not entirely successful, until
Etienne de Boré appeared. Face to face with ruin because of the failure of
the indigo crop, he staked his all on the granulation of sugar. He enlisted
the services of these successful Santo Dominicans, and went to work. In all
American history there can be fewer scenes more dramatic than the one
described by careful historians of Louisiana, the day when the final test
was made and there was passed around the electrical word, "It
granulates!"[36]

That year de Boré marketed $12,000 worth of super or sugar. The agriculture
of the Delta was revolutionized; seven years afterwards New Orleans
marketed 2,000,000 gallons of rum, 250,000 gallons of molasses, and
5,000,000 pounds of sugar. It was the beginning of the commercial
importance of one of the most progressive cities in the country.
Imagination refuses to picture what would have been the case but for the
refugees from San Domingo.

But the same revolution which gave to Louisiana its prestige to the
commercial world, almost starved the province to death. In the year 1791,
the trade, which had flourished briskly between Santo Domingo and New
Orleans, was closed because of the uprising, and but for Philadelphia,
famine would have decimated the city. 1,000 barrels of flour were sent in
haste to the starving city by the good Quakers of Philadelphia. The members
of the Cabildo, the local council, prohibited the introduction of people of
color from Santo Domingo, fearing the dangerous ideas of the brotherhood of
man. But it was too late. The news of the success of the slaves in Santo
Domingo, and the success of the French Revolution, says Gayarré, had
penetrated into the most remote cabins of Louisiana, and in April, 1795, on
the plantation of the same Poydras who had sung the glory of the army of
Galvez, a conspiracy was formed for a general uprising of the slaves
throughout the parish of Pointe Coupée. The leaders were three white men.
The conspiracy failed because one of the leaders was incensed at his advice
not being heeded and through his wife the authorities were notified. A
struggle ensued, and the conspiracy was strangled in its infancy by the
trial and execution of the slaves most concerned in the insurrection. The
three white men were exiled from the colony.[37] This finally ended the
importation of slaves from the West Indies.

ALICE DUNBAR-NELSON


FOOTNOTES:


[1] King, "New Orleans, the Place and the People during the Ancien Regime,"
333.

[2] De las Casas, "Historia, General," IV, 380.

[3] Herrera, "Historia General," dec. IV, libro II; dec. V, libro II; dec.
VII, libro IV.

[4] French, "Historical Collections of Louisiana," Part V, 119 et seq.

[5] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," 4th Edition, I, 242, 254.

[6] French, "Historical Collections of Louisiana," Part III, p. 42.

[7] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," I, 102.

[8] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," I, 242, 454.

[9] Ibid., I, 366.

[10] Ibid., I, 365-366.

[11] In 1900 a writer in Pearson's Magazine in discussing race mixture in
early Louisiana made some startling statements as to the results of the
miscegenation of these stocks during the colonial period.

[12] Code Noir, 1724.

[13] Code Noir.

[14] Lebeau, De la condition des gens de couleur libres sous l'ancien
régime, p. 49.

[15] Ibid., 49.

[16] Ibid., 50.

[17] Ibid., 51.

[18] In the treaty of 1803 between the newly acquired territory of
Louisiana and the government of the United States, they and all mixed
bloods were granted full citizenship.

[19] Most writers of our day adhere to this definition. See Grace King,
"New Orleans, etc.," and Gayarré, "History of Louisiana."

[20] Lebeau, De la condition des gens de couleur libres sous l'ancien
régime, passim.

[21] Ibid., 60.

[22] Laws of Jamaica.

[23] Litigation on the subject of the definition of the free person of
color reached its climax in the year of our Lord, 1909, when Judge Frank D.
Chretien defined the word Negro as differentiated from person of color as
used in Louisiana. The case, as it was argued in court, was briefly this.
It was charged that one Treadway, a white man, was living in illegal
relations with an octoroon, Josephine Lightell. The District Attorney
claimed that any one having a trace of African blood in his veins, however
slight, should be classed as a Negro. Counsel for the defence had taken the
position that Josephine Lightell had so little Negro blood in her veins
that she could not be classed as one. Judge Chretien held in his ruling
that local opinion, custom and sentiment had previously agreed in holding
that the black, and not the white blood settled the ethnological status of
each person and that an octoroon, no less than a quadroon and a mulatto,
had been considered a Negro. But he held that if the Caucasian wished to be
considered the superior race, and that if his blood be considered the
superior element in the infusion, then the Caucasian and not the Negro
blood must determine the status of a person. The case went to the Supreme
Court of Louisiana on an appeal from the decision of Judge Chretien who
held that a mulatto is not a Negro in legal parlance. The Supreme Court in
a decision handed down April 25, 1910, sustained the view of Judge
Chretien. This decision was an interpretation of an act of 1908 which set
forth a definition of the word Negro.--See State vs. Treadway, 126
Louisiana, 300.

[24] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," I, 444, 448.

[25] Ibid., I, 365, 442, 454.

[26] Ibid., I, 448.

[27] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," I, 435.

[28] Ibid., 440.

[29] Ibid., I, 444.

[30] Dumont, "Memoires Historiques sur la Louisiane," 225, 226.

[31] Another interesting story is related by Dumont, a historian of
     Louisiana, who published a work in 1753. The colony was then under
     the administration of Gov. Kerlerec, whose opinion of colonial
     courage was not very high. The colony was without an executioner, and
     no white man could be found who would be willing to accept the
     office. It was decided finally by the council to force it upon a
     Negro blacksmith belonging to the Company of the Indies, named
     Jeannot, renowned for his nerve and strength. He was summoned and
     told that he was to be appointed executioner and made a free man at
     the same time. The stalwart fellow started back in anguish and
     horror, "What! cut off the heads of people who have never done me any
     harm?" He prayed, he wept, but saw at last that there was no escape
     from the inflexible will of his masters. "Very well," he said, rising
     from his knees, "wait a moment." He ran to his cabin, seized a
     hatchet with his left hand, laid his right hand on a block of wood
     and cut it off. Returning, without a word he exhibited the bloody
     stump to the gentlemen of the council. With one cry, it is said, they
     sprang to his relief, and his freedom was given him.--Dumont,
     "Memoires Historiques sur la Louisiane," 244, 246.

     The story is also told by Grace King of one slave, an excellent cook,
     who had once served a French governor. When, in one of her periodic
     transitions from one government to another, Louisiana became the
     property of Spain, the "Cruel" O'Reilly was made governor of the
     colony. He was execrated as were all things sent by Spain or
     pertaining to Spanish rule. However, having heard of the fame of the
     Negro cook, he sent for him. "You belong now," said he, "to the king
     of Spain, and until you are sold, I shall take you into my service."
     "Do not dare it;" answered the slave, "you killed my master, and I
     would poison you." O'Reilly dismissed him unpunished.--Gayarré,
     "History of Louisiana," II, 344.

[32] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," I, 480.

[33] Ibid., III, 108.

[34] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," III, 108.

[35] Ibid., III, 126-132.

[36] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," III, 348.

[37] Gayarré, "History of Louisiana," III, 354.


THE DEFEAT OF THE SECESSIONISTS IN KENTUCKY IN 1861


The treatment of the Border States in the crisis of 1861 has received from
historians the same attention as Saxony, the objective point between
Prussia and Austria in the Seven Years' War. Directing special attention
to Kentucky requires some explanation. The possession of this commonwealth
was for several reasons more important than that of some other border
States. The transportation facilities afforded by the Cumberland and
Tennessee rivers furnished the key to carrying out the plan to divide the
South. The possession of the State by the Confederates was of strategic
importance for the invasion of the North too for the reason that the
Ordinance of 1787 had been so interpreted as to fix the boundary of
Kentucky on the north side of the Ohio River. It was, moreover, the native
State of Abraham Lincoln and it was important to have that commonwealth
support this untrained backwoodsman whom most statesmen considered
incapable of administering the affairs of the nation.

In the beginning, the situation was not the least encouraging to the
Unionists. The Breckenridge Democrats had carried the State in 1859 on a
platform favoring Southern rights. Their chief spokesman had become such a
defender of their faith that in 1860 he was chosen to lead the radically
proslavery party which had come to the point of so doubting the orthodoxy
of their Northern adherents as to deem it advisable to separate from
them. Unalterably in favor of the rights of the slave States, the leaders
of this persuasion had expressed themselves in terms that could not be
misunderstood.[1] One of their spokesmen Humphrey Marshall contended
that slavery is not a creature of municipal law. He believed that the
institution followed the flag. He wanted Union but only with that
equality which involved the recognition of the right of property in slaves
everywhere.[2] Speaking in the House of Representatives on January 30,
1861, John W. Stephenson, another of this faction, said on the same topic:
"Equality underlaid the whole Federal structure, and protection to persons
and property within the Federal jurisdiction, was the price of allegiance
of the States to such General Government, as delegated and prescribed in
the constitution. Wherever the American banner floated upon the seas or
land, all beneath it was entitled to the protection of the flag."[3]

On this question, their leader John C. Breckenridge, "a believer in the old
Democratic creed and a supporter of the South and her institutions,"[4]
took the same, if not higher ground. Referring to the Dred Scott decision
in a speech delivered in Ashland, Kentucky, in 1859, Breckenridge said:
"After this decision we had arrived at a point where we might reasonably
expect tranquillity and peace. The equality of rights and property of all
the states in the common Territory, having been stamped by the seal of
judicial authority, all good citizens might well acquiesce."[5] When the
Southern States seceded because of the threatened infringement of these
rights, the President of the United States, according to Breckenridge, had
no right to enlist men and no right to blockade the Southern ports, in
short, no right to wage war on these commonwealths. Lincoln had thus
overthrown constitutional government. If he was trying to preserve the
Union, he must do it in a constitutional way. Breckenridge wanted the Union
but contended that it would be no good without the Constitution.[6] To sum
up, as Southern Democrats they had helped to disrupt the Charleston
Convention, and developing into a strict Southern rights party, they had
through bolting made possible the election of Abraham Lincoln. They then
finally joined the States' rights party, which, boldly declaring the
election of Lincoln a just cause for the dissolution of the Union,
undertook to secede.[7]

With such radical leaders in control it might seem strange that, in a
State formed from an aristocratic commonwealth like Virginia and extending
into the fertile region of the Mississippi, these protagonists of States'
rights did not turn Kentucky over to the Confederacy. Exactly what part
did the rich slaveholders play during this crisis when the State was
called upon to decide the question between the North and South? What was
the position of such influential men as James B. Clay, George B. Hodge,
Cerro Gordo Williams, T. P. Porter, Roger W. Hansom, and S. B. Buckner?[8]

Other representative citizens, however, had been equally outspoken in
favor of the Union. Voicing the sentiment of the Union party, which on the
eighth of January met in Louisville to take steps to support the Federal
Government, Bell said: "Let us offer everything we can to avert the
torrent of evil, but let us always stand ready to support our rights in
the Union: the State is deeply and devotedly attached to the Union."[9]
Garrett Davis inquired: "Will you preserve the Union or rush into the
vortex of revolution under the name of secession?"[10] J. T. Boyle said in
the same convention that there could be no benefit or advantage, no civil
or political rights, no interest of any kind whatever, secured by
government in the Southern Confederacy which the people did not then enjoy
in the "blessed Union formed by our fathers." In his opinion, it was the
duty of Kentuckians "to stand by the Star Spangled Banner and cling to the
Union."[11] Some of the most influential newspapers were fearlessly
advocating the Union cause. Among others were the Frankfort _Daily
Commonwealth_, the Louisville _Courier_ and the _Democrat_.

Exactly what support these leaders of the differing factions would obtain
was determined by forces for centuries at work in that State. Southerners
who thought that, because Kentucky was a slave State it should go with the
South, had failed to take these causes into consideration. In the first
place, not every slaveholder was an ardent proslavery agitator. There were
masters who like Henry Clay considered slavery an evil and hoped to see it
abolished, but while the majority of their fellow countrymen held on to it
they did so too. Many Kentuckians, moreover, were like that restless class
of Westerners who, dissatisfied with the society based on slavery, had
taken up land beyond the mountains, where the poor man could toil up from
poverty.[12] Kentucky was the first section west of the Allegheny mountains
settled by these daring adventurers because they were there cut off from
the North by the French and from the South by the Spanish, and in Kentucky,
a section hemmed in by these foreign possessions, the settlers were less
liable to be disturbed. And even when the barrier of foreign claims had
been removed, the movement of population from the East to the West took
place along lines leading to the States later organized in the West rather
than into Kentucky. The people of Kentucky, therefore, were not radically
changed in a day by the influx of population. On the contrary, many of
them, especially the mountaineers, have not changed since the days of Boone
and Henderson. Some of them having left the uplands of the colonies because
they were handicapped by slavery, were naturally opposed to the bold claims
of that institution in 1861. They, like the Westerners, learned to look to
the General Government for the establishment of commonwealths, the building
of forts, and the maintenance of troops,[13] and, therefore, adhered to it
when it was threatened with destruction.

Another cause, moreover, was equally as potential. In Kentucky as in some
other Southern States, there had grown up a considerable number of
prosperous country towns, where resided lawyers, merchants, bankers,
teachers, and mechanics, who had little property interest in slavery, who
felt their own "intellectual superiority to the country squires and their
fox-hunting, horse-racing, quarrelsome sons, and who consequently asserted
social independence of them and social equality with them."[14] They were
hostile to the aristocratic masters, whom they generally denounced as
"oligarchs," "slavocrats," "Lords of the Lash," and "Terror Engenders."[15]
This mercantile and professional class, inspired by such men as Hinton
Rowan Helper, contemplated the removal of the Negroes and the bringing of
white laborers into the South.[16]

In view of this cleavage, it was difficult in the beginning of the struggle
to characterize the situation. There were unconditional Secessionists and
unconditional Union men. Judging from the condition then obtaining, no one
could tell exactly which way the State would go. "Sympathy, blood, and the
community of social feeling growing out of slavery," says one, "inclined
her to the South; her political faith which Clay more than any other man
had inspired her with and which Crittenden now loyally represented held her
fast to the Union."[17] Many of the people, though believing in States'
rights, did not think that the grievances of the South were such as to
justify secession. At the same time they opposed "coercion," and since a
reconstructed Union was impossible they would have solved the difficulty by
peaceful separation. Writing to Gen. McClellan June 8, 1861, Garrett Davis
said: "The sympathy for the South and the inclination to secession among
our people is much stronger in the southwestern corner of the state than
it is in any other part, and as you proceed toward the upper section of
the Ohio and our Virginia line, it gradually becomes weaker until it is
almost wholly lost.... I doubt not that two thirds of our people are
unconditionally for the Union. The timid are for it and they shrink from
convulsion and civil war, while all the bold, the reckless, and the
bankrupt are for secession."[18] This categorical distinction, however, is
hardly right. There were Kentuckians of representative families on both
sides in all parts of the State except in the extreme West.[19] A careful
study of the facts, however, leads one to the conclusion that even in the
beginning there were more Unionists than Secessionists. The Unionists,
unhappily, were not organized while the Secessionists were led by the State
officials, chief among whom was Governor Magoffin.

When the Southern States began to secede Governor Magoffin called a
special session of the State legislature, thinking that he could have a
secession convention called. He said in part: "I therefore submit to your
consideration the propriety of providing for the election of delegates to
a convention to be assembled at an early day to which shall be referred
for full and final determination the future of the Federal and interstate
relations of Kentucky." He further said: "Kentucky will not be an
indifferent observer of the force policy. The seceding States have not in
their haste and inconsiderate action our approval, but their cause is our
right and they have our sympathies. The people of Kentucky will never
stand by with folded arms while those States are struggling for their
constitutional rights and resisting oppression and being subjugated to an
anti-slavery government."[20] He believed that the idea of coercion, when
applied to great political communities, is revolting to a free people,
contrary to the spirit of our institutions, and if successful would
endanger the liberties of the people.[21] But the legislature did not
provide for such a convention. On the eleventh of February this body
adjourned. It reassembled on the twentieth of March and remained in
session until the fourth of April, but still these important matters were
not decided. Pursuant to another call of the Governor, it reassembled on
the 6th of May and sat until the twenty-fourth of May when it adjourned.
On the second of September the legislature elected in August came in, but
still the important question as to what should be done hung in the
balance. At first there came up the resolutions introduced by George W.
Ewing on the twenty-first of January, expressing regret that certain
States had furnished men and money for the coercion of the seceded
States, and requesting the Governor of Kentucky to notify such States
that should attempts be made to coerce these commonwealths, Kentucky
would join the South.[22] This resolution passed the House but did not
pass the whole legislature as so many have said. A resolution for calling
a convention to amend the Constitution of the United States was
passed.[23] Several distinguished men of Kentucky sat in this convention
which was in session from the fourth to the twenty-second of February
without accomplishing anything.

The majority of Kentuckians were then neutral. There were two classes of
neutrals, however. This was easily possible since neutrality meant one
thing to one man and a different thing to another. Each faction looked
forward to the adoption of this policy as a victory over the other. The
Unionists accepted it as the best policy, not knowing that, taking such a
position, they would aid the Confederacy. Even John J. Crittenden had
this idea. He said: "If Kentucky and the other border States should
assume this attitude, war between the two sections of the country would
be averted and the Confederate states after a few years' trial of their
experiment would return voluntarily to the Union." [24]

Neutrality was considered a necessity for another reason; namely, the
expected short duration of the war. No one believed at first that the war
would last long. Even Lincoln thought that it would be over in ninety
days. Some, therefore, felt that Kentucky would be foolish to cause blood
to be shed on her soil when the war could easily be kept out of the State
three months. This sentiment, however, must not be misunderstood as
evincing a lack of interest in the Union, for in the address declaring for
neutrality these same leaders said that the dismemberment of the Union was
no remedy for existing evils but an aggravation of them all.[25] To many
Unionists neutrality meant going slowly in the right direction. It was in
keeping with Lincoln's plan not to go so rapidly toward "coercion" in
Kentucky as he had in the other border States.

How then did the neutrality policy work out? On the twenty-ninth of
January R. T. Jacob introduced in the lower house of the legislature a
resolution declaring that the proper position of Kentucky was that of a
mediator between the sections, and that as an umpire she would remain firm
and impartial in that day of trial to their "beloved country that by
counsel and mediation she might aid in restoring peace and harmony and
brotherly love." Giving the reasons for adopting such a policy Jacob said:

"This leading sentiment of mediation was indorsed by the Union men of both
Houses of the Legislature.... Some may say, why did not the Kentucky
Legislature go for coercion? For two reasons: First, some States, it is
true had seceded from the Union, but war had not actually commenced:
second, the men at that time who would have undertaken to force coercion
upon the Legislature would have been in the hopeless minority and would
have immediately given a majority to the secessionists. It would have
ended in total destruction to the cause of the Union in the State. Those
resolutions were for two purposes. In good faith they were intended to
compromise all difference between the States, and if possible to restore
peace between sections. If that failed, they were intended to hold, if
possible, our meagre majority until the people could act and we had no
doubt that when they did speak it would be in unmistakable tones for the
preservation of the Union."[26]

No action was taken on these resolutions, but on the eleventh of February
there was passed a joint measure, entitled "Resolutions Declaring action
by the Legislature on political affairs unnecessary and inexpedient at
this time,"[27] These resolutions mentioned the great danger which
environed the Union, asked the Confederates to stay the work of secession
and protested against coercion. The last resolution favored the calling of
a convention to amend the Constitution of the United States. Significant
too for the Unionists were the last words: "It is unnecessary and
inexpedient for the Legislature to take any further action on the subject
at the present time, and as an evidence of the sincerity and good faith of
our propositions for an adjustment and our expression of devotion to the
Union and the desire for its preservation Kentucky awaits with great
solicitude the responses from her sister States."[28]

Neutrality, however, became the accepted policy of so many that it proved
to be dangerous. The Union State Committee, in drawing up on the
eighteenth of April a resolution to please all, seemingly pledged the
State to join the South. These resolutions were severely criticised by the
Unionists, especially that part which says: "What the future destiny of
Kentucky may be we cannot with certainty foresee. But if the enterprise
announced in the proclamation of the President should at any time
hereafter assume the aspect of a war for overrunning and subjugation of
the seceding States, then Kentucky ought to take her stand for the South."
[29] Many thought that this obligated Kentucky to go with the South.
Unionists of other States considered it a victory for the Confederacy.
This committee, however, stipulated this proposition to satisfy those
sympathizers with the South, who believed all the bad reports concerning
the functionaries of the Federal Government, circulated by the leaders of
the Confederacy. Hence, they said in this proposition not that Kentucky
would go with the South, but if at any time thereafter the President's
proclamation should assume the aspect of war, it would do so. They
evidently did not believe that it had or would assume such an aspect. They
were also trying to pacify those who misunderstood the issues of
"subjugation" and "coercion."[30] The relation of the States to the Union
was yet a problem to many a statesman. Many thought that the colonists
when in a state of nature came together and agreed to a compact, giving up
some of their sovereignty and retaining the other, and, therefore, had the
right to withdraw at pleasure, carrying a part of the national property
with them. Such thinkers contended too that the Union had no right to
"coerce" a seceded State. Calhoun had said that because the Union was a
compact it could be broken; on the other hand, Jackson had said that
because it was a compact it could not be broken. Now it was difficult for
Kentuckians to decide who was right. That the committee had no intention
of going with the Confederacy may be seen from the following declaration:
"Seditious leaders in the midst of us now appeal to her (Kentucky) to
furnish troops to uphold those combinations against the government of the
Union. Will she comply with this appeal? Ought she to comply with it? We
answer, no."[31]

While these things were going on, the great question of Fort Sumter was
before the people. When the fort was finally bombarded and Lincoln called
for seventy-five thousand troops Gov. Magoffin politely refused to comply.
His reply was: "I say emphatically Kentucky will furnish no troops for the
wicked purpose of subduing her sister Southern States."[32] He had already
been much moved by the large vote given the delegates to the Border States
Convention, indicating such a growth of Union sentiment that he called the
legislature together, hoping to win the day for secession by changing the
policy of the State from mediatorial to armed neutrality, resisting all
forces, whether Confederate or Federal, which might bring war into the
State. The body met on the sixteenth of May, passed a resolution of
mediatorial neutrality and approved the Governor's refusal to furnish
troops under the existing circumstances.[33] This, however, did not mean
that the legislature was in sympathy with the efforts of the Governor to
support the Southern cause. Writing to Gen. Scott, John J. Crittenden
explained it thus:

     "The position of Kentucky and the relation she occupies toward the
     government of the Union is not, I fear, understood at Washington. It
     ought to be well understood. Very important consequences may depend
     upon it and upon her proper treatment. Unfortunately for us our
     Governor does not sympathize with Kentucky in respect to secession.
     His opinions and feelings incline him strongly to the side of the
     South. His answer to the requisition for troops was in terms hasty
     and unbecoming and does not correspond with the usual and gentlemanly
     courtesy. But while she regretted the language of his answer,
     Kentucky acquiesced in his declining to furnish the troops called
     for, and she did so not because she loved the Union less but she
     feared that if she had parted with those troops and sent them to
     serve in your ranks, she would have been overwhelmed by secessionists
     at home, and severed from the Union. And it was to preserve
     substantially and ultimately our connection with the Union that
     induced us to acquiesce in the partial infraction of it by our
     Governor's refusal of the troops required. This was the most
     prevailing and general motive. To this may be added the strong
     indisposition of our people to a civil war with the South, and the
     apprehended consequences of a civil war within our state and among
     our people.... I think Kentucky's excuse a good one and that under
     all the circumstances of a complicated case she is rendering better
     service in her present position than she could by becoming an active
     party in the contest."[34]

The fact is that secession had little chance in Kentucky after public
opinion found expression. Neutrality early became the order of the day.
The elections of 1861 were significant in that they gave the people a
chance to express their will. It should be borne in mind that the
legislature of 1859 was elected when the question of union or disunion was
not before the people. Now in 1861 they had to elect members to the Border
State Convention, a new legislature, and congressmen to represent Kentucky
at the special session called by President Lincoln. In all these
elections, Unionists won. Some historians like Smith and Shaler[35] seem
to think that the State had pledged itself to remain unconditionally
neutral, that these elections had no particular bearing on the situation
and that if a "sovereignty convention" had been called, secession would
have won. These writers do not seem to see that the people of Kentucky,
although nominally neutral, desired to remain with the Union. Doubtless a
better statement is that, although the election of 1861 showed that a
large majority of the people were in favor of the Union, the Union leaders
did not show so in the early part of the year and neutrality was adopted
not as an end but as a means that triumph over the enemies of the Union
might finally be assured.[36] We easily see now that there was not much
danger of secession, but the Unionists could not see it so well at that
time. Smith and Shaler doubtless exaggerate the situation, for what danger
of secession could there have been when the people had elected the Union
candidates for the Border State Convention to be convened at Frankfort on
May 27, when they sent nine Unionists out of the ten congressmen to
represent them in the special session of Congress, and when on the 5th of
the following August, after the battle of Bull Run, they elected to the
State Legislature 103 Unionists out of 141 members.[37] The calling of a
convention then would have made little difference, if the people had
chosen a majority of Unionists to represent them in other bodies. How can
one conclude then that they would have elected seceders to represent them
in a "sovereignty convention"? Hodge states that the sympathizers with the
Confederacy did not contest to any considerable extent the elections of
August, 1861, and consequently the supporters of the Federal Government
were in the ascendency in the next legislature. He seems to indicate that
the Unionists used fraud, but the records show that the Secessionists,
regarding it as a lost cause, in many cases withdrew their candidates.
Evidently these elections showed not only that secession was impossible
but that neutrality could not last.[38]

After this sentiment began to change. Men boldly took decisive positions.
The unwieldy neutrality party then divided into three parts: those who
went to the Confederate lines to aid the Southern cause; those who openly
declared themselves in favor of the Union; and those sympathizers with the
South, who although in favor of the seceding States, seeing that their
cause was hopeless, advocated peaceful separation and finally, when that
failed, a compromise peace between the two sections.[39] The Union party,
though unalterably opposed to the abolitionists and not primarily attached
to the Union because of antagonism to slavery, gradually acquiesced in the
policy of the Federal Government with respect to that institution. This
party first reached the position that Negroes taken from the Confederates
could with propriety be disposed of as contraband of war and many of its
adherents grew more favorable to the policy of general emancipation.

It was soon evident that war could not long be kept out of the State. As
early as April, 1861, troops for service in the Confederacy were organized
in Kentucky. This movement was somewhat accelerated by an act of the
legislature providing that the arms supplied to the troops should not
be used against either section and that the State companies as well as
the Home Guards should take the same oath as the officers requiring
fidelity to the Constitution.[40] At this point many Kentuckians of
proslavery tendencies were forced out of their natural position and
driven into the Confederate ranks. Among these was S. B. Buckner, who
went South to command about ten thousand secessionists, recruited under
the leadership of Colonels Roger W. Hanson, Lloyd Tilghman, and W. D.
Lannon at Camp Boone.[41]

The Governor refused to furnish Lincoln troops but he was in touch with
the Confederacy, doing all he could to equip soldiers for its service,[42]
though not exactly openly, as that would have been sufficient excuse for
the Unionists who desired to help the Union. The Unionists who saw all of
this going on desired to arm and organize their forces but they were
handicapped in that the commander of the State guard was a Secessionist
and care had been taken to hold the military forces for the South. In
consequence of this difficulty Lincoln was secretly appealed to for arms,
which were shipped to cities on the Ohio River for secret distribution
among the Unionists of Kentucky as the opportunity would permit.[43] The
Secessionists had referred to these guns as the first so-called violation
of neutrality. The Unionists defended themselves on the ground that since
the Governor and his whole machine were about in the ranks of the
Confederates they were justified in doing almost anything to defend the
State. Shaler says that the action on both sides was almost simultaneous
and that the actual infringement of the neutrality proclamation issued by
the Governor was due to the action of Polk and Zollicoffer and the
simultaneous invasion of the State some hundreds of miles apart shows that
the rupture of the neutrality of Kentucky was deliberately planned by the
Confederate authorities.[44]

The invasion by Polk in September produced great excitement. The
legislature was then in session and passed a resolution that the invaders
be expelled, and that the Governor call out the military force of the
State and place the same under the command of Gen. Thomas L. Crittenden.
The resolutions were vetoed by the Governor but passed by a vote of two
thirds.[45] The desired proclamation was issued and soon sufficient men to
form forty regiments answered the call.[46] Making further response to the
invasion of the State by the Confederates, the legislature ordered that
the United States flag be raised over the capitol at Frankfort, and by a
resolution which "affirmed" distinctly, though not directly, the doctrine
of States' rights placed Kentucky in political and military association
with the North.[47]

WILLIAM T. McKINNEY


FOOTNOTES:


[1] See Debates in Congress.

[2] Marshall, Speech in Washington on the Nomination of Breckenridge and
Lane, p. 3.

[3] Speech of John Stephenson on the state of the Union in the House of
Representatives, January 30, 1861.

[4] Bartlett, "Presidential Candidates in 1860," pp. 344-345.

[5] Speech of Hon. J. C. Breckenridge delivered at Ashland, Kentucky, p. 9.

[6] Speech of J. C. Breckenridge on Executive Usurpation, July 16, 1861.

[7] "The Frankfort Commonwealth," August 21, 1861.

[8] These were some of the most intellectual and aristocratic men of the
State. Collins exaggerates, however, when he says that few leading men
opposed secession. See Collins, "History of Kentucky," I, 82.

[9] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 36.

[10] Ibid., 36.

[11] Ibid., 37.

[12] Hart, "Slavery and Abolition," 65, 178, 234; Turner, "Rise of the New
West," 77.

[13] Report of the American Historical Association, 1893, pp. 219-221.

[14] Burgess, "Civil War and the Constitution," I, 30.

[15] Ibid.

[16] McMaster, "History of the United States," VIII, 426-427.

[17] Rhodes, "History of the United States," III, 391.

[18] Rhodes, "History of the United States," VII, 392.

[19] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 158-179.

[20] _House Journal_, 1861, Governor's Message, p. 10.

[21] Ibid., 11.

[22] _House Journal_, 1861, Governor's Message, p. 12.

[23] Ibid., 14.

[24] Letter of John J. Crittenden to Gen. McClellan.

[25] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 42.

[26] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," p. 45.

[27] _House Journal_. 1861, p. 33.

[28] Ibid., 34.

[29] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 57.

[30] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 58-62.

[31] Ibid., 58.

[32] _House Journal_, 1861, p. 6.

[33] Ibid., 94.

[34] Nicolay and Hay, "Life of Lincoln," IV, 233.

[35] Smith, "History of Kentucky," 610; Shaler, "History of Kentucky," 243.

[36] Smith says in describing the period of 1861: "It were well nigh
certain that if a sovereignty convention could have been called at any time
before the formation of the Union sentiment and policy into action and
life, the state would have been carried off into the act of secession as
Virginia and Tennessee were by the sense of sympathy and kinship toward the
South." Shaler thinks the same. He says: "There is reason to believe that
this course (neutrality) was the only one that could have kept Kentucky
from secession. If what had been unhappily named a Sovereignty Convention
had been called in 1861; if the state had been compelled by the decision of
a body of men who were acting under the control of no constitutional
enunciation, the sense of sympathy and kinship with the Southern states,
such as would easily grow up under popular oratory in a mob, would probably
have precipitated action." Speed, however, is doubtless right in saying all
this is mere assertion and that there was no danger of secession after the
people had a chance to transfer their will to the government. Shaler,
"Kentucky," p. 240; Smith, "History of Kentucky," p. 610.

[37] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 93-98.

[38] Collins, "History of Kentucky," I, 243.

[39] _The Frankfort Commonwealth_, July 19; Aug. 19, 21, 23; Nov. 10, 20,
23; and Dec. 11, 1861; _The Yeoman Weekly_, May 10; June 21, 22; July 8,
1861; _Daily Louisville Democrat_, Sept. 7 and Oct. 8, 1861.

[40] _House Journal_, 1861, 240.

[41] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 192.

[42] War Records, Serial 108, p. 37; Serial 127, p. 234; Serial 110, pp.
44-64, and Serial 110, p. 71.

[43] Nicolay and Hay, "Life of Lincoln," IV, 237.

[44] Shaler, "History of Kentucky," 261.

[45] _House Journal_, 1861, p. 122.

[46] Speed, "The Union Cause in Kentucky," 300 _et seq_. See despatches
and letters given in same.

[47] Rhodes, "History of the United States," III, 392.


NOTES ON NEGROES IN GUATEMALA DURING THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY


The introduction of Negroes into Guatemala commenced with the year of the
conquest of that country by the Spaniards in 1524, when there came several
Negro slaves with the _conquistadores_ from Mexico. It seems that they soon
increased in numbers, for among the decrees of the _conquistador_, Pedro de
Alvarado, there is one which prohibits the selling of gunpowder to Indians
and Negroes. The number of African slaves brought to Guatemala had,
however, always remained relatively a very limited one, for as the
Spaniards had plenty of cheap hands by means of a system of indentured
labor forced upon the numerous Indian population, the importation of slaves
evidently did not pay them well. It seems safe to say, that their total
number never amounted to ten thousand.

The most copious, though still very sparse notices of them I have run
across, are those given by Thomas Gage, an English Catholic educated in
Spain, who, in the twenties and thirties of the seventeenth century, lived
as a priest in the then city of Guatemala, nowadays called Antigua, and in
some Indian villages not far from there.[1] One of the places where Thomas
Gage observed a somewhat considerable population of Negroes was the
so-called Costa del Sur, or Southern Coast, the hot land between the Andes
and the Pacific, to the south of the capital. They were worked there on the
indigo plantations and large cattle _haciendas_. The Negroes impressed
Thomas Gage as the only courageous people in Guatemala while the Spanish
Mestizos and Indians seemed to him to be very cowardly.

This writer said that if Guatemala was powerful with respect to its
people, for she was not in arms nor resources, then she was so merely by
virtue of a class of desperate Negroes, who were slaves living on the
indigo plantations. Though they had no arms but a machete, which was their
small lance used for chasing the wild cattle (nowadays, that name is given
to a long and broad, sword-like knife), they were so desperate that they
often caused fear to the very city of Guatemala and had made their masters
tremble. "There are among them," said he, "those who have no fear to brave
a wild bull, furious though he be, and to attach themselves to the
crocodiles in the rivers, until they have killed them and brought them to
the bank."[2]

In reading these lines, one cannot help from remembering the classical
description Alexander Von Humboldt gives of the Negro boatmen of the river
Dagua, in the actual republic of Colombia. The inimitable skill and
unsurpassable bravery Humboldt saw them display in the midst of the
ferocious currents and loud-pouring rapids of that river caused him to
exclaim: "Every movement of the paddle is a wonder, and every Negro a god!"
A nice monument to the fame of indomitable bravery the Negroes manifested
in past times in Guatemala exists still in a saying often heard by
travelers: "_Esos son negros_!" or "Those are Negroes," an exclamation
which means: "Those are desperate men, who do not care for anything." One
could also hear the saying: "_Esto es obra de negros_," or "that is a work
of Negroes," the meaning being that it was work for bold men with iron
nerves.

Another expression brings out the fact that the Negroes were considered, or
forced to be, very hard workers. "_Trabaja como un negro_" or "he works
like a Negro," signified doing "the most arduous labor." That the lot of
the slaves was often a bitter one, though, because of the less greedy
Spanish character, without doubt generally a less hard one than in North
America, is shown by the fact that Guatemala had her "_Cimarrones_" just as
Jamaica, and Guiana, had their Maroons.

The Spanish word "_cimarron_" signifies indiscriminately a runaway head of
cattle or horses, that had become wild, or a runaway slave. The fugitive
Negroes of Guatemala had their chief stronghold in the inaccessible
mountain woods of the Sierra de las Minas, which lies near the Atlantic
coast between the Golfo Dulce and the valley of the river Motagua. The
Golfo Dulce, which is now abandoned because of lack of sufficient depth for
the big vessels of to-day, was at that time the port of entry for the whole
of Guatemala. From it a bridle-path ran over the Sierra de las Minas to the
valley of the Motagua and further on to the capital. In speaking of this
path over the mountain, Gage remarks: "What the Spaniards fear most until
they get out of these mountains, are two or three hundred Negroes,
Cimarrones, who for the bad treatment they received have fled from
Guatemala and from other places, running away from their masters in order
to resort to these woods; there they live with their wives and children and
increase in numbers every year, so that the entire force of Guatemala City
and its environments is not capable to subdue them."

They very often came out of the woods to attack those who drove teams of
mules, and took from them wine, salt, clothes and arms to the quantity they
needed. They never did any harm to the mule drivers nor to their slaves. On
the contrary, the slaves amused themselves with the Cimarrones, because
they were of the same color and in the same condition of servitude, and not
seldom availed themselves of the opportunity to follow their example, and
united with them to obtain liberty, though obliged to live in the woods and
mountains.

Their arms were arrows and bows, which they carried only for the purpose of
defending themselves against attacks of the Spaniards; for they did not
harm those who passed by peacefully and who let them have a part of the
provisions they carried. They often declared that their principal reason
for resorting to these mountains was to be ready to join the English or
Dutch, if these some day appeared in the Gulf, for they well knew that
these, unlike the Spaniards, would let them live in peace.

Among the most remarkable facts learned by Thomas Gage in Guatemala is the
story of a Negro freedman who had accumulated great wealth. This Negro
lived in Agua Caliente, an Indian village, on the road to Guatemala City,
or Antigua, where the natives had obtained considerable quantities of gold
from some spot in the mountains only known to them. The Spaniards, not
content with an annual tribute paid them by the Indians, endeavored in vain
to force the natives to show them the mine, and because they refused killed
them, thus gaining no knowledge of the mine for which they were still
searching in vain in the times of Thomas Gage. "In that place of Agua
Caliente," continues Gage, "there is a Negro who lives and receives very
well the travelers who call upon him. His wealth consists in cattle, sheep,
and goats, and he furnishes the city of Guatemala and the environments with
the best cheese to be found in the country. But it is believed that his
wealth does not come so much from the produce of his farm and his cattle
and cheese, but from that hidden treasure which is believed known to him.
He, therefore, has been summoned to the Royal Audience in Guatemala, but he
has always denied to have any knowledge of it."

He had been suspected because he had formerly been a slave and had secured
his liberty by means of a considerable sum. After that, he had bought his
farm and much of the surrounding land and had considerably increased his
original holdings. To his inquisitors he replied that, "when young and
still a slave he had a kind master who suffered him to do what he pleased,
and that by economy he had accumulated where-with to buy his liberty and
afterwards a little house to live in; and God had given His blessing to
that and let him have the means for increasing his funds."

Another one of Gage's accounts discloses the abuses common among the
slave-holders under Spanish rule, and the silliness of the belief that the
masters for their own benefit would treat their human property well. This
account refers to one Juan Palomeque, a rich landowner and promoter of
mule-transports, who lived in Gage's parish of Mexico, near the actual
capital of Guatemala. He was believed to be worth six hundred thousand
ducats, about 1,400,000 dollars. He owned about a hundred Negroes, men,
women, and children, but was so stingy that, to avoid the expense of decent
house-keeping, he never lived in the city, though he had several houses
there. Instead, he lived in a straw-hut and feasted on hard, black bread
and on _tasajo_, or thin strips of salt beef dried in the sun.

He was so cruel to his Negroes, that, when one of them behaved badly, he
would whip him almost to death. He had among others a slave named Macaco,
"on behalf of whom," said Gage, "I often pleaded, but in vain. At times he
hung him by the hands and beat him until he had his back entirely covered
with blood, and in that state, the skin being entirely torn to pieces, in
order to heal up the slave's sores the master poured hot fat over them.
Moreover, he had marked him with a hot iron face, hands, arms, back, belly,
and legs, so that this poor slave got tired to live and intended several
times to suicide himself; but I prevented him from doing so every time by
remonstrances I made him."

Juan Palomeque was so sensual and voluptuous that he constantly abused the
wives of his slaves as he liked, and even when he saw in the city some girl
or woman of that class whom he wanted, and she was not attracted to him, he
would call upon her master or mistress and buy her, "giving much more than
she had cost; afterwards he boasted that he would break down her pride in
one year of slavery." "In my times," said Gage, "he killed two Indians on
the road to the Gulf, but by means of his money he got so easily out of
that affair as if he had killed but a dog." As Gage does not tell anything
of a prosecution for the crimes against the Negro, no actual law seems to
have been violated.[3]

The descendants of the ancient slaves have so completely become mixed up
with Spanish-Indian blood that, making exception of the valley of the
Motagua River, they have practically disappeared as a race. In 1796, their
number was considerably increased by the so-called Caribs, whom the English
deported from the Island of St. Vincent and set ashore in Guatemala. They
live now on the Atlantic coast, also on that of Honduras and Nicaragua, and
are estimated to total about 20,000. They are Zambos, but the African blood
seems to prevail.[4]


A MULATTO CORSAIR OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY


When on his return voyage to England, sailing down the Atlantic coast of
Costa Rica, Thomas Gage's ship was intercepted by two corsairs under the
Dutch flag, one of them being a man-of-war. The struggle of the Netherlands
for freedom against Spain had not then come to a close. The Dutch commander
was a character, of whose strange experiences Gage gives an interesting
account. Much to the surprise of the traveler the captain who had caught
them was a mulatto named Diaguillo, who was born and brought up at Habana
(Cuba), where his mother was still living. Having been maltreated by the
Governor of Campeche in whose service he had been, this mulatto in a fit of
utter desperation threw himself into a boat and ventured into the sea,
where he met with some Dutch ships on watch for a prize. He swam to and
went aboard one of these vessels, hoping to find better treatment than
among his country-men. He offered himself to the Dutch and promised to
serve them loyally against those of his nation who had maltreated him.
Afterwards he proved himself so loyal and reliable to the Dutch, that he
won much fame among them. He was married to a girl of their nation and
later made captain of a vessel under that brave and noble Dutchman, whom
the Spaniards dreaded much and whom they named Pie de Palo, or Wooden-leg.

"That famous mulatto," said Gage, "was he who boarded our frigate with his
soldiers. I lost four thousand pesos wealth in pearls and jewelry and about
three thousand in ready money. I had still other things with me, viz., a
bed, some books, pictures painted on copper, and clothes, and I asked that
Mulatto captain to let me keep them. He donated me them liberally, out of
consideration for my vocation, and said I must take patience, for he was
not allowed to dispose in other way of my pearls and my money; moreover, he
used the proverb: If fortune to-day is on my side, to-morrow it will be on
yours, and what I have won to-day, that I may lose to-morrow.... He also
ordered to give me back some single and double pistoles, out of generosity
and respect to my garb...."

"After having searched their prize," continued the traveler, "Captain and
soldiers thought of refreshing themselves on the provisions we had on
board; the generous captain had a luxurious dinner and invited me to be his
guest, and knowing that I was going to Habana, he drank the health of his
mother and asked me to go to see her and give her his kindest regards,
saying that for her sake he had treated me as kindly as was in his power.
He told us, moreover, when still at table, that for my sake he would give
us back our ship, so that we could get back to land, and that I might find
some other and safer way to continue my voyage to Spain.... Everything
taken away from the ship save my belongings, which captain Diaguillo
ordered to let me out of a generosity not often to be found with a corsair,
he bade us fare-well thanking us for the good luck we had procured him."

Thomas Gage reached Habana in safety and called upon the mother of the
Corsair, but does not say how he found her.

J. KUNST


FOOTNOTES:


[1] Gage published in 1648 in London an account of his residence and
voyages; I have only a French version of his work at hand, printed in
Amsterdam, in 1721. The passages cited are re-translated from that language
and, therefore, will not agree word for word with the original text.

[2] Gage's "Voyages," Part 3, Chapter II.

[3] It seems proper to add here, that three years after Guatemala had
declared her independence of Spain, she abrogated slavery by decree of
April 17, 1824. Thereby she got, by the way, into difficulties with Great
Britain, which as late as in 1840 demanded the extradition of slaves run
away from the adjacent British territory of Balize. Guatemala was by
men-of-war sent to her coast forced to do so, though that was contrary to
her constitution.

[4] Within the last decades, some Negroes have been brought over, from the
United States, to the banana plantations of United Fruit Co., near the
Atlantic coast, and occasionally, though very seldom, one meets with a
black newcomer from Jamaica, Barbadoes, or other West Indian islands.


DOCUMENTS


TRAVELERS' IMPRESSIONS OF SLAVERY IN AMERICA FROM 1750 TO 1800


From these writers, almost all of whom were foreigners, one would naturally
expect such a portraiture of slavery as persons unaccustomed to the
institution would give. Most Americans, of course, considered the
institution as belonging to the natural order of things and, therefore,
hardly ever referred to it except when they mentioned it unconsciously.
Foreigners, however, as soon as they came into this new world began to
compare the slaves with the lowest order of society in Europe. Finding the
lot of the bondmen so much inferior to that of those of low estate in
European countries, these travelers frequently made some interesting
comparisons. We are indebted to them for valuable information which we can
never hope to obtain from the literature of an essentially slaveholding
people. Here we see how the American Revolution caused a change for the
better in the condition of the Negroes in certain States, and how the
rigorousness of slavery continued in the others. We learn too what
enlightened Negroes thought about their state and what the white man
believed should be done to prevent their reaching the point of
self-assertion. That a large number of anti-slavery Americans were
advocating and effecting the emancipation of slaves appears throughout
these documents.


BURNABY'S VIEW OF THE SITUATION IN VIRGINIA


Speaking of Virginia, he said: "Their authority over their slaves renders
them vain and imperious, and entire strangers to that elegance of
sentiment, which is so peculiarly characteristic of refined and polished
nations. Their ignorance of mankind and of learning, exposes them to many
errors and prejudices, especially in regard to Indians and Negroes, whom
they scarcely consider as of human species; so that it is almost
impossible in cases of violence, or even murder, committed upon those
unhappy people by any of the planters, to have delinquents brought to
justice: for either the grand jury refuse to find the bill, or the petit
jury bring in the verdict of not guilty."--_Andrew Burnaby, "Travels_,"
1759, p. 54.


GENERAL TREATMENT OF SLAVES AMONG THE ALBANIANS--CONSEQUENT ATTACHMENT OF
DOMESTICS.--REFLECTIONS ON SERVITUDE BY AN AMERICAN LADY


In the society I am describing, even the dark aspect of slavery was
softened into a smile. And I must, in justice to the best possible masters,
say, that a great deal of that tranquility and comfort, to call it by no
higher name, which distinguished this society from all others, was owing to
the relation between master and servant being better understood here than
in any other place. Let me not be detested as an advocate for slavery when
I say that I think I have never seen people so happy in servitude as the
domestics of the Albanians. One reason was, (for I do not now speak of the
virtues of their masters,) that each family had a few of them, and that
there were no field negroes. They would remind one of Abraham's servants,
who were all born in the house, which was exactly their case. They were
baptized too, and shared the same religious instruction with the children
of the family; and, for the first years, there was little or no difference
with regard to food or clothing between their children and those of their
masters.

When a negro-woman's child attained the age of three years, the first New
Year's Day after, it was solemnly presented to a son or daughter, or other
young relative of the family, who was of the same sex with the child so
presented. The child to whom the young negro was given immediately
presented it with some piece of money and a pair of shoes; and from that
day the strongest attachment subsisted between the domestic and the
destined owner. I have no where met with instances of friendship more
tender and generous than that which here subsisted between the slaves and
their masters and mistresses. Extraordinary proofs of them have been often
given in the course of hunting or Indian trading, when a young man and his
slave have gone to the trackless woods, together, in the case of fits of
the ague, loss of a canoe, and other casualties happening near hostile
Indians. The slave has been known, at the imminent risque of his life, to
carry his disabled master through trackless woods with labour and fidelity
scarce credible; and the master has been equally tender on similar
occasions of the humble friend who stuck closer than a brother; who was
baptized with the same baptism, nurtured under the same roof, and often
rocked in the same cradle with himself. These gifts of domestics to the
younger members of the family, were not irrevokable: yet they were very
rarely withdrawn. If the kitchen family did not increase in proportion to
that of the master, young children were purchased from some family where
they abounded, to furnish those attached servants to the rising progeny.
They were never sold without consulting their mothers, who if expert and
sagacious, had a great deal to say in the family, and would not allow her
child to go into any family with whose domestics she was not acquainted.
These negro-women piqued themselves on teaching their children to be
excellent servants, well knowing servitude to be their lot or life, and
that it could only be sweetened by making themselves particularly useful,
and excellent in their departments. If they did their work well, it is
astonishing, when I recollect it, what liberty of speech was allowed to
those active and prudent mothers. They would chide, reprove, and
expostulate in a manner that we would not endure from our hired servants;
and sometimes exert fully as much authority over the children of the family
as the parents, conscious that they were entirely in their power. They did
not crush freedom of speech and opinion in those by whom they knew they
were beloved, and who watched with incessant care over their interest and
comfort. Affectionate and faithful as these home-bred servants were in
general, there were some instances (but very few) of those who, through
levity of mind, or a love of liquor or finery, betrayed their trust, or
habitually neglected their duty. In these cases, after every means had been
used to reform them, no severe punishments were inflicted at home. But the
terrible sentence, which they dreaded worse than death, was past--they were
sold to Jamaica. The necessity of doing this was bewailed by the whole
family as a most dreadful calamity, and the culprit was carefully watched
on his way to New-York, lest he should evade the sentence by
self-destruction.

One must have lived among those placid and humane people to be sensible
that servitude, hopeless, endless servitude, could exist with so little
servility and fear on the one side, and so little harshness or even
sternness of authority on the other. In Europe, the footing on which
service is placed in consequence of the corruptions of society, hardens the
heart, destroys confidence, and embitters life. The deceit and venality of
servants not absolutely dishonest, puts it out of one's power to love or
trust them. And if, in hopes of having people attached to us, who will
neither betray our confidence, nor corrupt our children, we are at pains to
rear them from childhood, and give them a religious and moral education;
after all our labour, others of their own class seduce them away to those
who can afford to pay higher for their services. This is not the case in a
few remote districts. Where surrounding mountains seem to exclude the
contagion of the world, some traces of fidelity and affection among
domestics still remain. But it must be remarked, that, in those very
districts, it is usual to treat inferiors with courtesy and kindness, and
to consider those domestics who marry out of the family as holding a kind
of relation to it, and still claiming protection. In short, the corruption
of that class of people is, doubtless, to be attributed to the example of
their superiors. But how severely are those superiors punished? Why this
general indifference about home; why are the household gods, why is the
sacred hearth so wantonly abandoned? Alas! the charm of home is destroyed,
since our children, educated in distant seminaries, are strangers in the
paternal mansion; and our servants, like mere machines, move on their
mercenary track without feeling or exciting one kind or generous sentiment.
Home, thus despoiled of all its charms, is no longer the scene of any
enjoyments but such as wealth can purchase. At the same time we feel there
a nameless cold privation, and conscious that money can coin the same
enjoyments with more variety elsewhere, we substitute these futile and
evanescent pleasures for that perennial spring of calm satisfaction,
"without o'erflowing full," which is fed by the exercise of the kindly
affections, and soon indeed must those stagnate where there are not proper
objects to excite them. I have been forced into this painful digression by
unavoidable comparisons. To return:--

Amidst all this mild and really tender indulgence to their negroes, these
colonists had not the smallest scruple of conscience with regard to the
right by which they held them in subjection. Had that been the case, their
singular humanity would have been incompatible with continued injustice.
But the truth is, that of law the generality of those people knew little;
and of philosophy, nothing at all. They sought their code of morality in
the Bible, and there imagined they found this hapless race condemned to
perpetual slavery; and thought nothing remained for them but to lighten the
chains of their fellow Christians, after having made them such. This I
neither "extenuate" nor "set down in malice," but merely record the fact.
At the same time it is but justice to record also a singular instance of
moral delicacy distinguishing this settlement from every other in the like
circumstances: though, from their simple and kindly modes of life, they
were from infancy in habits of familiarity with these humble friends, yet
being early taught that nature had placed between them a barrier, which it
was in a high degree criminal and disgraceful to pass, they considered a
mixture of such distinct races with abhorrence, as a violation of her laws.
This greatly conduced to the preservation of family happiness and concord.
An ambiguous race, which the law does not acknowledge; and who (if they
have any moral sense, must be as much ashamed of their parents as these
last are of them) are certainly a dangerous, because degraded part of the
community. How much more so must be those unfortunate beings who stand in
the predicament of the bat in the fable, whom both birds and beasts
disowned? I am sorry to say that the progress of the British army, when it
arrived, might be traced by a spurious and ambiguous race of this kind. But
of a mulatto born before their arrival I only remember a single instance;
and from the regret and wonder it occasioned, considered it as singular.
Colonel Schuyler, of whom I am to speak, had a relation so weak and
defective in capacity, that he never was intrusted with any thing of his
own, and lived an idle bachelor about the family. In process of time a
favourite negro-woman, to the great offense and scandal of the family, bore
a child to him, whose colour gave testimony to the relation. The boy was
carefully educated; and when he grew up, a farm was allotted to him well
stocked and fertile, but "in depth of woods embraced," about two miles back
from the family seat. A destitute white woman, who had somehow wandered
from the older colonies, was induced to marry him; and all the branches of
the family thought it incumbent on them now and then to pay a quiet visit
to Chalk (for so, for some unknown reason, they always called him). I have
been in Chalk's house myself, and a most comfortable abode it was; but
considered him as a mysterious and anomalous being.

I have dwelt the longer on this singular instance of slavery, existing
devoid of its attendant horrors, because the fidelity and affection
resulting from a bond of union so early formed between master and servant,
contributed so very much to the safety of individuals, as well as the
general comfort of society, as will hereafter appear.--"_Memoirs of An
American Lady with Sketches of Manners and Customs In America as they
existed previous to the Revolution_," Chapter VII, pp. 26-32, by Mrs. Anne
Grant.


IMPRESSIONS OF AN ENGLISH TRAVELER


"As I observed before, at least two thirds of the inhabitants are
negroes....

"It is fortunate for humanity that these poor creatures possess such a fund
of contentment and resignation in their minds; for they indeed seem to be
the happiest inhabitants in America, notwithstanding the hardness of their
fare, the severity of their labour, and the unkindness, ignominy, and often
barbarity of their treatment."--J.F.D., "_A Tour in the United States of
America, containing an account of the present situation of that country_";
London, 1784, p. 39.


ABBÉ ROBIN ON CONDITIONS IN VIRGINIA


"The population of Virginia is computed at one hundred fifty thousand
whites and five hundred thousand negroes. There is a still greater
disproportion between the whites and blacks in Maryland, where there are
not more than twenty thousand whites and at least two hundred thousand
negroes. The English imported into these two provinces between seven and
eight thousand yearly. Perhaps the lot of these slaves is not quite so hard
as that of the negroes in the islands; their liberty, it is true, is
irreparably lost in both places, but here they are treated with more
mildness, and are supported upon the same kind of food with their masters;
and if the earth which they cultivate, is moistened with their sweat, it
has never been known to blush with their blood. The American, not at all
industrious by nature, is considerate enough not to expect too much from
his slave, who in such circumstances, has fewer motives to be laborious for
himself."--Abbé Robin, "_New Travels through North America in a series of
letters_," Boston, 1784, p. 48.


OBSERVATIONS OF ST. JOHN DE CRÈVECOEUR


"There, arranged like horses at a fair, they are branded like cattle, and
then driven to toil, to starve and to languish for a few years on the
different plantations of those citizens.

"If negroes are permitted to become fathers, this fatal indulgence only
tends to increase their misery.... How many have I seen cursing the
irresistible propensity, and regretting that by having tasted of those
joys, they had become the authors of double misery to their wives.... Their
paternal fondness is embittered by considering that if their children live,
they must live to be slaves like themselves: no time is allowed them to
exercise their pious offices, the mothers must fasten them on their backs,
and, with the double load follow their husbands in the fields, where they
too often hear no other sound than that of the voice or whip of the
taskmaster, and the cries of their infants, broiling in the sun.... It is
said, I know, that they are much happier here than in the West Indies;
because land being cheaper upon this continent than in those Islands, the
field allowed them to raise their subsistence from, are in general more
extensive.

"... We have slaves likewise in our northern provinces; I hope the time
draws near when they will be all emancipated; but how different their lot,
how different their situation, in every possible respect! They enjoy as
much liberty as their masters, they are as well clad, and as well fed; in
health and sickness they are tenderly taken care of; they live under the
same roof, and are, truly speaking, a part of our families. Many of them
are taught to read and write, and are well instructed in the principles of
religion; they are the companions of our labours, and treated as such; they
enjoy many perquisites, many established holidays, and are not obliged to
work more than white people. They marry when their inclination leads them;
visit their wives every week; are as decently clad as the common people;
they are indulged in education, cherishing and chastising their children,
who are taught subordination to them as to their lawful parents; in short,
they participate in many of the benefits of our society without being
obliged to bear any of its burdens. They are fat, healthy, and hearty, and
far from repining at their fate; they think themselves happier than many of
the lower class whites: they share with their master the wheat and meat
provision, they help to raise; many of those whom the good Quakers have
emancipated, have received that great benefit with tears of regret, and
have never quitted, though free, their former masters and
benefactors."--St. John de Crèvecoeur, "_Letters from an American Farmer,
1782_," pp. 226 et seq.


IMPRESSIONS OF JOHANN D. SCHOEPF


"The condition of the Carolina negro slaves is in general harder and more
troublous than that of their northern brethren. On the rice plantations,
with wretched food, they are allotted more work and more tedious work; and
the treatment which they experience at the hands of the overseers and
owners is capricious and often tyrannical. In Carolina (and in no other of
the North American states) their severe handling has already caused several
uprisings among them. There is less concern here as to their moral
betterment, education, and instruction, and South Carolina appears little
inclined to initiate the praiseworthy and benevolent ordinances of its
sister states in regard to the negro. It is sufficient proof of the bad
situation in which these creatures find themselves here that they do not
multiply in the same proportions as the white inhabitants, although the
climate is more natural to them and agrees with them better. Their numbers
must be continually kept up by fresh importations; to be sure, the constant
taking up of new land requires more and more working hands, and the
pretended necessity of bringing in additional slaves is thus warranted in
part; but close investigation makes it certain that the increase of the
blacks in the northern states, where they are handled more gently, is
vastly more considerable. The gentlemen in the country have among their
negroes as the Russian nobility among the serfs, the most necessary
handicrafts-men, cobblers, tailors, carpenters, smiths, and the like, whose
work they command at the smallest possible price or for nothing almost.
There is hardly any trade or craft which has not been learned and is not
carried on by negroes, partly free, partly slave; the latter are hired out
by their owners for day's wages. Charleston swarms with blacks, mulattoes
and mestizos; their number greatly exceeds that of the whites, but they are
kept under strict order and discipline, and the police has a watchful eye
upon them. These may nowhere assemble more than 7 male negro slaves; their
dances and other assemblies must stop at 10 o'clock in the evening; without
permission of their owners none of them may sell beer or wine or brandy.
There are here many free negroes and mulattoes. They get their freedom if
by their own industry they earn enough to buy themselves off, or their
freedom is given them at the death of their masters or in other ways. Not
all of them know how to use their freedom to their own advantage; many give
themselves up to idleness and dissipation which bring them finally to
crafty deceptions and thievery. They are besides extraordinarily given to
vanity, and love to adorn themselves as much as they can and to conduct
themselves importantly."

--Johann D. Schoepf, "_Travels in the Confederation_," 1784, p. 220.


EXTRACTS FROM ANBUREY'S TRAVELS THROUGH NORTH AMERICA


"Thus the whole management of the plantation is left to the overseer, who
as an encouragement to make the most of the crops, has a certain portion as
his wages, but not having any interest in the negroes, any further than
their labour, he drives and whips them about, and works them beyond their
strength, and sometimes till they expire; he feels no loss in their death,
he knows the plantation must be supplied, and his humanity is estimated by
his interest, which rises always above freezing point.

"It is the poor negroes who alone work hard, and I am sorry to say, fare
hard. Incredible is the fatigue which the poor wretches undergo, and that
nature should be able to support it; there certainly must be something in
their constitutions, as well as their color, different from us, that
enables them to endure it.

"They are called up at day break, and seldom allowed to swallow a mouthful
of homminy, or hoe cake, but are drawn out into the field immediately,
where they continue at hard labour, without intermission, till noon, when
they go to their dinners, and are seldom allowed an hour for that purpose;
their meals consist of hominy and salt, and if their master is a man of
humanity, touched by the finer feelings of love and sensibility, he allows
them twice a week a little skimmed milk, fat rusty bacon, or salt herring,
to relish this miserable and scanty fare. The man at this plantation, in
lieu of these, grants his negroes an acre of ground, and all Saturday
afternoon to raise grain and poultry for themselves. After they have dined,
they return to labor in the field, until dusk in the evening; here one
naturally imagines the daily labor of these poor creatures was over, not
so, they repair to the tobacco houses, where each has a task of stripping
allotted which takes them up some hours, or else they have such a quantity
of Indian corn to husk, and if they neglect it, are tied up in the morning,
and receive a number of lashes from those unfeeling monsters, the
overseers, whose masters suffer them to exercise their brutal authority
without constraint. Thus by their night task, it is late in the evening
before these poor creatures return to their second scanty meal, and the
time taken up at it encroaches upon their hours of sleep, which for
refreshment of food and sleep together can never be reckoned to exceed
eight.

"When they lay themselves down to rest, their comforts are equally
miserable and limited, for they sleep on a bench, or on the ground, with
an old scanty blanket, which serves them at once for bed and covering,
their cloathing is not less wretched, consisting of a shirt and trowsers of
coarse, thin, hard, hempen stuff, in the Summer, with an addition of a very
coarse woolen jacket, breeches and shoes in Winter. But since the war,
their masters, for they cannot get the cloathing as usual, suffer them to
go in rags, and many in a state of nudity.

"The female slaves share labor and repose just in the same manner, except a
few who are term'd house negroes, and are employed in household drugery.

"These poor creatures are all submission to injuries and insults, and are
obliged to be passive, nor dare they resist or defend themselves if
attacked, without the smallest provocation, by a white person, as the law
directs the negroe's arm to be cut off who raises it against a white
person, should it be only in defence against wanton barbarity and outrage.

"Notwithstanding this humiliating state and rigid treatment to which this
wretched race are subject, they are devoid of care, and appear jovial,
contented and happy. It is a fortunate circumstance that they possess, and
are blessed with such an easy satisfied disposition, otherwise they must
inevitably sink under such a complication of misery and wretchedness; what
is singularly remarkable, they always carry out a piece of fire, and kindle
one near their work, let the weather be so hot and sultry.

"As I have several times mentioned homminy and hoe-cake, it may not be
amiss to explain them: the former is made of Indian corn, which is coarsely
broke, and boiled with a few French beans, till it is almost a pulp.
Hoe-cake is Indian corn ground into meal, kneaded into a dough, and baked
before a fire, but as the negroes bake theirs on the hoes that they work
with, they have the appellation of hoe-cakes. These are in common use among
the inhabitants, I cannot say they are palateable, for as to flavor, one
made of sawdust would be equally good, and not unlike it in appearance, but
they are certainly a very strong and hearty food."

  --Anburey, _"Travels through America during the War_," Vol. 2, pp. 330-5.


VINDICATION OF THE NEGROES: A CONTROVERSY


First let me repeat your longest section relative to that people.

'Below this class of inhabitants, (the whites of no property, in Virginia,)
we must rank the Negroes, who would be still more to be pitied, if their
_natural insensibility did not in some measure alleviate the wretchedness
inseparable from slavery_. Seeing them ill lodged, ill clothed, and often
overcome with labour, I concluded that their treatment had been as rigorous
as it is elsewhere. Notwithstanding I have been assured that it is very
mild, compared to what they suffer in the Sugar Colonies. And indeed one
does not hear habitually, as at Jamaica and St. Domingo, the sound of
whips, and the outcries of the wretched beings, whose bodies are torn piece
meal by their strokes. It is because the people of Virginia are commonly
milder than those of the Sugar Colonies, which consist chiefly of rapacious
men, eager to amass fortunes, as soon as possible, and return to Europe.
The produce of their labours being also less valuable, their tasks are not
so rigorously exacted, and in justice to both, it must be allowed that the
Negroes themselves are less treacherous and thievish, than they are in the
Islands: for the propagation of the black species being very considerable
here, most of them are born in the country, and it is remarked that these
are in general less depraved than those imported from Africa. Besides, we
must do the Virginians the justice to remark, that many of them treat their
Negroes with a great deal of humanity, and what is still more to their
honor, they appear sorry there are any among them, and are forever talking
of abolishing slavery, and falling upon some other mode of improving their
land, &c.

'However this may be, it is fortunate that different motives concur to
deter mankind from exercising such tyranny, at least upon their own
species, if we cannot say, strictly speaking, _their equals_; for the more
we observe the Negroes, the more we are convinced that the
difference between us _does not lie in the colour alone, &c._

'Enough upon this subject, which has not escaped the attention of the
politicians and philosophers of the present age: I have only to apologize
for treating it without declamation; but I have always thought, that
eloquence can only influence the resolutions of the moment, and that every
thing which requires time, must be the work of reason. And besides, it will
be an easy matter to add ten or twelve pages to these few reflections,
which may be considered as a concert composed only of principal parts, _con
corni ad libertum_.'

Upon reading this passage attentively, I was surprised to find it contain a
singular mixture of contradictory principles, and in the same breath, the
sentiments of a philosopher and of a colonist; of an advocate for the
Negroes, and of their enemy.

It is evident that as a philosopher, and a friend to humanity, you are
inclined to alleviate the lot of the Negroes, and commend those who do so,
but this tenderness itself conceals a subtile venom that ought to be
exposed. For you only bestow your pity upon the Negroes, while you owe
them, if you are a philosopher, vindication and defense; you wish their
masters to be humane; they ought to be just. Instead of praising such
humanity, you ought to have blamed them for stopping there, in short, such
a contempt for the Negroes pervades this whole article, as will necessarily
encourage their tormentors to rivet their chains. Is not this contempt
observable, for instance in the very first period?

"Below this class of inhabitants (the meanest whites of Virginia) we must
rank the Negroes, who would be still more to be pitied, if their natural
insensibility did not in some measure alleviate the wretchedness
inseparable from slavery."

And who told you, Sir, that nature had created the Negroes with less
feeling than other men? do you judge so because they have vegetated for
three centuries in European fetters, and at this day have not altogether
shaken off the horrid yoke? But do not their frequent risings, and the
cruelties they from time to time retaliate upon their masters, give the lie
to this natural insensibility? for an insensible being has no resentment.
If he does not feel, how should he remember? Do you think the wretched
Indians, who, since the discovery of the New world, are burried in the
mines of Peru, are also naturally insensible, because they suffer
patiently?

You calumniate nature in making her grant favours to particulars; in giving
her a system of inequality among her offspring. All men are cast in the
same mould.--The varieties which distinguish individuals, are the sports of
chance, or the result of different circumstances; but the black comes into
the world with as much sensibility as the white, the Peruvian, as the
European.

What then degrades this natural and moral sensibility? The greater or less
privation of liberty; in proportion as man loses it, he loses the powers of
sensation; he loses the man; he sickens or becomes a brute. It is slavery
alone which can reduce a man to a level with the brute creation, and
sometimes deprives him of all sensibility; but you blame nature, that kind
parent, who would have us all equal, free and happy, for the crime of
social barbarity, and you pass by this crime, to extenuate another, to
extenuate the horrid torments of slavery! Not satisfied with violating
nature, by abusing her offspring, even in her name, you encourage
slaveholders to torment them.

Do you not arm their tyrants, when you tell them, the insensibility of the
Negroes alleviates their torments?

What! because greatness of soul raised Sidney above the terrors of death,
the infernal Jefferies[1] who caused his execution, was less guilty!
because the Quakers appeared insensible to insults, blows, or punishments,
they are less to be pitied, and it was right to martyr them! A dangerous
notion, whose consequences I am sure you would disapprove. If this
insensibility with which you reproach the Negroes mitigated the cruelty of
their masters, it were well: but their tormentors do not wish them not to
feel; they would have them all feeling, for the pleasure of torturing them;
and their punishments are increased in proportion to their insensibility.

Seeing the Negroes, say you, "Ill lodged, ill cloathed, and often overcome
with labour, I concluded that their treatment had been as rigorous as it is
elsewhere. Notwithstanding I have been assured that it is very mild,
compared to what they suffer in the Sugar Colonies."

Why this comparison, which seems to insinuate a justification of the
Virginians? does a misfortune cease to be such, because there is a greater
elsewhere? Was Cartouche less detestable because Brinvilliers had existed
before him? Let us not weaken by comparisons the idea of criminality, nor
lessen the attention due to the miserable, this were to countenance the
crime. The Negroes are ill lodged, ill cloathed, oppressed with labour in
Virginia: this is the fact, this is the offence. It matters not whether
they are worse treated elsewhere; in whatever degree they are so in
Virginia, it is still outrage and injustice.

And again, why are the Negroes of Virginia less cruelly treated? Humanity
is not the motive, it is because covetousness cannot obtain so much from
their labours, as in the Sugar Islands. Was it otherwise, they would be
sacrificed to it here, as well as there; how can we praise such forced
humanity? how, on the contrary, not give vent to all the indignation, which
must naturally arise in every feeling mind?

"And to do justice to both, you add, if the Virginians are not so severe,
it is because the Negroes themselves are less treacherous and thievish than
in the islands, because the propagation of the black species being very
considerable here, most of the Negroes are born in the country, and it is
remarked, that these are in general less depraved than those imported from
Africa."

Here is a strange confusion of causes and effects, and a strange abuse of
words. First let us clear up the facts. Here are some valuable ones for the
cause of the Negroes.

You say they are not so thievish in Virginia, propagate faster, and are
less depraved: Why? Because they are less cruelly treated.--Here is the
cause and the effect, you have mistaken one for the other.

We must conclude from this fact, that if the Virginians were no longer
severe, and should treat the blacks like fellow-creatures, they would not
be more vicious than their white servants.

The degree of oppression is the measure of what is improperly called the
viciousness of the slaves.--The more cruel their tyrants, the more
treacherous, villainous and cruel are the slaves in return--Can we wonder
that Macronius should assassinate his master Tiberius? This viciousness is
a punishment that heaven inflicts upon tyranny.

Can the efforts of a slave for the recovery of his liberty, be denominated
vicious or criminal? From the moment you violate the laws of nature, in
regard to them, why should not they shake them off in their relative duties
to you? You rob them of liberty, and you would not have them steal your
gold! You whip and cruelly torment them, and expect them not to struggle
for deliverance! You assassinate them every day, and expect them not to
assassinate you once! You call your outrages, rights, and the courage which
repulses them, a crime! What a confusion of ideas! what horrid logic!

And you, sir, a humane philosopher! are accessory to this injustice, by
describing the blacks in the style of a dealer in human flesh! You call
what are no more than natural consequences of the compression of the spring
of liberty--treachery, theft and depravation.[2] But can a natural
consequence be criminal? Remove the cause or is it not the only crime?

For my part, sir, I firmly believe, that the barbarities committed by the
Negroes, not merely against their masters, but even against others, will be
attributed at the bar of eternal justice, to the slaveholders, and those
infamous persons employed in the Guinea trade. I firmly believe, that no
human justice has the right of putting a Negro slave to death for any crime
whatever, because not being free, he is not sui juris, and should be
regarded as a child or an idiot, being almost always under the lash. I
believe that the real criminal, the cause of the crime, is the man who
first seized him, sold him, or enslaved him.--And if ever I should fall
under the knife of an unhappy runaway, I would not resent it upon him but
upon those white men who keep blacks in slavery. I would tell them, your
cruelty towards your Negroes, has endangered my life--they execrate you,
they take me for a tyrant because I am white like you, and the vengeance
due to your crimes has fallen upon me.

God forbid, however, that I should undertake to encourage the blacks to
take up arms against their masters! God forbid, however, that I should
undertake to justify the excesses to which their resentments have sometimes
hurried them, and which have often fallen on persons who were not accessary
to their wretchedness! The slavery under which they groan, must be
abolished by peaceable means; and thanks to the active spirit of
benevolence which animates the Quakers, the pious undertaking is already
begun. In most of the United States of America, the yoke has been taken
from their necks; in others the Guinea-trade has been prohibited. Societies
have been formed both at Paris and London, to collect and circulate
information upon this interesting subject, to induce the European
governments to put a stop to the Negro trade, and provide for their gradual
emancipation in the West-India islands: No doubt success will crown their
views, and the friends of liberty will enjoy the satisfaction of
communicating its blessings to the blacks.

But the blacks must wait for the happy moment that shall restore them to
civil life, in silence and in peace; they must rely upon the unwearied
diligence and zeal of the numerous writers who advocate their cause, and
the efforts of the humane to second their endeavors; they must strive to
justify and support the arguments that are adduced in their favour, by
displaying virtue in the very bosom of slavery; they must endeavour, in a
word, to render themselves worthy of liberty, that they may know how to use
it when it shall be restored to them; for liberty itself is sometimes a
burden, when slavery has stupefied the soul.

Such blacks, therefore, as are so inconsiderate as to be concerned in
insurrections, are guilty of retarding the execution of the general plan
for their emancipation; for the question is not, at the present day,
whether a million of slaves ought to be set at liberty, but whether they
can when free, be put into a capacity of providing for the subsistence of
themselves and their families. Insurrections, far from effecting this
purpose, would destroy the means. Regard, therefore, to their own
interests, if there were no other motive, should therefore engage the
blacks to patient submission, and no doubt but they will yield it, if their
masters and the ministers of the gospel in particular, to whom the task of
comforting and instructing them, is committed, endeavour to prepare them
for approaching freedom.

You sir, have adopted the vulgar notion, that the Negroes born in Virginia,
are less depraved than those imported from Africa. You call the firmness
which is common in the early stages of their slavery _greater degeneracy;_
they are depraved, that is, in your language--they are wicked and
treacherous to those who have purchased them, or brought them from their
own country.--But in my mind, they are not depraved, because the acts of
violence their genius inspires them to revenge themselves upon their
tyrants, are justified by the rights of nature.

And why are those imported, more wicked in your opinion? In mine, more
quick, more ardent in their resentments? because, not having forgotten
their former situation, they feel their loss the more sensibly; and having
strong ideas, their resolutions are more firm and their actions more
violent, they not having yet contracted the habits of slavery.

They soon fall into that degree of apathy and insensibility, which you
unjustly believe to be natural to them; that is, in your language, they
become less depraved; but I would say that their depravity begins with this
apathy and weakness.--For depravity is the loss of nature, and the want of
those virtues inherent in man, courage and the love of liberty. Our readers
may judge from this article, how strangely writers have wrested words to
condemn these unhappy Negroes, and the unfortunate in general.

I do not, however, pretend to say, that the Negroes of Africa are all
good, or even that many of them are not depraved. But is this fact to be
imputed to them as a personal crime? Ought you not rather to have ascribed
it to the foreign source by which they are corrupted. Alike in them and in
the whites, the depravity of man is a consequence of his wretchedness, and
the usurpation of his rights. Wherever he is free and at ease, he is good;
wherever the contrary, he is wicked. Neither his nature nor the climate
corrupt him, but the government of his country. Now that of the Negroes is
almost universally despotic, such as must necessarily debase and corrupt
the Negro.

How much is the depravity, occasioned by the government of his country,
increased by his second slavery, far worse than the first--for he is no
longer among friends in his native land--surrounded by the pleasing scenes
of his childhood, he is among monsters who are going to live by, and trade
in his blood, and has nothing before his eyes but death, or oppression
equivalent to an endless punishment.

How is it possible such horrid prospects should not fire his soul? How, if
chance should present him with arms and liberty, should he resist using
them, to put an end to his own existence, or that of his tormentors? What
white man would be less cruel in his situation? Truly I think myself of a
humane disposition, that I love my fellow-creatures and detest the effusion
of blood, but if ever a villain, white or black, should snatch me from my
freedom, my family, and my friends, should overwhelm me with outrages and
blows, to gratify his caprice, should extend his barbarities to my wife and
children--my blood boils at the thought--perhaps in a transport of
revenge.... If such vengeance would be lawful in me, what makes the Negro
more guilty? Why should that be called wickedness and depravity in him,
which would be stiled virtue in me, in you, in every white man? Are not my
rights the same as his? Is not nature our common parent? God his father as
well as mine? His conscience an infallible guide as well as mine? Let us
then no longer make other laws for the blacks than those we are bound by
ourselves, since Heaven has placed them on a level with us, has made them
like us, since they are our brethren and our fellow-creatures.

Here you stop me, you say that _the Negro is not our fellow-creature, that
he is below the white_.

How could so shocking an opinion escape the pen of a member of the Royal
Academy, a writer who would be thought a friend of mankind!

Do not you see the tormentors of St. Domingo, avail themselves of it
already, redoubling their strokes, and regarding their slaves as mere
machines, like the Cartesians do the brutes? They are not our
fellow-creatures will they say: a philosopher of Paris has proved it?

What! the blacks our equals! Have not they eyes, ears, a shape, and organs
like ours? Does nature follow another order, other laws for them?--Have not
they speech, that peculiar characteristic of humanity? But then the colour!
What of that? Are the pale white Albinos, the olive or copper coloured
Indians also of different species! Who does not know that colour is
accidental. They are not our equals! Have not they the same
faculties--reason, memory, imagination? Yes, you reply, but they have
written no books. Who told you so? Who told you there were no learned
blacks? And supposing it were so, if none but authors are men, the whole
human race is different from us.

Shall I tell you why there are no authors or men of learning among the
Negroes? What has made you what you are? Education and circumstances!--Now
where are the Negroes favoured by either? Consider them wherever they are
to be found.--In Africa, wretchedly enslaved by domestic tyrants; in our
islands perpetual martyrs; in the southern United States, the meanest of
slaves; in the northern, domestics; in Europe, universally contemned, every
where proscribed, like the Jews; in a word, every where in a state of
debasement.

I have been told that there are blacks of property in the northern parts of
America; but these, like the other settlers, are no more than sensible
farmers or traders.--There are no authors[3] among them, because there are
few rich and idle people in America.

What spring of action could raise a Negro from his debased condition? the
road to glory and honor is impassible to him: What then should he write
for? Besides, the blacks have reason to detest the sciences, for their
oppressors cultivate them but they do not make them better.

Shall we say that the Indians or Arabs are not our equals, because they
despise both our arts and our sciences? or the Quakers, because they
neither respect academies nor wits?

In short, if you will deny the Negroes souls, energy, sensibility,
gratitude or beneficence, I oppose you to yourself, I might quote your own
anecdote of Mr. Langdon's Negro, and abundance of other well known facts in
favour of the blacks. You may find some striking ones in the Abbé Raynals'
philosophical history. One of them would have been sufficient. The Negro
who killed himself when his master who had injured him was in his power,
was superior to Epictetus, and the existence of a single Negro of so
sublime a character, ennobles all his kind.

But how could you judge whether the blacks were different from the whites,
who saw them only in a state of slavery and wretchedness? Do we estimate
beauty by the figure of a Laplander? magnanimity by the soul of a courtier?
or intelligence by the stupidity of an Esquimaux?

If the traces of humanity were so much weakened and effaced in the Negroes,
that you did not recognize them, I conclude not that they do not belong to
our species, but that they must have been cruelly tormented to reduce them
to this state of degeneracy. I do not conclude that they are not men, but
that the Europeans who kidnap the blacks, are not worthy of the name.

You consider what precautions it may be necessary to take to avoid the
danger which might attend a general emancipation of the Negroes.

I shall not now enter into a discussion of this nice question, but reserve
it for another work: yet I must say in a word, that the Negroes will never
be our friends, will never be men, until they are possessed of all our
rights, until we are upon an equality. Civil liberty is the boundary
between good and evil, order and disorder, happiness and misery, ignorance
and knowledge. If we would make the Negroes worthy of us, we must raise
them to our level by giving them this liberty.

Thus, the chief inconvenience you expect will follow the emancipation of
the Negroes, may be avoided; that although free, they will remain a
distinct species, a distinct and dangerous body.

This objection will vanish when we intermix with them, and boldly efface
every distinction. Unless this is the case, I foresee torrents of blood
spilt and the earth disputed between the whites and blacks, as America was
between the Europeans and Savages.

Perhaps, and it is no extravagant idea--perhaps it might be more prudent,
more humane, to send the blacks back again to their native country, settle
them there, encourage their industry, and assist them to form connections
with Europe and America. The celebrated doctor Fothergill conceived this
plan, and the society for the abolition of slavery, at London, have carried
it into execution at Sierra Leone. Time and perseverance, will discover the
policy and utility of this settlement. If it should succeed, the blacks
will quit America insensibly, and Sierra Leone become the centre from
whence general civilization will spread over all Africa.

Perhaps, sir, you will place these thoughts upon the Negroes with those
declamations you are pleased to ridicule: But what is the epithet of
declaimer to me, if I am right, if I make an impression upon my readers, if
I cause remorse into the breast of a single slave-holder; in a word, if I
contribute to accelerate the general impulse toward liberty.

You disapprove the application of eloquence to this subject; you think
nothing can affect it but exertions of cool reason. What is eloquence but
the language of reason and sensibility? When man is oppressed, he
struggles, he complains, he moves our passions, and bears down all
opposition. Such eloquence can perform wonders, and should be employed by
those who undertake to plead the cause of the unfortunate who spend their
days in continual agony, or he will make no impression.--I do not conceive
how any man can display wit instead of feeling, upon this distracting
subject, amuse with an antithesis, instead of forcible reasoning, and only
dazzle where he ought to warm. I have no conception how a sensible and
thinking being, can see a fellow-creature tortured and torn to pieces,
perhaps his poor wife bathed in tears, with a wretched infant sucking her
shriveled breast at his side; I say I have no conception how he can behold
such a sight, with indifference; how, unagonized and convulsed with rage
and indignation, he can have the barbarity to descend to jesting!
Notwithstanding, your observations upon the Negroes, conclude with a jest.

It will be an easy matter, say you, to add ten or twelve pages to these few
reflections, which may be considered as a concert, composed only of
principal parts, "con corni ad Libertum."

I hope there is nothing cruel, because there is nothing studied in this
connection, this inconsiderate manner: but how could such a comparison come
into the head of a man of feeling? It is the sad effect of wit, as I said
before; it contracts the soul. Ever glancing over agreeable objects, it is
unfeeling when intruded upon by wretchedness--uneasy to obliterate the
shocking idea, and elude the groans of nature, it rids itself of both by a
jest. The humane Benezet would never have connected this idea of harmony
with the sound of a Negro driver's whip.

Having proved that you have wronged the Quakers and the Negroes, I shall
proceed to shew that you have equally injured mankind and the
people.--_Critical Examination of the Marquis de Chastellux's Travels in
North-America, 1782. Translated from the French of Jean P. Verre Brissot de
Warville, 1788_, pp. 51-63.


FOOTNOTES:


[1] This Jefferies was the most infamous Chief Justice that ever existed in
England. Charles II. and James II. well acquainted with his talents for
chicane, his debauchery and blood-thirstiness, his baseness and his crimes,
made use of him to exterminate, with the sword of law, all those worthy men
who defended the constitution from their tyranny.

I often quote the History of England; unhappily for us it is too little
known in France.

[2] Most authors who have not studied the rights of men, fall into this
error. I have remarked elsewhere (Vol. II of the _Journ. du Licee_, No. 4,
page 222) that a writer, who, notwithstanding, deserves our esteem, for
having written against the despotism of the Turkish government, has
suffered himself to be drawn into it. M. le Baron de Tott says that the
Moldavians are thievish, mean and faithless. To translate these words into
the language of truth, we must say, the Turks, the masters of the
Moldavians, are unjust, robbers, villains, and tyrants; and that the
Moldavians revenge themselves by opposing deceit to oppression, etc. Thus,
the people are almost everywhere wrongfully accused.

[3] There was, however, a Negro author at London, whose productions are not
without merit, and were lately published in two volumes. His name was
Ignatius Sancho. He wrote in the manner of Sterne.


SUR L'ÉTAT GÉNÉRAL, LE GENRE D'INDUSTRIE, LES MOEURS, LE CARACTÈRE, ETC.
DES NOIRS, DANS LES ÉTATS-UNIS


"Dans les quatre états du nord et dans ceux du midi, les noirs libres sont,
ou domestiques, ou tiennent de petites boutiques, ou cultivent la terre.
Vous en voyez quelques-unes sur les bâtimens destinés au cabotage. Peu
osent se hasarder sur les vaisseau employés aux voyages de long cours,
parce qu'ils craignent d'être transportés et vendus dans les iles.--Au
physique, tous ces noirs sont généralement vigoureux,[1] d'une forte
constitution, capables des travaux les plus pénibles; ils sont généralement
actifs.--Domestiques, ils sont sobres et fidèles.--Ce portrait s'applique
aux femmes de cette couleur.--Je n'ai vu faire aucune distinction entr'eux
à cet égard et les domestiques blancs, quoique ces derniers les traitent
toujours avec mépris, comme étant d'une espèce inférieure.--Ceux qui
tiennent des boutiques, vivent médiocrement, n'augmentent jamais leurs
affaires au-dela d'un certain point. La raison en est simple: quoique
partout on traite les noirs avec humanité, les blancs qui ont l'argent, ne
sont pas disposés à faire aux noirs des avances, telles qu'elles les
missent en état d'entreprendre le commerce en grand; d'ailleurs, il faut
pour ce commerce quelques connoissances préliminaires, il faut faire un
noviciat dans un comptoir, et la raison n'a pas encore ouvert aux noirs la
porte du comptoir. On ne leur permet pas de s'y asseoir à côté des
blancs.--Si donc les noirs sont bornés ici à un petit commerce de détail,
n'en accusons pas leur impuissance, mais le préjugé des blancs, qui leur
donnent des entraves. Les mémes causes empéchent les moirs qui vivent à la
compagne d'avoir des plantations étendues; celles qu'ils cultivent sont
bornées, mais généralement assez bien cultivées: de bons habits, _une log
house_, ou maison de bois en bon état, des enfans plus nombreux les font
remarquer des Européens voyageurs, et l'oeil du philosophe se plaît à
considérer ces habitations, où la tyrannie ne fait point verser de pleurs.
Dans cette partie de l'Amerique, les noirs sont certainement heureux; mais
ayons le courage de l'avouer, leur bonheur et leurs talens ne sont pas
encore au degré où ils pourroient atteindre.--Il existe encoure un trop
grand intervalle entre eux et les blancs, sur-tout dans l'opinion publique,
et cette difference humiliante arrête tous les efforts qu'ils feroient pour
s'élever. Cette difference se montre par-tout. Par exemple, on admet les
noirs aux écoles publiques; mais ils ne peuvent franchir le seuil d'un
collège. Quoique libres, quoique indépendans, ils sont toujours eux-mêmes
accoutumés à se regarder comme au-dessous du blanc; il y a des droits
qu'ils n'out pas.[2] Concluons de là qu'on jugeroit mal de l'étendue, de la
capacité des noirs, en prenant pour base celle des noirs libres dans les
états du nord.

Mais quand on les compare aux noirs, esclaves des états du midi, quelle
prodigieuse différence les sépare! Dans le midi, les noirs sont dans un
état d'abjection et d'abrutissement difficile à peindre. Beaucoup sont
nuds, mal nourris, logés dans de miserables huttes, couchés sur la
paille.[3] On ne leur donne aucune éducation; on ne les instruit dans
aucune religion; on ne les marie pas, on les accouple; aussi sont ils
avilis, paresseux, sans idées, sans énergie.--Ills ne se donneroient
aucune peine pour avoir des habits, ou de meilleures provisions;
ils aiment mieux porter des haillons que de les raccommoder. Ills
passent le dimanche, qui est le jour du repos, entièrement dans
l'inaction.--L'inaction est leur souverain bonheur; aussi travaillent-ils
pen et nonchalamment.

Il faut rendre justice à la vérité; les Américains du midi traitent
doucement les esclaves, et c'est un des effets produits par l'extension
générale des idées sur la liberté; l'esclave travaille moins par-tout; mais
on s'est borné là. Il n'en est pas mieux, ni pour la mourriture, ni pour
son habillement, ni pour ses moeurs, ni pour ses idées; ainsi le maître
perd, sans que l'esclaves acquière; et s'il suivoit l'exemple des
Americains du nord, tous deux gagneroient au changement.

On a cru généralment jusqu'à ces derniers temps, que les nègres avoient
moins de capacité morale que les blancs; des auteurs même estimables l'ont
imprimé.[4] Ce préjugé commence à disparoitre; les états du nord pourroient
fournir des exemples du contraire. Je n'en citerai que deux frappans; le
premier, prouvera, qu'avec l'instruction, on peut rendre les noirs propres
à toutes les professions; le second, que la tête d'un nègre est organsée
pour les calculs les plus étonans, et par conséquent pour toutes les
sciences.

J'ai vu, dans mon séjour à Philadelphie, un noir, appelé Jacques Derham,
médecin, qui exerce dans la Nouvelle-Orleans, sur le Mississippi; et voici
son histoire, telle qu'elle m'a été attestée par plusieurs médecins.--Ce
noir a été élevé dans une famille de Philadelphie, où il a appris à lire, à
écrire, et où on l'a instruit dans les principes du christianisme. Dans sa
jeunesse, il fut vendu au feu docteur Jean Kearsley le jeune, de cette
ville, qui l'employoit pour composer des médecines, et les administrer á
ses malades.

A la mort du docteur Kearsley, il passa dans différentes mains, et il
devint enfin l'esclave du docteur George West, chirurgien du seizième
regiment d'Angleterre, sous lequel, pendant la dernière guerre en Amérique,
il remplit les fonctions les moins importantes de la médecine.

A la fin de la guerre, le docteur West le vendit au Docteur Robert Dove, de
la Nouvelle-Orleans, qui l'employa comme son second. Dans cette condition,
il gagna si bien la confiance et l'amité de son maître, que celui-ci
consentit à l'affranchir deux ou trois ans après, et à des conditions
modérées.--Derham s'étoit tellement perfectionné dans la medecine, qu'à
l'époque de sa liberté, il fut en état de la pratiquer avec succès à la
Nouvelle-Orleans.--Il a environ 26 ans; il est marié, mais il n'a point
d'enfans; la medecine lui rapporte 3000 dollars, ou 16000 l. environ par
an.

J'ai causé, m'a dit le docteur Wistar, avec lui sur les maladies aiguës et
épidémiques du pays où il vit, et je l'ai trouve bien versé dans la méthode
simple, usitée par les modernes pour le traitement de ces maladies.--Je
croyois pouvoir lui indiquer de nouveaux remèdes; mais ce fut lui qui me
les indiqua.--Il est modeste, et a des manières très-engageantes; il parle
francois avec facilité et a quelques connoisances de l'espagnol. -- Qoique
né dans une famille religieuse, on avoit, par accident, oublié de le faire
baptiser. En conséquence, il s'est adressé au docteur Withe pour recevoir
le baptême; il le lui a conféré, apres l'en avoir jugé digne, non-seulement
par ses connoisances, mais par son excellente conduite.

Voice l'autre fait, tel qu'il m'a été attesté, et imprimé par le docteur
Rush,[5] célèbre médecin et auteur, établi à Philadelphie et plusieurs
détails m'en ont été confirmés par l'épouse de l'immortel Washington, dans
le voisinage duquel ce nègre est depuis longtemps.

Son nom est Thomas Fuller; il est né en Afrique, et ne sait ni lire ni
écrire; il a maintenant soixante-dix ans, et a vécu toute sa vie sur la
plantation de M^{me} Cox, a quatre milles d'Alexandrie. Deux habitans
respectables de Pensylvanie, MM. Hartshom et Samuel Coates, qui
voyageoient en Virginie, ayant appris la facilité singuliere que ce noir
avoit pour les calculus les plus compliques, l'envoyèrent chercher, et lui
firent differentes questions.

Première. Etant interrogé, combien de secondes il y avoit dans une année et
demie, il repondit en deux minutes, 47,304,000, en comptant 365 jours dans
l'année.

Deuxième. Combien de secondes auroit vécu un homme âgé de soix-ante-dix ans
dix-sept jours et douze heures? Il répondit dans une minute et demie,
2,210,500,800.

Un des Americains qui l'interrogeoit et qui vérifioit ses calculs avec la
plume, lui dit qu'il se trompoit, que la somme n'étoit pas si considerable;
et cela étoit vrai: c'est qu'il n'avoit pas fait attention aux années
bissextiles; il corrigea le calcul avec la plus grande célérité.

Autre question. Supposez un laboureur qui a six truies, et que chaque
truie en met bas six autres la première année, et qu'elles multiplient dans
la même proportion jusqu'à, l' fin de la huitème année: combien alors de
truies aura le laboureur, s'il n'en perd aucune? Le vieillard répondit en
dix minutes, 34,588,806.

La longueur du temps ne fut occasionée que parce qu'il n'avoit pas d'abord
compris la question.

Après avoir satisfait à toutes les questions, il raconta l'origine et les
progrès de son talent en arithmétique.--Il compta a'abord jusqu'a 10, puis
100; et s'imaginoit alors, disoit-il, être un habile homme. Ensuite il
s'amusa à compter tous les grains d'un boisseau de ble, et successivement
il sut compter le nombre de rails ou morceaux de bois necessaires pour
enclore un champ d'une telle étendue, ou de grains nécessaires pour le
semer.--Sa maîtresse avoit tiré beaucoup d'advantages de son talen; il ne
parloit d'elle qu'avec la plus grande reconnoissance, parce qu'elle ne
l'avoit jamais voulu vendre, malgre les offres considerables qu'on lui
avoit faites pour l'acheter.--Sa tête commençoit à foiblir.--Un des
Americains lui ayant dit que c'étoit dommage qu'il n'eut pas recu de
l'éducation: Non, maître, dit-il; il vaut mieux que je n'aie rien appris,
car bien des savans ne sont que des sots.

Ces exemples prouveront, sans doute, que la capacité des nègres peut
s'étendre a tout; ils n'ont besoin que d'instruction et de liberté.--La
différence qui se remarque entre ceux qui sont libres et instruits et les
autres, se montre encore dans leurs travaux.--Les terres qu'habitent et les
blancs et les noirs, soumis à ce rêgime, sont infiniment mieux cultivées,
produisent plus abondamment, offrent par-tout l'image de l'aisance et du
bonheur; et tel est, par exemple, l'aspect du Connecticut et de la
Pensylvanie.--Passez dans le Maryland ou la Virginie, encore une fois, vous
croyez être dans un autre monde. Ce ne sont plus des plaines bien
cultivées, des maisons de campagne, propres et meme élégantes, des vastes
granges bien distribuées; ce ne sont plus des troupeaux nombreux de
bestiaux gras et vigoureux: non, tout dans le Maryland et la Virginia,
porte l'empreinte de l'esclavage; sol brulé, culture mal entendue, maisons
délabrées, bestiaux petits et peu nombreux, cadavres noirs ambulans; en un
mot, vous y voyez une misère réelle a côté de l'apparence du luxe.

On commence à s'appercevoir, même dans les états méridionaux, que nourrir
mal un exclave est une chétive économie, et que le fonds placé dans
l'esclavage ne rend pas son interêt. C'est peut-être plus à cette
considération, plus encore à l'impossibilité pécuniaire de recruter; c'est
plus, dis-je, à ces considérations qu'à l'humanité, qu'on doit
l'introduction du travail libre dans une partie de la Virginie, dans celle
qui avoisine la belle rivière de la Shenadore. Aussi croiroit-on, en la
voyant, voir encore la Pensylvanie.

Osons l'espérer, tel sera un jour le sort de la Virginie, quand elle ne
sera plus souillée par l'esclavage; et ce terme n'est peut-être pas
eloigné. Il n'y a des esclaves que parce qu'on les croit nécessaires á la
culture du tabac, et cette culture décline tous les jours et doit décliner.
Le tabac, qui se ciiltive près de l'Ohio et du Mississippi, est infiniment
plus abondant, de meilleure qualité, exige moins de travaux. Quand ce tabac
se sera ouvert le chemin de l'Europe, les Virginiens seront obligés de
cesser sa culture, et de demander à la terre du blé, des pommes de terre,
de faire des prairies et d'élever des bestiaux. Les Virginiens judicieux
prévoient cette revolution, l'anticipent, et se livrent à la culture du
blé.--A leur tête, on doit mettre cet homme étonnant, qui, général adoré,
eut le courage d'être republican sincère; qui, couvert de gloire, seul, ne
s'en souvient plus; héros dont la destinée unique sera d'avoir sauvé deux
fois sa patrie, de lui ouvrir le chemin de la prospérité, apres avoir
ouvert celui de la liberté. Maintenant _entièrement_ occupé[6] du soin
d'améliorer ses terres, d'en varier le produit, d'ouvrir des routes, des
communications, il donne à ses compatriotes un exemple utile, et qui sans
doute sera suivi. Il a cependant, dois-je, le dire? une foule nombreuse
d'esclaves noirs.--Mais ils sont traites avec la plus grande humanité. Bien
nourris, bien vêtus, n'ayant qu'un travail modéré à faire, ils bénissent
sans cesse le maître que le Ciel leur a donné.--Il est digne sans doute
d'une âme aussi élevée, aussi pure, aussi désinteressé, de commencer la
révolution en Virginie, d'y preparer l'affranchissement des nègres.--Ce
grand homme, lorsque j'eus le bonheur de l'entretenir, m'avoua qu'il
admiroit tout ce qui se faissoit dans les autres états, qu'il en desiroit
l'extension dans son propre pays; mais il ne me cacha pas que de nombreux
obstacles s'y opposoient encore, qu'il seroit dangereux de heurter de front
un préjugé qui commencoit à diminuer.--Du temps, de la patience, des
lumières, et on le convaincra, me dit-il. Presque tous les Virginiens,
ajoutoit-il, ne croyent pas que la liberté des noirs puisse sitôt devenir
générale. Voilà pourquoi ils ne veulent point former de société qui puisse
donner des idées dangereuses à leurs esclaves. Un autre obstacle s'y
oppose. Les grandes propriétés éloignent les hommes, rendent difficiles les
assemblées, et vous ne trouverez ici que de grands propriétaires.

Les Virginiens se trompent, lui disois-je; il est evident que tôt ou tard
les nègres obtiendront par-tout leur liberté, que cette révolution
s'étendra en Virginie. Il est done de l'intérêt de vos compatriotes de s'y
préparer, de tacher de concilier la restitution des droits des nègres avec
leur propriété. Les Moyens à prendre, pour cet effet, ne peuvent être
l'ouvrage que d'une société, et il est digne du sauveur de l'Amerique d'en
être le chef, et de rendre la liberté à 300,000 hommes malheureux dans son
pays. Ce grand homme me dit qu'il en desiroit la formation, qu'il la
seconderoit; mail il ne croyoit pas le moment favorable.--Sans doute des
vues plus élévees absorboient alors son attention et remplissoient son âme;
le destin de l'amerique étoit prêt à étre remis une seconde fois dans ses
mains.

C'est un malheur, n'en doutons pas, semblable société n'existe pas dans le
Maryland et dans la Virginie; car c'est au zèle constant de celles de
Philadelphie et de New-Yorck qu'on doit tous les progrès de cette
révolution en Amerique, et la naissance de la société de Londres.

Que ne puis-je ici vous peindre l'impression dont j'ai été frappé en
assistant aux séances de ces trois sociétés!--Quelle gravité dans la
contenance des membres! quelle simplicité dans leurs discours! quelle
candeur dans leurs discussions! quelle bienfaisance! quelle énergie dans
leur résolution! Chacun s'empressoit d'y prendre part, non pour briller,
mais pour être utile.--Avec quelle joie ils apprirent qu'il s'élevoit une
société semblable à la leur dans Paris, dans cette capitale immense, si
célèbre en Amerique par l'opulence, le faste, l'influence sur un vaste
royaume, et sur presque tous les états de l'Europe! Avec quel empressement
ils publièrent cette nouvelle dans toutes leurs gazettes, et répandirent
partout la traduction du premier discours lu dans cette société! Avec
quelle joie ils virent dans la liste des membres de cette société, un nom
cher à leurs coeurs, et qu'ils ne prononcent qu'aves attendrissement, et
les noms d'autres personness connues par leur énergie et leur patriotisme!
Ils ne doutoient point que si cette société s'étendoit, bravoit les
obstacles, s'unissoit avec celle de Londres, les lumières repandues par
elles sur le trafic des nègres et sur son infamie inutile, n'éclairassent
les gouvernmens, et n'en determinassent la suppression.

Ce fut, sans doute, à cet élan de joie et d'espoir, et aux recommendations
flatteuses que j'avois emportées d'Europe, plus qu'à mes foibles travaux,
que je dus l'honneur qu'ils me firent de m'associer à leur rang.

Ces sociétés ne se bornèrent pas à ces démonstrations; elles nommèrent dés
comités pour m'assister dans mes travaux; leurs archives me furent
ouvertes.

Ces sociétés bienfaisantes s'occupent maintenant de nouveaux prospects pour
consommer leur oeuvre de justice et d'humanité; elles s'occupent à creer de
nouvelles sociétés dans les états qui n'en out point; c'est ainsi qu'il
vient de s'en élever une dans l'état de Delaware.--Elles forment de
nouveaux projets pour décourager l'esclavage et le commerce des
esclaves.--Cest ainsi que, pour arrêter les ventes scandaleuses qui s'en
font encore dans New Yorck,[7] à des enchères publiques, tous les membres
se sont engagés à ne jamais employer l'officier public, l'huissier-priseur
qui présideroit à de pareilles ventes. Mais c'est sur-tout à sauver des
mains de la cupidité des esclaves, qu'elle voudroit et ne doit pas retenir,
que la société de Philadelphie est ingénieuse.--Un esclave est-il
maltraité, il trouve dans elle une protection assurée et gratuite.--Un
autre a fini son temps, et est toujours détenu; elle reclame ses
droits.--Des étrangers amènent des noirs, et ne satisfont pas à la loi; la
société en procure le benefice à ces malheureux nègres.--Un des plus
célèbres avocats de Philadelphie, dont j'aime à vanter les talents et
l'amitié qui nous unit, M. _Myers Fisher_, lui prête son ministère, presque
toujours avec succès, et tojours avec désintéressement. Cette société s'est
apperçue que de nombreuses assemblées, n'avoient pas d'action, parce que le
mouvement se perdoit en se divisant en trop de membres; elle a créé
plusiers comités, toujours en activite; elle sollicite des créations
semblables dans tous les états; afin que par-tout les loix sur l'abolition
de la traite et sur l'affranchissement soient executées; afin que par-tout
on presente des pétitions aux legislatures, pour obtenir de nouvelles loix
pour les cas non prévus. --Enfin, c'est a cette société, sand doute, que
l'on devra un jour de semblables établissemens dans le midi. J. P. Brissot,
(Warville). --"_Nouveau Vouage dans les États-Unis de l'Amerique
Septentrionale, 1788_," Tome Second, 31-49.


FOOTNOTES:


[1] Les noirs maries font certainement autant d'enfans que les blancs; mais
on a remarqué que dans les villes, il perissoit plus d'enfans noirs. Cette
difference tient moins a leur nature qu'au défaut d'aisance et de soins,
sur-tout des médecins et des chirurgiens.

[2] N'y eut-il que l'aversion des blancs pour le mariage de leurs filles
avec les noirs, ce seul sentiment suffiroit pour avilir ces deniers.
Cependant il y a quelques exemples de ces mariages.

Il existe a Pittsbourg sur l'Ohio une blanche d'origine françoise, menée a
Londres, et enlevée, à l'âge de douze ans, par des corsaires qui faisoient
métier d'enlever des enfans, et de les vendre en Amerique pour un temps
fixé de leur travail.--Des circonstances singulieres l'engagèrent à épouser
un nègre qui lui acheta sa liberté, et qui la tira des mains d'un blanc,
maître barbare et libi-dineux, qui avoit tout employé pour la desuire.--Une
mulâtresse, sortie de cette union, a épousé un chirurgien de Nantes, établi
à Pittsburg.--Cette famille est une des plus respectables de cette ville;
le nègre fait un très bon commerce, et la maîtresse se fait un devoir
d'accueillir et de bien traiter les étrangers, et sur tout les François que
le hasard amène de ce côté.

Mais on n'a point d'idée d'une pareille union dans le nord; elle
revolteroit.--Dans les etablissemens, le long de l'Ohio il y a bien des
négresses qui vivent avec des blancs non mariés.--Cependant on m'assura que
cette union est regardée de mauvais oeil par les nègres mêmes. Si une
négresse a une-querelle avec une mulâtresse, elle lui reproche d'être d'un
sang mêlé.

[3] Le docteur Rush, qui a été portée de traiter ces noirs, m'a communiqué
une observation bien importante, et qui prouve combien l'énergie morale et
intellectuelle d'un individu influe sur sa santé et son état physique. Il
m'a dit qu'il étoit bien plus difficile de traiter et de guérir ces noirs
esclaves que les blancs; qu'ils résistoient bien moins aux maladies
violentes ou longues. C'est qu'ils tiennent pen par l'âme à la vie: la
vitalité ou le ressort de la vie est presque nul dans eux.

[4] J'ai deja plusieurs fois refuté cette opinion et sur-tout dans mon
Examen critique des voyages de M. Chatellux. Elle a d'alleurs été détruite
dans une foule d'excellens ouvrages.

[5] Ce médecin est aussi célèbre en Amerique, par de bons écrits
politiques. C'est un apôtre infatigable de la liberté.

[6] Il n'étoit pas alors président des Etats-Unis. J'anticipe ici sur
plusieurs conversations que j'ai eues avec ce grand homme, et dont je
parlerai par la suite.

[7] A l'assemblée de la société de New-Yorck, du 9 novembre 1787, il a été arrêté qu'on
donneroit une medaille d'or pour le meilleur discours qui seroit prononcé a
l'ouverture du college de New-Yorck sur l'injustice et la cruaute de la
traite des nègres, et sur les funestes effets de l'esclavage.


SLAVERY AS SEEN BY HENRY WANSEY


"In this state (He was then at Worcester) the Negroes are free and happy,
are electors, but not elected to offices of state; their education,
however, is the same as the whites. ... No negro child is suffered to be
endentured beyond twenty-four years of age.

"We observe a school by the road-side in almost every parish, and out of it
run negro boys and girls as well as white children, without any
distinction. ... A road branched off here to our right hand, leading to
Albany about 60 miles distant. I now observe six or eight negroes working
together in a field, well dressed as other people. Notwithstanding, they
are here free, and admitted to equal privileges with the white people, yet
they love to associate with each other. It is observed that they are
naturally lazier, and will not work so hard as a white servant.--Perhaps,
the remembrance of former compulsive service, may make them place a luxury
in idleness. Nor do they yet seem to feel their importance in society; this
is a portion of inheritance reserved to the next generation of them. ...

  "Came on to Hartford....

Here I staid two days that I might have time to inspect the woolen
manufactory of this place, and attend the debates of the House of
Representatives of this state.... Two very interesting subjects were in
debate:--a bill brought in to repeal a law, passed in October last to
order 'That the money arising from the sale of their lands, between the
Ohio and Lake Erie, should be appropriated to increase the salaries of the
ministers of the gospel and the masters of schools;' and another bill (for
its second reading) 'To provide for those poor and sick negroes, who
having been freed from slavery might be unprovided for; and that till the
master was exculpated, by receiving a certificate from the state, that
negro was discharged in perfect health, it should be incumbent on the
master to continue to take care of him during sickness, or, at least, pay
the expenses of his cure.' I was much pleased to see a legislature extend
its humanity and care so far.

After our breakfast, which was not a very good one, we set off for
Elizabeth Town, near which, on the right, is Governor Livingstone's
handsome house. This is six miles from Newark....

I observed several negro houses, (low buildings of one story) detached from
the family house; for the slaves (from their pilfering disposition) are not
allowed to sleep in the same houses with their masters. Slavery, although
many regulations have been made to moderate its severity, is not yet
abolished in the New Jerseys....

"Most of the families of New York have black servants. I should suppose
that nearly one fifth of the inhabitants are negroes, most of whom are
free, and many in good circumstances."--Henry Wansey, F.A.S., "_The Journal
of an excursion to the United States of America in the summer of 1794
(Journey from New York to Boston)_," pp. 53, 57, 58, 67, and 227.


ESCLAVAGE PAR LA ROCHEFOUCAULD-LIANCOURT


Quant à l'esclavage, l'État de New-Yorck est un de ceux où les idées m'ont
paru le moins liberales. Il est donc naturel que les loix qui dans tous les
pays suivent plus ou moins l'opinion générale, manquent aussi de libéralité
à cet égard.

On peut concevoir comment dans les États du Sud le grand nombre des
esclaves rend leur émancipation difficile, et comment cette difficulté
d'émancipation donne pretexte à l'opinion de la necessité de loix
extrêmement sévères contre eux. Mais dans l'État de New-Yorck, où sur une
population de plus de quatre cent mille âmes on ne compte pas vingt mille
nègres; il est impossible de comprendre quels si grands obstacles
l'emancipation peut rencontrer, et sur quoi l'on peut fonder l'opinion
qui'il faut pour ce petit nombre de nègres des loix plus sévères que pour
les hommes d'une autre couleur.

Quoiqu'il en soit, une loi qui n'est pas plus ancienne que 1788, confirme
l'état d'esclavage pour tout nègre, mulâtre our mêtif esclave à l'époque où
elle a été rendue; déclare esclave tout enfant né ou à naître d'une femme
esclave; autorise la vente des esclaves et les soumet pour les petits
crimes, à un jugement, que l'on peut appeler prévotal, des juges de paix,
qui peuvent les condamner à l'emprisonnement ou aux coups de fouet. Un
article de cette loi les assuejétit à ce genre de jugement et à cette
espèce de sentence pour avoir frappé un blanc, sans faire exception du cas
où le blanc serait l'aggresseur. La faveur du jury est cependant accordée à
l'esclave, si le crime dont il est accusé peut emporter peine de mort. Il
est aussi admis en témoignage dans les affaires criminelles où d'autres
nègres sont impliqués.

La nouvelle jurisprudence criminelle, fondée sur les principes d'humanité
et de justice, ne détruit aucune des dispositions réellement injustes et
barbares, contenues dans cette loi. Cependant, les esclaves sont
généralement traités avec plus de douceur par leurs maîtres dans l'État de
New Yorck, et moins surchargés de travail que dans les États du Midi. Les
moeurs prévalent à cet égard sur la rigidité des loix; mais les moeurs y
sont aussi, comme dans beaucoup d'autres États de l'Amerique, imprégnées
d'avidité et d'avarice. Cette disposition seule y empêche l'abolition de
l'esclavage. Elle est fréquemment proposée dans la législature, et
jusqu'ici tout moyen, même préparatoire, y a été rejetté. Quoique la
proportion des hommes libres aux esclaves soit telle que le plus grand
nombre des habitans de l'État de New-Yorck ne possède pas d'esclaves, le
petit nombre de ceux qui en possèdent sont les plus riches, les plus grands
propriétaires; et, dans l'État de New-Yorck comme ailleurs, ils ont la
principale influence.

Le respect dû à _la propriété_, est l'arme avec laquelle on combat toute
proposition que tient à l'affranchissement. J'ai entendu un des hommes de
loi les plus éclairés, et dont à tout autre égard les opinions sont
libérales, soutenir que "ce serait attenter à _la propriété_ que de
déclarer libres même les enfans à naître des femmes esclaves, parce que,
disait-il, les maîtres qui out acheté ou hérité des esclaves, les possèdent
dans la confiance que leur _issue_ sera leur propriété utile et
disponible."

Ainsi, quand on dit en Virginie "qu'on ne peut y changer le sort de
l'esclavage qu'en exportant a-la-fois tous les nègres de l'État"; on dit à
New-Yorck "qu'on ne peut y penser à abolir l'esclage, ni rien faire de
préparatoire à cette intention, sans payer à chaque possesseur d'esclaves
le prix actuel de la valeur de ses nègres jeunes et vieux, et le prix
estimé de leur descendance supposée." C'est sans doute opposer à
l'abolition de l'esclavage tous les obstacles imaginables, c'est se montrer
bien ennemi de cette abolition.

Cependant l'obstacle présenté par les citoyens de New-Yorck, est moins
difficile à vaincre. En admenttant le principe de la nécessité d'un
dédommagement donné aux maîtres pour les nègres à affranchir, et en
évaluant chaque nègre à cent trente dollars, la somme totale ne serait que
de trois millions de dollars.

Ce prix serait encore susceptible de reduction, par le puissant motif
d'intérêt et d'honneur public auquel chaque membre de la société doit faire
des sacrifices.

La question de la propriété des enfans à naître ne tiendrait pas à un
quart-d'heure de discussion, si elle était agitée devant la legislature;
enfin cet affranchissement qui ne devrait être fait que par degrés,
coûterait à l'État des sacrifices moins grands encore, et dont la
succession les rendrait presqu'imperceptibles aux finances de l'État, qui
ne pourraient d'ailleurs avoir un plus saint emploi.

A New-Yorck comme ailleurs, l'affranchissement des nègres doit avoir pour
but le bonheur de l'État, son bon ordre, le bonheur même des nègres qu'on
veut affranchir. Un affranchissement trop prompt, trop subitement général,
manquerait ces differens buts de premiere nécessité. Je ne répéterai pas
ici ce que j'ai dit ailleurs à cet égard, et ce que tant d'autres ont dit
avant moi. La dépense pour l'État serait donc réduite à de bien petites
sommes, en les comparant avec l'utilité et le devoir de cette opération.
Mais tant que l'État de New-Yorck, entouré des exemples du Connecticut, du
Massachusetts et de Pensylvanie, ne fait rien qui conduise à cette
libération, tant qu'il semble approuver par le silence ou les refus de sa
legislature, la permanence de l'esclavage, il laisse sa constitution et ses
loix flétries d'une tâche que l'on peut, sans exageration, dire
deshonorante, puisqu'elle ne peut être excusée, ni palliée, par aucune des
circonstances où se trouve cet État.

L'importation dans l'État de New-Yorck d'esclaves étrangers est prohibée
par la même loi qui confirme l'esclavage de ceux qui y existaient à
l'époque où elle a été rendue; ainsi cette disposition de la loi, et la
manière douce dont sont traités les esclaves en général, confirment dans
l'opinion que l'intérêt pécuniaire, plus qu'une véritable approbation de
l'esclavage empêche la legislature de New-Yorck, de procéder à cet égard
avec la justice et les lumières qui dirigent généralement ses
délibérations.--"_Voyage dans Les États-Unis D'Amerique." Fait en 1795,
1796 et 1797_. Par La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt. Tome Septième, 114-119.


OBSERVATIONS SUR L'ESCLAVAGE PAR LA ROCHEFOUCAULD-LIANCOURT


Il est natural de supposer qu'un nègre esclave, fatigué de travail depuis
le commencement de l'année jusqu'à la fin, obligé, sous peine du fouet,
d'aller aux champs, qu'il soit où non en état de santé, ne voye dans la
liberté que la faculté de ne plus travailler. Tant qu'il était esclave, il
était plus ou moins mal nourri, mais il l'était sans aucun soin de sa part,
et sans qu'un travail plus assidu, plus actif, lui valut une meilleure
nourriture ou un meilleur nourriture ou un meilleur vêtement. Le travail
n'était donc pour lui qu'une peine, sans être jamais un moyen de bien être,
il est donc, il doit donc être paresseux et imprévoyant. Il jouit des
premiers momens de sa liberté, en ne travaillant point, car le fouet ne
claque plus à ses oreilles; les besoins se font sentir; aucune éducation ne
lui a été donnée que celle de l'esclavage, qui enseigne à tromper, à
voler, comme à mentir; il cherche à satisfaire ses besoins, auxquels son
travail n'a pas pourvu, en dérobant quelques bleds, quelques provisions à
ses voisins; il devient recéleur des nègres esclaves.

Tout cela peut et doit être, mais ne doit dégouter de l'affranchissement
progressif des nègres que ceux ne veulent pas penser qu'avec des soins
préparatoires, et sur-tout des soins généreux qui auraient pour objet une
émancipation générale successive, appropriée au nombre des nègres dans le
pays, et à plusieurs autres circonstances, la plus grande quantité de ces
inconvéniens serait evitée, et le serait totalement pour la génération
future si elle ne pouvait l'être pour la présente. Mais comment espérer une
philanthropie si prévoyante de ceux qui ne voyent que leur intérêt du
moment, et qui le croyent blessé.

Dans L'État de Maryland les esclaves sont jugés par les mêmes tribunaux que
les blancs, et comme eux par l'arbitrage des juris. Les punitions pour les
noirs sont plus sévères; mais les moeurs sont douces au moins dans la
partie du Maryland où je suis a présent, et elles prévalent sur la rigueur
des loix. J'ai été témoin d'un fait qui prouve que l'humanité des juges et
le désir de rendre une exacte justice les occupent pour les accusés
esclaves, comme pour les blancs. Une négresse est en prison, accusée
d'avoir voulu empoisonner sa maîtresse et d'avoir empoisonné un enfant. Sa
maîtresse est son accusatrice. C'est une femme d'une bonne reputation dans
le pays, appartenant à une famille très-etendue dans le comté, et y ayant
d'ailleurs beaucoup d'influence; les juges craignant l'effet de cette
influence sur les juris, ont profité de la faculté qu'ils out de renvoyer
le jugement à la cour générale du district qui se tient à soixante milles
de Chester, pour donner à l'accusée toute la chance possible d'un jugement
sain et impartial.

Il n'y a encore aucune mesure prise en Maryland pour l'affranchissement
progressif des esclaves. Quelques hommes bien intentionnées espèrent amener
la legislature dans peu de temps à une démarche à cet égard, mais l'opinion
du pays n'y semble pas dispossée. --"_Voyage dans Les États-Unis
D'Amerique." Par La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt. Tome Sixième, 69-71_.

Les nègres libres se trouvent assez facilement pour le travail des champs.
Us coûtent quatre-vingt dollars par an. Les nègres esclaves se louent à
cinquante. Quelques planteurs préfèrent des ouvriers blancs et des nègres
libres aux esclaves; ils ont moins d'embarras et plus de profit. Les vaches
se vendent ici de quinze à vingt dollars, les boeufs quarante, les chevaux
pour le labour cent; ceux pour la voiture coutent souvent six cents
dollars la paire. Le comté de Kent, dont Chester est le cheflieu, contient
treize mille habitans, dont cinq mille six cents sont nègres esclaves; il
fournit peu de betail aux marchés de Baltimore et de Philadelphie. Presque
tout ce qu'il produit dans ce genre est consommé dans son
enciente.--"_Voyage dans Les États-Unis D'Amerique_." Par La
Rouchefoucauld-Liancourt. Tome Sixieme, 79-80.


WHAT ISAAC WELD OBSERVED IN SLAVE STATES


"The principal planters in Virginia have nearly every thing they can want
on their estates. Amongst the slaves are found tailors, shoe-makers,
carpenters, smiths, turners, wheelwrights, weavers, tanners, etc. I have
seen patterns of excellent coarse woolen cloth made in the country by
slaves, and a variety of cotton manufacturers, amongst the rest good
nankeen. Cotton grows here extremely well; the plants are often killed by
frost in winter, but they always produce abundantly the first year in which
they are sown. The cotton from which nankeen is made is of a particular
kind naturally of a yellowish color.

"The large estates are managed by stewards and overseers, the proprietors
just amusing themselves with seeing what is going forward. The work is done
wholly by slaves, whose numbers are in this part of the country more than
double that of white persons. The slaves on the large plantations are in
general very well provided for, and treated with mildness. During three
months nearly, that I was in Virginia, but two or three instances of ill
treatment towards them came under my observation. Their quarters, the name
whereby their habitations are called, are usually situated one or two
hundred yards from the dwelling house, which gives appearance of a village
to the residence of every plantation in Virginia; when the estate, however,
is so large as to be divided into several farms, then separate quarters are
attached to the house of the overseer on each farm. Adjoining their little
habitations, the slaves commonly have small gardens and yards of poultry,
which are all of their property; they have ample time to attend to their
own concerns, and their gardens are generally found well stocked, and their
flocks of poultry numerous. Besides the food they raise for themselves,
they are allowed liberal rations of salted pork and Indian corn. Many of
their little huts are comfortably furnished, and they are themselves, in
general, extremely well clothed. In short their condition is by no means so
wretched as might be imagined. They are forced to work certain hours in the
day; but in return they are clothed, dieted, and lodged comfortably, and
saved all anxiety about provision for their offspring. Still, however, let
the condition of the slave be made ever so comfortable, as long as he is
conscious of being the property of another man, who has it in his power to
dispose of him according to the dictates of caprice; as long as he hears
people around him talking about the blessings of liberty, and considers
that he is in a state of bondage, it is not to be supposed that he can feel
equally happy with the freeman. It is immaterial under what form slavery
presents itself, whenever it appears there is ample cause for humanity to
weep at the sight, and to lament that men can be found so forgetful of
their own situations, as to live regardless of the blessings of their
fellow creatures.

"With respect to the policy of holding slaves in any country, on account of
the depravity of morals which it necessarily occasions, besides the many
other evil consequences attendant upon it, so much has already been said by
others, that it is needless here to make comments on the subject.

"The number of the slaves increases most rapidly, so that there is scarcely
any state but what is overstocked. This is a circumstance complained of by
every planter as the maintenance of more than are requisite for the culture
of the estate is attended with great expense. Motives ... of humanity deter
them from selling the poor creatures, or turning them adrift from the spot
where they have been born and brought up, in the midst of friends and
relations.

"What I have here said, respecting the condition and treatment of slaves,
appertains, it must be remembered, to those only who are upon the larger
plantations in Virginia; the lot of such as are unfortunate enough to fall
into the hands of the lower class of white people, and of hard task-masters
in towns, is very different. In the Carolinas and Georgia again, slavery
presents itself in very different colors from what it does even in its
worst form in Virginia. I am told that it is no uncommon thing there, to
see gangs of negroes staked at a horse race, and to see these unfortunate
beings bandied about from one set of drunken gamblers to another for days
together. How much to be deprecated are the laws which suffer such abuses
to exist! Yet these are the laws enacted by the people who boast of their
love of liberty and independence, and who presume to say, that it is in the
breasts of Americans alone that the blessings of freedom are held in just
estimation."--_Isaac Weld, Jr., "Travels through the States of North
America and the provinces of Upper and Lower Canada," 1795, 1796, and
1797._ (London, 1799.)


JOHN DAVIS'S THOUGHTS ON SLAVERY


"The negroes on the plantation, including house-servants and children,
amounted to a hundred; of whom the average price being respectively seventy
pounds, made them aggregately worth seven thousand to their possessor.

"Two families lived in one hut, and such was their unconquerable propensity
to steal, that they pilfered from each other. I have heard masters lament
this defect in their negroes. But what else can be expected from man in so
degraded a condition, that among the ancients the same word implied both a
slave and a thief.

"Since the introduction of the culture of cotton in the State of South
Carolina, the race of negroes has increased. Both men and women work in the
field, and the labour of the rice plantation formerly prevented the
pregnant negroes from bringing forth a long-lived offspring. It may be
established as a maxim that on a plantation where there are many children,
the work has been moderate. . . .

"Of genius in negroes many instances may be recorded. It is true that Mr.
Jefferson has pronounced the Poems of Phillis Wheatley, below the dignity
of criticism, and it is seldom safe to differ in judgment from the author
of Notes on Virginia. But her conceptions are often lofty, and her
versification often surpasses with unexpected refinement. Ladd, the
Carolina poet, in enumerating the bards of his country, dwells with
encomium on "Wheatley's polished verse"; nor is his praise undeserved, for
often it will be found to glide in the stream of melody. Her lines on
Imagination have been quoted with rapture by Imley of Kentucky, and
Steadman the Guinea Traveler; but I have ever thought her happiest
production the Goliath of Gath.

"Of Ignatius Sancho, Mr. Jefferson also speaks neglectingly; and remarks,
that he substitutes sentiment for argumentation. But I know not that
argumentation is required in a familiar epistle; and Sancho, I believe, has
only published his correspondence." --John Davis, "_Travels of four years
and a half in the United States of America during 1798, 1799, 1800, 1801,
1802_," p. 86.


OBSERVATIONS OF ROBERT SUTCLIFF


"I had the curiosity to look into some of their little habitations; but all
that I examined were wretched in the extreme and far inferior to many
Indian cottages I have seen.

"I slept at C. A.'s and this morning set out for Fredericksburg, being
accompanied by his young man, our road lying through the woods the greater
part of the way. At the place where we dined, we were waited on by two
mulatto girls, whose only clothing appeared to be loose garments of cotton
and woollen cloth, girt round the waist with a small cord. I had observed
that this was the common dress of the working female negroes in the fields;
but when engaged in business in the house it seemed hardly sufficient to
cover them. In the yard, I observed a number of slaves engaged in the
management of a still, employed in making spirits from cider. Here again I
had the curiosity to look into some of the negro huts, which like those I
had seen, presented little else but dirt and rags.

"We came to Fredericksburg and lodged at Fisher's Tavern. The next morning
I was waked early by the cries of a poor negro, who was undergoing a severe
correction, previously to his going to work. On taking a walk on the banks
of the Rappahannock, the river on which the town is seated, I stepped into
one of the large tobacco warehouses which are built here, for the reception
and inspection of that plant before it is permitted to be exported. On
entering into conversation with an inspector, as he was employed in looking
over a parcel of tobacco, he lamented the licentiousness which he remarked
so generally prevailed in this town. He said that in his remembrance, the
principal part of the inhabitants were emigrants from Scotland, and that it
was considered so reproachful to the white inhabitants, if they were found
to have illicit connection with their female slaves, that their neighbors
would shun the company of such, as of persons whom it was a reproach to be
acquainted. The case was now so much altered that, he believed, there were
but few slave holders in the place who were free from guilt in this
respect: and that it was now thought but little of. Such was the brutality
and hardness of heart which this evil produced, that many amongst them paid
no more regard to selling their own children, by their females slaves, or
even their brothers and sisters, in the same line, than they would do to
the disposal of a cow or a horse, or any other property in the brute
creation. To so low a degree of degradation does the system of negro
slavery sink the white inhabitants, who are unhappily engaged in
it."--Robert Sutcliff, _Travels in some parts of North America in Years
1804, 1805, 1806_, pp. 37-52.


SOME LETTERS OF RICHARD ALLEN AND ABSALOM JONES TO DOROTHY RIPLEY

