I imperfectly understood the real meaning of this scrap. I had thought
it was an encounter between stray forces. A talk with the driver of an
armed car, however, enlarged my perspective. It was a meeting of the
outposts of two great opposing armies, one of which was at Douai, the
other at Cambrai. The feelers of both forces were being extended to
discover the various positions, preparatory to a big battle, which was
expected on the morrow (Oct. 1) along the line of
Cambrai-Douai-Valenciennes.

It was understood that the Germans had massed in force at Cambrai and
strong wings were thrown out on both sides, the outposts of one wing, as
we have already seen, coming into touch with the French at Vitry.

From the reports of the auto-mitrailleuse men, who cover great
distances in a day, similar skirmishing had been taking place at Etain,
(where some farmhouses were burned,) Eterpigny, Croisilles, Boisleux,
and Boyelles, these places ranging from ten to twenty kilometers from
Arras.

There was a general exodus from Vitry and I secured standing room in a
wagon of the last train leaving for Arras. It was loaded with fugitives.

Arras had changed completely on my return. Its calmness was gone. The
station was empty of civilians, there were no trains running and the
station entrance was in charge of a strong picket of soldiers, while the
road outside echoed to the tread of infantry.

I stood still in amazement, while my papers were being closely examined,
and watched regiment after regiment of foot with their transport trains
complete marching out on the road to Douai. This was part of the
preparation for the big battle which I was told was going to begin
tomorrow.

In the town itself the transformation was still more amazing--soldiers
in every street, cavalry, infantry, dragoons, lancers, and engineers in
ones and twos, and parties of twenty or thirty picturesque Moroccans. I
never saw such a medley of colors and expressions, and the whole town
was full of them--material for one army corps at least.

I installed myself in quarters at the Hôtel de l'Univers, with the
intention of getting away the first thing in the morning if possible.
But it was not possible. I was informed that Arras was now under
military control, and no permits were being issued whatsoever. The
Lieutenant who told me this smiled as I shrugged my shoulders.

"You will bear witness, Monsieur, that I tried my best to get out," said
I.

"Certainly; but why go away?" he asked with a smile. "Arras est tres
belle ville, Monsieur. You have a good hotel, a good bed, and good food.
Why should you go out?"

And so I stayed at Arras.

That was Sept. 30. The next day I could hear guns. They started at about
8 o'clock in the morning, the French guns being in position about five
kilometers outside of Arras to the south, southeast, and east, sixteen
batteries of France's artillery or 75-millimeter calibre.

All day long the guns thundered and roared, and all day long I sat
outside the café of the Hôtel des Voyageurs in the Place de la Gare. The
station building was right in front of me. I longed for a position which
would enable me to see over the tall buildings on to the battlefield
beyond. Even the roof of the station would have suited. There was a
little crowd of officials already there with their field glasses, and
they could discern what was going on, for I noticed several pointing
here and there whenever a particularly loud explosion was heard.

Two men in civilian clothes sat down beside me and gave me "good day,"
evidently curious as to my nationality. I invited them to join me in
coffee and cognac, and during the ensuing conversation we all became
very friendly, and I was given to understand that one of them was the
volunteer driver of an auto-mitrailleuse who had just come off duty.

I remarked that it would be very interesting to get a sight of what was
going on behind the station.

"Is it very near--the battle?"

"About five kilometers, Monsieur. The German guns are ten kilometers
distant. One of the German shells exploded behind the station this
morning. Would Monsieur like to walk out a little way?"

"But surely the pickets will not let me pass beyond the barrier," said
I.

My good friend of the auto-mitrailleuse smiled, rose, and buttoned up
his coat. "Come with me," he invited.

At the barrier we were stopped, but luck had not deserted me, for in the
Sergeant in charge of the pickets I recognized another café acquaintance
of the previous night. We shook hands, exchanged cigarettes, and
proceeded up and down numerous streets, bearing always southward in the
direction of the firing, until the open country was reached.

My companion suddenly caught hold of my arm and we both jumped up the
bank at the side of the road to let a long string of artillery drivers
trot past on their way back for more ammunition. Another cloud of dust,
and coming up behind us was a fresh lot of shells on the way out to the
firing line.

Right up in the sky ahead suddenly appeared a ball of yellow greeny
smoke, which grew bigger and bigger, and then "boom" came the sound of a
gun about three seconds afterward. A shell had burst in the air about
300 yards away. Another and another came--all about the same place. They
appeared to come from the direction of Bapaume.

"Bad, very bad," commented my companion. And so it appeared to me, for
the Germans were dropping their shells from the southeast, at least one
kilometer over range. We were standing beside a strawstack and looking
due south, watching the just discernible line of French guns, when we
heard the ominous whistling screech of an approaching shell. Down on our
faces behind the stack, down we went like lightning, and over to the
left, not 200 yards away, rose a huge column of black smoke and earth,
and just afterward a very loud boom. A big German gun had come into
action, slightly nearer this time.

Just behind a wood I could plainly see the smoke of the gun itself
rising above the trees. Two more shells from the big gun exploded within
twenty yards of each other, and then, with disconcerting suddenness, a
French battery came into action within a hundred yards of our strawstack
cover. They had evidently been there for some time, awaiting
eventualities, for we had no suspicion of their proximity, and they were
completely hidden.

My ears are still tingling and buzzing from the sound of those guns. One
after another the guns of this battery bombarded the newly taken up
position of the German big guns, which replied with one shell every
three minutes.

Presently we had the satisfaction of hearing a violent explosion in the
wood, and a column of smoke and flame rose up to a great height.

Soixante-quinze had again scored, for the German guns had been put out
of action. From out the French position came infantry, at this point
thousands of little dots over the landscape, presenting a front of, I
should think, about two miles, rapidly advancing in skirmishing order.
Every now and then the sharp crackle of rifle fire could distinctly be
heard.

The French had advanced over a mile, and the Germans had hastily
evacuated the wood. Other French batteries now came into action, and the
German fire over the whole arc was becoming decidedly fainter and less
frequent. This might, of course, be due to changing their positions on
the German front.

Wounded began to arrive, which showed that for the present at any rate,
it was safe to go out to the trenches to collect them.

Very few of them seemed badly hit, and the wounded French artillerymen
seemed to be elated in spite of their wounds. Had not their beloved
Soixante-quinze again scored? The time was 6 o'clock of a beautiful
evening and the firing, though fairly continuous, was dropping off. The
Germans had changed their positions and it was getting a little too hazy
to make observation, although a French aeroplane was seen descending in
wide circles over the German position, evidently quite regardless of the
numerous small balls of smoke, which made their appearance in the sky in
dangerous proximity to the daring pilot.

It is very interesting to watch these aeroplane shells bursting in the
air. First of all one sees a vivid little streak of bluish white light
in the sky, and then instantaneously a smoke ball, which appears to be
about the size of a football, is seen in the sky, always fairly close to
the machine. Then there is the sound of an explosion like a giant
cracker.

Occasionally several guns will fire at about the same time, and it is
weird to watch the various balls of smoke, apparently coming into being
from nowhere, all around the machine. Sometimes one of these shells,
which are filled with a species of shrapnel, bursts rather unpleasantly
near the aeroplane, and then one sees the machine turn quickly and rise
a little higher.

Two or three holes have been neatly drilled through the planes. Perhaps
one has appeared in the body of the machine, rather too near the pilot
for safety; but it is a big gamble, anyhow, and besides the pilot has
been instructed to find out where the various positions are, and he
means to do it.

So he simply rises a little higher and calmly continues his big circles
over the German position.

I take off my hat to these brave men, the aeroplane pilots. They are
willing to chance their luck. What matters it if their machine gets hit,
if the planes are riddled with holes? It will still fly, even if the
engine gets a fatal wound and stops.

The pilot, if he is high enough, can still glide to safety in his own
lines. But (and it is a big "but") should a shrapnel ball find its
billet in the pilot--well, one has only to die once, and it is a quick
and sure death to fall with one's machine.

[Illustration]


*The Battles in Belgium*

[An Associated Press Dispatch.]


LONDON, Oct. 26, 4:40 A.M.--The correspondent of The Daily News, who has
been in an armored train to the banks of the Yser, gives a good
description of the battle in the North. He says:

"The battle rages along the Yser with frightful destruction of life. Air
engines, sea engines, and land engines deathsweep this desolate country,
vertically, horizontally, and transversely. Through it the frail little
human engines crawl and dig, walk and run, skirmishing, charging, and
blundering in little individual fights and tussles, tired and puzzled,
ordered here and there, sleeping where they can, never washing, and
dying unnoticed. A friend may find himself firing on a friendly force,
and few are to blame.

"Thursday the Germans were driven back over the Yser; Friday they
secured a footing again, and Saturday they were again hurled back. Now a
bridge blown up by one side is repaired by the other; it is again blown
up by the first, or left as a death trap till the enemy is actually
crossing.

"Actions by armored trains, some of them the most reckless adventures,
are attempted daily. Each day accumulates an unwritten record of
individual daring feats, accepted as part of the daily work. Day by day
our men push out on these dangerous explorations, attacked by shell
fire, in danger of cross-fire, dynamite, and ambuscades, bringing a
priceless support to the threatened lines. As the armored train
approaches the river under shell fire the car cracks with the constant
thunder of guns aboard. It is amazing to see the angle at which the guns
can be swung.

