I need hardly say, that throughout the chronicle there is a tolerable
sprinkling of the marvellous. {487} I give you the following as a
warning to all dishonest bell-founders.

The pious builder of a church being desirous, according to custom, of
putting a bell in the turret, engaged a skillful craftsman to carry into
effect his design. This man, "at the instigation of the devil," stole
some of the metal with which he had been furnished for the work; and the
bell was, in consequence, mis-shapen and of small size. It was, however,
placed in the turret; but, as a divine punishment for his crime,
whenever the bell was struck, the dishonest founder was thereupon seized
with frenzy, uttering strange words and barking like a dog!

GASTROS.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGIN OF THE WORD "NEWS."

I have great respect for "Mr. SAMUEL HICKSON," but I cannot treat his
derivation of the word "News" with any respect (No. 27. p. 428.). I wish
"Mr. HICKSON" had been a little more modest in his manner of propounding
his novelty. Can any thing be more dogmatic than his assertions? which I
will recapitulate as much as possible in his own words, before I proceed
to deal with them.

1. "I have never had the least doubt that this word is derived
immediately from the German."

2. "It is, in fact, 'das Neue' in the genitive case;" and "Mr. H."
proceeds to mention the German phrase, "Was giebt's Neues?" as giving
the exact sense of our "What is the news?" [which cannot be gainsaid;
but I shall have a word to say presently about _neues_ in that phrase
being the genitive case.]

3. "That the word is not derived from the English adjective 'new,'--that
it is not of English manufacture at all--I feel well assured."

4. "In that case '_s_' would be the sign of the plural; and we should
have, as the Germans have, either extant or obsolete, also 'the new.'"
[I do not see the _sequitur_.]

5 "'News' is a noun singular, and as such must have been adopted bodily
into the language."

Such are "Mr. HICKSON's" principal assertions: and when I add, that he
has found out that the German "neu" was in olden time spelt "new," so
that the genitive, "newes," was identical with the old form of the
English word "news;" and that he explains the transformation of a
genitive case of a German adjective into an English substantive by
English ignorance, which he further thinks is exemplified by the Koran
having been called "the Alkoran," in ignorance of "_Al_" meaning "the,"
I have given not only all of his assertions, but also the whole of his
argument.

I now proceed to assert on my part that the word "news" is not "derived
immediately from the German," and "has not been adopted bodily into our
language;" that the English "new" and German "neu" have, however, of
course the same origin, their common root being widely spread in other
languages, as [Greek: neos], Gr.; _norus_, Lat.; _neuf_, Fr., &c.; that
"news" is a noun of plural form and plural meaning, like _goods_,
_riches_, &c.; that its peculiar and frequent use is quite sufficient to
account for its having come to be used as a singular noun ("riches," by
the way, may be prefixed sometimes to a singular verb, as "riches is a
cause of corruption"); that Mr. HICKSON might as well say that "goods"
is derived immediately from "gutes," the genitive of "gut;" and "riches"
from "reiches," the genitive of "reich:" and also that if "_s_" in
"goods," and "_es_" in "riches" are signs of the plural, "we should
have, as the Germans have, either extant or obsolete," the "good," "the
rich," (not that I quite understand this part of "Mr. HICKSON's"
argument): and, lastly, I assert that I believe that _Neues_, in the
phrase "Was giebt's Neues?" is not the genitive, but the nominative
neuter, so that the phrase is to be literally translated "What is there
new?"

As regards the derivation of "News," I wish you had allowed the question
to rest as it stood after the sensible remarks of "A.E.B." (No. 23. p.
369.). Pray excuse me, Sir, for expressing a hope that you will ponder
well before you again allow us to be puzzled on so plain a subject, and
give circulation and your sanction to paradoxes, even though coming from
one so entitled to attention as "Mr. HICKSON."

The early communication between the English and German languages, of
which "Mr. HICKSON" puts forward the derivation of "news" from "neues"
as an instance, may be an interesting and profitable subject of inquiry;
but as I think he has been singularly unfortunate in the one instance,
so I do not think him particularly happy in his other. I see no further
resemblance between Heywood's "Song in praise of his Mistress," and the
early German poem, than what _might_ arise from treatment of the same
and a very common subject.

I am not enough of an etymologist to give you the root of the word
"noise." But my faith in "Mr. HICKSON" in this capacity is not strong
enough to lead me to believe, on his dictum, that "news" and "noise" are
the same word; and when, pursuing his fancy about "neues," he goes on to
say that "noise" is "from a dialect from which the modern German
pronunciation of the dipthong is derived," I fear his pronunciation of
German is faulty, if he pronounces _eu_ in "Neues" like _oi_ in "noise."

    [We differ from our correspondent on this point, and think that
    here, at all events, Mr. HICKSON has the advantage of the
    argument.]

I beg to repeat that for "Mr. HICKSON" I feel great respect. If he knew
my name, he would probably know nothing about me; but I happen {488} to
know of him, what perhaps, some of your readers do not, that he has
unostentatiously rendered many considerable services not only to
literature but to our social and political interests. In my humble
opinion, his recent essay in your columns on _The Taming of the Shrew_
is a contribution to our literary history which you may be proud of
having published. But I feel that I cannot too strongly protest against
his derivation of "News."

CH.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Dr. Whichcot and Lord Shaftesbury_ (No. 24. p. 382., No. 27. p.
444.).--I am obliged to "COLL. REGAL. SOCIUS" for his notice of my
inquiry. The Lord Chamberlain and Chancellor of Cambridge University
mentioned in Lord Lauderdale's letter to Dr. Whichcot, is the Earl of
Manchester. Shaftesbury was never either Lord Chamberlain or Chancellor
of Cambridge.

I may mention that Whichcot's intimacy with Lord Shaftesbury would
probably have been brought about by his being incumbent of the church of
St. Lawrence Jewry, Shaftesbury having his London house in the latter
part of his life in Aldersgate Street.

If it is not committing unpardonable trespass on that useful part of
your publication in which books and odd volumes are asked for, I will go
on to say that I should be glad to have a copy of the volume of
Whichcot's _Sermons_ (1698) which the third Lord Shaftesbury edited, at
a reasonable price.

CH.


_Elizabeth and Isabel_ (No. 27. p. 439.).--Mr. Thomas Duffus Hardy, in
his evidence on the Camoys Peerage case (June 18. 1838, Evidence, p.
351.) proved that the names of Isabella and Elizabeth were in ancient
times used indifferently, and particularly in the reigns of Edward I.
and Edward III. Mr. Hardy says in his evidence:--

    "In the British Museum there is a Latin letter of Elizabeth of
    Austria, Queen of Charles IX. of France, to Queen Elizabeth of
    England. In the Latin she is called Elizabetha, and she signs
    her name Ysabel. In the _Chronicle de St. Denis_, in the year
    1180, it is stated, 'Le jor martmes espousa la noble Roine
    Ysabel,' 'Upon this day, Queen Elizabeth was married;' and in
    _Rigordus de Gestis Philippi Augusti Regis Francois_ it is
    stated, 'Tune inuncta fuit Elizabeth uxor ejus venerabilis
    foemina;' and Moreri says she is called 'Elizabeth or Izabeau de
    Hainault, Queen of France, wife of Philippe Auguste.' Camden, in
    his _Remains_, says, 'Isabel is the same as Elizabeth;' that the
    Spaniards always translate Elizabeth into Isabel, and the French
    into Izabeau. I have seen in the British Museum a deed, in which
    the name Elizabetha is written in Latin; on the seal it is
    Isabella. In the _Inquisitiones post Mortem_ I have frequently
    seen Ysabella returned in one country and Elizabetha in an other
    for the same person. I have something like a dozen other
    instances from Moreri, in which he says that Elizabeth and
    Isabella or Isabeau are the same. Elizabeth or Izabeau de
    France, dau. of Lewis VIII. and Blanche of Castella; Elizabeth
    or Isabelle d'Aragon, Queen of France, wife of Philippe III.,
    surnamed le Hardie; Elizabeth or Isabeau de Bavière, Queen of
    France, wife of Charles VI.; Elizabeth or Isabeau d'Angoulême,
    wife of King John of England; Elizabeth or Isabeau de France,
    Queen of England, dau. of Philippe IV.; Elizabeth or Isabelle of
    France, Queen of Richard II.; Elizabeth or Isabelle de France,
    Queen of Navarre; Elizabeth or Isabelle de Valois, dau. of
    Charles of France; Elizabeth or Isabelle de France, dau. of
    Philippe le Long, King of France; Elizabeth or Isabelle de
    France, Duchess of Milan; Elizabeth or Isabelle, Queen of
    Philippe V. of Spain."

WM. DURRANT COOPER.

81. Guildford Street, May 4. 1850.


_Elizabeth--Isabel._--The Greek word [Greek: Elisabet] (Luke, i. 5. &c.)
from which Elizabeth, or _Elisabeth_, must have been adopted as a
Christian name, is used by the LXX. (Exodus, vi. 23.) to express the
Hebrew [Hebrew: Elisheba], the name of Aaron's wife. This at once
directs us to the verb [Hebrew: shaba], or rather to its Niphal,
[Hebrew: nishba], for the _Kal_ form does not occur, _to swear_; for the
combination of letters in [Hebrew: el isshaba], _God will swear_, or
_God sweareth_, is the same as that in the proper name. Now let us
transpose the verb and its nominative case, and we have [Hebrew: ishaba
el], which a Greek translator might soften into [Greek: Isabel].

The use of [Greek: Elisabet] both by the LXX. and the Evangelist, makes
it probable that the mother of John the Baptist, who was _of the
daughters of Aaron_ (Luke, i. 5.), was known amongst her own people by
the recognized and _family_ name of _Elisheba_, as _Anna_ no doubt would
be _Hannah_ ([Hebrew: hanah]), and _Mary, Miriam_ ([Greek: Mariam],
Luke, i. 27.). And this is confirmed by the Syriac version, the
vernacular, or nearly so, of Our Blessed Lord and His disciples, which
has [Syriac: elisheba].

Genesius, in his _Lexicon_, explains Elisheba to mean "cui Deus est
sacramentum," "quæ jurat per Deum, i.e. Dei cultrix: cf. Is. xix. 18." I
should rather take it to be a name expressive of trust in God's promises
or oath, such as _Elijah_, "the LORD is my God;" _Isaiah_, "the LORD is
my salvation;" _Ezekiel_, "God strengtheneth." Schleusner (_Lex. N.T._)
says that others derived it from [Hebrew: saba], _saturavit_; "sic in
Alberti _Gloss. N.T._, p. 87. explicatur, [Greek: Theou mou
plaesmonae]." Wolfius, in his note on Luke, i. 5., refers to Witsii
_Miscellanea_, tom. ii. p. 478., to which I must refer your
correspondent "A.C.," as I have not the book by me.

Camden must, of course, have derived the name {489} from [Hebrew:
shabath], _to rest_; but I think we must rather defer to the authority
of the LXX. And though [Hebrew: el ishaboth] may give us _Elisabeth_, we
shall not be able to deduce _Isabel_ from [Hebrew: ishboth el] quite so
easily.

B.

L ---- Rectory, S ----, May 4. 1850.

