 The ends of these reeds are bent
upwards towards the pole, as if they were the ribs of a half-closed
umbrella turned upside down, and wicker-work is woven in and out of them
so as to form a basket. This is filled with corn, and by means of other
reeds and wands the basket is extended upwards to within a few feet of
the top of the post. When the whole of the basket thus formed is loaded
with grain, a little roof or cap of reeds is made round the top of the
pole, like the cover of an open umbrella held upright, and this roof is
brought down until it meets the basket below, to which it is joined. In
this manner the grain is enclosed in a cigar-shaped basket, which is
raised a few feet from the ground.

The Nubians make little cylindrical grain-vessels of clay, which they
seal up, and place upon the top of tall stones. Many of the tribes of
Southern Africa build up clay store-vessels of various shapes, which
they raise from the ground by means of posts. One tribe, the Golos,
fashions its clay grain-holder in the shape of a drinking-cup. This is
poised upon a central post, and kept in its place by means of wooden
props. A pointed roof, which may be lifted off like a lid, is placed
over it, in order to keep out the rain or any intruder from above.


THE SUGAR MAPLE.


The Sugar Maple belongs to the same family of trees as our common maple
and sycamore. It grows in Canada and the northern parts of the United
States. Most of the maples contain a large amount of juice, which flows
freely when the stem of the tree is cut. In the Sugar Maple this juice
is very abundant, and so sweet that the Indians and settlers obtain
large quantities of sugar from it.

In the month of March, when the sap begins to ascend in the tree, the
sugar-makers build temporary sheds in or near the woods. They first tap
the trees by boring a hole, from one to two inches deep, into the stem
of each maple. A short tube is inserted into the hole, and the sap of
the tree flows through it, and is caught in a pail or trough placed at
the foot of the tree. The amount of sap which each tree yields varies
considerably, but the average is from two to three gallons each day. It
is said that some trees have yielded the enormous amount of twenty
gallons in one day, while sometimes, on the other hand, the quantity is
not more than a pint. The trees, which grow in small clumps, and thus
obtain more light and air, are more profitable as sugar-producers than
those which grow in forests. The maple-sap continues to flow from the
tree for about six weeks.

From time to time the Indians, or settlers, collect the contents of the
various vessels placed against the trees, and empty the juice into large
kettles, which hold from fifteen to twenty gallons each. One man can
usually attend to two or three hundred trees in this way, if they are
not too far apart. The juice in the kettles is boiled over fires until
the sugar begins to form into solid crystals. Sometimes milk, or white
of eggs, is added to the juice, in order to separate the impurities,
which rise to the surface, and are skimmed off with a ladle. The whole
operation is very simple and rough, when compared with the great care
which is given to the manufacture of sugar from the sugar-cane; the
sugar obtained from the maple, though not so pure, is the same in kind
as cane-sugar. The juice from the maple must be boiled within about
twenty-four hours after it has flowed from the tree. If kept longer than
this it begins to ferment, and quickly spoils. A good maple will yield
sufficient sap to make about four pounds of sugar every year.


THE GIANT OF THE TREASURE CAVES.

(_Continued from page 287._)


The colour was coming again into Estelle's white face, and presently
there was a flutter of the eyelids. Then she opened her eyes, and gave a
bewildered glance at the friends collected round her. She closed them
for a moment, as if weary, but only to open them again and smile as she
looked up at the anxious faces.

'Come, this is disgraceful,' said the doctor; 'I did not expect to have
you on my hands again so soon.'

Estelle smiled; then, recollection returning, she glanced round with
terror in her eyes.

'Jack! Oh, where's Jack?'

He came and knelt at her side, and took her hand protectingly in his own
strong fingers.

'I'm here, Missy,' he said, in a voice that brought to her a sense of
security and peace. 'You are all right now, and quite safe.'

'You see, Jack,' continued the little girl, in a pleading tone, 'I did
have something to be afraid of when you were away. You won't be angry if
I can't bear you to go away again, will you?'

'What had you to be afraid of?' asked the doctor, his keen eyes watching
her changing face.

'I did not know then,' replied Estelle, putting her free hand on her
chest; 'but I felt _here_ that there was something I could not
understand, and I did not want Jack to go.'

'What sort of a feeling?' asked the doctor again.

'That something would happen. And you see I was right. Something _did_
happen, and it was only Jack who could have saved me from Thomas.'

'Thomas?' repeated the doctor, in the same quiet tone, while Jack and
his mother only kept silent and motionless with difficulty. Their
excitement was great, for they were on the verge of discovering who
their little foundling was, and sadness had at least as large a share of
their hearts as joy. Did it not mean that they would lose her sunny
presence with them?

'Yes,' Estelle was saying, as she gazed up in surprise at her
questioner, 'Thomas, Aunt Betty's under-gardener. He tried to---- '

Like a flash the truth had broken upon her. She remembered!

With eyes wide open, she stared in awe and amazement at the earnest
faces around her. Mrs. Wright's eyes were brimming over. Julien's were
full of sorrow and trouble. For him, it meant losing her altogether.
Jack only held his little girl's hand more closely, giving no other
sign.

'So it has come at last, Missy,' he said, softly.

'Oh, Jack!' cried Estelle, her face flushing and paling in alarming
alternations, 'I know now! I am Estelle de Bohun, and I live with my
great-aunt, Lady Coke, at the Moat House, because my father, Lord
Lynwood is abroad. Oh, Jack! Oh, Goody!'

And she burst into tears.

Long did Jack and his mother sit up that night, discussing with their
good friend the doctor what it was their duty to do. Julien had gone
home, and was keeping his father and mother up later than usual, while
he related to them the events of the evening. M. le Préfet, as head of
the police in Tout-Petit, ordered that a search should be begun at once
for Lady Coke's late gardener. It was not merely for the sake of
punishing him as he deserved, but that some information might be
gathered from him which could help to restore the little lady to her
family. Julien and his father grew quite excited at the prospect of the
search, in which the boy wished earnestly to share. It was all he could
do to help the little girl to whom he had grown so strangely attached.
Perhaps, in the bottom of his heart, he hoped he might lay claim to some
gratitude for such service as it was in his power to give in the search,
and that he might yet see his little friend again in consequence. He had
never before desired to go to England; it had always been 'perfidious
Albion' to him till he met Estelle, but now his views had changed. He
longed to see her in her own home, to feel that when she left France it
would not mean final separation. He reflected on the chance of his
desires being granted somewhat sadly as he mounted the stairs to go to
bed; the prospect seemed too remote.

Jack's visit to the house of Fargis, to make inquiries about Thomas, was
the result of the consultation he had had with the doctor. Estelle's
memory seemed to have returned, and she had been able to answer all the
questions put to her, except those regarding the locality of the Moat
House. She had driven into Matherton with Lady Coke only once or twice,
and as it had become the custom in the family to call it 'the town,'
Estelle was not sufficiently familiar with the neighbourhood to have
remembered the name. Jack knew the coast, however, and believed he could
find out all about the families living in that part. Should he go alone
first, and return for the child when he had full information? But
Estelle's horror of being left without the security of his presence made
the doctor forbid that course. Should he appeal to the British Consul at
Nantes?

'Why don't you ask Thomas?' put in Estelle, who had just come into the
room as they were talking. 'He knows, for he has been all his life at
the Moat House. His mother has a cottage on the property.'

'Listen,' said the doctor, at last; 'the child is not strong, as this
fainting fit has proved to us. The expense of a long journey is more
than we can meet all at once. So wait a little. By the middle of the
month, or a little later, these winds will have blown themselves out.
Then you can charter Fargis' smack, and cruise round the coast till you
find where this Moat House is. It will be far less costly a way of
setting to work than going to England by the regular route, with inns
and trains into the bargain when you get there, and no certainty as to
where to go.'

If Thomas could not be found, this was certainly the best course to
pursue. Nevertheless, Jack did his best to trace the ex-gardener, aided
by M. le Préfet and his police. Julien would have been one of the
keenest of the searchers, but he was wanted at the Hospice de la
Providence. Both Mrs. Wright and Jack thought it was good for Estelle to
have a companion in her wanderings on the sea-shore. Their minds were
more at rest while Julien was with her, for he was a lad of coolness and
resource, and he was alive to the risk of Thomas turning up when least
expected.

Julien was only too delighted at the trust placed in him, and meant to
fulfil it like a man. Mrs. Wright and Jack--and most of all,
Estelle--should see that their confidence in him was not misplaced. He
thought long and earnestly over what he should do if Thomas did show
himself suddenly on one of their walks. Could he defend Estelle? What
was his strength compared to that of the ex-gardener? Still, if he was
not caught in a cave, he thought defence was just possible. He decided,
however, it was safer not to wander too far from the Hospice de la
Providence.

One evening, about a week after the _fête_, Jack announced that he was
going out trawling that night. It was no longer possible to put off his
work. Mrs. Wright and Estelle looked up at him with eves full of fear;
but, remembering the scene that had taken place when last he had gone,
neither of them said a word. Estelle drooped her head, and tears would
come in spite of her efforts to keep them back. Her heart sank when Jack
appeared in his oilskins, and it was with quivering lips and flushed
face that she said good-bye. He smiled encouragingly while he gave his
mother directions about securing the outer door as soon as he was gone.

'I have made everything fast inside,' he said, 'and I do not think you
need have any fears. I shall be back as early as possible. Now,
good-bye, and keep together. Go to sleep, Missy, and be down on the
beach when the boats come in.'

'I will go with Julien up to the cliff,' said Estelle, holding Jack's
hand very tight in her efforts to keep down her terror at his going.
'All the women will be there to watch for the boats, and I will wave my
handkerchief for you.'

'No,' replied Jack, decidedly, 'I won't have you go so far from Mother
in my absence. It will be better for you both to remain here. Julien
will come and keep you company all day; but I don't expect to be away as
long as that.'

Mrs. Wright followed him to the outer door, fastened it securely, and
returning, locked and barricaded the inner one. She did not fear attack,
but she knew it would give Estelle a greater feeling of safety. Though
her eyes wandered now and again round the vast kitchen, Estelle bore up
bravely. There certainly appeared to be more dark corners than even Mrs.
Wright had ever noticed before. 'But,' murmured the cheery old woman,
determined not to be fanciful, 'what did the corners matter, however
dark they might be, if they were empty?'

(_Continued on page 298._)

[Illustration: "'Good-bye, and keep together!'"]

[Illustration: "She waited in breathless silence, a pistol ready in her
hand."]


THE GIANT OF THE TREASURE CAVES.

(_Continued from page 295._)


Jack was gone. Suddenly Mrs. Wright's heart misgave her. The bookcase!
Had Jack thought of that? Her eyes rested upon it for a second,
fascinated. She dare not let them linger there for fear Estelle should
perceive her doubts. She felt restless, uneasy. She wished she had not
reminded Jack about it, and yet she did not now venture to go and see if
he had taken any precautions.

'What do you say, dearie, to our going to bed early to-night?' she
asked, when the child's chatter about the Moat House and Begbie Hall
came to a natural pause. 'It will be more comfortable in our own room,
and you can talk to me just the same till you fall asleep.'

Estelle, who had been sitting with her head against Goody's knee, as
being a safer place than anywhere else in that great, dark kitchen,
sprang up with joy at the proposal. The bedroom was so much smaller and
nicer, and had no ugly corners.

It did not take long to fold up Mrs. Wright's knitting, and put it into
the huge bag in which it was kept for convenience, nor to chase the
balls of wool and wind them up. Mrs. Wright, meantime, lighted the
candles, her eyes on the bookcase.

Her heart suddenly stood still. The bookcase, which ran on large
casters, covered the entrance to one of the long passages in the Hospice
de la Providence. It was heavy and difficult to move, and yet--was it
possible that it _was_ moving? She paused, match in hand, and gazed with
terrified eyes. The next moment the recollection of the necessity of
keeping the child in ignorance of her danger made her brace up her
nerves, and, throwing the match away calmly, she spoke in her usual
tones.

'Are you ready now, dearie? Come along. You carry my knitting-bag, and
I'll bring the candles and put the lamp out.'

Her movements were, perhaps, a trifle quicker than usual, and her voice
might have had a little quiver in it, but Estelle was too much excited,
and too anxious to get within the shelter of the bedroom, to notice
anything amiss. She whirled up the bag, threw it over her shoulder, as
she had seen the men do with their nets, and danced off. Following her
quickly, Mrs. Wright shut and barricaded the door. More than that. With
Estelle's assistance, she drew the chest of drawers across it. The
window was too high for danger to threaten from that quarter. With a
sigh of relief she sat down, after a glance into one of the drawers.
Jack's pistols were there, safe enough, in case they should be wanted.
She would load them as soon as the child was asleep. She left the two
candles alight.

'Are you not going to bed, too?' asked Estelle, as she opened her sleepy
eyes a few minutes later.

'Not just yet, dearie. It is early for me. But you get to sleep as fast
as you can.'

She remained perfectly still, holding the little girl's hand. In the
deep silence her hearing became acute, but for some time she could not
detect the faintest movement. Hope had begun to spring up. Perhaps,
after all, the bookcase had proved too heavy. Dared she venture to go to
bed? Drawing her hand gently from Estelle's relaxed hold, she rose
softly--then stopped. The dreaded sound! The door-handle was turned
gently!

With noiseless step, Mrs. Wright went to the chest, of drawers, took out
the pistols, and loaded them. If the man at the door had been listening,
he might have heard the faint click as she cocked the triggers.

Silence profound reigned for some seconds, and the loud beating of her
heart made her fear she had missed some sounds. Then came a slight
grating, and the next instant there was a wrench, and the door sprang
backwards. But for the two very long bolts, strengthened by the chest of
drawers, it must have been broken open. The noise made the sleeping
child stir, but happily did not wake her. It was evident that the
intruder, finding the door locked, had had recourse to stronger
measures, and would stop at nothing which would help him to get at the
child. Mrs. Wright knew he was not likely to give up his attempt at the
first failure. She waited in breathless silence, a pistol ready in her
hand.

Again the effort to spring the door open was made, but the bolts held it
fast. Another silence, and then came the sound of cuts being made in the
woodwork, as if to take out the panel. But the wood was thick, and old
age had hardened it. Any attempt to penetrate it would only mean loss of
valuable time.

This second failure depressed Thomas exceedingly. He had had a very hard
week. Only the hope of Jack's absence had kept him near the Hospice de
la Providence. He had managed to get into the disused portion, where
hiding had not been difficult among those gloomy passages and empty
chambers. Getting food had not been a light business. It had
necessitated a long walk every now and again, as soon as the friendly
shadows of night permitted, to a neighbouring village, where he was
unknown. He had been obliged to be very careful of his money, too, as he
had only what had been paid to him by the circus people. It could not
last long, and, what he grudged most of all, his candles and tools had
to come out of it. It was essential to the success of his plans that he
should discover a way into Jack's abode without attracting attention,
and for this he required light.

So cautiously were his discoveries made that even Jack was ignorant of
his presence so near him. Thomas could even hear what was said in the
vast kitchen if the voices of the speakers were at all raised, and by
this means he had learned of Jack's trawling expedition. Had he
discovered the opening before, he might have acted differently. The
discussion over the plans for finding Estelle's home would have made him
aware that he would gain more by helping than by any attempts at
kidnapping. He would have seen that it was wiser to make terms with
Jack, rather than risk the loss of everything by grasping at too much.

But Thomas's mind was naturally slow. He had not heard the discussion,
and the idea of sharing any reward which might be offered for Estelle
with anybody else had not even occurred to him. With any prospect of
success he would have scouted the idea; but, with no food, no money, and
the child so carefully guarded, he had sense enough to perceive that
Jack was better as his friend than as his enemy. Now, however, it was
too late. Jack was out of the way, and capture the child he must. Once
manage that, and he could dictate what terms he pleased.

He made up his mind that Jack could not know where Estelle's home was,
for it was not likely that, since the little girl had not been able to
tell him all this long time, she could tell him now. Her want of memory
gave him time.

He had failed with the door. He must try some other way. Meantime, he
would continue to live at the Hospice de la Providence, and pursue his
nightly investigations of that rocky coast.

On his return the following morning, Jack was alarmed at what his mother
had to tell him. She took care to speak when Estelle was not near, and
they agreed to keep a stricter watch. Jack secured the bookcase against
a second attempt to move it, and then went to M. le Préfet to see what
he advised. The result was that Thomas was hunted from one place of
concealment in the caves to another. No hiding in dark corners would
have saved him, however, had he not remembered a certain broad ledge of
open rock which he had discovered accidentally a few days before. On
this he managed to scramble, and remained there, watching his pursuers
with a great deal of bitterness and wrath.

(_Continued on page 310._)


THE DUKE'S RUSE.


The eccentric Duke of Bridgewater, who owned extensive coal-mines near
Manchester, and spent a large fortune in opening them out, and in
constructing a canal to carry the coal to Manchester and Liverpool, took
great pleasure in watching his men at work. He used to come every
morning to the place where they were boring for coal, and stand looking
on for hours at a time. He was often there when the bell rang at twelve
o'clock, at which hour the men ceased work for their noonday meal and
rest. But the men scarcely liked to give up work while the Duke was
watching them, and they continued on until he went away. As it was not
pleasant to have their dinner-hour deferred day after day in this way,
the men tried to avoid working at the boring which the Duke was
accustomed to visit, and the Duke's engineer, Brindley, had great
difficulty in finding sufficient men for that particular work. Upon
inquiry, he discovered the reason of it, and explained matters to the
Duke, who took care after that to walk away before the bell rang at
noon.

The Duke was a shrewd, observant man, and he did not fail to notice that
his workmen ceased working the moment the bell began to strike at twelve
o'clock, but they were not so prompt in resuming work at one o'clock.
They came leisurely up one by one, some minutes after the clock had
struck. When the Duke inquired the reason of this, the men excused
themselves by saying that while they heard the clock well enough when it
struck twelve, they did not always hear it when it struck only once. The
Duke thereupon had the clock made to strike thirteen at one o'clock, so
that the men could no longer plead this excuse for their dilatoriness.
This clock was still in use not many years ago, and may be even yet
striking its thirteen strokes at one o'clock.


LOOKING UP AND LOOKING DOWN.


  The little flower set in the grass,
    Where it doth lowly lie,
  As one by one the bright hours pass,
    Looks upward to the sky.
  So must a child's thoughts upward soar,
    So must my soul take wings,
  And to grow wiser than before
    Reach up to lofty things.

  The little stars set in the sky,
    As night by night they show,
  Though shining in their home on high,
    Look down to earth below.
  So I must stoop to lowly things,
    To gentle deeds of love;
  E'en though my thoughts soar upon wings,
    And climb to Heaven above.


PEEPS INTO NATURE'S NURSERIES.

X.--NURSERY CUSTOMS IN THE FISH-WORLD.


In our last article we drew a contrast between those creatures which
thrust their young upon the world at the earliest possible moment,
taking care only to lay their eggs in a favourable spot, and leaving
them to hatch or be eaten as the case may be, and those which display
the most tender care for their offspring at least until they are able to
fight for themselves. In the first case, thousands of young have to be
brought into the world at one time because of the enormous death-rate
which this helplessness brings about; in the second, comparatively few,
sometimes only one or two, young ones make up the family.

I propose now to tell you more of this fascinating question; to show you
some perfectly amazing instances of the care and love for their young
which some of these little mothers and fathers display, and these
instances shall be taken from what we call the 'cold-blooded' fishes.

Let us begin with one of the commonest and best-known of our fishes, the
stickleback of our ponds and ditches. The male stickleback, as many of
you may know, builds a wonderful nest (see fig. 1), in which, when
finished, he invites his chosen mate to lay her eggs. As soon as these
precious treasures have been entrusted to his care, he makes himself
their sole guardian, forcing currents of fresh water through the nest by
the violent fanning motion of his breast-fins, and driving away all that
come near. Strangely enough, he has to exercise the greatest care to
keep out his mate, who would eat every single egg if she could but get
the chance! Every now and then he holds an inspection, shakes up the
material of the nest, drags out the eggs, and pushes them back into
their places again just to make sure that they are safe, and to keep
them bathed in clear water. But soon the little fish appear, and then
his labours are increased a hundredfold. If they rise more than a
certain height above the bottom of the stream, or stray beyond what he
regards as a safe limit from the nest, they are immediately seized in
his mouth, brought back, and gently puffed or jetted into the nest
again. Day and night his watch is kept, till at last they grow too big
to be controlled, and are allowed to stray whither they will.

[Illustration: FIG. 1 THREE SPINED STICKLEBACK]

Another of our native fishes, found in the Thames among other places,
builds a nest for its young. This is the 'spotted goby' or 'pole-wing.'
Here an old shell is made to do duty for a nursery. The shell is turned
over so that its hollowed portion forms a roof; the mud from below is
scooped away and a tunnel is then made leading away from the chamber so
formed. When all is complete, the mother enters and deposits her eggs,
and leaves her mate to mount guard over the nest till the young are
hatched and make their way out.

In the 'butter-fishes' or 'gunnels' which are found round our coasts,
the eggs are rolled into a ball, and jealously nursed by the parents,
each in turn coiling its body round the mass, and so protecting it from
injury (see fig. 2).

[Illustration: FIG 2 BUTTER FISH]

Many of those crafty 'hooligans' of the sea, the skates, are most
affectionate as parents. One of the giants of the tribe, the great
'devil-fish,' will defend its young with great ferocity. Its capture is
at all times attended with danger, but is especially perilous when it is
accompanying its offspring; at such times it has been known to attack
and upset a boat!

In one of the 'cat-fishes'--the Aspredo (fig. 3)--the mother carries the
eggs about with her, and this is managed in a very remarkable way. Just
at the time she lays her eggs, the skin of the under surface of her
body becomes swollen and spongy, and into this she presses her eggs by
lying on them. Here, snugly sheltered, they remain till hatched! The
curious 'sea-horse' has adopted a yet stranger contrivance, the fins and
certain special folds of the skin of the under sides of the body forming
a pouch, into which the eggs are placed, remaining till hatched. As soon
as this takes place the pouch becomes the nursery of the young ones.
But, strange though it may seem, this pouch is developed by the father
of the family, who does all the nursing!

[Illustration: FIG 3 THE ASPREDO CAT FISH]

Some of the cat-fishes--the Arius, for example--carry the eggs in their
capacious throats till they hatch! How the fish manages to prevent the
escape of his precious burden through his gills, or to prevent himself
from swallowing them, is something of a mystery.

[Illustration: FIG 4 PARADISE FISH]

Finally we come, I think, to the oddest of all these devices to ensure
the safety and well-being of the young. Thus, certain fishes related to
the wonderful Anabas--the perch that climbs trees!--make nests of
bubbles, in which the eggs are placed! The Gorami and the beautiful
little 'paradise-fish' (fig. 4), for example, built floating nurseries
of this kind, the bubble-raft being made by the male. In the case of the
paradise-fish these bubbles are blown so that the enclosed eggs are
raised above the level of the water, where they remain till hatched!
This raft, although it has been seen many times by travellers, is so
frail that it cannot be preserved, and has never yet been drawn by an
artist, so that we can only show the fish that makes it.

W. P. PYCRAFT, F.Z.S., A.L.S.

[Illustration: "Fast asleep!"]


THE POLICEMAN'S JOKE.


It was a bitterly cold night, but Jones, the watchman at the hole which
was being dug in the street at Armstrong Square, knew how to take care
of himself. 'I do not mean to freeze if I can help it!' he remarked to
his friend, the policeman, who was going round the square on his beat.

'Don't make yourself too comfortable, that's all,' said the policeman,
in a warning voice, as he saw Jones settle himself snugly in his rough
shelter with a big coke fire in front of him and a thick sack over his
knees. 'Maybe, if you fall asleep, you will wake up to find that some
rascal has made off with all the spades and pickaxes, and then your job
will be some one else's.'

'No fear!' said Jones, putting some fresh lumps of coal on to the tripod
fire. 'If I should drop off (and I shan't!), I am a very light sleeper;
the least step wakes me, and then my dog will let no one come near the
place. Oh, I am all right, and as warm as toast!

'That's more than I can say!' said the policeman, for he had no warm
shed to protect him from the keen east wind. 'Well, good-night--and
good-night, Jack,' he added, stooping to pat the dog, who was Jones's
close friend and companion.

'Ah, he knows you!' remarked Jones, as the dog rubbed his head against
the policeman's legs; 'but he can be a bit nasty to strangers, Jack
can.'

'I dare say he can,' was the policeman's answer as he went off, and
disappeared into the darkness.

In an hour's time he was round again, and stood awhile at the corner of
the square. The tripod fire was burning as fiercely as ever, and gave
light enough to show Jones--fast asleep! Jack, however, was awake, and
stood there, with bristling hair, ready to guard his master.

'Good old Jack!' said the policeman, as he patted the dog's head, and
Jack yawned, stretched his legs, and lay down again.

'And he calls himself a light sleeper!' said the policeman, looking at
the snoring Jones, who leant back with his arms folded, and his eyes
shut.

'It would be a bit of a joke to make off with his lantern and ropes,'
said the policeman to himself; 'it might teach him not to be so
bumptious about his light sleeping.'

The idea was irresistible, for the policeman was young, and loved a
joke. 'I'll do it!' he said at last, and, as he spoke, he went towards
Jones's shelter. Jack--faithful Jack--looked up suspiciously, but the
policeman said, briskly, 'It's all right, Jack; your master knows
me'--and Jack lay down again, feeling perhaps that a policeman could do
no harm.

The next time the policeman passed the square he roused the
still-sleeping Jones. 'Wake up, Jones,' he said; 'the men will be here
directly, and they must not find you sleeping.'

'I only just closed my eyes,' said Jones, drowsily. He sat up, however,
and the next minute exclaimed loudly: 'Hallo! who has been here?
Thieves! my lantern is gone and the coil of new rope! I'm ruined, I tell
you! I shall never get another night job!'

'Gone?' said the policeman, feigning astonishment. 'Surely not. You are
too light a sleeper for any one to take your things without you knowing
it, you know.'

'I'm ruined!' repeated the wretched Jones.

