  I was lately at a Tea-Table, where some young Ladies entertained the
  Company with a Relation of a Coquet in the Neighbourhood, who had been
  discovered practising before her Glass. To turn the Discourse, which
  from being witty grew to be malicious, the Matron of the Family took
  occasion, from the Subject, to wish that there were to be found
  amongst Men such faithful Monitors to dress the Mind by, as we consult
  to adorn the Body. She added, that if a sincere Friend were
  miraculously changed into a Looking-Glass, she should not be ashamed
  to ask its Advice very often. This whimsical Thought worked so much
  upon my Fancy the whole Evening, that it produced [a very odd Dream.
  [1]]

  Methought, that as I stood before my Glass, the Image of a Youth, of
  an open ingenuous Aspect, appeared in it; who with a small shrill
  Voice spoke in the following manner.

    The Looking-Glass, you see, was heretofore a Man, even I, the
    unfortunate Fidelio. I had two Brothers, whose Deformity in Shape
    was made out by the Clearness of their Understanding: It must be
    owned however, that (as it generally happens) they had each a
    Perverseness of Humour suitable to their Distortion of Body. The
    eldest, whose Belly sunk in monstrously, was a great Coward; and
    tho' his splenetick contracted Temper made him take fire
    immediately, he made Objects that beset him appear greater than they
    were. The second, whose Breast swelled into a bold Relievo, on the
    contrary, took great pleasure in lessening every thing, and was
    perfectly the Reverse of his Brother. These Oddnesses pleased
    Company once or twice, but disgusted when often seen; for which
    reason the young Gentlemen were sent from Court to study
    Mathematicks at the University.

    I need not acquaint you, that I was very well made, and reckoned a
    bright polite Gentleman. I was the Confident and Darling of all the
    Fair; and if the Old and Ugly spoke ill of me, all the World knew it
    was because I scorned to flatter them. No Ball, no Assembly was
    attended till I had been consulted. Flavia colour'd her Hair before
    me, Celia shew'd me her Teeth, Panthea heaved her Bosom, Cleora
    brandished her Diamonds; I have seen Cloe's Foot, and tied
    artificially the Garters of Rhodope.

    'Tis a general Maxim, that those who doat upon themselves, can have
    no violent Affection for another: But on the contrary, I found that
    the Women's Passion for me rose in proportion to the Love they bare
    to themselves. This was verify'd in my Amour with Narcissa, who was
    so constant to me, that it was pleasantly said, had I been little
    enough, she would have hung me at her Girdle. The most dangerous
    Rival I had, was a gay empty Fellow, who by the Strength of a long
    Intercourse with Narcissa, joined to his natural Endowments, had
    formed himself into a perfect Resemblance with her. I had been
    discarded, had she not observed that he frequently asked my Opinion
    about Matters of the last Consequence: This made me still more
    considerable in her Eye.

    Tho' I was eternally caressed by the Ladies, such was their Opinion
    of my Honour, that I was never envy'd by the Men. A jealous Lover of
    Narcissa one day thought he had caught her in an Amorous
    Conversation; for tho' he was at such a Distance that he could hear
    nothing, he imagined strange things from her Airs and Gestures.
    Sometimes with a serene Look she stepped back in a listning Posture,
    and brightened into an innocent Smile. Quickly after she swelled
    into an Air of Majesty and Disdain, then kept her Eyes half shut
    after a languishing Manner, then covered her Blushes with her Hand,
    breathed a Sigh, and seemd ready to sink down. In rushed the furious
    Lover; but how great was his Surprize to see no one there but the
    innocent Fidelio, with his Back against the Wall betwixt two
    Windows?

    It were endless to recount all my Adventures. Let me hasten to that
    which cost me my Life, and Narcissa her Happiness.

    She had the misfortune to have the Small-Pox, upon which I was
    expressly forbid her Sight, it being apprehended that it would
    increase her Distemper, and that I should infallibly catch it at the
    first Look. As soon as she was suffered to leave her Bed, she stole
    out of her Chamber, and found me all alone in an adjoining
    Apartment. She ran with Transport to her Darling, and without
    Mixture of Fear, lest I should dislike her. But, oh me! what was her
    Fury when she heard me say, I was afraid and shockd at so loathsome
    a Spectacle. She stepped back, swollen with Rage, to see if I had
    the Insolence to repeat it. I did, with this Addition, that her
    ill-timed Passion had increased her Ugliness. Enraged, inflamed,
    distracted, she snatched a Bodkin, and with all her Force stabbed me
    to the Heart. Dying, I preserv'd my Sincerity, and expressed the
    Truth, tho' in broken Words; and by reproachful Grimaces to the last
    I mimick'd the Deformity of my Murderess.

    Cupid, who always attends the Fair, and pity'd the Fate of so useful
    a Servant as I was, obtained of the Destinies, that my Body should
    be made incorruptible, and retain the Qualities my Mind had
    possessed. I immediately lost the Figure of a Man, and became
    smooth, polished, and bright, and to this day am the first Favourite
    of the Ladies.

T.


[Footnote 1: [so odd a Dream, that no one but the SPECTATOR could
believe that the Brain, clogged in Sleep, could furnish out such a
regular Wildness of Imagination.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 393.                Saturday, May 31, 1712.                Addison.


  'Nescio quâ præter solitum dulcedine læti.'

  Virg.


Looking over the Letters that have been sent me, I chanced to find the
following one, which I received about two years ago from an ingenious
Friend, who was then in Denmark.


  Copenhagen, May 1, 1710.

  Dear Sir,

  The Spring with you has already taken Possession of the Fields and
  Woods: Now is the Season of Solitude, and of moving Complaints upon
  trivial Sufferings: Now the Griefs of Lovers begin to flow, and their
  Wounds to bleed afresh. I too, at this Distance from the softer
  Climates, am not without my Discontents at present. You perhaps may
  laugh at me for a most Romantick Wretch, when I have disclosed to you
  the Occasion of my Uneasiness; and yet I cannot help thinking my
  Unhappiness real, in being confined to a Region, which is the very
  Reverse of Paradise. The Seasons here are all of them unpleasant, and
  the Country quite Destitute of Rural Charms. I have not heard a Bird
  sing, nor a Brook murmur, nor a Breeze whisper, neither have I been
  blest with the Sight of a flow'ry Meadow these two years. Every Wind
  here is a Tempest, and every Water a turbulent Ocean. I hope, when you
  reflect a little, you will not think the Grounds of my Complaint in
  the least frivolous and unbecoming a Man of serious Thought; since the
  Love of Woods, of Fields and Flowers, of Rivers and Fountains, seems
  to be a Passion implanted in our Natures the most early of any, even
  before the Fair Sex had a Being.

  I am, Sir, &c.


Could I transport my self with a Wish from one Country to another, I
should chuse to pass my Winter in Spain, my Spring in Italy, my Summer
in England, and my Autumn in France. Of all these Seasons there is none
that can vie with the Spring for Beauty and Delightfulness. It bears the
same Figure among the Seasons of the Year, that the Morning does among
the Divisions of the Day, or Youth among the Stages of Life. The English
Summer is pleasanter than that of any other Country in Europe on no
other account but because it has a greater Mixture of Spring in it. The
Mildness of our Climate, with those frequent Refreshments of Dews and
Rains that fall among us, keep up a perpetual Chearfulness in our
Fields, and fill the hottest Months of the Year with a lively Verdure.

In the opening of the Spring, when all Nature begins to recover her
self, the same animal Pleasure which makes the Birds sing, and the whole
brute Creation rejoice, rises very sensibly in the Heart of Man. I know
none of the Poets who have observed so well as Milton those secret
Overflowings of Gladness which diffuse themselves thro' the Mind of the
Beholder, upon surveying the gay Scenes of Nature: he has touched upon
it twice or thrice in his Paradise Lost, and describes it very
beautifully under the Name of Vernal Delight, in that Passage where he
represents the Devil himself as almost sensible of it.

  Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue
  Appear'd, with gay enamel'd Colours mixt:
  On which the Sun more glad impress'd his Beams
  Than in fair evening Cloud, or humid Bow,
  When God hath shower'd the Earth; so lovely seem'd
  That Landskip: And of pure now purer Air
  Meets his approach, and to the Heart inspires
  Vernal Delight, and Joy able to drive
  All Sadness but Despair, &c. [1]

Many Authors have written on the Vanity of the Creature, and represented
the Barrenness of every thing in this World, and its Incapacity of
producing any solid or substantial Happiness. As Discourses of this
Nature are very useful to the Sensual and Voluptuous; those Speculations
which shew the bright Side of Things, and lay forth those innocent
Entertainments which are to be met with among the several Objects that
encompass us, are no less beneficial to Men of dark and melancholy
Tempers. It was for this reason that I endeavoured to recommend a
Chearfulness of Mind in my two last Saturday's Papers, and which I would
still inculcate, not only from the Consideration of our selves, and of
that Being on whom we depend, nor from the general Survey of that
Universe in which we are placed at present, but from Reflections on the
particular Season in which this Paper is written. The Creation is a
perpetual Feast to the Mind of a good Man, every thing he sees chears
and delights him; Providence has imprinted so many Smiles on Nature,
that it is impossible for a Mind, which is not sunk in more gross and
sensual Delights, to take a Survey of them without several secret
Sensations of Pleasure. The Psalmist has in several of his Divine Poems
celebrated those beautiful and agreeable Scenes which make the Heart
glad, and produce in it that vernal Delight which I have before taken
Notice of.

Natural Philosophy quickens this Taste of the Creation, and renders it
not only pleasing to the Imagination, but to the Understanding. It does
not rest in the Murmur of Brooks, and the Melody of Birds, in the Shade
of Groves and Woods, or in the Embroidery of Fields and Meadows, but
considers the several Ends of Providence which are served by them, and
the Wonders of Divine Wisdom which appear in them. It heightens the
Pleasures of the Eye, and raises such a rational Admiration in the Soul
as is little inferior to Devotion.

It is not in the Power of every one to offer up this kind of Worship to
the great Author of Nature, and to indulge these more refined
Meditations of Heart, which are doubtless highly acceptable in his
Sight: I shall therefore conclude this short Essay on that Pleasure
which the Mind naturally conceives from the present Season of the Year,
by the recommending of a Practice for which every one has sufficient
Abilities.

I would have my Readers endeavour to moralize this natural Pleasure of
the Soul, and to improve this vernal Delight, as Milton calls it, into a
Christian Virtue. When we find our selves inspired with this pleasing
Instinct, this secret Satisfaction and Complacency arising from the
Beauties of the Creation, let us consider to whom we stand indebted for
all these Entertainments of Sense, and who it is that thus opens his
Hand and fills the World with Good. The Apostle instructs us to take
advantage of our present Temper of Mind, to graft upon it such a
religious Exercise as is particularly conformable to it, by that Precept
which advises those who are sad to pray, and those who are merry to sing
Psalms. The Chearfulness of Heart which springs up in us from the Survey
of Nature's Works, is an admirable Preparation for Gratitude. The Mind
has gone a great way towards Praise and Thanksgiving, that is filled
with such a secret Gladness: A grateful Reflection on the supreme Cause
who produces it, sanctifies it in the Soul, and gives it its proper
Value. Such an habitual Disposition of Mind consecrates every Field and
Wood, turns an ordinary Walk into a morning or evening Sacrifice, and
will improve those transient Gleams of Joy, which naturally brighten up
and refresh the Soul on such Occasions, into an inviolable and perpetual
State of Bliss and Happiness.

I.


[Footnote 1: Paradise Lost, Bk iv. ll. 148-156.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 394.                 Monday, June 2, 1712.                  Steele.


  'Bene colligitur hæc Pueris et Mulierculis et Servis et Servorum
  simillimis Liberis esse grata. Gravi vero homini et ea quæ fiunt
  Judicio certo ponderanti probari posse nullo modo.'

  Tull.


I have been considering the little and frivolous things which give Men
Accesses to one another, and Power with each other, not only in the
common and indifferent Accidents of Life, but also in Matters of greater
importance. You see in Elections for Members to sit in Parliament, how
far saluting Rows of old Women, drinking with Clowns, and being upon a
level with the lowest Part of Mankind in that wherein they themselves
are lowest, their Diversions, will carry a Candidate. A Capacity for
prostituting a Man's Self in his Behaviour, and descending to the
present Humour of the Vulgar, is perhaps as good an Ingredient as any
other for making a considerable Figure in the World; and if a Man has
nothing else, or better, to think of, he could not make his way to
Wealth and Distinction by properer Methods, than studying the particular
Bent or Inclination of People with whom he converses, and working from
the Observation of such their Biass in all Matters wherein he has any
Intercourse with them: For his Ease and Comfort he may assure himself,
he need not be at the Expence of any great Talent or Virtue to please
even those who are possessd of the highest Qualifications. Pride in some
particular Disguise or other, (often a Secret to the proud Man himself)
is the most ordinary Spring of Action among Men. You need no more than
to discover what a Man values himself for; then of all things admire
that Quality, but be sure to be failing in it your self in comparison of
the Man whom you court. I have heard, or read, of a Secretary of State
in Spain, who served a Prince who was happy in an elegant use of the
Latin Tongue, and often writ Dispatches in it with his own Hand. The
King shewed his Secretary a Letter he had written to a foreign Prince,
and under the Colour of asking his Advice, laid a Trap for his Applause.
The honest Man read it as a faithful Counsellor, and not only excepted
against his tying himself down too much by some Expressions, but mended
the Phrase in others. You may guess the Dispatches that Evening did not
take much longer Time. Mr. Secretary, as soon as he came to his own
House, sent for his eldest Son, and communicated to him that the Family
must retire out of Spain as soon as possible; for, said he, the King
knows I understand Latin better than he does.

This egregious Fault in a Man of the World, should be a Lesson to all
who would make their Fortunes: But a Regard must be carefully had to the
Person with whom you have to do; for it is not to be doubted but a great
Man of common Sense must look with secret Indignation or bridled
Laughter, on all the Slaves who stand round him with ready Faces to
approve and smile at all he says in the gross. It is good Comedy enough
to observe a Superior talking half Sentences, and playing an humble
Admirer's Countenance from one thing to another, with such Perplexity
that he knows not what to sneer in Approbation of. But this kind of
Complaisance is peculiarly the Manner of Courts; in all other Places you
must constantly go farther in Compliance with the Persons you have to do
with, than a mere Conformity of Looks and Gestures. If you are in a
Country Life, and would be a leading Man, a good Stomach, a loud Voice,
and a rustick Chearfulness will go a great way, provided you are able to
drink, and drink any thing. But I was just now going to draw the Manner
of Behaviour I would advise People to practise under some Maxim, and
intimated, that every one almost was governed by his Pride. There was an
old Fellow about forty Years ago so peevish and fretful, though a Man of
Business, that no one could come at him: But he frequented a particular
little Coffee-house, where he triumphed over every body at Trick-track
and Baggammon. The way to pass his Office well, was first to be insulted
by him at one of those Games in his leisure Hours; for his Vanity was to
shew, that he was a Man of Pleasure as well as Business. Next to this
sort of Insinuation, which is called in all Places (from its taking its
Birth in the Housholds of Princes) making one's Court, the most
prevailing way is, by what better-bred People call a Present, the Vulgar
a Bribe. I humbly conceive that such a thing is conveyed with more
Gallantry in a Billet-doux that should be understood at the Bank, than
in gross Money; But as to stubborn People, who are so surly as to accept
of neither Note or Cash, having formerly dabbled in Chymistry, I can
only say that one part of Matter asks one thing, and another another, to
make it fluent; but there is nothing but may be dissolved by a proper
Mean: Thus the Virtue which is too obdurate for Gold or Paper, shall
melt away very kindly in a Liquid. The Island of Barbadoes (a shrewd
People) manage all their Appeals to Great-Britain, by a skilful
Distribution of Citron-Water among the Whisperers about Men in Power.
Generous Wines do every Day prevail, and that in great Points, where ten
thousand times their Value would have been rejected with Indignation.

But to wave the Enumeration of the sundry Ways of applying by Presents,
Bribes, Management of People, Passions and Affections, in such a Manner
as it shall appear that the Virtue of the best Man is by one Method or
other corruptible; let us look out for some Expedient to turn those
Passions and Affections on the side of Truth and Honour. When a Man has
laid it down for a Position, that parting with his Integrity, in the
minutest Circumstance, is losing so much of his very Self, Self-love
will become a Virtue. By this means Good and Evil will be the only
Objects of Dislike and Approbation; and he that injures any Man, has
effectually wounded the Man of this Turn as much as if the Harm had been
to himself. This seems to be the only Expedient to arrive at an
Impartiality; and a Man who follows the Dictates of Truth and right
Reason, may by Artifice be led into Error, but never can into Guilt.

T.


       *       *       *       *       *


TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE CHARLES EARL OF SUNDERLAND [1]

My Lord,

Very many Favours and Civilities (received from You in a private
Capacity) which I have no other Way to acknowledge, will, I hope, excuse
this Presumption; but the Justice I, as a Spectator, owe your Character,
places me above the want of an Excuse. Candor and Openness of Heart,
which shine in all your Words and Actions, exacts the highest Esteem
from all who have the Honour to know You, and a winning Condescention to
all subordinate to You, made Business a Pleasure to those who executed
it under You, at the same time that it heightened Her Majesty's Favour
to all who had the Happiness of having it convey'd through Your Hands: A
Secretary of State, in the Interests of Mankind, joined with that of his
Fellow-Subjects, accomplished with a great Facility and Elegance in all
the Modern as well as Ancient Languages, was a happy and proper Member
of a Ministry, by whose Services Your Sovereign and Country are in so
high and flourishing a Condition, as makes all other Princes and
Potentates powerful or inconsiderable in Europe, as they are Friends or
Enemies to Great-Britain. The Importance of those great Events which
happened during that Administration, in which Your Lordship bore so
important a Charge, will be acknowledgd as long as Time shall endure; I
shall not therefore attempt to rehearse those illustrious Passages, but
give this Application a more private and particular Turn, in desiring
Your Lordship would continue your Favour and Patronage to me, as You are
a Gentleman of the most polite Literature, and perfectly accomplished in
the Knowledge of Books and Men, which makes it necessary to beseech Your
Indulgence to the following Leaves, and the Author of them: Who is, with
the greatest Truth and Respect,

My Lord,
Your Lordship's Obliged,
Obedient, and Humble Servant,
THE SPECTATOR.


[Footnote 1: Charles Spencer, to whom the Sixth Volume of the Spectator
is here inscribed, represented Tiverton, in 1700, when he took the Lady
Anne Churchill, Marlborough's second daughter, for his second wife. On
the death of his father Robert, in 1702, he became Earl of Sunderland.
He was an accomplished man and founder of the library at Althorpe. In
1705 he was employed diplomatically at the courts of Prussia, Austria,
and Hanover. Early in 1706 he was one of the Commissioners for arranging
the Union with Scotland, and in September of that year he was forced by
the Whigs on Queen Anne, as successor to Sir Charles Hedges in the
office of Secretary of State. Steele held under him the office of
Gazetteer, to which he was appointed in the following May. In 1710
Sunderland shared in the political reverse suffered by Marlborough. In
the summer of that year Sunderland was dismissed from office, but with
an offer from the Queen of a pension of £3000 a year. He replied that he
was glad her Majesty was satisfied that he had done his duty; but if he
could not have the honour to serve his country, he would not plunder it.
The accession of George I. restored him to favour and influence. He
became Lord-lieutenant of Ireland; had, in 1715, a pension of £12,000 a
year settled on him; in April, 1717, was again Secretary of State; and
in the following March, Lord President of the Council. His political
influence was broken in 1721, the year before his death.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 395.                  Tuesday, June 3, 1712.              Budgell.


  'Quod nunc ratio est, Impetus ante fuit.'

  Ovid.


Beware of the Ides of March, said the Roman Augur to Julius Cæsar:
Beware of the Month of May, says the British Spectator to his fair
Country-women. The Caution of the first was unhappily neglected, and
Cæsar's Confidence cost him his Life. I am apt to flatter my self that
my pretty Readers had much more regard to the Advice I gave them, since
I have yet received very few Accounts of any notorious Trips made in the
last Month.

But tho' I hope for the best, I shall not pronounce too positively on
this point, till I have seen forty Weeks well over, at which Period of
Time, as my good Friend Sir ROGER has often told me, he has more
Business as a Justice of Peace, among the dissolute young People in the
Country, than at any other Season of the Year.

Neither must I forget a Letter which I received near a Fortnight since
from a Lady, who, it seems, could hold out no longer, telling me she
looked upon the Month as then out, for that she had all along reckoned
by the New Style.

On the other hand, I have great reason to believe, from several angry
Letters which have been sent to me by disappointed Lovers, that my
Advice has been of very signal Service to the fair Sex, who, according
to the old Proverb, were Forewarned forearm'd.

One of these Gentlemen tells me, that he would have given me an hundred
Pounds, rather than I should have publishd that Paper; for that his
Mistress, who had promised to explain herself to him about the Beginning
of May, upon reading that Discourse told him that she would give him her
Answer in June.

Thyrsis acquaints me, that when he desired Sylvia to take a Walk in the
Fields, she told him the Spectator had forbidden her.

Another of my Correspondents, who writes himself Mat Meager, complains,
that whereas he constantly used to Breakfast with his Mistress upon
Chocolate, going to wait upon her the first of May he found his usual
Treat very much changed for the worse, and has been forced to feed ever
since upon Green Tea.

As I begun this Critical Season with a Caveat to the Ladies, I shall
conclude it with a Congratulation, and do most heartily wish them Joy of
their happy Deliverance.

They may now reflect with Pleasure on the Dangers they have escaped, and
look back with as much Satisfaction on their Perils that threat'ned
them, as their Great-Grandmothers did formerly on the Burning
Plough-shares, after having passed through the Ordeal Tryal. The
Instigations of the Spring are now abated. The Nightingale gives over
her Love-labourd Song, as Milton phrases it, the Blossoms are fallen,
and the Beds of Flowers swept away by the Scythe of the Mower.

I shall now allow my Fair Readers to return to their Romances and
Chocolate, provided they make use of them with Moderation, till about
the middle of the Month, when the Sun shall have made some Progress in
the Crab. Nothing is more dangerous, than too much Confidence and
Security. The Trojans, who stood upon their Guard all the while the
Grecians lay before their City, when they fancied the Siege was raised,
and the Danger past, were the very next Night burnt in their Beds: I
must also observe, that as in some Climates there is a perpetual Spring,
so in some Female Constitutions there is a perpetual May: These are a
kind of Valetudinarians in Chastity, whom I would continue in a constant
Diet. I cannot think these wholly out of Danger, till they have looked
upon the other Sex at least Five Years through a Pair of Spectacles.
WILL. HONEYCOMB has often assured me, that its much easier to steal one
of this Species, when she has passed her grand Climacterick, than to
carry off an icy Girl on this side Five and Twenty; and that a Rake of
his Acquaintance, who had in vain endeavoured to gain the Affections of
a young Lady of Fifteen, had at last made his Fortune by running away
with her Grandmother.

But as I do not design this Speculation for the Evergreens of the Sex, I
shall again apply my self to those who would willingly listen to the
Dictates of Reason and Virtue, and can now hear me in cold Blood. If
there are any who have forfeited their Innocence, they must now consider
themselves under that Melancholy View, in which Chamont regards his
Sister, in those beautiful Lines.

 --Long she flourish'd,
  Grew sweet to Sense, and lovely to the Eye;
  Till at the last a cruel Spoiler came,
  Cropt this fair Rose, and rifled all its Sweetness;
  Then cast it like a loathsome Weed away. [1]

On the contrary, she who has observed the timely Cautions I gave her,
and lived up to the Rules of Modesty, will now Flourish like a Rose in
June, with all her Virgin Blushes and Sweetness about her: I must,
however, desire these last to consider, how shameful it would be for a
General, who has made a Successful Campaign, to be surprized in his
Winter Quarters: It would be no less dishonourable for a Lady to lose in
any other Month of the Year, what she has been at the pains to preserve
in May.

There is no Charm in the Female Sex, that can supply the place of
Virtue. Without Innocence, Beauty is unlovely, and Quality contemptible,
Good-breeding degenerates into Wantonness, and Wit into Impudence. It is
observed, that all the Virtues are represented by both Painters and
Statuaries under Female Shapes, but if any one of them has a more
particular Title to that Sex, it is Modesty. I shall leave it to the
Divines to guard them against the opposite Vice, as they may be
overpowerd by Temptations; It is sufficient for me to have warned them
against it, as they may be led astray by Instinct.

I desire this Paper may be read with more than ordinary Attention, at
all Tea-Tables within the Cities of London and Westminster.

X.


[Footnote 1: Otway's Orphan, Act IV.]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 396.               Wednesday, June 4, 1712.                 Henley.


  'Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, Baralipton.'


  To Mr. SPECTATOR. [1]

  From St. John's College Cambridge, Feb. 3, 1712.

  SIR,

  The Monopoly of Punns in this University has been an immemorial
  Privilege of the Johnians; and we can't help resenting the late
  Invasion of our ancient Right as to that Particular, by a little
  Pretender to Clenching in a neighbouring College, who in an
  Application to you by way of Letter, a while ago, styled himself
  Philobrune. Dear Sir, as you are by Character a profest Well-wisher to
  Speculation, you will excuse a Remark which this Gentleman's Passion
  for the Brunette has suggested to a Brother Theorist; 'tis an Offer
  towards a mechanical Account of his Lapse to Punning, for he belongs
  to a Set of Mortals who value themselves upon an uncommon Mastery in
  the more humane and polite Part of Letters. A Conquest by one of this
  Species of Females gives a very odd Turn to the Intellectuals of the
  captivated Person, and very different from that way of thinking which
  a Triumph from the Eyes of another more emphatically of the fair Sex,
  does generally occasion. It fills the Imagination with an Assemblage
  of such Ideas and Pictures as are hardly any thing but Shade, such as
  Night, the Devil, &c. These Portraitures very near over-power the
  Light of the Understanding, almost benight the Faculties, and give
  that melancholy Tincture to the most sanguine Complexion, which this
  Gentleman calls an Inclination to be in a Brown-study, and is usually
  attended with worse Consequences in case of a Repulse. During this
  Twilight of Intellects, the Patient is extremely apt, as Love is the
  most witty Passion in Nature, to offer at some pert Sallies now and
  then, by way of Flourish, upon the amiable Enchantress, and
  unfortunately stumbles upon that Mongrel miscreated (to speak in
  Miltonic) kind of Wit, vulgarly termed, the Punn. It would not be much
  amiss to consult Dr. T--W--[2] (who is certainly a very able
  Projector, and whose system of Divinity and spiritual Mechanicks
  obtains very much among the better Part of our Under-Graduates)
  whether a general Intermarriage, enjoyned by Parliament, between this
  Sisterhood of the Olive Beauties, and the Fraternity of the People
  call'd Quakers, would not be a very serviceable Expedient, and abate
  that Overflow of Light which shines within them so powerfully, that it
  dazzles their Eyes, and dances them into a thousand Vagaries of Error
  and Enthusiasm. These Reflections may impart some Light towards a
  Discovery of the Origin of Punning among us, and the Foundation of its
  prevailing so long in this famous Body. Tis notorious from the
  Instance under Consideration, that it must be owing chiefly to the use
  of brown Juggs, muddy Belch, and the Fumes of a certain memorable
  Place of Rendezvous with us at Meals, known by the Name of Staincoat
  Hole: For the Atmosphere of the Kitchen, like the Tail of a Comet,
  predominates least about the Fire, but resides behind and fills the
  fragrant Receptacle above-mentioned. Besides, 'tis farther observable
  that the delicate Spirits among us, who declare against these nauseous
  proceedings, sip Tea, and put up for Critic and Amour, profess
  likewise an equal Abhorrency for Punning, the ancient innocent
  Diversion of this Society. After all, Sir, tho' it may appear
  something absurd, that I seem to approach you with the Air of an
  Advocate for Punning, (you who have justified your Censures of the
  Practice in a set Dissertation upon that Subject;) yet, I'm confident,
  you'll think it abundantly atoned for by observing, that this humbler
  Exercise may be as instrumental in diverting us from any innovating
  Schemes and Hypothesis in Wit. as dwelling upon honest Orthodox Logic
  would be in securing us from Heresie in Religion. Had Mr. W--n's [3]
  Researches been confined within the Bounds of Ramus or Crackanthorp,
  that learned News-monger might have acquiesced in what the holy
  Oracles pronounce upon the Deluge, like other Christians; and had the
  surprising Mr. L--y[4] been content with the Employment of refining
  upon Shakespear's Points and Quibbles, (for which he must be allowed
  to have a superlative Genius) and now and then penning a Catch or a
  Ditty, instead of inditing Odes, and Sonnets, the Gentlemen of the Bon
  Goust in the Pit would never have been put to all that Grimace in
  damning the Frippery of State, the Poverty and Languor of Thought, the
  unnatural Wit, and inartificial Structure of his Dramas.
  I am, SIR,
  Your very humble Servant,
  Peter de Quir.


[Footnote 1: This letter was by John Henley, commonly called Orator
Henley. The paper is without signature in first issue or reprint, but
the few introductory lines, doubtless, are by Steele. John Henley was at
this time but 20 years old. He was born at Melton Mowbray in 1692, and
entered St. John's College, Cambridge, in 1709. After obtaining his
degree he was invited to take charge of the Grammar School in his native
place, and raised it from decay. He published Esther, a poem; went to
London; introduced action into pulpit oratory; missing preferment, gave
lectures and orations, religious on Sundays, and political on
Wednesdays; was described by Pope in the Dunciad as the Zany of his age,
and represented by Hogarth upon a scaffold with a monkey by his side
saying Amen. He edited a paper of nonsense called the Hip Doctor, and
once attracted to his oratory an audience of shoemakers by announcing
that he would teach a new and short way of making shoes; his way being
to cut off the tops of boots. He died in 1756.]


[Footnote 2: Percy suggests very doubtfully that this may mean Thomas
Woolston, who was bom in 1669, educated at Sidney College, Cambridge,
published, in 1705, The Old Apology for the Truth against the Jews and
Gentiles revived, and afterwards was imprisoned and fined for levity in
discussing sacred subjects. The text points to a medical theory of
intermarriage. There was a Thomas Winston, of Clare Hall, Cambridge, who
travelled over the continent, took degrees at Basle and Padua, returned
to take his M.D. at Cambridge, and settled in London in 1607.]


[Footnote 3: William Whiston, born 1667, educated at Tamworth School and
Clare Hall, Cambridge, became a Fellow in 1693, and then Chaplain to
Bishop Moore. In 1696 he published his New Theory of the Earth, which
divided attention with Burnet's Sacred Theory of the Earth already
mentioned. In 1700 Whiston was invited to Cambridge, to act as deputy to
Sir Isaac Newton, whom he succeeded in 1703 as Lucasian Professor. For
holding some unorthodox opinions as to the doctrines of the early
Christians, he was, in 1710, deprived of his Professorship, and banished
from the University. He was a pious and learned man, who, although he
was denied the Sacrament, did not suffer himself to be driven out of the
Church of England till 1747. At last he established a small congregation
in his own house in accordance with his own notion of primitive
Christianity. He lived till 1752.]


[Footnote 4: No L--y of that time has written plays that are remembered.
The John Lacy whom Charles II. admired so much that he had his picture
painted in three of his characters, died in 1681, leaving four comedies
and an alteration of Shakespeare's Taming of the Shrew. He was a
handsome man: first dancing-master, then quarter-master, then an admired
comedian. Henley would hardly have used a blank in referring to a
well-known writer who died thirty years before. There was another John
Lacy advertising in the Post Boy, Aug. 3, 1714, The Steeleids, or the
Trial of Wits, a Poem in three cantos, with a motto:

  Then will I say, swelled with poetic rage,
  That I, John Lacy, have reformed the age.]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 397.               Thursday, June 5, 1712.                 Addison.


  '--Dolor ipse disertum
  Fecerat--'

  Ovid.


As the Stoick Philosophers discard all Passions in general, they will
not allow a Wise Man so much as to pity the Afflictions of another. If
thou seest thy Friend in Trouble, says Epictetus, thou mayst put on a
Look of Sorrow, and condole with him, but take care that thy Sorrow be
not real. [1] The more rigid of this Sect would not comply so far as to
shew even such an outward Appearance of Grief, but when one told them of
any Calamity that had befallen even the nearest of their Acquaintance,
would immediately reply, What is that to me? If you aggravated the
Circumstances of the Affliction, and shewed how one Misfortune was
followed by another, the Answer was still, All this may be true, but
what is it to me?

For my own part, I am of Opinion, Compassion does not only refine and
civilize Humane Nature, but has something in it more pleasing and
agreeable than what can be met with in such an indolent Happiness, such
an Indifference to Mankind as that in which the Stoicks placed their
Wisdom. As Love is the most delightful Passion, Pity is nothing else but
Love softned by a degree of Sorrow: In short, it is a kind of pleasing
Anguish, as well as generous Sympathy, that knits Mankind together, and
blends them in the same common Lot.

Those who have laid down Rules for Rhetorick or Poetry, advise the
Writer to work himself up, if possible, to the Pitch of Sorrow which he
endeavours to produce in others. There are none therefore who stir up
Pity so much as those who indite their own Sufferings. Grief has a
natural Eloquence belonging to it, and breaks out in more moving
Sentiments than be supplied by the finest Imagination. Nature on this
Occasion dictates a thousand passionate things which cannot be supplied
by Art.

It is for this Reason that the short Speeches, or Sentences which we
often meet with in Histories, make a deeper Impression on the Mind of
the Reader, than the most laboured Strokes in a well-written Tragedy.
Truth and Matter of Fact sets the Person actually before us in the one,
whom Fiction places at a greater Distance from us in the other. I do not
remember to have seen any Ancient or Modern Story more affecting than a
Letter of Ann of Bologne, Wife to King Henry the Eighth, and Mother to
Queen Elizabeth, which is still extant in the Cotton Library, as written
by her own Hand.

Shakespear himself could not have made her talk in a Strain so suitable
to her Condition and Character. One sees in it the Expostulations of a
slighted Lover, the Resentments of an injured Woman, and the Sorrows of
an imprisoned Queen. I need not acquaint my Reader that this Princess
was then under Prosecution for Disloyalty to the King's Bed, and that
she was afterwards publickly beheaded upon the same Account, though this
Prosecution was believed by many to proceed, as she her self intimates,
rather from the King's Love to Jane Seymour than from any actual Crime
in Ann of Bologne.


  Queen Ann Boleyn's last Letter to King Henry.

  [Cotton Libr. Otho C. 10.]

  SIR,

  Your Grace's Displeasure, and my Imprisonment, are Things so strange
  unto me, as what to write, or what to excuse, I am altogether
  ignorant. Whereas you send unto me (willing me to confess a Truth, and
  so obtain your Favour) by such an one, whom you know to be mine
  ancient professed Enemy, I no sooner received this Message by him,
  than I rightly conceived your Meaning; and if, as you say, confessing
  a Truth indeed may procure my Safety, I shall with all Willingness and
  Duty perform your Command.

  But let not your Grace ever imagine, that your poor Wife will ever be
  brought to acknowledge a Fault, where not so much as a Thought thereof
  preceded. And to speak a Truth, never Prince had Wife more Loyal in
  all Duty, and in all true Affection, than you have ever found in Ann
  Boleyn: with which Name and Place I could willingly have contented my
  self, if God and your Grace's Pleasure had been so pleased. Neither
  did I at any time so far forget my self in my Exaltation, or received
  Queenship, but that I always looked for such an Alteration as now I
  find; for the Ground of my Preferment being on no surer Foundation
  than your Grace's Fancy, the least Alteration I knew was fit and
  sufficient to draw that Fancy to some other [Object. [2]] You have
  chosen me, from a low Estate, to be your Queen and Companion, far
  beyond my Desert or Desire. If then you found me worthy of such
  Honour, good your Grace let not any light Fancy, or bad Counsel of
  mine Enemies, withdraw your Princely Favour from me; neither let that
  Stain, that unworthy Stain, of a Disloyal Heart towards your good
  Grace, ever cast so foul a Blot on your most Dutiful Wife, and the
  Infant-Princess your Daughter. Try me, good King, but let me have a
  lawful Tryal, and let not my sworn Enemies sit as my Accusers and
  Judges; Yea let me receive an open Tryal, for my Truth shall fear no
  open Shame; then shall you see either mine Innocence cleared, your
  Suspicion and Conscience satisfied, the Ignominy and Slander of the
  World stopped, or my Guilt openly declared. So that whatsoever God or
  you may determine of me, your Grace may be freed from an open Censure,
  and mine Offence being so lawfully proved, your Grace is at liberty,
  both before God and Man, not only to Execute worthy Punishment on me
  as an unlawful Wife, but to follow your Affection, already settled on
  that Party, for whose sake I am now as I am, whose Name I could some
  good while since have pointed unto, your Grace being not ignorant of
  my Suspicion therein.

  But if you have already determined of me, and that not only my Death,
  but an Infamous Slander must bring you the enjoying of your desired
  Happiness; then I desire of God, that he will pardon your great Sin
  therein, and likewise mine Enemies, the Instruments thereof; and that
  he will not call you to a strict Account for your unprincely and cruel
  Usage of me, at his general Judgment Seat, where both you and my self
  must shortly appear, and in whose Judgment I doubt not (whatsoever the
  World may think of me) mine Innocence shall be openly known, and
  sufficiently cleared.

  My last and only Request shall be, that my self may only bear the
  Burthen of your Grace's Displeasure, and that it may not touch the
  innocent Souls of those poor Gentlemen, who (as I understand) are
  likewise in strait Imprisonment for my sake. If ever I have found
  Favour in your Sight, if ever the Name of Ann Boleyn hath been
  pleasing in your Ears, then let me obtain this Request, and I will so
  leave to trouble your Grace any further, with mine earnest Prayers to
  the Trinity to have your Grace in his good Keeping, and to direct you
  in all your Actions. From my doleful Prison in the Tower, this sixth
  of May;

  Your most Loyal,
  And ever Faithful Wife,
  Ann Boleyn.


[Footnote 1:

  When you see a Neighbour in Tears, and hear him lament the Absence of
  his Son, the Hazards of his Voyage into some remote Part of the World,
  or the Loss of his Estate; keep upon your Guard, for fear lest some
  false Ideas that may rise upon these Occasions, surprise you into a
  Mistake, as if this Man were really miserable, upon the Account of
  these outward Accidents. But be sure to distinguish wisely, and tell
  your self immediately, that the Thing which really afflicts this
  Person is not really the Accident it self, (for other People, under
  his Circumstances, are not equally afflicted with it) but merely the
  Opinion which he hath formed to himself concerning this Accident.
  Notwithstanding all which, you may be allowed, as far as Expressions
  and outward Behaviour go, to comply with him; and if Occasion require,
  to bear a part in his Sighs, and Tears too; but then you must be sure
  to take care, that this Compliance does not infect your Mind, nor
  betray you to an inward and real Sorrow, upon any such
  Account.

Epictetus his Morals, with Simplicius his Comment.

Made English from the Greek by George Stanhope (1694) chapter xxii.]


[Footnote 2: Subject.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 398.               Friday, June 6, 1712.                    Steele.


  'Insanire pares certa ratione modoque.'

  Hor.


Cynthio and Flavia are Persons of Distinction in this Town, who have
been Lovers these ten Months last past, and writ to each other for
Gallantry Sake, under those feigned Names; Mr. Such a one and Mrs. Such
a one not being capable of raising the Soul out of the ordinary Tracts
and Passages of Life, up to that Elevation which makes the Life of the
Enamoured so much superior to that of the rest of the World. But ever
since the beauteous Cecilia has made such a Figure as she now does in
the Circle of Charming Women, Cynthio has been secretly one of her
Adorers. Lætitia has been the finest Woman in Town these three Months,
and so long Cynthio has acted the Part of a Lover very awkwardly in the
Presence of Flavia. Flavia has been too blind towards him, and has too
sincere an Heart of her own to observe a thousand things which would
have discovered this Change of Mind to any one less engaged than she
was. Cynthio was musing Yesterday in the Piazza in Covent-Garden, and
was saying to himself that he was a very ill Man to go on in visiting
and professing Love to Flavia, when his Heart was enthralled to another.
It is an Infirmity that I am not constant to Flavia; but it would be
still a greater Crime, since I cannot continue to love her, to profess
that I do. To marry a Woman with the Coldness that usually indeed comes
on after Marriage, is ruining one's self with one's Eyes open; besides
it is really doing her an Injury. This last Consideration, forsooth, of
injuring her in persisting, made him resolve to break off upon the first
favourable Opportunity of making her angry. When he was in this Thought,
he saw Robin the Porter who waits at Will's Coffee-House, passing by.
Robin, you must know, is the best Man in Town for carrying a Billet; the
Fellow has a thin Body, swift Step, demure Looks, sufficient Sense, and
knows the Town. This Man carried Cynthio's first Letter to Flavia, and
by frequent Errands ever since, is well known to her. The Fellow covers
his Knowledge of the Nature of his Messages with the most exquisite low
Humour imaginable: The first he obliged Flavia to take, was, by
complaining to her that he had a Wife and three Children, and if she did
not take that Letter, which, he was sure, there was no Harm in, but
rather Love, his Family must go supperless to Bed, for the Gentleman
would pay him according as he did his Business. Robin therefore Cynthio
now thought fit to make use of, and gave him Orders to wait before
Flavia's Door, and if she called him to her, and asked whether it was
Cynthio who passed by, he should at first be loth to own it was, but
upon Importunity confess it. There needed not much Search into that Part
of the Town to find a well-dressed Hussey fit for the Purpose Cynthio
designed her. As soon as he believed Robin was posted, he drove by
Flavia's Lodgings in an Hackney-Coach and a Woman in it. Robin was at
the Door talking with Flavia's Maid, and Cynthio pulled up the Glass as
surprized, and hid his Associate. The Report of this Circumstance soon
flew up Stairs, and Robin could not deny but the Gentleman favoured his
Master; yet if it was he, he was sure the Lady was but his Cousin whom
he had seen ask for him; adding that he believed she was a poor
Relation, because they made her wait one Morning till he was awake.
Flavia immediately writ the following Epistle, which Robin brought to
Wills


  June 4, 1712.

  SIR,

  It is in vain to deny it, basest, falsest of Mankind; my Maid, as well
  as the Bearer, saw you.

  The injur'd Flavia.


After Cynthio had read the Letter, he asked Robin how she looked, and
what she said at the Delivery of it. Robin said she spoke short to him,
and called him back again, and had nothing to say to him, and bid him
and all the Men in the World go out of her Sight; but the Maid followed,
and bid him bring an Answer.

Cynthio returned as follows.


  June 4, Three Afternoon, 1712.

  Madam,

  That your Maid and the Bearer has seen me very often is very certain;
  but I desire to know, being engaged at Picket, what your Letter means
  by 'tis in vain to deny it. I shall stay here all the Evening.

  Your amazed Cynthio.


As soon as Robin arrived with this, Flavia answered:


  Dear Cynthio,

  I have walked a Turn or two in my Anti-Chamber since I writ to you,
  and have recovered my self from an impertinent Fit which you ought to
  forgive me, and desire you would come to me immediately to laugh off a
  Jealousy that you and a Creature of the Town went by in an
  Hackney-Coach an Hour ago. I am Your most humble Servant,

  FLAVIA.

  I will not open the Letter which my Cynthio writ, upon the
  Misapprehension you must have been under when you writ, for want of
  hearing the whole Circumstance.


Robin came back in an Instant, and Cynthio answered:


  Half Hour, six Minutes after Three,

  June 4. Will's Coffee-house.

  Madam, It is certain I went by your Lodgings with a Gentlewoman to
  whom I have the Honour to be known, she is indeed my Relation, and a
  pretty sort of Woman. But your starting Manner of Writing, and owning
  you have not done me the Honour so much as to open my Letter, has in
  it something very unaccountable, and alarms one that has had Thoughts
  of passing his Days with you. But I am born to admire you with all
  your little Imperfections.

  CYNTHIO.


Robin run back, and brought for Answer;


  Exact Sir, that are at Will's Coffee-house six Minutes after Three,
  June 4; one that has had Thoughts and all my little Imperfections.
  Sir, come to me immediately, or I shall determine what may perhaps not
  be very pleasing to you.
  FLAVIA.


Robin gave an Account that she looked excessive angry when she gave him
the Letter; and that he told her, for she asked, that Cynthio only
looked at the Clock, taking Snuff, and writ two or three Words on the
Top of the Letter when he gave him his.

Now the Plot thickened so well, as that Cynthio saw he had not much more
to do to accomplish being irreconciliably banished, he writ,


  Madam,
  I have that Prejudice in Favour of all you do, that it is not possible
  for you to determine upon what will not be very pleasing to Your
  Obedient Servant,
  CYNTHIO.


This was delivered, and the Answer returned, in a little more than two
Seconds.

  SIR,
  Is it come to this? You never loved me; and the Creature you were with
  is the properest Person for your Associate. I despise you, and hope I
  shall soon hate you as a Villain to
  The Credulous Flavia.


Robin ran back, with


  Madam,
  Your Credulity when you are to gain your Point, and Suspicion when you
  fear to lose it make it a very hard Part to behave as becomes Your
  humble Slave,
  CYNTHIO.


Robin whipt away, and returned with,


  Mr. Wellford,
  Flavia and Cynthio are no more. I relieve you from the hard Part of
  which you complain, and banish you from my Sight for ever.
  Ann Heart.


Robin had a Crown for his Afternoon's Work; and this is published to
admonish Cecilia to avenge the Injury done to Flavia.

T.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 399.               Saturday, June 7, 1712.                 Addison.


  'Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere!'

  Pers.


Hypocrisie, at the fashionable End of the Town, is very different from
Hypocrisie in the City. The modish Hypocrite endeavours to appear more
vicious than he really is, the other kind of Hypocrite more virtuous.
The former is afraid of every thing that has the Shew of Religion in it,
and would be thought engaged in many Criminal Gallantries and Amours,
which he is not guilty of. The latter assumes a Face of Sanctity, and
covers a Multitude of Vices under a seeming Religious Deportment.

But there is another kind of Hypocrisie, which differs from both these,
and which I intend to make the Subject of this Paper: I mean that
Hypocrisie, by which a Man does not only deceive the World, but very
often imposes on himself; That Hypocrisie, which conceals his own Heart
from him, and makes him believe he is more virtuous than he really is,
and either not attend to his Vices, or mistake even his Vices for
Virtues. It is this fatal Hypocrisie and Self-deceit, which is taken
notice of in those Words, Who can understand his Errors? cleanse thou me
from secret Faults. [1]

If the open Professors of Impiety deserve the utmost Application and
Endeavours of Moral Writers to recover them from Vice and Folly, how
much more may those lay a Claim to their Care and Compassion, who are
walking in the Paths of Death, while they fancy themselves engaged in a
Course of Virtue! I shall endeavour, therefore, to lay down some Rules
for the Discovery of those Vices that lurk in the secret Corners of the
Soul, and to show my Reader those Methods by which he may arrive at a
true and impartial Knowledge of himself. The usual Means prescribed for
this Purpose, are to examine our selves by the Rules which are laid down
for our Direction in Sacred Writ, and to compare our Lives with the Life
of that Person who acted up to the Perfection of Human Nature, and is
the standing Example, as well as the great Guide and Instructor, of
those who receive his Doctrines. Though these two Heads cannot be too
much insisted upon, I shall but just mention them, since they have been
handled by many Great and Eminent Writers.

I would therefore propose the following Methods to the Consideration of
such as would find out their secret Faults, and make a true Estimate of
themselves.

In the first Place, let them consider well what are the Characters which
they bear among their Enemies. Our Friends very often flatter us, as
much as our own Hearts. They either do not see our Faults, or conceal
them from us, or soften them by their Representations, after such a
manner, that we think them too trivial to be taken notice of. An
Adversary, on the contrary, makes a stricter Search into us, discovers
every Flaw and Imperfection in our Tempers, and though his Malice may
set them in too strong a Light, it has generally some Ground for what it
advances. A Friend exaggerates a Man's Virtues, an Enemy inflames his
Crimes. A Wise Man should give a just Attention to both of them, so far
as they may tend to the Improvement of the one, and Diminution of the
other. Plutarch has written an Essay on the Benefits which a Man may
receive from his Enemies, [2] and, among the good Fruits of Enmity,
mentions this in particular, that by the Reproaches which it casts upon
us we see the worst side of our selves, and open our Eyes to several
Blemishes and Defects in our Lives and Conversations, which we should
not have observed, without the Help of such ill-natured Monitors.

In order likewise to come at a true Knowledge of our selves, we should
consider on the other hand how far we may deserve the Praises and
Approbations which the World bestow upon us: whether the Actions they
celebrate proceed from laudable and worthy Motives; and how far we are
really possessed of the Virtues which gain us Applause among those with
whom we converse. Such a Reflection is absolutely necessary, if we
consider how apt we are either to value or condemn ourselves by the
Opinions of others, and to sacrifice the Report of our own Hearts to the
Judgment of the World.

In the next Place, that we may not deceive our selves in a Point of so
much Importance, we should not lay too great a Stress on any supposed
Virtues we possess that are of a doubtful Nature: And such we may esteem
all those in which Multitudes of Men dissent from us, who are as good
and wise as our selves. We should always act with great Cautiousness and
Circumspection in Points, where it is not impossible that we may be
deceived. Intemperate Zeal, Bigotry and Persecution for any Party or
Opinion, how praiseworthy soever they may appear to weak Men of our own
Principles, produce infinite Calamities among Mankind, and are highly
Criminal in their own Nature; and yet how many Persons eminent for Piety
suffer such monstrous and absurd Principles of Action to take Root in
their Minds under the Colour of Virtues? For my own Part, I must own I
never yet knew any Party so just and reasonable, that a Man could follow
it in its Height and Violence, and at the same time be innocent.

We should likewise be very apprehensive of those Actions which proceed
from natural Constitution, favourite Passions, particular Education, or
whatever promotes our worldly Interest or Advantage. In these and the
like Cases, a Man's Judgment is easily perverted, and a wrong Bias hung
upon his Mind. These are the Inlets of Prejudice, the unguarded Avenues
of the Mind, by which a thousand Errors and secret Faults find
Admission, without being observed or taken Notice of. A wise Man will
suspect those Actions to which he is directed by something [besides [3]]
Reason, and always apprehend some concealed Evil in every Resolution
that is of a disputable Nature, when it is conformable to his particular
Temper, his Age, or Way of Life, or when it favours his Pleasure or his
Profit.

There is nothing of greater Importance to us than thus diligently to
sift our Thoughts, and examine all these dark Recesses of the Mind, if
we would establish our Souls in such a solid and substantial Virtue as
will turn to Account in that great Day, when it must stand the Test of
infinite Wisdom and Justice.

I shall conclude this Essay with observing that the two kinds of
Hypocrisie I have here spoken of, namely that of deceiving the World,
and that of imposing on our selves, are touched with wonderful Beauty in
the hundred and thirty ninth Psalm. The Folly of the first kind of
Hypocrisie is there set forth by Reflections on God's Omniscience and
Omnipresence, which are celebrated in as noble Strains of Poetry as any
other I ever met with, either Sacred or Profane. The other kind of
Hypocrisie, whereby a Man deceives himself, is intimated in the two last
Verses, where the Psalmist addresses himself to the great Searcher of
Hearts in that emphatical Petition; Try me, O God, and seek the ground
of my heart; prove me, and examine my Thoughts. Look well if there be
any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

L.


[Footnote 1: Psalm xix. 12.]


[Footnote 2: See note on p. 441 [Footnote 1 of No. 125], vol. i.]


[Footnote 3: more than]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 400.               Monday, June 9, 1712.                   Steele.


  '--Latet Anguis in Herba.'

  Virg.


It should, methinks, preserve Modesty and its Interests in the World,
that the Transgression of it always creates Offence; and the very
Purposes of Wantonness are defeated by a Carriage which has in it so
much Boldness, as to intimate that Fear and Reluctance are quite
extinguishd in an Object which would be otherwise desirable. It was said
of a Wit of the last Age,

  Sedley has that prevailing gentle Art,      }
  Which, can with a resistless Charm impart   }
  The loosest Wishes to the chastest Heart;   }
  Raise such a Conflict, kindle such a Fire,
  Between declining Virtue and Desire,
  That the poor vanquished Maid dissolves away
  In Dreams all Night, in Sighs and Tears all Day. [1]

This prevailing gentle Art was made up of Complaisance, Courtship, and
artful Conformity to the Modesty of a Woman's Manners. Rusticity, broad
Expression, and forward Obtrusion, offend those of Education, and make
the Transgressors odious to all who have Merit enough to attract Regard.
It is in this Taste that the Scenery is so beautifully ordered in the
Description which Antony makes, in the Dialogue between him and
Dolabella, of Cleopatra in her Barge.

  Her Galley down the Silver Cydnos row'd;
  The Tackling Silk, the Streamers wav'd with Gold;
  The gentle Winds were lodg'd in purple Sails:
  Her Nymphs, like Nereids, round her Couch were placed,
  Where she, another Sea-born Venus, lay;
  She lay, and lean'd her Cheek upon her Hand,
  And cast a Look so languishingly sweet,
  As if, secure of all Beholders Hearts,
  Neglecting she could take 'em. Boys like Cupids
  Stood fanning with their painted Wings the Winds
  That play'd about her Face; but if she smil'd,
  A darting Glory seemed to blaze abroad,
  That Men's desiring Eyes were never weary'd,
  But hung upon the Object. To soft Flutes
  The Silver Oars kept Time; and while they play'd,
  The Hearing gave new Pleasure to the Sight,
  And both to Thought [2]--

Here the Imagination is warmed with all the Objects presented, and yet
there is nothing that is luscious, or what raises any Idea more loose
than that of a beautiful Woman set off to Advantage. The like, or a more
delicate and careful Spirit of Modesty, appears in the following Passage
in one of Mr. Philip's Pastorals. [3]

  'Breathe soft ye Winds, ye Waters gently flow,
  Shield her ye Trees, ye Flowers around her grow,
  Ye Swains, I beg you, pass in Silence by,
  My Love in yonder Vale asleep does lie.'

Desire is corrected when there is a Tenderness or Admiration expressed
which partakes the Passion. Licentious Language has something brutal in
it, which disgraces Humanity, and leaves us in the Condition of the
Savages in the Field. But it may be askd to what good Use can tend a
Discourse of this Kind at all? It is to alarm chaste Ears against such
as have what is above called the prevailing gentle Art. Masters of that
Talent are capable of cloathing their Thoughts in so soft a Dress, and
something so distant from the secret Purpose of their Heart, that the
Imagination of the Unguarded is touched with a Fondness which grows too
insensibly to be resisted. Much Care and Concern for the Lady's Welfare,
to seem afraid lest she should be annoyed by the very Air which
surrounds her, and this uttered rather with kind Looks, and expressed by
an Interjection, an Ah, or an Oh, at some little Hazard in moving or
making a Step, than in my direct Profession of Love, are the Methods of
skilful Admirers: They are honest Arts when their Purpose is such, but
infamous when misapplied. It is certain that many a young Woman in this
Town has had her Heart irrecoverably won, by Men who have not made one
Advance which ties their Admirers, tho' the Females languish with the
utmost Anxiety. I have often, by way of Admonition to my female Readers,
give them Warning against agreeable Company of the other Sex, except
they are well acquainted with their Characters. Women may disguise it if
they think fit, and the more to do it, they may be angry at me for
saying it; but I say it is natural to them, that they have no Manner of
Approbation of Men, without some Degree of Love: For this Reason he is
dangerous to be entertaind as a Friend or Visitant who is capable of
gaining any eminent Esteem or Observation, though it be never so remote
from Pretensions as a Lover. If a Man's Heart has not the Abhorrence of
any treacherous Design, he may easily improve Approbation into Kindness,
and Kindness into Passion. There may possibly be no manner of Love
between them in the Eyes of all their Acquaintance, no it is all
Friendship; and yet they may be as fond as Shepherd and Shepherdess in a
Pastoral, but still the Nymph and the Swain may be to each other no
other I warrant you, than Pylades and Orestes.

  When Lucy decks with Flowers her swelling Breast,
  And on her Elbow leans, dissembling Rest,
  Unable to refrain my madding Mind,
  Nor Sleep nor Pasture worth my Care I find.

  Once Delia slept, on easie Moss reclin'd,
  Her lovely Limbs half bare, and rude the Wind;
  I smoothed her Coats, and stole a silent Kiss:
  Condemn me Shepherds if I did amiss. [4]

Such good Offices as these, and such friendly Thoughts and Concerns for
one another, are what make up the Amity, as they call it, between Man
and Woman.

It is the Permission of such Intercourse, that makes a young Woman come
to the Arms of her Husband, after the Disappointment of four or five
Passions which she has successively had for different Men, before she is
prudentially given to him for whom she has neither Love nor Friendship.
For what should a poor Creature do that has lost all her Friends?
There's Marinet the Agreeable, has, to my Knowledge, had a Friendship
for Lord Welford, which had like to break her Heart; then she had so
great a Friendship for Colonel Hardy, that she could not endure any
Woman else should do any thing but rail at him. Many and fatal have been
Disasters between Friends who have fallen out, and their Resentments are
more keen than ever those of other Men can possibly be: But in this it
happens unfortunately, that as there ought to be nothing concealed from
one Friend to another, the Friends of different Sexes [very often [5]]
find fatal Effects from their Unanimity.

For my Part, who study to pass Life in as much Innocence and Tranquility
as I can, I shun the Company of agreeable Women as much as possible; and
must confess that I have, though a tolerable good Philosopher, but a low
Opinion of Platonick Love: for which Reason I thought it necessary to
give my fair Readers a Caution against it, having, to my great Concern,
observed the Waste of a Platonist lately swell to a Roundness which is
inconsistent with that Philosophy.

T.


[Footnote 1: Rochester's 'Allusion to the 10th Satire of the 1st Book of
Horace.']


[Footnote 2: Dryden's All for Love, Act III. sc. i. ]


[Footnote 3: The Sixth.]


[Footnote 4: Two stanzas from different parts of Ambrose Philips's sixth
Pastoral. The first in the original follows the second, with three
stanzas intervening.]


[Footnote 5: (, for want of other Amusement, often study Anatomy
together; and what is worse than happens in any other Friendship, they)]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 401.               Tuesday, June 10, 1712.                  Budgell.


  'In amore hæc omnia insunt vitia: Injuriæ,
  Suspiciones, Inimicitiæ, Induciæ,
  Bellum, pax rursum:'

  Ter.


I shall publish for the Entertainment of this Day, an odd sort of a
Packet, which I have just received from one of my Female Correspondents.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  Since you have often confess'd that you are not displeased your Paper
  should sometimes convey the Complaints of distressed Lovers to each
  other, I am in Hopes you will favour one who gives you an undoubted
  Instance of her Reformation, and at the same time a convincing Proof
  of the happy Influence your Labours have had over the most
  Incorrigible Part of the most Incorrigible Sex. You must know, Sir, I
  am one of that Species of Women, whom you have often Characteriz'd
  under the Name of Jilts, and that I send you these Lines, as well to
  do Publick Penance for having so long continued in a known Error, as
  to beg Pardon of the Party offended. I the rather chuse this way,
  because it in some measure answers the Terms on which he intimated the
  Breach between us might possibly be made up, as you will see by the
  Letter he sent me the next Day after I had discarded him; which I
  thought fit to send you a Copy of, that you might the better know the
  whole Case.

  I must further acquaint you, that before I Jilted him, there had been
  the greatest Intimacy between us for an Year and half together, during
  all which time I cherished his Hopes, and indulged his Flame. I leave
  you to guess after this what must be his Surprize, when upon his
  pressing for my full Consent one Day, I told him I wondered what could
  make him fancy he had ever any Place in my Affections. His own Sex
  allow him Sense, and all ours Good-Breeding. His Person is such as
  might, without Vanity, make him believe himself not incapable to be
  beloved. Our Fortunes indeed, weighed in the nice Scale of Interest,
  are not exactly equal, which by the way was the true Case of my
  Jilting him, and I had the Assurance to acquaint him with the
  following Maxim, That I should always believe that Man's Passion to be
  the most Violent, who could offer me the largest Settlement. I have
  since changed my Opinion, and have endeavoured to let him know so much
  by several Letters, but the barbarous Man has refused them all; so
  that I have no way left of writing to him, but by your Assistance. If
  we can bring him about once more, I promise to send you all Gloves and
  Favours, and shall desire the Favour of Sir ROGER and your self to
  stand as God-Fathers to my first Boy.
  I am, SIR,
  Your most Obedient
  most Humble Servant,
  Amoret.


    Philander to Amoret.

    Madam,

    I am so surprised at the Question you were pleased to ask me
    Yesterday, that I am still at a loss what to say to it. At least my
    Answer would be too long to trouble you with, as it would come from
    a Person, who, it seems, is so very indifferent to you. Instead of
    it, I shall only recommend to your Consideration the Opinion of one
    whose Sentiments on these matters I have often heard you say are
    extremely just. A generous and Constant Passion, says your favourite
    Author, in an agreeable Lover, where there is not too great a
    Disparity in their Circumstances, is the greatest Blessing that can
    befal a Person beloved; and if overlook'd in one, may perhaps never
    be found in another.

    I do not, however, at all despair of being very shortly much better
    beloved by you than Antenor is at present; since whenever my Fortune
    shall exceed his, you were pleased to intimate your Passion would
    encrease accordingly.

    The World has seen me shamefully lose that Time to please a fickle
    Woman, which might have been employed much more to my Credit and
    Advantage in other Pursuits. I shall therefore take the Liberty to
    acquaint you, however harsh it may sound in a Lady's Ears, that tho
    your Love-Fit should happen to return, unless you could contrive a
    way to make your Recantation as well known to the Publick, as they
    are already apprised of the manner with which you have treated me,
    you shall never more see Philander.


    Amoret to Philander.

    SIR,

    Upon Reflection, I find the Injury I have done both to you and my
    self to be so great, that though the Part I now act may appear
    contrary to that Decorum usually observed by our Sex, yet I
    purposely break through all Rules, that my Repentance may in some
    measure equal my Crime. I assure you that in my present Hopes of
    recovering you, I look upon Antenor's Estate with Contempt. The Fop
    was here Yesterday in a gilt Chariot and new Liveries, but I refused
    to see him. Tho' I dread to meet your Eyes after what has pass'd, I
    flatter my self, that amidst all their Confusion you will discover
    such a Tenderness in mine, as none can imitate but those who Love. I
    shall be all this Month at Lady D--'s in the Country; but the Woods,
    the Fields and Gardens, without Philander, afford no Pleasures to
    the unhappy Amoret.


  I must desire you, dear Mr. Spectator, to publish this my Letter to
  Philander as soon as possible, and to assure him that I know nothing
  at all of the Death of his rich Uncle in Gloucestershire.

X.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 402.                Wednesday, June 11, 1712.               Steele.


[--quæ
Spectator tradit sibi--

Hor. [1]]


Were I to publish all the Advertisements I receive from different Hands,
and Persons of different Circumstances and Quality, the very Mention of
them, without Reflections on the several Subjects, would raise all the
Passions which can be felt by human Mind[s], As Instances of this, I
shall give you two or three Letters; the Writers of which can have no
Recourse to any legal Power for Redress, and seem to have written rather
to vent their Sorrow than to receive Consolation.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I am a young Woman of Beauty and Quality, and suitably married to a
  Gentleman who doats on me. But this Person of mine is the Object of an
  unjust Passion in a Nobleman who is very intimate with my Husband.
  This Friendship gives him very easie Access, and frequent
  Opportunities of entertaining me apart. My Heart is in the utmost
  Anguish, and my Face is covered over with Confusion, when I impart to
  you another Circumstance, which is, that my Mother, the most mercenary
  of all Women, is gained by this false Friend of my Husband to sollicit
  me for him. I am frequently chid by the poor believing Man my Husband,
  for shewing an Impatience of his Friend's Company; and I am never
  alone with my Mother, but she tells me Stories of the discretionary
  Part of the World, and such a one, and such a one who are guilty of as
  much as she advises me to. She laughs at my Astonishment; and seems to
  hint to me, that as virtuous as she has always appeared, I am not the
  Daughter of her Husband. It is possible that printing this Letter may
  relieve me from the unnatural Importunity of my Mother, and the
  perfidious Courtship of my Husband's Friend. I have an unfeigned Love
  of Virtue, and am resolved to preserve my Innocence. The only Way I
  can think of to avoid the fatal Consequences of the Discovery of this
  Matter, is to fly away for ever; which I must do to avoid my Husband's
  fatal Resentment against the Man who attempts to abuse him, and the
  Shame of exposing the Parent to Infamy. The Persons concerned will
  know these Circumstances relate to 'em; and though the Regard to
  Virtue is dead in them, I have some Hopes from their Fear of Shame
  upon reading this in your Paper; which I conjure you to do, if you
  have any Compassion for Injured Virtue.

  Sylvia.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I am the Husband of a Woman of Merit, but am fallen in Love, as they
  call it, with a Lady of her Acquaintance, who is going to be married
  to a Gentleman who deserves her. I am in a Trust relating to this
  Lady's Fortune, which makes my Concurrence in this Matter necessary;
  but I have so irresistible a Rage and Envy rise in me when I consider
  his future Happiness, that against all Reason, Equity, and common
  Justice, I am ever playing mean Tricks to suspend the Nuptials. I have
  no manner of Hopes for my self; Emilia, for so I'll call her, is a
  Woman of the most strict Virtue; her Lover is a Gentleman who of all
  others I could wish my Friend; but Envy and Jealousie, though placed
  so unjustly, waste my very Being, and with the Torment and Sense of a
  Daemon, I am ever cursing what I cannot but approve. I wish it were
  the Beginning of Repentance, that I sit down and describe my present
  Disposition with so hellish an Aspect; but at present the Destruction
  of these two excellent Persons would be more welcome to me than their
  Happiness. Mr. SPECTATOR, pray let me have a Paper on these terrible
  groundless Sufferings, and do all you can to exorcise Crowds who are
  in some Degree possessed as I am.

  Canniball.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I have no other Means but this to express my Thanks to one Man, and my
  Resentment against another. My Circumstances are as follows. I have
  been for five Years last past courted by a Gentleman of greater
  Fortune than I ought to expect, as the Market for Women goes. You must
  to be sure have observed People who live in that sort of Way, as all
  their Friends reckon it will be a Match, and are marked out by all the
  World for each other. In this View we have been regarded for some
  Time, and I have above these three Years loved him tenderly. As he is
  very careful of his Fortune, I always thought he lived in a near
  Manner to lay up what he thought was wanting in my Fortune to make up
  what he might expect in another. Within few Months I have observed his
  Carriage very much altered, and he has affected a certain Air of
  getting me alone, and talking with a mighty Profusion of passionate
  Words, How I am not to be resisted longer, how irresistible his Wishes
  are, and the like. As long as I have been acquainted with him, I could
  not on such Occasions say down-right to him, You know you may make me
  yours when you please. But the other Night he with great Frankness and
  Impudence explained to me, that he thought of me only as a Mistress. I
  answered this Declaration as it deserv'd; upon which he only doubled
  the Terms on which he proposed my yielding. When my Anger heightned
  upon him, he told me he was sorry he had made so little Use of the
  unguarded Hours we had been together so remote from Company, as
  indeed, continued he, so we are at present. I flew from him to a
  neighbouring Gentlewoman's House, and tho' her Husband was in the
  Room, threw my self on a Couch, and burst into a Passion of Tears. My
  Friend desired her Husband to leave the Room. But, said he, there is
  something so extraordinary in this, that I will partake in the
  Affliction; and be it what it will, she is so much your Friend, that
  she knows she may command what Services I can do her. The Man sate
  down by me, and spoke so like a Brother, that I told him my whole
  Affliction. He spoke of the Injury done me with so much Indignation,
  and animated me against the Love he said he saw I had for the Wretch
  who would have betrayed me, with so much Reason and Humanity to my
  Weakness, that I doubt not of my Perseverance. His Wife and he are my
  Comforters, and I am under no more Restraint in their Company than if
  I were alone; and I doubt not but in a small time Contempt and Hatred
  will take Place of the Remains of Affection to a Rascal.

  I am

  SIR,

  Your affectionate Reader,

  Dorinda.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I had the Misfortune to be an Uncle before I knew my Nephews from my
  Nieces, and now we are grown up to better Acquaintance they deny me
  the Respect they owe. One upbraids me with being their Familiar,
  another will hardly be perswaded that I am an Uncle, a third calls me
  Little Uncle, and a fourth tells me there is no Duty at all due to an
  Uncle. I have a Brother-in-law whose Son will win all my Affection,
  unless you shall think this worthy of your Cognizance, and will be
  pleased to prescribe some Rules for our future reciprocal Behaviour.
  It will be worthy the Particularity of your Genius to lay down Rules
  for his Conduct who was as it were born an old Man, in which you will
  much oblige,

  Sir,

  Your most obedient Servant,

  Cornelius Nepos.


T.


[Footnote 1: No motto in the first issue.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 403.                Thursday, June 12, 1712.                Addison


  'Qui mores hominun multorum vidit?'

  Hor.


When I consider this great City in its several Quarters and Divisions, I
look upon it as an Aggregate of various Nations distinguished from each
other by their respective Customs, Manners and Interests. The Courts of
two Countries do not so much differ from one another, as the Court and
City in their peculiar Ways of Life and Conversation. In short, the
Inhabitants of St. James's, notwithstanding they live under the same
Laws, and speak the same Language, are a distinct People from those of
Cheapside, who are likewise removed from those of the Temple on the one
side, and those of Smithfield on the other, by several Climates and
Degrees in their way of Thinking and Conversing together.

For this Reason, when any publick Affair is upon the Anvil, I love to
hear the Reflections that arise upon it in the several Districts and
Parishes of London and Westminster, and to ramble up and down a whole
Day together, in order to make my self acquainted with the Opinions of
my Ingenious Countrymen. By this means I know the Faces of all the
principal Politicians within the Bills of Mortality; and as every
Coffee-house has some particular Statesman belonging to it, who is the
Mouth of the Street where he lives, I always take care to place my self
near him, in order to know his Judgment on the present Posture of
Affairs. The last Progress that I made with this Intention, was about
three Months ago, when we had a current Report of the King of France's
Death. As I foresaw this would produce a new Face of things in Europe,
and many curious Speculations in our British Coffee-houses, I was very
desirous to learn the Thoughts of our most eminent Politicians on that
Occasion.

That I might begin as near the Fountain Head as possible, I first of all
called in at St James's, where I found the whole outward Room in a Buzz
of Politics. The Speculations were but very indifferent towards the
Door, but grew finer as you advanced to the upper end of the Room, and
were so very much improved by a Knot of Theorists, who sat in the inner
Room, within the Steams of the Coffee-Pot, that I there heard the whole
Spanish Monarchy disposed of, and all the Line of Bourbon provided for
in less than a Quarter of an Hour.

I afterwards called in at Giles's, where I saw a Board of French
Gentlemen sitting upon the Life and Death of their Grand Monarque. Those
among them who had espoused the Whig Interest, very positively affirmed,
that he departed this Life about a Week since, and therefore proceeded
without any further Delay to the Release of their Friends on the
Gallies, and to their own Re-establishment; but finding they could not
agree among themselves, I proceeded on my intended Progress.

Upon my Arrival at Jenny Man's, I saw an alerte young Fellow that cocked
his Hat upon a Friend of his who entered just at the same time with my
self, and accosted him after the following Manner. Well, Jack, the old
Prig is dead at last. Sharp's the Word. Now or never, Boy. Up to the
Walls of Paris directly. With several other deep Reflections of the same
Nature.

I met with very little Variation in the Politics between Charing-Cross
and Covent-Garden. And upon my going into Wills I found their Discourse
was gone off from the Death of the French King to that of Monsieur
Boileau, Racine, Corneile, and several other Poets, whom they regretted
on this Occasion, as Persons who would have obliged the World with very
noble Elegies on the Death of so great a Prince, and so eminent a Patron
of Learning.

At a Coffee-house near the Temple, I found a couple of young Gentlemen
engaged very smartly in a Dispute on the Succession to the Spanish
Monarchy. One of them seemed to have been retained as Advocate for the
Duke of Anjou, the other for his Imperial Majesty. They were both for
regulating the Title to that Kingdom by the Statute Laws of England; but
finding them going out of my Depth, I passed forward to Paul's
Church-Yard, where I listen'd with great Attention to a learned Man, who
gave the Company an Account of the deplorable State of France during the
Minority of the deceased King. I then turned on my right Hand into
Fish-street, where the chief Politician of that Quarter, upon hearing
the News, (after having taken a Pipe of Tobacco, and ruminated for some
time) If, says he, the King of France is certainly dead, we shall have
Plenty of Mackerell this Season; our Fishery will not be disturbed by
Privateers, as it has been for these ten Years past. He afterwards
considered how the Death of this great Man would affect our Pilchards,
and by several other Remarks infused a general Joy into his whole
Audience.

I afterwards entered a By Coffee-house that stood at the upper end of a
narrow Lane, where I met with a Nonjuror, engaged very warmly with a
Laceman who was the great Support of a neighbouring Conventicle. The
Matter in Debate was, whether the late French King was most like
Augustus Cæsar, or Nero. The Controversie was carried on with great Heat
on both Sides, and as each of them looked upon me very frequently during
the Course of their Debate, I was under some Apprehension that they
would appeal to me, and therefore laid down my Penny at the Bar, and
made the best of my way to Cheapside.

I here gazed upon the Signs for some time before I found one to my
Purpose. The first Object I met in the Coffeeroom was a Person who
expressed a great Grief for the Death of the French King; but upon his
explaining himself, I found his Sorrow did not arise from the Loss of
the Monarch, but for his having sold out of the Bank about three Days
before he heard the News of it: Upon which a Haberdasher, who was the
Oracle of the Coffee-house, and had his Circle of Admirers about him,
called several to witness that he had declared his Opinion above a Week
before, that the French King was certainly dead; to which he added, that
considering the late Advices we had received from France, it was
impossible that it could be otherwise. As he was laying these together,
and dictating to his Hearers with great Authority, there came in a
Gentleman from Garraway's, who told us that there were several Letters
from France just come in, with Advice that the King was in good Health,
and was gone out a Hunting the very Morning the Post came away: Upon
which the Haberdasher stole off his Hat that hung upon a wooden Pegg by
him, and retired to his Shop with great Confusion. This Intelligence put
a Stop to my Travels, which I had prosecuted with [much [1]]
Satisfaction; not being a little pleased to hear so many different
Opinions upon so great an Event, and to observe how naturally upon such
a Piece of News every one is apt to consider it with a Regard to his own
particular Interest and Advantage.

L.


[Footnote 1: [great]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 404.                Friday, June 13, 1712.                   Budgell


  ['--Non omnia possumus omnes.'

  Virg. [1]]


Nature does nothing in vain: the Creator of the Universe has appointed
every thing to a certain Use and Purpose, and determin'd it to a settled
Course and Sphere of Action, from which, if it in the least deviates, it
becomes unfit to answer those Ends for which it was designed. In like
manner it is in the Dispositions of Society, the civil Oeconomy is
formed in a Chain as well as the natural; and in either Case the Breach
but of one Link puts the Whole into some Disorder. It is, I think,
pretty plain, that most of the Absurdity and Ridicule we meet with in
the World, is generally owing to the impertinent Affectation of
excelling in Characters Men are not fit for, and for which Nature never
designed them.

Every Man has one or more Qualities which may make him useful both to
himself and others: Nature never fails of pointing them out, and while
the Infant continues under her Guardianship, she brings him on in this
Way; and then offers her self for a Guide in what remains of the
Journey; if he proceeds in that Course, he can hardly miscarry: Nature
makes good her Engagements; for as she never promises what she is not
able to perform, so she never fails of performing what she promises. But
the Misfortune is, Men despise what they may be Masters of, and affect
what they are not fit for; they reckon themselves already possessed of
what their Genius inclined them to, and so bend all their Ambition to
excel in what is out of their Reach: Thus they destroy the Use of their
natural Talents, in the same manner as covetous Men do their Quiet and
Repose; they can enjoy no Satisfaction in what they have, because of the
absurd Inclination they are possessed with for what they have not.

Cleanthes had good Sense, a great Memory, and a Constitution capable of
the closest Application: In a Word, there was no Profession in which
Cleanthes might not have made a very good Figure; but this won't
satisfie him, he takes up an unaccountable Fondness for the Character of
a fine Gentleman; all his Thoughts are bent upon this: instead of
attending a Dissection, frequenting the Courts of Justice, or studying
the Fathers, Cleanthes reads Plays, dances, dresses, and spends his Time
in drawing-rooms; instead of being a good Lawyer, Divine, or Physician,
Cleanthes is a downright Coxcomb, and will remain to all that knew him a
contemptible Example of Talents misapplied. It is to this Affectation
the World owes its whole Race of Coxcombs: Nature in her whole Drama
never drew such a Part: she has sometimes made a Fool, but a Coxcomb is
always of a Man's own making, by applying his Talents otherwise than
Nature designed, who ever bears an high Resentment for being put out of
her Course, and never fails of taking her Revenge on those that do so.
Opposing her Tendency in the Application of a Man's Parts, has the same
Success as declining from her Course in the Production of Vegetables; by
the Assistance of Art and an hot Bed, we may possibly extort an
unwilling Plant, or an untimely Sallad; but how weak, how tasteless and
insipid? Just as insipid as the Poetry of Valerio: Valerio had an
universal Character, was genteel, had Learning, thought justly, spoke
correctly; 'twas believed there was nothing in which Valerio did not
excel; and 'twas so far true, that there was but one; Valerio had no
Genius for Poetry, yet he's resolved to be a Poet; he writes Verses, and
takes great Pains to convince the Town, that Valerio is not that
extraordinary Person he was taken for.

If Men would be content to graft upon Nature, and assist her Operations,
what mighty Effects might we expect? Tully would not stand so much alone
in Oratory, Virgil in Poetry, or Cæsar in War. To build upon Nature, is
laying the Foundation upon a Rock; every thing disposes its self into
Order as it were of Course, and the whole Work is half done as soon as
undertaken. Cicero's Genius inclined him to Oratory, Virgil's to follow
the Train of the Muses; they piously obeyed the Admonition, and were
rewarded. Had Virgil attended the Bar, his modest and ingenious Virtue
would surely have made but a very indifferent Figure; and Tully's
declamatory Inclination would have been as useless in Poetry. Nature, if
left to her self, leads us on in the best Course, but will do nothing by
Compulsion and Constraint; and if we are not satisfied to go her Way, we
are always the greatest Sufferers by it.

Wherever Nature designs a Production, she always disposes Seeds proper
for it, which are as absolutely necessary to the Formation of any moral
or intellectual Excellence, as they are to the Being and Growth of
Plants; and I know not by what Fate and Folly it is, that Men are taught
not to reckon him equally absurd that will write Verses in Spite of
Nature, with that Gardener that should undertake to raise a Jonquil or
Tulip without the Help of their respective Seeds.

As there is no Good or bad Quality that does not affect both Sexes, so
it is not to be imagined but the fair Sex must have suffered by an
Affectation of this Nature, at least as much as the other: The ill
Effect of it is in none so conspicuous as in the two opposite Characters
of Cælia and Iras; Cælia has all the Charms of Person, together with an
abundant Sweetness of Nature, but wants Wit, and has a very ill Voice;
Iras is ugly and ungenteel, but has Wit and good Sense: If Cælia would
be silent, her Beholders would adore her; if Iras would talk, her
Hearers would admire her; but Cælia's Tongue runs incessantly, while
Iras gives her self silent Airs and soft Languors; so that 'tis
difficult to persuade one's self that Cælia has Beauty and Iras Wit:
Each neglects her own Excellence, and is ambitious of the other's
Character; Iras would be thought to have as much Beauty as Cælia, and
Cælia as much Wit as Iras.

The great Misfortune of this Affectation is, that Men not only lose a
good Quality, but also contract a bad one: They not only are unfit for
what they were designed, but they assign themselves to what they are not
fit for; and instead of making a very good Figure one Way, make a very
ridiculous one another. If Semanthe would have been satisfied with her
natural Complexion, she might still have been celebrated by the Name of
the Olive Beauty; but Semanthe has taken up an Affectation to White and
Red, and is now distinguished by the Character of the Lady that paints
so well. In a word, could the World be reformed to the Obedience of that
famed Dictate, Follow Nature, which the Oracle of Delphos pronounced to
Cicero when he consulted what Course of Studies he should pursue, we
should see almost every Man as eminent in his proper Sphere as Tully was
in his, and should in a very short time find Impertinence and
Affectation banished from among the Women, and Coxcombs and false
Characters from among the Men. For my Part, I could never consider this
preposterous Repugnancy to Nature any otherwise, than not only as the
greatest Folly, but also one of the most heinous Crimes, since it is a
direct Opposition to the Disposition of Providence, and (as Tully
expresses it) like the Sin of the Giants, an actual Rebellion against
Heaven.

Z.


[Footnote 1:

  Continuo has leges æternaque foedera certis
  Imposuit natura locis.

Virg.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 405.                Saturday, June 14, 1712.                Addison.


  [Greek:
  Oi dè panaemérioi molpàe theòn hiláskonto,
  Kalòn aeídontes paiáeona kouroi Achaiôn,
  Mélpontes Ekáergon. Ho dè phréna térpet akoúôn.]

  Hom.


I am very sorry to find, by the Opera Bills for this Day, that we are
likely to lose the greatest Performer in Dramatick Musick that is now
living, or that perhaps ever appeared upon a Stage. I need not acquaint
my Reader, that I am speaking of Signior Nicolini. [1] The Town is
highly obliged to that Excellent Artist, for having shewn us the Italian
Musick in its Perfection, as well as for that generous Approbation he
lately gave to an Opera of our own Country, in which the Composer
endeavoured to do Justice to the Beauty of the Words, by following that
Noble Example, which has been set him by the greatest Foreign Masters in
that Art.

I could heartily wish there was the same Application and Endeavours to
cultivate and improve our Church-Musick, as have been lately bestowed on
that of the Stage. Our Composers have one very great Incitement to it:
They are sure to meet with Excellent Words, and, at the same time, a
wonderful Variety of them. There is no Passion that is not finely
expressed in those parts of the inspired Writings, which are proper for
Divine Songs and Anthems.

There is a certain Coldness and Indifference in the Phrases of our
European Languages, when they are compared with the Oriental Forms of
Speech: and it happens very luckily, that the Hebrew Idioms run into the
English Tongue with a particular Grace and Beauty. Our Language has
received innumerable Elegancies and Improvements, from that Infusion of
Hebraisms, which are derived to it out of the Poetical Passages in Holy
Writ. They give a Force and Energy to our Expressions, warm and animate
our Language, and convey our Thoughts in more ardent and intense
Phrases, than any that are to be met with in our own Tongue. There is
something so pathetick in this kind of Diction, that it often sets the
Mind in a Flame, and makes our Hearts burn within us. How cold and dead
does a Prayer appear, that is composed in the most Elegant and Polite
Forms of Speech, which are natural to our Tongue, when it is not
heightened by that Solemnity of Phrase, which may be drawn from the
Sacred Writings. It has been said by some of the Ancients, that if the
Gods were to talk with Men, they would certainly speak in Plato's Style;
but I think we may say, with Justice, that when Mortals converse with
their Creator, they cannot do it in so proper a Style as in that of the
Holy Scriptures.

If any one would judge of the Beauties of Poetry that are to be met with
in the Divine Writings, and examine how kindly the Hebrew Manners of
Speech mix and incorporate with the English Language; after having
perused the Book of Psalms, let him read a literal Translation of Horace
or Pindar. He will find in these two last such an Absurdity and
Confusion of Style, with such a Comparative Poverty of Imagination, as
will make him very sensible of what I have been here advancing.

Since we have therefore such a Treasury of Words, so beautiful in
themselves, and so proper for the Airs of Musick, I cannot but wonder
that Persons of Distinction should give so little Attention and
Encouragement to that Kind of Musick, which would have its Foundation in
Reason, and which would improve our Virtue in proportion as it raised
our Delight. The Passions that are excited by ordinary Compositions
generally flow from such silly and absurd Occasions, that a Man is
ashamed to reflect upon them seriously; but the Fear, the Love, the
Sorrow, the Indignation that are awakened in the Mind by Hymns and
Anthems, make the Heart better, and proceed from such Causes as are
altogether reasonable and praise-worthy. Pleasure and Duty go hand in
hand, and the greater our Satisfaction is, the greater is our Religion.

Musick among those who were styled the chosen People was a Religious
Art. The Songs of Sion, which we have reason to believe were in high
Repute among the Courts of the Eastern Monarchs, were nothing else but
Psalms and Pieces of Poetry that adored or celebrated the Supreme Being.
The greatest Conqueror in this Holy Nation, after the manner of the old
Grecian Lyricks, did not only compose the Words of his Divine Odes, but
generally set them to Musick himself: After which, his Works, tho' they
were consecrated to the Tabernacle, became the National Entertainment,
as well as the Devotion of his People.

The first Original of the Drama was a Religious Worship consisting only
of a Chorus, which was nothing else but an Hymn to a Deity. As Luxury
and Voluptuousness prevailed over Innocence and Religion, this Form of
Worship degenerated into Tragedies; in which however the Chorus so far
remembered its first Office, as to brand every thing that was vicious,
and recommend every thing that was laudable, to intercede with Heaven
for the Innocent, and to implore its Vengeance on the Criminal.

Homer and Hesiod intimate to us how this Art should be applied, when
they represent the Muses as surrounding Jupiter, and warbling their
Hymns about his Throne. I might shew from innumerable Passages in
Ancient Writers, not only that Vocal and Instrumental Musick were made
use of in their Religious Worship, but that their most favourite
Diversions were filled with Songs and Hymns to their respective Deities.
Had we frequent Entertainments of this Nature among us, they would not a
little purifie and exalt our Passions, give our Thoughts a proper Turn,
and cherish those Divine Impulses in the Soul, which every one feels
that has not stifled them by sensual and immoderate Pleasures.

Musick, when thus applied, raises noble Hints in the Mind of the Hearer,
and fills it with great Conceptions. It strengthens Devotion, and
advances Praise into Rapture. It lengthens out every Act of Worship, and
produces more lasting and permanent Impressions in the Mind, than those
which accompany any transient Form of Words that are uttered in the
ordinary Method of Religious Worship.

O.


[Footnote 1: See note on p. 51, vol. i [Footnote 1 of No. 13]. He took
leave, June 14, in the Opera of Antiochus.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 406.                Monday, June 16, 1712.                   Steele.


  'Hæc studia Adolescentiam alunt, Senectutem oblectant, secundas res
  ornant, adversis solatium et perfugium præbet delectant domi, non
  impediunt foris; Pernoctant nobiscum, peregrinantur, rusticantur.'

  Tull.


The following Letters bear a pleasing Image of the Joys and
Satisfactions of private Life. The first is from a Gentleman to a
Friend, for whom he has a very great Respect, and to whom he
communicates the Satisfaction he takes in Retirement; the other is a
Letter to me, occasioned by an Ode written by my Lapland Lover; this
Correspondent is so kind as to translate another of Scheffer's Songs [1]
in a very agreeable Manner. I publish them together, that the Young and
Old may find something in the same Paper which may be suitable to their
respective Taste in Solitude; for I know no Fault in the Description of
ardent Desires, provided they are honourable.


  Dear Sir,

  You have obliged me with a very kind Letter; by which I find you shift
  the Scene of your Life from the Town to the Country, and enjoy that
  mixt State which wise Men both delight in, and are qualified for.
  Methinks most of the Philosophers and Moralists have run too much into
  Extreams, in praising entirely either Solitude or publick Life; in the
  former Men generally grow useless by too much Rest, and in the latter
  are destroyed by too much Precipitation: As Waters lying still,
  putrifie and are good for nothing; and running violently on, do but
  the more Mischief in their Passage to others, and are swallowed up and
  lost the sooner themselves. Those who, like you, can make themselves
  useful to all States, should be like gentle Streams, that not only
  glide through lonely Vales and Forests amidst the Flocks and
  Shepherds, but visit populous Towns in their Course, and are at once
  of Ornament and Service to them. But there is another sort of People
  who seem designed for Solitude, those I mean who have more to hide
  than to shew: As for my own Part, I am one of those of whom Seneca
  says, Tum Umbratiles sunt, ut putent in turbido esse quicquid in luce
  est. Some Men, like Pictures, are fitter for a Corner than a full
  Light; and I believe such as have a natural Bent to Solitude, are like
  Waters which may be forced into Fountains, and exalted to a great
  Height, may make a much nobler Figure, and a much louder Noise, but
  after all run more smoothly, equally and plentifully, in their own
  natural Course upon the Ground. The Consideration of this would make
  me very well contented with the Possession only of that Quiet which
  Cowley calls the Companion of Obscurity; but whoever has the Muses too
  for his Companions, can never be idle enough to be uneasie. Thus, Sir,
  you see I would flatter my self into a good Opinion of my own Way of
  Living; Plutarch just now told me, that 'tis in human Life as in a
  Game at Tables, one may wish he had the highest Cast, but if his
  Chance be otherwise, he is even to play it as well as he can, and make
  the best of it.

  I am, SIR,
  Your most obliged,
  and most humble Servant.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  The Town being so well pleased with the fine Picture of artless Love,
  which Nature inspired the Laplander to paint in the Ode you lately
  printed; we were in Hopes that the ingenious Translator would have
  obliged it with the other also which Scheffer has given us; but since
  he has not, a much inferior Hand has ventured to send you this.

  It is a Custom with the Northern Lovers to divert themselves with a
  Song, whilst they Journey through the fenny Moors to pay a visit to
  their Mistresses. This is addressed by the Lover to his Rain-Deer,
  which is the Creature that in that Country supplies the Want of
  Horses. The Circumstances which successively present themselves to him
  in his Way, are, I believe you will think, naturally interwoven. The
  Anxiety of Absence, the Gloominess of the Roads, and his Resolution of
  frequenting only those, since those only can carry him to the Object
  of his Desires; the Dissatisfaction he expresses even at the greatest
  Swiftness with which he is carried, and his joyful Surprize at an
  unexpected Sight of his Mistress as she is bathing, seems beautifully
  described in the Original.

  If all those pretty Images of Rural Nature are lost in the Imitation,
  yet possibly you may think fit to let this supply the Place of a long
  Letter, when Want of Leisure or Indisposition for Writing will not
  permit our being entertained by your own Hand. I propose such a Time,
  because tho it is natural to have a Fondness for what one does ones
  self, yet I assure you I would not have any thing of mine displace a
  single Line of yours.


    I.      Haste, my Rain-Deer, and let us nimbly go
              Our am'rous Journey through this dreery Waste;
            Haste, my Rain-Deer! still still thou art too slow;
              Impetuous Love demands the Lightning's Haste.


    II.     Around us far the Rushy Moors are spread:
              Soon will the Sun withdraw her chearful Ray:
            Darkling and tir'd we shall the Marshes tread,
              No Lay unsung to cheat the tedious Way.


    III.    The wat'ry Length of these unjoyous Moors
              Does all the flow'ry Meadow's Pride excel,
            Through these I fly to her my Soul adores;
              Ye flowery Meadows, empty Pride, Farewel.


    IV.     Each Moment from the Charmer I'm confin'd,
              My Breast is tortur'd with impatient Fires;
            Fly, my Rain-Deer, fly swifter than the Wind,
              Thy tardy Feet wing with my fierce Desires.


    V.      Our pleasing Toil will then be soon o'erpaid,
              And thou, in Wonder lost, shalt view my Fair,
            Admire each Feature of the lovely Maid,
              Her artless Charms, her Bloom, her sprightly Air,


    VI.     But lo! with graceful Motion there she swims,
              Gently moving each ambitious Wave;
            The crowding Waves transported clasp her Limbs:
              When, when, oh when, shall I such Freedoms have!


    VII.    In vain, you envious Streams, so fast you flow,
              To hide her from a Lover's ardent Gaze:
            From ev'ry Touch you more transparent grow,
              And all reveal'd the beauteous Wanton plays.


T.


[Footnote 1: See No. 366 and note.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 407.                  Tuesday, June 17, 1712.               Addison.


  '--abest facundis Gratia dictis.'

  Ovid.


Most Foreign Writers who have given any Character of the English Nation,
whatever Vices they ascribe to it, allow in general, that the People are
naturally Modest. It proceeds perhaps from this our National Virtue,
that our Orators are observed to make use of less Gesture or Action than
those of other Countries. Our Preachers stand stock-still in the Pulpit,
and will not so much as move a Finger to set off the best Sermons in the
World. We meet with the same speaking Statues at our Bars, and in all
publick Places of Debate. Our Words flow from us in a smooth continued
Stream, without those Strainings of the Voice, Motions of the Body, and
Majesty of the Hand, which are so much celebrated in the Orators of
Greece and Rome. We can talk of Life and Death in cold Blood, and keep
our Temper in a Discourse which turns upon every thing that is dear to
us. Though our Zeal breaks out in the finest Tropes and Figures, it is
not able to stir a Limb about us. I have heard it observed more than
once by those who have seen Italy, that an untravelled Englishman cannot
relish all the Beauties of Italian Pictures, because the Postures which
are expressed in them are often such as are peculiar to that Country.
One who has not seen an Italian in the Pulpit, will not know what to
make of that noble Gesture in Raphael's Picture of St. Paul preaching at
Athens, where the Apostle is represented as lifting up both his Arms,
and pouring out the Thunder of his Rhetorick amidst an Audience of Pagan
Philosophers.

It is certain that proper Gestures and vehement Exertions of the Voice
cannot be too much studied by a publick Orator. They are a kind of
Comment to what he utters, and enforce every thing he says, with weak
Hearers, better than the strongest Argument he can make use of. They
keep the Audience awake, and fix their Attention to what is delivered to
them, at the same time that they shew the Speaker is in earnest, and
affected himself with what he so passionately recommends to others.
Violent Gesture and Vociferation naturally shake the Hearts of the
Ignorant, and fill them with a kind of Religious Horror. Nothing is more
frequent than to see Women weep and tremble at the Sight of a moving
Preacher, though he is placed quite out of their Hearing; as in England
we very frequently see People lulled asleep with solid and elaborate
Discourses of Piety, who would be warmed and transported out of
themselves by the Bellowings and Distortions of Enthusiasm.

If Nonsense, when accompanied with such an Emotion of Voice and Body,
has such an Influence on Men's Minds, what might we not expect from many
of those Admirable Discourses which are printed in our Tongue, were they
delivered with a becoming Fervour, and with the most agreeable Graces of
Voice and Gesture?

We are told that the great Latin Orator very much impaired his Health by
this laterum contentio, this Vehemence of Action, with which he used to
deliver himself. The Greek Orator was likewise so very Famous for this
Particular in Rhetorick, that one of his Antagonists, whom he had
banished from Athens, reading over the Oration which had procured his
Banishment, and seeing his Friends admire it, could not forbear asking
them, if they were so much affected by the bare reading of it, how much
more they would have been alarmed, had they heard him actually throwing
out such a Storm of Eloquence?

How cold and dead a Figure in Comparison of these two great Men, does an
Orator often make at the British Bar, holding up his Head with the most
insipid Serenity, and streaking the sides of a long Wigg that reaches
down to his Middle? The truth of it is, there is often nothing more
ridiculous than the Gestures of an English Speaker; you see some of them
running their Hands into their Pockets as far as ever they can thrust
them, and others looking with great Attention on a piece of Paper that
has nothing written in it; you may see many a smart Rhetorician turning
his Hat in his Hands, moulding it into several different Cocks,
examining sometimes the Lining of it, and sometimes the Button, during
the whole course of his Harangue. A deaf Man would think he was
Cheap'ning a Beaver, when perhaps he is talking of the Fate of the
British Nation. I remember, when I was a young Man, and used to frequent
Westminster-Hall, there was a Counsellor who never pleaded without a
Piece of Pack-thread in his Hand, which he used to twist about a Thumb,
or a Finger, all the while he was speaking: The Waggs of those Days used
to call it the Thread of his Discourse, for he was not able to utter a
Word without it. One of his Clients, who was more merry than wise, stole
it from him one Day in the midst of his Pleading; but he had better have
let it alone, for he lost his Cause by his Jest.

I have all along acknowledged my self to be a Dumb Man, and therefore
may be thought a very improper Person to give Rules for Oratory; but I
believe every one will agree with me in this, that we ought either to
lay aside all kinds of Gesture, (which seems to be very suitable to the
Genius of our Nation) or at least to make use of such only as are
graceful and expressive.

O.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 408.                Wednesday, June 18, 1712.                  Pope.


  'Decet affectus animi neque se nimium erigere, nec subjacere
  serviliter.'

  Tull. de Finibus.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I have always been a very great Lover of your Speculations, as well in
  Regard to the Subject, as to your Manner of Treating it. Human Nature
  I always thought the most useful Object of human Reason, and to make
  the Consideration of it pleasant and entertaining, I always thought
  the best Employment of human Wit: Other Parts of Philosophy may
  perhaps make us wiser, but this not only answers that End, but makes
  us better too. Hence it was that the Oracle pronounced Socrates the
  wisest of all Men living, because he judiciously made Choice of human
  Nature for the Object of his Thoughts; an Enquiry into which as much
  exceeds all other Learning, as it is of more Consequence to adjust the
  true Nature and Measures of Right and Wrong, than to settle the
  Distance of the Planets, and compute the Times of their
  Circumvolutions.

  One good Effect that will immediately arise from a near Observation of
  human Nature, is, that we shall cease to wonder at those Actions which
  Men are used to reckon wholly unaccountable; for as nothing is
  produced without a Cause, so by observing the Nature and Course of the
  Passions, we shall be able to trace every Action from its first
  Conception to its Death; We shall no more admire at the Proceedings of
  Catiline or Tiberius, when we know the one was actuated by a cruel
  Jealousie, the other by a furious Ambition; for the Actions of Men
  follow their Passions as naturally as Light does Heat, or as any other
  Effect flows from its Cause; Reason must be employed in adjusting the
  Passions, but they must ever remain the Principles of Action.

  The strange and absurd Variety that is so apparent in Men's Actions,
  shews plainly they can never proceed immediately from Reason; so pure
  a Fountain emits no such troubled Waters: They must necessarily arise
  from the Passions, which are to the Mind as the Winds to a Ship, they
  only can move it, and they too often destroy it; if fair and gentle,
  they guide it into the Harbour; if contrary and furious, they overset
  it in the Waves: In the same manner is the Mind assisted or endangered
  by the Passions; Reason must then take the Place of Pilot, and can
  never fail of securing her Charge if she be not wanting to her self:
  The Strength of the Passions will never be accepted as an Excuse for
  complying with them, they were designed for Subjection, and if a Man
  suffers them to get the upper Hand, he then betrays the Liberty of his
  own Soul.

  As Nature has framed the several Species of Beings as it were in a
  Chain, so Man seems to be placed as the middle Link between Angels and
  Brutes: Hence he participates both of Flesh and Spirit by an admirable
  Tie, which in him occasions perpetual War of Passions; and as a Man
  inclines to the angelick or brute Part of his Constitution, he is then
  denominated good or bad, virtuous or wicked; if Love, Mercy, and
  Good-nature prevail, they speak him of the Angel; if Hatred, Cruelty,
  and Envy predominate, they declare his Kindred to the Brute. Hence it
  was that some of the Ancients imagined, that as Men in this Life
  inclined more to the Angel or Brute, so after their Death they should
  transmigrate into the one or the other: and it would be no unpleasant
  Notion, to consider the several Species of Brutes, into which we may
  imagine that Tyrants, Misers, the Proud, Malicious, and Ill-natured
  might be changed.

  As a Consequence of this Original, all Passions are in all Men, but
  all appear not in all; Constitution, Education, Custom of the Country,
  Reason, and the like Causes, may improve or abate the Strength of
  them, but still the Seeds remain, which are ever ready to sprout forth
  upon the least Encouragement. I have heard a Story of a good religious
  Man, who, having been bred with the Milk of a Goat, was very modest in
  Publick by a careful Reflection he made on his Actions, but he
  frequently had an Hour in Secret, wherein he had his Frisks and
  Capers; and if we had an Opportunity of examining the Retirement of
  the strictest Philosophers, no doubt but we should find perpetual
  Returns of those Passions they so artfully conceal from the Publick. I
  remember Matchiavel observes, that every State should entertain a
  perpetual jealousie of its Neighbours, that so it should never be
  unprovided when an Emergency happens; [1] in like manner should the
  Reason be perpetually on its Guard against the Passions, and never
  suffer them to carry on any Design that may be destructive of its
  Security; yet at the same Time it must be careful, that it don't so
  far break their Strength as to render them contemptible, and
  consequently it self unguarded.

  The Understanding being of its self too slow and lazy to exert it self
  into Action, its necessary it should be put in Motion by the gentle
  Gales of the Passions, which may preserve it from stagnating and
  Corruption; for they are as necessary to the Health of the Mind, as
  the Circulation of the animal Spirits is to the Health of the Body;
  they keep it in Life, and Strength, and Vigour; nor is it possible for
  the Mind to perform its Offices without their Assistance: These
  Motions are given us with our Being, they are little Spirits that are
  born and dye with us; to some they are mild, easie, and gentle, to
  others wayward and unruly, yet never too strong for the Reins of
  Reason and the Guidance of Judgment.

  We may generally observe a pretty nice Proportion between the Strength
  of Reason and Passion; the greatest Genius's have commonly the
  strongest Affections, as on the other hand, the weaker Understandings
  have generally the weaker Passions; and 'tis fit the Fury of the
  Coursers should not be too great for the Strength of the Charioteer.
  Young Men whose Passions are not a little unruly, give small Hopes of
  their ever being considerable; the Fire of Youth will of course abate,
  and is a Fault, if it be a Fault, that mends every Day; but surely
  unless a Man has Fire in Youth, he can hardly have Warmth in Old Age.
  We must therefore be very cautious, lest while we think to regulate
  the Passions, we should quite extinguish them, which is putting out
  the Light of the Soul: for to be without Passion, or to be hurried
  away with it, makes a Man equally blind. The extraordinary Severity
  used in most of our Schools has this fatal Effect, it breaks the
  Spring of the Mind, and most certainly destroys more good Genius's
  than it can possibly improve. And surely 'tis a mighty Mistake that
  the Passions should be so intirely subdued; for little Irregularities
  are sometimes not only to be borne with, but to be cultivated too,
  since they are frequently attended with the greatest Perfections. All
  great Genius's have Faults mixed with their Virtues, and resemble the
  flaming Bush which has Thorns amongst Lights.

  Since, therefore the Passions are the Principles of human Actions, we
  must endeavour to manage them so as to retain their Vigour, yet keep
  them under strict Command; we must govern them rather like free
  Subjects than Slaves, lest while we intend to make them obedient, they
  become abject, and unfit for those great Purposes to which they were
  designed. For my Part I must confess, I could never have any Regard to
  that Sect of Philosophers, who so much insisted upon an absolute
  Indifference and Vacancy from all Passion; for it seems to me a Thing
  very inconsistent for a Man to divest himself of Humanity, in order to
  acquire Tranquility of Mind, and to eradicate the very Principles of
  Action, because its possible they may produce ill Effects.

  I am, SIR,

  Your Affectionate Admirer,

  T. B.


Z.


[Footnote 1: The Prince, ch. xlv, at close.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 409.               Thursday, June 19, 1712.                 Addison.


  'Musæo contingere cuncta lepore.'

  Lucr.


Gratian very often recommends the Fine Taste, [1] as the utmost
Perfection of an accomplished Man. As this Word arises very often in
Conversation, I shall endeavour to give some Account of it, and to lay
down Rules how we may know whether we are possessed of it, and how we
may acquire that fine Taste of Writing, which is so much talked of among
the Polite World.

Most Languages make use of this Metaphor, to express that Faculty of the
Mind, which distinguishes all the most concealed Faults and nicest
Perfections in Writing. We may be sure this Metaphor would not have been
so general in all Tongues, had there not been a very great Conformity
between that Mental Taste, which is the Subject of this Paper, and that
Sensitive Taste which gives us a Relish of every different Flavour that
affects the Palate. Accordingly we find, there are as many Degrees of
Refinement in the intellectual Faculty, as in the Sense, which is marked
out by this common Denomination.

I knew a Person who possessed the one in so great a Perfection, that
after having tasted ten different Kinds of Tea, he would distinguish,
without seeing the Colour of it, the particular Sort which was offered
him; and not only so, but any two Sorts of them that were mixt together
in an equal Proportion; nay he has carried the Experiment so far, as
upon tasting the Composition of three different Sorts, to name the
Parcels from whence the three several Ingredients were taken. A Man of a
fine Taste in Writing will discern, after the same manner, not only the
general Beauties and Imperfections of an Author, but discover the
several Ways of thinking and expressing himself, which diversify him
from all other Authors, with the several Foreign Infusions of Thought
and Language, and the particular Authors from whom they were borrowed.

After having thus far explained what is generally meant by a fine Taste
in Writing, and shewn the Propriety of the Metaphor which is used on
this Occasion, I think I may define it to be that Faculty of the Soul,
which discerns the Beauties of an Author with Pleasure, and the
Imperfections with Dislike. If a Man would know whether he is possessed
of this Faculty, I would have him read over the celebrated Works of
Antiquity, which have stood the Test of so many different Ages and
Countries, or those Works among the Moderns which have the Sanction of
the Politer Part of our Contemporaries. If upon the Perusal of such
Writings he does not find himself delighted in an extraordinary Manner,
or if, upon reading the admired Passages in such Authors, he finds a
Coldness and Indifference in his Thoughts, he ought to conclude, not (as
is too usual among tasteless Readers) that the Author wants those
Perfections which have been admired in him, but that he himself wants
the Faculty of discovering them.

He should, in the second Place, be very careful to observe, whether he
tastes the distinguishing Perfections, or, if I may be allowed to call
them so, the Specifick Qualities of the Author whom he peruses; whether
he is particularly pleased with Livy for his Manner of telling a Story,
with Sallust for his entering into those internal Principles of Action
which arise from the Characters and Manners of the Persons he describes,
or with Tacitus for his displaying those outward Motives of Safety and
Interest, which give Birth to the whole Series of Transactions which he
relates.

He may likewise consider, how differently he is affected by the same
Thought, which presents it self in a great Writer, from what he is when
he finds it delivered by a Person of an ordinary Genius. For there is as
much Difference in apprehending a Thought cloathed in Cicero's Language,
and that of a common Author, as in seeing an Object by the Light of a
Taper, or by the Light of the Sun.

It is very difficult to lay down Rules for the Acquirement of such a
Taste as that I am here speaking of. The Faculty must in some degree be
born with us, and it very often happens, that those who have other
Qualities in Perfection are wholly void of this. One of the most eminent
Mathematicians of the Age has assured me, that the greatest Pleasure he
took in reading Virgil, was in examining Æneas his Voyage by the Map; as
I question not but many a Modern Compiler of History, would be delighted
with little more in that Divine Author, than in the bare Matters of
Fact.

But notwithstanding this Faculty must in some measure be born with us,
there are several Methods for Cultivating and Improving it, and without
which it will be very uncertain, and of little use to the Person that
possesses it. The most natural Method for this Purpose is to be
conversant among the Writings of the most Polite Authors. A Man who has
any Relish for fine Writing, either discovers new Beauties, or receives
stronger Impressions from the Masterly Strokes of a great Author every
time he peruses him; Besides that he naturally wears himself into the
same manner of Speaking and Thinking.

Conversation with Men of a Polite Genius is another Method for improving
our Natural Taste. It is impossible for a Man of the greatest Parts to
consider anything in its whole Extent, and in all its Variety of Lights.
Every Man, besides those General Observations which are to be made upon
an Author, forms several Reflections that are peculiar to his own Manner
of Thinking; so that Conversation will naturally furnish us with Hints
which we did not attend to, and make us enjoy other Men's Parts and
Reflections as well as our own. This is the best Reason I can give for
the Observation which several have made, that Men of great Genius in the
same way of Writing seldom rise up singly, but at certain Periods of
Time appear together, and in a Body; as they did at Rome in the Reign of
Augustus, and in Greece about the Age of Socrates. I cannot think that
Corneille, Racine, Moliere, Boileau, la Fontaine, Bruyere, Bossu, or the
Daciers, would have written so well as they have done, had they not been
Friends and Contemporaries.

It is likewise necessary for a Man who would form to himself a finished
Taste of good Writing, to be well versed in the Works of the best
Criticks both Ancient and Modern. I must confess that I could wish there
were Authors of this kind, who beside the Mechanical Rules which a Man
of very little Taste may discourse upon, would enter into the very
Spirit and Soul of fine Writing, and shew us the several Sources of that
Pleasure which rises in the Mind upon the Perusal of a noble Work. Thus
although in Poetry it be absolutely necessary that the Unities of Time,
Place and Action, with other Points of the same Nature, should be
thoroughly explained and understood; there is still something more
essential to the Art, something that elevates and astonishes the Fancy,
and gives a Greatness of Mind to the Reader, which few of the Criticks
besides Longinus have considered.

Our general Taste in England is for Epigram, Turns of Wit, and forced
Conceits, which have no manner of Influence, either for the bettering or
enlarging the Mind of him who reads them, and have been carefully
avoided by the greatest Writers, both among the Ancients and Moderns. I
have endeavoured in several of my Speculations to banish this Gothic
Taste, which has taken Possession among us. I entertained the Town, for
a Week together, with an Essay upon Wit, in which I endeavoured to
detect several of those false Kinds which have been admired in the
different Ages of the World; and at the same time to shew wherein the
Nature of true Wit consists. I afterwards gave an Instance of the great
Force which lyes in a natural Simplicity of Thought to affect the Mind
of the Reader, from such vulgar Pieces as have little else besides this
single Qualification to recommend them. I have likewise examined the
Works of the greatest Poet which our Nation or perhaps any other has
produced, and particularized most of those rational and manly Beauties
which give a Value to that Divine Work. I shall next Saturday enter upon
an Essay on the Pleasures of the Imagination, which, though it shall
consider that Subject at large, will perhaps suggest to the Reader what
it is that gives a Beauty to many Passages of the finest Writers both in
Prose and Verse. As an Undertaking of this Nature is entirely new, I
question not but it will be received with Candour.

O.


[Footnote 1: See note on p. 620, ante [Footnote 3 of No. 379]. This fine
taste was the 'cultismo', the taste for false concepts, which Addison
condemns.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 410.                  Friday, June 20, 1712.               Tickell.


  'Dum foris sunt, nihil videtur Mundius,
  Nec magis compositum quidquam, nec magis elegans:
  Quæ, cum amatore suo cum coenant, Liguriunt,
  Harum videre ingluviem, sordes, inopiam:
  Quam inhonestæ solæ sint domi, atque avidæ cibi,
  Quo pacto ex Jure Hesterno panem atrum varent.
  Nosse omnia hæc, salus est adolescentulis.'

  Ter.


WILL. HONEYCOMB, who disguises his present Decay by visiting the Wenches
of the Town only by Way of Humour, told us, that the last rainy Night he
with Sir ROGER DE COVERLY was driven into the Temple Cloister, whither
had escaped also a Lady most exactly dressed from Head to Foot. WILL,
made no Scruple to acquaint us, that she saluted him very familiarly by
his Name, and turning immediately to the Knight, she said, she supposed
that was his good Friend, Sir ROGER DE COVERLY: Upon which nothing less
could follow than Sir ROGER'S Approach to Salutation, with, Madam the
same at your Service. She was dressed in a black Tabby Mantua and
Petticoat, without Ribbons; her Linnen striped Muslin, and in the whole
in an agreeable Second-Mourning; decent Dresses being often affected by
the Creatures of the Town, at once consulting Cheapness and the
Pretensions to Modesty. She went on with a familiar easie Air. Your
Friend, Mr. HONEYCOMB, is a little surprized to see a Woman here alone
and unattended; but I dismissed my Coach at the Gate, and tripped it
down to my Council's Chambers, for Lawyer's Fees take up too much of a
small disputed Joynture to admit any other Expence but meer Necessaries.
Mr. HONEYCOMB begged they might have the Honour of setting her down, for
Sir ROGER'S Servant was gone to call a Coach. In the Interim the Footman
returned, with no Coach to be had; and there appeared nothing to be done
but trusting herself with Mr. HONEYCOMB and his Friend to wait at the
Tavern at the Gate for a Coach, or to be subjected to all the
Impertinence she must meet with in that publick Place. Mr. HONEYCOMB
being a Man of Honour determined the Choice of the first, and Sir ROGER,
as the better Man, took the Lady by the Hand, leading through all the
Shower, covering her with his Hat, and gallanting a familiar
Acquaintance through Rows of young Fellows, who winked at Sukey in the
State she marched off, WILL. HONEYCOMB bringing up the Rear.

Much Importunity prevailed upon the Fair one to admit of a Collation,
where, after declaring she had no Stomach, and eaten a Couple of
Chickens, devoured a Trusse of Sallet, and drunk a full Bottle to her
Share, she sung the Old Man's Wish to Sir ROGER. The Knight left the
Room for some Time after Supper, and writ the following Billet, which he
conveyed to Sukey, and Sukey to her Friend WILL. HONEYCOMB. WILL. has
given it to Sir ANDREW FREEPORT, who read it last Night to the Club.

  Madam,

  I am not so meer a Country-Gentleman, but I can guess at the
  Law-Business you had at the Temple. If you would go down to the
  Country and leave off all your Vanities but your Singing, let me know
  at my Lodgings in Bow-street Covent-Garden, and you shall be
  encouraged by

  Your humble Servant,

  ROGER DE COVERLY.

My good Friend could not well stand the Raillery which was rising upon
him; but to put a Stop to it I deliverd WILL. HONEYCOMB the following
Letter, and desired him to read it to the Board.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  Having seen a Translation of one of the Chapters in the Canticles into
  English Verse inserted among your late Papers, I have ventured to send
  you the 7th Chapter of the Proverbs in a poetical Dress. If you think
  it worthy appearing among your Speculations, it will be a sufficient
  Reward for the Trouble of

  Your constant Reader,

  A. B.


    My Son, th' Instruction that my Words impart,
    Grave on the Living Tablet of thy Heart;
    And all the wholesome Precepts that I give,
    Observe with strictest Reverence, and live.
      Let all thy Homage be to Wisdom paid,
    Seek her Protection and implore her Aid;
    That she may keep thy Soul from Harm secure,
    And turn thy Footsteps from the Harlot's Door,
    Who with curs'd Charms lures the Unwary in,
    And sooths with Flattery their Souls to Sin.
      Once from my Window as I cast mine Eye
    On those that pass'd in giddy Numbers by,
    A Youth among the foolish Youths I spy'd,
    Who took not sacred Wisdom for his Guide.
      Just as the Sun withdrew his cooler Light,
    And Evening soft led on the Shades of Night,
    He stole in covert Twilight to his Fate,
    And passd the Corner near the Harlot's Gate
    When, lo, a Woman comes!--
    Loose her Attire, and such her glaring Dress,
    As aptly did the Harlot's Mind express:
    Subtle she is, and practisd in the Arts,
    By which the Wanton conquer heedless Hearts:
    Stubborn and loud she is; she hates her Home,
    Varying her Place and Form; she loves to roam;
    Now she's within, now in the Street does stray;
    Now at each Corner stands, and waits her Prey.
    The Youth she seiz'd; and laying now aside
    All Modesty, the Female's justest Pride,
    She said, with an Embrace, Here at my House
    Peace-offerings are, this Day I paid my Vows.
    I therefore came abroad to meet my Dear,
    And, Lo, in Happy Hour I find thee here.
      My Chamber I've adornd, and o'er my Bed
    Are cov'rings of the richest Tap'stry spread,
    With Linnen it is deck'd from Egypt brought,
    And Carvings by the Curious Artist wrought,
    It wants no Glad Perfume Arabia yields
    In all her Citron Groves, and spicy Fields;
    Here all her store of richest Odours meets,
    Ill lay thee in a Wilderness of Sweets.
    Whatever to the Sense can grateful be
    I have collected there--I want but Thee.
    My Husband's gone a Journey far away,         }
    Much Gold he took abroad, and long will stay, }
    He nam'd for his return a distant Day.        }
      Upon her Tongue did such smooth Mischief dwell,
    And from her Lips such welcome Flatt'ry fell,
    Th' unguarded Youth, in Silken Fetters ty'd,
    Resign'd his Reason, and with Ease comply'd.
    Thus does the Ox to his own Slaughter go,
    And thus is senseless of th' impending Blow.
    Thus flies the simple Bird into the Snare,
    That skilful Fowlers for his Life prepare.
    But let my Sons attend, Attend may they
    Whom Youthful Vigour may to Sin betray;
    Let them false Charmers fly, and guard their Hearts
    Against the wily Wanton's pleasing Arts,
    With Care direct their Steps, nor turn astray,
    To tread the Paths of her deceitful Way;
    Lest they too late of Her fell Power complain,
    And fall, where many mightier have been Slain.


T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 411.                 Saturday, June 21, 1712.               Addison.


  'Avia Pieridum peragro loca, nullius ante
  Trita solo; juvat integros accedere fonteis;
  Atque haurire:--'

  Lucr.


Our Sight is the most perfect and most delightful of all our Senses. It
fills the Mind with the largest Variety of Ideas, converses with its
Objects at the greatest Distance, and continues the longest in Action
without being tired or satiated with its proper Enjoyments. The Sense of
Feeling can indeed give us a Notion of Extension, Shape, and all other
Ideas that enter at the Eye, except Colours; but at the same time it is
very much streightned and confined in its Operations, to the number,
bulk, and distance of its particular Objects. Our Sight seems designed
to supply all these Defects, and may be considered as a more delicate
and diffusive kind of Touch, that spreads it self over an infinite
Multitude of Bodies, comprehends the largest Figures, and brings into
our reach some of the most remote Parts of the Universe.

It is this Sense which furnishes the Imagination with its Ideas; so that
by the Pleasures of the Imagination or Fancy (which I shall use
promiscuously) I here mean such as arise from visible Objects, either
when we have them actually in our View, or when we call up their Ideas
in our Minds by Paintings, Statues, Descriptions, or any the like
Occasion. We cannot indeed have a single Image in the Fancy that did not
make its first Entrance through the Sight; but we have the Power of
retaining, altering and compounding those Images, which we have once
received, into all the varieties of Picture and Vision that are most
agreeable to the Imagination; for by this Faculty a Man in a Dungeon is
capable of entertaining himself with Scenes and Landskips more beautiful
than any that can be found in the whole Compass of Nature.

There are few Words in the English Language which are employed in a more
loose and uncircumscribed Sense than those of the Fancy and the
Imagination. I therefore thought it necessary to fix and determine the
Notion of these two Words, as I intend to make use of them in the Thread
of my following Speculations, that the Reader may conceive rightly what
is the Subject which I proceed upon. I must therefore desire him to
remember, that by the Pleasures of the Imagination, I mean only such
Pleasures as arise originally from Sight, and that I divide these
Pleasures into two Kinds: My Design being first of all to Discourse of
those Primary Pleasures of the Imagination, which entirely proceed from
such Objects as are [before our [1]] Eye[s]; and in the next place to
speak of those Secondary Pleasures of the Imagination which flow from
the Ideas of visible Objects, when the Objects are not actually before
the Eye, but are called up into our Memories, or formed into agreeable
Visions of Things that are either Absent or Fictitious.

The Pleasures of the Imagination, taken in the full Extent, are not so
gross as those of Sense, nor so refined as those of the Understanding.
The last are, indeed, more preferable, because they are founded on some
new Knowledge or Improvement in the Mind of Man; yet it must be confest,
that those of the Imagination are as great and as transporting as the
other. A beautiful Prospect delights the Soul, as much as a
Demonstration; and a Description in Homer has charmed more Readers than
a Chapter in Aristotle. Besides, the Pleasures of the Imagination have
this Advantage, above those of the Understanding, that they are more
obvious, and more easie to be acquired. It is but opening the Eye, and
the Scene enters. The Colours paint themselves on the Fancy, with very
little Attention of Thought or Application of Mind in the Beholder. We
are struck, we know not how, with the Symmetry of any thing we see, and
immediately assent to the Beauty of an Object, without enquiring into
the particular Causes and Occasions of it.

A Man of a Polite Imagination is let into a great many Pleasures, that
the Vulgar are not capable of receiving. He can converse with a Picture,
and find an agreeable Companion in a Statue. He meets with a secret
Refreshment in a Description, and often feels a greater Satisfaction in
the Prospect of Fields and Meadows, than another does in the Possession.
It gives him, indeed, a kind of Property in every thing he sees, and
makes the most rude uncultivated Parts of Nature administer to his
Pleasures: So that he looks upon the World, as it were in another Light,
and discovers in it a Multitude of Charms, that conceal themselves from
the generality of Mankind.

There are, indeed, but very few who know how to be idle and innocent, or
have a Relish of any Pleasures that are not Criminal; every Diversion
they take is at the Expence of some one Virtue or another, and their
very first Step out of Business is into Vice or Folly. A Man should
endeavour, therefore, to make the Sphere of his innocent Pleasures as
wide as possible, that he may retire into them with Safety, and find in
them such a Satisfaction as a wise Man would not blush to take. Of this
Nature are those of the Imagination, which do not require such a Bent of
Thought as is necessary to our more serious Employments, nor, at the
same time, suffer the Mind to sink into that Negligence and Remissness,
which are apt to accompany our more sensual Delights, but, like a gentle
Exercise to the Faculties, awaken them from Sloth and Idleness, without
putting them upon any Labour or Difficulty.

We might here add, that the Pleasures of the Fancy are more conducive to
Health, than those of the Understanding, which are worked out by Dint of
Thinking, and attended with too violent a Labour of the Brain.
Delightful Scenes, whether in Nature, Painting, or Poetry, have a kindly
Influence on the Body, as well as the Mind, and not only serve to clear
and brighten the Imagination, but are able to disperse Grief and
Melancholy, and to set the Animal Spirits in pleasing and agreeable
Motions. For this Reason Sir Francis Bacon, in his Essay upon Health,
has not thought it improper to prescribe to his Reader a Poem or a
Prospect, where he particularly dissuades him from knotty and subtile
Disquisitions, and advises him to pursue Studies that fill the Mind with
splendid and illustrious Objects, as Histories, Fables, and
Contemplations of Nature.

I have in this Paper, by way of Introduction, settled the Notion of
those Pleasures of the Imagination which are the Subject of my present
Undertaking, and endeavoured, by several Considerations, to recommend to
my Reader the Pursuit of those Pleasures. I shall, in my next Paper,
examine the several Sources from whence these Pleasures are derived. [2]

O.


[Footnote 1: [present to the]]


[Footnote 2: From a MS. Note-book of Addison's, met with in 1858, Mr. J.
Dykes Campbell printed at Glasgow, in 1864, 250 copies of some portions
of the first draught of these papers on Imagination with the Essay on
Jealousy (No. 176) and that on Fame (No. 255). The MS. was an old calf
bound 8vo volume obtained from a dealer. There were about 31 pages
written on one side of each leaf in a beautiful print-like hand, which
contained the Essays in their first state. Passages were added by
Addison in his ordinary handwriting upon the blank pages opposite to
this carefully-written text, and there are pieces in a third
hand-writing which neither the keeper of the MSS. Department of the
British Museum nor the Librarian of the Bodleian could identify. The
insertions in this third hand form part of the paper as finally
published. Thus in the paper on Jealousy (No. 171) it wrote the English
verse translation added to the quotation from Horace's Ode I. xiii. The
MS. shows with how much care Addison revised and corrected the first
draught of his papers, especially where, as in the series of eleven upon
Imagination here commenced, he meant to put out all his strength. In
Blair's Rhetoric four Lectures (20-23) are given to a critical
Examination of the Style of Mr. Addison in Nos. 411, 412, 413, and 414
of the Spectator. Akenside's poem on the Pleasures of the Imagination,
published in 1744, when he was 23 years old, was suggested by these
papers. Many disquisitions upon Taste were written towards the close of
the last century. They formed a new province in literature, of which
Addison here appears as the founder and first lawgiver.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 412.                Monday, June 23, 1712.                 Addison.


  '--Divisum sic breve fiet Opus.'

  Mart.


I shall first consider those Pleasures of the Imagination, which arise
from the actual View and Survey of outward Objects: And these, I think,
all proceed from the Sight of what is Great, Uncommon, or Beautiful.
There may, indeed, be something so terrible or offensive, that the
Horror or Loathsomeness of an Object may over-bear the Pleasure which
results from its Greatness, Novelty, or Beauty; but still there will be
such a Mixture of Delight in the very Disgust it gives us, as any of
these three Qualifications are most conspicuous and prevailing.

By Greatness, I do not only mean the Bulk of any single Object, but the
Largeness of a whole View, considered as one entire Piece. Such are the
Prospects of an open Champain Country, a vast uncultivated Desart, of
huge Heaps of Mountains, high Rocks and Precipices, or a wide Expanse of
Waters, where we are not struck with the Novelty or Beauty of the Sight,
but with that rude kind of Magnificence which appears in many of these
stupendous Works of Nature. Our Imagination loves to be filled with an
Object, or to grasp at any thing that is too big for its Capacity. We
are flung into a pleasing Astonishment at such unbounded Views, and feel
a delightful Stillness and Amazement in the Soul at the Apprehension[s]
of them. The Mind of Man naturally hates every thing that looks like a
Restraint upon it, and is apt to fancy it self under a sort of
Confinement, when the Sight is pent up in a narrow Compass, and shortned
on every side by the Neighbourhood of Walls or Mountains. On the
contrary, a spacious Horizon is an Image of Liberty, where the Eye has
Room to range abroad, to expatiate at large on the Immensity of its
Views, and to lose it self amidst the Variety of Objects that offer
themselves to its Observation. Such wide and undetermined Prospects are
as pleasing to the Fancy, as the Speculations of Eternity or Infinitude
are to the Understanding. But if there be a Beauty or Uncommonness
joined with this Grandeur, as in a troubled Ocean, a Heaven adorned with
Stars and Meteors, or a spacious Landskip cut out into Rivers, Woods,
Rocks, and Meadows, the Pleasure still grows upon us, as it rises from
more than a single Principle.

Every thing that is new or uncommon raises a Pleasure in the
Imagination, because it fills the Soul with an agreeable Surprize,
gratifies its Curiosity, and gives it an Idea of which it was not before
possest. We are indeed so often conversant with one Set of Objects, and
tired out with so many repeated Shows of the same Things, that whatever
is new or uncommon contributes a little to vary human Life, and to
divert our Minds, for a while, with the Strangeness of its Appearance:
It serves us for a kind of Refreshment, and takes off from that Satiety
we are apt to complain of in our usual and ordinary Entertainments. It
is this that bestows Charms on a Monster, and makes even the
Imperfections of Nature [please [1]] us. It is this that recommends
Variety, where the Mind is every Instant called off to something new,
and the Attention not suffered to dwell too long, and waste it self on
any particular Object. It is this, likewise, that improves what is great
or beautiful, and make it afford the Mind a double Entertainment.
Groves, Fields, and Meadows, are at any Season of the Year pleasant to
look upon, but never so much as in the Opening of the Spring, when they
are all new and fresh, with their first Gloss upon them, and not yet too
much accustomed and familiar to the Eye. For this Reason there is
nothing that more enlivens a Prospect than Rivers, Jetteaus, or Falls of
Water, where the Scene is perpetually shifting, and entertaining the
Sight every Moment with something that is new. We are quickly tired with
looking upon Hills and Vallies, where every thing continues fixed and
settled in the same Place and Posture, but find our Thoughts a little
agitated and relieved at the Sight of such Objects as are ever in
Motion, and sliding away from beneath the Eye of the Beholder.

But there is nothing that makes its Way more directly to the Soul than
Beauty, which immediately diffuses a secret Satisfaction and Complacency
through the Imagination, and gives a Finishing to any thing that is
Great or Uncommon. The very first Discovery of it strikes the Mind with
an inward Joy, and spreads a Chearfulness and Delight through all its
Faculties. There is not perhaps any real Beauty or Deformity more in one
Piece of Matter than another, because we might have been so made, that
whatsoever now appears loathsome to us, might have shewn it self
agreeable; but we find by Experience, that there are several
Modifications of Matter which the Mind, without any previous
Consideration, pronounces at first sight Beautiful or Deformed. Thus we
see that every different Species of sensible Creatures has its different
Notions of Beauty, and that each of them is most affected with the
Beauties of its own Kind. This is no where more remarkable than in Birds
of the same Shape and Proportion, where we often see the Male determined
in his Courtship by the single Grain or Tincture of a Feather, and never
discovering any Charms but in the Colour of its Species.

  Scit thalamo servare fidem, sanctasque veretur
  Connubii leges, non illum in pectore candor
  Sollicitat niveus; neque pravum accendit amorem
  Splendida Lanugo, vel honesta in vertice crista,
  Purpureusve nitor pennarum; ast agmina latè
  Foeminea explorat cautus, maculasque requirit
  Cognatas, paribusque interlita corpora guttis:
  Ni faceret, pictis sylvam circum undique monstris
  Confusam aspiceres vulgò, partusque biformes,
  Et genus ambiguum, et Veneris monumenta nefandæ.
  Hinc merula in nigro se oblectat nigra marito,
  Hinc socium lasciva petit Philomela canorum,
  Agnoscitque pares sonitus, hinc Noctua tetram
  Canitiem alarum, et glaucos miratur ocellos.
  Nempe sibi semper constat, crescitque quotannis
  Lucida progenies, castos confessa parentes;
  Dum virides inter saltus lucosque sonoros
  Vere novo exultat, plumasque decora Juventus
  Explicat ad solem, patriisque coloribus ardet. [2]

There is a second Kind of Beauty that we find in the several Products of
Art and Nature, which does not work in the Imagination with that Warmth
and Violence as the Beauty that appears in our proper Species, but is
apt however to raise in us a secret Delight, and a kind of Fondness for
the Places or Objects in which we discover it. This consists either in
the Gaiety or Variety of Colours, in the Symmetry and Proportion of
Parts, in the Arrangement and Disposition of Bodies, or in a just
Mixture and Concurrence of all together. Among these several Kinds of
Beauty the Eye takes most Delight in Colours. We no where meet with a
more glorious or pleasing Show in Nature than what appears in the
Heavens at the rising and setting of the Sun, which is wholly made up of
those different Stains of Light that shew themselves in Clouds of a
different Situation. For this Reason we find the Poets, who are always
addressing themselves to the Imagination, borrowing more of their
Epithets from Colours than from any other Topic. As the Fancy delights
in every thing that is Great, Strange, or Beautiful, and is still more
pleased the more it finds of these Perfections in the same Object, so is
it capable of receiving a new Satisfaction by the Assistance of another
Sense. Thus any continued Sound, as the Musick of Birds, or a Fall of
Water, awakens every moment the Mind of the Beholder, and makes him more
attentive to the several Beauties of the Place that lye before him. Thus
if there arises a Fragrancy of Smells or Perfumes, they heighten the
Pleasures of the Imagination, and make even the Colours and Verdure of
the Landskip appear more agreeable; for the Ideas of both Senses
recommend each other, and are pleasanter together than when they enter
the Mind separately: As the different Colours of a Picture, when they
are well disposed, set off one another, and receive an additional Beauty
from the Advantage of their Situation.

O.


[Footnote 1: [to please]]


[Footnote 2: Addison's MS. described in the note to No. 411 shows, by
corrections in his handwriting of four or five lines in this piece of
Latin verse, that he was himself its author. Thus in the last line he
had begun with Scintillat solitis, altered that to Ostentat solitas,
struck out that also, and written, as above, Explicat ad solem.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 413.              Tuesday, June 24, 1712.                 Addison.


  '--Causa latet, vis est notissima--'

  Ovid.


Though in Yesterday's Paper we considered how every thing that is Great,
New, or Beautiful, is apt to affect the Imagination with Pleasure, we
must own that it is impossible for us to assign the necessary Cause of
this Pleasure, because we know neither the Nature of an Idea, nor the
Substance of a Human Soul, which might help us to discover the
Conformity or Disagreeableness of the one to the other; and therefore,
for want of such a Light, all that we can do in Speculations of this
kind is to reflect on those Operations of the Soul that are most
agreeable, and to range under their proper Heads, what is pleasing or
displeasing to the Mind, without being able to trace out the several
necessary and efficient Causes from whence the Pleasure or Displeasure
arises.

Final Causes lye more bare and open to our Observation, as there are
often a great Variety that belong to the same Effect; and these, tho'
they are not altogether so satisfactory, are generally more useful than
the other, as they give us greater Occasion of admiring the Goodness and
Wisdom of the first Contriver.

One of the Final Causes of our Delight, in any thing that is great, may
be this. The Supreme Author of our Being has so formed the Soul of Man,
that nothing but himself can be its last, adequate, and proper
Happiness. Because, therefore, a great Part of our Happiness must arise
from the Contemplation of his Being, that he might give our Souls a just
Relish of such a Contemplation, he has made them naturally delight in
the Apprehension of what is Great or Unlimited. Our Admiration, which is
a very pleasing Motion of the Mind, immediately rises at the
Consideration of any Object that takes up a great deal of Room in the
Fancy, and by Consequence, will improve into the highest Pitch of
Astonishment and Devotion when we contemplate his Nature, that is
neither circumscribed by Time nor Place, nor to be comprehended by the
largest Capacity of a Created Being.

He has annexed a secret Pleasure to the Idea of any thing that is new or
uncommon, that he might encourage us in the Pursuit after Knowledge, and
engage us to search into the Wonders of his Creation; for every new Idea
brings such a Pleasure along with it, as rewards any Pains we have taken
in its Acquisition, and consequently serves as a Motive to put us upon
fresh Discoveries.

He has made every thing that is beautiful in our own Species pleasant,
that all Creatures might be tempted to multiply their Kind, and fill the
World with Inhabitants; for 'tis very remarkable that where-ever Nature
is crost in the Production of a Monster (the Result of any unnatural
Mixture) the Breed is incapable of propagating its Likeness, and of
founding a new Order of Creatures; so that unless all Animals were
allured by the Beauty of their own Species, Generation would be at an
End, and the Earth unpeopled.

In the last Place, he has made every thing that is beautiful in all
other Objects pleasant, or rather has made so many Objects appear
beautiful, that he might render the whole Creation more gay and
delightful. He has given almost every thing about us the Power of
raising an agreeable Idea in the Imagination: So that it is impossible
for us to behold his Works with Coldness or Indifference, and to survey
so many Beauties without a secret Satisfaction and Complacency. Things
would make but a poor Appearance to the Eye, if we saw them only in
their proper Figures and Motions: And what Reason can we assign for
their exciting in us many of those Ideas which are different from any
thing that exists in the Objects themselves, (for such are Light and
Colours) were it not to add Supernumerary Ornaments to the Universe, and
make it more agreeable to the Imagination? We are every where
entertained with pleasing Shows and Apparitions, we discover Imaginary
Glories in the Heavens, and in the Earth, and see some of this Visionary
Beauty poured out upon the whole Creation; but what a rough unsightly
Sketch of Nature should we be entertained with, did all her Colouring
disappear, and the several Distinctions of Light and Shade vanish? In
short, our Souls are at present delightfully lost and bewildered in a
pleasing Delusion, and we walk about like the enchanted Hero of a
Romance, who sees beautiful Castles, Woods and Meadows; and at the same
time hears the warbling of Birds, and the purling of Streams; but upon
the finishing of some secret Spell, the fantastick Scene breaks up, and
the disconsolate Knight finds himself on a barren Heath, or in a
solitary Desart. It is not improbable that something like this may be
the State of the Soul after its first Separation, in respect of the
Images it will receive from Matter; tho indeed the Ideas of Colours are
so pleasing and beautiful in the Imagination, that it is possible the
Soul will not be deprived of them, but perhaps find them excited by some
other Occasional Cause, as they are at present by the different
Impressions of the subtle Matter on the Organ of Sight.

I have here supposed that my Reader is acquainted with that great Modern
Discovery, which is at present universally acknowledged by all the
Enquirers into Natural Philosophy: Namely, that Light and Colours, as
apprehended by the Imagination, are only Ideas in the Mind, and not
Qualities that have any Existence in Matter. As this is a Truth which
has been proved incontestably by many Modern Philosophers, and is indeed
one of the finest Speculations in that Science, if the English Reader
would see the Notion explained at large, he may find it in the Eighth
Chapter of the second Book of Mr. Lock's Essay on Human Understanding.

O.


[To Addison's short paper there was added in number 413 of the Spectator
the following letter, which was not included in the reprint into volumes:


  June 24, 1712.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I would not divert the Course of your Discourses, when you seem bent
  upon obliging the World with a train of Thinking, which, rightly
  attended to, may render the Life of every Man who reads it, more easy
  and happy for the future. The Pleasures of the Imagination are what
  bewilder Life, when Reason and Judgment do not interpose; It is
  therefore a worthy Action in you to look carefully into the Powers of
  Fancy, that other Men, from the Knowledge of them, may improve their
  Joys and allay their Griefs, by a just use of that Faculty: I say,
  Sir, I would not interrupt you in the progress of this Discourse; but
  if you will do me the Favour of inserting this Letter in your next
  Paper, you will do some Service to the Public, though not in so noble
  a way of Obliging, as that of improving their Minds. Allow me, Sir, to
  acquaint you with a Design (of which I am partly Author), though it
  tends to no greater a Good than that of getting Money. I should not
  hope for the Favour of a Philosopher in this Matter, if it were not
  attempted under all the Restrictions which you Sages put upon private
  Acquisitions.

  The first Purpose which every good Man is to propose to himself, is
  the Service of his Prince and Country; after that is done, he cannot
  add to himself, but he must also be beneficial to them. This Scheme of
  Gain is not only consistent with that End, but has its very Being in
  Subordination to it; for no Man can be a Gainer here but at the same
  time he himself, or some other, must succeed in their Dealings with
  the Government. It is called the Multiplication Table, and is so far
  calculated for the immediate Service of Her Majesty, that the same
  Person who is fortunate in the Lottery of the State, may receive yet
  further Advantage in this Table. And I am sure nothing can be more
  pleasing to Her gracious Temper than to find out additional Methods of
  increasing their good Fortune who adventure anything in Her Service,
  or laying Occasions for others to become capable of serving their
  Country who are at present in too low Circumstances to exert
  themselves. The manner of executing the Design is, by giving out
  Receipts for half Guineas received, which shall entitle the fortunate
  Bearer to certain Sums in the Table, as is set forth at large in the
  Proposals Printed the 23rd instant. There is another Circumstance in
  this Design, which gives me hopes of your Favour to it, and that is
  what Tully advises, to wit, that the Benefit is made as diffusive as
  possible. Every one that has half a Guinea is put into a possibility,
  from that small Sum, to raise himself an easy Fortune; when these
  little parcels of Wealth are, as it were, thus thrown back again into
  the Redonation of Providence, we are to expect that some who live
  under Hardship or Obscurity, may be produced to the World in the
  Figure they deserve by this means. I doubt not but this last Argument
  will have Force with you, and I cannot add another to it, but what
  your Severity will, I fear, very little regard; which is, that
  I am, SIR, Your greatest Admirer,
  Richard Steele.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 414.                Wednesday, June 25, 1712.               Addison.


--Alterius sic
Altera poscit opem res et conjurat amicè.

Hor.


If we consider the Works of Nature and Art, as they are qualified to
entertain the Imagination, we shall find the last very defective, in
Comparison of the former; for though they may sometimes appear as
Beautiful or Strange, they can have nothing in them of that Vastness and
Immensity, which afford so great an Entertainment to the Mind of the
Beholder. The one may be as Polite and Delicate as the other, but can
never shew her self so August and Magnificent in the Design. There is
something more bold and masterly in the rough careless Strokes of
Nature, than in the nice Touches and Embellishments of Art. The Beauties
of the most stately Garden or Palace lie in a narrow Compass, the
Imagination immediately runs them over, and requires something else to
gratifie her; but, in the wide Fields of Nature, the Sight wanders up
and down without Confinement, and is fed with an infinite variety of
Images, without any certain Stint or Number. For this Reason we always
find the Poet in Love with a Country-Life, where Nature appears in the
greatest Perfection, and furnishes out all those Scenes that are most
apt to delight the Imagination.

  'Scriptorum chorus omnis amat nemus et fugit Urbes.'

  Hor.


  'Hic Secura quies, et nescia fallere vita,
  Dives opum variarum; hic latis otia fundis,
  Speluncæ, vivique lacus, hic frigida Tempe,
  Mugitusque boum, mollesque sub arbore somni.'

  Virg.

But tho' there are several of these wild Scenes, that are more
delightful than any artificial Shows; yet we find the Works of Nature
still more pleasant, the more they resemble those of Art: For in this
case our Pleasure rises from a double Principle; from the Agreeableness
of the Objects to the Eye, and from their Similitude to other Objects:
We are pleased as well with comparing their Beauties, as with surveying
them, and can represent them to our Minds, either as Copies or
Originals. Hence it is that we take Delight in a Prospect which is well
laid out, and diversified with Fields and Meadows, Woods and Rivers; in
those accidental Landskips of Trees, Clouds and Cities, that are
sometimes found in the Veins of Marble; in the curious Fret-work of
Rocks and Grottos; and, in a Word, in any thing that hath such a Variety
or Regularity as may seem the Effect of Design, in what we call the
Works of Chance.

If the Products of Nature rise in Value, according as they more or less
resemble those of Art, we may be sure that artificial Works receive a
greater Advantage from their Resemblance of such as are natural; because
here the Similitude is not only pleasant, but the Pattern more perfect.
The prettiest Landskip I ever saw, was one drawn on the Walls of a dark
Room, which stood opposite on one side to a navigable River, and on the
other to a Park. The Experiment is very common in Opticks. Here you
might discover the Waves and Fluctuations of the Water in strong and
proper Colours, with the Picture of a Ship entering at one end, and
sailing by Degrees through the whole Piece. On another there appeared
the Green Shadows of Trees, waving to and fro with the Wind, and Herds
of Deer among them in Miniature, leaping about upon the Wall. I must
confess, the Novelty of such a Sight may be one occasion of its
Pleasantness to the Imagination, but certainly the chief Reason is its
near Resemblance to Nature, as it does not only, like other Pictures,
give the Colour and Figure, but the Motion of the Things it represents.

We have before observed, that there is generally in Nature something
more Grand and August, than what we meet with in the Curiosities of Art.
When therefore, we see this imitated in any measure, it gives us a
nobler and more exalted kind of Pleasure than what we receive from the
nicer and more accurate Productions of Art. On this Account our English
Gardens are not so entertaining to the Fancy as those in France and
Italy, where we see a large Extent of Ground covered over with an
agreeable mixture of Garden and Forest, which represent every where an
artificial Rudeness, much more charming than that Neatness and Elegancy
which we meet with in those of our own Country. It might, indeed, be of
ill Consequence to the Publick, as well as unprofitable to private
Persons, to alienate so much Ground from Pasturage, and the Plow, in
many Parts of a Country that is so well peopled, and cultivated to a far
greater Advantage. But why may not a whole Estate be thrown into a kind
of Garden by frequent Plantations, that may turn as much to the Profit,
as the Pleasure of the Owner? A Marsh overgrown with Willows, or a
Mountain shaded with Oaks, are not only more beautiful, but more
beneficial, than when they lie bare and unadorned. Fields of Corn make a
pleasant Prospect, and if the Walks were a little taken care of that lie
between them, if the natural Embroidery of the Meadows were helpt and
improved by some small Additions of Art, and the several Rows of Hedges
set off by Trees and Flowers, that the Soil was capable of receiving, a
Man might make a pretty Landskip of his own Possessions.

Writers who have given us an Account of China, tell us the Inhabitants
of that Country laugh at the Plantations of our Europeans, which are
laid out by the Rule and Line; because, they say, any one may place
Trees in equal Rows and uniform Figures. They chuse rather to shew a
Genius in Works of this Nature, and therefore always conceal the Art by
which they direct themselves. They have a Word, it seems, in their
Language, by which they express the particular Beauty of a Plantation
that thus strikes the Imagination at first Sight, without discovering
what it is that has so agreeable an Effect. Our British Gardeners, on
the contrary, instead of humouring Nature, love to deviate from it as
much as possible. Our Trees rise in Cones, Globes, and Pyramids. We see
the Marks of the Scissars upon every Plant and Bush. I do not know
whether I am singular in my Opinion, but, for my own part, I would
rather look upon a Tree in all its Luxuriancy and Diffusion of Boughs
and Branches, than when it is thus cut and trimmed into a Mathematical
Figure; and cannot but fancy that an Orchard in Flower looks infinitely
more delightful, than all the little Labyrinths of the [more [1]]
finished Parterre. But as our great Modellers of Gardens have their
Magazines of Plants to dispose of, it is very natural for them to tear
up all the beautiful Plantations of Fruit Trees, and contrive a Plan
that may most turn to their own Profit, in taking off their Evergreens,
and the like Moveable Plants, with which their Shops are plentifully
stocked.

O.


[Footnote 1: [most]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 415.               Thursday, June 26, 1712.                 Addison.


  'Adde tot egregias urbes, operumque laborem.'

  Virg.


Having already shewn how the Fancy is affected by the Works of Nature,
and afterwards considered in general both the Works of Nature and of
Art, how they mutually assist and compleat each other, in forming such
Scenes and Prospects as are most apt to delight the Mind of the
Beholder, I shall in this Paper throw together some Reflections on that
Particular Art, which has a more immediate Tendency, than any other, to
produce those Primary Pleasures of the Imagination, which have hitherto
been the Subject of this Discourse. The Art I mean is that of
Architecture, which I shall consider only with regard to the Light in
which the foregoing Speculations have placed it, without entring into
those Rules and Maxims which the great Masters of Architecture have laid
down, and explained at large in numberless Treatises upon that Subject.

Greatness, in the Works of Architecture, may be considered as relating
to the Bulk and Body of the Structure, or to the Manner in which it is
built. As for the first, we find the Ancients, especially among the
Eastern Nations of the World, infinitely superior to the Moderns.

Not to mention the Tower of Babel, of which an old Author says, there
were the Foundations to be seen in his time, which looked like a
spacious Mountain; what could be more noble than the Walls of Babylon,
its hanging Gardens, and its Temple to Jupiter Belus, that rose a Mile
high by Eight several Stories, each Story a Furlong in Height, and on
the Top of which was the Babylonian Observatory; I might here, likewise,
take Notice of the huge Rock that was cut into the Figure of Semiramis,
with the smaller Rocks that lay by it in the Shape of Tributary Kings;
the prodigious Basin, or artificial Lake, which took in the whole
Euphrates, till such time as a new Canal was formed for its Reception,
with the several Trenches through which that River was conveyed. I know
there are persons who look upon some of these Wonders of Art as
Fabulous, but I cannot find any [Grand [1]] for such a Suspicion, unless
it be that we have no such Works among us at present. There were indeed
many greater Advantages for Building in those Times, and in that Part of
the World, than have been met with ever since. The Earth was extremely
fruitful, Men lived generally on Pasturage, which requires a much
smaller number of Hands than Agriculture: There were few Trades to
employ the busie Part of Mankind, and fewer Arts and Sciences to give
Work to Men of Speculative Tempers; and what is more than all the rest,
the Prince was absolute; so that when he went to War, he put himself at
the Head of a whole People: As we find Semiramis leading her [three [2]]
Millions to the Field, and yet over-powered by the Number of her
Enemies. 'Tis no wonder, therefore, when she was at Peace, and turned
her Thoughts on Building, that she could accomplish so great Works, with
such a prodigious Multitude of Labourers: Besides that, in her Climate,
there was small Interruption of Frosts and Winters, which make the
Northern Workmen lie half the Year Idle. I might mention too, among the
Benefits of the Climate, what Historians say of the Earth, that it
sweated out a Bitumen or natural kind of Mortar, which is doubtless the
same with that mentioned in Holy Writ, as contributing to the Structure
of Babel. Slime they used instead of Mortar.

In Egypt we still see their Pyramids, which answer to the Descriptions
that have been made of them; and I question not but a traveller might
find out some Remains of the Labyrinth that covered a whole Province,
and had a hundred Temples disposed among its several Quarters and
Divisions.

The Wall of China is one of these Eastern Pieces of Magnificence, which
makes a Figure even in the Map of the World, altho an Account of it
would have been thought Fabulous, were not the Wall it self still
extant.

We are obliged to Devotion for the noblest Buildings that have adornd
the several Countries of the World. It is this which has set Men at work
on Temples and Publick Places of Worship, not only that they might, by
the Magnificence of the Building, invite the Deity to reside within it,
but that such stupendous Works might, at the same time, open the Mind to
vast Conceptions, and fit it to converse with the Divinity of the Place.
For every thing that is Majestick imprints an Awfulness and Reverence on
the Mind of the Beholder, and strikes in with the Natural Greatness of
the Soul.

In the Second place we are to consider Greatness of Manner in
Architecture, which has such Force upon the Imagination, that a small
Building, where it appears, shall give the Mind nobler Ideas than one of
twenty times the Bulk, where the Manner is ordinary or little. Thus,
perhaps, a Man would have been more astonished with the Majestick Air
that appeared in one of [Lysippus's [3]] Statues of Alexander, tho' no
bigger than the Life, than he might have been with Mount Athos, had it
been cut into the Figure of the Hero, according to the Proposal of
Phidias, [4] with a River in one Hand, and a City in the other.

Let any one reflect on the Disposition of Mind he finds in himself, at
his first Entrance into the Pantheon at Rome, and how his Imagination is
filled with something Great and Amazing; and, at the same time, consider
how little, in proportion, he is affected with the Inside of a Gothick
Cathedral, tho' it be five times larger than the other; which can arise
from nothing else, but the Greatness of the Manner in the one, and the
Meanness in the other.

I have seen an Observation upon this Subject in a French Author, which
very much pleased me. It is in Monsieur Freart's Parallel of the Ancient
and Modern Architecture. I shall give it the Reader with the same Terms
of Art which he has made use of. I am observing (says he) a thing which,
in my Opinion, is very curious, whence it proceeds, that in the same
Quantity of Superficies, the one Manner seems great and magnificent, and
the other poor and trifling; the Reason is fine and uncommon. I say
then, that to introduce into Architecture this Grandeur of Manner, we
ought so to proceed, that the Division of the Principal Members of the
Order may consist but of few Parts, that they be all great and of a bold
and ample Relievo, and Swelling; and that the Eye, beholding nothing
little and mean, the Imagination may be more vigorously touched and
affected with the Work that stands before it. For example; In a Cornice,
if the Gola or Cynatium of the Corona, the Coping, the Modillions or
Dentelli, make a noble Show by their graceful Projections, if we see
none of that ordinary Confusion which is the Result of those little
Cavities, Quarter Rounds of the Astragal and I know not how many other
intermingled Particulars, which produce no Effect in great and massy
Works, and which very unprofitably take up place to the Prejudice of the
Principal Member, it is most certain that this Manner will appear Solemn
and Great; as on the contrary, that it will have but a poor and mean
Effect, where there is a Redundancy of those smaller Ornaments, which
divide and scatter the Angles of the Sight into such a Multitude of
Rays, so pressed together that the whole will appear but a Confusion.

Among all the Figures in Architecture, there are none that have a
greater Air than the Concave and the Convex, and we find in all the
Ancient and Modern Architecture, as well in the remote Parts of China,
as in Countries nearer home, that round Pillars and Vaulted Roofs make a
great Part of those Buildings which are designed for Pomp and
Magnificence. The Reason I take to be, because in these Figures we
generally see more of the Body, than in those of other Kinds. There are,
indeed, Figures of Bodies, where the Eye may take in two Thirds of the
Surface; but as in such Bodies the Sight must split upon several Angles,
it does not take in one uniform Idea, but several Ideas of the same
kind. Look upon the Outside of a Dome, your Eye half surrounds it; look
up into the Inside, and at one Glance you have all the Prospect of it;
the entire Concavity falls into your Eye at once, the Sight being as the
Center that collects and gathers into it the Lines of the whole
Circumference: In a Square Pillar, the Sight often takes in but a fourth
Part of the Surface: and in a Square Concave, must move up and down to
the different Sides, before it is Master of all the inward Surface. For
this Reason, the Fancy is infinitely more struck with the View of the
open Air, and Skies, that passes through an Arch, than what comes
through a Square, or any other Figure. The Figure of the Rainbow does
not contribute less to its Magnificence, than the Colours to its Beauty,
as it is very poetically described by the Son of Sirach: Look upon the
Rainbow and praise him that made it; very beautiful it is in its
Brightness; it encompasses the Heavens with a glorious Circle, and the
Hands of the [most High [5]] have bended it.

Having thus spoken of that Greatness which affects the Mind in
Architecture, I might next shew the Pleasure that arises in the
Imagination from what appears new and beautiful in this Art; but as
every Beholder has naturally a greater Taste of these two Perfections in
every Building which offers it self to his View, than of that which I
have hitherto considered, I shall not trouble my Reader with any
Reflections upon it. It is sufficient for my present Purpose, to
observe, that there is nothing in this whole Art which pleases the
Imagination, but as it is Great, Uncommon, or Beautiful.

O.


[Footnote 1: Grounds]


[Footnote 2: two]


[Footnote 3: Protogenes's]


[Footnote 4: Dinocrates.]


[Footnote 5: [Almighty]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 416.                Friday, June 27, 1712.                 Addison.


  'Quatenûs hoc simile est oculis, quod mente videmus.'

  Lucr.


I at first divided the Pleasures of the Imagination, into such as arise
from Objects that are actually before our Eyes, or that once entered in
at our Eyes, and are afterwards called up into the Mind either barely by
its own Operations, or on occasion of something without us, as Statues,
or Descriptions. We have already considered the first Division, and
shall therefore enter on the other, which for Distinction sake, I have
called the Secondary Pleasures of the Imagination. When I say the Ideas
we receive from Statues, Descriptions, or such like Occasions, are the
same that were once actually in our View, it must not be understood that
we had once see the very Place, Action, or Person which are carved or
described. It is sufficient, that we have seen Places, Persons, or
Actions, in general, which bear a Resemblance, or at least some remote
Analogy with what we find represented. Since it is in the Power of the
Imagination, when it is once Stocked with particular Ideas, to enlarge,
compound, and vary them at her own Pleasure.

Among the different Kinds of Representation, Statuary is the most
natural, and shews us something likest the Object that is represented.
To make use of a common Instance, let one who is born Blind take an
Image in his Hands, and trace out with his Fingers the different Furrows
and Impressions of the Chissel, and he will easily conceive how the
Shape of a Man, or Beast, may be represented by it; but should he draw
his Hand over a Picture, where all is smooth and uniform, he would never
be able to imagine how the several Prominencies and Depressions of a
human Body could be shewn on a plain Piece of Canvas, that has in it no
Unevenness or Irregularity. Description runs yet further from the Things
it represents than Painting; for a Picture bears a real Resemblance to
its Original, which Letters and Syllables are wholly void of. Colours
speak of Languages, but Words are understood only by such a People or
Nation. For this Reason, tho' Men's Necessities quickly put them on
finding out Speech, Writing is probably of a later invention than
Painting; particularly we are told, that in America when the Spaniards
first arrived there Expresses were sent to the Emperor of Mexico in
Paint, and the News of his Country delineated by the Strokes of a
Pencil, which was a more natural Way than that of Writing, tho' at the
same time much more imperfect, because it is impossible to draw the
little Connexions of Speech, or to give the Picture of a Conjunction or
an Adverb. It would be yet more strange, to represent visible Objects by
Sounds that have no Ideas annexed to them, and to make something like
Description in Musick. Yet it is certain, there may be confused,
imperfect Notions of this Nature raised in the Imagination by an
Artificial Composition of Notes; and we find that great Masters in the
Art are able, sometimes, to set their Hearers in the Heat and Hurry of a
Battel, to overcast their Minds with melancholy Scenes and Apprehensions
of Deaths and Funerals, or to lull them into pleasing Dreams of Groves
and Elisiums.

In all these Instances, this Secondary Pleasure of the Imagination
proceeds from that Action of the Mind, which compares the Ideas arising
from the Original Objects, with the Ideas we receive from the Statue,
Picture, Description, or Sound that represents them. It is impossible
for us to give the necessary Reason, why this Operation of the Mind is
attended with so much Pleasure, as I have before observed on the same
Occasion; but we find a great Variety of Entertainments derived from
this single Principle: For it is this that not only gives us a Relish of
Statuary, Painting and Description, but makes us delight in all the
Actions and Arts of Mimickry. It is this that makes the several kinds of
Wit Pleasant, which consists, as I have formerly shewn, in the Affinity
of Ideas: And we may add, it is this also that raises the little
Satisfaction we sometimes find in the different Sorts of false Wit;
whether it consists in the Affinity of Letters, as in Anagram,
Acrostick; or of Syllables, as in Doggerel Rhimes, Ecchos; or of Words,
as in Punns, Quibbles; or of a whole Sentence or Poem, to Wings, and
Altars. The final Cause, probably, of annexing Pleasure to this
Operation of the Mind, was to quicken and encourage us in our Searches
after Truth, since the distinguishing one thing from another, and the
right discerning betwixt our Ideas, depends wholly upon our comparing
them together, and observing the Congruity or Disagreement that appears
among the several Works of Nature.

But I shall here confine my self to those Pleasures of the Imagination,
[which [1]] proceed from Ideas raised by Words, because most of the
Observations that agree with Descriptions, are equally Applicable to
Painting and Statuary.

Words, when well chosen, have so great a Force in them, that a
Description often gives us more lively Ideas than the Sight of Things
themselves. The Reader finds a Scene drawn in stronger Colours, and
painted more to the Life in his Imagination, by the help of Words, than
by an actual Survey of the Scene which they describe. In this case the
Poet seems to get the better of Nature; he takes, indeed, the Landskip
after her, but gives it more vigorous Touches, heightens its Beauty, and
so enlivens the whole Piece, that the Images which flow from the Objects
themselves appear weak and faint, in Comparison of those that come from
the Expressions. The Reason, probably, may be, because in the Survey of
any Object we have only so much of it painted on the Imagination, as
comes in at the Eye; but in its Description, the Poet gives us as free a
View of it as he pleases, and discovers to us several Parts, that either
we did not attend to, or that lay out of our Sight when we first beheld
it. As we look on any Object, our Idea of it is, perhaps, made up of two
or three simple Ideas; but when the Poet represents it, he may either
give us a more complex Idea of it, or only raise in us such Ideas as are
most apt to affect the Imagination.

It may be here worth our while to Examine how it comes to pass that
several Readers, who are all acquainted with the same Language, and know
the Meaning of the Words they read, should nevertheless have a different
Relish of the same Descriptions. We find one transported with a Passage,
which another runs over with Coldness and Indifference, or finding the
Representation extreamly natural, where another can perceive nothing of
Likeness and Conformity. This different Taste must proceed, either from
the Perfection of Imagination in one more than in another, or from the
different Ideas that several Readers affix to the same Words. For, to
have a true Relish, and form a right Judgment of a Description, a Man
should be born with a good Imagination, and must have well weighed the
Force and Energy that lye in the several Words of a Language, so as to
be able to distinguish which are most significant and expressive of
their proper Ideas, and what additional Strength and Beauty they are
capable of receiving from Conjunction with others. The Fancy must be
warm to retain the Print of those Images it hath received from outward
Objects and the Judgment discerning, to know what Expressions are most
proper to cloath and adorn them to the best Advantage. A Man who is
deficient in either of these Respects, tho' he may receive the general
Notion of a Description, can never see distinctly all its particular
Beauties: As a Person, with a weak Sight, may have the confused Prospect
of a Place that lies before him, without entering into its several
Parts, or discerning the variety of its Colours in their full Glory and
Perfection.

O.


[Footnote 1: [that]]


THE SPECTATOR


VOL. III.


A NEW EDITION


REPRODUCING THE ORIGINAL TEXT BOTH AS FIRST ISSUED AND AS CORRECTED BY
ITS AUTHORS

WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND INDEX
BY
HENRY MORLEY

PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LITERATURE, UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON


IN THREE VOLUMES


VOL. III.


1891


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 417.                 Saturday, June 28, 1712.                  Addison.


  'Quem tu Melpomene semel
  Nascentem placido lumine videris,
    Non illum labor Isthmius
  Clarabit pugilem, non equus impiger, &c.
  Sed quæ Tibur aquæ fertile perfluunt,
    Et Spissæ nemorum comæ
  Fingent Æolio carmine nobilem.'

  Hor.


We may observe, that any single Circumstance of what we have formerly
seen often raises up a whole Scene of Imagery, and awakens [numberless
[1]] Ideas that before slept in the Imagination; such a particular Smell
or Colour is able to fill the Mind, on a sudden, with the Picture of the
Fields or Gardens, where we first met with it, and to bring up into View
all the Variety of Images that once attended it. Our Imagination takes
the Hint, and leads us unexpectedly into Cities or Theatres, Plains or
Meadows. We may further observe, when the Fancy thus reflects on the
Scenes that have past in it formerly, those which were at first pleasant
to behold, appear more so upon Reflection, and that the Memory heightens
the Delightfulness of the Original. A _Cartesian_ would account for both
these Instances in the following Manner.

The Sett of Ideas, which we received from such a Prospect or Garden,
having entered the Mind at the same time, have a Sett of Traces
belonging to them in the Brain, bordering very near upon one another;
when, therefore, any one of these Ideas arises in the Imagination, and
consequently dispatches a flow of Animal Spirits to its proper Trace,
these Spirits, in the Violence of their Motion, run not only into the
Trace, to which they were more particularly directed, but into several
of those that lie about it: By this means they awaken other Ideas of the
same Sett, which immediately determine a new Dispatch of Spirits, that
in the same manner open other Neighbouring Traces, till at last the
whole Sett of them is blown up, and the whole Prospect or Garden
flourishes in the Imagination. But because the Pleasure we received from
these Places far surmounted, and overcame the little Disagreeableness we
found in them; for this Reason there was at first a wider Passage worn
in the Pleasure Traces, and, on the contrary, so narrow a one in those
which belonged to the disagreeable Ideas, that they were quickly stopt
up, and rendered incapable of receiving any Animal Spirits, and
consequently of exciting any unpleasant Ideas in the Memory.

It would be in vain to enquire, whether the Power of Imagining Things
strongly proceeds from any greater Perfection in the Soul, or from any
nicer Texture in the Brain of one Man than of another. But this is
certain, that a noble Writer should be born with this Faculty in its
full Strength and Vigour, so as to be able to receive lively Ideas from
outward Objects, to retain them long, and to range them together, upon
Occasion, in such Figures and Representations as are most likely to hit
the Fancy of the Reader. A Poet should take as much Pains in forming his
Imagination, as a Philosopher in cultivating his Understanding. He must
gain a due Relish of the Works of Nature, and be thoroughly conversant
in the various Scenary of a Country Life.

When he is stored with Country Images, if he would go beyond Pastoral,
and the lower kinds of Poetry, he ought to acquaint himself with the
Pomp and Magnificence of Courts. He should be very well versed in every
thing that is noble and stately in the Productions of Art, whether it
appear in Painting or Statuary, in the great Works of Architecture which
are in their present Glory, or in the Ruins of those [which [2]]
flourished in former Ages.

Such Advantages as these help to open a Man's Thoughts, and to enlarge
his Imagination, and will therefore have their Influence on all kinds of
Writing, if the Author knows how to make right use of them. And among
those of the learned Languages who excel in this Talent, the most
perfect in their several kinds, are perhaps _Homer_, _Virgil_, and
_Ovid_. The first strikes the Imagination wonderfully with what is
Great, the second with what is Beautiful, and the last with what is
Strange. Reading the _Iliad_ is like travelling through a Country
uninhabited, where the Fancy is entertained with a thousand Savage
Prospects of vast Desarts, wide uncultivated Marshes, huge Forests,
mis-shapen Rocks and Precipices. On the contrary, the _Æneid_ is like a
well ordered Garden, where it is impossible to find out any Part
unadorned, or to cast our Eyes upon a single Spot, that does not produce
some beautiful Plant or Flower. But when we are in the _Metamorphoses_,
we are walking on enchanted Ground, and see nothing but Scenes of Magick
lying round us.

_Homer_ is in his Province, when he is describing a Battel or a
Multitude, a Heroe or a God. _Virgil_ is never better pleased, than when
he is in his _Elysium_, or copying out an entertaining Picture.
_Homer's_ Epithets generally mark out what is Great, _Virgil's_ what is
Agreeable. Nothing can be more Magnificent than the Figure _Jupiter_
makes in the first _Iliad_, no more Charming than that of Venus in the
first _Æneid_.

  [Greek:
  Ae, kaì kyanéaesin ep' ophrysi neuse Kroníôn,
  Ambrósiai d' ára chaitai eperrhôsanto ánaktos
  Kratòs ap' athanátoio mégan d' élélixen Ólympos.]


  Dixit et avertens roseâ cervice refulsit:
  Ambrosiæque comæ; divinum vertice odorem
  Spiravere: Pedes vestis defluxit ad imos:
  Et vera incessu patuit Dea--

_Homer's_ Persons are most of them God-like and Terrible; _Virgil_ has
scarce admitted any into his Poem, who are not Beautiful, and has taken
particular Care to make his Heroe so.

--lumenque juventæ
  Purpureum, et lætos oculis afflavit honores.

In a Word, 'Homer' fills his Readers with Sublime Ideas, and, I believe,
has raised the Imagination of all the good Poets that have come after
him. I shall only instance 'Horace', who immediately takes Fire at the
first Hint of any Passage in the 'Iliad' or 'Odyssey', and always rises
above himself, when he has 'Homer' in his View. 'Virgil' has drawn
together, into his 'Æneid', all the pleasing Scenes his Subject is
capable of admitting, and in his 'Georgics' has given us a Collection of
the most delightful Landskips that can be made out of Fields and Woods,
Herds of Cattle, and Swarms of Bees.

'Ovid', in his 'Metamorphoses', has shewn us how the Imagination may be
affected by what is Strange. He describes a Miracle in every Story, and
always gives us the Sight of some new Creature at the end of it. His Art
consists chiefly in well-timing his Description, before the first Shape
is quite worn off, and the new one perfectly finished; so that he every
where entertains us with something we never saw before, and shews
Monster after Monster, to the end of the 'Metamorphoses'.

If I were to name a Poet that is a perfect Master in all these Arts of
working on the Imagination, I think 'Milton' may pass for one: And if
his 'Paradise Lost' falls short of the 'Æneid' or 'Iliad' in this
respect, it proceeds rather from the Fault of the Language in which it
is written, than from any Defect of Genius in the Author. So Divine a
Poem in 'English', is like a stately Palace built of Brick, where one
may see Architecture in as great a Perfection as in one of Marble, tho'
the Materials are of a coarser Nature. But to consider it only as it
regards our present Subject: What can be conceived greater than the
Battel of Angels, the Majesty of Messiah, the Stature and Behaviour of
Satan and his Peers? What more beautiful than 'Pandæmonium', Paradise,
Heaven, Angels, 'Adam' and 'Eve'? What more strange, than the Creation
of the World, the several Metamorphoses of the fallen Angels, and the
surprising Adventures their Leader meets with in his Search after
Paradise? No other Subject could have furnished a Poet with Scenes so
proper to strike the Imagination, as no other Poet could have painted
those Scenes in more strong and lively Colours.

O.


[Footnote 1: [a Thousand]]


[Footnote 2: [that]]


       *       *       *       *       *


  [Advertisement:--'Whereas the Proposal called the Multiplication Table
  is under an Information from the Attorney General, in Humble
  Submission and Duty to her Majesty the said Undertaking is laid down,
  and Attendance is this Day given ... in order to repay such Sums as
  have been paid into the said Table without Deduction.']


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 418.                  Monday, June 30, 1712.                   Addison.


  '--ferat et rubus asper amomum.'

  Virg.


The Pleasures of these Secondary Views of the Imagination, are of a
wider and more Universal Nature than those it has when joined with
Sight; for not only what is Great, Strange or Beautiful, but any Thing
that is Disagreeable when looked upon, pleases us in an apt Description.
Here, therefore, we must enquire after a new Principle of Pleasure,
which is nothing else but the Action of the Mind, which _compares_ the
Ideas that arise from Words, with the Ideas that arise from the Objects
themselves; and why this Operation of the Mind is attended with so much
Pleasure, we have before considered. For this Reason therefore, the
Description of a Dunghill is pleasing to the Imagination, if the Image
be represented to our Minds by suitable Expressions; tho' perhaps, this
may be more properly called the Pleasure of the Understanding than of
the Fancy, because we are not so much delighted with the Image that is
contained in the Description, as with the Aptness of the Description to
excite the Image.

But if the Description of what is Little, Common, or Deformed, be
acceptable to the Imagination, the Description of what is Great,
Surprising or Beautiful, is much more so; because here we are not only
delighted with _comparing_ the Representation with the Original, but are
highly pleased with the Original itself. Most Readers, I believe, are
more charmed with _Milton's_ Description of Paradise, than of Hell; they
are both, perhaps, equally perfect in their Kind, but in the one the
Brimstone and Sulphur are not so refreshing to the Imagination, as the
Beds of Flowers and the Wilderness of Sweets in the other.

There is yet another Circumstance which recommends a Description more
than all the rest, and that is if it represents to us such Objects as
are apt to raise a secret Ferment in the Mind of the Reader, and to
work, with Violence, upon his Passions. For, in this Case, we are at
once warmed and enlightened, so that the Pleasure becomes more
Universal, and is several ways qualified to entertain us. Thus in
Painting, it is pleasant to look on the Picture of any Face, where the
Resemblance is hit, but the Pleasure increases, if it be the Picture of
a Face that is Beautiful, and is still greater, if the Beauty be
softened with an Air of Melancholy or Sorrow. The two leading Passions
which the more serious Parts of Poetry endeavour to stir up in us, are
Terror and Pity. And here, by the way, one would wonder how it comes to
pass, that such Passions as are very unpleasant at all other times, are
very agreeable when excited by proper Descriptions. It is not strange,
that we should take Delight in such Passions as are apt to produce Hope,
Joy, Admiration, Love, or the like Emotions in us, because they never
rise in the Mind without an inward Pleasure which attends them. But how
comes it to pass, that we should take delight in being terrified or
dejected by a Description, when we find so much Uneasiness in the Fear
or Grief [which [1]] we receive from any other Occasion?

If we consider, therefore, the Nature of this Pleasure, we shall find
that it does not arise so properly from the Description of what is
terrible, as from the Reflection we make on our selves at the time of
reading it. When we look on such hideous Objects, we are not a little
pleased to think we are in no Danger of them. We consider them at the
same time, as Dreadful and Harmless; so that the more frightful
Appearance they make, the greater is the Pleasure we receive from the
Sense of our own Safety. In short, we look upon the Terrors of a
Description, with the same Curiosity and Satisfaction that we survey a
dead Monster.

  '--Informe cadaver
  Protrahitur, nequeunt expleri corda tuendo
  Terribiles oculos: vultum, villosaque satis
  Pectora semiferi, atque extinctos faucibus ignes.'

  Virg.

It is for the same Reason that we are delighted with the reflecting upon
Dangers that are past, or in looking on a Precipice at a distance, which
would fill us with a different kind of Horror, if we saw it hanging over
our Heads.

In the like manner, when we read of Torments, Wounds, Deaths, and the
like dismal Accidents, our Pleasure does not flow so properly from the
Grief which such melancholy Descriptions give us, as from the secret
Comparison which we make between our selves and the Person [who [2]]
suffers. Such Representations teach us to set a just Value upon our own
Condition, and make us prize our good Fortune, which exempts us from the
like Calamities. This is, however, such a kind of Pleasure as we are not
capable of receiving, when we see a Person actually lying under the
Tortures that we meet with in a Description; because in this case, the
Object presses too close upon our Senses, and bears so hard upon us,
that it does not give us Time or Leisure to reflect on our selves. Our
Thoughts are so intent upon the Miseries of the Sufferer, that we cannot
turn them upon our own Happiness. Whereas, on the contrary, we consider
the Misfortunes we read in History or Poetry, either as past, or as
fictitious, so that the Reflection upon our selves rises in us
insensibly, and over-bears the Sorrow we conceive for the Sufferings of
the Afflicted.

But because the Mind of Man requires something more perfect in Matter,
than what it finds there, and can never meet with any Sight in Nature
which sufficiently answers its highest Ideas of Pleasantness; or, in
other Words, because the Imagination can fancy to it self Things more
Great, Strange, or Beautiful, than the Eye ever saw, and is still
sensible of some Defect in what it has seen; on this account it is the
part of a Poet to humour the Imagination in its own Notions, by mending
and perfecting Nature where he describes a Reality, and by adding
greater Beauties than are put together in Nature, where he describes a
Fiction.

He is not obliged to attend her in the slow Advances which she makes
from one Season to another, or to observe her Conduct, in the successive
Production of Plants and Flowers. He may draw into his Description all
the Beauties of the Spring and Autumn, and make the whole Year
contribute something to render it the more agreeable. His Rose-trees,
Wood-bines, and Jessamines may flower together, and his Beds be cover'd
at the same time with Lillies, Violets, and Amaranths. His Soil is not
restrained to any particular Sett of Plants, but is proper either for
Oaks or Mirtles, and adapts itself to the Products of every Climate.
Oranges may grow wild in it; Myrrh may be met with in every Hedge, and
if he thinks it proper to have a Grove of Spices, he can quickly command
Sun enough to raise it. If all this will not furnish out an agreeable
Scene, he can make several new Species of Flowers, with richer Scents
and higher Colours than any that grow in the Gardens of Nature. His
Consorts of Birds may be as full and harmonious, and his Woods as thick
and gloomy as he pleases. He is at no more Expence in a long Vista, than
a short one, and can as easily throw his Cascades from a Precipice of
half a Mile high, as from one of twenty Yards. He has his Choice of the
Winds, and can turn the Course of his Rivers in all the Variety of
_Meanders_, that are most delightful to the Reader's Imagination. In a
word, he has the modelling of Nature in his own Hands, and may give her
what Charms he pleases, provided he does not reform her too much, and
run into Absurdities, by endeavouring to excel.

O.


[Footnote 1: that]


[Footnote 2: that]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 419.              Tuesday, July 1, 1712.               Addison.


  '--mentis gratissimus Error.'

  Hor.


There is a kind of Writing, wherein the Poet quite loses Sight of
Nature, and entertains his Reader's Imagination with the Characters and
Actions of such Persons as have many of them no Existence, but what he
bestows on them. Such are Fairies, Witches, Magicians, Demons, and
departed Spirits. This Mr. _Dryden_ calls _the Fairy Way of Writing_,
which is, indeed, more difficult than any other that depends on the
Poet's Fancy, because he has no Pattern to follow in it, and must work
altogether out of his own Invention.

There is a very odd Turn of Thought required for this sort of Writing,
and it is impossible for a Poet to succeed in it, who has not a
particular Cast of Fancy, and an Imagination naturally fruitful and
superstitious. Besides this, he ought to be very well versed in Legends
and Fables, antiquated Romances, and the Traditions of Nurses and old
Women, that he may fall in with our natural Prejudices, and humour those
Notions which we have imbibed in our Infancy. For otherwise he will be
apt to make his Fairies talk like People of his own Species, and not
like other Setts of Beings, who converse with different Objects, and
think in a different Manner from that of Mankind;

  'Sylvis deducti caveant, me Judice, Fauni
  Ne velut innati triviis ac poene forenses
  Aut nimium teneris juvenentur versibus'

  [Hor.]

I do not say with Mr. _Bays_ in the _Rehearsal_, that Spirits must not
be confined to speak Sense, but it is certain their Sense ought to be a
little discoloured, that it may seem particular, and proper to the
Person and the Condition of the Speaker.

These Descriptions raise a pleasing kind of Horrour in the Mind of the
Reader, and amuse his Imagination with the Strangeness and Novelty of
the Persons who are represented in them. They bring up into our Memory
the Stories we have heard in our Childhood, and favour those secret
Terrors and Apprehensions to which the Mind of Man is naturally subject.
We are pleased with surveying the different Habits and Behaviours of
Foreign Countries, how much more must we be delighted and surprised when
we are led, as it were, into a new Creation, and see the Persons and
Manners of another Species? Men of cold Fancies, and Philosophical
Dispositions, object to this kind of Poetry, that it has not Probability
enough to affect the Imagination. But to this it may be answered, that
we are sure, in general, there are many Intellectual Beings in the World
besides our selves, and several Species of Spirits, who are subject to
different Laws and Oeconomies from those of Mankind; when we see,
therefore, any of these represented naturally, we cannot look upon the
Representation as altogether impossible; nay, many are prepossest with
such false Opinions, as dispose them to believe these particular
Delusions; at least, we have all heard so many pleasing Relations in
favour of them, that we do not care for seeing through the Falshood, and
willingly give our selves up to so agreeable an Imposture.

The Ancients have not much of this Poetry among them, for, indeed,
almost the whole Substance of it owes its Original to the Darkness and
Superstition of later Ages, when pious Frauds were made use of to amuse
Mankind, and frighten them into a Sense of their Duty. Our Forefathers
look'd upon Nature with more Reverence and Horrour, before the World was
enlightened by Learning and Philosophy, and lov'd to astonish themselves
with the Apprehensions of Witchcraft, Prodigies, Charms and
Enchantments. There was not a Village in _England_, that had not a Ghost
in it, the Church-yards were all haunted, every large Common had a
Circle of Fairies belonging to it, and there was scarce a Shepherd to be
met with who had not seen a Spirit.

Among all the Poets of this Kind our _English_ are much the best, by
what I have yet seen; whether it be that we abound with more Stories of
this Nature, or that the Genius of our Country is fitter for this sort
of Poetry. For the _English_ are naturally fanciful, and very often
disposed by that Gloominess and Melancholy of Temper, which is so
frequent in our Nation, to many wild Notions and Visions, to which
others are not so liable.

Among the _English_, _Shakespear_ has incomparably excelled all others.
That noble Extravagance of Fancy which he had in so great Perfection,
thoroughly qualified him to touch this weak superstitious Part of his
Reader's Imagination; and made him capable of succeeding, where he had
nothing to support him besides the Strength of his own Genius. There is
something so wild and yet so solemn in the Speeches of his Ghosts,
Fairies, Witches and the like Imaginary Persons, that we cannot forbear
thinking them natural, tho' we have no rule by which to judge of them,
and must confess, if there are such Beings in the World, it looks highly
probable that they should talk and act as he has represented them.

There is another sort of imaginary Beings, that we sometimes meet with
among the Poets, when the Author represents any Passion, Appetite,
Virtue or Vice, under a visible Shape, and makes it a Person or an Actor
in his Poem. Of this Nature are the Descriptions of Hunger and Envy in
_Ovid_, of Fame in _Virgil_, and of Sin and Death in _Milton_. We find a
whole Creation of the like Shadowy Persons in _Spencer_, who had an
admirable Talent in Representations of this kind. I have discoursed of
these Emblematical Persons in former Papers, and shall therefore only
mention them in this Place. Thus we see how many Ways Poetry addresses
it self to the Imagination, as it has not only the whole Circle of
Nature for its Province, but makes new Worlds of its own, shews us
Persons who are not to be found in Being, and represents even the
Faculties of the Soul, with her several Virtues and Vices, in a sensible
Shape and Character.

I shall, in my two following Papers, consider in general, how other
kinds of Writing are qualified to please the Imagination, with which I
intend to conclude this Essay.

O.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 420               Wednesday, July 2, 1712.             Addison.


  'Quocunque volunt mentem Auditoris agunto.'

  Hor.


As the Writers in Poetry and Fiction borrow their several Materials from
outward Objects, and join them together at their own Pleasure, there are
others who are obliged to follow Nature more closely, and to take entire
Scenes out of her. Such are Historians, natural Philosophers,
Travellers, Geographers, and in a Word, all who describe visible Objects
of a real Existence.

It is the most agreeable Talent of an Historian, to be able to draw up
his Armies and fight his Battels in proper Expressions, to set before
our Eyes the Divisions, Cabals, and Jealousies of great Men, and to lead
us Step by Step into the several Actions and Events of his History. We
love to see the Subject unfolding it self by just Degrees, and breaking
upon us insensibly, that so we may be kept in a pleasing Suspense, and
have time given us to raise our Expectations, and to side with one of
the Parties concerned in the Relation. I confess this shews more the Art
than the Veracity of the Historian, but I am only to speak of him as he
is qualified to please the Imagination. And in this respect _Livy_ has,
perhaps, excelled all who went before him, or have written since his
Time. He describes every thing in so lively a Manner, that his whole
History is an admirable Picture, and touches on such proper
Circumstances in every Story, that his Reader becomes a kind of
Spectator, and feels in himself all the Variety of Passions which are
correspondent to the several Parts of the Relation.

But among this Sett of Writers there are none who more gratifie and
enlarge the Imagination, than the Authors of the new Philosophy, whether
we consider their Theories of the Earth or Heavens, the Discoveries they
have made by Glasses, or any other of their Contemplations on Nature. We
are not a little pleased to find every green Leaf swarm with Millions of
Animals, that at their largest Growth are not visible to the naked Eye.
There is something very engaging to the Fancy, as well as to our Reason,
in the Treatises of Metals, Minerals, Plants, and Meteors. But when we
survey the whole Earth at once, and the several Planets that lie within
its Neighbourhood, we are filled with a pleasing Astonishment, to see so
many Worlds hanging one above another, and sliding round their Axles in
such an amazing Pomp and Solemnity. If, after this, we contemplate those
wild Fields of _Ether_, that reach in Height as far as from _Saturn_ to
the fixt Stars, and run abroad almost to an Infinitude, our Imagination
finds its Capacity filled with so immense a Prospect, and puts it self
upon the Stretch to comprehend it. But if we yet rise higher, and
consider the fixt Stars as so many vast Oceans of Flame, that are each
of them attended with a different Sett of Planets, and still discover
new Firmaments and new Lights that are sunk farther in those
unfathomable Depths of _Ether_, so as not to be seen by the strongest of
our Telescopes, we are lost in such a Labyrinth of Suns and Worlds, and
confounded with the Immensity and Magnificence of Nature.

Nothing is more pleasant to the Fancy, than to enlarge it self by
Degrees, in its Contemplation of the various Proportions [which [1]] its
several Objects bear to each other, when it compares the Body of Man to
the Bulk of the whole Earth, the Earth to the Circle it describes round
the Sun, that Circle to the Sphere of the fixt Stars, the sphere of the
fixt Stars to the Circuit of the whole Creation, the whole Creation it
self to the infinite Space that is every where diffused about it; or
when the Imagination works downward, and considers the Bulk of a human
Body in respect of an Animal, a hundred times less than a Mite, the
particular Limbs of such an Animal, the different Springs [which [2]]
actuate the Limbs, the Spirits which set these Springs a going, and the
proportionable Minuteness of these several Parts, before they have
arrived at their full Growth and Perfection. But if, after all this, we
take the least Particle of these Animal Spirits, and consider its
Capacity of being Wrought into a World, that shall contain within those
narrow Dimensions a Heaven and Earth, Stars and Planets, and every
different Species of living Creatures, in the same Analogy and
Proportion they bear to each other in our own Universe; such a
Speculation, by reason of its Nicety, appears ridiculous to those who
have not turned their Thoughts that way, though at the same time it is
founded on no less than the Evidence of a Demonstration. Nay, we might
yet carry it farther, and discover in the smallest Particle of this
little World a new and inexhausted Fund of Matter, capable of being spun
out into another Universe.

I have dwelt the longer on this Subject, because I think it may shew us
the proper Limits, as well as the Defectiveness of our Imagination; how
it is confined to a very small Quantity of Space, and immediately stopt
in its Operations, when it endeavours to take in any thing that is very
great, or very little. Let a Man try to conceive the different Bulk of
an Animal, which is twenty, from another which is a hundred times less
than a Mite, or to compare, in his Thoughts, a length of a thousand
Diameters of the Earth, with that of a Million, and he will quickly find
that he has no different Measures in his Mind, adjusted to such
extraordinary Degrees of Grandeur or Minuteness. The Understanding,
indeed, opens an infinite Space on every side of us, but the
Imagination, after a few faint Efforts, is immediately at a stand, and
finds her self swallowed up in the Immensity of the Void that surrounds
it: Our Reason can pursue a Particle of Matter through an infinite
Variety of Divisions, but the Fancy soon loses sight of it, and feels in
it self a kind of Chasm, that wants to be filled with Matter of a more
sensible Bulk. We can neither widen, nor contract the Faculty to the
Dimensions of either Extreme. The Object is too big for our Capacity,
when we would comprehend the Circumference of a World, and dwindles into
nothing, when we endeavour after the Idea of an Atome.

It is possible this defect of Imagination may not be in the Soul it
self, but as it acts in Conjunction with the Body. Perhaps there may not
be room in the Brain for such a variety of Impressions, or the Animal
Spirits may be incapable of figuring them in such a manner, as is
necessary to excite so very large or very minute Ideas. However it be,
we may well suppose that Beings of a higher Nature very much excel us in
this respect, as it is probable the Soul of Man will be infinitely more
perfect hereafter in this Faculty, as well as in all the rest; insomuch
that, perhaps, the Imagination will be able to keep Pace with the
Understanding, and to form in it self distinct Ideas of all the
different Modes and Quantities of Space.

O.


[Footnote 1: [that]]


[Footnote 2: [that]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 421.               Thursday, July 3, 1712.             Addison.


  'Ignotis errare locis, ignota videre
  Flumina gaudebat; studio minuente laborem.'

  Ovid.


The Pleasures of the Imagination are not wholly confined to such
particular Authors as are conversant in material Objects, but are often
to be met with among the Polite Masters of Morality, Criticism, and
other Speculations abstracted from Matter, who, tho' they do not
directly treat of the visible Parts of Nature, often draw from them
their Similitudes, Metaphors, and Allegories. By these Allusions a Truth
in the Understanding is as it were reflected by the Imagination; we are
able to see something like Colour and Shape in a Notion, and to discover
a Scheme of Thoughts traced out upon Matter. And here the Mind receives
a great deal of Satisfaction, and has two of its Faculties gratified at
the same time, while the Fancy is busie in copying after the
Understanding, and transcribing Ideas out of the Intellectual World into
the Material.

The Great Art of a Writer shews it self in the Choice of pleasing
Allusions, which are generally to be taken from the _great_ or
_beautiful_ Works of Art or Nature; for though whatever is New or
Uncommon is apt to delight the Imagination, the chief Design of an
Allusion being to illustrate and explain the Passages of an Author, it
should be always borrowed from what is more known and common, than the
Passages which are to be explained.

Allegories, when well chosen, are like so many Tracks of Light in a
Discourse, that make every thing about them clear and beautiful. A noble
Metaphor, when it is placed to an Advantage, casts a kind of Glory round
it, and darts a Lustre through a whole Sentence: These different Kinds
of Allusion are but so many different Manners of Similitude, and, that
they may please the Imagination, the Likeness ought to be very exact, or
very agreeable, as we love to see a Picture where the Resemblance is
just, or the Posture and Air graceful. But we often find eminent Writers
very faulty in this respect; great Scholars are apt to fetch their
Comparisons and Allusions from the Sciences in which they are most
conversant, so that a Man may see the Compass of their Learning in a
Treatise on the most indifferent Subject. I have read a Discourse upon
Love, which none but a profound Chymist could understand, and have heard
many a Sermon that should only have been preached before a Congregation
of _Cartesians_. On the contrary, your Men of Business usually have
recourse to such Instances as are too mean and familiar. They are for
drawing the Reader into a Game of Chess or Tennis, or for leading him
from Shop to Shop, in the Cant of particular Trades and Employments. It
is certain, there may be found an infinite Variety of very agreeable
Allusions in both these kinds, but for the generality, the most
entertaining ones lie in the Works of Nature, which are obvious to all
Capacities, and more delightful than what is to be found in Arts and
Sciences.

It is this Talent of affecting the Imagination, that gives an
Embellishment to good Sense, and makes one Man's Compositions more
agreeable than another's. It sets off all Writings in general, but is
the very Life and highest Perfection of Poetry: Where it shines in an
Eminent Degree, it has preserved several Poems for many Ages, that have
nothing else to recommend them; and where all the other Beauties are
present, the Work appears dry and insipid, if this single one be
wanting. It has something in it like Creation; It bestows a kind of
Existence, and draws up to the Reader's View several Objects which are
not to be found in Being. It makes Additions to Nature, and gives a
greater Variety to God's Works. In a Word, it is able to beautifie and
adorn the most illustrious Scenes in the Universe, or to fill the Mind
with more glorious Shows and Apparitions, than can be found in any Part
of it.

We have now discovered the several Originals of those Pleasures that
gratify the Fancy; and here, perhaps, it would not be very difficult to
cast under their proper Heads those contrary Objects, which are apt to
fill it with Distaste and Terrour; for the Imagination is as liable to
Pain as Pleasure. When the Brain is hurt by any Accident, or the Mind
disordered by Dreams or Sickness, the Fancy is over-run with wild dismal
Ideas, and terrified with a thousand hideous Monsters of its own framing.

  'Eumenidum veluti demens videt Agmina Pentheus,
  Et solem geminum, et duplices se ostendere Thebas.
  Aut Agamemnonius scenis agitatus Orestes,
  Armatam facibus matrem et serpentibus atris
  Cum videt, ultricesque sedent in limine Diræ.'

  Vir.

There is not a Sight in Nature so mortifying as that of a Distracted
Person, when his Imagination is troubled, and his whole Soul disordered
and confused. _Babylon_ in Ruins is not so melancholy a Spectacle. But
to quit so disagreeable a Subject, I shall only consider, by way of
Conclusion, what an infinite Advantage this Faculty gives an Almighty
Being over the Soul of Man, and how great a measure of Happiness or
Misery we are capable of receiving from the Imagination only.

We have already seen the Influence that one Man has over the Fancy of
another, and with what Ease he conveys into it a Variety of Imagery; how
great a Power then may we suppose lodged in him, who knows all the ways
of affecting the Imagination, who can infuse what Ideas he pleases, and
fill those Ideas with Terrour and Delight to what Degree he thinks fit?
He can excite Images in the Mind, without the help of Words, and make
Scenes rise up before us and seem present to the Eye without the
Assistance of Bodies or Exterior Objects. He can transport the
Imagination with such beautiful and glorious Visions, as cannot possibly
enter into our present Conceptions, or haunt it with such ghastly
Spectres and Apparitions, as would make us hope for Annihilation, and
think Existence no better than a Curse. In short, he can so exquisitely
ravish or torture the Soul through this single Faculty, as might suffice
to make up the whole Heaven or Hell of any finite Being.

This Essay on the Pleasures of the Imagination having been published in
separate Papers, I shall conclude it with a Table of the principal
Contents in each Paper.


  The CONTENTS.


PAPER I. [No. 411, Volume 2.]

  The Perfection of our Sight above our other Senses. The Pleasures of
  the Imagination arise originally from Sight. The Pleasures of the
  Imagination divided under two Heads. The Pleasures of the Imagination
  in some Respects equal to those of the Understanding. The Extent of
  the Pleasures of the Imagination. The Advantages a Man receives from a
  Relish of these Pleasures. In what Respect they are preferable to
  those of the Understanding.


PAPER II. [No. 412, Volume 2.]

  Three Sources of all the Pleasures of the Imagination, in our Survey
  of outward Objects. How what is Great pleases the Imagination. How
  what is New pleases the Imagination. How what is Beautiful in our own
  Species, pleases the Imagination. How what is Beautiful in general
  pleases the Imagination. What other Accidental Causes may contribute
  to the heightening of these Pleasures.


PAPER III. [No. 413, Volume 2.]

  Why the Necessary Cause of our being pleased with what is Great, New,
  or Beautiful, unknown. Why the Final Cause more known and more useful.
  The Final Cause of our being pleased with what is Great. The Final
  Cause of our being pleased with what is New. The Final Cause of our
  being pleased with what is Beautiful in our own Species. The Final
  Cause of our being pleased with what is Beautiful in general.


PAPER IV. [No. 414, Volume 2.]

  The Works of Nature more pleasant to the Imagination than those of
  Art. The Works of Nature still more pleasant, the more they resemble
  those of Art. The Works of Art more pleasant, the more they resemble
  those of Nature. Our English Plantations and Gardens considered in the
  foregoing Light.


PAPER V. [No. 415, Volume 2.]

  Of Architecture as it affects the Imagination. Greatness in
  Architecture relates either to the Bulk or to the Manner. Greatness of
  Bulk in the Ancient Oriental Buildings. The ancient Accounts of these
  Buildings confirm'd,

    1. From the Advantages, for raising such Works, in the first Ages of
       the World and in the Eastern Climates:

    2. From several of them which are still extant.

  Instances how Greatness of Manner affects the Imagination. A French
  Author's Observation on this Subject. Why Concave and Convex Figures
  give a Greatness of Manner to Works of Architecture. Every thing that
  pleases the Imagination in Architecture is either Great, Beautiful, or
  New.


PAPER VI. [No. 416, Volume 2.]

  The Secondary Pleasures of the Imagination. The several Sources of
  these Pleasures (Statuary, Painting, Description and Musick) compared
  together. The Final Cause of our receiving Pleasure from these several
  Sources. Of Descriptions in particular. The Power of Words over the
  Imagination. Why one Reader more pleased with Descriptions than
  another.


PAPER VII. [No. 417, Volume 3.]

  How a whole Set of Ideas Hang together, &c. A Natural Cause assigned
  for it. How to perfect the Imagination of a Writer. Who among the
  Ancient Poets had this Faculty in its greatest Perfection. Homer
  excelled in Imagining what is Great; Virgil in Imagining what is
  Beautiful; Ovid in imagining what is New. Our own Country-man Milton
  very perfect in all three respects.


PAPER VIII. [No. 418, Volume 3.]

  Why any thing that is unpleasant to behold, pleases the Imagination
  when well described. Why the Imagination receives a more Exquisite
  Pleasure from the Description of what is Great, New, or Beautiful. The
  Pleasure still heightned, if--what is described raises Passion in the
  Mind. Disagreeable Passions pleasing when raised by apt Descriptions.
  Why Terror and Grief are pleasing to the Mind when excited by
  Descriptions. A particular Advantage the Writers in Poetry and Fiction
  have to please the Imagination. What Liberties are allowed them.


PAPER IX. [No. 419, Volume 3.]

  Of that kind of Poetry which Mr. Dryden calls the Fairy Way of
  Writing. How a Poet should be Qualified for it. The Pleasures of the
  Imagination that arise from it. In this respect why the Moderns excell
  the Ancients. Why the English excell the Moderns. Who the Best among
  the English. Of Emblematical Persons.


PAPER X. [No. 420, Volume 3.]

  What Authors please the Imagination who have nothing to do with
  Fiction. How History pleases the Imagination. How the Authors of the
  new Philosophy please the Imagination. The Bounds and Defects of the
  Imagination. Whether these Defects are Essential to the Imagination.


PAPER XI. [No. 421, Volume 3.]

  How those please the Imagination who treat of Subjects abstracted from
  Matter, by Allusions taken from it. What Allusions most pleasing to
  the Imagination. Great Writers how Faulty in this Respect. Of the Art
  of Imagining in General. The Imagination capable of Pain as well as
  Pleasure. In what Degree the Imagination is capable either of Pain or
  Pleasure.


O.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 422.                   Friday, July 4, 1712.                Steele.


  'Hæc scripsi non otii abundantia sed amoris erga te.'

  Tull. Epis.


I do not know any thing which gives greater Disturbance to Conversation,
than the false Notion some People have of Raillery. It ought certainly
to be the first Point to be aimed at in Society, to gain the good Will
of those with whom you converse. The Way to that, is to shew you are
well inclined towards them: What then can be more absurd, than to set up
for being extremely sharp and biting, as the Term is, in your
Expressions to your Familiars? A Man who has no good Quality but
Courage, is in a very ill way towards making an agreeable Figure in the
World, because that which he has superior to other People cannot be
exerted, without raising himself an _Enemy_. Your Gentleman of a
Satyrical Vein is in the like Condition. To say a Thing which perplexes
the Heart of him you speak to, or brings Blushes into his Face, is a
degree of Murder; and it is, I think, an unpardonable Offence to shew a
Man you do not care, whether he is pleased or displeased. But won't you
then take a Jest? Yes: but pray let it be a Jest. It is no Jest to put
me, who am so unhappy as to have an utter Aversion to speaking to more
than one Man at a time, under a Necessity to explain my self in much
Company, and reducing me to Shame and Derision, except I perform what my
Infirmity of Silence disables me to do.

_Callisthenes_ has great Wit accompanied with that Quality (without
which a Man can have no Wit at all) a Sound Judgment. This Gentleman
rallies the best of any Man I know, for he forms his Ridicule upon a
Circumstance which you are in your Heart not unwilling to grant him, to
wit, that you are Guilty of an Excess in something which is in it self
laudable. He very well understands what you would be, and needs not fear
your Anger for declaring you are a little too much that Thing. The
Generous will bear being reproached as Lavish, and the Valiant, Rash,
without being provoked to Resentment against their Monitor. What has
been said to be a Mark of a good Writer, will fall in with the Character
of a good Companion. The good Writer makes his Reader better pleased
with himself, and the agreeable Man makes his Friends enjoy themselves,
rather than him, while he is in their Company. _Callisthenes_ does this
with inimitable Pleasantry. He whispered a Friend the other Day, so as
to be overheard by a young Officer, who gave Symptoms of Cocking upon
the Company, That Gentleman has very much of the Air of a General
Officer. The Youth immediately put on a Composed Behaviour, and behaved
himself suitably to the Conceptions he believed the Company had of him.
It is to be allowed that _Callisthenes_ will make a Man run into
impertinent Relations, to his own Advantage, and express the
Satisfaction he has in his own dear self till he is very ridiculous, but
in this case the Man is made a Fool by his own Consent, and not exposed
as such whether he will or no. I take it therefore that to make Raillery
agreeable, a Man must either not know he is rallied, or think never the
worse of himself if he sees he is.

_Acetus_ is of a quite contrary Genius, and is more generally admired
than _Callisthenes_, but not with Justice. _Acetus_ has no regard to the
Modesty or Weakness of the Person he rallies; but if his Quality or
Humility gives him any Superiority to the Man he would fall upon, he has
no Mercy in making the Onset. He can be pleased to see his best Friend
out of Countenance, while the Laugh is loud in his own Applause. His
Raillery always puts the Company into little Divisions and separate
Interests, while that of _Callisthenes_ cements it, and makes every Man
not only better pleased with himself, but also with all the rest in the
Conversation.

To rally well, it is absolutely necessary that Kindness must run thro'
all you say, and you must ever preserve the Character of a Friend to
support your Pretensions to be free with a Man. _Acetus_ ought to be
banished human Society, because he raises his Mirth upon giving Pain to
the Person upon whom he is pleasant. Nothing but the Malevolence, which
is too general towards those who excell, could make his Company
tolerated; but they with whom he converses, are sure to see some Man
sacrificed where-ever he is admitted, and all the Credit he has for Wit
is owing to the Gratification it gives to other Men's Ill-nature.

_Minutius_ has a Wit that conciliates a Man's Love at the same time that
it is exerted against his Faults. He has an Art of keeping the Person he
rallies in Countenance, by insinuating that he himself is guilty of the
same Imperfection. This he does with so much Address, that he seems
rather to bewail himself, than fall upon his Friend.

It is really monstrous to see how unaccountably it prevails among Men,
to take the Liberty of displeasing each other. One would think sometimes
that the Contention is, who shall be most disagreeable, Allusions to
past Follies, Hints which revive what a Man has a Mind to forget for
ever, and deserves that all the rest of the World should, are commonly
brought forth even in Company of Men of Distinction. They do not thrust
with the Skill of Fencers, but cut up with the Barbarity of Butchers. It
is, methinks, below the Character of Men of Humanity and Good-manners,
to be capable of Mirth while there is any one of the Company in Pain and
Disorder. They who have the true Taste of Conversation, enjoy themselves
in a Communication of each other's Excellencies, and not in a Triumph
over their Imperfections. _Fortius_ would have been reckoned a Wit, if
there had never been a Fool in the World: He wants not Foils to be a
Beauty, but has that natural Pleasure in observing Perfection in others,
that his own Faults are overlooked out of Gratitude by all his
Acquaintance.

After these several Characters of Men who succeed or fail in Raillery,
it may not be amiss to reflect a little further what one takes to be the
most agreeable Kind of it; and that to me appears when the Satyr is
directed against Vice, with an Air of Contempt of the Fault, but no
Ill-will to the Criminal. Mr. _Congreve's Doris_ is a Master-piece in
this Kind. It is the Character of a Woman utterly abandoned, but her
Impudence by the finest Piece of Raillery is made only Generosity.

  'Peculiar therefore is her Way,
    Whether by Nature taught,
  I shall not undertake to say,
    Or by experience bought;

  For who o'er Night obtain'd her Grace,
    She can next Day disown,
  And stare upon the strange Man's Face,
    As one she ne'er had known,

  So well she can the Truth disguise,
    Such artful Wonder frame,
  The Lover or distrusts his Eyes,
    Or thinks 'twas all a Dream.

  Some censure this as lewd or low,
    Who are to Bounty blind;
  For to forget what we bestow,
    Bespeaks a noble Mind.'


T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 423.                  Saturday, July 5, 1712.                  Steele.


  '--Nuper Idoneus.'

  Hor.


I look upon my self as a Kind of Guardian to the Fair, and am always
watchful to observe any thing which concerns their Interest. The present
Paper shall be employed in the Service of a very fine young Woman; and
the Admonitions I give her, may not be unuseful to the rest of the Sex.
_Gloriana_ shall be the Name of the Heroine in To-day's Entertainment;
and when I have told you that she is rich, witty, young and beautiful,
you will believe she does not want Admirers. She has had since she came
to Town about twenty five of those Lovers, who make their Addresses by
way of Jointure and Settlement. These come and go, with great
Indifference on both Sides; and as beauteous as she is, a Line in a Deed
has had Exception enough against it, to outweigh the Lustre of her Eyes,
the Readiness of her Understanding, and the Merit of her general
Character. But among the Crowd of such cool Adorers, she has two who are
very assiduous in their Attendance. There is something so extraordinary
and artful in their Manner of Application, that I think it but common
Justice to alarm her in it. I have done it in the following Letter.


  Madam,

  'I have for some time taken Notice of two Gentlemen who attend you in
  all publick Places, both of whom have also easie Access to you at your
  own House: But the Matter is adjusted between them, and _Damon_, who
  so passionately addresses you, has no Design upon you; but _Strephon_,
  who seems to be indifferent to you, is the Man, who is, as they have
  settled it, to have you. The Plot was laid over a Bottle of Wine; and
  _Strephon_, when he first thought of you, proposed to _Damon_ to be
  his Rival. The manner of his breaking of it to him, I was so placed at
  a Tavern, that I could not avoid hearing. _Damon_, said he with a deep
  Sigh, I have long languished for that Miracle of Beauty _Gloriana_,
  and if you will be very stedfastly my Rival, I shall certainly obtain
  her. Do not, continued he, be offended at this Overture; for I go upon
  the Knowledge of the Temper of the Woman, rather than any Vanity that
  I should profit by an Opposition of your Pretensions to those of your
  humble Servant. _Gloriana_ has very good Sense, a quick Relish of the
  Satisfactions of Life, and will not give her self, as the Crowd of
  Women do, to the Arms of a Man to whom she is indifferent. As she is a
  sensible Woman, Expressions of Rapture and Adoration will not move her
  neither; but he that has her must be the Object of her Desire, not her
  Pity. The Way to this End I take to be, that a Man's general Conduct
  should be agreeable, without addressing in particular to the Woman he
  loves. Now, Sir, if you will be so kind as to sigh and die for
  _Gloriana_, I will carry it with great Respect towards her, but seem
  void of any Thoughts as a Lover. By this Means I shall be in the most
  amiable Light of which I am capable; I shall be received with Freedom,
  you with Reserve. _Damon_, who has himself no Designs of Marriage at
  all, easily fell into the Scheme; and you may observe, that where-ever
  you are _Damon_ appears also. You see he carries on an unaffecting
  Exactness in his Dress and Manner, and strives always to be the very
  Contrary of _Strephon_. They have already succeeded so far, that your
  Eyes are ever in Search of _Strephon_, and turn themselves of Course
  from _Damon_. They meet and compare Notes upon your Carriage; and the
  Letter which, was brought to you the other Day, was a Contrivance to
  remark your Resentment. When you saw the Billet subscribed _Damon_,
  and turned away with a scornful Air, and cried Impertinence! you gave
  Hopes to him that shuns you, without mortifying him that languishes
  for you. What I am concerned for, Madam, is, that in the disposal of
  your Heart, you should know what you are doing, and examine it before
  it is lost. _Strephon_ contradicts you in Discourse with the Civility
  of one who has a Value for you, but gives up nothing like one that
  loves you. This seeming Unconcern gives this Behaviour the advantage
  of Sincerity, and insensibly obtains your good Opinion, by appearing
  disinterested in the purchase of it. If you watch these Correspondents
  hereafter, you will find that _Strephon_ makes his Visit of Civility
  immediately after _Damon_ has tired you with one of Love. Tho' you are
  very discreet, you will find it no easie matter to escape the Toils so
  well laid, as when one studies to be disagreeable in Passion, the
  other to be pleasing without it. All the Turns of your Temper are
  carefully watched, and their quick and faithful Intelligence gives
  your Lovers irresistible Advantage. You will please, Madam, to be upon
  your guard, and take all the necessary Precautions against one who is
  amiable to you before you know he is enamoured.

  _I am, Madam,
  Your most Obedient Servant._


_Strephon_ makes great Progress in this Lady's good Graces, for most
Women being actuated by some little Spirit of Pride and Contradiction,
he has the good effects of both those Motives by this Covert-Way of
Courtship. He received a Message Yesterday from _Damon_ in the following
Words, superscribed _With Speed_.

  'All goes well; she is very angry at me, and I dare say hates me in
  earnest. It is a good time to Visit.
  _Yours_.'


The Comparison of _Strephon's_ Gayety to _Damon's_ Languishment, strikes
her Imagination with a Prospect of very agreeable Hours with such a Man
as the former, and Abhorrence of the insipid Prospect with one like the
latter. To know when a Lady is displeased with another, is to know the
best time of advancing your self. This method of two Persons playing
into each other's Hand is so dangerous, that I cannot tell how a Woman
could be able to withstand such a Siege. The Condition of _Gloriana_, I
am afraid, is irretrievable, for _Strephon_ has had so many
Opportunities of pleasing without suspicion, that all which is left for
her to do is to bring him, now she is advised, to an Explanation of his
Passion, and beginning again, if she can conquer the kind Sentiments she
has already conceived for him. When one shews himself a Creature to be
avoided, the other proper to be fled to for Succour, they have the whole
Woman between them, and can occasionally rebound her Love and Hatred
from one to the other, in such a manner as to keep her at a distance
from all the rest of the World, and cast Lots for the Conquest.

N. B. _I have many other Secrets which concern the Empire of Love, but I
consider that while I alarm my Women, I instruct my Men_.

T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 424.                   Monday, July 7, 1712.                  Steele


  'Est Ulubris, animus si te non deficit--'

  Hor.


  London, June 24.

  Mr. Spectator,

  'A man who has it in his Power to chuse his own Company, would
  certainly be much to blame should he not, to the best of his Judgment,
  take such as are of a Temper most suitable to his own; and where that
  Choice is wanting, or where a Man is mistaken in his Choice, and yet
  under a Necessity of continuing in the same Company, it will certainly
  be to his Interest to carry himself as easily as possible.

  'In this I am sensible I do but repeat what has been said a thousand
  times, at which however I think no Body has any Title to take
  Exception, but they who never failed to put this in Practice--Not to
  use any longer Preface, this being the Season of the Year in which
  great Numbers of all sorts of People retire from this Place of
  Business and Pleasure to Country Solitude, I think it not improper to
  advise them to take with them as great a Stock of Good-humour as they
  can; for tho' a Country-Life is described as the most pleasant of all
  others, and though it may in Truth be so, yet it is so only to those
  who know how to enjoy Leisure and Retirement.

  'As for those who can't live without the constant helps of Business or
  Company, let them consider, that in the Country there is no
  _Exchange_, there are no Play-houses, no Variety of Coffee-houses, nor
  many of those other Amusements which serve here as so many Reliefs
  from the repeated Occurrences in their own Families; but that there
  the greatest Part of their Time must be spent within themselves, and
  consequently it behoves them to consider how agreeable it will be to
  them before they leave this dear Town.

  'I remember, Mr. SPECTATOR, we were very well entertained last Year,
  with the Advices you gave us from Sir ROGER'S Country Seat; which I
  the rather mention, because 'tis almost impossible not to live
  pleasantly, where the Master of a Family is such a one as you there
  describe your Friend, who cannot therefore (I mean as to his domestick
  Character) be too often recommended to the Imitation of others. How
  amiable is that Affability and Benevolence with which he treats his
  Neighbours, and every one, even the meanest of his own Family! And yet
  how seldom imitated? instead of which we commonly meet with
  ill-natured Expostulations, Noise, and Chidings--And this I hinted,
  because the Humour and Disposition of the Head, is what chiefly
  influences all the other Parts of a Family.

  'An Agreement and kind Correspondence between Friends and
  Acquaintance, is the greatest Pleasure of Life. This is an undoubted
  Truth, and yet any Man who judges from the Practice of the World, will
  be almost persuaded to believe the contrary; for how can we suppose
  People should be so industrious to make themselves uneasie? What can
  engage them to entertain and foment Jealousies of one another upon
  every the least Occasion? Yet so it is, there are People who (as it
  should seem) delight in being troublesome and vexatious, who (as
  _Tully_ speaks) _Mira sunt alacritate ad litigandum, Have a certain
  Chearfulness in wrangling_. And thus it happens, that there are very
  few Families in which there are not Feuds and Animosities, tho' 'tis
  every one's Interest, there more particularly, to avoid 'em, because
  there (as I would willingly hope) no one gives another Uneasiness,
  without feeling some share of it--But I am gone beyond what I
  designed, and had almost forgot what I chiefly proposed; which was,
  barely to tell you, how hardly we who pass most of our Time in Town
  dispense with a long Vacation in the Country, how uneasie we grow to
  our selves and to one another when our Conversation is confined,
  insomuch that by _Michaelmas_ 'tis odds but we come to downright
  squabbling, and make as free with one another to our Faces, as we do
  with the rest of the World behind their Backs. After I have told you
  this, I am to desire that you would now and then give us a Lesson of
  Good-humour, a Family-Piece; which, since we are all very fond of you,
  I hope may have some Influence upon us--

  'After these plain Observations give me leave to give you an Hint of
  what a Set of Company of my Acquaintance, who are now gone into the
  Country, and have the Use of an absent Nobleman's Seat, have settled
  among themselves, to avoid the Inconveniencies above mentioned. They
  are a Collection of ten or twelve, of the same good Inclination
  towards each other, but of very different Talents and Inclinations:
  From hence they hope, that the Variety of their Tempers will only
  create Variety of Pleasures. But as there always will arise, among the
  same People, either for want of Diversity of Objects, or the like
  Causes, a certain Satiety, which may grow into ill Humour or
  Discontent, there is a large Wing of the House which they design to
  employ in the Nature of an Infirmary. Whoever says a peevish thing, or
  acts any thing which betrays a Sowerness or Indisposition to Company,
  is immediately to be conveyed to his Chambers in the Infirmary; from
  whence he is not to be relieved, till by his Manner of Submission, and
  the Sentiments expressed in his Petition for that Purpose, he appears
  to the Majority of the Company to be again fit for Society. You are to
  understand, that all ill-natured Words or uneasie Gestures are
  sufficient Cause for Banishment; speaking impatiently to Servants,
  making a Man repeat what he says, or any thing that betrays
  Inattention or Dishumour, are also criminal without Reprieve: But it
  is provided, that whoever observes the ill-natured Fit coming upon
  himself, and voluntarily retires, shall be received at his return from
  the Infirmary with the highest Marks of Esteem. By these and other
  wholesome Methods it is expected that if they cannot cure one another,
  yet at least they have taken Care that the ill Humour of one shall not
  be troublesome to the rest of the Company. There are many other Rules
  which the Society have established for the Preservation of their Ease
  and Tranquility, the Effects of which, with the Incidents that arise
  among them, shall be communicated to you from Time to Time for the
  publick Good, by,

  SIR,
  Your most humble Servant,
  R. O.


T.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 425.                 Tuesday, July 8, 1712.                  Budgell.


  'Frigora mitescunt Zephyris, Ver proterit Æstas
  Interitura, simul
  Pomifer Autumnus fruges effuderit, et mox
  Bruma recurrit iners.'

  Hor.


  _Mr_. SPECTATOR,

  'There is hardly any thing gives me a more sensible Delight, than the
  Enjoyment of a cool still Evening after the Uneasiness of a hot sultry
  Day. Such a one I passed not long ago, which made me rejoice when the
  Hour as come for the Sun to set, that I might enjoy the Freshness of
  the Evening in my Garden, which then affords me the pleasantest Hours
  I pass in the whole Four and twenty. I immediately rose from my Couch,
  and went down into it. You descend at first by twelve Stone Steps into
  a large Square divided into four Grass-plots, in each of which is a
  Statue of white Marble. This is separated from a large Parterre by a
  low Wall, and from thence, thro' a Pair of Iron Gates, you are led
  into a long broad Walk of the finest Turf, set on each Side with tall
  Yews, and on either Hand bordered by a Canal, which on the Right
  divides the Walk from a Wilderness parted into Variety of Allies and
  Arbours, and on the Left from a kind of Amphitheatre, which is the
  Receptacle of a great Number of Oranges and Myrtles. The Moon shone
  bright, and seemed then most agreeably to supply the Place of the Sun,
  obliging me with as much Light as was necessary to discover a thousand
  pleasing Objects, and at the same time divested of all Power of Heat.
  The Reflection of it in the Water, the Fanning of the Wind rustling on
  the Leaves, the Singing of the Thrush and Nightingale, and the
  Coolness of the Walks, all conspired to make me lay aside all
  displeasing Thoughts, and brought me into such a Tranquility of Mind,
  as is I believe the next Happiness to that of hereafter. In this sweet
  Retirement I naturally fell into the Repetition of some Lines out of a
  Poem of _Milton's_, which he entitles _Il Penseroso_, the Ideas of
  which were exquisitely suited to my present Wandrings of Thought.

    'Sweet Bird! that shun'st the Noise of Folly,
    Most musical! most melancholy!
    Thee Chauntress, oft the Woods among,
    I wooe to hear thy Evening Song:
    And missing thee, I walk unseen
    On the dry smooth-shaven Green,
    To behold the wandring Moon,
    Riding near her highest Noon,
    Like one that hath been led astray,
    Thro' the Heavn's wide pathless Way,
    And oft, as if her Head she bow'd,
    Stooping thro' a fleecy Cloud.

    Then let some strange mysterious Dream
    Wave with his Wings in airy Stream,
    Of lively Portraiture displaid,
    Softly on my Eyelids laid;
    And as I wake, sweet Musick breathe
    Above, about, or underneath,
    Sent by Spirits to Mortals Good,
    Or th' unseen Genius of the Wood.'

  I reflected then upon the sweet Vicissitudes of Night and Day, on the
  charming Disposition of the Seasons, and their Return again in a
  perpetual Circle; and oh! said I, that I could from these my declining
  Years return again to my first Spring of Youth and Vigour; but that,
  alas! is impossible: All that remains within my Power, is to soften
  the Inconveniences I feel, with an easie contented Mind, and the
  Enjoyment of such Delights as this Solitude affords me. In this
  Thought I sate me down on a Bank of Flowers and dropt into a Slumber,
  which whether it were the Effect of Fumes and Vapours, or my present
  Thoughts, I know not; but methought the Genius of the Garden stood
  before me, and introduced into the Walk where I lay this Drama and
  different Scenes of the Revolution of the Year, which whilst I then
  saw, even in my Dream, I resolved to write down, and send to the
  SPECTATOR.

  The first Person whom I saw advancing towards me was a Youth of a most
  beautiful Air and Shape, tho' he seemed not yet arrived at that exact
  Proportion and Symmetry of Parts which a little more time would have
  given him; but however, there was such a Bloom in his Countenance,
  such Satisfaction and Joy, that I thought it the most desirable Form
  that I had ever seen. He was cloathed in a flowing Mantle of green
  Silk, interwoven with Flowers: He had a Chaplet of Roses on his Head,
  and a _Narcissus_ in his Hand; Primroses and Violets sprang up under
  his Feet, and all Nature was cheer'd at his Approach. _Flora_ was on
  one Hand and _Vertumnus_ on the other in a Robe of changeable Silk.
  After this I was surprized to see the Moon-beams reflected with a
  sudden Glare from Armour, and to see a Man compleatly armed advancing
  with his Sword drawn. I was soon informed by the Genius it was _Mars_,
  who had long usurp'd a Place among the Attendants of the _Spring_. He
  made Way for a softer Appearance, it was _Venus_, without any Ornament
  but her own Beauties, not so much as her own Cestus, with which she
  had incompass'd a Globe, which she held in her right Hand, and in her
  left she had a Sceptre of Gold. After her followed the Graces with
  their Arms intwined within one another, their Girdles were loosed, and
  they moved to the Sound of soft Musick, striking the Ground
  alternately with their Feet: Then came up the three Months which
  belong to this Season. As _March_ advanced towards me, there was
  methought in his Look a louring Roughness, which ill befitted a Month
  which was ranked in so soft a Season; but as he came forwards his
  Features became insensibly more mild and gentle: He smooth'd his Brow,
  and looked with so sweet a Countenance that I could not but lament his
  Departure, though he made way for _April_. He appeared in the greatest
  Gaiety imaginable, and had a thousand Pleasures to attend him: His
  Look was frequently clouded, but immediately return'd to its first
  Composure, and remained fixed in a Smile. Then came _May_ attended by
  _Cupid_, with his Bow strung, and in a Posture to let fly an Arrow: As
  he passed by methought I heard a confused Noise of soft Complaints,
  gentle Ecstacies, and tender Sighs of Lovers; Vows of Constancy, and
  as many Complainings of Perfidiousness; all which the Winds wafted
  away as soon as they had reached my Hearing. After these I saw a Man
  advance in the full Prime and Vigour of his Age, his Complexion was
  sanguine and ruddy, his Hair black, and fell down in beautiful
  Ringlets not beneath his Shoulders, a Mantle of Hair-colour'd Silk
  hung loosely upon him: He advanced with a hasty Step after the
  _Spring_, and sought out the Shade and cool Fountains which plaid in
  the Garden. He was particularly well pleased when a Troop of _Zephyrs_
  fanned him with their Wings: He had two Companions who walked on each
  Side that made him appear the most agreeable, the one was _Aurora_
  with Fingers of Roses, and her Feet dewy, attired in grey: The other
  was _Vesper_ in a Robe of Azure beset with Drops of Gold, whose Breath
  he caught whilst it passed over a Bundle of Honey-Suckles and
  Tuberoses which he held in his Hand. _Pan_ and _Ceres_ followed them
  with four Reapers, who danced a Morrice to the Sound of Oaten Pipes
  and Cymbals. Then came the Attendant Months. _June_ retained still
  some small Likeness of the _Spring_; but the other two seemed to step
  with a less vigorous Tread, especially _August_, who seem'd almost to
  faint whilst for half the Steps he took the Dog-Star levelled his Rays
  full at his Head: They passed on and made Way for a Person that seemed
  to bend a little under the Weight of Years; his Beard and Hair, which
  were full grown, were composed of an equal Number of black and grey;
  he wore a Robe which he had girt round him of a yellowish Cast, not
  unlike the Colour of fallen Leaves, which he walked upon. I thought he
  hardly made Amends for expelling the foregoing Scene by the large
  Quantity of Fruits which he bore in his Hands. _Plenty_ walked by his
  Side with an healthy fresh Countenance, pouring out from an Horn all
  the various Product of the Year. _Pomona_ followed with a Glass of
  Cyder in her Hand, with _Bacchus_ in a Chariot drawn by Tygers,
  accompanied by a whole Troop of Satyrs, Fauns, and Sylvans.
  _September_, who came next, seem'd in his Looks to promise a new
  _Spring_, and wore the Livery of those Months. The succeeding Month
  was all soiled with the Juice of Grapes, as if he had just come from
  the Wine-Press. _November_, though he was in this Division, yet, by
  the many Stops he made seemed rather inclined to the _Winter_, which
  followed close at his Heels. He advanced in the Shape of an old Man in
  the Extremity of Age: The Hair he had was so very white it seem'd a
  real Snow; his Eyes were red and piercing, and his Beard hung with a
  great Quantity of Icicles: He was wrapt up in Furrs, but yet so
  pinched with Excess of Cold that his Limbs were all contracted and his
  Body bent to the Ground, so that he could not have supported himself
  had it not been for _Comus_ the God of Revels, and _Necessity_ the
  Mother of Fate, who sustained him on each side. The Shape and Mantle
  of _Comus_ was one of the things that most surprized me; as he
  advanced towards me, his Countenance seemed the most desirable I had
  ever seen: On the fore Part of his Mantle was pictured Joy, Delight,
  and Satisfaction, with a thousand Emblems of Merriment, and Jests with
  Faces looking two Ways at once; but as he passed from me I was amazed
  at a Shape so little correspondent to his Face: His Head was bald, and
  all the rest of his Limbs appeared old and deformed. On the hinder
  Part of his Mantle was represented Murder with dishevelled Hair and a
  Dagger all bloody, Anger in a Robe of Scarlet, and Suspicion squinting
  with both Eyes; but above all the most conspicuous was the Battel of
  the _Lapithæ_ and the _Centaurs_. I detested so hideous a Shape, and
  turned my Eyes upon _Saturn_, who was stealing away behind him with a
  Scythe in one Hand, and an Hour-glass in t'other unobserved. Behind
  _Necessity_ was _Vesta_ the Goddess of Fire with a Lamp which was
  perpetually supply'd with Oyl; and whose Flame was eternal. She
  cheered the rugged Brow of _Necessity_, and warmed her so far as
  almost to make her assume the Features and Likeness of _Choice.
  December, January,_ and _February_, passed on after the rest all in
  Furrs; there was little Distinction to be made amongst them, and they
  were only more or less displeasing as they discovered more or less
  Haste towards the grateful Return of _Spring._


Z.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 426.                 Wednesday, July 9, 1712.                Steele.


  '--Quid non mortalia Pectora cogis
  Auri sacra fames'

  Virg.


A very agreeable Friend of mine, the other Day, carrying me in his Coach
into the Country to Dinner, fell into Discourse concerning the Care of
Parents due to their Children, and the Piety of Children towards their
Parents. He was reflecting upon the Succession of particular Virtues and
Qualities there might be preserved from one Generation to another, if
these Regards were reciprocally held in Veneration: But as he never
fails to mix an Air of Mirth and good Humour with his good Sense and
Reasoning, he entered into the following Relation.

I will not be confident in what Century, or under what Reign it
happened, that this Want of mutual Confidence and right Understanding
between Father and Son was fatal to the Family of the _Valentines_ in
_Germany_. _Basilius Valentinus_ was a Person who had arrived at the
utmost Perfection in the Hermetick Art, and initiated his Son
_Alexandrinus_ in the same Mysteries: But as you know they are not to be
attained but by the Painful, the Pious, the Chaste, and Pure of Heart,
_Basilius_ did not open to him, because of his Youth, and the Deviations
too natural to it, the greatest Secrets of which he was Master, as well
knowing that the Operation would fail in the Hands of a Man so liable to
Errors in Life as _Alexandrinus_. But believing, from a certain
Indisposition of Mind as well as Body, his Dissolution was drawing nigh,
he called _Alexandrinus_ to him, and as he lay on a Couch, over-against
which his Son was seated, and prepared by sending out Servants one after
another, and Admonition to examine that no one over-heard them, he
revealed the most important of his Secrets with the Solemnity and
Language of an Adept. My Son, said he, many have been the Watchings,
long the Lucubrations, constant the Labours of thy Father, not only to
gain a great and plentiful Estate to his Posterity, but also to take
Care that he should have no Posterity. Be not amazed, my Child; I do not
mean that thou shalt be taken from me, but that I will never leave thee,
and consequently cannot be said to have Posterity. Behold, my dearest
_Alexandrinus_, the Effect of what was propagated in nine Months: We are
not to contradict Nature but to follow and to help her; just as long as
an Infant is in the Womb of its Parent, so long are these Medicines of
Revification in preparing. Observe this small Phial and this little
Gallipot, in this an Unguent, in the other a Liquor. In these, my child,
are collected such Powers, as shall revive the Springs of Life when they
are yet but just ceased, and give new Strength, new Spirits, and, in a
Word, wholly restore all the Organs and Senses of the human Body to as
great a Duration, as it had before enjoyed from its Birth to the Day of
the Application of these my Medicines. But, my beloved Son, Care must be
taken to apply them within ten Hours after the Breath is out of the
Body, while yet the Clay is warm with its late Life, and yet capable of
Resuscitation. I find my Frame grown crasie with perpetual Toil and
Meditation; and I conjure you, as soon as I am dead, to anoint me with
this Unguent; and when you see me begin to move, pour into my Lips this
inestimable Liquor, else the Force of the Ointment will be ineffectual.
By this Means you will give me Life as I have you, and we will from that
Hour mutually lay aside the Authority of having bestowed Life on each
other, but live as Brethren, and prepare new Medicines against such
another Period of Time as will demand another Application of the same
Restoratives. In a few Days after these wonderful Ingredients were
delivered to _Alexandrinus_, _Basilius_ departed this Life. But such was
the pious Sorrow of the Son at the Loss of so excellent a Father, and
the first Transports of Grief had so wholly disabled him from all manner
of Business, that he never thought of the Medicines till the Time to
which his Father had limited their Efficacy was expired. To tell the
Truth, _Alexandrinus_ was a Man of Wit and Pleasure, and considered his
Father had lived out his natural Time, his Life was long and uniform,
suitable to the Regularity of it; but that he himself, poor Sinner,
wanted a new Life, to repent of a very bad one hitherto; and in the
Examination of his Heart, resolved to go on as he did with this natural
Being of his, but repent very faithfully and spend very piously the Life
to which he should be restored by Application of these Rarities, when
Time should come, to his own Person.

It has been observed, that Providence frequently punishes the Self-love
of Men who would do immoderately for their own Off-spring, with Children
very much below their Characters and Qualifications, insomuch that they
only transmit their Names to be born by those who give daily Proofs of
the Vanity of the Labour and Ambition of their Progenitors.

It happened thus in the Family of _Basilius_; for  _Alexandrinus_ began
to enjoy his ample Fortune in all the Extremities of Houshold Expence,
Furniture, and insolent Equipage; and this he pursued till the Day of
his own Departure began, as he grew sensible, to approach. As _Basilius_
was punished with a Son very unlike him, _Alexandrinus_ was visited with
one of his own Disposition. It is natural that ill Men should be
suspicious, and _Alexandrinus_, besides that Jealousie, had Proofs of
the vitious Disposition of his Son _Renatus_, for that was his Name.

_Alexandrinus_, as I observed, having very good Reasons for thinking it
unsafe to trust the real Secret of his Phial and Gallypot to any Man
living, projected to make sure Work, and hope for his Success depending
from the Avarice, not the Bounty of his Benefactor.

With this Thought he called _Renatus_ to his Bed-side, and bespoke him
in the most pathetick Gesture and Accent. As much, my Son, as you have
been addicted to Vanity and Pleasure, as I also have been before you,
you nor I could escape the Fame, or the good Effects of the profound
Knowledge of our Progenitor, the Renowned _Basilius_. His Symbol is very
well known in the Philosophick World, and I shall never forget the
venerable Air of his Countenance, when he let me into the profound
Mysteries of _the Smaragdine Table of_ Hermes. _It is true_, said he,
_and far removed from all Colour of Deceit, That which is Inferior is
like that which is Superior, by which are acquired and perfected all the
Miracles of a certain Work. The Father is the Sun, the Mother the Moon:
the Wind is the Womb, the Earth is the Nurse of it, and Mother of all
Perfection. All this must be received with Modesty and Wisdom._ The
Chymical People carry in all their Jargon a whimsical sort of Piety,
which is ordinary with great Lovers of Money, and is no more but
deceiving themselves, that their Regularity and Strictness of Manners
for the Ends of this World, has some Affinity to the Innocence of Heart
which must recommend them to the next. _Renatus_ wondered to hear his
Father talk so like an Adept, and with such a Mixture of Piety, while
_Alexandrinus_ observing his Attention fixed, proceeded: This Phial,
Child, and this little Earthen-Pot will add to thy Estate so much, as to
make thee the richest Man in the _German_ Empire. I am going to my Long
Home, but shall not return to common Dust. Then he resumed a Countenance
of Alacrity, and told him, That if within an Hour after his Death he
anointed his whole Body, and poured down his Throat that Liquor which he
had from old _Basilius_, the Corps would be converted into pure Gold. I
will not pretend to express to you the unfeigned Tendernesses that
passed between these two extraordinary Persons; but if the Father
recommended the Care of his Remains with Vehemence and Affection, the
Son was not behind-hand in professing that he would not cut the least
Bit off him, but upon the utmost Extremity, or to provide for his
younger Brothers and Sisters.

Well, _Alexandrinus_ died, and the Heir of his Body (as our Term is)
could not forbear in the Wantonness of his Heart, to measure the Length
and Breadth of his beloved Father, and cast up the ensuing Value of him
before he proceeded to Operation. When he knew the immense Reward of his
Pains, he began the Work: But lo! when he had anointed the Corps all
over, and began to apply the Liquor, the Body stirred, and _Renatus_, in
a Fright, broke the Phial. [1]


[Footnote 1: This tale is from the Description of the memorable Sea and
Land Travels through Persia to the East Indies, by Johann Albrecht von
Mandelslo, translated from the German of Olearius, by J. B. B. Bk v. p.
189. Basil Valentine, whom it makes the hero of a story after the manner
of the romances of Virgil the Enchanter, was an able chemist (in those
days an alchemist) of the sixteenth century, who is believed to have
been a Benedictine monk of Erfurth, and is not known to have had any
children. He was the author of the Currus Triumphalis Antimonii,
mentioned in a former note. His name was familiar through several books
in French, especially 'L'Azoth des Philosophes, avec les 12 Clefs de
Philosophie' (Paris, 1660), and a 'Testament de Basile Valentine'
(London, 1671).]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 427.                Thursday, July 10, 1712.                Steele.


  'Quartum a rerum turpitudine abes, tantum Te a verborum libertate
  sejungas.'

  Tull.


It is a certain Sign of an ill Heart to be inclined to Defamation. They
who are harmless and innocent, can have no Gratification that way; but
it ever arises from a Neglect of what is laudable in a Man's self, and
an Impatience of seeing it in another. Else why should Virtue provoke?
Why should Beauty displease in such a Degree, that a Man given to
Scandal never lets the Mention of either pass by him without offering
something to the Diminution of it? A Lady the other Day at a Visit being
attacked somewhat rudely by one, whose own Character has been very
roughly treated, answered a great deal of Heat and Intemperance very
calmly, 'Good Madam spare me, who am none of your Match; I speak Ill of
no Body, and it is a new Thing to me to be spoken ill of.' Little Minds
think Fame consists in the Number of Votes they have on their Side among
the Multitude, whereas it is really the inseparable Follower of good and
worthy Actions. Fame is as natural a Follower of Merit, as a Shadow is
of a Body. It is true, when Crowds press upon you, this Shadow cannot be
seen, but when they separate from around you, it will again appear. The
Lazy, the Idle, and the Froward, are the Persons who are most pleas'd
with the little Tales which pass about the Town to the Disadvantage of
the rest of the World. Were it not for the Pleasure of speaking Ill,
there are Numbers of People who are too lazy to go out of their own
Houses, and too ill-natur'd to open their Lips in Conversation. It was
not a little diverting the other Day to observe a Lady reading a
Post-Letter, and at these Words, 'After all her Airs, he has heard some
Story or other, and the Match is broke off', give Orders in the midst of
her Reading, 'Put to the Horses.' That a young Woman of Merit has missed
an advantagious Settlement, was News not to be delayed, lest some Body
else should have given her malicious Acquaintance that Satisfaction
before her. The Unwillingness to receive good Tidings is a Quality as
inseparable from a Scandal-Bearer, as the Readiness to divulge bad. But,
alas, how wretchedly low and contemptible is that State of Mind, that
cannot be pleased but by what is the Subject of Lamentation. This Temper
has ever been in the highest Degree odious to gallant Spirits. The
_Persian_ Soldier, who was heard reviling _Alexander_ the Great, was
well admonished by his Officer; _Sir, you are paid to fight against_
Alexander, _and not to rail at him_.

_Cicero_ in one of his Pleadings, [1] defending his Client from general
Scandal, says very handsomely, and with much Reason, _There are many who
have particular Engagements to the Prosecutor: There are many who are
known to have ill-will to him for whom I appear; there are many who are
naturally addicted to Defamation, and envious of any Good to any Man,
who may have contributed to spread Reports of this kind: For nothing is
so swift as Scandal, nothing is more easily sent abroad, nothing
received with more Welcome, nothing diffuses it self so universally. I
shall not desire, that if any Report to our Disadvantage has any Ground
for it, you would overlook or extenuate it: But if there be any thing
advanced without a Person who can say whence he had it, or which is
attested by one who forgot who told him it, or who had it from one of so
little Consideration that he did not then think it worth his Notice, all
such Testimonies as these, I know, you will think too slight to have any
Credit against the Innocence and Honour of your Fellow-Citizen_. When an
ill Report is traced, it very often vanishes among such as the Orator
has here recited. And how despicable a Creature must that be, who is in
Pain for what passes among so frivolous a People? There is a Town in
_Warwickshire_ of good Note, and formerly pretty famous for much
Animosity and Dissension, the chief Families of which have now turned
all their Whispers, Backbitings, Envies, and private Malices, into Mirth
and Entertainment, by means of a peevish old Gentlewoman, known by the
Title of the Lady _Bluemantle_. This Heroine had for many Years together
out-done the whole Sisterhood of Gossips in Invention, quick Utterance,
and unprovoked Malice. This good Body is of a lasting Constitution,
though extremely decayed in her Eyes, and decrepid in her Feet. The two
Circumstances of being always at Home from her Lameness, and very
attentive from her Blindness, make her Lodgings the Receptacle of all
that passes in Town, Good or Bad; but for the latter, she seems to have
the better Memory. There is another Thing to be noted of her, which is,
That as it is usual with old People, she has a livelier Memory of Things
which passed when she was very young, than of late Years. Add to all
this, that she does not only not love any Body, but she hates every
Body. The Statue in Rome does not serve to vent Malice half so well, as
this old Lady does to disappoint it. She does not know the Author of any
thing that is told her, but can readily repeat the Matter it self;
therefore, though she exposes all the whole Town, she offends no one
Body in it. She is so exquisitely restless and peevish, that she
quarrels with all about her, and sometimes in a Freak will instantly
change her Habitation. To indulge this Humour, she is led about the
Grounds belonging to the same House she is in, and the Persons to whom
she is to remove, being in the Plot, are ready to receive her at her own
Chamber again. At stated Times, the Gentlewoman at whose House she
supposes she is at the Time, is sent for to quarrel with, according to
her common Custom: When they have a Mind to drive the Jest, she is
immediately urged to that Degree, that she will board in a Family with
which she has never yet been; and away she will go this Instant, and
tell them all that the rest have been saying of them. By this means she
has been an Inhabitant of every House in the Place without stirring from
the same Habitation; and the many Stories which every body furnishes her
with to favour that Deceit, make her the general Intelligencer of the
Town of all that can be said by one Woman against another. Thus
groundless Stories die away, and sometimes Truths are smothered under
the general Word: When they have a Mind to discountenance a thing, Oh!
that is in my Lady _Bluemantle's_ Memoirs.

Whoever receives Impressions to the Disadvantage of others without
Examination, is to be had in no other Credit for Intelligence than this
good Lady _Bluemantle_, who is subjected to have her Ears imposed upon
for want of other Helps to better Information. Add to this, that other
Scandal-Bearers suspend the Use of these Faculties which she has lost,
rather than apply them to do Justice to their Neighbours; and I think,
for the Service of my fair Readers, to acquaint them, that there is a
voluntary Lady _Bluemantle_ at every Visit in Town.

T.


[Footnote 1: Orat. pro Cu. Plancio. A little beyond the middle.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 428.                  Friday, July 11, 1712.                 Steele.


  'Occupet extremum Scabies--'

  Hor.


It is an impertinent and unreasonable Fault in Conversation, for one Man
to take up all the Discourse. It may possibly be objected to me my self,
that I am guilty in this kind, in entertaining the Town every Day, and
not giving so many able Persons who have it more in their Power, and as
much in their Inclination, an Opportunity to oblige Mankind with their
Thoughts. Besides, said one whom I overheard the other Day, why must
this Paper turn altogether upon Topicks of Learning and Morality? Why
should it pretend only to Wit, Humour, or the like? Things which are
useful only to amuse Men of Literature and superior Education. I would
have it consist also of all Things which may be necessary or useful to
any Part of Society, and the mechanick Arts should have their Place as
well as the Liberal. The Ways of Gain, Husbandry, and Thrift, will serve
a greater Number of People, than Discourses upon what was well said or
done by such a Philosopher, Heroe, General, or Poet. I no sooner heard
this Critick talk of my Works, but I minuted what he had said; and from
that Instant resolved to enlarge the Plan of my Speculations, by giving
Notice to all Persons of all Orders, and each Sex, that if they are
pleased to send me Discourses, with their Names and Places of Abode to
them, so that I can be satisfied the Writings are authentick, such their
Labours shall be faithfully inserted in this Paper. It will be of much
more Consequence to a Youth in his Apprenticeship, to know by what Rules
and Arts such a one became Sheriff of the City of _London_, than to see
the Sign of one of his own Quality with a Lion's Heart in each Hand. The
World indeed is enchanted with romantick and improbable Atchievements,
when the plain Path to respective Greatness and Success in the Way of
Life a Man is in, is wholly overlooked. Is it possible that a young Man
at present could pass his Time better, than in reading the History of
Stocks, and knowing by what secret Springs they have had such sudden
Ascents and Falls in the same Day? Could he be better conducted in his
Way to Wealth, which is the great Article of Life, than in a Treatise
dated from _Change-Alley_ by an able Proficient there? Nothing certainly
could be more useful, than to be well instructed in his Hopes and Fears;
to be diffident when others exult, and with a secret Joy buy when others
think it their Interest to sell. I invite all Persons who have any thing
to say for the Profitable Information of the Publick, to take their
Turns in my Paper: They are welcome, from the late noble Inventor of the
Longitude, [1] to the humble Author of Strops for Razors. If to carry
Ships in Safety, to give Help to People tost in a troubled Sea, without
knowing to what Shoar they bear, what Rocks to avoid, or what Coast to
pray for in their Extremity, be a worthy Labour, and an Invention that
deserves a Statue; at the same Time, he who has found a Means to let the
Instrument which is to make your Visage less [horrible [2]], and your
Person more smug, easie in the Operation, is worthy of some kind of good
Reception: If Things of high Moment meet with Renown, those of little
Consideration, since of any Consideration, are not to be despised. In
order that no Merit may lye hid and no Art unimproved, I repeat it, that
I call Artificers, as well as Philosophers, to my Assistance in the
Publick Service. It would be of great Use if we had an exact History of
the Successes of every great Shop within the City-Walls, what Tracts of
Land have been purchased by a constant Attendance within a Walk of
thirty Foot. If it could also be noted in the Equipage of those who are
ascended from the Successful Trade of their Ancestors into Figure and
Equipage, such Accounts would quicken Industry in the Pursuit of such
Acquisitions, and discountenance Luxury in the Enjoyment of them.

To diversifie these kinds of Informations, the Industry of the Female
World is not to be unobserved: She to whose Houshold Virtues it is
owing, that Men do Honour to her Husband, should be recorded with
Veneration; she who had wasted his Labours, with Infamy. When we are
come into Domestick Life in this manner, to awaken Caution and
Attendance to the main Point, it would not be amiss to give now and then
a Touch of Tragedy, and describe [the [3]] most dreadful of all human
Conditions, the Case of Bankruptcy; how Plenty, Credit, Chearfulness,
full Hopes, and easy Possessions, are in an Instant turned into Penury,
faint Aspects, Diffidence, Sorrow, and Misery; how the Man, who with an
open Hand the Day before could administer to the Extremities of others,
is shunned today by the Friend of his Bosom. It would be useful to shew
how just this is on the Negligent, how lamentable on the Industrious. A
Paper written by a Merchant, might give this Island a true Sense of the
Worth and Importance of his Character: It might be visible from what he
could say, That no Soldier entring a Breach adventures more for Honour,
than the Trader does for Wealth to his Country. In both Cases the
Adventurers have their own Advantage, but I know no Cases wherein every
Body else is a Sharer in the Success.

It is objected by Readers of History, That the Battels in those
Narrations are scarce ever to be understood. This Misfortune is to be
ascribed to the Ignorance of Historians in the Methods of drawing up,
changing the Forms of a Battalia, and the Enemy retreating from, as well
as approaching to, the Charge. But in the Discourses from the
Correspondents, whom I now invite, the Danger will be of another kind;
and it is necessary to caution them only against using Terms of Art, and
describing Things that are familiar to them in Words unknown to their
Readers. I promise my self a great Harvest of new Circumstances,
Persons, and Things from this Proposal; and a World, which many think
they are well acquainted with, discovered as wholly new. This Sort of
Intelligence will give a lively Image of the Chain and mutual Dependance
of humane Society, take off impertinent Prejudices, enlarge the Minds of
those, whose Views are confined to their own Circumstances; and, in
short, if the Knowing in several Arts, Professions, and Trades will
exert themselves, it cannot but produce a new Field of Diversion, an
Instruction more agreeable than has yet appeared.

T.


[Footnote 1: If this means the Marquis of Worcester, the exact
ascertainment of the longitude was not one of his century of Inventions.
The sextant had its origin in the mind of Sir Isaac Newton, who was
knighted in 1705, and living at this time, but its practical inventor
was Thomas Godfrey, a glazier at Philadelphia. Godfrey's instrument is
said to have been seen by John Hadley, or that English philosopher,
after whom the instrument is named, invented it at the same time, about
1730. Honours of invention were assigned to both Godfrey and Hadley.
Means of exact observation of the heavenly bodies would not suffice for
exact determining of longitude until the sailor was provided with a
timepiece that could be relied upon in all climates for a true uniform
standard of time. The invention of such a time-piece, for which
Parliament offered a reward of £20,000, was the real solution of the
difficulty, and this we owe to the Yorkshireman John Harrison, a
carpenter and son of a carpenter, who had a genius for clockmaking, and
was stimulated to work at the construction of marine chronometers by
living in sight of the sea. He came to London in 1728, and after fifty
years of labour finished in 1759 a chronometer which, having stood the
test of two voyages, obtained for him the offered reward of £20,000.
Harrison died in 1776 at the age of 83.]


[Footnote 2: [horrid]]


[Footnote 3: [that]]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 429.                  Saturday, July 12, 1712.              Steele.


  '--Populumque falsis dedocet uti
  Vocibus--'


  _Mr_. SPECTATOR,

  Since I gave an Account of an agreeable Set of Company which were gone
  down into the Country, I have received Advices from thence, that the
  Institution of an Infirmary for those who should be out of Humour, has
  had very good Effects. My Letters mention particular Circumstances of
  two or three Persons, who had the good Sense to retire of their own
  Accord, and notified that they were withdrawn, with the Reasons of it,
  to the Company, in their respective Memorials.

    _The Memorial of Mrs_. Mary Dainty, _Spinster_,

    Humbly Sheweth,

    That conscious of her own want of Merit, accompanied with a Vanity
    of being admired, she had gone into Exile of her own accord.

    She is sensible, that a vain Person is the most insufferable
    Creature living in a well-bred Assembly.

    That she desired, before she appeared in publick again, she might
    have Assurances, that tho' she might be thought handsome, there
    might not more Address or Compliment be paid to her, than to the
    rest of the Company.

    That she conceived it a kind of Superiority, that one Person should
    take upon him to commend another.

    Lastly, That she went into the Infirmary, to avoid a particular
    Person who took upon him to profess an Admiration of her.

    She therefore prayed, that to applaud out of due place, might be
    declar'd an Offence, and punished in the same Manner with
    Detraction, in that the latter did but report Persons defective, and
    the former made them so.

    All which is submitted, &c.

  There appeared a Delicacy and Sincerity in this Memorial very
  uncommon, but my Friend informs me, that the Allegations of it were
  groundless, insomuch that this Declaration of an Aversion to being
  praised, was understood to be no other than a secret Trap to purchase
  it, for which Reason it lies still on the Table unanswered.

    _The humble Memorial of the Lady_ Lydia Loller, Sheweth,

    That the Lady _Lydia_ is a Woman of Quality; married to a private
    Gentleman.

    That she finds her self neither well nor ill.

    That her Husband is a Clown.

    That Lady _Lydia_ cannot see Company. That she desires the Infirmary
    may be her Apartment during her stay in the Country.

    That they would please to make merry with their Equals.

    That Mr. _Loller_ might stay with them if he thought fit.

  It was immediately resolved, that Lady _Lydia_ was still at _London._

    _The humble Memorial_ of Thomas Sudden, _Esq_., of the Inner-Temple,
    Sheweth,

    That Mr. _Sudden_ is conscious that he is too much given to
    Argumentation.

    That he talks loud.

    That he is apt to think all things matter of Debate.

    That he stayed behind in _Westminster-Hall_, when the late Shake of
    the Roof happened, only because a Council of the other Side asserted
    it was coming down.

    That he cannot for his Life consent to any thing.

    That he stays in the Infirmary to forget himself.

    That as soon as he has forgot himself, he will wait on the Company.

  His Indisposition was allowed to be sufficient to require a Cessation
  from Company.

    _The Memorial_ of Frank Jolly, Sheweth,

    That he hath put himself into the Infirmary, in regard he is
    sensible of a certain rustick Mirth which renders him unfit for
    polite Conversation.

    That he intends to prepare himself by Abstinence and thin Diet to be
    one of the Company.

    That at present he comes into a Room as if he were an Express from
    Abroad.

    That he has chosen an Apartment with a matted Anti-Chamber, to
    practise Motion without being heard.

    That he bows, talks, drinks, eats, and helps himself before a Glass,
    to learn to act with Moderation.

    That by reason of his luxuriant Health he is oppressive to Persons
    of composed Behaviour.

    That he is endeavouring to forget the Word _Pshaw, Pshaw_.

    That he is also weaning himself from his Cane.

    That when he has learnt to live without his said Cane, he will wait
    on the Company, &c.

  ...

    _The Memorial_ of John Rhubarb, _Esq_.,

    Sheweth,

    That your Petitioner has retired to the Infirmary, but that he is
    in perfect good Health, except that he has by long Use. and for want
    of Discourse, contracted an Habit of Complaint that he is sick.

    That he wants for nothing under the Sun, but what to say, and
    therefore has fallen into this unhappy Malady of complaining that he
    is sick.

    That this Custom of his makes him, by his own Confession, fit only
    for the Infirmary, and therefore he has not waited for being
    sentenced to it.

    That he is conscious there is nothing more improper than such a
    Complaint in good Company, in that they must pity, whether they
    think the Lamenter ill or not; and that the Complainant must make a
    silly Figure, whether he is pitied or not.

    Your Petitioner humbly prays, that he may have Time to know how he
    does, and he will make his Appearance.

  The Valetudinarian was likewise easily excused; and this Society being
  resolved not only to make it their Business to pass their Time
  agreeably for the present Season, but also to commence such Habits in
  themselves as may be of Use in their future Conduct in general, are
  very ready to give into a fancied or real Incapacity to join with
  their Measures, in order to have no Humourist, proud Man, impertinent
  or sufficient ellow, break in upon their Happiness. Great Evils seldom
  happen to disturb Company; but Indulgence in Particularities of
  Humour, is the Seed of making half our Time hang in Suspence, or waste
  away under real Discomposures.

  Among other Things it is carefully provided that there may not be
  disagreeable Familiarities. No one is to appear in the publick Rooms
  undressed, or enter abruptly into each other's Apartment without
  intimation. Every one has hitherto been so careful in his Behaviour,
  that there has but one Offender in ten Days Time been sent into the
  Infirmary, and that was for throwing away his Cards at Whist.

  He has offered his Submission in the following Terms.

    _The humble Petition of_ Jeoffry Hotspur, _Esq._,

    Sheweth,

    Though the Petitioner swore, stamped, and threw down his Cards, he
    has all imaginable Respect for the Ladies, and the whole Company.

    That he humbly desires it may be considered in the Case of Gaming,
    there are many Motives which provoke to Disorder.

    That the Desire of Gain, and the Desire of Victory, are both
    thwarted in Losing.

    That all Conversations in the World have indulged Human Infirmity in
    this Case.

    Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, that he may be restored
    to the Company, and he hopes to bear ill Fortune with a good Grace
    for the future, and to demean himself so as to be no more than
    chearful when he wins, than grave when he loses.


T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 430.                   Monday, July 14, 1712.               Steele.


  'Quære peregrinum vicinia rauca reclamat.'

  Hor.


  _SIR_,

  As you are Spectator-General, you may with Authority censure
  whatsoever looks ill, and is offensive to the Sight; the worst Nusance
  of which kind, methinks, is the scandalous Appearance of Poor in all
  Parts of this wealthy City. Such miserable Objects affect the
  compassionate Beholder with dismal Ideas, discompose the Chearfulness
  of his Mind, and deprive him of the Pleasure that he might otherwise
  take in surveying the Grandeur of our Metropolis. Who can without
  Remorse see a disabled Sailor, the Purveyor of our Luxury, destitute
  of Necessaries? Who can behold an honest Soldier, that bravely
  withstood the Enemy, prostrate and in Want amongst his Friends? It
  were endless to mention all the Variety of Wretchedness, and the
  numberless Poor, that not only singly, but in Companies, implore your
  Charity. Spectacles of this Nature every where occur; and it is
  unaccountable, that amongst the many lamentable Cries that infest this
  Town, your Comptroller-General should not take notice of the most
  shocking, _viz_. those of the Needy and Afflicted. I can't but think
  he wav'd it meerly out of good Breeding, chusing rather to stifle his
  Resentment, than upbraid his Countrymen with Inhumanity; however, let
  not Charity be sacrificed to Popularity, and if his Ears were deaf to
  their Complaints, let not your Eyes overlook their Persons. There are,
  I know, many Impostors among them. Lameness and Blindness are
  certainly very often acted; but can those that have their Sight and
  Limbs, employ them better than in knowing whether they are
  counterfeited or not? I know not which of the two misapplies his
  Senses most, he who pretends himself blind to move Compassion, or he
  who beholds a miserable Object without pitying it. But in order to
  remove such Impediments, I wish, Mr. SPECTATOR, you would give us a
  Discourse upon Beggars, that we may not pass by true Objects of
  Charity, or give to Impostors. I looked out of my Window the other
  Morning earlier than ordinary, and saw a blind Beggar, an Hour before
  the Passage he stands in is frequented, with a Needle and Thread,
  thriftily mending his Stockings: My Astonishment was still greater,
  when I beheld a lame Fellow, whose Legs were too big to walk within an
  Hour after, bring him a Pot of Ale. I will not mention the Shakings,
  Distortions, and Convulsions which many of them practise to gain an
  Alms; but sure I am, they ought to be taken Care of in this Condition,
  either by the Beadle or the Magistrate. They, it seems, relieve their
  Posts according to their Talents. There is the Voice of an old Woman
  never begins to beg 'till nine in the Evening, and then she is
  destitute of Lodging, turned out for want of Rent, and has the same
  ill Fortune every Night in the Year. You should employ an Officer to
  hear the Distress of each Beggar that is constant at a particular
  Place, who is ever in the same Tone, and succeeds because his Audience
  is continually changing, tho' he does not alter his Lamentation. If we
  have nothing else for our Money, let us have more Invention to be
  cheated with. All which is submitted to your Spectatorial Vigilance:
  and I am,
  SIR,
  Your most humble Servant.


  SIR,

  I was last _Sunday_ highly transported at our Parish-Church; the
  Gentleman in the Pulpit pleaded movingly in Behalf of the poor
  Children, and they for themselves much more forcibly by singing an
  Hymn; And I had the Happiness to be a Contributor to this little
  religious Institution of Innocents, and am sure I never disposed of
  Money more to my Satisfaction and Advantage. The inward Joy I find in
  my self, and the Good-will I bear to Mankind, make me heartily wish
  those pious Works may be encouraged, that the present Promoters may
  reap the Delight, and Posterity the Benefit of them. But whilst we are
  building this beautiful Edifice, let not the old Ruins remain in View
  to sully the Prospect: Whilst we are cultivating and improving this
  young hopeful Offspring, let not the ancient and helpless Creatures be
  shamefully neglected. The Crowds of Poor, or pretended Poor, in every
  Place, are a great Reproach to us, and eclipse the Glory of all other
  Charity. It is the utmost Reproach to Society, that there should be a
  poor Man unrelieved, or a poor Rogue unpunished. I hope you will think
  no Part of Human Life out of your Consideration, but will, at your
  Leisure, give us the History of Plenty and Want, and the natural
  Gradations towards them, calculated for the Cities of _London_ and
  _Westminster_.
  _I am, SIR,
  Your most Humble Servant_,
  T. D.


  _Mr_. SPECTATOR,

  I beg you would be pleased to take Notice of a very great Indecency,
  which is extreamly common, though, I think, never yet under your
  Censure. It is, Sir, the strange Freedoms some ill-bred married People
  take in Company: The unseasonable Fondness of some Husbands, and the
  ill-timed Tenderness of some Wives. They talk and act, as if Modesty
  was only fit for Maids and Batchelors, and that too before both. I was
  once, Mr. SPECTATOR, where the Fault I speak of was so very flagrant,
  that (being, you must know, a very bashful Fellow, and several young
  Ladies in the Room) I protest I was quite out of Countenance.
  _Lucina_, it seems, was breeding, and she did nothing but entertain
  the Company with a Discourse upon the Difficulty of Reckoning to a
  Day, and said she knew those who were certain to an Hour; then fell a
  laughing at a silly unexperienced Creature, who was a Month above her
  Time. Upon her Husband's coming in, she put several Questions to him;
  which he not caring to resolve, Well, cries _Lucina_, I shall have 'em
  all at Night--But lest I should seem guilty of the very Fault I write
  against, I shall only intreat _Mr_. SPECTATOR to correct such
  Misdemeanors;

    'For higher of the Genial Bed by far,
    And with mysterious Reverence, I deem.' [1]

  _I am, SIR,

  Your humble Servant_,

  T. Meanwell.


T.


[Footnote 1: Paradise Lost, Bk VIII. 11. 598-9.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 431.               Tuesday, July 15, 1712.                 Steele.


  'Quid Dulcius hominum generi a Natura datum est quam sui cuique
liberi?'

  Tull.


I have lately been casting in my Thoughts the several Unhappinesses of
Life, and comparing the Infelicities of old Age to those of Infancy. The
Calamities of Children are due to the Negligence and Misconduct of
Parents, those of Age to the past Life which led to it. I have here the
History of a Boy and Girl to their Wedding-Day, and I think I cannot
give the Reader a livelier Image of the insipid way which Time
uncultivated passes, than by entertaining him with their authentick
Epistles, expressing all that was remarkable in their Lives, 'till the
Period of their Life above mentioned. The Sentence at the Head of this
Paper, which is only a warm Interrogation, _What is there in Nature so
dear as a Man's own Children to him_? is all the Reflection I shall at
present make on those who are negligent or cruel in the Education of
them.


  _Mr_. SPECTATOR,

  I am now entring into my One and Twentieth Year, and do not know that
  I had one Day's thorough Satisfaction since I came to Years of any
  Reflection, till the Time they say others lose their Liberty, the Day
  of my Marriage. I am Son to a Gentleman of a very great Estate, who
  resolv'd to keep me out of the Vices of the Age; and in order to it
  never let me see any Thing that he thought could give me the least
  Pleasure. At ten Years old I was put to a Grammar-School, where my
  Master received Orders every Post to use me very severely, and have no
  regard to my having a great Estate. At Fifteen I was removed to the
  University, where I liv'd, out of my Father's great Discretion, in
  scandalous Poverty and Want, till I was big enough to be married, and
  I was sent for to see the Lady who sends you the Underwritten. When we
  were put together, we both considered that we could not be worse than
  we were in taking one another, out of a Desire of Liberty entered into
  Wedlock. My Father says I am now a Man, and may speak to him like
  another Gentleman.

  _I am, SIR,

  Your most humble Servant_,

  Richard Rentfree.


  _Mr_. SPEC.

  I grew tall and wild at my Mother's, who is a gay Widow, and did not
  care for shewing me 'till about two Years and a half ago; at which
  time my Guardian Uncle sent me to a Boarding-School, with Orders to
  contradict me in nothing, for I had been misused enough already. I had
  not been there above a Month, when being in the Kitchin, I saw some
  Oatmeal on the Dresser; I put two or three Corns in my Mouth, liked
  it, stole a Handful, went into my Chamber, chewed it, and for two
  Months after never failed taking Toll of every Pennyworth of Oatmeal
  that came into the House: But one Day playing with a Tobacco-pipe
  between my Teeth, it happened to break in my Mouth, and the spitting
  out the Pieces left such a delicious Roughness on my Tongue, that I
  could not be satisfied 'till I had champed up the remaining Part of
  the Pipe. I forsook the Oatmeal, and stuck to the Pipes three Months,
  in which Time I had dispensed with thirty seven foul Pipes, all to the
  Boles; They belonged to an old Gentleman, Father to my Governess--He
  lock'd up the clean ones. I left off eating of Pipes, and fell to
  licking of Chalk. I was soon tired of this; I then nibbled all the red
  Wax of our last Ball-Tickets, and three Weeks after the black Wax from
  the Burying-Tickets of the old Gentleman. Two Months after this I
  liv'd upon Thunder-bolts, a certain long, round bluish Stone, which I
  found among the Gravel in our Garden. I was wonderfully delighted with
  this; but Thunder-bolts growing scarce, I fasten'd Tooth and Nail upon
  our Garden-Wall, which I stuck to almost a Twelvemonth, and had in
  that time peeled and devoured half a Foot towards our Neighbour's
  Yard. I now thought my self the happiest Creature in the World, and I
  believe in my Conscience, I had eaten quite through, had I had it in
  my Chamber; but now I became lazy, and unwilling to stir, and was
  obliged to seek Food nearer Home. I then took a strange Hankering to
  Coals; I fell to scranching 'em, and had already consumed, I am
  certain, as much as would have dressed my Wedding Dinner, when my
  Uncle came for me Home. He was in the Parlour with my Governess when I
  was called down. I went in, fell on my Knees, for he made me call him
  Father; and when I expected the Blessing I asked, the good Gentleman,
  in a Surprize, turns himself to my Governess, and asks, Whether this
  (pointing to me) was his Daughter? This (added he) is the very Picture
  of Death. My Child was a plump-fac'd, hale, fresh-coloured Girl; but
  this looks as if she was half-starved, a mere Skeleton. My Governess,
  who is really a good Woman, assured my Father I had wanted for
  nothing; and withal told him I was continually eating some Trash or
  other, and that I was almost eaten up with the Green-sickness, her
  Orders being never to cross me. But this magnified but little with my
  Father, who presently, in a kind of Pett, paying for my Board, took me
  home with him. I had not been long at home, but one _Sunday_ at Church
  (I shall never forget it) I saw a young neighbouring Gentleman that
  pleased me hugely; I liked him of all Men I ever saw in my Life, and
  began to wish I could be as pleasing to him. The very next Day he
  came, with his Father, a visiting to our House: We were left alone
  together, with Directions on both Sides to be in Love with one
  another, and in three Weeks time we were married. I regained my former
  Health and Complexion, and am now as happy as the Day is long. Now,
  _Mr_. SPEC., I desire you would find out some Name for these craving
  Damsels, whether dignified or distinguished under some or all of the
  following Denominations, (to wit) _Trash-eaters, Oatmeal-chewers,
  Pipe-champers, Chalk-lickers, Wax-nibbles, Coal-Scranchers,
  Wall-peelers_, or _Gravel-diggers_: And, good Sir, do your utmost
  endeavour to prevent (by exposing) this unaccountable Folly, so
  prevailing among the young ones of our Sex, who may not meet with such
  sudden good Luck as,

  _SIR,
  Your constant Reader,
  and very humble Servant_,
  Sabina Green,
  _Now_ Sabina Rentfree.


T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 432.                Wednesday, July 16, 1712.              Steele.


  'Inter-strepit anser olores.'

  Virg.


  Oxford, July 14.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  According to a late Invitation in one of your Papers to every Man who
  pleases to write, I have sent you the following short Dissertation
  against the Vice of being prejudiced.

  _Your most humble Servant_.


  Man is a sociable Creature, and a Lover of Glory; whence it is that
  when several Persons are united in the same Society, they are studious
  to lessen the Reputation of others, in order to raise their own. The
  Wise are content to guide the Springs in Silence, and rejoice in
  Secret at their regular Progress: To prate and triumph is the Part
  allotted to the Trifling and Superficial: The Geese were
  providentially ordained to save the _Capitol_. Hence it is, that the
  Invention of Marks and Devices to distinguish Parties, is owing to the
  _Beaux_ and _Belles_ of this Island. Hats moulded into different Cocks
  and Pinches, have long bid mutual Defiance; Patches have been set
  against Patches in Battel-aray; Stocks have risen or fallen in
  Proportion to Head-Dresses; and Peace or War been expected, as the
  _White_ or the _Red_ Hood hath prevailed. These are the
  Standard-Bearers in our contending Armies, the Dwarfs and Squires who
  carry the Impresses of the Giants or Knights, not born to fight
  themselves, but to prepare the Way for the ensuing Combat.

  It is Matter of Wonder to reflect how far Men of weak Understanding
  and strong Fancy are hurried by their Prejudices, even to the
  believing that the whole Body of the adverse Party are a Band of
  Villains and Dæmons. Foreigners complain, that the _English_ are the
  proudest Nation under Heaven. Perhaps they too have their Share; but
  be that as it will, general Charges against Bodies of Men is the Fault
  I am writing against. It must be own'd, to our Shame, that our common
  People, and most who have not travelled, have an irrational Contempt
  for the Language, Dress, Customs, and even the Shape and Minds of
  other Nations. Some Men otherwise of Sense, have wondered that a great
  Genius should spring out of _Ireland_; and think you mad in affirming,
  that fine Odes have been written in _Lapland_.

  This Spirit of Rivalship, which heretofore reigned in the Two
  Universities, is extinct, and almost over betwixt College and College:
  In Parishes and Schools the Thirst of Glory still obtains. At the
  Seasons of Football and Cock-fighting, these little Republicks
  reassume their national Hatred to each other. My Tenant in the Country
  is verily perswaded, that the Parish of the Enemy hath not one honest
  Man in it.

  I always hated Satyrs against Woman, and Satyrs against Man; I am apt
  to suspect a Stranger who laughs at the Religion of _The Faculty_; My
  Spleen rises at a dull Rogue, who is severe upon Mayors and Aldermen;
  and was never better pleased than with a Piece of Justice executed
  upon the Body of a Templer, who was very arch upon Parsons.

  The Necessities of Mankind require various Employments; and whoever
  excels in his Province is worthy of Praise. All Men are not educated
  after the same Manner, nor have all the same Talents. Those who are
  deficient deserve our Compassion, and have a Title to our Assistance.
  All cannot be bred in the same Place; but in all Places there arise,
  at different Times, such Persons as do Honour to their Society, which
  may raise Envy in little Souls, but are admired and cherished by
  generous Spirits.

  It is certainly a great Happiness to be educated in Societies of great
  and eminent Men. Their Instructions and Examples are of extraordinary
  Advantage. It is highly proper to instill such a Reverence of the
  governing Persons, and Concern for the Honour of the Place, as may
  spur the growing Members to worthy Pursuits and honest Emulation: But
  to swell young Minds with vain Thoughts of the Dignity of their own
  Brotherhood, by debasing and villifying all others, doth them a real
  Injury. By this means I have found that their Efforts have become
  languid, and their Prattle irksome, as thinking it sufficient Praise
  that they are Children of so illustrious and ample a Family. I should
  think it a surer as well as more generous Method, to set before the
  Eyes of Youth such Persons as have made a noble Progress in
  Fraternities less talk'd of; which seems tacitly to reproach their
  Sloth, who loll so heavily in the Seats of mighty Improvement: Active
  Spirits hereby would enlarge their Notions, whereas by a servile
  Imitation of one, or perhaps two, admired Men in their own Body, they
  can only gain a secondary and derivative kind of Fame. These Copiers
  of Men, like those of Authors or Painters, run into Affectations of
  some Oddness, which perhaps was not disagreeable in the Original, but
  sits ungracefully on the narrow-soul'd Transcriber.

  By such early Corrections of Vanity, while Boys are growing into Men,
  they will gradually learn not to censure superficially; but imbibe
  those Principles of general Kindness and Humanity, which alone can
  make them easie to themselves, and beloved by others.

  Reflections of this nature have expunged all Prejudices out of my
  Heart, insomuch that, tho' I am a firm Protestant, I hope to see the
  Pope and Cardinals without violent Emotions; and tho' I am naturally
  grave, I expect to meet good Company at _Paris_.

  _I am, SIR,
  Your obedient Servant_.


  _Mr_. SPECTATOR,

  I find you are a general Undertaker, and have by your Correspondents
  or self an Insight into most things: which makes me apply my self to
  you at present in the sorest Calamity that ever befel Man. My Wife has
  taken something ill of me, and has not spoke one Word, good or bad, to
  me, or any Body in the Family, since _Friday_ was Seven-night. What
  must a Man do in that Case? Your Advice would be a great Obligation
  to,

  _SIR, Your most humble Servant_,

  Ralph Thimbleton.


  _Mr_. SPECTATOR,

  When you want a Trifle to fill up a Paper, in inserting this you will
  lay an Obligation on

  _Your humble Servant_,

  Olivio.
  July 15th, 1712.


    _Dear_ Olivia,

    It is but this Moment I have had the Happiness of knowing to whom I
    am obliged for the Present I received the second of _April_. I am
    heartily sorry it did not come to Hand the Day before; for I can't
    but think it very hard upon People to lose their Jest, that offer at
    one but once a Year. I congratulate my self however upon the Earnest
    given me of something further intended in my Favour, for I am told,
    that the Man who is thought worthy by a Lady to make a Fool of,
    stands fair enough in her Opinion to become one Day her Husband.
    Till such time as I have the Honour of being sworn, I take Leave to
    subscribe my self,

    _Dear_ Olivia, _Your Fool Elect_,

    Nicodemuncio.


T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 433.                Thursday, July 17, 1712.               Addison.


  'Perlege Mæonio cantatas carmine Ranas,
  Et frontem nugis solvere disce meis.'

  Mart.


The Moral World, as consisting of Males and Females, is of a mixt
Nature, and filled with several Customs, Fashions and Ceremonies, which
would have no place in it, were there but _One_ Sex. Had our Species no
Females in it, Men would be quite different Creatures from what they are
at present; their Endeavours to please the opposite Sex, polishes and
refines them out of those Manners which are most Natural to them, and
often sets them upon modelling themselves, not according to the Plans
which they approve in their own Opinions, but according to those Plans
which they think are most agreeable to the Female World. In a Word, Man
would not only be unhappy, but a rude unfinished Creature, were he
conversant with none but those of his own Make.

Women, on the other side, are apt to form themselves in every thing with
regard to that other half of reasonable Creatures, with whom they are
here blended and confused; their Thoughts are ever turned upon appearing
amiable to the other Sex; they talk, and move, and smile, with a Design
upon us; every Feature of their Faces, every part of their Dress is
filled with Snares and Allurements. There would be no such Animals as
Prudes or Coquets in the World, were there not such an Animal as Man. In
short, it is the Male that gives Charms to Womankind, that produces an
Air in their Faces, a Grace in their Motions, a Softness in their
Voices, and a Delicacy in their Complections.

As this mutual Regard between the two Sexes tends to the Improvement of
each of them, we may observe that Men are apt to degenerate into rough
and brutal Natures, who live as if there were no such things as Women in
the World; as on the contrary, Women, who have an Indifference or
Aversion for their Counter-parts in human Nature, are generally Sower
and Unamiable, Sluttish and Censorious.

I am led into this Train of Thoughts by a little Manuscript which is
lately fallen into my Hands, and which I shall communicate to the
Reader, as I have done some other curious Pieces of the same Nature,
without troubling him with any Enquiries about the Author of it. It
contains a summary Account of two different States which bordered upon
one another. The one was a Commonwealth of _Amazons_, or Women without
Men; the other was a Republick of Males that had not a Woman in their
whole Community. As these two States bordered upon one another, it was
their way, it seems, to meet upon their Frontiers at a certain Season of
the Year, where those among the Men who had not made their Choice in any
former Meeting, associated themselves with particular Women, whom they
were afterwards obliged to look upon as their Wives in every one of
these yearly Rencounters. The Children that sprung from this Alliance,
if Males, were sent to their respective Fathers, if Females, continued
with their Mothers. By means of this Anniversary Carnival, which lasted
about a Week, the Commonwealths were recruited from time to time, and
supplied with their respective Subjects.

These two States were engaged together in a perpetual League, Offensive
and Defensive, so that if any Foreign Potentate offered to attack either
of them, both the Sexes fell upon him at once, and quickly brought him
to Reason. It was remarkable that for many Ages this Agreement continued
inviolable between the two States, notwithstanding, as was said before,
they were Husbands and Wives; but this will not appear so wonderful, if
we consider that they did not live together above a Week in a Year.

In the Account which my Author gives of the Male Republick, there were
several Customs very remarkable. The Men never shaved their Beards, or
pared their Nails above once in a Twelvemonth, which was probably about
the time of the great annual Meeting upon their Frontiers. I find the
Name of a Minister of State in one Part of their History, who was fined
for appearing too frequently in clean Linnen; and of a certain great
General who was turned out of his Post for Effeminacy, it having been
proved upon him by several credible Witnesses that he washed his Face
every Morning. If any Member of the Commonwealth had a soft Voice, a
smooth Face, or a supple Behaviour, he was banished into the
Commonwealth of Females, where he was treated as a Slave, dressed in
Petticoats, and set a Spinning. They had no Titles of Honour among them,
but such as denoted some Bodily Strength or Perfection, as such an one
_the Tall_, such an one _the Stocky_, such an one _the Gruff_. Their
publick Debates were generally managed with Kicks and Cuffs, insomuch
that they often came from the Council Table with broken Shins, black
Eyes, and bloody Noses. When they would reproach a Man in the most
bitter Terms, they would tell him his Teeth were white, or that he had a
fair Skin, and a soft Hand. The greatest Man I meet with in their
History, was one who could lift Five hundred Weight, and wore such a
prodigious Pair of Whiskers as had never been seen in the Commonwealth
before his Time. These Accomplishments it seems had rendred him so
popular, that if he had not died very seasonably, it is thought he might
have enslaved the Republick. Having made this short Extract out of the
History of the Male Commonwealth, I shall look into the History of the
neighbouring State which consisted of Females, and if I find any thing
in it, will not fail to Communicate it to the Publick.

C.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 434.                Friday, July 18, 1712.                Addison.


  'Quales Threiciæ cùm flumina Thermodoontis
  Pulsant, et pictis bellantur Amazones armis:
  Seu circum Hippolyten, seu cùm se Martia curru
  Penthesilea refert, magnoque ululante tumultu
  Fæminea exultant lunatis agmina peltis.'

  Virg.


Having carefully perused the Manuscript I mentioned in my Yesterday's
Paper, so far as it relates to the Republick of Women, I find in it
several Particulars which may very well deserve the Reader's Attention.

The Girls of Quality, from six to twelve Years old, were put to publick
Schools, where they learned to Box and play at Cudgels, with several
other Accomplishments of the same Nature; so that nothing was more usual
than to see a little Miss returning Home at Night with a broken Pate, or
two or three Teeth knocked out of her Head. They were afterwards taught
to ride the great Horse, to Shoot, Dart, or Sling, and listed into
several Companies, in order to perfect themselves in Military Exercises.
No Woman was to be married till she had killed her Man. The Ladies of
Fashion used to play with young Lions instead of Lap-dogs, and when they
made any Parties of Diversion, instead of entertaining themselves at
Ombre or Piquet, they would wrestle and pitch the Bar for a whole
Afternoon together. There was never any such thing as a Blush seen, or a
Sigh heard, in the Commonwealth. The Women never dressed but to look
terrible, to which end they would sometimes after a Battel paint their
Cheeks with the Blood of their Enemies. For this Reason likewise the
Face which had the most Scars was looked upon as the most beautiful. If
they found Lace, Jewels, Ribbons, or any Ornaments in Silver or Gold
among the Booty which they had taken, they used to dress their Horses
with it, but never entertained a Thought of wearing it themselves. There
were particular Rights and Privileges allowed to any Member of the
Commonwealth, who was a Mother of three Daughters. The Senate was made
up of old Women; for by the Laws of the Country none was to be a
Councellor of State that was not past Child-bearing. They used to boast
their Republick had continued Four thousand Years, which is altogether
improbable, unless we may suppose, what I am very apt to think, that
they measured their Time by _Lunar_ Years.

There was a great Revolution brought about in this Female Republick, by
means of a neighbouring King, who had made War upon them several Years
with various Success, and at length overthrew them in a very great
Battel. This Defeat they ascribe to several Causes; some say that the
Secretary of State having been troubled with the Vapours, had committed
some fatal Mistakes in several Dispatches about that Time. Others
pretend, that the first Minister being big with Child, could not attend
the Publick Affairs, as so great an Exigency of State required; but this
I can give no manner of Credit to, since it seems to contradict a
Fundamental Maxim in their Government which I have before mentioned. My
Author gives the most probable Reason of this great Disaster; for he
affirms, that the General was brought to Bed, or (as others say)
Miscarried the very Night before the Battel: However it was, this signal
Overthrow obliged them to call in the Male Republick to their
Assistance; but notwithstanding their Common Efforts to repulse the
Victorious Enemy, the War continued for many Years before they could
entirely bring it to a happy Conclusion.

The Campaigns which both Sexes passed together made them so well
acquainted with one another, that at the End of the War they did not
care for parting. In the Beginning of it they lodged in separate Camps,
but afterwards as they grew more familiar, they pitched their Tents
promiscuously.

From this time the Armies being Chequered with both Sexes, they polished
apace. The Men used to invite their Fellow-Soldiers into their Quarters,
and would dress their Tents with Flowers and Boughs, for their
Reception. If they chanced to like one more than another, they would be
cutting her Name in the Table, or Chalking out her Figure upon a Wall,
or talking of her in a kind of rapturous Language, which by degrees
improved into Verse and Sonnet. These were as the first Rudiments of
Architecture, Painting, and Poetry among this Savage People. After any
Advantage over the Enemy, both Sexes used to Jump together and make a
Clattering with their Swords and Shields, for Joy, which in a few Years
produced several Regular Tunes and Sett Dances.

As the two Armies romped on these Occasions, the Women complained of the
thick bushy Beards and long Nails of their Confederates, who thereupon
took care to prune themselves into such Figures as were most pleasing to
their Female Friends and Allies.

When they had taken any Spoils from the Enemy, the Men would make a
Present of every thing that was Rich and Showy to the Women whom they
most admired, and would frequently dress the Necks, or Heads, or Arms of
their Mistresses, with any thing which they thought appeared Gay or
Pretty. The Women observing that the Men took delight in looking upon
them, when they were adorned with such Trappings and Gugaws, set their
Heads at Work to find out new Inventions, and to outshine one another in
all Councils of War or the like solemn Meetings. On the other hand, the
Men observing how the Women's Hearts were set upon Finery, begun to
Embellish themselves and look as agreeably as they could in the Eyes of
their Associates. In short, after a few Years conversing together, the
Women had learnt to Smile, and the Men to Ogle, the Women grew Soft, and
the Men Lively.

When they had thus insensibly formed one another, upon the finishing of
the War, which concluded with an entire Conquest of their common Enemy,
the Colonels in one Army Married the Colonels in the other; the Captains
in the same Manner took the Captains to their Wives: The whole Body of
common Soldiers were matched, after the Example of their Leaders. By
this means the two Republicks incorporated with one another, and became
the most Flourishing and Polite Government in the Part of the World
which they Inhabited.

C.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 435.               Saturday, July 19, 1712.              Addison.


  'Nec duo sunt at forma duplex, nec fæmina dici
  Nec puer ut possint, neutrumque et utrumque videntur.'

  Ovid.


Most of the Papers I give the Publick are written on Subjects that never
vary, but are for ever fixt and immutable. Of this kind are all my more
serious Essays and Discourses; but there is another sort of
Speculations, which I consider as Occasional Papers, that take their
Rise from the Folly, Extravagance, and Caprice of the present Age. For I
look upon my self as one set to watch the Manners and Behaviour of my
Countrymen and Contemporaries, and to mark down every absurd Fashion,
ridiculous Custom, or affected Form of Speech that makes its Appearance
in the World, during the Course of these my Speculations. The Petticoat
no sooner begun to swell, but I observed its Motions. The Party-patches
had not time to muster themselves before I detected them. I had
Intelligence of the Coloured Hood the very first time it appeared in a
Publick Assembly. I might here mention several other the like Contingent
Subjects, upon which I have bestowed distinct Papers. By this Means I
have so effectually quashed those Irregularities which gave Occasion to
'em, that I am afraid Posterity will scarce have a sufficient Idea of
them, to relish those Discourses which were in no little Vogue at the
time when they were written. They will be apt to think that the Fashions
and Customs I attacked were some Fantastick Conceits of my own, and that
their Great-Grand-mothers could not be so whimsical as I have
represented them. For this Reason, when I think on the Figure my several
Volumes of Speculations will make about a Hundred Years hence, I
consider them as so many Pieces of old Plate, where the Weight will be
regarded, but the Fashion lost.

Among the several Female Extravagancies I have already taken Notice of,
there is one which still keeps its Ground. I mean that of the Ladies who
dress themselves in a Hat and Feather, a Riding-coat and a Perriwig, or
at least tie up their Hair in a Bag or Ribbond, in imitation of the
smart Part of the opposite Sex. As in my Yesterday's Paper I gave an
Account of the Mixture of two Sexes in one Commonwealth, I shall here
take notice of this Mixture of two Sexes in one Person. I have already
shewn my Dislike of this Immodest Custom more than once; but in Contempt
of every thing I have hitherto said, I am informed that the Highways
about this great City are still very much infested with these Female
Cavaliers.

I remember when I was at my Friend Sir ROGER DE COVERLY'S about this
time Twelve-month, an Equestrian Lady of this Order appeared upon the
Plains which lay at a distance from his House. I was at that time
walking in the Fields with my old Friend; and as his Tenants ran out on
every side to see so strange a Sight, Sir ROGER asked one of them who
came by us what it was? To which the Country Fellow reply'd, 'Tis a
Gentlewoman, saving your Worship's Presence, in a Coat and Hat. This
produced a great deal of Mirth at the Knight's House, where we had a
Story at the same time of another of his Tenants, who meeting this
Gentleman-like Lady on the High-way, was asked by her _whether that was_
Coverly-Hall, the Honest Man seeing only the Male Part of the Querist,
replied, _Yes, Sir_; but upon the second Question, _whether_ Sir ROGER
DE COVERLY _was a married Man_, having dropped his Eye upon the
Petticoat, he changed his Note into _No, Madam_.

Had one of these Hermaphrodites appeared in _Juvenal's_ Days, with what
an Indignation should we have seen her described by that excellent
Satyrist. He would have represented her in a Riding Habit, as a greater
Monster than the Centaur. He would have called for Sacrifices or
Purifying Waters, to expiate the Appearance of such a Prodigy. He would
have invoked the Shades of _Portia_ or _Lucretia_, to see into what the
_Roman_ Ladies had transformed themselves.

For my own part, I am for treating the Sex with greater Tenderness, and
have all along made use of the most gentle Methods to bring them off
from any little Extravagance into which they are sometimes unwarily
fallen: I think it however absolutely necessary to keep up the Partition
between the two Sexes, and to take Notice of the smallest Encroachments
which the one makes upon the other. I hope therefore that I shall not
hear any more Complaints on this Subject. I am sure my She-Disciples who
peruse these my daily Lectures, have profited but little by them, if
they are capable of giving into such an Amphibious Dress. This I should
not have mentioned, had not I lately met one of these my Female Readers
in _Hyde Park_, who looked upon me with a masculine Assurance, and
cocked her Hat full in my Face.

For my part, I have one general Key to the Behaviour of the Fair Sex.
When I see them singular in any Part of their Dress, I conclude it is
not without some Evil Intention; and therefore question not but the
Design of this strange Fashion is to smite more effectually their Male
Beholders. Now to set them right in this Particular, I would fain have
them consider with themselves whether we are not more likely to be
struck by a Figure entirely Female, than with such an one as we may see
every Day in our Glasses: Or, if they please, let them reflect upon
their own Hearts, and think how they would be affected should they meet
a Man on Horseback, in his Breeches and Jack-Boots, and at the same time
dressed up in a Commode and a Night-raile.

I must observe that this Fashion was first of all brought to us from
_France_, a Country which has Infected all the Nations of _Europe_ with
its Levity. I speak not this in derogation of a whole People, having
more than once found fault with those general Reflections which strike
at Kingdoms or Commonwealths in the Gross: A piece of Cruelty, which an
ingenious Writer of our own compares to that of _Caligula_, who wished
the _Roman_ People had all but one Neck, that he might behead them at a
Blow. I shall therefore only Remark, that as Liveliness and Assurance
are in a peculiar manner the Qualifications of the _French_ Nation, the
same Habits and Customs will not give the same Offence to that People,
which they produce among those of our own Country. Modesty is our
distinguishing Character, as Vivacity is theirs: And when this our
National Virtue appears in that Female Beauty, for which our _British_
Ladies are celebrated above all others in the Universe, it makes up the
most amiable Object that the Eye of Man can possibly behold.

C.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 436.                Monday, July 21, 1712.               Steele


  'Verso pollice vulgi
  Quemlibet occidunt Populariter.'

  Juv.


Being a Person of insatiable Curiosity, I could not forbear going on
_Wednesday_ last to a Place of no small Renown for the Gallantry of the
lower Order of _Britons_, namely, to the Bear-Garden at _Hockley in the
Hole_; [1] where (as a whitish brown Paper, put into my Hands in the
Street, informed me) there was to be a Tryal of Skill to be exhibited
between two Masters of the Noble Science of Defence, at two of the Clock
precisely. I was not a little charm'd with the Solemnity of the
Challenge, which ran thus:

  "_I_ James Miller, _Serjeant, (lately come from the Frontiers of_
  Portugal_) Master of the noble Science of Defence, hearing in most
  Places where I have been of the great Fame of_ Timothy Buck _of_
  London, _Master of the said Science, do invite him to meet me, and
  exercise at the several Weapons following_, viz.


   Back-Sword,          Single Falchon,
   Sword and Dagger,    Case of Falchons,
   Sword and Buckler,   Quarter Staff."


If the generous Ardour in _James Miller_ to dispute the Reputation of
_Timothy Buck_, had something resembling the old Heroes of Romance,
_Timothy Buck_ return'd Answer in the same Paper with the like Spirit,
adding a little Indignation at being challenged, and seeming to
condescend to fight _James Miller_, not in regard to _Miller_ himself,
but in that, as the Fame went out, he had fought _Parkes_ of _Coventry_.
[2] The Acceptance of the Combat ran in these Words:

  "_I_ Timothy Buck _of_ Clare-Market, _Master of the Noble Science of
  Defence, hearing he did fight Mr._ Parkes _of_ Coventry, _will not
  fail (God Willing) to meet this fair Inviter at the Time and Place
  appointed, desiring a clear Stage and no Favour._

  Vivat Regina."

I shall not here look back on the Spectacles of the _Greeks_ and
_Romans_ of this kind, but must believe this Custom took its rise from
the Ages of Knight-Errantry; from those who lov'd one Woman so well,
that they hated all Men and Women else; from those who would fight you,
whether you were or were not of their Mind; from those who demanded the
Combat of their Contemporaries, both for admiring their Mistress or
discommending her. I cannot therefore but lament, that the terrible Part
of the ancient Fight is preserved, when the amorous Side of it is
forgotten. We have retained the Barbarity, but lost the Gallantry of the
old Combatants. I could wish, methinks, these Gentlemen had consulted me
in the Promulgation of the Conflict. I was obliged by a fair young Maid
whom I understood to be called _Elizabeth Preston_, Daughter of the
Keeper of the Garden, with a Glass of Water; whom I imagined might have
been, for Form's sake, the general Representative of the Lady sought
for, and from her Beauty the proper _Amarillis_ on these Occasions. It
would have ran better in the Challenge, _I_ James Miller, _Serjeant, who
have travelled Parts abroad, and came last from the Frontiers of_
Portugal, _for the Love of_ Elizabeth Preston, _do assert, That the
said_ Elizabeth is the Fairest of Women. Then the Answer; _I_ Timothy
Buck, _who have stay'd in_ Great Britain _during all the War in Foreign
Parts, for the Sake of_ Susanna Page, _do deny that_ Elizabeth Preston
_is so fair as the said_ Susanna Page. Let _Susanna Page_ look on, and I
desire of _James Miller_ no Favour.

This would give the Battel quite another Turn; and a proper Station for
the Ladies, whose Complexion was disputed by the Sword, would animate
the Disputants with a more gallant Incentive than the Expectation of
Money from the Spectators; tho' I would not have that neglected, but
thrown to that Fair One, whose Lover was approved by the Donor.

Yet, considering the Thing wants such Amendments, it was carried with
great Order. _James Miller_ came on first, preceded by two disabled
Drummers, to shew, I suppose, that the Prospect of maimed Bodies did not
in the least deter him. There ascended with the daring _Miller_ a
Gentleman, whose Name I could not learn, with a dogged Air, as
unsatisfied that he was not Principal. This Son of Anger lowred at the
whole Assembly, and weighing himself as he march'd around from Side to
Side, with a stiff Knee and Shoulder, he gave Intimations of the Purpose
he smothered till he saw the Issue of this Encounter. _Miller_ had a
blue Ribband tied round the Sword Arm; which Ornament I conceive to be
the Remain of that Custom of wearing a Mistress's Favour on such
Occasions of old.

_Miller_ is a Man of six Foot eight Inches Height, of a kind but bold
Aspect, well-fashioned, and ready of his Limbs: and such Readiness as
spoke his Ease in them, was obtained from a Habit of Motion in Military
Exercise.

The Expectation of the Spectators was now almost at its Height, and the
Crowd pressing in, several active Persons thought they were placed
rather according to their Fortune than their Merit, and took it in their
Heads to prefer themselves from the open Area, or Pitt, to the
Galleries. This Dispute between Desert and Property brought many to the
Ground, and raised others in proportion to the highest Seats by Turns
for the Space of ten Minutes, till _Timothy Buck_ came on, and the whole
Assembly giving up their Disputes, turned their Eyes upon the Champions.
Then it was that every Man's Affection turned to one or the other
irresistibly. A judicious Gentleman near me said, _I could methinks be_
Miller's _Second, but I had rather have_ Buck _for mine_. _Miller_ had
an Audacious Look, that took the Eye; _Buck_ a perfect Composure, that
engaged the Judgment. _Buck_ came on in a plain Coat, and kept all his
Air till the Instant of Engaging; at which time he undress'd to his
Shirt, his Arm adorned with a Bandage of red Ribband. No one can
describe the sudden Concern in the whole Assembly; the most tumultuous
Crowd in Nature was as still and as much engaged, as if all their Lives
depended on the first Blow. The Combatants met in the Middle of the
Stage, and shaking Hands as removing all Malice, they retired with much
Grace to the Extremities of it; from whence they immediately faced
about, and approached each other, _Miller_ with an Heart full of
Resolution, _Buck_ with a watchful untroubled Countenance; _Buck_
regarding principally his own Defence, _Miller_ chiefly thoughtful of
annoying his Opponent. It is not easie to describe the many Escapes and
imperceptible Defences between two Men of quick Eyes and ready Limbs,
but _Miller's_ Heat laid him open to the Rebuke of the calm _Buck_, by a
large Cut on the Forehead. Much Effusion of Blood covered his Eyes in a
Moment, and the Huzzas of the Crowd undoubtedly quickened the Anguish.
The Assembly was divided into Parties upon their different ways of
Fighting; while a poor Nymph in one of the Galleries apparently suffered
for _Miller_, and burst into a Flood of Tears. As soon as his Wound was
wrapped up, he came on again with a little Rage, which still disabled
him further. But what brave Man can be wounded into more Patience and
Caution? The next was a warm eager Onset, which ended in a decisive
Stroke on the Left Leg of _Miller_. The Lady in the Gallery, during this
second Strife, covered her Face; and for my Part, I could not keep my
Thoughts from being mostly employed on the Consideration of her unhappy
Circumstance that Moment, hearing the Clash of Swords, and apprehending
Life or Victory concerned her Lover in every Blow, but not daring to
satisfie her self on whom they fell. The Wound was exposed to the View
of all who could delight in it, and sowed up on the Stage. The surly
Second of _Miller_ declared at this Time, that he would that Day
Fortnight fight Mr. _Buck_ at the same Weapons, declaring himself the
Master of the renowned _Gorman_; but _Buck_ denied him the Honour of
that couragious Disciple, and asserting that he himself had taught that
Champion, accepted the Challenge.

There is something in Nature very unaccountable on such Occasions, when
we see the People take a certain painful Gratification in beholding
these Encounters. Is it Cruelty that administers this Sort of Delight?
Or is it a Pleasure which is taken in the Exercise of Pity? It was
methought pretty remarkable, that the Business of the Day being a Tryal
of Skill, the Popularity did not run so high as one would have expected
on the Side of _Buck_. Is it that People's Passions have their Rise in
Self-Love, and thought themselves (in spite of all the Courage they had)
liable to the Fate of _Miller_, but could not so easily think themselves
qualified like _Buck_?

_Tully_ speaks of this Custom with less Horrour than one would expect,
though he confesses it was much abused in his Time, and seems directly
to approve of it under its first Regulations, when Criminals only fought
before the People.

  'Crudele Gladiatorum spectaculum et inhumanum nonnullis videri solet;
  et haud scio annon ita sit ut nunc fit; cum vero sontes ferro
  depugnabant, auribus fortasse multa, oculis quidem nulla, poterat esse
  fortior contra dolorem et mortem disciplina.

  The Shows of Gladiators may be thought barbarous and inhumane, and I
  know not but it is so as it is now practised; but in those Times when
  only Criminals were Combatants, the Ear perhaps might receive many
  better Instructions, but it is impossible that any thing which affects
  our Eyes, should fortifie us so well against Pain and Death.' [3]

T.


[Footnote 1: See note on p. 118, vol. i. [Footnote 2 of No. 31.]]


[Footnote 2: John Sparkes of Coventry has this piece of biography upon
his tombstone:

  'To the memory of Mr. John Sparkes, a native of this city; he was a
  man of a mild disposition, a gladiator by profession, who, after
  having fought 350 battles in the principal parts of Europe with honour
  and applause, at length quitted the stage, sheathed his sword, and,
  with Christian resignation, submitted to the grand victor in the 52nd
  year of his age.

    _Anno salutis humanae_, 1733.'

Serjeant James Miller afterwards became a captain, and fought in
Scotland, under the Duke of Cumberland in 1745.]


[Footnote 3: Tuscul. Quaest. lib. II., De Tolerando Dolore.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 437.                 Tuesday, July 22, 1712.


  'Tune impune hæc facias? Tune hic homines adolescentulos
  Imperitos rerum, eductos libere, in fraudem illicis?
  Sollicitando, et pollicitando eorum animos lactas?
  Ac meritricios amores nuptiis conglutinas?'

  Ter. And.


The other Day passed by me in her Chariot a Lady with that pale and wan
Complexion, which we sometimes see in young People, who are fallen into
Sorrow and private Anxiety of Mind, which antedate Age and Sickness. It
is not three Years ago since she was gay, airy, and a little towards
Libertine in her Carriage; but, methought, I easily forgave her that
little Insolence, which she so severely pays for in her present
Condition. _Favilla_, of whom I am speaking, is married to a sullen Fool
with Wealth: Her Beauty and Merit are lost upon the Dolt, who is
insensible of Perfection in any thing. Their Hours together are either
painful or insipid: The Minutes she has to herself in his Absence, are
not sufficient to give Vent at her Eyes to the Grief and Torment of his
last Conversation. This poor Creature was sacrificed with a Temper
(which, under the Cultivation of a Man of Sense, would have made the
most agreeable Companion) into the Arms of this loathsome Yoak-fellow by
_Sempronia_. _Sempronia_ is a good Lady, who supports herself in an
affluent Condition, by contracting Friendship with rich young Widows and
Maids of plentiful Fortunes at their own Disposal, and bestowing her
Friends upon worthless indigent Fellows; on the other Side, she ensnares
inconsiderate and rash Youths of great Estates into the Arms of vitious
Women. For this Purpose, she is accomplished in all the Arts which can
make her acceptable at impertinent Visits; she knows all that passes in
every Quarter, and is well acquainted with all the favourite Servants,
Busiebodies, Dependants, and poor Relations of all Persons of Condition
in the whole Town. At the Price of a good Sum of Money, _Sempronia_, by
the Instigation of _Favilla's_ Mother, brought about the Match for the
Daughter, and the Reputation of this, which is apparently, in point of
Fortune, more than _Favilla_ could expect, has gained her the Visits and
frequent Attendance of the Crowd of Mothers, who had rather see their
Children miserable in great Wealth, than the happiest of the Race of
Mankind in a less conspicuous State of Life. When _Sempronia_ is so well
acquainted with a Woman's Temper and Circumstance, that she believes
Marriage would be acceptable to her, and advantageous to the Man who
shall get her; her next Step is to look out for some one, whose
Condition has some secret Wound in it, and wants a Sum, yet, in the Eye
of the World, not unsuitable to her. If such is not easily had, she
immediately adorns a worthless Fellow with what Estate she thinks
convenient, and adds as great a Share of good Humour and Sobriety as is
requisite: After this is settled, no Importunities, Arts, and Devices
are omitted to hasten the Lady to her Happiness. In the general indeed
she is a Person of so strict Justice, that she marries a poor Gallant to
a rich Wench, and a Moneyless Girl to a Man of Fortune. But then she has
no manner of Conscience in the Disparity, when she has a Mind to impose
a poor Rogue for one of an Estate, she has no Remorse in adding to it,
that he is illiterate, ignorant, and unfashioned; but makes those
Imperfections Arguments of the Truth of his Wealth, and will, on such an
Occasion, with a very grave Face, charge the People of Condition with
Negligence in the Education of their Children. Exception being made
t'other Day against an ignorant Booby of her own Cloathing, whom she was
putting off for a rich Heir, _Madam_, said she, _you know there is no
making Children who know they have Estates attend their Books._

_Sempronia,_ by these Arts, is loaded with Presents, importuned for her
Acquaintance, and admired by those who do not know the first Taste of
Life, as a Woman of exemplary good Breeding. But sure, to murder and to
rob are less Iniquities, than to raise Profit by Abuses, as irreparable
as taking away Life; but more grievous, as making it lastingly unhappy.
To rob a Lady at Play of Half her Fortune, is not so ill, as giving the
whole and her self to an unworthy Husband. But _Sempronia_ can
administer Consolation to an unhappy Fair at Home, by leading her to an
agreeable Gallant elsewhere. She can then preach the general Condition
of all the Married World, and tell an unexperienced young Woman the
Methods of softning her Affliction, and laugh at her Simplicity and Want
of Knowledge, with an _Oh! my Dear, you will know better._

The Wickedness of _Sempronia,_ one would think, should be superlative;
but I cannot but esteem that of some Parents equal to it; I mean such as
sacrifice the greatest Endowments and Qualifications to base Bargains. A
Parent who forces a Child of a liberal and ingenious Spirit into the
Arms of a Clown or a Blockhead, obliges her to a Crime too odious for a
Name. It is in a Degree the unnatural Conjunction of rational and brutal
Beings. Yet what is there so common, as the bestowing an accomplished
Woman with such a Disparity. And I could name Crowds who lead miserable
Lives, or want of Knowledge in their Parents, of this Maxim, that good
Sense and good Nature always go together. That which is attributed to
Fools, and called good Nature, is only an Inability of observing what is
faulty, which turns in Marriage, into a Suspicion of every thing as
such, from a Consciousness of that Inability.


  Mr. Spectator,

  'I am entirely of your Opinion with Relation to the Equestrian
  Females, who affect both the Masculine and Feminine Air at the same
  time; and cannot forbear making a Presentment against another Order of
  them who grow very numerous and powerful; and since our Language is
  not very capable of good compound Words, I must be contented to call
  them only the _Naked Shouldered_. These Beauties are not contented to
  make Lovers where-ever they appear, but they must make Rivals at the
  same time. Were you to see _Gatty_ walk the _Park_ at high Mall, you
  would expect those who followed her and those who met her could
  immediately draw their Swords for her. I hope, Sir, you will provide
  for the future, that Women may stick to their Faces for doing any
  future Mischief and not allow any but direct Traders in Beauty to
  expose more than the fore Part of the Neck, unless you please to allow
  this After-Game to those who are very defective in the Charms of the
  Countenance. I can say, to my Sorrow, the present Practice is very
  unfair, when to look back is Death; and it may be said of our
  Beauties, as a great Poet did of Bullets,

    'They kill and wound like Parthians as they fly.'

  I submit this to your Animadversion; and am, for the little while I
  have left,

  _Your humble Servant, the languishing_ Philanthus.

  P. S. Suppose you mended my Letter, and made a Simile about the
  Porcupine, but I submit that also.

T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 438.               Wednesday, July 23, 1712.               Steele.


  '--Animum rege qui nisi paret
  Imperat--'

  Hor.


It is a very common Expression, That such a one is very good-natur'd,
but very passionate. The Expression indeed is very good-natur'd, to
allow passionate People so much Quarter: But I think a passionate Man
deserves the least Indulgence Imaginable. It is said, it is soon over;
that is, all the Mischief he does is quickly dispatch'd, which, I think,
is no great Recommendation to Favour. I have known one of these
good-natur'd passionate Men say in a mix'd Company even to his own Wife
or Child, such Things as the most inveterate Enemy of his Family would
not have spoke, even in Imagination. It is certain that quick
Sensibility is inseparable from a ready Understanding; but why should
not that good Understanding call to it self all its Force on such
Occasions, to master that sudden Inclination to Anger. One of the
greatest Souls now in the World [1] is the most subject by Nature to
Anger, and yet so famous from a Conquest of himself this Way, that he is
the known Example when you talk of Temper and Command of a Man's Self.
To contain the Spirit of Anger, is the worthiest Discipline we can put
our selves to. When a Man has made any Progress this way, a frivolous
Fellow in a Passion, is to him as contemptible as a froward Child. It
ought to be the Study of every Man, for his own Quiet and Peace. When he
stands combustible and ready to flame upon every thing that touches him,
Life is as uneasie to himself as it is to all about him. _Syncropius_
leads, of all Men living, the most ridiculous Life; he is ever
offending, and begging Pardon. If his Man enters the Room without what
he sent for, _That Blockhead_, begins he--_Gentlemen, I ask your Pardon,
but Servants now a-days_--The wrong Plates are laid, they are thrown
into the Middle of the Room; his Wife stands by in Pain for him, which
he sees in her Face, and answers as if he had heard all she was
thinking; _Why, what the Devil! Why don't you take Care to give Orders
in these things?_ His Friends sit down to a tasteless Plenty of every
thing, every Minute expecting new Insults from his impertinent Passions.
In a Word, to eat with, or visit _Syncropius_, is no other than going to
see him exercise his Family, exercise their Patience, and his own Anger.

It is monstrous that the Shame and Confusion in which this good-natured
angry Man must needs behold his Friends while he thus lays about him,
does not give him so much Reflection as to create an Amendment. This is
the most scandalous Disuse of Reason imaginable; all the harmless Part
of him is no more than that of a Bull-Dog, they are tame no longer than
they are not offended. One of these good-natured angry Men shall, in an
Instant, assemble together so many Allusions to secret Circumstances, as
are enough to dissolve the Peace of all the Families and Friends he is
acquainted with, in a Quarter of an Hour, and yet the next Moment be the
best-natured Man in the whole World. If you would see Passion in its
Purity, without Mixture of Reason, behold it represented in a mad Hero,
drawn by a mad Poet. _Nat Lee_ makes his _Alexander_ say thus:

  'Away, begon, and give a Whirlwind Room,
  Or I will blow you up like Dust! Avaunt;
  Madness but meanly represents my Toil.
  Eternal Discord!
  Fury! Revenge! Disdain and Indignation!
  Tear my swoln Breast, make way for Fire and Tempest.
  My Brain is burst, Debate and Reason quench'd;
  The Storm is up, and my hot bleeding Heart
  Splits with the Rack, while Passions, like the Wind,
  Rise up to Heav'n, and put out all the Stars.'

Every passionate Fellow in Town talks half the Day with as little
Consistency, and threatens Things as much out of his Power.

The next disagreeable Person to the outrageous Gentleman, is one of a
much lower Order of Anger, and he is what we commonly call a peevish
Fellow. A peevish Fellow is one who has some Reason in himself for being
out of Humour, or has a natural Incapacity for Delight, and therefore
disturbs all who are happier than himself with Pishes and Pshaws, or
other well-bred Interjections, at every thing that is said or done in
his Presence. There should be Physick mixed in the Food of all which
these Fellows eat in good Company. This Degree of Anger passes,
forsooth, for a Delicacy of Judgment, that won't admit of being easily
pleas'd: but none above the Character of wearing a peevish Man's Livery,
ought to bear with his ill Manners. All Things among Men of Sense and
Condition should pass the Censure, and have the Protection, of the Eye
of Reason.

No Man ought to be tolerated in an habitual Humour, Whim, or
Particularity of Behaviour, by any who do not wait upon him for Bread.
Next to the peevish Fellow is the Snarler. This Gentleman deals mightily
in what we call the Irony, and as those sort of People exert themselves
most against these below them, you see their Humour best, in their Talk
to their Servants. That is so like you, You are a fine Fellow, Thou art
the quickest Head-piece, and the like. One would think the Hectoring,
the Storming, the Sullen, and all the different Species and
Subordinations of the Angry should be cured, by knowing they live only
as pardoned Men; and how pityful is the Condition of being only
suffered? But I am interrupted by the pleasantest Scene of Anger and the
Disappointment of it that I have ever known, which happened while I was
yet Writing, and I overheard as I sat in the Backroom at a _French_
Bookseller's. There came into the Shop a very learned Man with an erect
Solemn Air, and tho' a Person of great Parts otherwise, slow in
understanding anything which makes against himself. The Composure of the
faulty Man, and the whimsical Perplexity of him that was justly angry,
is perfectly New: After turning over many Volumes, said the Seller to
the Buyer, _Sir, you know I have long asked you to send me back the
first Volume of French Sermons I formerly lent you;_ Sir, said the
Chapman, I have often looked for it but cannot find it; It is certainly
lost, and I know not to whom I lent it, it is so many Years ago; _then,
Sir, here is the other Volume, I'll send you home that, and please to
pay for both_. My Friend, reply'd he, canst thou be so Senseless as not
to know that one Volume is as imperfect in my Library as in your Shop?
_Yes, Sir, but it is you have lost the first Volume, and to be short I
will be Paid._ Sir, answered the Chapman, you are a young Man, your Book
is lost, and learn by this little Loss to bear much greater Adversities,
which you must expect to meet with. _Yes, Sir, I'll bear when I must,
but I have not lost now, for I say you have it and shall pay me._
Friend, you grow Warm, I tell you the Book is lost, and I foresee in the
Course even of a prosperous Life, that you will meet Afflictions to make
you Mad, if you cannot bear this Trifle. _Sir, there is in this Case no
need of bearing, for you have the Book._ I say, Sir, I have not the
Book. But your Passion will not let you hear enough to be informed that
I have it not. Learn Resignation of your self to the Distresses of this
Life: Nay do not fret and fume, it is my Duty to tell you that you are
of an impatient Spirit, and an impatient Spirit is never without Woe.
_Was ever any thing like this?_ Yes, Sir, there have been many things
like this. The Loss is but a Trifle, but your Temper is Wanton, and
incapable of the least Pain; therefore let me advise you, be patient,
the Book is lost, but do not you for that Reason lose your self.

T.


[Footnote 1: Lord Somers.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 439.              Thursday, July 24, 1712.                Addison.


  'Hi narrata ferunt alio: mensuraque ficti
  Crescit; et auditis aliquid novus adjicit auctor.'

  Ovid.


Ovid describes the Palace of Fame [1] as situated in the very Center of
the Universe, and perforated with so many Windows and Avenues as gave
her the Sight of every thing that was done in the Heavens, in the Earth,
and in the Sea. The Structure of it was contrived in so admirable a
manner, that it Eccho'd every Word which was spoken in the whole Compass
of Nature; so that the Palace, says the Poet, was always filled with a
confused Hubbub of low dying Sounds, the Voices being almost spent and
worn out before they arrived at this General Rendezvous of Speeches and
Whispers.

I consider Courts with the same Regard to the Governments which they
superintend, as _Ovid's_ Palace of Fame with regard to the Universe. The
Eyes of a watchful Minister run through the whole People. There is
scarce a Murmur or Complaint that does not reach his Ears. They have
News-gatherers and Intelligencers distributed into their several Walks
and Quarters, who bring in their respective Quotas, and make them
acquainted with the Discourse and Conversation of the whole Kingdom or
Common-wealth where they are employed. The wisest of Kings, alluding to
these invisible and unsuspected Spies, who are planted by Kings and
Rulers over their Fellow-Citizens, as well as to those Voluntary
Informers that are buzzing about the Ears of a great Man, and making
their Court by such secret Methods of Intelligence, has given us a very
prudent Caution: _Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought, and Curse
not the Rich in thy Bedchamber: For a Bird of the Air shall carry the
Voice, and that which hath Wings shall tell the matter._ [2]

As it is absolutely necessary for Rulers to make use of other People's
Eyes and Ears, they should take particular Care to do it in such a
manner, that it may not bear too hard on the Person whose Life and
Conversation are enquired into. A Man who is capable of so infamous a
Calling as that of a Spy, is not very much to be relied upon. He can
have no great Ties of Honour, or Checks of Conscience, to restrain him
in those covert Evidences, where the Person accused has no Opportunity
of vindicating himself. He will be more industrious to carry that which
is grateful, than that which is true.

There will be no Occasion for him, if he does not hear and see things
worth Discovery; so that he naturally inflames every Word and
Circumstance, aggravates what is faulty, perverts what is good, and
misrepresents what is indifferent. Nor is it to be doubted but that such
ignominious Wretches let their private Passions into these their
clandestine Informations, and often wreck their particular Spite or
Malice against the Person whom they are set to watch. It is a pleasant
Scene enough, which an _Italian_ Author describes between a Spy, and a
Cardinal who employed him. The Cardinal is represented as minuting down
every thing that is told him. The Spy begins with a low Voice, Such an
one, the Advocate, whispered to one of his Friends, within my Hearing,
that your Eminence was a very great Poultron; and after having given his
Patron time to take it down, adds that another called him a Mercenary
Rascal in a publick Conversation. The Cardinal replies, Very well, and
bids him go on. The Spy proceeds, and loads him with Reports of the same
Nature, till the Cardinal rises in great Wrath, calls him an impudent
Scoundrel, and kicks him out of the Room.

It is observed of great and heroick Minds, that they have not only shewn
a particular Disregard to those unmerited Reproaches which have been
cast upon 'em, but have been altogether free from that Impertinent
Curiosity of enquiring after them, or the poor Revenge of resenting
them. The Histories of _Alexander_ and _Cæsar_ are full of this kind of
Instances. Vulgar Souls are of a quite contrary Character. _Dionysius_,
the Tyrant of _Sicily_, had a Dungeon which was a very curious Piece of
Architecture; and of which, as I am informed, there are still to be seen
some Remains in that Island. It was called _Dionysius's_ Ear, and built
with several little Windings and Labyrinths in the form of a real Ear.
The Structure of it made it a kind of whispering Place, but such a one
as gathered the Voice of him who spoke into a Funnel, which was placed
at the very Top of it. The Tyrant used to lodge all his State-Criminals,
or those whom he supposed to be engaged together in any Evil Designs
upon him, in this Dungeon. He had at the same time an Apartment over it,
where he used to apply himself to the Funnel, and by that Means
over-hear every thing that was whispered in [the [3]] Dungeon. I believe
one may venture to affirm, that a _Cæsar_ or an _Alexander_ would rather
have died by the Treason, than have used such disingenuous Means for the
detecting of it. A Man, who in ordinary Life is very Inquisitive after
every thing which is spoken ill of him, passes his Time but very
indifferently. He is wounded by every Arrow that is shot at him, and
puts it in the Power of every insignificant Enemy to disquiet him. Nay,
he will suffer from what has been said of him, when it is forgotten by
those who said or heard it. For this Reason I could never bear one of
those officious Friends, that would be telling every malicious Report,
every idle Censure that [passed [4]] upon me. The Tongue of Man is so
petulant, and his Thoughts so variable, that one should not lay too
great a Stress upon any present Speeches and Opinions. Praise and
Obloquy proceed very frequently out of the same Mouth upon the same
Person, and upon the same Occasion. A generous Enemy will sometimes
bestow Commendations, as the dearest Friend cannot sometimes refrain
from speaking Ill. The Man who is indifferent in either of these
Respects, gives his Opinion at random, and praises or disapproves as he
finds himself in Humour.

I shall conclude this Essay with Part of a Character, which
is finely drawn by the Earl of _Clarendon_, in the first Book of
his History, and which gives us the lively Picture of a great
Man teizing himself with an absurd Curiosity.

  'He had not that Application and Submission, and Reverence for the
  Queen, as might have been expected from his Wisdom and Breeding; and
  often crossed her Pretences and Desires with more Rudeness than was
  natural to him. Yet he was impertinently sollicitous to know what her
  Majesty said of him in private, and what Resentments she had towards
  him. And when by some Confidents, who had their Ends upon him from
  those Offices, he was informed of some bitter Expressions fallen from
  her Majesty, he was so exceedingly afflicted and tormented with the
  Sense of it, that sometimes by passionate Complaints and
  Representations to the King; sometimes by more dutiful Addresses and
  Expostulations with the Queen, in bewailing his Misfortune; he
  frequently exposed himself, and left his Condition worse than it was
  before, and the Eclaircisment commonly ended in the Discovery of the
  Persons from whom he had received his most secret Intelligence.' [5]

C.


[Footnote 1: Metamorphoses, Bk xii.]


[Footnote 2: Eccl. x. 20.]


[Footnote 3: [this]]


[Footnote 4: [passes]]


[Footnote 5: Written of Lord Treasurer Western, Earl of Portland.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 440.                 Friday, July 25, 1712.               Addison


  'Vivere si rectè nescis, discede peritis.'

  Hor.


I have already given my Reader an Account of a Sett of merry Fellows,
who are passing their Summer together in the Country, being provided of
a great House, where there is not only a convenient Apartment for every
particular Person, but a large Infirmary for the Reception of such of
them as are any way indisposed, or out of Humour. Having lately received
a Letter from the Secretary of this Society, by Order of the whole
Fraternity, which acquaints me with their Behaviour during the last
Week, I shall here make a Present of it to the Publick.


  _Mr_. SPECTATOR,

  'We are glad to find that you approve the Establishment which we have
  here made for the retrieving of good Manners and agreeable
  Conversation, and shall use our best Endeavours so to improve our
  selves in this our Summer Retirement, that we may next Winter serve as
  Patterns to the Town.  But to the end that this our Institution may be
  no less Advantageous to the Publick than to our selves, we shall
  communicate to you one Week of our Proceedings, desiring you at the
  same time, if you see any thing faulty in them, to favour us with your
  Admonitions. For you must know, Sir, that it has been proposed among
  us to chuse you for our Visitor, to which I must further add, that one
  of the College having declared last Week, he did not like the
  _Spectator_ of the Day, and not being able to assign any just Reasons
  for such his Dislike, he was sent to the Infirmary _Nemine
  Contradicente_.

  'On _Monday_ the Assembly was in very good Humour, having received
  some Recruits of _French_ Claret that Morning: when unluckily, towards
  the middle of the Dinner, one of the Company swore at his Servant in a
  very rough manner, for having put too much Water in his Wine. Upon
  which the President of the Day, who is always the Mouth of the
  Company, after having convinced him of the Impertinence of his
  Passion, and the Insult it had made upon the Company, ordered his Man
  to take him from the Table and convey him to the Infirmary. There was
  but one more sent away that Day; this was a Gentleman who is reckoned
  by some Persons one of the greatest Wits, and by others one of the
  greatest Boobies about Town. This you will say is a strange Character,
  but what makes it stranger yet, it is a very true one, for he is
  perpetually the Reverse of himself, being always merry or dull to
  Excess. We brought him hither to divert us, which he did very well
  upon the Road, having lavished away as much Wit and Laughter upon the
  Hackney Coachman as might have served him during his whole Stay here,
  had it been duly managed. He had been lumpish for two or three Days,
  but was so far connived at, in hopes of Recovery, that we dispatched
  one of the briskest Fellows among the Brotherhood into the Infirmary,
  for having told him at Table he was not merry. But our President
  observing that he indulged himself in this long Fit of Stupidity, and
  construing it as a Contempt of the College, ordered him to retire into
  the Place prepared for such Companions. He was no sooner got into it,
  but his Wit and Mirth returned upon him in so violent a manner, that
  he shook the whole Infirmary with the Noise of it, and had so good an
  Effect upon the rest of the Patients, that he brought them all out to
  Dinner with him the next Day.

  'On _Tuesday_ we were no sooner sat down, but one of the Company
  complained that his Head aked; upon which another asked him, in an
  insolent manner, what he did there then; this insensibly grew into
  some warm Words; so that the President, in order to keep the Peace,
  gave directions to take them both from the Table, and lodge them in
  the Infirmary. Not long after, another of the Company telling us, he
  knew by a Pain in his Shoulder that we should have some Rain, the
  President ordered him to be removed, and placed as a Weather-glass in
  the Apartment above mentioned.

  'On _Wednesday_ a Gentleman having received a Letter written in a
  Woman's Hand, and changing Colour twice or thrice as he read it,
  desired leave to retire into the Infirmary. The President consented,
  but denied him the Use of Pen, Ink and Paper, till such time as he had
  slept upon it. One of the Company being seated at the lower end of the
  Table, and discovering his secret Discontent by finding fault with
  every Dish that was served up, and refusing to Laugh at any thing that
  was said, the President told him, that he found he was in an uneasie
  Seat, and desired him to accommodate himself better in the Infirmary.
  After Dinner a very honest Fellow chancing to let a Punn fall from
  him, his Neighbour cryed out, _to the Infirmary_; at the same time
  pretending to be Sick at it, as having the same Natural Antipathy to a
  Punn, which some have to a Cat. This produced a long Debate. Upon the
  whole, the Punnster was Acquitted and his Neighbour sent off.

  'On _Thursday_ there was but one Delinquent. This was a Gentleman of
  strong Voice, but weak Understanding. He had unluckily engaged himself
  in a Dispute with a Man of excellent Sense, but of a modest Elocution.
  The Man of Heat replied to every Answer of his Antagonist with a
  louder Note than ordinary, and only raised his Voice when he should
  have enforced his Argument. Finding himself at length driven to an
  Absurdity, he still reasoned in a more clamorous and confused manner,
  and to make the greater Impression upon his Hearers, concluded with a
  loud Thump upon the Table. The President immediately ordered him to be
  carried off, and dieted with Water-gruel, till such time as he should
  be sufficiently weakened for Conversation.

  'On _Friday_ there passed very little remarkable, saving only, that
  several Petitions were read of the Persons in Custody, desiring to be
  released from their Confinement, and vouching for one another's good
  Behaviour for the future.

  'On _Saturday_ we received many Excuses from Persons who had found
  themselves in an unsociable Temper, and had voluntarily shut
  themselves up. The Infirmary was indeed never so full as on this Day,
  which I was at some loss to account for, till upon my going Abroad I
  observed that it was an Easterly Wind. The Retirement of most of my
  Friends has given me Opportunity and Leisure of writing you this
  Letter, which I must not conclude without assuring you, that all the
  Members of our College, as well those who are under Confinement, as
  those who are at Liberty, are your very humble Servants, tho' none
  more than,  _&c._'

C.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 441.               Saturday, July 26, 1712.                Addison.


  'Si fractus illabatur orbis
  Impavidum ferient ruinæ.'

  Hor.


Man, considered in himself, is a very helpless and a very wretched
Being. He is subject every Moment to the greatest Calamities and
Misfortunes. He is beset with Dangers on all sides, and may become
unhappy by numberless Casualties, which he could not foresee, nor have
prevented, had he foreseen them.

It is our Comfort, while we are obnoxious to so many Accidents, that we
are under the Care of one who directs Contingencies, and has in his
Hands the Management of every Thing that is capable of annoying or
offending us; who knows the Assistance we stand in need of, and is
always ready to bestow it on those who ask it of him.

The natural Homage, which such a Creature bears to so infinitely Wise
and Good a Being, is a firm Reliance on him for the Blessings and
Conveniences of Life, and an habitual Trust in him for Deliverance out
of all such Dangers and Difficulties as may befall us.

The Man, who always lives in this Disposition of Mind, has not the same
dark and melancholy Views of Human Nature, as he who considers himself
abstractedly from this Relation to the Supreme Being. At the same time
that he reflects upon his own Weakness and Imperfection, he comforts
himself with the Contemplation of those Divine Attributes, which are
employed for his Safety and his Welfare. He finds his Want of Foresight
made up by the Omniscience of him who is his Support. He is not sensible
of his own want of Strength, when he knows that his Helper is Almighty.
In short, the Person who has a firm trust on the Supreme Being is
Powerful in _his_ Power, Wise by _his_ Wisdom, Happy by _his_ Happiness.
He reaps the Benefit of every Divine Attribute, and loses his own
Insufficiency in the Fullness of Infinite Perfection.

To make our Lives more easie to us, we are commanded to put our Trust in
him, who is thus able to relieve and succour us; the Divine Goodness
having made such a Reliance a Duty, notwithstanding we should have been
miserable had it been forbidden us.

Among several Motives, which might be made use of to recommend this Duty
to us, I shall only take notice of those that follow.

The first and strongest is, that we are promised, He will not fail those
who put their Trust in him.

But without considering the Supernatural Blessing which accompanies this
Duty, we may observe that it has a natural Tendency to its own Reward,
or in other Words, that this firm Trust and Confidence in the great
Disposer of all Things, contributes very much to the getting clear of
any Affliction, or to the bearing it manfully. A Person who believes he
has his Succour at hand, and that he acts in the sight of his Friend,
often excites himself beyond his Abilities, and does Wonders that are
not to be matched by one who is not animated with such a Confidence of
Success. I could produce Instances from History, of Generals, who out of
a Belief that they were under the Protection of some invisible
Assistant, did not only encourage their Soldiers to do their utmost, but
have acted themselves beyond what they would have done, had they not
been inspired by such a Belief. I might in the same manner show how such
a Trust in the Assistance of an Almighty Being, naturally produces
Patience, Hope, Cheerfulness, and all other Dispositions of Mind that
alleviate those Calamities which we are not able to remove.

The Practice of this Virtue administers great Comfort to the Mind of Man
in Times of Poverty and Affliction, but most of all in the Hour of
Death. When the Soul is hovering in the last Moments of its [Separation,
[1]] when it is just entring on another State of Existence, to converse
with Scenes, and Objects, and Companions that are altogether new, what
can support her under such Tremblings of Thought, such Fear, such
Anxiety, such Apprehensions, but the casting of all her Cares upon him
who first gave her Being, who has conducted her through one Stage of it,
and will be always with her to Guide and Comfort her in her [Progress
[2]] through Eternity?

_David_ has very beautifully represented this steady Reliance on God
Almighty in his twenty third Psalm, which is a kind of _Pastoral_ Hymn,
and filled with those Allusions which are usual in that kind of Writing.
As the Poetry is very exquisite, I shall present my Reader with the
following Translation of it. [3]


  I.    The Lord my Pasture shall prepare,
        And feed me with a Shepherd's Care;
        His Presence shall my Wants supply,
        And guard me with a watchful Eye;
        My Noon-day Walks he shall attend,
        And all my Mid-night Hours defend.

  II.   When in the sultry Glebe I faint,
        Or on the thirsty Mountain pant;
        To fertile Vales, and dewy Meads
        My weary wand'ring Steps he leads;
        Where peaceful Rivers, soft and slow,
        Amid the verdant Landskip flow.

  III.  Tho' in the Paths of Death I tread,
        With gloomy Horrors overspread,
        My steadfast Heart shall fear no Ill,
        For thou, O Lord, art with me still;
        Thy friendly Crook shall give me Aid,
        And guide me through the dreadful Shade.

  IV.   Tho' in a bare and rugged Way,
        Through devious lonely Wilds I stray,
        Thy Bounty shall my Pains beguile;
        The barren Wilderness shall smile,
        With sudden Greens and Herbage crown'd,
        And Streams shall murmur all around.


C.


[Footnote 1: Dissolution]


[Footnote 2: Passage]


[Footnote 3: By Addison]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 442.                  Monday, July 28, 1712.            Steele.


  '--Scribimus Indocti Doctique--'

  Hor.

