8          | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.7         |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {4.2.6.4     |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   26   |  971- 980 | 7.9.7.8      | 3            | 6            | {6.4.6.4     | 7            | 2            | 4            | 6.8          | 3            | 6.8.7        | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {6.1.5       |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  981- 990 | 7.9.7.8      | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.6.8        | 3            | 6.8.7        | 7 | 3 |   |   |
        |  991-1000 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.8.5.7      | 2            | 4            | 6.8          | 4.2.3        | 6.5.7        | 5 | 5 |18 |12 | 1: 0.67
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
     In |trials 1001| to 1100 the  | right door   |was indicated | by being     |raised before | the choice   | was made.    |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
   30   | 1101-1110 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.6.5        | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | {7.7.7.7.7   | 3            | 6.6.7        | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.6.6.7.8   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.7.6.7     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   31   | 1111-1120 | 7.7.8        | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 6.7          | 3.3.2        | 4            | {7.6.6.7     | 4.4.4.3      | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.6.8*      |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 1121-1130 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
 August |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    2   | 1131-1140 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.3.3.2      | 4            | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   | 1141-1150 | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
    3   | 1151-1160 | 7.9.8        | 4.3          | 7.6          | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 5.4          | 7.6.7.8      | 4.3          | 6.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   | 1161-1170 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 6 | 4 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
    4   | 1171-1180 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 6.5.6.7      | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   | 1181-1190 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.3.2        | 4            | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |10 |10 | 1: 1.00
    5   | 1191-1200 | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 3.3.3.2      | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        | 1201-1210 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 1211-1220 | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6.5        | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.7.6.7.8    | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |17 |13 | 1: 0.76
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    6   | 1221-1230 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | {6.5.6.6     | 2            | 4            | {5.6.5.7     | 3            | 6.8.6.7      | 7 | 3 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.6.5.7     |              |              | {9.7.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 1231-1240 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 4.5          | 7            | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |13 | 7 | 1: 0.54
    7   | 1241-1250 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   | 1251-1260 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   | 1261-1270 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.3.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |23 | 7 | 1: 0.30
    9   | 1271-1280 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 9.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   | 1281-1290 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |16 | 4 | 1: 0.25
   10   | 1291-1300 | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 6.7          | 3.2          | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 1301-1310 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 5.6          | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.8          | 3            | 6.8.7        | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   | 1311-1320 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 5.7          | 2            | 4            | 5.7.8        | 3            | 4.6.8.7      | 6 | 4 |14 |16 | 1: 1.14
   11   | 1321-1330 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 3.2          | 4            | 4.6.7.8      | 2.3          | 5.7          | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   | 1331-1340 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |10 |10 | 1: 1.00
   12   | 1341-1350 | 9.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   | 1351-1360 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 7.8          | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |12 | 8 | 1: 0.67
   19   | 1361-1370 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        | 1371-1380 | 9.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | 7.9.8        | 3            | 6.8.7        | 6 | 4 |12 | 8 | 1: 0.67
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========

[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]


After two hundred and fifty trials on problem 2 had been given Julius,
it seemed desirable to introduce a radical change in method in order to
stimulate him to maximal effort. It was therefore decided to force him
to make a round trip through the apparatus in connection with each
choice, and to let this forced labor serve, in the place of confinement,
as punishment for mistakes. This new method yielded peculiar and
characteristic results. They differ from those previously obtained
largely because of the orang utan's remarkably strong tendency to
reenter the box through which he had just passed. This occurred so
persistently, as may be seen in table 9 (June 17, second series, June
18, etc.), that a further modification of method was introduced in that
after the same wrong box had been entered five times in succession, the
experimenter on the next choice of the box confined the animal for a
stated interval, say sixty seconds, in it, and then allowed it to escape
by way of the exit door and choose repeatedly until it finally located
the right box. Were it not for this particular feature of the method,
the number of choices recorded after June 17 would unquestionably be
very much greater than the table indicates.

The new method proved a severe test of the orang utan's patience and
perseverance, for he had to work much harder than formerly for his
reward, and often became much fatigued before completing the regular
series of ten trials. Early in the use of this method, he developed the
habit of rolling around from exit door to starting point by a series of
somersaults. When especially discouraged he would often bump his head
against the floor so hard that I could hear the dull thud. As has been
noted, I found it desirable to vary the procedure repeatedly. It proved
especially interesting to give one series per day with the round trip as
punishment and another series with confinement as punishment.

Day after day, as the experiment progressed, slight or great
fluctuations of the ratios of right to wrong choices appeared, but
without consistent improvement. There was, to be sure, as the last
column of table 9 shows, a radical improvement during the first six
hundred and fifty trials, for the number of right choices per series
increased from 0 to 8. But, as the observations were continued from day
to day, it became more and more evident that the animal was merely
passing from tendency to tendency--method to method--mixing tendencies,
and occasionally developing new ones, without approach to the solution
of the problem. This fact would have led me to discontinue the work much
earlier than I actually did had it not been for the peculiarity of the
results obtained with problem 1. It seemed not improbable that at any
time Julius might succeed in perfectly solving this problem over night
precisely as he had solved the first problem.

A curiously interesting bit of behavior appeared for the first time on
June 29. Julius had gone to the first box at the right end of the group,
and instead of entering, he had wheeled around toward his right, and
turning a complete circle, faced the right box, which he promptly
entered. Subsequently, the tendency developed and the method was used
with increasing frequency. On June 30, it appeared in the first series,
four times, in the second series, six times; on July 1, in the first
series, three times, and in the second series, four times; on July 2, in
the first series, five times, and in the second series, nine times. It
was indeed only by accident that the animal failed to fulfill the
technical requirement for perfect solution of the problem in this
series. Yet, had he done so, his subsequent trials would doubtless have
revealed the lack of any other idea than that of turning completely
around before entering a box.

This odd bit of behavior proved peculiarly interesting and significant
in that the tendency to turn became dissociated from the position (in
front of the first box at the right end of the group) in connection with
which it originally developed. After a few days, Julius would enter the
reaction-chamber and instead of proceeding directly to the right end of
the group, would stop suddenly wherever he happened to be, turn toward
his right in a complete circle, and hasten into the box nearest to him
which, as often as not, proved to be the wrong one. Thus the idea of
turning completely about, which had it continued its association with
the idea of facing the first box at the right, would have yielded
success, instead became useless because of its dissociation. That the
orang utan is capable of using free ideas seems clear enough in the
light of this behavior. That he proved incapable of getting the idea of
second from the right end is as clearly shown by the detailed results of
table 9,--the fruits of weeks of experimenting.

Certain other interesting tricks developed in Julius's behavior. Thus,
on July 5, there appeared the tendency to move as though about to enter
the right box (feint), then to stop suddenly and promptly enter another
box, which was, of course, a wrong one. The reason for the development
of this tendency could not be discovered, but in connection with it,
there appeared another tendency which possibly can be explained. Julius
took to backing into the chosen box so that he could face the
experimenter. He would then, after a period of hesitation, come out and
promptly enter one of the other boxes. This tendency was apparently due
to the fact that during one or two series the experimenter growled at
the orang utan every time he made a mistake. The growl startled him and
caused him to look around. He evidently felt the need of keeping his
eyes on the experimenter,--Hence the backing into the open box. The
tendency disappeared shortly after the experimenter gave up the use of
the growl as a method of punishing the animal for what were suspected to
be careless choices.

Curiously enough, it was not until July 10 that direct choice of the
right box was made at all frequently. Previously, selection of it had
been made almost invariably after approach to other boxes. But in the
second series for July 10 there was an extraordinary improvement in
method. This developed in the presence of two visitors, and it is
therefore all the more surprising. The choices were made not only
directly, but with decision and evident certainty that was quite at
variance with the previous behavior of the animal.

All the while through variation of methods, I was seeking to discover
the best means of holding the orang utan to his maximum effort and care
in attempting to select the right box. One day it would seem as though
forcing him to make round trips with rewards only for correct first
choices proved most satisfactory, and the next it might seem equally
clear that punishment by confinement for thirty seconds or sixty
seconds, with reward for correct choice in every trial, yielded better
results. In the end I had to admit that no best method had been
demonstrated and that I had failed to develop conditions which served to
compel the animal's attention to the problem and to lead him to work
without discouragement. There were, it is true, days on which it seemed
practically certain that the problem would be solved, but as it turned
out, Julius never succeeded in choosing correctly--throughout a series
of ten trials.

As a last resort, in order to make perfectly sure that the orang utan
was doing his best, I decided to introduce corporal punishment in a mild
form. For this purpose, I placed my assistant in charge of the apparatus
and the series of trials, and stationed myself in one corner of the
reaction-chamber with a whip in my hand. Whenever Julius entered a wrong
box, I approached him with the whip and struck at him, being careful not
to injure him and rarely striking him at all, for the threat was more
effective than a blow. He was extremely afraid of the whip and would
begin to whine and attempt to get out of the way as soon as he saw it.

This method was introduced on August 10, but no improvement resulted,
and in the end there was no reason to consider it more satisfactory than
the other procedures. I am now wholly convinced that Julius did his best
to choose correctly in the majority of the numerous series which were
given him in connection with problem 2.

From trials 1001 to 1100, a radical departure from the previous methods
was introduced in that the right box was indicated to the animal by the
slight and momentary raising of its exit door. Of course no records of
the choices for this group of one hundred trials appear in table 9, for
the simple reason that the animal inevitably and immediately entered the
right box. It was thought that this method might serve to break up the
previously developed tendencies toward inadequate forms of response and
so encourage the animal that he would later solve the problem when given
opportunity to select the right box without aid from the experimenter.
But as a matter of fact, while the ratio of right to wrong first choices
was 1 to .67 in the series preceding this change of method, it was 1 to
1.50 in the first series following its use. There is no satisfactory
evidence that Julius profited by this experience, though as a matter of
fact he did succeed in making his best daily record, eight right to two
wrong choices, on August 4, after 1190 trials.

The curve of learning for this problem has been plotted and is presented
in figure 19. It is of course incomplete and it is offered only to
indicate the extreme irregularity in performance.


_Problem 1a. First at the Right End_

