He could still exert no attention, could neither read nor be read to,
nor occupy himself in any way; but he was amused by talk around him,
and companionship was never lacking. Wilmet, whose forte had never
been conversation, found herself in a stream of small talk with
inquiring friends of all degrees in the hierarchy; but was most at
her ease when the female Harewoods were prattling good-humoured
inconsequent chatter. Willie lying on the grass murmuring with Lance,
or John lured into stories of Indian surveying adventures in the
cause of the Ordnance Map. And when she was carried off to have her
meals with the family, she had put herself so entirely at the mercy
of circumstances, that she never seemed scandalised by their crazy
unpunctuality, their wonderful free and easy ways, and customs of
putting things to every use but the right, did not censure Grace or
Lucy for dawdling and gossiping whole mornings away, and took it
naturally when their mother inquired after her eldest brother by the
alternate names of Festus and Frank, and when she mentioned Lance's
disaster as his coup d'etat. And here was the last of these pleasant
afternoons, full of still sweet sounds, midsummer hum above, the soft
ripple of the water close by, the cawing of the rooks in the Close--
all such peace, that her heart quailed as she looked forward to the
din of the High Street at Bexley, and she strangled a sigh half way
up her throat.

The click of the cloister door was heard, and Lance awoke from a
doze, saying, 'Is that Bill?--You've not been here since morning, you
vagabone.'

'See what I've got for you,' said Bill. 'What do you say for that,
now?'

For Lance, with sparkling eyes, was rising to his feet. 'Hurrah!
Robin herself! O Robin a Bobbin, isn't this jolly?' and Robina was
entangled in that wonderful embrace peculiar to their own two selves,
too ecstatic for a word between them, though as she received her
sister's kiss, she spoke rather pleadingly--'Cherry and Sister
Constance said I might, Wilmet; and Mrs. Harewood was so very kind as
to send Willie to fetch me to spend Sunday. Do you mind, Wilmet?'

'Mind! Of course she doesn't,' said Lance. 'I was hungry to see you,
Bob.'

'It was very kind in Mrs. Harewood,' said Wilmet. 'I must go and
thank her. Only, first, how is Cherry?'

'Much better. She has been out for a drive with Mr. Froggatt. It will
be all right now you are coming home, Mettie! Oh! and Dr. Lee is
delighted to hear of Lance's going to Ewmouth to make Felix stay
longer there. Oh! if ever anything was so delightful as this place!
only I must see your prize, Lancey.'

As the two children linked their arms round one another's waists to
walk along the alley, all-sufficient to one another, maybe there shot
a little pang across Wilmet's breast. No one had raptures for her.
She was Felix's housekeeper, and represented mother to all; but since
Alda had been taken from her, she had ceased to be any one's perfect
equal and delight. She might be valued, but only like air, or bread,
or any other necessary of life, but she was foremost with no one.
Lance had been everything to her, and she to Lance, for full four
weeks; but she should never awaken the look on his face she had seen
for Robin. Such thoughts as these had never troubled her before; it
had been quite enough to know herself indispensable to all, and there
was no time for sentiment; but this strange time of nursing had
inspired a new sensation of yearning, a softness and melancholy, that
she strove against vainly as weak and unnatural.

The change had not been unperceived by Lance; for as his little
sister, looking at his sunken cheeks, and feeling his thin bony hand,
poured out her pity, he answered, 'I've had rather a jolly time of it
of late; Mettie is so delicious, you can't think how her very voice
and eyes seemed to do me good. I'm sure that the bella-donna lily,
cold hard painted thing, was a mistake; she must have been something
much sweeter. What do you think of a honeysuckle? That's bright red
and white, and its leaves come out when nothing else does.'

'But it trails about, and doesn't stand alone.'

'It has got a good stout hard stem, that can make a bush of its own
when it hasn't anything to twine upon. I say, Robin, that's just what
you women-folk should be, always ready to twine, and yet able to
stick up for yourselves when you've got nothing to hang upon.'

'Well, if Wilmet was the honeysuckle, I'm sure Alda wasn't. O Lance,
it has been so horrid coming home without any one I wanted, and all
so queer and uncomfortable. I would as soon have been at school, or
sooner, for there I had home to think about.'

'The last holidays weren't first-rate,' said Lance.

'No; but then I'd got you!'

'I wish Dr. Manby would prescribe you to come with me,' said Lance.

'It's something to have this little sight! And here! I wanted to give
this back, Lance.'

'Ah!' as he took the key of the violin-case, 'We'll take a look at
her, Robin, to see if she's quite well; but I couldn't make her
speak, it would be like sticking daggers through my head.'

'Poor little key! I looked at it so often when you were so bad, and
grieved to think you had missed all that pleasure. Only it was a
comfort to know you had been so good about it.'

'I am glad you took it, Robin; I know I should have grown idle if I
had had it. Depend on it, 'twas that gave me this year of grace and
the Bishop's prize.'

'Oh! come and show me that! I hope it is not packed up.'

'No; I wanted to take it to show Felix, but Mettie says it is too
big, and would come to grief. What prizes have you, Robin?'

'Three. General good marks, catechism, and history--beautiful books.'

'Then the avenging harpies have forgiven you?'

'Pretty well; and they were very kind when you were ill, and the
girls are much nicer; I am glad we stayed on, except for Angel's
sake. Do you know, Lance, I really am afraid she is going in for
naughtiness.'

'Give a dog an ill name--' quoted Lance. 'Is that it?'

'I do believe it is that! She is such a Tom-boy! Fancy! One
afternoon, there was an awful uproar, and her class were all found
playing at races, some riding astride with handkerchiefs round the
forms, which they had named after the real horses; and the others
pretending to bet on them, with their books in their hands, shouting
out at the top of their voices.'

'Go it, Angel,' said Lance, laughing; 'that's the way Clem's sisters
improve the tone of the school.'

Robina still looked distressed, but that was soon forgotten in
visiting Lance's quarters, and admiring his books, peeping
respectfully at his silent violin, and being lionised as far as his
strength would permit. They were hand in hand the whole evening, till
be was sent to bed, and his sisters were claimed by the Harewoods.

The Cathedral was resuming its usual voices on the Sunday morning,
and when the early bell brought Wilmet from her room, she found Lance
up and dressed, his little black gown on, and his trencher cap in his
hand.

'That's nice!' he said in admiration, as she advanced in her fresh
white pique and blue ribbons. 'O Mettie, I'm so glad this isn't my
last time here!' and he added, as she bent over him and kissed him,
not quite able to speak, 'Please, Mettie, I beg your pardon for all
the times I have been tiresome or cross.'

'My dear little boy--' She broke down, and finished with another
kiss, for Robina was at hand, shy in her thankfulness, and clinging
to Lance's hand; but as Will Harewood followed, grave and subdued,
Lance went up to him, and put his arm into his. Mr. Harewood, the
Captain, and Lucy, were all likewise there; but the greetings were
silent, and then Mr. Harewood led them all through the library, and
was followed by the two boys to the sacristy; for though the
celebration was not choral, all those of the choir who were present
were always robed. Wilmet hardly liked not to keep her boy beside
her, but she could not be sorry when she saw the two friends once
more heading the little procession together; and with such happy
grave faces, though so different: one broad, ruddy, sandy; the other
fair, wasted, delicate, the hollow cheeks scarcely more coloured than
the white linen, and yet with a pure fresh air of bright hope and
recovery.

The Cathedral was nobly and calmly beautiful in the summer morning;
the sunbeams high up in the slender brilliant windows that crowned
the east, and the voice sounding low and solemn in the distance at
the Altar. To Wilmet and Robina it was a great deal more than the
joyous festival they had last shared in there, even though then they
had exulted in their brother's jubilant notes; and now he scarcely
breathed a faint response, left his book unopened, and knelt in the
dreamy passiveness of one incapable of actions of the mind, but too
simply happy and thankful to doubt of his welcome. In his place,
Clement would have distressed himself and his advisers over this
inability to perform his usual mental exercises of devotion; but
Lance never seemed to question but that he ought to lay himself
before the Altar in thankfulness as soon as he was able, as certain
of being welcomed there, as by the kind hands that shook his in the
sacristy.

He came to breakfast afterwards at the Harewoods', to put an end to
his invalid ways; but the clatter soon was too much for him; and he
spent the chief part of the day lying on his bed, able now to follow
dreamily the echoes from the minster, the full glories of which his
sisters were enjoying. There was afterwards a rush of his choir mates
to shake hands with him; and little Dick Graeme, a delicate, sallow,
black-eyed boy, in whom Wilmet believed she recognised the hero of
the swans' eggs, could not be got rid of the whole day. He lived at a
farm three miles off, and had been sent in to take his part on the
Sunday; indeed, he had often been at the door to inquire, but had
only been allowed momentary glimpses of Lance, whom he followed about
like a little dog, till at last, late in the evening, the proposal
was started of walking him down to the river, along which lay the
path leading to his home.

It was a charming summer evening when they set forth; the three
Underwoods, the two Harewood brothers, and little Graeme, slowly
moving along, Robina in ecstasies with the loose-strife and forget-
me-nots, and the boys absorbed in fish and water-rats, till Bill,
holding Robin a little back, pointed to a pollard, and told her in a
low hoarse voice, 'That was where I left those verses.'

'There!' Robina tried to measure with her eye the distance, which
looked immense for such a run. She could not speak; but little Dick
turned--

'Ay, 'twas a jolly run in the time. Spyers and I tried it, and both
got blown; but nobody runs like Underwood.'

'Well, it does look a goodish distance,' said Lance. 'And Robin, do
you know, it all came of this fellow being too good a poet. He
thought it was the Tiber, you know.'

'The subject was the Tiber, wasn't it?'

'Ay; and Bill here got to spouting about Horace Cocles till he didn't
know, nor I either, whether we were heathen Romans or not. It was a
mercy he didn't go home in Cocles' costume.'

Bill did not laugh. He seemed to forget everything, bystanders and
all, and threw his arm round his friend's neck. 'O Lancey, don't say
a word more. If you only could guess what--what this month has been
like to me! And now to see you standing here, like your dear old self
again! Oh! if I could only--' and he broke off and rushed away behind
the tree, where they heard him sobbing.

Lance shrugged his shoulders. 'Poor old Bill! he _will_ treat himself
as if he did it on purpose, but he'll be better now he's had it out.
But d'ye see, I can't go no farther now. So you, Dick, be off. Spare
the feelings of your dutiful parents, and get home in Christianable
time.'

'I say please, Underwood, may I have the bed by yours next half?'

'That's not as it pleases Underwood, but Mrs. Drake; but look here,
Graeme, there's a little brat of a new treble coming into our
dormitory. You stand his friend, and speak to Harewood if Bolt takes
to bullying him.'

'But you'll be back?' said the child, his face all consternation.

'I hope so; but for fear of accidents, you know. Good night, Dick,
and thank your mater for those stunning raspberries.'

'That's a good dodge,' said Will Harewood, emerging, 'to keep the
little ape from bullying the little one himself. But you will be able
to come back, Lance; 'tis as dull as ditch-water without you.'

'I shall be glad enough to come back,' said Lance, 'and make the most
of this year. I didn't know how I cared for this place. There's
nothing like it!' and he leant against a tree, looking back at the
Cathedral, where the sunbeams were 'weaving a parting crown' for the
tall tower, and the soft grey of the exquisite stone-work of the
chapter-house contrasted with the fresh green of the trees, rising up
from the sparkling river and emerald meadows. Presently he burst out,
'You beautiful old thing, and did you hush your grand glorious old
voice only for me? I should like to be your own, and to serve you for
ever!'

The other two felt a little awed at the outburst, and possibly Lance
a little ashamed, for he suddenly started from his tree trunk,
crying, 'I'm sure we ought to go home. However there are Jack and
Mettie on beyond ever so far.' And he elevated his voice in a coo-ee,
after what he believed to be Australian fashion; but his weakness
prevailed, and he laughed at his own want of power to shout much
above his breath. 'You do it, Bill.'

'Not I! Coo-ee indeed? 'Tis coo-coo there, river and moonlight and
all.'

At one and the same moment, Lance exclaimed, 'Jack and Mettie!
Thunder and ages!' and Robina, 'For shame, Willie!' while that
personage cut a caper, at once expressive of affirmation and
amusement at their surprise.

'After all,' sagaciously observed Lance, 'I'm not so much surprised.
I think I've made a pretty good Cupid.'

'You believe it, then?' cried Robina.

'Bless you,' affirmed Willie, 'we've been roasting Jack about it for
the last fortnight--only the pater was so awfully afraid of your
sister's hearing it, that he said any one who breathed the ghost of a
joke near her should be shipped off to old Aunt Grace that instant.'

'Well, they have my consent and blessing,' said Lance.

'Amen,' responded his friend.

'Ho!' continued Lance, 'that's the meaning of old W. W. being so
jolly. I wondered whether it was only that I thought so because I had
nothing to do but to look at her.'

'Oh, you know she is a real true beauty and no mistake,' said Bill,
beginning to feel a personal pride in her; 'there's Miles raving
about her, and every one runs about saying, "Have you seen little
Underwood's handsome sister?" Half the folks that came to ask after
you did it to get a look at her; and if she stayed a week longer, she
might have a dozen offers, only luckily Jack cut in first.'

'Well, I'm glad she is even with Alda,' was Lance's next sentiment.

'That's the one that is booked for the Red Indian you converted,
ain't it?' asked Bill. 'Fact, Robina; we heard a new fellow was
coming who had converted a Cherokee, and that the Bishop had
christened him in his war paint and feathers. Mrs. Shapcote sent out
invitations to a missionary tea in honour of him.'

'What, of the Cherokee?'

