GEORGE woke up with a start. What was this feeling in his throat?
Had he swallowed his blanket, or his cocoa-nut matting? No, they
were still in their respective places. He tore out his tongue and his
tonsils, and examined them. They were on fire. This puzzled him. He
replaced them. As he did so, a shower of red-hot coppers fell from his
mouth on to his feet. The agony was awful. He howled, and danced about
the room. Then he dashed at the whiskey, but the bottle ducked as he
approached, and he failed to tackle it. Poor GEORGE, you see, was a
rowing-man, not a football-player. Then he knew what he wanted. In
his keeping-room were six _carafes_, full of Cambridge water, and a
dozen bottles of Hunyádi Janos. He rushed in, and hurled himself upon
the bottles with all his weight. The crash was dreadful. The foreign
bottles, being poor, frail things, broke at once. He lapped up the
liquid like a thirsty dog. The _carafes_ survived. He crammed them
with their awful contents, one after another, down his throat. Then he
returned to his bed-room, seized his jug, and emptied it at one gulp.
His bath was full. He lifted it in one hand, and drained it as dry
as a University sermon. The thirst compelled him--drove him--made
him--urged him--lashed him--forced him--shoved him--goaded him--to
drink, drink, drink water, water, water! At last he was appeased. He
had cried bitterly, and drunk up all his tears. He fell back on his
bed, and slept for twenty-four hours, and the Devil went out and gave
his gyp, STARLING, a complete set of instructions for use in case of
flood.

CHAPTER III.

STARLING was a pale, greasy man. He was a devil of a gyp. He went into
GEORGE's bed-room and shook his master by the shoulder. GEORGE woke
up.

"Bring me the College pump," he said. "I must have it. No, stay," he
continued, as STARLING prepared to execute his orders, "a hair of the
dog--bring it, quick, quick!"

STARLING gave him three. He always carried them about with him in case
of accidents. GEORGE devoured them eagerly, recklessly. Then with a
deep sigh of relief, he went stark staring mad, and bit STARLING in
the fleshy part of the thigh, after which he fell fast asleep again.
On awaking, he took his name off the College books, gave STARLING a
cheque for £5000, broke off his engagement, but forgot to post the
letter, and consulted a Doctor.

"What you want," said the Doctor, "is to be shut up for a year in the
tap-room of a public-house. No water, only spirits. That must cure
you."

So GEORGE ordered STARLING to hire a public-house in a populous
district. When this was done, he went and lived there. But you
scarcely need to be told that STARLING had not carried out his orders.
How could he be expected to do that? Only fifty-six pages of my book
had been written, and even publishers--the most abandoned people on
the face of the earth--know that that amount won't make a Christmas
Annual. So STARLING hired a Temperance Hotel. As I have said, he was
a devil of a gyp.

CHAPTER IV.

The fact was this. One of GEORGE's great-great uncles had held a
commission in the Blue Ribbon Army. GEORGE remembered this too late.
The offer of a seat in the University Trial Eights must have suggested
the blue ribbon which the University Crew wear on their straw hats.
Thus the diabolical forces of heredity were roused to fever-heat, and
the great-great uncle, with his blue ribbon, whose photograph hung in
GEORGE's home over the parlour mantelpiece, became a living force in
GEORGE's brain.

GEORGE GINSLING went and lived in a suburban neighbourhood. It was
useless. He married a sweet girl with various spiteful relations. In
vain. He changed his name to PUMPDRY, and conducted a local newspaper.
Profitless striving. STARLING was always at hand, always ready
with the patent filter, and as punctual in his appearances as the
washing-bill or the East wind. I repeat, he was a devil of a gyp.

CHAPTER V.

They found GEORGE GINSLING feet uppermost in six inches of water in
the Daffodil Road reservoir. It was a large reservoir, and had been
quite full before GEORGE began upon it. This was his record drink, and
it killed him. His last words were, "If I had stuck to whiskey, this
would never have happened."

THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

"IT IS THE BOGIE MAN!"--BLACKIE'S _Modern Cyclopedia_. Nothing to do
with the Christy Minstrel Entertainment, but a very useful work of
reference, issued from the ancient house of publishers which is now
quite BLACKIE with age. We have looked through the "B's" for "Bogie,"
but "The Bogie Man" is "Not there, not there, my child!" but he is
to be found in that other BLACKIE's collection at the St. James's
Hall, which Bogie Man is said to be the original of that ilk.
_Unde derivatur_ "Bogie"? Perhaps the next edition of BLACKIE's
_still-more-Modern-than-ever Cyclopedia will explain_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PARS ABOUT PICTURES (_by Old Par_).--At the Fine Art Society's Gallery
I gazed upon the pictures of "Many-sided Nature" with great content,
and came to the conclusion that Mr. ALBERT GOODWIN was a many-sided
artist. "Now," said I, quoting SHAKSPEARE--_Old Par's Improved
Edition_--"is the GOODWIN of our great content made glorious." O.P.,
who knows every inch of Abingdon, who has gazed upon Hastings from
High Wickham, who is intimate with every brick in Dorchester, who
loves every reed and ripple on the Thames, and has a considerable
knowledge of the Rigi and Venice, can bear witness to the truth of the
painter. There are over seventy pictures--every one worth looking at.

       *       *       *       *       *

"BUSINESS!"

[Illustration: _Sweater_ (_to Mr. Punch_). "NO USE YOUR INTERFERING.
BUSINESS IS BUSINESS!"

_Mr. P._ "YES, AND UNCOMMONLY BAD BUSINESS, TOO, FOR _THEM_. COULDN'T
THE LARGE FIRMS TAKE A TRIFLE LESS PROFIT, AND PUT A LITTLE PLEASURE
INTO THE BUSINESS OF THESE POOR STARVING WORKERS?"]

    ["Business!" cries the Sweater, when remonstrated with
    for paying the poor Match-box makers twopence-farthing or
    twopence-half-penny a gross, whilst his own profits reach
    22-1/2 to 25 per cent.--_Daily News_.]

_PUNCH TO THE SWEATING SHYLOCK._

  Eh? "Business is business"? Sheer cant, Sir! Pure gammon?
  Of all the inhuman, sham Maxims of Mammon,
    This one is the worst,
  For under its cover lurks cruelty callous,
  With murderous meanness that merits the gallows,
    And avarice accurst.

  Oh, well, I'm aware, Sir, how ruthless rapacity
  Loves to take shelter, with cunning mendacity
    'Neath an old saw;
  But well says the scribe that such "business" is crime, Sir,
  And such would be but for gaps half the time, Sir,
    'Twixt justice and law.

  Bah! Many a man who's sheer rogue in reality,
  Hides the harsh knave in the mask of "legality."
    When 'tis too gross,
  Robbery's rash, but austere orthodoxies
  Countenance such things as modern match-boxes
    Nine-farthings a gross!

  From seven till ten, and sometimes to eleven,
  For "six bob" a week. Ah! such life _must_ be heaven;
    Whilst as for your "profit,"
  That's bound to approach five-and-twenty per cent.,
  That Sweaters shall thrive, let their tools be content
    With starvation in Tophet.

  To starve's bad enough, but to starve and to work
  (Mrs. LABOUCHERE hints), the most patient may irk;
    And the lady is right--
  Business? On brutes who dare mouth such base trash,
  _Mr. Punch_, who loves justice and sense, lays his lash,
    With the greatest delight.

  He knows the excuses advanced for the Sweater,
  But bad is the best, and, until you find better,
    'Tis useless to cant
  Of freedom of contract, supply and demand,
  And all the cold sophistries ever on hand
    Sound sense to supplant.

  A phrase takes the place of an argument often.
  And stomachs go empty, and brains slowly soften,
    And sense sick with dizziness,
  All in the name of the bosh men embody
  In one clap-trap phrase that dupes many a noddy,
    That--business is business!

  Business? Yes, precious bad business for them, Sir,
  Whose joyless enslavement _you_ take with such phlegm, Sir,
    Suppose, to enhance
  Their small share of ease, such as you, were content, Sir,
  To lower a trifle your precious "per cent.," Sir,
    And give _them_ a chance!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SOFT SAWDER.

"BUT I DON'T CALL THIS A FASHIONABLE 'AT!"

"IT WILL SOON _BECOME_ SO, MADAM, IF _YOU_ WEAR IT!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

[Illustration: A Christmas Masque.]

In _Camp and Studio_, Mr. IRVING MONTAGU, some time on the artistic
staff of _The Illustrated London News_, gives his experiences of the
Russo-Turkish Campaign. He concisely sums up the qualifications of a
War Correspondent by saying that he should "have an iron constitution,
a laconic, incisive style, and sufficient tact to establish a safe
and rapid connecting link between the forefront of battle and his own
head-quarters in Fleet Street or elsewhere." As Mr. IRVING MONTAGU
seems to have lived up to his ideal, it is a little astonishing to
find the last chapters of his book devoted to _Back in Bohemia_,
wherein he discourses of going to the Derby, a Hammersmith
_Desdemona_, and of the _Postlethwaites_ and _Maudles_, "whose
peculiarities have been recorded by the facile pen of DU MAURIER." But
as the author seems pleased with the reader, it would be indeed sad
were the reader to find fault with the author. However, this may be
said in his favour--he tells (at least) one good story. On his return
from Plevna to Bohemia, a dinner was given in his honour at the
Holborn Restaurant. Every detail was perfect--the only omission was
forgetfulness on the part of the Committee to invite _the guest of
the evening_! At the last moment the mistake was discovered, and a
telegram was hurriedly despatched to Mr. MONTAGU, telling him that he
was "wanted." On his arrival he was refused admittance to the dinner
by the waiters, because he was not furnished with a ticket! Ultimately
he was ushered into the Banqueting Hall, when everything necessarily
ended happily.

One might imagine that Birthday Books have had their day, but
apparently they still flourish, for HAZELL, WATSON, & VINEY publish
yet another, under the title of _Names we Love, and Places we Know_.
The first does not apply to our friends, but to the quotations
selected, and places are shown by photos.

Of many _Beneficent and Useful Lives_, you will hear "in
CHAMBERS,"--the reader sitting as judge on the various cases brought
before him by Mr. ROBERT COCHRANE.

_Unlucky_ will not be the little girl who reads the book with this
name, by CAROLINE AUSTIN.

_Everybody's Business_, by ISMAY THORN, nobody likes interference, but
in this case it proved the friend in need.

_Chivalry_, by LÉON GAUTIER, translated by HENRY FRITH, is a chronicle
of knighthood, its rules, and its deeds. To the scientific student,
_Discoveries and Inventions of the Nineteenth Century_, by ROBERT
ROUTLEDGE, B.S., F.C.S., will be interesting, and help him to discover
a lot he does not know. Those who have not already read it, _A Wonder
Book for Girls and Boys_, by NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE, will have a real
treat in the myths related; _Tanglewood Tales_ are included, and these
are delightful for all. _Rosebud_, by Mrs. ADAMS ACTON, a tale for
girls, who will love this bright little flower, bringing happiness all
around.

_Holly Leaves_, the Special Number of _The Sporting and Dramatic_, is
quite a seasonable decoration for the drawing-room table during the
Christmas holidays.

My faithful "Co." has been reading _Jack's Secret_, by Mrs.
LOVETT CAMERON, which, he says, has greatly pleased him. It has
an interesting story, and is full of clever sketches of character.
_Jack_, himself, is rather a weak personage, and scarcely deserves the
good fortune which ultimately falls to his lot. After flirting with a
born coquette, who treats him with a cruelty which is not altogether
unmerited, he settles down with a thoroughly lovable little wife, and
a seat in the House of Lords. From this it will be gathered that all
ends happily. _Jack's Secret_ will be let out by MUDIE's, and will be
kept, for a considerable time--by the subscribers.

Girls will be the richer this year by _Fifty-two more Stories for
Girls_, and boys will be delighted with _Fifty-two more Stories for
Boys_, by many of the best authors: both these books are edited by
ALFRED MILES, and published by HUTCHISON & Co. _Lion Jack_, by P.T.
BARNUM, is an account of JACK's perilous adventures in capturing wild
animals. If they weren't, of course, all true, _Lyin' Jack_ would have
been a better title.

_Syd Belton_, unlike most story-book boys, would not go to sea, but he
was made to _go_, by the author, Mr. MANVILLE FENN. Once launched, he
proved himself a British salt of the first water. _Dumps and I_, by
Mrs. PARR, is a _par_ticularly pretty book for girls, and quite on a
par with, her other works. METHUEN & CO. publish these.

_Pictures and Stories from English History_, and _Royal Portrait
Gallery_, are two Royal Prize Books for the historical-minded child;
they are published by T. NELSON AND SONS, as likewise "_Fritz_" _of
Prussia, Germany's Second Emperor_, by LUCY TAYLOR. _Dictionary of
Idiomatic English Phrases_, by JAMES MAIN DIXON, M.A., F.R.S.E., which
may prove a useful guide to benighted foreigners in assisting them to
solve the usual British vagaries of speech; like the commencement of
the Dictionary, it is quite an "A1" book.

"Dear Diary!" as one of Mr. F.C. PHILLIPS's heroines used to
address her little book, but DE LA RUE's are not "dear Diaries," nor
particularly cheap ones. This publisher is quite the Artful Dodger in
devising diaries in all shapes and sizes, from the big pocket-book to
the more insidious waistcoat-pocket booklet,--"small by degrees, but
beautifully less."

"Here's to you, TOM SMITH!"--it's BROWN in the song, but no
matter,--"Here's to you," sings the Baron, "with all my heart!" Your
comic gutta-percha-faced Crackers are a novelty; in fact, you've
solved a difficulty by introducing into our old Christmas Crackers
several new features.

This year the Baron gives the prize for pictorial amusement to LOTHAR
MEGGENDORFER (Gods! what a name!), who, assisted by his publishers,
GREVEL & CO., has produced an irresistibly funny book of movable
figures, entitled _Comic Actors_. What these coloured actors do is so
moving, that the spectators will be in fits of chuckling. Recommended,
says THE BARON DE BOOK-WORMS.

       *       *       *       *       *

"WHERE IGNORANCE IS BLISS."

ARGUMENT.--EDWIN has taken ANGELINA, his _fiancée_, to an
entertainment by a Mesmerist, and, wishing to set his doubts at
rest, has gone upon the platform, and placed himself entirely at the
Mesmerist's disposition. On rejoining ANGELINA, she has insisted upon
being taken home immediately, and has cried all the way back in the
hansom--much to EDWIN's perplexity. They are alone together, in a
Morning-room; ANGELINA is still sobbing in an arm-chair, and EDWIN is
rubbing his ear as he stands on the hearthrug.

_Edwin_. I say, ANGELINA, don't go on like this, or we shall have
somebody coming in! I wouldn't have gone up if I'd known it would
upset you like this; but I only wanted to make quite sure that the
whole thing was humbug, and--(_complacently_)--I rather think I
settled that.

