Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)


THE JUDGE

by

REBECCA WEST

Author of "The Return Of The Soldier"

New York
George H. Doran Company

1922,


TO

THE MEMORY OF

MY MOTHER


BOOK ONE


     "Every mother is a judge who sentences the children for the sins of
     the father."


CHAPTER I

I


It was not because life was not good enough that Ellen Melville was
crying as she sat by the window. The world, indeed, even so much of it
as could be seen from her window, was extravagantly beautiful. The
office of Mr. Mactavish James, Writer to the Signet, was in one of those
decent grey streets that lie high on the northward slope of Edinburgh
New Town, and Ellen was looking up the side-street that opened just
opposite and revealed, menacing as the rattle of spears, the black rock
and bastions of the Castle against the white beamless glare of the
southern sky. And it was the hour of the clear Edinburgh twilight, that
strange time when the world seems to have forgotten the sun though it
keeps its colour; it could still be seen that the moss between the
cobblestones was a wet bright green, and that a red autumn had been busy
with the wind-nipped trees, yet these things were not gay, but cold and
remote as brightness might be on the bed of a deep stream, fathoms
beneath the visitation of the sun. At this time all the town was
ghostly, and she loved it so. She took her mind by the arm and marched
it up and down among the sights of Edinburgh, telling it that to be
weeping with discontent in such a place was a scandalous turning up of
the nose at good mercies. Now the Castle Esplanade, that all day had
proudly supported the harsh, virile sounds and colours of the drilling
regiments, would show to the slums its blank surface, bleached
bone-white by the winds that raced above the city smoke. Now the Cowgate
and the Canongate would be given over to the drama of the disorderly
night; the slum-dwellers would foregather about the rotting doors of
dead men's mansions and brawl among the not less brawling ghosts of a
past that here never speaks of peace, but only of blood and argument.
And Holyrood, under a black bank surmounted by a low bitten cliff, would
lie like the camp of an invading and terrified army.... She stopped and
said, "Yon about Holyrood's a fine image for the institution of
monarchy." For she was a Suffragette, so far as it is possible to be a
Suffragette effectively when one is just seventeen, and she spent much
of her time composing speeches which she knew she would always be too
shy to deliver. "There is a sinister air about palaces. Always they
appear like the camp of an invading army that is uneasy and keeps a good
look-out lest they need shoot. Remember they are always ready to
shoot...." She interrupted herself with a click of annoyance. "I see
myself standing on a herring-barrel and trying to hold the crowd with
the like of that. It's too literary. I always am. I doubt I'll never
make a speaker. 'Deed, I'll never be anything but the wee typist that I
am...." And misery rushed in on her mind again. She fell to watching the
succession of little black figures that huddled in their topcoats as
they came down the side-street, bent suddenly at the waist as they came
to the corner and met the full force of the east wind, and then pulled
themselves upright and butted at it afresh with dour faces. The
spectacle evoked a certain local pride, for such inclemencies were just
part of the asperity of conditions which she reckoned as the price one
had to pay for the dignity of living in Edinburgh; which indeed gave it
its dignity, since to survive anything so horrible proved one good rough
stuff fit to govern the rest of the world. But chiefly it evoked
desolation. For she knew none of these people. In all the town there was
nobody but her mother who was at all aware of her. It was six months
since she left John Thompson's Ladies' College in John Square, so by
this time the teachers would barely remember that she had been strong in
Latin and mathematics but weak in French, and they were the only adult
people who had ever heard her name. She wanted to be tremendously known
as strong in everything by personalities more glittering than these.
Less than that would do: just to see people's faces doing something else
than express resentment at the east wind, to hear them say something
else than "Twopence" to the tram-conductor. Perhaps if one once got
people going there might happen an adventure which, even if one had no
part in it, would be a spectacle. It was seventeen years since she had
first taken up her seat in the world's hall (and it was none too
comfortable a seat), but there was still no sign of the concert
beginning.

"Yet, Lord, I've a lot to be thankful for!" breathed Ellen. She had this
rich consciousness of her surroundings, a fortuitous possession, a mere
congenital peculiarity like her red hair or her white skin, which did
the girl no credit. It kept her happy even now, when from time to time
she had to lick up a tear with the point of her tongue, on the thin joy
of the twilight.

Really the world was very beautiful. She fell to thinking of those
Saturdays that she and her mother, in the days when she was still at
school, had spent on the Firth of Forth. Very often, after Mrs. Melville
had done her shopping and Ellen had made the beds, they packed a basket
with apples and sandwiches (for dinner out was a terrible price) and
they took the tram down the south spurs to Leith or Grantown to find a
steamer. Each port was the dwelling-place of romance. Leith was a
squalid pack of black streets that debouched on a high brick wall
delightfully surmounted by mast-tops, and from every door there flashed
the cutlass gleam of the splendid sinister. Number 2, Sievering Street,
was an opium den. It was a corner house with Nottingham lace curtains
and a massive brown door that was always closed. You never would have
known it, but that was what it was. And once Ellen and her mother had
come back late and were taking a short cut through the alleys to the
terminus of the Edinburgh trams (one saved twopence by not taking the
Leith trams and had a sense of recovering the cost of the expedition),
and were half-way down a silent street when they heard behind them
flippety-flop, flippety-flop, stealthy and wicked as the human foot may
be. They turned and saw a great black figure, humped but still high,
keeping step with them a yard or so behind. Several times they turned,
terrified by that tread, and could make nothing more of it, till the
rays of a lamp showed them a tall Chinaman with a flat yellow face and a
slimy pigtail drooping with a dreadful waggish school-girlishness over
the shoulder of his blue nankin blouse; and long black eyes staring but
unshining. They were between the high blank walls of warehouses closed
for the night. They dared not run. Flippety-flop, flippety-flop, he came
after them, always keeping step. Leith Walk was a yellow glow a long way
off at the end of the street; it clarified into naphtha jets and roaring
salesmen and a crowd that slowly flocked up and down the roadway and was
channelled now and then by lumbering lighted cars; it became a
protecting jostle about them. Ellen turned and saw the Chinaman's flat
face creased with a grin. He had been savouring the women's terror under
his tongue, sucking unimaginable sweetness and refreshment from it. Mrs.
Melville was shedding angry tears and likening the Chinese to the
Irish--a people of whom she had a low opinion--(Mr. Melville had been an
Irishman)--but Ellen felt much sympathy as one might bestow upon some
disappointed ogre in a fairy tale for this exiled Boxer who had tried to
get a little homely pleasure. Ellen found it not altogether Grantown's
gain that it was wholly uninhabited by horror, being an honest row of
fishers' cottages set on a road beside the Firth to the west of Leith.
Its wonder was its pier, a granite road driving its rough blocks out
into the tumbling seas, the least urban thing in the world, that brought
to the mind's eye men's bare chests and muscle-knotted arms,
round-mouthed sea-chanteys, and great sound bodies caught to a wholesome
death in the vicinity of upturned keels and foundered rust-red sails and
the engulfing eternal sterilisation of the salt green waves.

From either of these places they sailed across the Firth: an arm of the
sea that could achieve anything from an end-of-the-world desolation,
when there was snow on the shores and the water rolled black shining
mountains, to a South Seasish bland and tidy presentation of white and
green islands enamelled on a blue channel under a smooth summer sky.
Most often, for it was the cheapest trip, they crossed to Aberlady,
where the tall trees stood at the sea's edge, and one could sit on
seaweedy rocks in the shadow of green leaves. Last time they had gone it
had been one of the "fairs," and men and women were dancing on the lawns
that lay here and there among the wooded knolls. Ellen had sat with her
feet in a pool and watched the dances over her shoulder. "Mummie," she
had said, "we belong to a nation which keeps all its lightness in its
feet," and Mrs. Melville had made a sharp remark like the ping of a
mosquito about the Irish. Sometimes they would walk along a lane by the
beach to Burntisland. There was nothing good about that except the name,
and a queer resemblance to fortifications in the quays, which one felt
might at any moment be manned by dripping mermen at war with the
landfolk. There they would find a lurching, paintless, broad-bowed
ferry, its funnel and metal work damascened by rust; with the streamers
of the sunset high to the north-west, and another tenderer sunset
swimming before their prow, spilling oily trails of lemon and rose and
lilac on waters white with the fading of the meridian skies, they would
sail back to quays that mounted black from troughs of gold.

She thought of it, still smiling; but the required ecstasy, that would
reconcile her to her hopeless life, did not come. She waited for it with
a canny look as she did at home when she held a match to the gas-ring to
see if there was another shilling needed in the slot. The light did not
come. By every evidence of her sense she was in the completest darkness.
But she did not know what coin it was that would turn on the light
again. Before there had been no fee demanded, but just appreciation of
her surroundings, and that she had always had in hand; even to an extent
that made her feel ridiculous to those persons, sufficiently numerous in
Edinburgh, who regarded their own lack of it as a sign of the wealth of
inhibition known as common sense, and hardly at ease on a country walk
with anybody except her mother or her schoolfellow Rachael Wing. She
thought listlessly now of their day-long excited explorations of the
Pentland Hills. Why had that walk on Christmas Eve, two years ago, kept
them happy for a term? They had just walked between the snow that lay
white on the hills and the snow that hung black in the clouds, and had
seen no living creature save the stray albatross that winged from peak
to peak. She thought without more zest of their cycle-rides; though
there had been a certain grim pride in squeezing forty miles a day out
of the cycle which, having been won in a girls' magazine competition,
constantly reminded her of its gratuitous character by a wild
capriciousness. And there were occasions too which had been sanctified
by political passion. There had been one happy morning when Rachael and
she had ridden past Prestonpans, where the fisher-folk sat mending their
nets on the beach, and they had eaten their lunch among the wild rose
thickets that tumbled down from the road to the sea. Rachael had raised
it all to something on a much higher level than an outing by munching
vegetarian sandwiches and talking subversively, for she too was a
Suffragette and a Socialist, at the great nine-foot wall round Lord
Wemyss's estate, by which they were to cycle for some miles. She pointed
out how its perfect taste and avoidance of red brick and its hoggish
swallowing of tracts of pleasant land symbolised the specious charm and
the thieving greed which were well known to be the attributes of the
aristocracy. Rachael was wonderful. She was an Atheist, too. When she
was twelve she had decided to do without God for a year, and it had
worked. Ellen had not got as far as that. She thought religion rather
pretty and a great consolation if one was poor. Rachael was even poorer
than Ellen, but she had an unbreakable spirit and seemed to mind nothing
in the world, not even that she never had new clothes because she had
two elder sisters. It had always seemed so strange that such a clever
girl couldn't make things with paper patterns as Ellen could, as Ellen
had frequently done in the past, as Ellen never wished to do again. She
was filled with terror by the thought that she should ever again pin
brown paper out of _Weldon's Fashions_ on to stuff that must not on any
account run higher than a shilling the yard; that she should slash with
the big cutting-out scissors just as Mrs. Melville murmured over her
shoulder, "I doubt you've read the instructions right...." What was the
good? She was decaying. That was proven by the present current of her
thoughts, which had passed from the countryside, towards which she had
always previously directed her mind when she had desired it to be happy,
as one moves for warmth into a southern-facing room, and were now
dwelling on the mean life of hopeless thrift she and her mother lived in
Hume Park Square. She recollected admiringly the radiance that had been
hers when she was sixteen; of the way she had not minded more than a
wrinkle between the brows those Monday evenings when she had to dodge
among the steamy wet clothes hanging on the kitchen pulleys as she
cooked the supper, those Saturday nights when she and her mother had to
wait for the cheap pieces at the butcher's among a crowd that hawked and
spat and made jokes that were not geniality but merely a mental form of
hawking and spitting; of the way that in those days her attention used
to leap like a lion on the shy beast Beauty hiding in the bush, the
housewifely briskness with which her soul took this beauty and simmered
it in the pot of meditation into a meal that nourished life for days. At
the thought of the premature senility that had robbed her of these
accomplishments now that she was seventeen she began again to weep....

The door opened and Mr. Mactavish James lumbered in, treading bearishly
on his soft slippers, and rubbing the gold frame of his spectacles
against his nose to allay the irritation they had caused by their
persistent pressure during the interview he had been holding with the
representative of another firm: an interview in which he had disguised
his sense of his client's moral instability by preserving the most
impressive physical immobility. The air of the room struck cold on him,
and he went to the fireplace and put on some coal, and sat down on a
high stool where he could feel the warmth. He gloomed over it, pressing
his hands on his thighs; decidedly Todd was in the wrong over this right
of way, and Menzies & Lawson knew it. He looked dotingly across at
Ellen, breathed "Well, well!"--that greeting by which Scot links himself
to Scot in a mutual consciousness of a prudent despondency about life.
Age permitted him, in spite of his type, to delight in her. In his youth
he had turned his back on romance, lest it should dictate conduct that
led away from prosperity, or should alter him in some manner that would
prevent him from attaining that ungymnastic dignity which makes the
respected townsman. He had meant from the first to end with a paunch.
But now wealth was inalienably his and Beauty could beckon him on no
strange pilgrimages, his soul retraced its steps and contemplated this
bright thing as an earth creature might creep to the mouth of its lair
and blink at the sun. And there was more than that to it. He loved her.
He had never had enough to do with pitiful things (his wife Elizabeth
had been a banker's daughter), and this, child had come to him, that day
in June, so white, so weak, so chilled to the bone, for all the summer
heat, by her monstrous ill-usage....

He said, "Nelly, will your mother be feared if you stop and take a few
notes for Mr. Philip till eight? There is a chemist body coming through
from the cordite works at Aberfay who can't come in the day but Saturday
mornings, and you ken Mr. Philip's away to London for the week-end by
the 8.30, so he's seeing him the night. Mr. Philip would be thankful if
you'd stop."

"I will so, Mr. James," said Ellen.

"You're sure your mother'll not be feared?"

"What way would my mother be feared," said Ellen, "and me seventeen
past?"

"There's many a lassie who's found being seventeen no protection from a
wicked world." He emitted some great Burns-night chuckles, and kicked
the fire to a blaze.

She said sternly, "Take note, Mr. James, that I haven't done a hand's
turn this hour or more, and that not for want of asking for work. Dear
knows I have my hand on Mr. Morrison's door-knob half the day."

Mr. James got up to go. "You're a fierce hussy, and mean to be a partner
in the firm before you've done with us."

"If I were a man I would be that."

"Better than that for you, lassie, better than that. Wait till a good
man comes by."

She snorted at the closing door, but felt that he had come near to
defining what she wanted. It was not a good man she needed, of course,
but nice men, nice women. She had often thought that of late. Sometimes
she would sit up in bed and stare through the darkness at an imaginary
group of people whom she desired to be with--well-found people who would
disclose themselves to one another with vivacity and beautiful results;
who in large lighted rooms would display a splendid social life that had
been previously nurtured by separate tender intimacies at hearths that
were more than grates and fenders, in private picture-galleries with
wide spaces between the pictures, and libraries adorned with big-nosed
marble busts. She knew that that environment existed for she had seen
it. Once she had gone to a Primrose League picnic in the grounds of an
Edinburgh M.P.'s country home and the secretary had taken her up to the
house. They had waited in a high, long room with crossed swords on the
walls wherever there were not bookshelves or the portraits of men and
women so proud that they had not minded being painted plain, and there
were French windows opening to a flagged terrace where one could lean on
an ornate balustrade and look over a declivity made sweet with many
flowering trees to a wooded cliff laced by a waterfall that seemed, so
broad the intervening valley, to spring silently to the bouldered
river-bed below. On a white bearskin, in front of one of the few
unnecessary fires she had ever seen, slept a boar-hound. It was a pity
that the books lying on the great round table were mostly the drawings
of Dana Gibson and that when the lady of the house came in to speak to
them she proved to be a lisping Jewess, but that could not dull the
pearl of the spectacle. She insisted on using the memory as a guarantee
that there must exist, to occupy this environment, that imagined society
of thin men without an Edinburgh accent, of women who were neither thin
like her schoolmistresses nor fat like her schoolfellows' mothers and
whose hair had no short ends round the neck.

But sometimes it seemed likely, and in this sad twilight it seemed
specially likely, that though such people certainly existed they had
chosen some other scene than Edinburgh, whose society was as poor and
restricted as its Zoo, perhaps for the same climatic reason. It was the
plain fact of the matter that the most prominent citizen of Edinburgh
to-day was Mary Queen of Scots. Every time one walked in the Old Town
she had just gone by, beautiful and pale as though in her veins there
flowed exquisite blood that diffused radiance instead of ruddiness, clad
in the black and white that must have been a more solemn challenge, a
more comprehensive announcement of free dealings with good and evil,
than the mere extravagance of scarlet could have been; and wearing a
string of pearls to salve the wound she doubtless always felt about her
neck. Ellen glowed at the picture as girls do at womanly beauty. Nobody
of a like intensity had lived here since. The Covenanters, the
Jacobites, Sir Walter Scott and his fellows, had dropped nothing in the
pool that could break the ripples started by that stone, that precious
stone, flung there from France so long ago. The town had settled down
into something that the tonic magic of the place prevented being decay,
but it was though time still turned the hour-glass, but did it
dreamingly, infatuated with the marvellous thing she had brought forth
that now was not. So greatly had the play declined in plot and character
since Mary's time that for the catastrophe of the present age there was
nothing better than the snatching of the Church funds from the U.F.'s by
the Wee Frees. It appeared to her an indication of the quality of the
town's life that they spoke of their churches by initials just as the
English, she had learned from the Socialist papers, spoke of their trade
unions. And for personalities there were innumerable clergymen and Sir
Thomas Gilzean, Edinburgh's romantic draper, who talked French with a
facility that his fellow townsmen suspected of being a gift acquired on
the brink of the pit, and who had a long wriggling waist which suggested
that he was about to pick up the tails of his elegant frock-coat and
dance. He was light indeed, but not enough to express the lightness of
which life was capable; while the darker side of destiny was as
inadequately represented by Æneas Walkinshaw, the last Jacobite, whom at
the very moment Ellen could see standing under the lamp-post at the
corner, in the moulting haberdashery of his wind-draggled kilts and lace
ruffles, cramming treasonable correspondence into a pillar-box marked
G.R.... She wanted people to be as splendid as the countryside, as
noble as the mountains, as variable within the limits of beauty as the
Firth of Forth, and this was what they were really like. She wept
undisguisedly.


II

"What ails you, Miss Melville?" asked Mr. Philip James. He had lit the
gas and seen that she was crying.

At first she said, "Nothing." But there grew out of her gratitude to
this family a feeling that it was necessary, or at least decent, that
she should always answer them with the cleanest candour. As one rewards
the man who has restored a lost purse by giving him some of the coins in
it, so she shared with them, by the most exact explanation of her
motives whenever they were asked for, the self which they had saved. So
she added, "It's just that I'm bored. Nothing ever happens to me!"

Mr. Philip had hoped she was going to leave it at that "Nothing," and
bore her a grudge for her amplification at the same time that the way
she looked when she made it swept him into sympathy. Indeed, he always
felt about the lavish gratitude with which Ellen laid her personality at
the disposal of the firm rather as the Englishman who finds the Chinaman
whom he saved from death the day before sitting on his verandah in the
expectation of being kept for the rest of his life that his rescuer has
forced upon him. It was true that she was an excellent shorthand-typist,
but she vexed the decent grey by her vividness. The sight of her through
an open door, sitting at her typewriter in her blue linen overall,
dispersed one's thoughts; it was as if a wireless found its waves jammed
by another instrument. Often he found himself compelled to abandon his
train of ideas and apprehend her experiences: to feel a little tired
himself if she drooped over her machine, to imagine, as she pinned on
her tam-o'-shanter and ran down the stairs, how the cold air would
presently prick her smooth skin. Yet these apprehensions were quite
uncoloured by any emotional tone. It was simply that she was essentially
conspicuous, that one had to watch her as one watches a very tall man
going through a crowd. Even now, instead of registering disapproval at
her moodiness, he was looking at her red hair and thinking how it
radiated flame through the twilight of her dark corner, although in the
sunlight it always held the softness of the dusk. That was
characteristic of her tendency always to differ from the occasion. He
had once seen her at a silly sort of picnic where everybody was making a
great deal of noise and playing rounders, and she had sat alone under a
tree. And once, as he was walking along Princes Street on a cruel day
when there was an easterly ha'ar blowing off the Firth, she had stepped
towards him out of the drizzle, not seeing him but smiling sleepily. It
was strange how he remembered all these things, for he had never liked
her very much.

He put his papers on the table and sat down by the fire. "Well, what
should happen? No news is good news, I've heard!"

She continued to disclose herself to him without the impediment of
shyness, for he was unattractive to her because he had an Edinburgh
accent and always carried an umbrella. He was so like hundreds of young
men in the town, dark and sleek-headed and sturdily under-sized, with an
air of sagacity and consciously shrewd eyes under a projecting brow,
that it seemed like uttering one's complaint before a jury or some other
representative body. She believed, too, that he was not one of the
impeccable and happy to whom one dare not disclose one's need for pity,
for she was sure that the clipped speech that slid through his
half-opened mouth was a sign that secretly he was timid and ashamed. So
she cried honestly, "I'm so dull that I'll die. You and Mr. James are
awfully good to me, and I can put up with Mr. Morrison, though he's a
doited old thing, and I like my work, but coming here in the morning and
going home at night, day in and day out, it drives me crazy. I don't
know what's the matter with me, but I want to run away to new places and
see new people. This morning I was running to catch the tram and I saw
the old wife who lives in the wee house by the cycle shop had put a bit
heather in a glass bottle at the window, and do you know, I was near
turning my back and going off to the Pentlands and letting the work go
hang!"

They were both law-abiding people. They saw the gravity of her case.

"Not that I want the Pentlands. Dear knows I love the place, but I want
something more than those old hills. I want to go somewhere right far
away. The sight of a map makes me sick. And then I hear a band play--not
the pipes, they make me think of Walter Scott's poetry, which I never
could bear, but a band. I feel that if I followed it it would lead me
somewhere that I would like to go. And the posters. There's one at the
Waverley station--Venice. I could tear the thing down. Did you ever go
to Italy, Mr. Philip?"

"No. I go with the girls to Germany every summer."

"My patience!" said Ellen bitterly. "The way the world is! The people
who can afford to go to Italy go to Germany. And I--I'll die if I don't
get away."

"Och, I often feel like this," said Mr. Philip. "I just take a week-end
off at a hydro."

"A hydro!" snorted Ellen. "It's something more like the French
Revolution I'm wanting. Something grand and coloured. Swords, and people
being rescued, and things like that."

"There's nothing going on like that now," he said stolidly, "and we
ought to be thankful for it."

"I know everything's over in Europe," she agreed sadly, "but there's
revolutions in South America. I've read about them in Richard Harding
Davis. Did ever you read him? Mind you, I'm not saying he's an artist,
but the man has force. He makes you long to go."

"A dirty place," said Mr. Philip.

"What does that matter, where there's life? I feel--I feel"--she wrung
her inky brown hands--"as if I should die if something didn't happen at
once: something big, something that would bang out like the one o'clock
gun up at the Castle. And nothing will. Nothing ever will!"

"Och, well," he comforted her, "you're young yet, you know."

"Young!" cried Ellen, and suddenly wept. If this was youth--!

He bent down and played with the fire-irons. It was odd how he didn't
want to go away, although she was in distress. "Some that's been in
South America don't find it to their taste," he said. "The fellow that's
coming to-night wants to sell some property in Rio de Janeiro because he
doesn't mean to go back."

"Ah, how can he do that?" asked Ellen unsteadily. The tears she was too
proud to wipe away made her look like a fierce baby. "Property in Rio de
Janeiro! It's like being related to someone in 'Treasure Island.'"

"'Treasure Island!' Imph!" He had seen his father draw Ellen often
enough to know how to do it, though he himself would never have paid
enough attention to her mental life to discover it. "You're struck on
that Robert Louis Stevenson, but he wasn't so much. My Aunt Phemie was
with him at Mr. Robert Thompson's school in Heriot Row, and she says he
was an awful young blackguard, playing with the keelies all he could and
gossiping with the cabmen on the rank. She wouldn't have a word to say
to him, and grandfather would never ask him to the house, not even when
all the English were licking his boots. I'm not much on these writing
chaps myself." He made scornful noises and crossed his legs as though he
had disposed of art.

"And who," asked Ellen, with temper, "might your Aunt Phemie be?
There'll not be much in the papers when she's laid by in Trinity
Cemetery, I'm thinking! The impairtinence of it! All these Edinburgh
people ought to go on their knees and thank their Maker that just once,
just once in that generation, He let something decent come out of
Edinburgh!" She turned away from him and laid her cheek against the oak
shutter.

Mr. Philip chuckled. When a woman did anything for itself, and not for
its effect on the male, it seemed to him a proof of her incapacity to
look after herself, and he found incapacity in women exciting and
endearing. He watched her with a hard attention that was his kind of
tenderness, as she sat humped schoolgirlishly in her shapeless blue
overall, averting her face from the light but attempting a proud pose,
and keeping her grief between her teeth as an ostler chews a straw.

"He had a good time, the way he travelled in France and the South Seas.
But he deserved it. He wrote such lovely books. Ah," she said, listening
to her own sombre interpretation of things as to sad music, "it isn't
just chance that some people had adventures and others hadn't. One makes
one's own fate. I have no fate because I'm too weak to make one." She
looked down resentfully on her hands, that for all her present
fierceness and the inkstains of her daily industry lay little things on
her lap, and thought of Rachael Wing, who had so splendidly departed to
London to go on the stage. "But it's hard to be punished just for what
you are."

He wondered whether, although she was the typist, there was not
something rare about her. He could not compare her in this moment with
his sisters May and Gracie, who were always getting up French plays for
bazaars, or Chrissie, who played the violin, for the earth held nothing
to vex the sturdiness of these young women except the profligacy with
which it offered its people attractions competitive with bazaars and
violin solos. But he thought it unlikely that any occasion would have
evoked from them this serene despair, which was no more irritable than
that which is known by the nightingale. It was impossible that they
could shed such tears as smudged her bright colours now, such exquisite
distillations of innocent grief at the wasting of the youth of which she
was so innocently proud, and generous rage at the decrying of a name
that was neither relative nor friend nor employer but merely a maker of
beauty. Without doubt she lived in a lonely world, where tears were shed
for other things than the gift of gold, and where one could perform
these simplicities before a witness without fear of contempt, because
human intercourse went only to the tune of charity and pity. Suddenly he
wanted to enter into this world; not indeed with the intention of
naturalising himself as its inhabitant nor with the intention of staying
there for ever, but as a navvy might stop on his way to work and refresh
his horny sweating body by a swim in a sunny pool. He felt a thirst, a
thing that stopped the breath for her pity. And although his desire was
but for participation in kindness, his instinct for conformity was so
suspicious of her vividness that he felt furtive and red-eared while he
searched in the purse of his experiences to find the coin that would
admit him to her world. The search at first was vain, for most of them
that he cared to remember were mere manifestations of the kind of
qualities that are mentioned in testimonials. But presently he gripped
the disappointment that would buy him her pity.

He said, "I'm right sorry for you, Miss Melville. But you know ... We
all have our troubles."

She raised her eyebrows.

"I wanted to go into the Navy."

"You did? Would your father not let you?" She said it in her red-headed
"My-word-if-I'd-been-there" way.

"Aye, he would have liked it fine."

"What was it then?" She leaned forward and almost crooned at him. "What
was it then?"

His speech became more clipped. "My eyes."

"Your eyes!" she breathed. He suddenly became a person to her. "I never
thought."

"I'm as short-sighted as a bat."

"They look all right." She frowned at them as though they were traitors.

He basked in her pity. "They're not. I never could play football at the
University."

She rose and stood beside him at the table, so that he would feel how
sorry she was, and set one finger to her lips and murmured, "Well,
well!" and at the end of a warm, drowsy moment, after which they seemed
to know each other much better, she said softly and irrelevantly, "I saw
you capped."

"Did you so? How did you notice me? It was one of the big graduations."

"I went with my mother to see my cousin Jeanie capped M.A., and we saw
your name on the list. Philip Mactavish James. And mother said, 'Yon'll
be the son of Mactavish James. Many's the time I've danced with him when
I was Ellen Forbes.' Funny to think of them dancing!"

"Oh, father was a great man for the ladies." They both laughed. He
vacillated from the emotional business of the moment. "Do you dance?" he
asked.

"I did at school--"

"Don't you go to dances?"

She shook her head. It was a shame, thought Mr. Philip.

With that long slender waist she should have danced so beautifully; he
could imagine how her head would droop back and show her throat, how her
brows would become grave with great pleasure. He wished she could come
to his mother's dances, but he knew so well the rigid standards of his
own bourgeoisie that he felt displeased by his wish. It was impossible
to ask a Miss Melville to a dance unless one could say, 'She's the
daughter of old Mr. Melville in Moray Place. Do you not mind Melville,
the wine merchant?' and specially impossible to ask this Miss Melville
unless one had some such certificate to attach to her vividness. But he
wished he could dance with her.

Ellen recalled him to the business of pity. She had thought of dances
for no more than a minute, though it had long been one of her dreams to
enter a ballroom by a marble staircase (which she imagined of a size and
steepness really more suited to a water-chute), carrying a black
ostrich-feather fan such as she had seen Sarah Bernhardt pythoning about
with in "La Dame aux Camélias." This hour she had dedicated to Mr.
Philip, and he knew it. She was thinking of him with an intentness which
was associated with an entire obliviousness of his personal presence,
just as a church circle might pray fervently for some missionary without
attempting to visualise his face; and though he missed this quaint
meaning of her abstraction, he was well content to watch it and nurse
his private satisfaction. He was still aware that he was Mr. Philip of
the firm, so he was not going to tell her that for two nights after he
had heard the decision of the Medical Examiners he had cried himself to
sleep, though he was fourteen past. But it was exquisite to know that if
he had told her she would have been moved to some glorious gesture of
pity. His imagination trembled at the thought of its glory as she turned
to him with a benignity that was really good enough, and said
diffidently, because her ambition was such a holy thing that she feared
to speak of his: "Still, there are lots of things for you to do. I've
heard...."

He was kindly and indulgent. "What have you heard?"

Ellen had, as her mother used to say, a great notion of politics. "Why,
that you're going to stand for Parliament."

"That's true enough," he said, swelling a little.

"Could anything be finer?" she breathed. "What are you going to do?"

"I'll have to contest two-three hopeless seats. Then they'll give me
something safe."

"But what will you do?"

He didn't follow.

"What'll you do after that?" She towered above him, her cheeks flushed
with intellectual passion. "In Parliament, I mean. There's so much to
do. Will it be housing? If it was me it would be housing. But what are
you going to do?"

"I'll sit as a Liberal," he said, with an air of quiet competence.
"We've always been Liberals."

"Ach! _Liberal!_" she said, with the spirit of one who had cried, "Keep
the Liberal out!" at a Leith polling-booth and had been haled backwards
by the hair from the person of Mr. Winston Churchill. Mr. Philip laughed
again and felt a kind of glow. He never could get over a feeling that to
discover a woman excited about an intellectual thing was like coming on
her bathing; her cast-off femininity affected him as a heap of her
clothes on the beach might have done. But the flash in her eyes died to
the homelier fires of a more personal quarrel. "Is yon Mrs. Powell's
heavy feet coming up the stair?" she enquired.

"It is so. I asked her to do a chop for me, so that I won't need to dine
on the train...."

"Mercy me! We'll see the fine cook she is!" She ran out to the landing
(she had never known he was so nice). Mr. Philip found that her absence
acted curiously as a relief to an excitement that was beginning to buzz
in his head. Then she came back with the tray, her cheeks bright and her
mouth pursed, for she and the caretaker had been sandpapering each
other's temperaments with a few words. "Be thankful she thought to boil
a potato. No greens. And I had to ask for a bit bread. And the reason's
not far to seek. She's had a drop again. It staggers me how your father,
who's so particular with the rest of us, stands such a body in the
place."

He did not answer her. The moment had become one of pure enjoyment.
There was no sense of strain in his appreciation of her while she was
putting down the tray, spreading out the plates, and doing things that
were all directed to giving him comfort. Their relationship felt
absolutely right.

"Will you have one of the bottles of Burgundy your father keeps for when
he lunches in?" she said.

"I was just thinking I would," he answered, and went into his father's
room. As he stooped before the cupboard her voice reached him,
fortuitously uplifted in "The Flowers of the Forest are a' wede away."
Now how did she look when she sang? It improved some people. He knelt
for a minute in front of the dusty cupboard, frowning fiercely at the
bottles because it struck him that she would stop singing when he went
back, and he could think of no way of asking her to go on that would not
be, as he put it, _infra dig_. And sure enough, when he entered the room
a shy silence fell on her, which she broke by saying, "If you've not got
the corkscrew there's one on my pocket-knife." He used it, telling
himself that it spared turning on the gas again in the other room, and
she stood behind him murmuring, "Yon's not a bad knife. Four blades and
a thing that takes stones out of a horse's hoof...."

He sat down to his meal, and she remained by the fireplace until he
said, "Pray sit down, Miss Melville, I wish I could ask you to join
me...."

She obeyed because she was afraid she might be fretting him by standing
there, and took the seat on the other side of the table. The gas-jet was
behind her, so to him there was a gold halo about her head and her face
was a dusky oval in which her eyes and the three-cornered patch of her
mouth were points of ardour. She had an animal's faculty for keeping
quite still. He felt a pricking appetite to force the moment on to
something he could not quite previsage, and found himself saying, "Will
you have some Burgundy?"

She was shocked. "Oh no!"

He perceived that here was a matter of principle. But he felt, although
principles were among his conventions, not the least impulse to defer to
it. Instead, the project of persuading her to do something he felt she
oughtn't to do flooded him with a tingling pleasure.

He said, "But it's so pretty!" He could not imagine why he should have
said that, and yet he knew when he had said it that he had hit on an
argument that would weigh with her.

She sighed as who makes a concession. "Oh yes, it's pretty!" And then,
to his perplexity, her face fell into complete repose. She was absorbed
in the red beauty in his glass.

It angered him, yet he still felt bland and coaxing. "You'll have a
glass?"

"No, thank you."

"You'll surely have a taste?"

"Ah, no--"

"Just a drop...."

Their eyes met. He was peering into her face so that he could be sure
she was looking at him, and somehow the grimace seemed to be promising
her infinite pleasure.

She muttered, "Well, just a drop!" and found herself laughing unhappily.

He passed her his glass.

"But what," she asked in dismay, "will you drink from?"

Almost irritably he clicked his tongue, though he still smiled. "Drink
it up! Drink it up!"

She raised the glass to her lips and set her head back that the sin
might have swift progress, expecting the loveliest thing, like an ice,
but warm and very worldly; and informed with solemn pleasure too, for
such colours are spilt on marble floors when the sun sets behind
cathedral windows, such colours come into the mind when great music is
played or some deep voice speaks Shakespeare....

"Ach!" she screamed, and banged the glass down on the table. "It's
horrid! It draws the mouth!" She started up and stood rubbing her
knuckles into her cheeks and twisting her lips. She had never thought
wine was like this. It was not so much a drink as a blow in the mouth.
And yet somehow she felt ashamed of not liking it. "The matron at
school used to give us something for toothache that was as bad as
this!" she said peevishly, and tears stood in her eyes.

Mr. Philip stood up, laughing. The crisis of his pleasure in persuading
her to do the thing which she hadn't wanted to do was his joy that she
hadn't liked it when she had done it. And suddenly one of the walls of
the neat mental chamber in which he customarily stood fell in; by the
light that streamed in upon him he perceived that his ecstasy was only
just beginning. At last he knew what he wanted to do. With gusto he
marked that Ellen too was conscious that the incident was not at its
close, for she was still wringing her hands, though the taste of the
wine must long have gone from her mouth, and was stammering miserably,
"Well, if yon stuff's a temptation to any poor folk--!" Again he felt
that their relationship was on a proper footing; he moved towards her,
walking masterfully. Oh, it was going to be ecstasy.... There was a loud
knocking at the outer door.


III

She forgot all about the wine at once, he was so very big. And he looked
as though he had gold rings in his ears, although he hadn't; it was just
part of his sea-going air.

He looked at her very hard and said as though it hardly mattered, "I
want to see Mr. James. My name's Yaverland."

"Will you step inside?" said Ellen, with her best English accent. "Mr.
Philip's expecting you." She was glad he had come, for he looked
interesting, but she hoped he would not interrupt her warm comfortable
occupation of mothering Mr. Philip. To keep that mood aglow in herself
she stopped as they went along the passage and begged, "You'll not make
him miss his train? He's away to London to-night. He should leave here
on the very clap of eight."

The stranger seemed, after a moment's silence, of which, since they
stood in darkness, she could not read the cause, to lay aside a
customary indifference for the sake of the gravity of the occasion. "Oh,
certainly; he shall leave on the very clap of eight," he replied
earnestly.

He spoke without an accent and was most romantically dark. Ellen
wondered whether Mr. Philip would like him--she had noticed that Mr.
Philip didn't seem to fancy people who were very tall. And she perceived
with consternation as they entered the room that he had suddenly been
overtaken by one of his moods. He had taken up the tray and was trying
to slip it into the cupboard, which he might have seen would never hold
it, and in any case was a queer place for a tray, and stood there with
it in his hands, brick-red and glowering at them. She was going to take
it from him when he dunted it down on the window-seat with a clatter.
"What for can he not go on with his good chop?" thought Ellen. "We're
putting on grand company manners for this bit chemist body, surely," and
she pulled forward a chair for the stranger and sat down in the corner
with her note-book on her knee.

"You're Mr. Yaverland?" said Mr. Philip, shooting his chin forward and
squaring his shoulders, and looking as though his father were dead and
he were the head of the firm.

"I'm Richard Yaverland. Mr. Frank Gibson said you might be good enough
to see to my affairs for me. I've got a letter from him...."

Decidedly the man had an air. He slid the letter across the table as if
he did not care in the least whether anybody ever picked it up and
retreated into a courteous inattention. She felt a little cross at Mr.
Philip for not showing that Edinburgh too understands the art of
arrogance, for opening the letter so clumsily and omitting to say the
nice friendly thing. Well, if he was put about it was his own fault for
not going on with the chop, it being well known to all educated persons
that one cannot work on an empty stomach. If this man would go soon she
would run down to Mrs. Powell and get her to heat up the chop again. She
eyed him anxiously to see if he looked the kind of person who left when
one wanted him to, and found herself liking him for the way he slouched
in his chair, as though he wanted to mitigate as much as possible his
terrifying strength and immensity. What for did a fine man like him help
to make cordite, the material of militarism, which is the curse of the
nations? She wished he could have heard R.J. Campbell speak on peace the
other night at the Synod Hall; it was fine. But probably he was a
Conservative, for these big men were often unprogressive. She examined
him carefully out of the corner of her eye to estimate the chances of
his being brought into the fold of reform by properly selected oratory.
That at least was the character of contemplation she intended, but
though she was so young that she believed the enjoyment of any sensory
impression sheer waste unless it was popped into the mental stockpot and
made the basis of some sustaining moral soup, she found herself just
looking at him. His black hair lay in streaks and rings on his rain-wet
forehead and gave him an abandoned and magical air, like the ghost of a
drowned man risen for revelry; his dark gold skin told a traveller's
tale of far-off pleasurable weather; and the bare hand that lay on his
knee was patterned like a snake's belly with brown marks, doubtless the
stains of his occupation; and his face was marked with an expression
that it vexed her she could not put a name to, for if at her age she
could not read human nature like a book she never would. It was not
hunger, for it was serene, and it was not greed, for it was austere, and
yet it certainly signified that he habitually made upon life some urgent
demand that was not wholly intellectual and that had not been wholly
satisfied. As she wondered a slight retraction of his chin and a
drooping of his heavy eyelids warned her, by their likeness to the
controlled but embarrassed movements of a highly-bred animal approached
by a stranger, that he knew she was watching him, and she took her gaze
away. But she had to look again, just to confirm her feeling that
however fanciful she might be about him his appearance would always give
some further food for her imagination; and presently, for though she was
the least vain person in the world she was the most egotistical, began
to compare the large correctness of his features with the less academic
spontaneity of her own. "Lord! Why has everybody but me got a straight
nose!" she exclaimed to herself. "But it's all blethers to think that an
indented chin means character. How can a dunt in your bone have anything
to do with your mind?" She rubbed her own chin, which was a little white
ball, and pushed it forward, glowering at his great jaw. Then her
examination ended. She noticed that all over his upper lip and chin
there was a faint bluish bloom, as if he had shaved closely and
recently but the strong hair was already pressing through again. That
disgusted her, although she reminded herself that he could not help it,
that that was the way he was made. "There's something awful like an
animal about a man," she thought, and shivered.

"Och, aye!" said Mr. Philip, which was a sure sign that he was upset,
for in business he reckoned to say "Yes, yes." The two men began by
exchange of politenesses about Mr. Frank Gibson, to whom they referred
in the impersonal way of business conversations as though he were some
well-known brand of integrity, and then proceeded to divest the property
in Rio de Janeiro of all interest in a like manner. It was a house, it
appeared, and was at present let to an American named Capel on a five
years' lease, which had nearly expired. There was no likelihood of Capel
requiring any extension of this lease, for he was going back to the
States. So now Yaverland wanted to sell it. There ought to be no trouble
in finding a buyer, for it was a famous house. "Everybody in Rio knows
the Villa Miraflores," he said. She gasped at the name and wrote it in
longhand; to compress such deliciousness into shorthand would have been
sacrilege. After that she listened more eagerly to his voice, which she
perceived was charged with suppressed magic as it might have been with
suppressed laughter. The merry find no more difficulty in keeping a
straight face than he found in using the flat phrase. And as she
gleefully gazed at him, recognising in him her sort of person, his
speech slipped the business leash. There were hedges of geranium and
poinsettia about the villa, pergolas hung with bougainvillea, numberless
palms, and a very pleasant orange grove in good bearing; in the
courtyard a bronze Venus rode on a sprouting whale, and there were many
fountains; and within there was much white marble and pillars of
precious stone, and horrible liverish Viennese mosaics, for the house
was something of a prodigy, having been built in a trade boom by a
_rastaqouère_. "Mhm," said Mr. Philip sagaciously, and from the funeral
slide of respect in his voice Ellen guessed that he imagined
_rastaqouère_ to be a Brazilian variety of Lord Provost. She would have
laughed had there not been the plainest intimation that he was still
upset about something in his question whether Yaverland thought he
would be well advised to sell the house, whether he had any reasonable
expectation of recovering the capital he had sunk in it; for she had
noticed that whenever Mr. Philip felt miserable he was wont to try and
cheer himself by suggesting that somebody had been "done."

But that worry was dissolved by the enchantment of Yaverland's answer.
He hadn't the slightest idea what he had paid for the villa. It happened
this way. He had won a lot of money at poker ("Tchk! Tchk!" said Mr.
Philip, half shocked, but showing by the way he put one thumb in his
waistcoat arm-hole that he was so far sensible of the change in the
atmosphere that he felt the need of some romantic gesture), and had felt
no shame in pocketing it since it came from a man who was gambling to
try to show that he wasn't a Jew. Ellen hated him for that. She believed
in absolute racial equality, and sometimes intended to marry a Hindu as
a propagandist measure. And then he had remembered that a friend of his,
de Cayagun of the Villa Miraflores, was broke and wanted to move. Even
Rio was tired of poor de Cayagun, though he'd given it plenty of fun.
There had been great times at the villa. His phrases, which seemed to
have scent and colour as well as meaning, made her see red pools of wine
on the marble floor and rose wreaths about the bronze whale's snout, and
hear from the orange grove the sound of harps, yet from a sullenness in
his faint smile she deduced there had been something dark in this
delight. Perhaps somebody had got drunk. But he was saying now that that
time had come to an end long before the night when he had won this money
from Demetrios. De Cayagun had no more jewels to give away and even the
servants had all left him.... She saw night invading the villa like a
sickness of the light, the pools of wine lying black on marble that the
dusk had made blue like cold flesh; and this stranger standing
white-faced in the stripped banquet-hall, with the broken body of the
Venus on a bier at his feet and above his head the creaking wings of
birds come to establish desolation under the shattered roof. Why was he
so sad because some people who were members of the parasite class and
were probably devoid of all political idealism had had to stop having a
good time? It was, she supposed, that ethereal abstract sorrow, undimmed
by personal misery and unconfined by the syllogisms of moral judgment,
that poets feel: that Milton had felt when he wrote "Comus" about
somebody for whom he probably wouldn't have mixed a toddy, that she
herself had often felt when the evening star shone its small perfect
crescent above the funeral flame of the day. People would call it a
piece of play-acting nonsense just because of its purity and their
inveterate peering liking for personal emotion, which they seemed to
honour according to its intensity even if that intensity progressed
towards the disagreeable. She remembered how the neighbours had all
respected Mrs. Ball in the house next door for the terrific
manifestations of her abandonment to the grief of widowhood. "Tits,
tits, puir body!" they had said with zestful reverence, and yet the
woman had been behaving exactly as if she was seasick. She preferred the
impersonal pang. It was right. Right as the furniture in the Chambers
Museum was, as the clothes in Redfern's window in Princes Street were,
as this stranger was. And it had a high meaning too. It was evoked by
the end of things, by sunsets, by death, by silence, following song; by
intimations that no motion is perpetual and that death is a part of the
cosmic process. It had the sacred quality of any recognition of the
truth....

Well, he was telling them how he had gone up to de Cayagun, and they had
knocked up a notary and made him draft a deed of sale, which he had
posted to his agents without reading. He had only the vaguest idea how
much money had changed hands. Mr. Philip shook his head and chuckled
knowingly, "Well, Mr. Yaverland, that is not how we do business in
Scotland," and suggested that it might be wise to retain some part of
the property: the orange grove, for instance. At that Yaverland was
silent for a moment, and then replied with an august, sweet-tempered
insolence that he couldn't see why he should, since he wasn't a
marmalade fancier. "Besides, that's an impossible proposition. It's like
selling a suburban villa and retaining an interest in the geranium
bed...." In the warm, interesting atmosphere she detected an intimation
of enmity between the two men; and it was like catching a caraway seed
under a tooth while one was eating a good cake. She was disturbed and
wanted to intervene, to warn the stranger that he made Mr. Philip dizzy
by talking like that. And the reflection came to her that it would be
sweet, too, to tell him that he could talk like that to her for ever,
that he could go on as he was doing, being much more what one expected
of an opera than a client, and she would follow him all the way. But it
struck her suddenly and chillingly that she had no reason to suppose
that he would be interested. His talk was in the nature of a monologue.
He showed no sign of desiring any human companionship.

Still, he was wonderful. She did not take it as warning of any coldness
or unkindness in him that it was impossible to imagine him linked by a
human relationship to any ordinary person like herself; there are
pictures too fine for private ownership. Just then he was being
particularly fine in an exciting way. He sat up very straight, flung out
his great arm with a gesture of abandonment, and said that he would have
no more to do with this house. So might a conqueror speak of a city he
was weary of looting. He wanted to sell it outright, and desired Mr.
Philip to undertake the whole business of concluding the sale with the
Rio agents. "It's all here," he said, and took from his pocket-book a
packet of letters. "They hold the title-deeds and you'll see how things
are getting on with the deal. But I suppose the language will be a
difficulty. I can read you these, of course, but how will you carry on
the correspondence?"

"Och, we can send out to a translator--"

A tingling ran through Ellen's veins. The men's words, uttered on one
side in irritated languor and on the other with empty spruceness, had
suddenly lifted her to the threshold of life. She had previsioned many
moments in which she should disclose her unique value to a dazzled
world, but most of them had seemed, even to herself, extremely unlikely
to arrive. It was improbable that Mr. Asquith should fall into a river
just as she was passing, and that he should be so helpless and the
countryside so depopulated that she would be able to exact votes for
women as the price of his rescue; besides, she could not swim. It was
improbable, too, that she should be in a South American republic just
when a revolution was proclaimed, and that, the Latin attitude to women
being what it is, she should be given a high military command. But there
had been one triumph which she knew to be not impossible even in her
obscurity. It might conceivably happen that by some exhibition of the
prodigious bloom of her efficiency she would repay her debt to the firm
and make the first steps towards becoming the pioneer business queen.
For it was one of her dreams, perhaps the six hundred and seventy-ninth
in the series, that one day she would sit at a desk answering
innumerable telephone calls with projecting jaw, as millionaires do on
the movies, and crushing rivals like blackbeetles in order that, after
being reviled by the foolish as a heartless plutocrat, she might hand a
gigantic Trust over to the Socialist State.

"Mr. Philip," she said.

Apparently he did not hear her, though the other man turned his dark
glance on her.

"Mr. Philip," she said. He looked across at her with a blankness she
took as part of the business. "I've been taking Commercial Spanish at
Skerry's. I took a first-class certificate. Maybe I could manage the
letters?"

"Oh!" exclaimed Yaverland explosively. He appeared to be about to make
some objection, and then he bit back the speech that was already in his
mouth. And as he tried to find other words the beauty of her body caught
his attention. It was, as it happened, very visible at that moment. The
fulness of her overall had fallen to one side as she sat on the high
stool, and so that linen was tightly wrapped about her, disclosing that
she was made like a delicate fleet beast; in the valley between her high
small breasts there lay a shadow, which grew greater when she breathed
deeply. He looked at her with the dispassionateness which comes to men
who have lived much in countries where nakedness offers itself unashamed
to the sunlight, and said to himself, "I should like to see her run." He
knew that a body like this must possess an infinite capacity for
physical pleasure, that to her mere walking would give more joy than
others find in dancing. And then he raised his eyes to her face and was
sad. For sufficient reasons he was very sensitive to the tragedies of
women, and he knew it was a tragedy that such a face should surmount
such a body. For her body would imprison her in soft places: she would
be allowed no adventures other than love, no achievements other than
births. But her face was haggard, in spite of its youth, with appetite
for travel in the hard places of the world, for the adventures and
achievements that are the birthright of any man. "It's rotten luck to be
a girl," he thought. "If she were a boy I could get her a job at Rio....
Lord, she has lovely hair!" He perceived sharply that he was not likely
to be of any more use to her than most men would. All he could do would
be to avert the humiliation which the moment seemed likely to bring down
on her.

"Oh, this is a wonderful country," he said aloud, "where you get people
studying Spanish in their off-hours." Ellen thought it rather wonderful
too, and looked at her toes with a priggish blankness. "You've got a
marvellous educational system...." He paused, conscious that he was too
manifestly talking at random. "In two continents you've enjoyed the
reputation of being able to talk the hind-leg off a donkey," he reminded
himself. "It's the language to learn," he said aloud. "It's the language
of the future. Ever been in Spain, Mr. James?"

"No," said Mr. Philip, "but I was thinking of going there--or mebbe
Italy--ma Easter holidays." Ellen smiled brilliantly at him, for she
knew that he had had no such thought till that evening's talk with her;
she had converted him to a romantic. He caught her eye, only to glare
coldly into the centre of her smile.

It was Yaverland's opportunity, for he had spent two years as chemist at
the Romanones mines in Andalusia; and he had learned by now the art of
talking to the Scotch, whom he had discovered to be as extravagantly
literate as they were unsensuous. To them panpipes might play in vain,
but almost any series of statistics or the more desiccated kind of
social fact recited with a terrier-like air of sagacity would entrance
them. "The mines are Baird's, you know--Sir Milne Baird; it's a Glasgow
firm...." "Mhm," said Mr. Philip, "I know who you mean." Detestable,
thought Yaverland, this Scotch locution which implies that one has made
a vague or incorrect description which only the phenomenal intelligence
of one's listener has enabled him to penetrate, but he set himself
suavely enough to describe the instability of Spanish labour, its
disposition to call strikes that were really larks, and the greater
willingness with which it keeps its saints' days rather than the
commandments; the feckless incapacity of the Spanish to exploit their
own minerals and the evangelic part played in the shameful shoes by
Scotch engineers; and the depleted state of the country in general,
which he was careful to ascribe not so much to the presence of
Catholicism as to the absence of Presbyterianism. And he advised Mr.
Philip that while a sojourn in the towns would reveal these sad
political conditions, there were other deplorable aspects of the
national decay which could only be witnessed if he took a few rides over
the countryside. ("A horse or a bicycle?" asked Mr. Philip doubtfully.)
Then he would have a pleasant holiday. The language presented few
difficulties, although travelling off the tracks in Andalusia was
sometimes impeded by the linguistic ingenuity of the peasants, who,
though they didn't neigh and whinny like the Castilians, went one better
by omitting the consonants. Why, there was a place which spelt itself
Algodonales on the map and calls itself Aooae.

He watched her under his lids as she silently tried it over.

It was a village of no importance, save for the road that close by
forded the Guadalete, which was a pale icy mountain stream, snow-broth,
as Shakespeare said. (Now what had he said to excite her so? Modesty and
a sense of office discipline were restraining some eager cry of her
mind, like white hands holding birds resolved on flight.) One passed
through it on a ride that Mr. Philip must certainly take when he went to
Spain. Yaverland himself had done it last February. He receded into a
dream of that springtime, yet kept his consciousness of the girl's rapt
attention, as one may clasp the warm hand of a friend while one thinks
deeply, and he sent his voice out to Mr. Philip as into a void,
describing how he had gone to Seville one saint's day and how the narrow
decaying streets, choked with loveliness like stagnant ditches filled
with a fair weed, had entertained him. For a time he had sat in the
Moorish courts of the Alcazar; he had visited the House of Pontius
Pilate and had watched through the carven windows the two stone women
that pray for ever among the flowers in the courtyard; he had lingered
by the market-stalls observing their exquisite, unprofitable trade. He
was telling not half the beauty that he recollected, save in a phrase
that he now and then dropped to the girl's manifest appetite for such
things, and he took a malign pleasure in painting, so to speak,
advertisement matter across the sky of his landscapes so that Mr. Philip
could swallow them as being of potential commercial value and not mere
foolish sensuous enjoyment. "There's so little real wealth in the
country that they have to buy and sell mere pretty things for God knows
what fraction of a farthing. On the stalls where you'd have cheap clocks
and crockery and Austrian glass, they had stacks of violets and
carnations--_violetas y claveles_...." Then a chill and a dimness passed
over the bright spectacle and a sunset flamed up half across the sky as
though light had been driven out of the gates by the sword and had
scaled the heaven that it might storm the city from above. The lanes
became little runnels of darkness and night slowly silted up the broader
streets. The incessant orgy of sound that by day had been but the
tuneless rattling of healthy throats and the chatter of castanets became
charged with tragedy by its passage through the grave twilight. The
people pressed about him like vivacious ghosts, differentiating
themselves from the dusk by wearing white flowers in their hair or
cherishing the glow-worm tip of a cigarette between their lips.

He remembered it very well. For that was a night that the torment of
loneliness had rushed in upon him, an experience of the pain that had
revisited him so often that a little more and he would be reconciled to
the idea of death. Even then he had been intelligent about the mood and
had known that his was not a loneliness that could be exorcised by any
of the beautiful brown bodies which here professed the arts of love and
the dance and that drunkenness which would bring a physical misery to
match his mental state. Though this was wisdom, it added to his sense of
being lost in black space like a wandering star. In the end he had gone
into a café and drunk manzanilla, and with the limp complaisance of a
wrecked seasick man whose raft has shivered and left him to the mercy of
an octopus he had suffered adoption by a party of German engineers, who
had made very merry with stories of tipsy priests and nuns who had not
lived up to their position as the brides of Christ. Dismal night,
forerunner of a hundred such. "Oh, God, what is the use of it all? I sit
here yarning to this damned little dwarf of a solicitor and this girl
who is sick to go to these countries from which I've come back cold and
famined...."

But he went on, since the occasion seemed to demand it, giving a gay
account of the beauty which he remembered so intensely because it had
framed his agony; how the next day, under a sky that was temporarily
pale and amiable because this was early spring, he had ridden down the
long road between the brown heathy pastures to the blue barren downland
that lies under the black mountains, and had come at last to a winding
path that led not only through space but through time, for it ran nimbly
in and out among the seasons. It travelled under the rosy eaves of a
forest of blossoming almond up to a steep as haggard with weather as a
Scotch moor, and dipped again to hedges of aloes and cactus and
asphodel. At one moment a spindrift of orange blossom blew about him; at
another he had watched the peasants in their brown capes stripping their
dark green orange-groves and piling the golden globes into the panniers
of donkeys which were gay with magenta tassels. At one time there was
trouble getting the horse up the icy trail, yet a little later it was
treading down the irises and jonquils and bending its head to snuff the
rosemary. So on, beauty all the way, and infinitely variable, all the
many days' journey to the coast, where the mountain drops suddenly to
the surf and reflects the Mediterranean sky as a purple glamour on its
snowy crest. Ah, such a country!

He meant to go at that, for his listeners were now like honey-drugged
bees: to toss his papers on the table, go out, and let the situation
settle itself after his departure. But Mr. Philip said, "But surely
they're crool. Bullfights and that--"

He could not let that pass. "You don't understand. It's different over
there."

"Surely right's right and wrong's wrong, wherever you are?" said Mr.
Philip.

"No. Spain's a place, as I said, where one travels in time as well as in
space...." He didn't himself agree that the bullfight was so much
crueller than most organised activities of men. From the bull's point of
view, indeed, it was a nobler way of becoming roast beef than any other
and gave him the chance of drawing blood for blood; and the toreador's
life was good, as all dangerous lives are. But of course there were the
horses; he shuddered at his unspoken memory of a horse stumbling from
the arena at Seville with a riven belly and hanging entrails that
gleamed like mother-o'-pearl. Oh, yes, he admitted, it was cruel; or,
rather, would be if it were committed by a people like ourselves. But it
wasn't. That was the point he wanted to make. When one travelled far
back in time. It was hard for us--"for you, especially," he amplified,
with a courteous, enthusiastic flinging out of his hand, "with your
unparalleled Scotch system of education"--to comprehend the mentality of
a people which had been prevented, by the economic insanity of its
governors and the determination of the Church to sit on its intelligence
till it stopped kicking, from growing up. Among the things it hadn't
attained to was the easy anthropocentric attitude that is part of our
civilisation.

Ellen thought him very wonderful, as he stood theorising about the
experiences he had described, like a lecturer in front of his
magic-lantern pictures; for he was wholly given up to speculation and
yet was as substantial as any man of action.

Panic, he invited them to consider, was the habitual state of mind of
primitive peoples, the flood that submerged all but the strongest
swimmers. The savage spent his days suspecting and exorcising evil. The
echo in the cliff is an enemy, the wind in the grass an approaching
sickness, the new-born child clad in mystery and defilement. But it
wasn't for us to laugh at the savage for, so to speak, not having found
his earth-legs, since our quite recent ancestors had held comets and
eclipses to be menacing gestures of the stars. Some primitive suspicions
were reasonable, and chief among these the fear that man's ascendancy
over the other animals might yet be disputed. Early man sat by the camp
fire gnawing his bone and sneered through the dusk at the luminous,
envious eyes of the wild beasts that stood in the forest fringes, but he
was not easy in his mind about them. Their extreme immobility might be
the sign of a tense patience biding its time. Who was to say that some
night the position might not be reversed--that it would not be he who
stood naked save for his own pelt among the undergrowth watching some
happy firelit puma licking the grease of a good meal from its paws? That
was the primitive doubt. It's an attitude that one may understand even
now, he said, when one faces the spring of one of the larger carnivora;
and Ellen thrilled to hear him refer to this as Edinburgh folk refer to
a wrestle with the east wind. It's an attitude that was bound to
persist, long after the rest of Europe had got going with more modern
history, in Spain; where villages were subject on winter's nights to the
visitations of wolves and bears, and where the Goths and the Arabs and
the Christians and the Berbers proved so extravagantly the wrangling
lack of solidarity in the human herd. There had from earliest times
existed all round the Mediterranean basin a ceremony by which primitive
man gave a concrete ritual expression to this fear: the killing of the
bull. They took the bull as the representative of the brutes which were
the enemies of man and slew him by a priest's knife and with much
decorative circumstances to show that this was no mere butchering of
meat. Well, there in Spain it survived.... He had spoken confidently and
dogmatically, but his eyes asked them appealingly whether they didn't
see, as if in his course through the world he had been disappointed by
the number of people who never saw.

"That's all very fine," said Mr. Philip, "but they've had time to get
over their little fancies. We're in the twentieth century now."

Ah, the conception might never emerge into their consciousness, and
perhaps they would laugh at it if it did; but for all that it lies sunk
in their minds and shapes their mental contour. When a dead city is
buried by earth and no new city is built on its site the peasants tread
out their paths on the terraces which show where the old streets ran.
Something like that happened to a nation. Modern Spaniards hadn't,
thanks to taxation and the Church, been able to build a mental life for
themselves; so, since the mind of man must have a little exercise, they
repeated imitatively the actions by which their forefathers had
responded to their quite real psychological imperatives. You couldn't
perhaps find in the whole of the Peninsula a man or woman who felt this
fear of the beast, but that didn't affect his case. It was enough that
all men and women in the Peninsula had once felt it and had formed a
national habit of attending bullfights, and as silly subalterns
sometimes lay the toe of their boots to a Hindu for the glory of the
British Empire--keeping the animal creation in its place by kicks and
blows to mules and dogs.

It was incredible, he exclaimed, the interweaving of the old and the new
that made up the fabric of life in Spain. He could give them another
illustration of that. He had lodged for three weeks in Seville, in a
flat at the Cathedral end of the Canovas de Castillo--"that's a street,"
he interjected towards Ellen, "called after a statesman they
assassinated, they don't quite know why." In the flat there lodged a
priest, the usual drunken Spanish priest; and very early every morning,
as the people first began to sing in the streets, a man drove up in an
automobile and took him away for an hour. Presently he was told the
story of this morning visitor by several people in the house, and he had
listened to it as one didn't often listen to twice-told tales, for it
was amazing to observe how each of the tellers, whether it was tipsy Fra
Jeronimo or the triple-chinned landlady, Donna Gloria, or Pepe, the
Atheist medical student who kept his skeletons in the washhouse on the
roof, accepted it as a quite commonplace episode. The man in the
automobile had lost his wife. He minded quite a lot, perhaps because he
had gone through a good deal to get her. When he first met her she was
another man's wife. He said nothing to her then, but presently the way
that he stared at her at the bullfight and the opera and waited in the
Paseo de la Delicias for her carriage to come by made Seville talk, and
her husband called him out. The duel was fought on some sandy flat down
by the river, and the husband was killed. It was given out that he had
been gored by a bull, and within a year the widow married the man who
had killed him. In another year she was dead of fever. Her husband gave
great sums for Masses for her soul and to charity, and shut up the house
where they had entertained Seville with the infantile, interminable
gaieties that are loved by the South, and went abroad. When he returned
he went back to live in that house, but now no one ever entered it
except the priest; and he went not for any social purpose, but to say
Mass over the woman's bed, which her husband had turned into an altar.
Every day those two said Mass at that bed, though it was five years
since she had died. That was a queer enough story for the present day,
with its woman won by bloodshed and the long unassuagable grief of the
lover and the resort to religion that struck us as irreverent because it
was so utterly believing; it might have come out of the Decameron. But
the last touch of wildness was added by the identity of the man in the
automobile. For he was the Marquis d'Italica, the finest Spanish
aviator, a man not only of the mediæval courage one might have guessed
from the story, but also of the most modern wit about machines....

Yaverland bit his lip suddenly. He had told the story without shame, for
he knew well and counted it among the heartening facts of life, like the
bravery of seamen and the sweetness of children, that to a man a woman's
bed may sometimes be an altar. But Mr. Philip had ducked his head and
his ears were red. Shame was entering the room like a bad smell.

For a minute Yaverland did not dare to look at Ellen. "I had forgotten
she was a girl," he thought miserably. "I thought of nothing but how
keen she is on Spain. I don't know how girls feel about things...." But
she was sitting warm and rosy in a happy dream, looking very solemnly at
a picture she was making in the darkness over his left shoulder. She had
liked the story, although the thought of men fighting over a woman made
her feel sick, as any conspicuous example of the passivity common in her
sex always did. But the rest she had thought lovely. It was a beautiful
idea of the Marquis's to turn the bed into an altar. Probably he had
often gone into his wife's room to kiss her good-night. She saw a narrow
iron bedstead such as she herself slept in, a face half hidden by the
black hair flung wide across the pillow, a body bent like a bow under
the bedclothes; for she herself still curled up at nights as dogs and
children do; and the Marquis, whom she pictured as carrying a robin's
egg blue enamelled candlestick like the one she always carried up to her
room, kneeling down and kissing his wife very gently lest she should
awake. Love must be a great compensation to those who have not political
ambitions. She became aware that Yaverland's eyes were upon her, and she
slowly smiled, reluctantly unveiling her good will to him. It again
appeared to him that the world was a place in which one could be at
one's ease without disgrace.

He stood up and brought a close to the business interview, and was
gripping Mr. Philip's hand, when a sudden recollection reddened his
face. "Ah, there's one thing," he said quite lightly, though the vein
down the middle of his forehead had darkened. "You see from those
letters that a Señor Vicente de Rojas is making an offer for the house.
He's not to have it. Do you understand? Not at any price."

The effect of this restriction, made obviously at the behest of some
deep passion, was to make him suddenly sinister. They gazed at him as
though he had revealed that he carried arms. But Ellen remembered
business again.

"Those letters," she reminded Mr. Philip, "had I not better read them
over before Mr. Yaverland goes?"

Yaverland caught his breath, then spoke off-handedly. "You're
forgetting. They don't speak Spanish in Brazil, but Portuguese." And
added confidentially, "Of course you were thinking of the Argentine."

She was as hurt by the revelation of this vast breach in her omniscience
as the bright twang of knowingness in her voice had told him she would
be.

"Yes," she said unsteadily, "I was thinking of the Argentine."

He shook hands with Mr. Philip, and she took him down the corridor to
the door. She blinked back her tears as he stood at the head of the
stair and put up his collar with those strange hands that were speckled
like a snake's belly, for it seemed a waste, like staying indoors when
the menagerie procession is going round the town, to let anything so
unusual go away without seeing as much of it as possible. Then she
remembered the thing that she had wanted to say in the other room, and
wondered if it would be bold to speak, and finally remarked in a voice
disagreeable with shyness, "The people up on the Pentland Hills use that
word you said was in Shakespeare. Snow-broth. When the hill-streams run
full after the melting of the snows, that's snow-broth."

He liked women who were interested in queer-shaped fragments of fact,
for they reminded him of his mother. He took pains to become animated at
her news.

"They do, they do!" Ellen assured him, pleased by his response. "And
they say 'hit' for 'it,' which is Anglo-Saxon."

He noticed that her overall, which she was growing out of, fitted
tightly on her over-thin shoulders and showed how their line was spoilt
by the deep dip of the clavicle, and wondered why that imperfection
should make her more real to him than she had been when he had thought
her wholly beautiful. Again he became aware of her discontent with her
surroundings, which had exerted on her personality nothing of the
weakening effect of despair, since it sprang from such a rich content
with the universe, such a confident faith that the supremest beauty she
could imagine existed somewhere and would satisfy her if only she could
get at it. He said, with no motive but to confirm her belief that the
world was full of interest, "You must go on with your Spanish, you know.
Don't just treat it as a commercial language. There's a lot of fine
stuff in Spanish literature." He hesitated, feeling uncertain as to
whether "Celestina" or "Juan de Ruiz" were really suitable for a young
girl. "Saint Teresa, you know," he suggested, with the air of one who
had landed on his feet.

"Oh, I can't do with religion," said Ellen positively.

He spluttered a laugh that seemed to her the first irrational flaw in
something exquisitely reasonable, and ran down the dark stairs. She
attended imaginatively to the sound of his footsteps; as on her first
excited night in country lodgings the summer before she had sat up in
bed listening to horse's hooves beating through the moonlit village
street, and had thought of the ghosts of highwaymen. But this was the
ghost of an Elizabethan seaman. She could see him, bearded and with gold
rings in his ears and the lustrousness of fever in his eyes, captaining
with oaths and the rattle of arms a boat rowed by naked Indians along a
yellow waterway between green cliffs of foliage. Yes, she could not
imagine him consulting any map that was not gay with painted figures and
long scrolls.

Dazed with the wonder of him, she went back into the room, and it was a
second or two before she noticed that Mr. Philip was ramming his hat on
his head and putting on his overcoat as though he had not a moment to
lose. "You've no need to fash yourself," she told him happily. "It's not
half-past seven yet. You've got a full hour. I can run down and heat up
your chop, if you'll wait."

"Oh, spare yourself!" he begged her shortly.

She moved about the room, putting away papers and shutting drawers and
winding up the eight-day clock on the mantelpiece a clear three days
before it needed it, with a mixed motive of clearing up before her
departure and making it clean and bare as befitted a place where heroes
came to do business; and she was more than unaware that Mr. Philip was
watching her like an ambushed assassin, she was confident in a
conception of the world which excluded any such happening. He was
standing by the mantelpiece fastening his furry storm-gloves, and though
he found it teasing to adjust the straps in the shadow, he would not
step into the light and look down on his hands. For his little eye was
set on Ellen, and it was dull with speculation as to whether she knew
what he had meant to do to her that moment when the knocking came at the
door. Because the thing that he had meant to do seemed foul when he
looked on her honourably held little head and her straight blue smock,
he began to tamper with reality, so that he might believe himself not to
have incurred the guilt of that intention. Surely it had been she that
had planned that thing, not he? Girls were nasty-minded and were always
thinking about men. He began to remember the evening all over again,
dusting with lasciviousness each of the gestures that had shone with
such clear colours in his sight, dulling each of the sentences by which
she had displayed to him her trimly-kept mental accoutrement until they
became simpering babble, falsifying his minute memory of the scene until
it became a record of her lust instead of his. Something deep in him
stated quietly and glumly that he was now doing a wrong far worse than
the thing that he had planned, and, though he would not listen, it was
making him so sensible that the essence of the evening was his
degradation that he felt very ill. If the palpitation of his heart and
the shortness of his breath continued he would have to sit down and then
she would be kind to him. He would never forgive her for all this
trouble she had brought on him.

When she could no longer hold it in she exclaimed artlessly, "Yon Mr.
Yaverland's a most interesting man."

He searched for an insult and felt resentful of the required effort, for
his heart was making him very uncomfortable. He wished some crude
gesture, some single ugly word, would do it. "You thought him an
interesting man?" he asked naggingly. "You don't surprise me. It was a
bit too plain you thought so. I'll thank you not to be so forward with a
client again. It'll give the office a bad name. And chatting at the door
like that!"

He looked for his umbrella, which was kept in this room and not in the
hall-stand, lest its handsome cairngorm knob should tempt any of the
needier visitors to the office, and removed its silk cover, which he
placed in the pocket where he kept postage-stamps and, to provide for
emergencies, a book of court plaster.

"I'm sure I'll not have to speak twice about this, Miss Melville," he
said, with an appearance of forbearing kindliness, as he passed out of
the door. "Good night."


IV

She paused in the dark archway that led into Hume Park Square.

"It can't hurt me, what Mr. Philip said, because it isn't true." She
wagged a pedagogic finger at herself. "See here! Think of it in terms of
Euclid. If you do a faulty proof by superposition and haven't remembered
the theorem rightly, you can go on saying, 'Lay AB along DE' till all's
blue and you'll never make C coincide with F. In the same way Mr. Philip
can blether to his silly heart's content and he'll never prove that I'm
a bold girl. Me, Ellen Melville, who cares for nothing in the world
except the enfranchisement of women and getting on...."

She felt better. "There's nothing in life you can't get the better of by
thinking about it," she said sententiously, and fell to dabbing her eyes
with her handkerchief. She could easily pass off her tearstains as the
marks of a bad cold. "It's a dreadful thing to rejoice in another body's
affliction, but sometimes I'm glad mother's so short-sighted.

"He wanted to make me unhappy, but he did not know how," she thought,
with a sudden renewal of rage. "Now I should have minded awful if he had
noticed that slip I made about the Brazilians talking Spanish. It was a
mercy yon man Yaverland thought I was thinking of the Argentine." But
indeed the stranger would never have wanted to hurt her; she felt sure
that he was either very kind to people or very indifferent. She began to
recall him delightedly, to see him standing in the villa garden against
a hedge of scarlet flowers that marched as tall as soldiers beside a
marble wall, to see him moving, dark and always a little fierce, through
a world of beauty she was now too fatigued to imagine save as a kind of
solidification of a sunset. Dreamily she moved to the little house in
the corner....

It was her habit to let herself in with the latchkey just as if she were
the man of the house.

"Mercy, Ellen, you're late! I was getting feared!" cried her mother, who
had gone to the kitchen to boil up the cocoa when she heard the key in
the lock. She liked that sound. Ellen thought herself a wonderful new
sort of woman who was going to be just like a man; she would have been
surprised if she had known how many of her stern-browed ambitions, how
much of her virile swagger of life, were not the invention of her own
soul, but had been suggested to her by an old woman who liked to pretend
her daughter was a son.

"We had a great press of business and I had to stay," said Ellen with
masculine nonchalance. "A most interesting client came in...."


CHAPTER II

I


Every Saturday afternoon Ellen sold _Votes for Women_ in Princes Street,
and the next day found her as usual with a purple, white and green
poster hung from her waist and a bundle of papers tucked under her arm.
This street-selling had always been a martyrdom to her proud spirit, for
it was one of the least of her demands upon the universe that she should
be well thought of eternally and by everyone; but she had hitherto been
sustained by the reflection that while there were women in jail, as
there were always in those days, it ill became her to mind because Lady
Cumnock (and everyone knew what she was, for all that she opened so many
bazaars) laughed down her long nose as she went by. But now Ellen had
lost all her moral stiffening, and as that had always been her specialty
she was distressed by the lack; she felt like a dress-shirt that a
careless washerwoman had forgotten to starch. The giggling of the
passers-by and the manifest unpopularity of her opinions pricked her to
tears, and she mournfully perceived that she had ceased to be a poet.
For that the day was given over to a high melancholy of grey clouds,
which did not let the least stain of weak autumn sunlight discolour the
black majesty of the Castle Rock, and that a bold wind played with the
dull clothes of the Edinburgh folk and swelled them out into fantastic
shapes like cloaks carried by grandees, were as nothing to her because
the hurricane tore the short ends of her hair from under her hat and
made them straggle on her forehead. "I doubt if I'll be able to
appreciate Keats if this goes on," she meditated gloomily. And the
people that went by, instead of being as usual mere provocation for her
silent laughter, had to-day somehow got power over her and tormented her
by making her suspect the worthlessness of her errand. It seemed the
height of folly to work for the race if the race was like this: men who,
if they had dignity, looked cold and inaccessible to fine disastrous
causes; men who were without dignity and base as monkeys; mountainous
old men who looked bland because the crevices of their expressions had
been filled up with fat, but who showed in the glares they gave her and
her papers an immense expertness in coarse malice; hen-like genteel
women with small mouths and mean little figures that tried for
personality with trimmings and feather boas and all other adornments
irrelevant to the structure of the human body; flappers who swung
scarlet bows on their plaits and otherwise assailed their Presbyterian
environment by glad cries of the appearance; and on all these faces the
smirk of superior sagacity that vulgar people give to the untriumphant
ideal. "I must work out the ethics of suicide this evening," thought
Ellen chokingly, "for if the world's like this it's the wisest thing to
do. But not, of course, until mother's gone."

She mechanically offered a paper to a passing flapper, who rejected it
with a scornful exclamation, "'Deed no, Ellen Melville! I think you're
mad." Ellen recognised her as a despised schoolfellow and gnashed her
teeth at being treated like this by a poor creature who habitually got
thirty per cent, in her arithmetic examination. "Mad, am I? Not so mad
as you, my dear, thinking you look like Phyllis Dare with yon wee, wee
pigtail. You evidently haven't realised that a Scotch girl can't help
looking sensible. That graceful butterfly frivolity that comes so easy
to the English, and, I've haird, the French, is not for us. I think it's
something about our ankles that prevents us." She looked at the girl's
feet, said "Ay!" in a manner that hinted that they confirmed her theory,
and turned away, remarking over her shoulder, "Mind you, I admire your
spirit, setting out to look like one of these light English actresses
when your name's Davidina Todd." The wind was trying to tear the poster
from the cord that held it to her waist, the cold was making her sniff,
and as she gave her back to this flimsy little fool she caught sight of
a minister standing a yard or two away and giggling "Tee hee!" at her.
It was too much. She darted down on him. "Are you not Mr. Hunter of the
Middleton Place United Free Church?" she asked, making her voice sound
soft and cuddly.

He wiped the facetiousness from his face and assented with a polite
bob. Perhaps she was the daughter of an elder. Quite nice people were
taking up this nonsense.

"I heard you preach last Sunday," she said, glowing with interest. He
began to look coy. Then her voice changed to something colder than the
wind. "The most lamentable sairmon I ever listened to. Neither lairning
nor inspiration. And a _read_ sairmon, too."

As his black back threaded through the traffic remorse fell upon her.
"Here's an opportunity for doing quiet, uncomplaining service to the
Cause," she reproached herself, "and I'm turning it into a fair picnic
for my tongue." Everyone was rubbish, and she herself was no exception.
Her hair was nearly down. And she had to stay there for another hour.

But she determined to endure it; and Richard Yaverland, who afar off had
formed the intention of stopping and speaking to the girl with the
poster because she had such hair, was suddenly reminded by the comic and
romantic quality of her attitude that this was the typist he had met on
the previous evening, whose manifest discontent and ambition had come
into his mind more than once during his sleepless night and had
distressed him until some recollected gesture or accent made him laugh.
He slightly resented this recognition and the change it worked on his
emotional tone. For he was compelled to think of her as a human being
and be sorry because she was plainly cold and miserable; and it was his
desire to look on women with a magpie thievish eye and no concern for
their souls. Considering the part that most of them played in life it
was unwarrantable of them to have souls. The dinner that one eats does
not presume to have a soul. But the happy freedom of the voluptuary was
not for him; against his will there lived in him something sombre and
kind that was sensitive to spiritual things and despondent but
powerfully vigilant about the happiness of other people. He said to
himself, "That little girl is pretty well done up. She's nearly crying.
Someone must have been rude to her." (He did not know his Ellen yet.) "I
must give her a moment to get her poor little face straight." So until
he drew level with her his dark eyes were fixed on the Castle Rock.

And Ellen thought, "Why, here is the big man who has been in Spain and
South America and has the queer stains on his hands! How big he is, and
dark! He looks like a king among these other people. And how wonderful
his eyes are! He is miles away from here, seeing some distant beautiful
thing. Perhaps that mountainside he told us about where the reflection
of the sky is like a purple shadow on the snow. A poet must look like
that when he is thinking of a poem. But--but--if he keeps on staring up
there he won't see me and buy a paper. I should like to interest him in
the Cause. And I daren't speak to him." She flushed. Though Mr. Philip's
claw had not done all the hurt it hoped, it had yet mauled its victim
cruelly. "That would look bold."

But in the nick of time his eyes fell on her. He gave a start of
surprise and said in his kind, insolent voice:

"Good morning. So you're a Suffragette."

She was pleased to be publicly recognised by such a splendid person, and
answered shyly; but caught a glint in his eyes which reminded her that
she wasn't perfectly sure that he really had thought she was thinking of
the Argentine when she had proposed writing to Brazil in Spanish. Was it
possible that he was not being entirely respectful to her? She would not
have that, for she was splendid herself too, though the idiot world had
given her no chance to show it. She pulled herself together, knitted her
brows, and looked as much like Mr. Gladstone as could be managed with
such a pliable profile.

"Sell me one of your papers," he said. "No, don't bother about the
change. The Cause can let itself go on the odd elevenpence. Well, I
think you're wonderful to stand out here in this awful weather with all
these blighters going by."

"When one is wrapped up in a great Cause," replied Ellen superbly, "one
hardly notices these minor discomforts. Will you not take a ticket for
the meeting next Friday at the Synod Hall? Mrs. Ormiston and Mrs. Mark
Lyle are speaking. The tickets are half-a-crown and a shilling. But
you'll find the shilling ones quite good, for they're both exceptionally
clear and audible speakers. Women are."

"Next Friday? Yes, I can come up that night. Are you taking the chair,
or seconding the resolution, or anything like that?"

"Me? Mercy, no!" gasped Ellen. Had he really been taken in by her bluff
that she was grown-up? For she had a feeling, which she would never
admit even to herself but which came to her nearly every day, that she
was a truant child masquerading in long skirts, and that at any moment
someone might come and with the bleak unanswerable authority of a
schoolmistress order her back to her short frocks and the class-room.
But this was nonsense, for she really was grown-up. She was seventeen
past and earning. "No. I'll be stewarding and selling literature."

"Good." He handed her half-a-crown and took the ticket from her, folded
it across, hesitated, and asked appealingly: "I say, hadn't you better
write your name on this? I once went to a Suffrage meeting in Glasgow
and they wouldn't let me in because they thought I looked the sort of
person who would interrupt. But if you wrote your name on my ticket
they'll know I'm all right." He gave her a pencil-stump, and as she
wrote reflected: "How do I come to be such a fluent liar? I didn't get
it from my mother. No, not from my mother. I suppose my father had that
vice as well as the others. But why am I taking so much trouble to find
out about this little girl--I who don't care a damn about anything or
anybody?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He smiled when he took back the card, and with some difficulty, for she
had tried to impart an impressive frenzy to her round hand, read her
signature. Ellen Melville was a ridiculous name for one of the most
beautiful people who have ever lived. It was like climbing to a towered
castle on a high eagle-haunted cliff and finding that it was called
"Seaview." She was amazingly beautiful now, burning against the grey
weather with her private fire; and she had been beautiful the night
before, in that baggy blue overall that only the most artless female
creature would have worn. But she had looked even younger then; he
remembered how, as she had opened the door, she had lifted a glowing and
receptive face like a child who had been having a lovely time at a
party. It occurred to him to question what the lovely time that she had
been having in that dreary office could possibly be. And into the pretty
print of the scene on his mind, like a humped marine beast rising
through a summer sea, there obtruded the recollection of the little
solicitor, the graceless embarrassment that he had shown at the
beginning of the interview by purposeless rubbings of his hands and
twisting of the ankles, the revelation of ugly sexual quality which he
had given by his shame at the story of the bed that was made an altar.
He looked at her sharply and said to himself: "I wonder...."

Oh, surely not! The note of her face was pure expectancy. As yet she had
come upon nothing fundamental of any kind. He had no prepossessions in
favour of innocence, and he put people who did not make love in the same
class as vegetarians, but he was immensely relieved. He would have hated
this fine thing to have fallen into clumsy hands.

There was, he realised, not the smallest excuse for staying with her any
longer. "Good-bye; I hope I'll see you at the meeting," he said; and
then, since he remembered how keen she was on being businesslike, "and
look after my villa for me."

"Yes, we'll do that," she said competently, and looked after him with
smiling eyes. "Oh, he looks most adventurous!" she thought. "I wonder,
now, if he's ever killed a man?"


II

"Is my frock hooked up all the way down?" wondered Ellen, as she stood
with her back to a pillar in the Synod Hall. "Not that I care a button
about it myself, but for the sake of the Cause...." But that small worry
was just one dark leaf floating on the quick sunlit river of her mind,
for she was very happy and excited at these Suffrage meetings. She had
taken seven shillings and sixpence for pamphlets, the hall was filling
up nicely, and Miss Traquair and Dr. Katherine Kennedy and Miss
Mackenzie and several members of the local militant suffrage society had
spoken to her as they went to their places just as if they counted her
grown-up and one of themselves. And she was flushed with the sense of
love and power that comes of comradeship. She looked back into the
hideous square hall, with its rows of chattering anticipant people, and
up to the gallery packed with faces dyed yellowish drab by the near
unmitigated gas sunburst, and she smiled brilliantly. All these people
were directing their attention and enthusiasm to the same end as
herself: would feel no doubt the same tightness of throat as the heroic
women came on the platform, and would sanctify the emotion as sane by
sharing it; and by their willingness to co-operate in rebellion were
making her individual rebellious will seem less like a schoolgirl's
penknife and more like a soldier's sword. "I'm being a politikon Zoon!"
she boasted to herself. She had always liked the expression when she
read it in _The Scotsman_ Leaders.

And here they were! The audience made a tumult that was half applause
and half exclamation at a prodigy, and the three women who made their
way on the platform seemed to be moving through the noise as through a
viscid element. The woman doctor, who was to be the chairman, lowered
her curly grey head against it buttingly; Mrs. Ormiston, the mother of
the famous rebels Brynhild, Melissa, and Guendolen, and herself a
heroine, lifted a pale face where defiance dwelt among the remains of
dark loveliness like a beacon lit on a grey castle keep; and Mrs. Mark
Lyle, a white and golden wonder in a beautiful bright dress, moved
swimmingly about and placed herself on a chair like a fastidious lily
choosing its vase. Oh! it was going to be lovely! Wasn't it ridiculous
of that man Yaverland to have stayed away and missed all this glory, to
say nothing of wasting a good half-crown and a ticket which someone
might have been glad of? It just showed that men were hopeless and there
was no doing anything for them.

But then suddenly she saw him. He was standing at one of the entrances
on the other side of the hall, looking tremendous and strange in a
peaked cap and raindashed oilskins, as though he had recently stood on a
heeling deck and shouted orders to cutlassed seamen, and he was staring
at the tumult as if he regarded noise as a mutiny of inferiors against
his preference for calm. By his side a short-sighted steward bent
interminably over his ticket. "The silly gowk!" fumed Ellen. "Can the
woman not read? It looks so inefficient, and I want him to think well of
the movement." Presently, with a suave and unimpatient gesture, he took
his ticket away from the peering woman and read her the number. "I like
him!" said Ellen. "There's many would have snapped at her for that."

She liked, too, the way he got to his seat without disturbing his
neighbours, and the neathandedness with which he took off his cap and
oilskins and fell to wiping a pair of motor-goggles while his eyes
maintained a dark glance, too intense to flash, on the women on the
platform. "How long he is looking at them!" she said to herself
presently. "No doubt he is taken up by Mrs. Mark Lyle. I believe such
men are very susceptible to beautiful women. I hope," she continued with
sudden bitterness, "he is as susceptible to spiritual beauty and will
take heed of Mrs. Ormiston!" With that, she tried herself to look at
Mrs. Ormiston, but found she could not help watching the clever way he
went on cleaning the goggles while his eyes and attention were fixed
otherwhere. There was something ill-tempered about his movements which
made her want to go dancingly across and say teasing things to him. Yet
when a smile at some private thought suggested by the speech broke his
attention, and he began to look round the hall, she was filled with
panic at the prospect of meeting his eyes. She did not permit herself
irrational emotions, so she pretended that what she was feeling was not
terror of this man, but the anger of a feminist against all men, and
stared fiercely at the platform, crying out silently: "What have I to do
with this man? I will have nothing to do with any man until I am great.
Then I suppose I will have to use them as pawns in my political and
financial intrigues."

Through this gaping at the client from Rio she had missed the chairman's
speech. Dr. Munro had just sat down. Her sensible square face looked red
and stern, as though she had just been obliged to smack someone, and
from the tart brevity of the applause it was evident that that was what
she had been doing. This rupture of the bright occasion struck Ellen,
who found herself suddenly given over to irritations, as characteristic
of the harshness of Edinburgh life. Here was a cause so beautiful in its
affirmation of freedom that it should have been served only by the
bravery of dignified women and speeches lucent with reason and
untremulously spoken, by things that would require no change of quality
but only rearrangements to be instantly commemorable by art; and yet
this Scotch woman, moving with that stiffness of the mental joints which
nations which suffer from it call conscientiousness, had managed to turn
a sacramental gathering of the faithful into a steamy short-tempered
activity, like washing-day. "Think shame on yourself, Ellen Melville!"
she rebuked herself. "She's a better woman than ever you'll be, with the
grand work she's done at the Miller's Wynd Dispensary." But that the
doctor was a really fine woman made the horsehair texture of her manner
all the more unpleasing, for it showed her sinisterly illustrative of a
community which had reached an intellectual standard that could hardly
be bettered and which possessed certain moral energy, and yet was
content to be rude. Amongst these people Ellen felt herself, with her
perpetual tearful desire that everybody should be nice, to be a tenuous
and transparent thing. She doubted if she would ever be able to contend
with such as they. "Maybe I shall not get on after all!" she thought,
and her heart turned over with fear.

But Mrs. Ormiston was speaking now. Oh, it was treason to complain
against the world when it held anything so fine as this! She stood very
far forward on the platform, and it seemed as though she had no friends
in the world but did not care. Beauty was hers, and her white face, with
its delicate square jaw and rounded temples, recalled the pansy by its
shape. She wore a dress of deep purple, that colour which is almost a
sound, an emotion, which is seen by the mind's eye when one hears great
music. Her hoarse, sweet North-country voice rushed forth like a wind
bearing the sounds of a battlefield, the clash of arms, the curses
hurled at an implacable and brutish enemy, the sights of the dying--for
already some had died; and with a passion that preserved her words from
the common swift mortality of spoken things she told stories of her
followers' brave deeds which seemed to remain in the air and deck the
hall like war-tattered standards. She spoke of the women who were
imprisoned at Birmingham for interrupting Mr. Asquith's meeting, and
how they lay now day and night in the black subterranean prison cells,
huddled on the tree-stumps that were the only seats, clad in nothing but
coarse vests because they would not wear the convict clothes, breathing
the foul sewage-tainted air for all but that hour when they were carried
up to the cell where the doctor and the wardresses waited to bind and
gag them and ram the long feeding-tube down into their bodies. This they
had endured for six weeks, and would for six weeks more. She spoke with
a proud reticence as to her sufferings, about her recent sojourn in
Holloway, from which she had gained release by hunger-striking a
fortnight before.

"Ah, I could die for her!" cried Ellen to herself, wet-eyed with
loyalty. "If only it weren't for mother I'd go to prison to-morrow." Her
love could hardly bear it when Mrs. Ormiston went on, restrained rage
freezing her words, to indict the conspiracy of men that had driven her
and her followers to revolt: the refusal to women of a generous
education, of a living wage, of opportunities for professional
distinction; the social habit of amused contempt at women's doings; the
meanness that used a woman's capacity for mating and motherhood to bind
her a slave either of the kitchen or of the streets. All these things
Ellen knew to be true, because she was poor and had had to drink life
with the chill on, but it did not sadden her to have her reluctant views
confirmed by the woman she thought the wisest in the world, for she felt
an exaltation that she was afraid must make her eyes look wild. It had
always appeared to her that certain things which in the main were
sombre, such as deep symphonies of an orchestra, the black range and
white scaurs of the Pentland Hills against the south horizon, the idea
that at death one dies utterly and is buried in the earth, were patterns
cut from the stuff of reality. They were relevant to fate, typical of
life, in a way that gayer things, like the song of girls or the
field-checked pleasantness of plains or the dream of a soul's holiday in
eternity, were not; And in the bitter eloquence of this pale woman she
rapturously recognised that same authentic quality.

But what good was it if one woman had something of the dignity of nature
and art? Everybody knew that the world was beautiful. She sent her mind
out from the hall to walk in the night, which was not wet, yet had a
bloom of rain in the air, so that the lights shone with a plumy beam and
all roads seemed to run to a soft white cliff. Above, the Castle Rock
was invisible, but certainly cut strange beautiful shapes out of the
mist; beneath it lay the Gardens, a moat of darkness, raising to the
lighted street beyond terraces planted with rough autumn flowers that
would now be close-curled balls curiously trimmed with dew, and grass
that would make placid squelching noises under the feet; and at the end
of the Gardens were the two Greek temples that held the town's
pictures--the Tiepolo, which shows Pharaoh's daughter walking in a
fardingale of gold with the negro page to find a bambino Moses kicking
in Venetian sunlight; the Raeburns, coarse and wholesome as a home-made
loaf; the lent Whistler collection like a hive of butterflies. And at
the Music Hall Frederick Lamond was playing Beethoven. How his strong
hands would beat out the music! Oh, as to the beauty of the world there
was no question!

But people weren't as nice as things. Humanity was no more than an ugly
parasite infesting the earth. The vile quality of men and women could
hardly be exaggerated. There was Miss Coates, the secretary of the
Anti-Suffrage Society, who had come to this meeting from some obscure
motive of self-torture and sat quite close by, jerking her pale face
about in the shadow of a wide, expensive hat (it was always women like
that, Ellen acidly remarked, who could afford good clothes) as she was
seized by convulsions of contempt for the speaker and the audience.
Ellen knew her very well, for every Saturday morning she used to stride
up in an emerald green sports skirt, holding out a penny in a hand that
shook with rage, and saying something indistinct about women biting
policemen. On these occasions Ellen was physically afraid, for she could
not overcome a fancy that the anklebones which projected in
geological-looking knobs on each side of Miss Coates's large flat
brogues were a natural offensive weapon like the spurs of a cock; and
she was afraid also in her soul. Miss Coates was plainly, from her
yellow but animated pallor, from her habit of wearing her blouse open at
the neck to show a triangle of chest over which the horizontal bones
lay like the bars of a gridiron, a mature specimen of a type that Ellen
had met in her school-days. There had been several girls at John
Thompson's, usually bleached and ill-favoured victims of anæmia or
spinal curvature, who had seemed to be compelled by something within
themselves to spend their whole energies in trying, by extravagances of
hair-ribbon and sidecombs and patent leather belts, the collection of
actresses' postcards, and the completest abstention from study, to
assert the femininity which their ill-health had obscured. Their efforts
were never rewarded by the companionship of any but the most shambling
kind of man or boy; but they proceeded through life with a greater
earnestness than other children of their age, intent on the business of
establishing their sex. Miss Coates was plainly the adult of the type,
who had found in Anti-Suffragism, that extreme gesture of political
abasement before the male, a new way of calling attention to what
otherwise only the person who was naturally noticing about clothes would
detect. It was a fact of immense and dangerous significance that the
Government and the majority of respectable citizens were on the side of
this pale, sickly, mad young woman against the brave, beautiful Mrs.
Ormiston. People were horrible.

And there was Mr. Philip.

Oh, why had she thought of him? All the time that she had been in the
hall she had forgotten him, but now he had come back to torture her
untiringly, as he had done all that week. It had been all very well for
her to run through the darkness so happily that evening, unvexed by the
accusation of her boldness because she was not bold, for she had not
then known the might of cruelty. Indeed, she had not believed that
anybody had ever hurt anybody deliberately, except long-dead soldiers
sent by mad kings to make what history books, to mark the unusual horror
of the event, called massacres. She had begun to know better late last
Monday afternoon. She had returned to her little room after taking down
some shorthand notes from dictation, and, because there was a thick,
ugly twilight and she had come dazzled by the crude light on Mr.
Mactavish James's desk, had moved about for some seconds, with a freedom
that seemed foolishness as soon as she knew she was observed, before
she saw that Mr. Philip was standing at the hearth.

"Have you come straight off the train?" it was in her mind to say. "Will
I ask Mrs. Powell to get you some tea?" But he looked strange. The
driving flame of the fire cast flickering shadows and red lights on the
shoulders and skirt of his greatcoat, so he looked as though he was
performing some evil incantatory dance of the body, while his face and
hands and feet remained black and still. There was no sound of his
breath. "Good mercy on us!" she said to herself. "Is it his wraith, and
has he come to harm in London?" But the dark patch of his face moved,
and he began his long demonstration to her that a man need not be dead
to be dreadful. "Is there anything you want of me, Miss Melville?" the
clipped voice had asked. It was, so plainly the cold answer to an ogle
that she gazed about her for some person who deserved this reproach and
whom he had called by her name in error. But of course there was no one,
and she realised that he had come back from London her enemy, that this
accusation of her boldness was to be the favourite weapon of his enmity,
and that he found it the more serviceable way to accuse her of making
advances to him as well as to the client from Rio.

"I want nothing," she said, and left him. Since there was nowhere else
for her to go, she was obliged to wait in the lobby beside the
umbrella-stand till he came out, quirked his head at her suspiciously,
and went into his father's room. She perceived that there had been no
need for him to go into her room save his desire to make this gesture of
hate towards her. It came to her then that, although an accusation could
not hurt one if it was false, the accuser could hurt by the evil spirit
he discharged. If a man emptied a jug of water over you from a top
window in the belief that you were a cat, the fact that you were not a
cat would not prevent you from getting wet through. In the midst of her
alarm she smiled at finding an apt image. There were still intellectual
refuges. But very few. Every day Mr. Philip convinced her how few and
ineffectual. He never now, when he had finished dictating, said, "That's
all for the present, thank you," but let an awkward space of silence
fall, and then enquired with an affectation of patience, "And what are
you waiting on, Miss Melville?" He treated her infrequent errors in
typing as if she was a simpering girl who was trying to buy idleness
with her charm. And he was speaking ill of her. That she knew from Mr.
Mactavish James's kindnesses, which brightened the moment but always
made the estimate of her plight more dreary, since just so might a
gaoler in a brigand's cave bring a prisoner scraps of sweeter food and
drink when the talk of her death and the thought of her youth had made
him feel tenderly. Only that morning he had padded up behind Ellen and
set a white parcel by her typewriter. "Here's some taiblet for you,
lassie," he had said, and had laid a loving, clumsy hand on her
shoulder. What had Mr. Philip been saying now? And she did so want to be
well spoken of. But there was worse than that--something so bad that she
would not allow her mind to harbour any visual image of it, but thought
of it in a harsh, short sentence. _"When Mr. Morrison went out of the
room and we were left alone he got up and set the door ajar...."_
Something weak and little in her cried out, "Oh, God, stop Mr. Philip
being so cruel to me or I shall die!" and something fiercer said, "I
will kill him...."

There was a roar of applause, and she found that Mrs. Ormiston had
finished her speech. This was another iniquity to be charged against Mr.
Philip. The thought of him had robbed her of heaven knows how much of
the wisdom of her idol, and it might be a year or more before Mrs.
Ormiston came to Edinburgh again. She could have cried as she clapped,
but fortunately there was Mrs. Mark Lyle yet to speak. She watched the
advance to the edge of the platform of that tall, beautiful figure in
the shining dress which it would have been an understatement to call
sky-blue, unless one predicated that the sky was Italian, and rejoiced
that nature had so appropriately given such a saint a halo of gold hair.
Then came the slow, clear voice building a crystal bridge of argument
between the platform and the audience, and formulating with an
indignation that was fierce, yet left her marmoreal, an indictment
against the double standard of morality and the treatment of unmarried
mothers.

Ellen clapped loudly, not because she had any great opinion of
unmarried mothers, whom she suspected of belonging to the same type of
woman who would start on a day's steamer excursion and then find that
she had forgotten the sandwiches, but because she was a neat-minded girl
and could not abide the State's pretence that an illegitimate baby had
only one parent when everybody knew that every baby had really two. And
she fell to wondering what this thing was that men did to women. There
was certainly some definite thing. Children, she was sure, came into the
world because of some kind of embrace; and she had learned lately, too,
that women who were very poor sometimes let men do this thing to them
for money: such were the women whom she saw in John Square, when she
came back late from a meeting or a concert, leaning against the
garden-railings, their backs to the lovely nocturnal mystery of groves
and moonlit lawns, and their faces turned to the line of rich men's
houses which mounted out of the night like a tall, impregnable fortress.
Some were grey-haired. Such traffic was perilous as it was ugly, for
somehow there were babies who were born blind because of it! That was
the sum of her knowledge. What followed the grave kisses shown in
pictures, what secret Romeo shared with Juliet, she did not know, she
would not know.

Twice she had refused to learn the truth. Once a schoolfellow named Anna
McLellan, a minister's daughter, a pale girl with straight, yellow hair
and full, whitish lips, had tried to tell her something queer about
married people as they were walking along Princes Street, and Ellen had
broken away from her and run into the Gardens. The trees and grass and
daffodils had seemed not only beautiful but pleasantly un-smirched by
the human story. And in the garret at home, in a pile of her father's
books, she had once found a medical volume which she knew from the words
on its cover would tell her all the things about which she was
wondering. She had laid her fingers between its leaves, but a shivering
had come upon her, and she ran downstairs very quickly and washed her
hands. These memories made her feel restless and unhappy, and she drove
her attention back to the platform and beautiful Mrs. Mark Lyle. But
there came upon her a fantasy that she was standing again in the garret
with that book in her hands, and that Mr. Philip was leaning against
the wall in that dark place beyond the window laughing at her, partly
because she was such a wee ninny not to know, and partly because when
she did know the truth there would be something about it which would
humiliate her. She cast down her eyes and stared at the floor so that
none might see how close she was to tears. She was a silly weak thing
that would always feel like a bairn on its first day at school; she was
being tormented by Mr. Philip. Even the very facts of life had been
planned to hurt her.

Oh, to be like that man from Rio! It was his splendid fate to be made
tall and royal, to be the natural commander of all men from the moment
that he ceased to be a child. He could captain his ship through the
steepest seas and fight the pirate frigate till there was nothing
between him and the sunset but a few men clinging to planks and a
shot-torn black flag floating on the waves like a rag of seaweed. For
rest he would steer to small islands, where singing birds would fly out
of woods and perch on the rigging, and brown men would come and run
aloft and wreathe the masts with flowers, and shy women with long,
loose, black hair would steal out and offer palm-wine in conches, while
he smiled aloofly and was gracious. It would not matter where he sailed;
at no port in the world would sorrow wait for him, and everywhere there
would be pride and honour and stars pinned to his rough coat by grateful
kings. And if he fell in love with a beautiful woman he would go away
from her at once and do splendid things for her sake. And when he died
there would be a lying-in-state in a great cathedral, where emperors and
princes would file past and shiver as they looked on the white, stern
face and the stiff hands clasped on the hilt of his sword, because now
they had lost their chief defender. Oh, he was too grand to be known, of
course, but it was a joy to think of him.

She looked across the hall at him. Their eyes met.


III

There had mounted in him, as he rode through the damp night on his
motor-cycle, such an inexplicable and intense exhilaration, that this
ugly hall which was at the end of his journey, with its stone corridors
in which a stream of people wearing mackintoshes and carrying umbrellas
made sad, noises with their feet, seemed an anti-climax. It was absurd;
that he should feel like that, for he had known quite well why he was
coming into Edinburgh and what a Suffrage meeting would be like. But he
was angry and discontented, and impatient that no deflecting adventure
had crossed his path, until he arrived at the door which led to the
half-crown seats and saw across the hall that girl called Ellen
Melville. The coarse light deadened the brilliance of her hair, so that
it might have been but a brightly coloured tam-o'-shanter she was
wearing; and now that that obvious beauty was not there to hypnotise the
eye the subtler beauty of her face and body got its chance. "I had
remembered her all wrong," he said to himself. "I was thinking of her as
a little girl, but she's a beautiful and dignified woman." And yet her
profile, which showed against the dark pillar at which she stood, was
very round and young and surprised, and altogether much more infantile
than the proud full face which she turned on the world. There was
something about her, too, which he could not identify, which made him
feel the sharp yet almost anguished delight that is caused by the
spectacle of a sunset or a foam-patterned breaking wave, or any other
beauty that is intense but on the point of dissolution.

The defile of some women on to the platform and a clamour of clapping
reminded him that he had better be getting to his seat, and he found
that the steward to whom he had given his ticket, a sallow young woman
with projecting teeth, was holding it close to her eyes with one hand
and using the other to fumble in a leather bag for some glasses which
manifestly were not there. He felt sorry for her because she was not
beautiful like Ellen Melville. Did she grieve at it, he wondered; or had
she, like most plain women, some scrap of comeliness, slender ankles or
small hands, which she pathetically invested with a magic quality and
believed to be more subtly and authentically beautiful than the specious
pictorial quality of other women? In any case she must often have been
stung by the exasperation of those at whom she gawked. He took the
ticket back from her and told her the number of his seat. It was far
forward, and as he sat down and looked up at the platform he saw how
vulgarly mistaken he had been in thinking--as just for the moment that
the sallow woman with the teeth had stooped and fumbled beside him he
certainly had thought--that the Suffrage movement was a fusion of the
discontents of the unfit. These people on the platform were real women.
The speaker who had risen to open the meeting was a jolly woman like a
cook, with short grey curly hair; and her red face was like the Scotch
face--the face that he had looked on many a time in all parts of the
world and had always been glad to see, since where it was there was
sense and courage. She was the image of old Captain Guthrie of the
_Gondomar_, and Dr. Macalister at the Port Said hospital, and that
medical missionary who had come home on the Celebes on sick leave from
Mukden. Harsh things she was saying--harsh things about the decent
Scotch folks who were shocked by the arrest of Suffragettes in London
for brawling, harsh suggestions that they would be better employed being
shocked at the number of women who were arrested in Edinburgh for
solicitation.

He chuckled to think that the Presbyterian woman had found out the
Presbyterian man, for he did not believe, from his knowledge of the
world, that any man was ever really as respectable as the Presbyterian
man pretended to be. The woman who sat beside her, who was evidently the
celebrated Mrs. Ormiston, was also a personage. She had not the same
stamp of personal worth, but she had the indefinable historic quality.
For no reason to be formulated by the mind, her face might become a flag
to many thousands, a thing to die for, and, like a flag, she would be at
their death a mere martial mark of the occasion, with no meaning of
pity.

The third woman he detested. Presumably she was at this meeting because
she was a loyal Suffragist and wanted to bring an end to the subjection
of woman, yet all the time that the other woman was speaking her
beautiful body practised fluid poses as if she were trying to draw the
audience's attention to herself and give them facile romantic dreams in
which the traditional relations of the sexes were rejoiced in rather
than disturbed. And she wore a preposterous dress. There were two ways
that women could dress. If they had work to do they could dress curtly
and sensibly like men and let their looks stand or fall on their
intrinsic merits; or if they were among the women who are kept to
fortify the will to live in men who are spent or exasperated by conflict
with the world, the wives and daughters and courtesans of the rich, then
they should wear soft lustrous dresses that were good to look at and
touch and as carefully beautiful as pictures. But this blue thing was
neither sturdy covering nor the brilliant fantasy it meant to be. It had
the spurious glitter of an imitation jewel. He knew he felt this
irritation about her partly because there was something base in him,
half innate and half the abrasion his present circumstances had rubbed
on his soul, which was willing to go on this stupid sexual journey
suggested by such vain, passive women, and the saner part of him was
vexed at this compliance; he thought he had a real case against her. She
was one of those beautiful women who are not only conscious of their
beauty but have accepted it as their vocation. She was ensphered from
the world of creative effort in the establishment of her own perfection.
She was an end in herself as no human, save some old saint who has made
a garden of his soul, had any right to be.

That little girl Ellen Melville was lovelier stuff because she was at
grips with the world. This woman had magnificent smooth wolds of
shoulders and a large blonde dignity; but life was striking sparks of
the flint of Ellen's being. There came before him the picture of her as
she had been that day in Princes Street, with the hairs straggling under
her hat and her fierce eyes holding back the tears, telling him
haughtily that a great cause made one indifferent to discomfort; and he
nearly laughed aloud. He looked across the hall at her and just caught
her switching her gaze from him to the platform. He felt a curious
swaggering triumph at the flight of her eyes.

But Mrs. Ormiston had begun to speak, and he, too, turned his attention
to the platform. He liked this old woman's invincible quality, the way
she had turned to and made a battering-ram of her own meagre middle-aged
body to level the walls of authority; and she reminded him of his
mother. There was no physical likeness, but plainly this woman also was
one of those tragically serious mothers in whose souls perpetual concern
for their children dwelt like a cloud. He thought of her as he had often
thought of his mother, that it was impossible to imagine her visited by
those morally blank moods of purely sensuous perception which were the
chief joy he had found in life. Such women never stood upright, lifting
their faces to the sunlight, smiling at the way of the wind in the
tree-tops; they seemed to be crouched down with ear to earth, listening
to the footsteps of the events which were marching upon their beloved.

The resemblance went no further than this spiritual attitude, for this
woman was second-rate stuff. Her beauty was somehow shoddy, her purple
gown the kind of garment that a clairvoyant might have worn, her
movements had the used quality of photographers' poses. Publicity had
not been able to change the substance of the precious metal of her soul,
but it had tarnished it beyond all remedy. She alluded presently to her
preposterously-named daughters, Brynhild, Melissa and Guendolen, and he
was reminded of a French family of musicians with whom he had travelled
on the steamer between Rio and Sao Paulo, a double-chinned swarthy
Madame and her three daughters, Céline, Roxane and Juliette, who sat
about on deck nursing musical instruments tied with grubby scarlet
ribbons, silent and dispirited, as though they were so addicted to
public appearance that they found their private hours an embarrassment.
But he remembered with a prick of compunction that they had made
excellent music; and that, after all, was their business in life. So
with the Ormistons. In the pursuit of liberty they had inadvertently
become a troupe; but they had fought like lions. And they were giving
the young that guarantee that life is really as fine as storybooks say,
which can only be given by contemporary heroism. Little Ellen Melville,
on the other side of the hall, was lifting the most wonderful face all
fierce and glowing with hero-worship. "That's how I used to feel about
Old Man Guthrie of the _Gondomar_ when I was seventeen," he thought.
"It's a good age...."

When he was seventeen.... He was not at all sure that those three years
he had spent at sea were not the best time of his life. It came back to
him, the salt enchantment of that time; the excitement in his heart, the
ironic serenity of the surrounding world, on that dawn when he stood on
the deck of his first ship as it sailed out of the Thames to the open
sea. The mouth of the river was barred by a rosy, drowsy sunrise; the
sky had lost its stars, and had blenched, and was being flooded by a
brave daylight blue; the water was changing from a sad silver width to a
sheet of white silk, creased with blue lines; the low hills on the
southern bank and the flat spit between the estuary and the Medway were
at first steamy shapes that might have drowned seamen's dreams of land,
but they took on earthly colours as he watched; and to the north Kerith
Island, that had been a blackness running weedy fingers out into the
flood, showed its farms and elms standing up to their middles in mist.
He went to the side and stared at the ridge of hills that lay behind the
island, that this picture should be clear in his mind at the last if the
storms should take him. There were the four crumbling grey towers of
Roothing Castle; and eastward there was Roothing Church, with its squint
spire and its sea-gnarled yews about it, and at its base the dazzling
white speck which he knew to be his father's tomb. He hated that he
should be able to see it even from here. All his life that mausoleum had
enraged him. He counted it a kind of cowardice of his father to have
died before his son was a man. He suspected him of creeping into his
coffin as a refuge, of wearing its lead as armour, from fear of his
son's revenges; and the choice of so public a sanctuary as this massive
tomb on the hillside was a last insolence.

Eastward, a few fields' length along the ridge, was the belvedere on his
father's estate. He had not looked at it for years, but from here it was
so little like itself that he could bear to let his eyes dwell on it. It
was built at the fore of a crescent-shaped plantation on the brow of the
hill, and the dark woods stretched away on each side of the temple like
great green wings spread by a small white bird. And eastward yet a mile
or so, at the end of a line of salt-stunted oaks, was the red block of
Yaverland's End. Under that thatch was his mother. She would be asleep
now. Nearly always now she dropped off to sleep before dawn. With a
constriction of the heart he thought of her as she would be looking now,
lying very straight in her narrow bed, one arm crooked behind the head
and the other rigid by her side, the black drift of her hair drawn
across her eyes like a mask and her uncovered mouth speaking very often.
Many of her nights were spent in argument with the dead. At the picture
he felt a rush of love that dizzied him, and he cursed himself for
having left her, until the serenity of the white waters and the limpid
sky imposed reason on his thoughts as it was imposing harmoniousness on
the cries of the seagulls and the shouts of the sailors. Then he
recognised the necessity of this adventure. It was his duty to her to go
out into the world and do great things. He had said so very definitely
to himself, and had turned back to his work with a scowl of resolution.
So that boy, thirteen years before....

He shivered and wished he had not thought of the time when he meant to
do great things, for this was one of the nights when he felt that he had
done nothing and was nothing. He saw his soul as something detached from
his body and inimical to it, an enveloping substance, thin as smoke and
acrid to the smell, which segregated him from the participation in
reality which he felt to be his due, and he changed his position, and
cleared his throat, and stared hard at the people round him and at the
woman on the platform in hopes that some arresting gesture might summon
him from this shadowy prison. But the audience sat still in a sheeplike,
grazing sort of attention, and Mrs. Ormiston continued to exercise her
distinguished querulousness on the subject of male primogeniture. So he
remained rooted in this oppressive sense of his own nothingness.

"Oh, come, I've had an hour or two!" he reassured himself. There were
those three days and nights when he stood at the wheel of the Father
Time, because the captain and every man who was wise about navigation
were dying in their bunks of New Guinea fever; days that came up from
the seas fresh as a girl from a bathe and turned to a torturing dome of
fire; nights when he looked up at the sky and could not tell which were
the stars and which the lights which trouble the eyes of sleep-sick
men. There was that week when he and Perez and the two French chemists
and the handful of loyal workmen held the Romanones Works against the
strikers. He was conscious that he had behaved well on these occasions
and that they had been full of beauty, but they had not nourished him.
They had ended when they ended. Such deeds gave a man nothing better
than the exultation of the actor, who loses his value and becomes a
suspended soul, unable to fulfil his function when the curtain falls.
"But you are condemning the whole of human action!" he expostulated with
himself. "Yes, I am condemning the whole of human action," he replied
tartly.

There remained, of course, his scientific work. That was indubitably
good. He had done well, considering he had not gone to South Kensington
till he was twenty and had broken the habit of study by a life of
adventure, simply because the idea of explosiveness had captured his
imagination. That rust is a slow explosion, that every movement is the
result of a physical explosion, that explosives are capricious as women
about the forces to which they yield, so that this one will only ignite
with heat and that only with concussion--these facts had from his
earliest knowledge of them been gilded with irrational delight, and it
had been no effort to him to work at the subject with an austere
diligence that had shown itself worth while in that last paper he had
read at the Paris Conference. That was a pretty piece of research. But
now for the first time he resented his chemistry work because it was of
no service to his personal life. Before, it had always seemed to him the
special dignity of his vocation that it could conduct its researches
without resorting to the use of humanity and that he could present his
results unsigned by his own personality. He had often pitied doctors,
who, instead of dealing with exquisitely consistent chemicals, have to
work on men and women, unselected specimens of the most variable of all
species, which was singularly inept at variating in the direction of
beauty; and it seemed miraculous that he could turn the yeasty workings
of his mind into cool, clear statements of hitherto unstated truth that
would in no way betray to those that read them that their maker was
lustful and hot-tempered and, about some things, melancholic. He had
felt Science to be so gloriously above life; to make the smallest
discovery was like hearing the authentic voice of God who is no man but
a Spirit.

But now none of these things mattered. He was caught in the net of life
and nothing that was above it was of any use to him; as well expect a
man who lies through the night with his foot in a man-trap to be
comforted by the beauty of the stars. The only God he could have any use
for would be the kind the Salvationists talk about, who goes about
giving drunken men an arm past the public-house and coming between the
pickpocket and Black Maria with a well-timed text. There was nothing in
Science that would lift him out of this hell of loneliness, this
conviction of impotence, this shame of achievementless maturity. He
perceived that he had really known this for a long time, and that it was
the meaning of the growing irritability which had of late changed his
day in the laboratory from the rapt, swift office of the mind it used to
be, to an interminable stretch of drudgery checkered with fits of rage
at faulty apparatus, neurotic moods when he felt unable to perform fine
movements, and desolating spaces when he stood at the window and stared
at the high grassy embankment which ran round the hut, designed to break
the outward force of any explosion that might occur, and thought grimly
over the commercial uses that were to be made of his work. What was the
use of sweating his brains so that one set of fools could blow another
set of fools to glory? Oh, this was hell!...

The detestable blonde was now holding the platform in attitudes such as
are ascribed to goddesses by British sculptors, and speaking with a
slow, pure gusto of the horrors of immorality. For a moment her
allusions to the wrongs of unmarried mothers made him think of the proud
but defeated poise of his mother's head, and then the peculiar calm,
gross qualities of her phrases came home to him. He wondered how long
she had been going on like this, and he stared round to see how these
people, who looked so very decent, whom it was impossible to imagine
other than fully dressed, were taking it. Without anticipation his eyes
fell on Ellen and found her looking very Scotch and clapping sturdily.
Of course it must be all right, since everything about her was all
right, but he searched this surprising gesture as though he were trying
to read a signal, till with a quick delight he realised that this was
just the final proof of how very much all right she was. Only a girl so
innocent that these allusions to sex had called to her mind no physical
presentations whatsoever could have stood there with perked head and
made cymbals of her hands. Evidently she did nothing by halves; her mind
was white as her hair was red.

He felt less appalled by this speech now that he saw that it was
powerless to wound simplicity, but he still hated it. It was doing no
good, because it was a part of the evil it attacked; for the spirit that
makes people talk coarsely about sex is the same spirit that makes men
act coarsely to women. It was not Puritanism at all that would put an
end to this squalor and cruelty, but sensuality. If you taught that
these encounters were degrading, then inevitably men treated the women
whom they encountered as degraded; but if you claimed that even the most
casual love-making was beautiful, and that a woman who yields to a man's
entreaty gave him some space of heaven, then you could insist that he
was under an obligation of gratitude to her and must treat her
honourably. That would not only change the character of immorality, but
would also diminish it, for men have no taste for multiplying their
responsibilities.

Besides, it was true. These things were very good. He had half forgotten
how good they were. The meeting became a babble in his ears, a
transparency of listening shapes before his eyes.... He was back in Rio;
back in youth. He was waiting with a fever in his blood at that dinner
at old Hermes Pessôa's preposterous house, that was built like--so far
as it was like anything else on earth--the Villa d'Este mingled with the
Alhambra. The dinner, considered as a matter of food, had come to an
end, and for some little time had been a matter of drink; most of the
guests had gathered in a circle at the head of the hall round fat old
Pessôa, who had sent a servant upstairs for a pair of tartan socks so
that he could dance the Highland fling. He had got up and strolled to
the other end of the room, where the great black onyx fireplace climbed
out of the light into the layer of gloom which lay beneath the ceiling
that here and there dripped stalactites of ornament down into the
brightness. Against the wall on each side of the fireplace there stood
six great chairs of cypress wood, padded with red Spanish leather that
smelt sweetly and because of its great age was giving off a soft red
dust. These chairs pleased him; they were the only old things in this
mad new house, in this mad new society. He had pulled one out and lain
back, feeling rather ill, because he had eaten nothing and his heart was
beating violently. He hated being there, but he had to make sure. Much
rather would he have been out in the gardens, standing beside one of
those magnolias, watching the stars travel across the bay. "Then
marriage is right," he said to himself. "Where there is real love one
wants to go to church first."

Others who had wearied of the party drifted down to this recess of
peace. An elderly Frenchman with a pointed black beard, and a slim, fair
English boy with tears on his long eyelashes, sat themselves down in two
of these great chairs, with a bottle of wine at their feet and one
glass, from which they drank alternately with an effect of exchanging
vows, while the boy whimpered some confession, sobbing that it would all
never have happened if he had still been with Father Errington of the
Sacred Heart in Liverpool, and the older man repeated paternally,
mystically, and yet with a purring satisfaction, "Little one, do not
grieve. It is always thus when one forgets the Church."

There came later another Frenchman, a fat and very drunken banker, who
sat down at his right and complained from time to time of the lack of
elegance in this debauchery. He wished that these people had left him
alone, and stared at the wall in front of him, where curtains of crimson
brocade and gold galoon hung undrawn between the lustred tiles and the
high windows, black with the outer night but streaked and oiled with
reflections of the inner feast. Opposite there hung a Bouguereau, which
irritated him--nymphs ought not to look as if they had come newly
unguented from a _cabinet de toilette_. Below it stood an immense
Cloisonné vase, about the neck of which was tied a scarlet silk
stocking. He remembered having seen it there on his last visit six
months before. She must have been an exceptionally careless lady. Out
here there were many ladies who were careless of their honour, but most
of them were careful enough about tangible possessions like silk
stockings. A fresh outburst in the babel at the other end of the room
did not make him turn round, though the French banker had cried in an
ecstasy, "_Tiens! c'est atroce!_" and had bounded up the hall. He sat
on, hating this ugly place of his delay, while the Frenchman and the boy
kept up an insincere, voluptuous whisper about God and the comfort of
the Mass....

At last he rose to his feet. It was a quarter to twelve, and time for
him to go. He went up the hall, treading on lobster claws and someone's
wig, and looking about him for a certain person. He could not see him
among the group of revellers that stood in the space before the large
folding-doors, and for a minute a hand closed over his heart as he
feared that for once the person whom he sought had gone home before
morning. But presently he saw a long chair by the wall, and on its
cushions a blotched face and a gross, full body. He bent over the chair
and whispered, "De Rojas, de Rojas!" But the fat man slept. Hatred
gushed up in him, and a joy that the night was secure, and he passed on
to the folding-doors. But from the little group that was gathered round
the table, which before the dinner had supported the Winged Victory that
now lay spread-eagled on the floor, there stepped Pessôa. He bade him
good-night and thanked him for a riotous evening, but perceived that
Pessôa was waving a cocked revolver at him and saying something about
Léonore. What could he be saying? It appeared incredible, even to-night,
that he should really be saying that every departing guest must kiss
Léonore's back and swear that it was the most beautiful back in Brazil.

He looked along the avenue of revellers that had turned grinning to see
how his English stiffness would meet the occasion, and saw poor Léonore.
She was sitting on the table, one hand holding her pink wrapper to her
breast and the other patting back a yawn, and her nightdress was pulled
down to her waist so that her back was bare. Such a broad, honest back
it was, for she was the thick type of Frenchwoman, and might have stood
as a model for Millet's "Angelus." She looked over her shoulder and
smiled at him benignantly, perplexedly, and he saw that she was unhappy.
They had fetched her down from her warm bed, whither doubtless she had
gone with hopes of having a good night's rest for once, since Hermes was
giving a stag-dinner. They had not even given her time to wipe off all
the cold cream, some of which lay in an ooze round her jaw and temples,
or to take the curl-papers out of her hair, which still sported some
white snippets of the _Jornal de Commercio_. She bore no malice, the
good soul was saying to herself, but once a woman is in her bed she
likes to stay there: still, men are men, and mad, so what can one
expect?

He would not treat her lightly, nor spoil his sense of dedication to one
woman. He flicked the revolver out of Pessôa's hand and flung it through
the nearest window. The thick glass took a little time to fall.

"My friends will wait on you in the morning," Pessôa had spouted, and he
had said the appropriate courteous things, and gone up to Léonore, and
kissed her hand and said something chaffing in her ear, at which she
smiled sleepily, and said in English, "Go on, you bad man!" She spoke so
slowly and so meaninglessly, as stupid people do when they speak a
foreign tongue, that the words seemed to be uttered by some lonely ghost
that had found a lodging in her broad mouth. Then the men fell back to
let him go out through the folding-doors, and he went out into the
Moorish arches of the entrance-hall, where Indian flunkeys in purple
livery gave him his coat and hat, and he set his back to this queer mass
of cupolas and towers, that radiated from its uncurtained windows rays
of light which were pollutions of the moonlight. He thought of that
blotched face, that gross, full body.... It was a night of strong
moonlight. He was walking along a dazzling white causeway edged, where
the wall cast its shadow, with a ribbon of blackness. Palms stood up
glittering, touched by the moon to something madder than their daylight
fantasy of form. The aluminium-painted railings in front of de Rojas'
villa gleamed like the spears of heroes. He stared between them at the
red façade; if she was a coward she would still be somewhere in there.
The thought struck him with terror. If she were not waiting for him the
moonlight would shatter and turn to darkness, the violence of his
heart-beat turn to stillness.

Now he had come to the Villa Miraflores. This was his house. Yet he
entered the gate like a thief, and crept along the shadow of the wall
that enclosed his own gardens. The magnolias stood blazing white on the
lawns, the stiff scarlet poinsettias twitched resentfully under the
poising fireflies' weight, and from the dark geraniums scent rose like a
smoke. He would have liked to go to her with an armful of flowers, but
he did not dare to go out into the light. He passed the door that led
from his to de Rojas' garden, which had been made when a father and son
had been tenants of the two houses, and which had never been blocked up
because de Rojas and he were such good neighbours. If it had not been
unlocked to-night, if the marble summerhouse were empty.... He stood in
the pillared portico and did not dare go in. He thought of the temple,
not so very much unlike this, on a far-off Essex hillside, where his
mother used to meet his father; and somehow this made him feel that if
Mariquita had failed him it would be a bitter shame and dishonour to
him. Very slowly, rehearsing cruel things that he would say to her
to-morrow, he opened the door and let the moonbeams search the
summerhouse. It showed a huddled figure that wailed a little as it saw
the light. He shut the door and moved into the darkness, taking his
woman in his arms, finding her lips....

It had all gone. He could remember nothing of it. He could remember
nothing of the joy that had thralled him for two years, that by its
ending had desolated him for two more and alienated him from women. He
knew as a matter of historical fact that he had been her lover, but it
meant no more to him than his knowledge that Antony had once loved
Cleopatra and Nelson Lady Hamilton; of the quality of her kisses, the
magic that must have filled these hours, he could recollect nothing.
Perhaps it was not fair to blame her for that. Perhaps it was not her
fault but the fault of Nature, who is so determined that men shall go
on love-making that she makes the delights of love the least memorable
of all. But it was her fault that she had given him nothing spiritual to
remember. When he came to think of it, she had hardly ever said anything
that one could carry away with one. She was one of those women who moan
a lot, and one cannot get any solid satisfaction out of repeating a moan
to oneself. He grinned as he thought of the alarm of his laboratory boy
if he should ever try in some cheerless stretch of his work to remind
himself of Mariquita by saying over to himself her characteristic moan.
Nothing she had ever said or done when they were lovers was half so real
to him as the tears she shed when she cast him off because the priest
had told her that she must; when she broke the tie between them with a
blank dismissal which, if it had been given by a man to a woman, these
Suffragettes would have called a Vile betrayal.

He could remember well enough his rage when he took her to him in that
last embrace and she would not give him both her hands, because in one
she held the ebony cross of her rosary, to make her strong to do this
unnatural thing. Well, perhaps it was natural enough that that hour
should seem most real to him, for it was then that he had found out
their real relationship. To him it had seemed as if they were two
children wandering in the unfriendly desert that is life, comforting
each other with kisses, finding in their love a refuge from coldness and
unkindness. But in her fear he perceived that she had never been his
comrade. She had thought of him as an external power, like the Church,
who told her to do things, and in the end the choice had been for her
not between a dear and pitied lover and a creed, but between two
tyrants; and since one tyrant threatened damnation while the other only
promised love, a sensible woman knew which to choose. All he had thought
of her had been an illusion. The years he had given to his love for her
were as wasted as if he had spent them in drunkenness or in prison.

Oh, women were the devil! All except his mother. They were the clumsiest
of biological devices, and as they handed on life they spoiled it. They
stood at the edge of the primeval swamps and called the men down from
the highlands of civilisation and certain cells determined upon
immortality betrayed their victims to them. They served the seed of
life, but to all the divine accretions that had gathered round it, the
courage that adventures, the intellect that creates, the soul that
questions how it came, they were hostile. They hated the complicated
brains that men wear in their heads as men hated the complicated hats
that women wear on their heads; they hated men to look at the stars
because they are sexless; they hated men who loved them passionately
because such love was tainted with the romantic and imaginative quality
that spurs them to the folly of science and art and exploration. And yet
surely there were other women. Surely there was a woman somewhere who,
if one loved her, would prove not a mere possession who would either
bore one or go and get lost just when one had grown accustomed to it,
but would be an endless research. A woman who would not be a mere film
of graceful submissiveness but real as a chemical substance, so that one
could observe her reactions and find out her properties; and like a
chemical substance, irreducible to final terms, so that one never came
to an end. A woman who would get excited about life as men do and could
laugh and cheer. A woman whose beauty would be forever significant with
speculation. He perceived with a shock that he was thinking of this
woman not as one thinks of a hypothetical person, but with the glowing
satisfaction which one feels in recounting the charms of a new friend.
He was thinking of some real person. It was someone he had met quite
lately, someone with red hair. He was thinking of that little Ellen
Melville.

He looked across the hall at her. Their eyes met.


IV

When he went over to her side at the end of the meeting she glowered at
him and said, "Oh, it's you!" as if it was the first time she had set
eyes upon him that evening; but he knew that that was just because she
was shy, and he shook hands rather slowly and looked her full in the
face as he said he had liked the speeches so that she might see she
couldn't come it over _him_. And he asked if he might see her home.

She swallowed, and pushed up her chin, as if trying to rise to some
tremendous occasion, and then pulled herself together, and with an air
of having found a loophole of escape, enquired, "But where are you
stopping?" and when he made answer that he was staying at the Caledonian
Hotel, she exclaimed in a tone of relief, "Ah, but I live at Hume Park
Square out by the Meadows!"

"I want to see you home," he said inflexibly.

"Oh, if you want the walk!" she answered resignedly. "Though you've a
queer taste in walks, for the streets are terrible underfoot. But I
suppose you're shut up all day at your work. You'll just have to sit
down and wait till I've checked the literature and handed in the
takings. I doubt yon stout body in plum-coloured velveteen who bought
R.J. Campbell on the Social Evil with such an air of condescension has
paid me with a bad threepenny-bit. Aren't folks the limit?" She was so
full of bitterness against the fraudulent body in plum-coloured
velveteen that she forgot her shyness and looked into his eyes to appeal
for sympathy. "Ah, well!" she said, stiffening again, "I'll be back in a
minute."

He leaned against a pillar and waited. The hall became empty, became
melancholy; mysteriously and insultingly its emptiness seemed to
summarise the proceedings that had just ended. It was as if the place
were waiting till he and the few darkly dressed women who still stood
about chewing the speeches were gone, and would then enact a satire on
the evening; the rows of seats which turned their polished brown
surfaces towards the platform with an effect of mock attentiveness would
jeeringly imitate the audience, the chairs that had been left
higgledy-piggledy on the platform would parody the speakers. And
doubtless, if there is a beneficent Providence that really picks the
world over for opportunities of kindliness, halls which are habitually
let out for political meetings are allowed means of relieving their
feelings which are forbidden to other collections of bricks and mortar.
But he mustn't say that to Ellen. To her political meetings were plainly
sacred rituals, and in any case he was not sure whether she laughed at
things.

She called to him from the doorway, "I'm through, Mr. Yaverland!" She
was wearing a tam-o'-shanter and a mackintosh, which she buttoned right
up to her chin, and she looked just a brown pipe with a black knob at
the top, a mere piece of plumbing. He thought it very probable that
never before in the history of the human race had a beautiful girl
dressed herself so unbecomingly. But that she had done so seemed so
peculiarly and deliciously amusing that as he walked by her side he
could hardly keep from looking at her smilingly in a way that would have
puzzled and annoyed her. And outside the hall, when they found that the
mist, like a sour man who will not give way to his temper but keeps on
dropping disagreeable remarks, was letting down just enough of itself to
soak Edinburgh without giving it the slightest hope that it would rain
itself out by the morning, he caught again this queer flavour of her
that in its sharpness and its freshness reminded him of the taste of
fresh celery. He asked her if she hadn't an umbrella, and she replied,
"I've no use for umbrellas; I like the feel of the rain on my face, and
I see no sense in paying three-and-eleven for avoiding a positive
pleasure."

By that time Ellen was almost sure that he was smiling to himself in the
darkness, and was miserable. It was a silly, homely thing to have said.
"Ah, what for can he be wanting to see me home?" she thought helplessly.
"He is so wonderful. But then, so am I! So am I!" And as they went
through the dark tangle of small streets she turned loose on him her
enthusiasm for the meeting, so that he might see that women also have
their serious splendours. Hadn't it been a magnificent meeting? Wasn't
Mrs. Ormiston a grand speaker? Could he possibly, if he cared anything
for honesty, affirm that he had ever heard a man speaker who came within
a hundred miles of her? And wasn't Mrs. Mark Lyle beautiful, and didn't
she remind him of the early Christian martyrs? Didn't he think the women
who were forcibly fed were heroines, and didn't he think the Liberal
Governments were the most abominable bloodstained tyrants of our times?
"Though, mind you, I'd be with the Liberal Party myself if they'd only
give us the vote." It was rather like going for a walk with a puppy
barking at one's heels, but he liked it. Through her talk he noticed
little things about her. She had had very little to do with men,
perhaps she had never walked with a man before, for she did not
naturally take the wall when they crossed the road. Her voice was soft
and seemed to cling to her lips, as red-haired people's voices often do.
Her heels did not click on the pavements; she walked noiselessly, as
though she trod on grass.

Suddenly she clapped her bare hands. "Ah, if you're a sympathiser you
must join the Men's League for Women's Suffrage. You will? Oh, that's
fine! I've never brought in a member yet...." She paused, furious with
herself, for she was so very young that she hated ever to own that she
was doing anything for the first time. It was her aim to appear
infinitely experienced. Usually, she thought, she succeeded.

To end the silence, so that she might say something to which he could
listen, he said, "I was converted long before to-night, you know. My
mother's keen on the movement."

"Is she?" She searched her memory. "Yet I don't know the name. Does she
speak, or organise?"

"Oh, she doesn't do anything in public. She lives very quietly in a
little Essex village," he answered, speaking with an involuntary
gravity, an effect of referring to pain, that made her wonder if his
mother was an invalid. She hoped it was not so, for if Mrs. Yaverland
was anything like her son it was terrible to think of her lying in the
stagnant air of ill-health among feeding-cups and medicine bottles and
weaktasting foods. The lot of the sick and the old, whom she conceived
as exceptional people specially scourged, drew tears from her in the
darkness, and she looked across the road at the tall wards which the
infirmary thrust out like piers from its main corridor. "Ah, the poor
souls in there!" she breathed, looking up at the rows of windows which
disclosed the dreadful pale wavering light that lives in sick-rooms. "It
makes you feel guilty, being happy when those poor souls are lying there
in pain." Yaverland did not seek to find out why she had said it, any
more than he asked himself how this night's knowledge of her was to be
continued, or what she meant the end of it to be, though he was aware
that those questions existed. He simply noted that she was being happy.
Yes, they were curiously happy for two people who hardly knew each
other, going home in the rain.

They were passing down the Meadow Walk now, between trees that were like
shapes drawn on blotting-paper and lamps that had the smallest scope.
"Edinburgh's a fine place," he said. "It can handle even an asphalt
track with dignity."

"Oh, a fine place," she answered pettishly, "if you could get away from
it." He felt faintly hostile to her adventurousness. Why should a woman
want to go wandering about the world?

From a dream of foreign countries she asked suddenly, "How long were you
a sailor?"

"Three years. From the time I was seventeen till I was twenty."

Then it struck him: "How did you know I'd been a sailor?"

"I just knew," she said, with something of a sibylline air. Evidently he
was thinking how clever it was of her to have guessed it, and indeed she
thought it was a remarkable example of her instinctive understanding of
men. And Yaverland, on his side, was letting his mind travel down a
channel of feeling which he knew to be silly and sentimental, like a man
who drinks yet another glass of wine though he knows it will make his
head swim, and was wondering if this clairvoyance meant that there was a
mystic tie between them. But it soon flashed over Ellen's mind that the
reason why she thought that he had been a sailor was that he had looked
like one when he came into the hall in his raindashed oilskins. She
wondered if she ought to tell him so. An unhappy silence fell upon her,
which he did not notice because he was thinking how strange it was that
even in this black lane, between blank walls through which they were
passing, when he could not see her, when she was not saying anything,
when he could get no personal intimation of her at all except that
softness of tread, it was pleasant to be with her. But he began to feel
anxiety because of the squalor of the district. This must be a mews, for
there were sodden shreds of straw on the cobblestones, and surely that
was the thud of sleeping horses' hooves that sounded like the blows of
soft hammers on soft anvils behind the high wooden doors. If she lived
near here she must be very poor. But without embarrassment she turned
to him in the shadow of a brick wall surmounted by broken hoarding and
pointed down a paved entry to a dark archway pierced in what seemed, by
the light that shone from a candle stuck in a bottle at an uncurtained
window, to be a very mean little house. "The Square's through here," she
said. "Come away in and I'll find you a membership form for the Men's
League...."

Beyond the archway lay the queerest place. It was a little box-like
square, hardly forty paces across, on three sides of which small squat
houses sat closely with a quarrelling air, as if each had to broaden its
shoulders and press out its elbows for fear of being squeezed out by its
neighbours and knocked backwards into the mews. They sent out in front
of them the slimmest slices of garden which left room for nothing but a
paved walk from the entry and a fenced bed in the middle, where a
lamp-post stood among some leggy laurels, which the rain was shaking as
a terrier shakes a rat. Huddled houses and winking lamp and agued
bushes, all seemed alive and second cousins to the goblins. On the
fourth side were railings that evidently gave upon some sort of public
park, for beyond them very tall trees which had not been stunted by
garden soil sent up interminable stains on the white darkness, and
beneath their drippings paced a policeman, a black figure walking with
that appearance of moping stoicism that policemen wear at night. He,
too, participated in the fantasy of the place, for it seemed possible
that he had never arrested anybody and never would; that his sole
business was to keep away bad dreams from the little people who were
sleeping in these little houses. They were probably poor little people,
for poverty keeps early hours, and in all the square there was but one
lighted window. And that he perceived, as he got his bearings, was in
the house to which Ellen was leading him down the narrowest garden he
had ever seen, a mere cheese straw of grass and gravel. It was a corner
house, and of all the houses in the square it looked the most put upon,
the most relentlessly squeezed by its neighbours; yet Ellen opened the
door and invited him in with something of an air.

"It's very late," he objected, but she had cried into the darkness,
"Mother, I've brought a visitor!" and an inner door opened and let out
light, and a voice that was as if dusk had fallen on Ellen's voice said,
"What's that you say, Ellen?"

"I've brought a visitor, mother," she repeated. "Go on in; I'll not be a
minute finding the form.... Mother, this is Mr. Yaverland, the client
from Rio. He says he'll join the Men's League and I'm just going to find
him a membership form."

She went to a desk in the corner of the room and dashed it open, and
fell to rummaging in a pile of papers with such noisy haste that he knew
she was afraid she ought not to have asked him in and was trying to
carry it off under a pretence of urgency; and he found himself facing a
little woman who wore a shawl in the low-spirited Scotch way, as if it
were a badge of despondency, and who was saying, "Good evening, Mr.
Yaverland. Will you not sit down? I'm ashamed the hall gas wasn't lit."
A very poor little woman, this mother of Ellen's. The hand that shook
his was so very rough, and at the neck of her stuff gown she wore a
large round onyx brooch, a piece of such ugly jewellery as is treasured
by the poor, and the sum of her tentative expressions was surely that
someone had rudely taken something from her and she was too
gentle-spirited to make complaint. She was like some brown bird that had
not migrated at the right season of the year, and had been surprised as
well as draggled by the winter, chirping sweetly and sadly on a bare
bough that she could not have believed such things of the weather. Yet
once she must have been like Ellen; her hair was the ashes of such a
fire as burned over Ellen's brows, and she had Ellen's short upper lip,
though of course she had never been fierce nor a swift runner, and no
present eye could guess if she had ever been a focus of romantic love.
The aged are terrible--mere heaps of cinders on the grass from which
none can tell how tall the flames once were or what company gathered
round them.

She struck him as being very old to be Ellen's mother, for when he had
been seventeen his mother had still been a creature of brilliant eyes
and triumphant moments, but perhaps it was poverty that had made her so
dusty and so meagre. "Yes, they are very poor," he groaned to himself.
The room was so low, the fireplace so small a hutch of cast-iron, the
wallpaper so yellow and so magnified a confusion of roses, and so
unsuggestive of summer; the fatigued brown surface of the leather
upholstery was coming away in strips like curl-papers; there were big
steel engravings of Highland cattle enjoying domestic life under adverse
climatic conditions, and Queen Victoria giving religion a leg up by
signing things in the presence of bishops and handing niggers
Bibles--engravings which they obviously didn't like, since here and
there were little home-made pictures made out of quite good plates torn
from art magazines, but which they had kept because no secondhand
dealers would give any money for them, and the walls had to be covered
somehow. And there was nothing pretty anywhere.

The little brown bird of a woman was asking in a kind, interested way if
he were a stranger to Edinburgh, and he was telling her how long he had
been in Broxburn and what he did there, and when he mentioned cordite
she made the clucking, concerned noise that elderly ladies always made
when they heard that his work lay among high explosives. And Ellen's
rootings in the untidy desk culminated in a sudden sweep of mixed paper
stuff on to the floor, at which Mrs. Melville remonstrated, "Ellen, it
beats me how you can be so neat with your work and such a bad, untidy
girl about the house!" and Ellen exclaimed, "Och, drat the thing, it
must be upstairs!" and ran out of the room with her face turned away
from them.

They heard a clatter on the staircase, followed by violent noises
overhead as if a chest was being dashed open and the contents flung on
the floor. "Dear, dear!" ejaculated Mrs. Melville adoringly. She began
to look him over with a maternal eye. "For all you've been six months in
the North, you've not lost your tan," she said.

"Well, I had a good baking in Spain and South America," he answered.
Their eyes met and they smiled. In effect she had said, "Well, you are a
fine fellow," and he had answered, "Yes, perhaps I am."

"I like a man to travel," she went on, tossing her head and looking
altogether fierce Ellen's mother. "I never go into the bank without
looking at the clerks and thinking what sumphs they are, sitting on
their high stools." She seemed to have come to some conclusion to treat
him as one of the family, for she retrieved her knitting from the
mantelpiece and turned her armchair more cosily to the fire, and began a
sauntering of the tongue that he knew meant that she liked him. "I hope
you don't think Ellen a wild girl, running about to these meetings all
alone. It's not what I would like, of course, but I say nothing, for
this Suffrage business keeps the bairn amused. I'm not much of a
companion to her. I'm getting on, you see. She was my youngest."

"The youngest!" he exclaimed. "I didn't know. I thought she was an only
child." He flushed at this betrayal of the interest he felt in her.

"She's that now. But I had three others. They all died before Ellen was
born. They sickened for influenza on a bad winter voyage my husband and
I made from America." She mourned over some remote grievance as well as
the sorrow. "One was a boy. He was just turned five. That's a snapshot
of Ronnie on the mantelpiece. A gentleman on board took it the day he
was taken ill."

He stood up to look at it. "He must have been a jolly little chap."

"He was Ellen's build and colour, and he was wonderfully clever for his
age. He would have been something out of the ordinary if he had lived. I
knew it wasn't wise to sail just then. I said to wait till the New
Year...." Her voice changed, and he perceived that she was making use of
the strange power to carry on disputes with the dead which is possessed
by widows. The tone was a complete reconstruction of her marriage. There
was a girn in it, as if she had learned to expect contradiction and
disregard as the habitual response to all her remarks, and at the back
of that a terror, far more dignified than the protest to which it gave
birth, at the dreadful things she knew would happen because she was
disregarded, and a small, weak, guilty sense that she had not made her
protest loudly and, perhaps, cleverly enough. Life had behaved very
meanly to this woman. When she was young and sweet her sweetness had
been violated and crushed by something harsh and reckless; and now she
was not sweet any longer, but just a wisp of an old woman, and nobody
would ever bother about her again; and life gives one no second chances.
Yaverland lamented, as Ellen had done, the fate of those exceptional
people who are old or not perfectly happy.

"You're not Irish, are you?" she enquired seriously; and immediately he
knew that her husband had been Irish, and that she held a naïve and
touching belief that no one but a man of his race would have behaved as
he had done, that all other men would have been kind. Particularly now
that Ellen was growing such a big girl she didn't want any Irish coming
into this little home, where at least there was peace and quiet.

"No," he said reassuringly, "I'm not Irish. My people have been in Essex
for hundreds of years. I'm afraid," he added, for so evident was it that
most of her fellow-creatures had dealt cheatingly with her that decent
people felt a special obligation to treat her honestly, "my grandmother
was an O'Connor, but she was half French. Lord, what's that?"

It seemed as if a heavy sea was breaking on the back of the house as on
a sea-wall. The gasolier trembled, the floor throbbed, the little goblin
dwelling pulsated as if it were alarmed. Only the continued calm of Mrs.
Melville at her knitting and the coarse threads of music running through
the sound persuaded him that this riot was the result of some genial
human activity.

"Oh, I suppose you notice it, being a stranger," said Mrs. Melville. "We
hardly hear it now. You see, they've turned the Wesleyan Hall that backs
on to the Square into a dancing-hall, and this is the grand noise they
make with their feet. It's not a nice place. 'Gentlemen a shilling,
ladies invited,' it says outside. Still, we don't complain, for the
noise is nothing noticeable and it reduces the rent."

This was a masterpiece of circumstance. By nothing more than a thin wall
which shook to music was this little home divided from a thick-aired
place where ugly people lurched against each other lustfully; and yet it
had been made an impregnable fort of loveliness and decency by this
virtuous ageing woman, whose slight silliness was but a holy abstinence,
a refusal to side with common sense because that was so often concerned
in cruel decisions, by this girl who was so young that it seemed at the
sight of her as if time had turned back again and earth rolled unstained
by history, and so beautiful that it seemed as if henceforth eternity
could frame nothing but happiness. The smile of Ellen had made a faery
ring where heavy-footed dancers could not enter; her gravity had made a
sanctuary as safe as any church crowned with a belfry and casketing the
Host. And he, participating in the safety of the place, pitied the men
behind the shaking wall, and all men over the world who had committed
themselves to that search for pleasure which makes joy inaccessible.
They had chosen frustration for their destiny. Because they desired some
ecstasy that would lighten the leaden substance of life they turned to
drunkenness, which did no more than jumble reality, steep the earth in
aniline dyes, tinge the sunset with magenta. Because they desired love
they sought out women who, although dedicated to sex, were sexually
cancelled by repeated use, like postage-stamps on a much re-directed
letter, who efficiently went through the form of passion, yet presented
it so empty of all exaltation that their lovers left them feeling as if
they were victims of a practical joke.

And here, not half a dozen yards from some of these seekers, was one who
could bring to these desires a lovelier death than they would meet on
the dirty bed of gratification or the hard pallet of renunciation.
Because the untouched truth about her could give ecstasy one would not
lose the power of seeing things as they are, and she made one forget the
usual sexual story. Although she was formed for love and the intention
of being her lover was now a fundamental part of him, she was so busy
with her voice and body in playing quaint variations on the theme of
herself that he did not mind how long might be the journey to their
marriage. She was more interesting than any other person or thing in the
world. She was going to have more interesting experiences; because her
unique simplicity comprehended a wild impatience with lies she would
have a claim on reality that would give her unprecedented wisdom. Now he
could understand why saints in their narrow cells despise sinners as
dull stay-at-homes.

And when she burst into the room again he saw that all he had been
thinking about her was true. It might be that everybody else on earth
would see her as nothing but a red-haired girl in an ill-fitting blue
serge dress with an appalling tartan silk vest, but still it was true.

"Here you are," she said, "you put your name _there_." She bent over him
as he wrote and wished she could put something on the form to show how
magnificent he was and what a catch she had made for the movement.

Well, there was no possible excuse for staying any longer, and the poor
old lady was yawning behind her knitting. He rose and said good-bye,
wondering as he spoke how he could make his entrance here again and how
he could break it to these women, who were like hardy secular nuns, that
he came for love. If this had been a Spanish or a Cariocan mother and
daughter how easy it would have been! The elder woman's eyes would have
crackled brightly among her wrinkles and she would have looked at her
daughter with the air of genial treachery which old women wear when they
contrive a young girl's marriage, and she would have dropped some subtle
hint at the next convenient assignation; and the girl herself would have
stood by like a dark living scythe in the Latin attitude of modesty,
very straight from the waist to the feet, but the shoulders bent as if
to hide the bosom and the head bowed, mysteriously intimating that she
knew nothing and yet could promise to submit to everything. But here was
Mrs. Melville saying something quite vague about hoping that he would
drop in if he was passing, and Ellen lifting to him a stubborn face that
warned him there would be a thousand resistances to overcome before she
would own herself a being accessible to passion. Yet this harsh
inexpertness about life was the essence that made these people
delightful to him. It was unreasonable, but it was true, that he adored
them because they were difficult.

"Ellen, run out and light the hall gas for Mr. Yaverland." And from the
courtesy in the tone and something gracious in Ellen's obedience he saw
that they were too poor to keep the gas burning in the hall all the
evening, and so the lighting of it ranked as a ceremonial for an
honoured guest. They were dear people.

As he buttoned his oilskins to the chin while Ellen stood ready to open
the front door he did not dare look at her because his stare would have
been so fixed and bright. He set his eyes instead on the engravings,
which for the most part represented Robert Burns as the Scotch like to
picture their national poet, with hair sleek and slightly waved like the
coat of a retriever hanging round a face oval and blank and sweet like a
tea-biscuit.

"You seem to admire Burns," he said.

"Me? No, indeed. Those are my grandmother's pictures. I think nothing of
the man. His intellectual content was miserably small."

"That's a proposition he never butted up against--"

"What?"

"A woman who said that his intellectual content was miserably small.
You're one of Time's revenges...."

She didn't follow his little joke, although she smiled faintly with
pleasure at being called a woman, because she was distressfully
wondering if her reluctance to let him go was a premonition of some
disaster that lurked for him outside. She so strangely wanted him to
stay. She could actually have wound her arms about him, which was a
queer enough thing to want to do, as if the feelers of some
nightmare-crawling horned beast were twitching for him in the darkness
beyond the door. This inordinate emotion must have some meaning, and it
could have none other than that Great Granny Macleod had really had
second sight, and she had inherited it; it was warning her that
something dreadful was going to happen to him on his way to the hotel.
"Well, if I see anything in the papers to-morrow morning about a big man
being run down by a motor-car in the fog, I'll know there's something in
the supernatural," said the cool elf that dwelt in her head. But agony
transfixed her like an arrow because her thought reminded her that this
glorious being whose eyes blazed with serenity as other people's eyes
blaze only with rage, was susceptible to pain and would some day be
subject to death.

"Good-night," he said. He did not know why her breath had failed and why
she had raised her hand to her throat, but he knew that his presence was
doing marvellous things to her, and he was sure that they were
beautiful things, for everything that passed between them from now on
till the end of time would be flawlessly beautiful. "Good-night," he
said again, and stopped when he had gone a yard or two down the path
simply that they might speak to each other again. "You must shut the
door. You're letting in the rain and cold."

"No," she said dreamily, sleepily, and slowly closed the door.

He went on in the impatient mood of a man who has been secretly married
and must leave his wife in a poor lodging until he can disclose his
marriage.


CHAPTER III

I


When she opened the door with her latchkey on Monday evening, late from
a class in Advanced Commercial Spanish at Skerry's College, and sat down
in the hall to take her boots off, her mother cried out from the
kitchen, "Ellen, I've got the grandest surprise for you!"

These fanciful women! "And what's that?" she cried back tolerantly,
though the dark thoughts buzzed about her head like bees. She thought
she could feel better if she could only tell someone how Mr. Philip had
sat by her fire like a nasty wee black imp and said that awful thing.
But she must not tell her mother, who would only be fretted by it and
ask like a little anxious mouse, "You're sure you've not said anything,
dear? You're sure you've been a careful girl with your work, dear?" and
would brace herself with heartrending bravery to meet this culminating
misfortune. "Ah, well, dear, if you do have to look round for a new post
we must just manage." So she must keep silent and seem cheerful, though
that memory was rolling round and round in her brain like a hot marble.

"Away into the dining-room and see what it is," said Mrs. Melville,
coming out with the cocoa-jug in her hand. She had put on her brighter
shawl, the tartan one.

"You look as we'd been left a fortune," said Ellen.

"No fear of that. If your grand-aunt Watson remembers you with a hundred
pounds that's all we can expect. But there's something fine waiting for
you. Finish taking off that muddy boot before you come. Now!"

She flung open the door.

"Roses!" breathed Ellen. "Mother--roses!"

On the table between the loaf and the syrup-tin there was a jug filled
with red and white roses; on the mantelpiece three vases that had long
held nothing but dust now held roses, and doubtless felt a resurrection
joy; and on the book-cases roses lifted stiff stems from two jam-jars.
Ellen, being a slave of the eye, grew so pale and so gay at the sight of
the flowers that almost everybody in the world except one man would have
jeered at her, and she put her arms round her mother's neck and kissed
her, though she knew the gift could not have come from her. The flowers
were beautiful in so many ways. They were beautiful just as roses,
because "roses" is such a lovely word; as clear patches of red and white
because red and white are such lovely colours; and because a red rose
has so strange an air of complicity in human passion, and the first
white rose was surely grown from some phosphorescent cutting that
dropped through the starlight from the moon. And these were the furled,
attenuated blooms of winter, born out of due season and nurtured in
stoked warmth, like the delicate children of kings, and emanating a
faint reluctant scent like the querulous sweet smile of an invalid.

They looked hard and cold, as if they had protected themselves against
the cold weather by imitating the substance of precious stones.

They were an orgy and a prophecy, these flowers. They were an outburst
of unnecessary loveliness in a house that did not dare open its doors to
anything but necessities; and they showed, since they blossomed here
though the rain roared down outside, that the world was not after all an
immutably unpleasant place, and could be turned upside down very
enjoyably if one had the money to buy things. It really was worth while
struggling to get on....

"Mother, where did they come from?"

"Ah!" said Mrs. Melville waggishly.

"Och, tell me! I don't imagine you went out and pawned the family
jewels. Och, do tell me! Come on!"

"A boy brought them up from Gilbey, the florist's, this morning. I could
have fallen down when I opened the door. And the wee brat of a boy tried
to convey to me that he wasn't used to coming to such a place. He wore a
look like a missionary in Darkest Africa. They were left for Miss
Melville, mind you. Not for your poor old mother. And they're from Mr.
Yaverland. Yon's his card sticking up against your grandmother on the
mantelpiece."

Ellen's hands, outspread over the roses, dropped to her side.

"I would have thought he had more sense," she said sulkily. "If he'd
money to burn he should have sent this lot to the infirmary."

"Och, Ellen, are you not pleased?"

"What's the man thinking of to fill us up with flowers as if we were an
Episcopal church on Easter Sunday?"

"Ellen, you've no notion of manners. Gentlemen often send flowers to
ladies they admire. When your Aunt Bessie and I were girls many's the
fine present of flowers we got from officers at the Castle."

"I've neither time nor taste for such things. It makes me feel like a
hospital. He'll be sending us new-laid eggs and lint bandages next. The
man's mad."

"Ellen, you're a queer girl," complained. Mrs. Melville. "If this
argy-bargying about votes for women makes you turn up your nose at bonny
flowers that a decent fellow sends you I'm sorry for you--it's just
tempting Providence to scorn good mercies like this. I'll away and take
the fish-pie out of the oven."

It was strange that as soon as her mother had left the room she began to
feel differently about the roses. Of course they were very beautiful;
and they were contenting in a quite magic way, for besides satisfying
her longing for pretty things, they seemed to have deprived of urgency
all her other longings, even including her desire for a vote, for
eminence of some severe sort, for an income of three hundred pounds a
year (which was the most she believed a person with a social conscience
could enjoy), for a perpetual ticket for the Paterson Concerts at the
MacEwan Hall, and for perfect self-possession. She felt as if these
things were already hers, or as if they were coming so certainly that
she need not fret about them any more than one frets about a parcel that
one knows has been posted, or concerning some desires, as if it did not
matter so much as she had thought whether she got them or not.
Especially that dream of being one of a company of men and women whose
bodies should be grave as elms with dignity and whose words should be
bright as butterflies with wit struck her as being foolish. It was as
idle as wanting to be born in the days of Queen Elizabeth. What she
really wanted was a friend. She had felt the need of one since Rachael
Wing went to London. Surely Richard Yaverland meant to be her friend,
since he sent flowers to her. But she wished the gift could have been
made secretly, and if he came to pay a visit she should be quite alone.
For no reason that she could formulate, the thought of even her mother
setting eyes on them together seemed a threat of disgrace. She wished
that they could be standing side by side at the fire in that five
minutes when it is sheer extravagance to light the gas but so dark that
one may stare as one cannot by day, so that she might look at what the
driving flamelight showed of his black, sea-roughened magnificence. At
her perfect memory of him she felt a rush of exhilaration which left her
confused and glad and benevolent.

"Mother, dear," she said, for Mrs. Melville had come back with the
fish-pie, and was bidding her with an offended briskness to sit forward
and eat her meal while it was hot, "they're the loveliest things. I
can't think what for I was so cross."

"Neither can I. There's so little bonny comes our way that I do think we
might be grateful when we get a treat."

"I'm sorry. I can't think what came over me."

"Never mind. But, you know, you're sometimes terribly like your father.
You must fight against it."

They sat down to supper, looking up from their food at the roses.

"Mother, the gas is awful bad for them. Carbonic acid is just murderous
to flowers."

"I was thinking that myself. It was well known that gas was bad for
flowers even when I was young, though we didn't talk about carbonic
acid. But if you don't see them by gaslight you'll never see them, for
it's dark by five. They must fall faster than they would have done."

"Och, no! I'd rather you had the pleasure of them by day, and let the
poor things last. I must content myself with a look at them at
breakfast."

"Nonsense! They're your flowers, lassie. But do you not think it would
do if we brought in the two candles and turned out the gas? It'll be a
bit dark, but it isn't as if there were many bones in the fish-pie."

And that is what they did. It was a satisfactory arrangement, for then
there was a bright soft light on the red and white petals, and a drapery
of darkness about the mean walls of the room, and a thickening of the
atmosphere which hid the archness on the older woman's face, so that the
girl dreamed untormented and without knowing that she dreamed.

"Ah, well!" sighed Mrs. Melville after a silence, with that air of irony
which she was careful to impart to her sad remarks, as if she wanted to
remove any impression that she respected the fate that had assailed her.
"I don't know how many years it is since I sat down with roses on the
table."

"I never have before," said Ellen.


II

It was indeed much more as the friend that Ellen wanted than as the
declared lover he had intended to be that Yaverland came to Hume Park
Square on Saturday in answer to the letter of thanks which, after the
careful composition of eight drafts, she had sent him. All week he had
meant to ask her to marry him at the first possible moment. By day, when
the thought of her rushed in upon him like a sweet-smelling wind every
time he lifted his mind from his work, and by night, when she stood
red-gold and white on every wall of his room in the darkness, it grew
more and more incredible that he could meet her and not tell her that he
wanted to spend all the rest of his life with her. He felt ashamed that
he was not her husband, and at the back of his mind was a confused
consciousness of inverted impropriety, as if continuance in his present
course would bring upon him denunciations from the pulpit for living in
open chastity apart from a woman to whom he was really married. There
was, too, a strange sense of a severer guilt, as if by not letting his
love for her have its way he was committing the crime a scientific man
commits when he fails to communicate the result of a valuable research.
Even when he went out to mount his motor-cycle for the ride to Edinburgh
he meant to force on her at once as much knowledge of his love as her
youth could hold.

But going down the garden he met the postman, who gave him a letter;
and before he opened it it checked his enterprise. For the address was
in his mother's handwriting, and though it was still black and
exquisite, like the tracery of bare tree-boughs against the sky, it was
larger than usual, and he had often before noticed that she wrote like
that only when her eyes had been strained by one of her bouts of
sleeplessness. "Why doesn't she go to a doctor and get him to give her
something for it?" he asked himself impatiently, annoyed at the casting
of this shadow on his afternoon; but it struck him what a lovely and
characteristic thing it was that, though his mother had suffered great
pain from sleeplessness for thirty years, she had never bought peace
with a drug. Nothing would make her content to tamper with reality. He
found, too, in her letter a phrase that bore out his suspicion, a
complaint of the length of the winter, a confessed longing for his
return in the New Year, which was a breach of her habitual pretence,
which never took him in for an instant and which she kept up perhaps for
that very reason, that she did not care when she saw him again.

"Oh, God, she must be going through it!" he muttered. He could see her
as she would be at this hour, sitting at the wide window in her room,
which she kept uncurtained so that the Thames estuary and the silver
fingers it thrust into the marshes should lie under her eye like a map.
Her nightlong contest with memory would not have destroyed her air of
power nor wiped from her lips and eyes that appearance of having just
finished smiling at a joke that was not quite good enough to prolong her
merriment, but being quite ready to smile at another; it would only have
made her rather ugly. Her hair would be straight and greasy, her skin
leaden, the flesh of her face heavy except when something in the scene
she looked on invoked that expression which he could not bear. Her face
would become girlish and alive, and after one moment of forgetfulness
would settle into a mask of despair. Something on the marshes had
reminded her of her love. She had remembered how one frosty morning she
and her lover had walked with linked arms through cold dancing air along
the grassy terrace that divided the pastures, the green bank to the east
sloping to a ditch whose bright water gave back the morning sky, the
bank to the west sloping white with rime to a ditch of black ice; or she
had remembered how, one summer night when the sky was a yellow clot of
starshine, she had sat in the long grass under the sea-wall with his
head in her lap. And then she had remembered the end.

It was strange that such things could hurt after thirty years. Yet it
seemed less strange to him to-day than it had ever done before, because
he could see that the love that would happen if he was Ellen's lover
would be a living thing in thirty years' time.... It would be immutably
glorious as his mother's love had been interminably grievous. Yet
suddenly he did not want to think of Ellen or the prospect of triumphant
wooing any more. It seemed disloyalty to be making happy love when his
mother was going through one of her bad times. He would have to go to
Hume Park Square, but he would talk coolly and stay only a little time.

And before he had gone very far on his way to Edinburgh something else
happened to blanch his temper. A heavy motor-van rumbled ahead of him
with a lurching course that made him wonder at the spirit of the Scotch
that can get drunk on the early afternoon of a clear grey day; and ten
minutes after a turn of the road brought him to an overturned cart, its
inside wheels shattered like cracked biscuits and a horse struggling
wildly in the shafts, and a lad lying under the hedge with blood
spattered on a curd-white face. Men and a hurdle had to be fetched from
the farm that was in sight, the doctor had to be summoned from a village
three miles away, and then he was asked to wait lest there should be
need of a further errand to a cottage hospital. He was in a jarred mood
by then, for the farm people had been inhumanly callous to the lad's
suffering, but were just human enough to know that their behaviour was
disgusting, and were disguising their reluctance to lift their little
fingers to save a stranger's life as resentment against Yaverland
himself for his peremptory way of requesting their help. They had known
from his speech that he came from the south, so as he sat in the kitchen
they exchanged comments on the incapacity of the English to understand
the sturdy independence of the Scotch. He began to fret at this delay
among these beastly people in their sour smoke, and to think greedily
of how by this time he might have been with Ellen listening to the grave
conversation that sat as quaintly on her loveliness as tortoiseshell
spectacles on an elfin nose, and looking at that incomparable hair.

But it struck him that this impatience was a rotten thing to feel when
it was a matter of helping a poor chap in pain. He rose and opened the
door to see if the doctor was coming out of the room across the passage
where the patient lay; but he could hear nothing but the lad's moans. He
shivered. They reminded him of the night when for the first time he had
heard his mother make just such anguished sounds as these. He was
twenty-one then, and a student at South Kensington, and it was on one of
his week-ends at Yaverland's End. He had sat up late working, and as he
was passing his mother's door on his way to bed he heard the sound of a
lament sadder than any weeping, since it had no hint of a climax but
went on and on, as if it knew the sorrow that inspired it would not fail
all through eternity. It appalled him, and he felt shy of going in, so
he went on to his room and sat on his bed. After an hour he went out
into the passage and listened. She still was moaning. Without knocking,
lest her pride should forbid him to come in, he went into her room.

She was sitting at the table by the window playing patience, and she
stared over her shoulder at him with tearless eyes. But all the windows
were flung open to let out misery, and she had lit several candles, as
well as the electric light; and winged things that had risen from the
marshes to visit this brightness died in those candle-flames without
intervention from her who would at ordinary times try to prevent the
death of anything. She wore nothing over her nightgown, and her lilac
and gold kimono lay in the middle of the floor. Men who were lost in the
bush stripped themselves, he had often heard it said; and he had seen
panic-stricken women on the deck of a foundering ship throw off their
coats. She had turned back to her cards immediately, and he had not
spoken, but in some way he knew that she fully understood. "Take those
books off the armchair and sit down," she ordered in her rough, soft
voice.

For some time he sat there, while over and over again she shuffled and
dealt and played her game and started another at a speed which dazzled
his eyes; until she rose and said indifferently, "Let's go to bed. It
must be past four." There was an upward inflection in her naming of the
hour that showed she believed it later than she said, that she felt that
this long agony must have brought her quite close to the dawn, but she
had not dared to say so for fear of the disappointment which she knew
followed always on her imagining of brighter things. But it was not yet
three. "I can't think why we're sitting up like this," she continued
scornfully, and her face crumpled suddenly as she fell sideways into his
arms, crying, "Richard! Richard!" His heart seemed to break in two. He
held her close and kissed her and comforted her, and carried her over to
the bed, entreating her to lie quietly and try to forget and sleep. "But
I have so many things to remember," she reminded him. Turning her face
away from him, and drawing the bedclothes about her chin, she began to
talk very rapidly about the intense memories that pricked her like a
thousand thorns. But at the sound of Roothing Church clock striking, so
far off and so feebly that it told no hour but merely sweetly reminded
the ear of time, she rolled over again and looked at him, smilingly,
glowingly, sadly. "Ah, darling!" she said. "It is very late. Perhaps if
you hold my hand I will drop off to sleep now." But it was he that had
slept....

And she was going through a bad time like that now.

When at last he was free to continue his ride to Edinburgh he did not
greatly want to go. He would have turned back to Broxburn had he not
reflected that, although Ellen and her mother had not named any
particular day for his visit, they might perhaps expect him this
afternoon. Indeed, he became quite certain that they were expecting him.
But nothing seemed agreeable to him in his abandonment to this ritualist
desire to live soberly for a little so that he might share the sorrow of
the woman who was enduring pain because she had given him life. He
certainly would not make love to Ellen. He hoped that she was not so
wonderful as he had remembered her.

But though his spirit doubled on his track it did not lead him back to
solitude. Perhaps when the sun falls over the edge of polar-earth the
Arctic fox laments that he must run through the night alone, for in the
white livery he must assume at the year's death he feels himself beast
of a different kind from the brown mate with whom he sported all the
summer-time; and hears a soft pad on the snow and finds her running by
his side, white like himself. So it was with Yaverland when he came to
Hume Park Square, for the Ellen he found was a dove, a nun, a nurse. Up
to the moment she opened the door to him she had been a sturdy, rufous
thing, a terrier-tiger, exasperated because she had imperilled her
immortal soul by coming off her Princes Street pitch when a truly
conscientious woman would have gone on selling _Votes for Women_ for at
least five minutes longer; and because she had had to pretend to her
mother all through tea that she hadn't really expected him; and because
after her mother had gone out she had begun to read the _Scotsman's_
report of an anti-Suffrage meeting in London. "Yon Lord Curzon's an
impudent birkie," she said, with a rush of tears to her eyes that seemed
even to herself an excessive comment on Lord Curzon; then the knock
came. "It'll be my old boots back from the mending," she had told
herself bitterly, and went to the door like a shrew. And because there
had been some secret diplomacy between their souls of which they knew
nothing, some mutual promises that each would attempt to give what the
other felt was lacking in the universe at the moment, the first sight of
him made her change herself from top to toe to a quiet, kind thing.

The little sitting-room was drowsy as a church, its darkness not so much
lit as stained amber by candlelight, and her voice was quiet and
pattering and gentle, like castanets played softly. She made him tea,
though it was far too late, and he had politely said he did not want
any, and afterwards she sat by the fire, listening without exclamation
to the story of the accident, making no demand on him for argument or
cheerfulness, sometimes letting the conversation sag into silence, but
always showing a smile that such a time meant no failure of goodwill.
The unique quality of her smile, which was exquisitely gay and comically
irregular, lifting the left corner of her mouth a little higher than the
right, reminded Yaverland that of course he loved her. It would make it
all right if he wrote to his mother about her at once. He reflected how
he could word the letter to convey that this girl was the most glorious
and desirable being on earth without lapsing into the exuberance of
phrase which was the one thing that made her turn on him the speculative
gaze, not so much expressive of contempt as admitting that the word
contempt had certainly passed through her mind, which she habitually
turned on the rest of the world....

But Ellen was speaking now, apologising because she had made him eat by
candlelight, offering to light the gas, explaining that she and her
mother had burned candles all the week because they hurt his roses less.
"But surely," he said, "these roses can't be the ones I sent you? That
was five days ago. These look quite fresh." Her face became vivacious
and passionate; she came to the table and bent over the vases with an
excitement that would have struck most people as a little mad. "Of
course these are your roses!" she exclaimed. "Five days indeed! They'll
keep a fortnight the way mother and I do them. When they begin to droop
you plunge the stalks into boiling water...."

He watched her with quiet delight. In the course of his life he had
given flowers to several women, but none of them had ever plunged their
stalks into boiling water. Instead they had stood up very straight in
their shiny gowns and lifted the flowers in a pretence of inhaling the
fragrance which the strong scent they used must certainly have prevented
them from smelling, and had sent out from their little mouths fluttering
murmurs of gratitude that were somehow not references to the flowers at
all, but declarations of femaleness. Surely both the woman who performed
that conventional gesture and the man who witnessed it were very
pathetic. It was as if the man brought the flowers as a symbol of the
wonderful gifts he might have given her if they had been real lovers,
and as if the woman answered by those female murmurings that if they had
been real lovers she would have repaid him with such miracles of
tenderness. The gesture was always followed, he remembered, by a period
of silence when she laid the flowers aside for some servant's attention,
which was surely a moment of flat ironic regret.

But the roses that he had brought Ellen were no symbol but a real gift.
They satisfied one of her starvations. She was leaning over them
wolfishly, and presently straightened herself and stared at a dark wall
and told how early one spring she had gone to a Primrose League picnic
("Mother brought me up as a Consairvative. It's been a great grief to
her the way I've gone") at Melville Castle. There had been lilac and
laburnums. Lilac and laburnums! She had evidently been transported by
those delicate mauve and yellow silk embroideries on the grey canvas of
the Scottish countryside, and his roses had taken her the same journey
into ecstasy, just as the fact of her had brought him back into the
happiness away from which he had been travelling for years. They had a
magical power to give each other the things they wanted.

But she was uneasy. The clock had struck seven, and she had seemed
perturbed by its striking. "Do you want me to go?" he asked, with the
frank bad manners of a man who is making love in a hurry.

"Och, no!" she answered reluctantly, "but there's the shopping."

"Can't I come and carry the things for you?"

She brought her hands together with a happy movement that at the last
instant she checked. But indeed she was very glad. For nowadays if
anybody was unkind, and on Saturday nights people were tired and busy
and altogether disposed to be unkind, she immediately noted it as fresh
evidence that there did indeed exist that human conspiracy of
malevolence in which the sudden unprovoked unceasing cruelty of Mr.
Philip had made her believe. But if the client from Rio were with her,
things would not happen perversely and she would not think dark
thoughts. "That'll be fine. You'll make a grand jumentum."

"Ju--?"

"Jumentum, jumenti, neuter, second. A beast of burden. It's a word that
Cæsar was much addicted to."

When she came in again from the hall he saw with delight that she had
put on her hat and coat in the dark, and, though she went to the
mantelpiece, it was not to revise the rough draft of her dressing at the
glass, but to fish some money out of a ginger-jar. She brought the
coins over to the table and began to arrange them in little heaps,
evidently making some calculation concerning the domestic finance, while
her face assumed a curious expression of contemptuous thrift. It was as
if she was making her reckoning with scrupulous accuracy and at the same
time ridiculing her own penury and promising herself that there would
come a time when she should make calculations concerning the treasures
of emperors. She was deluding herself with dreams of the time when she
should have crowned herself queen or made herself the hidden
tyrant-saviour of an industry. He detested her ambition: he felt it to
be a kind of spiritual adultery; he moved his clenched hand forward on
the table till it almost touched her money. Immediately she ceased to
add, slowly her gaze travelled from his fingers to his face, and she
smiled a disturbed smile that expressed at first the greeting that one
beautiful animal gives to another, and then poetic wonder at his beauty,
and then happiness because they liked each other so, and at last it
became a sheer grimace of courage because the happiness was turning into
a slight physical misery because there was something she ought to do or
say, and she did not know what it was. And he was smiling too, because
he perfectly knew what she did not.

One of the candles had burnt to its socket, and at its guttering arms of
shadow seemed to whirl about them, and at its death the darkness seemed
to bend forward from the corners of the room and press them closer to
each other. Very soon she would be in his arms, and there would be an
exquisite, exciting contrast between the rough texture of the coat that
his hands would grasp and the smooth skin that his lips would meet. But
there would not. The passion that possessed him was so strong that it
killed sensation. He desired her body ardently, but only because it was
inhabited by her soul, for their flesh had become unreal. He felt an
exaltation, an illusion that he was being interpenetrated with light,
and the loveliness that he had thought of as Ellen seemed now only a
richly coloured film blown round the fact of her. If he wanted to hold
her close to him it was only that he might shatter these frail
substances with a harsh embrace and let their liberated souls stream out
like comets' hair. There followed a moment when wisdom seemed to
crackle like a lit fire in his head. The plan of the universe lay set
out among the coins on the table, and he looked down on it and said, "Of
course!" But immediately he had forgotten why he had said it. The world
was the same again. And Ellen was sitting there on the other side of the
table, and she seemed very real.

She murmured petulantly, "I can't remember a thing mother said.... I
can't remember what I've got to buy," and swept the money into her
pocket. She was fatigued and blinded, as though all day she had watched
a procession of burnished armies passing in strong sunlight. "Let's go
on," she said, and while he found his hat and coat in the lobby she went
and stood in the garden, ringing her heels on the cold stone of the
path, drinking in the iced air, abandoning herself to the chill of the
evening as if it were a refuge from him.

But they were happy almost at once. Like all clever adolescents, she had
a mind like a rag-bag full of scraps of silks and satins and calicoes
and old bits of ribbon which was constantly bursting and scattering a
trail of allusions that were irrelevant to the occasion of their
appearance, and so when he came to her side she began talking about
George Borrow. Didn't he love "Lavengro," him being a traveller? And had
he ever seen a prize-fight? Oh, Yaverland had. He had even had the
privilege of crossing the Atlantic in the cattleboat _ss. Glory_ with
Jim Corraway, since known to fame as Cardiff Jim. But he broke it to her
that now many of the best boxers were Jew lads from the East End of
London, and not a few came from the special schools for the
feeble-minded; feeble-mindedness often gave a man the uncloudable temper
that makes a good boxer.

So, chattering like that, they came to the business of shopping. It was,
he thought, an extravagantly charming business. As well as any other
place on earth did he like this homely street, with its little low shops
that sent into the frosty air savoury smells of what they sold, and took
the chill off the moonlight with their yellow gas-jets. He liked its
narrow pavements thronged with shaggy terrier-like people who walked
briskly on short legs; he liked its cobbled roadway, along which passed
at intervals tramcars that lumbered along more slowly than any other
trams in the world, with an air of dignity which intimated that their
slowness was due to no mechanical defect, but to a sagacity which was
aware that in this simple town nobody was doing anything more urgent
than going home to supper.

It seemed a courageous little city as it lay at the base of the towering
black and silver Northern night: a brave kindling of comfort in the
midst of the indifferent universe. And Ellen's shopping manner, her east
wind descent on salesmen, showed that she participated in the hardy
quality of her surroundings. In the first shop she was still too much
aware of him to get into her stride. It was a bakery--such a
marvellously stocked bakery as could be found only in the land of that
resourceful people, which, finding itself too poor to have bread and
circuses, set about to make a circus of its bread. She bought a
shepherd's bap, its pale smooth crust velvety with white flour, and an
iced cake that any other nation would have thought prodigious save for a
wedding or a christening, while she smiled deprecatingly at him, as
though she felt these were mawkish foods to be buying in the company of
a friend of bruisers. But in the butcher's shop the Saturday night fever
seized her, and presently Yaverland, who had been staring at a bullock's
carcase and liking the lovely springing arch of the ribs, was startled
to hear her cry, "Mr. Lawson, you surprise me!" But it was only the
price of a piece of a neck of mutton that had surprised her. After that
he listened to the conversation that passed between her and the shopmen,
and found it as different from the bland English chatter of such
occasions as if it had been in a different tongue. It had the tweedy
texture of Scotch talk, the characteristic lack of suavity and richness
in sense, in casual informativeness, in appositeness. Here, it was
plain, was a people almost demoniac with immense, unsensual,
intellectual energy.

In the grocer's shop they had to wait their turn to be served. Ellen put
in the time staring up at a Peter's milk chocolate advertisement that
hung on the wall, a yodelling sort of landscape showing a mountain like
a vanilla ice running down into a lake of Reckitt's blue; she was under
the illusion that it was superb because it was a foreign place.
Yaverland watched the silver-haired grocer slicing breakfast sausage,
for Ellen had told him that this was one of the city fathers, and it
seemed to him that there was something noble about the old man in his
white apron which reminded one of his civic dignity. Doubtless, however,
in his civic robes he would remind one that he was a grocer, for it was
the note of Edinburgh, of all lowland Scotland, to rise out of ordinary
life to a more than ordinary magnificence, and then to qualify that
magnificence by some cynical allusion to ordinary life. The old man
seemed to like Ellen, though she was very rude about his ham and said,
"If that's the best, then times have been hard for the pigs lately."
Yaverland gave to their bickering amenities an attention that dwelt not
so much on the words as the twanging, gibing intonations. But after they
got into the streets again a question and answer began to tease his
mind: "Would you be wanting your change in halfpence, Miss Melville?"

"Och, no, thank you, Mr. Lindsay."

They had come to the end of Ellen's shopping list and she was taking him
home through St. Patrick's Square. "Look at that lighted window, where
they've got a blue blind! That's where de Quincey stopped!" she said
excitedly, and he answered, "Oh, is it?... I say, why did the old chap
offer to give you change in halfpence?"

"Well, to-morrow's Sunday, you see."

"I'm afraid I don't. I'm stupid. Why do you want halfpence more on
Sunday than on any other day?"

"Why, for the plate. For the collection. In church. But we always put in
threepenny-bits. Mother's picked up a lot of English ways. What's taken
you?" She stared up in wonder at his laughter, until it broke on her
that she had unwittingly given him, an Englishman, food for the silly
English taunt that the Scotch are mean. "Och, you don't understand," she
began to stammer hastily. "I didn't mean that exactly."

And then a hot rage came on her. Why should she make excuses for her own
people, because this stranger who was less than nothing to her chose to
giggle? Wasn't he using his size, which was sheer luck, his experiences
in foreign lands, of which she was bitterly jealous, and his maleness,
which until she got a vote was a ground for hostility, to "come it over"
her? She said acidly, "I'm glad you're amused. I suppose you don't do
such things in England?" and at his laughing answer, "I don't know; I've
never been to Church in England. But I shouldn't think so," her
neatly-brushed and braided temper came down. She came to a sudden stop.
They were on the unfrequented pavement of Buccleuch Place, a street of
tall houses separated by so insanely wide a cobbled roadway that it had
none of the human, close-pressed quality of a street, but was desolate
with the natural desolation of a ravine, and under these windowed cliffs
she danced with rage, a tiny figure of fury with a paper-bag flapping
from each hand like a pendulous boxing-glove, while he stood in front of
her in a humble, pinioned attitude, keeping his elbows close to his side
lest he should drop any parcels.

He loved every word of it, from the moment she explosively told him that
it was all very well to hee-haw up there like a doited giraffe, and his
mind felt the same pleasure that the palate gets out of a good curry as
she told him that the English were a miserable, decadent people who were
held together only by the genius and application of the Scotch, that
English industry was dependent for its existence on Scotch engineers,
and that English education consisted solely of Univairsities that were
no more than genteel athletic clubs, and begged him to consider the
implication of the fact that the Scotch, though a smaller people than
the English, had defended a larger country....

He woke up at that. He had been tranced in a pleasant reverie, for
though she was angry he knew that she would not get too angry. She was
running away from him, but in a circle.

"Scotland bigger than England!" he jeered. "Think of the map! Bigger
than England!"

She thought of the map, and for a minute her mouth was a little round
dismayed hole. But she was not to be beaten. "I was alluding to its
surface," she said coldly. "It being such an elevated country, there
must be many square miles standing practically on end, thus taking
hardly any space on the map. Consequently I was correct in saying that
Scotland is bigger than England." She drew breath to go on, but her lips
began to twitch and her eyes to seek his half-ashamedly, and then she
began to giggle at her own sophistry and was not angry when he joined
her. They built a little bright vibrant cave in the night with their
laughter, from which they did not wish to move. They were standing quite
still on the broad pavement, staring intently at each other's faces,
trying to remember the reality under the distortions painted by the
strong moonlight. It was a precious moment of intimacy, and they did not
quite know what to do with it. They did not even know whether to be
grave or gay. It was as if they held between them a sheet of shot tissue
and could not decide whether to hold it up to the light and show its
merry rosy colour or let it sag and glow rich gold.

But indeed they had no choice. For he found himself saying huskily, "I
didn't mean to be rude. I had forgotten you were Scotch. You're a person
all by yourself. One doesn't think of you as belonging to any country."

"Well, of course," she murmured, "father was Irish; but he was just an
expense."

He choked back a laugh. But this sense that she was funny did not blur
the romantic quality of his love for her any more than this last
manifestation of her funniness spoiled the clear beauty of her face,
which now, in this moonlight that painted black shadows under her high
cheek-bones, was candid and alert like the face of a narcissus. "I
didn't mean to be rude," he repeated. "I didn't think that what I said
could possibly touch you. As if I could say anything about you that
wasn't...." His voice cracked like a boy's. He felt an agony of
tenderness towards her, and a terrifying sense that love was not all
delight. It was stripping him of the armour of hardness and
self-possession that it had been the business of his adult years to
acquire, and it was leaving him the raw and smarting substance,
accessible and attractive to pain, that he had not been since he was a
boy.

And it was all to no purpose. For nothing seemed more likely than that
Ellen should look up at him fixedly and fully assume that expression of
wisdom which sometimes intruded into the youth in her eyes; that she
should say in a new deep voice, "You are not good enough for me." And of
course it would be true, it would be true. Then she would walk on and
turn the corner to her home, and he would be left alone among these
desolate tall houses, eternally hungry. He could imagine how she would
look as she turned the corner, the forward slant of her body, the upward
tilt of her head, the awful irrevocable quality of her movements, the
ghostlike glamour the moonlight would lay on her as if to warn him that
she was as separate from him as though she were dead. He would not be
able to pursue her, for there was something about her which would
prevent him from ever trying on her those ordinary compulsions which men
are accustomed to apply to women; quiet, menacing devotion, or
persistent roaring importunities, or those forcible embraces, of which
he thought with the disgust he now felt for the sexual processes of
everybody in the world except himself and Ellen, which induce the body
to betray the reluctant mind. Because he loved her he was obliged, in
spite of himself, to acknowledge the sacredness of her will, even though
that acknowledgement might frustrate every hope of his love. He greatly
disliked that obligation.

She was abstractedly murmuring defensive things about the Scotch. "And
Scotland is such a lovely place. Even round here. Dalmeny. Cramond Brig.
Hawthornden. And oh, the Pentlands! Have you not been to the Pentlands
yet? Oh, but they're the grandest place in the world. There are lochs
hidden behind the range the way you'd never think. And waterfalls. The
water comes down red with the peat. And miles and miles of heather."

"Take me there, Ellen."

"Would you like to come? Let's go next Saturday. I've got the whole day
off. Mr. James said it was my due, what with the overtime I've been
doing. It'll be lovely. I've had nobody to go with since Rachael Wing
went to London. But would you truly care to come? It's just moors.
You'll not turn up your nose at it?"

"Anywhere I went with you I'd like."

She started and began to walk on. It was as if the sheet of tissue had
grown too heavy for her young hand and she had dropped it. Although he
went on talking about how much he liked Scotland, and how intelligent he
found the workmen at the cordite factory at Broxburn, she hardly
answered, but moved her head from side to side like a horse galled by
its collar. Had he thought her a bold girl, fixing up a walk with him so
eagerly? And ought he to have called her by her Christian name? Of
course he was so much older that perhaps he felt that he had a right to
do it. When they passed through the arch into Hume Park Square she saw a
light in the dining-room window and said, "Mother's home before us."

She did not know that in that minute she had decided the course of her
life. For she did not know that just before she spoke she had sighed,
and that Yaverland had heard her and perceived that she sighed because
soon they would no longer be alone together. Perhaps something like fear
would have come upon her if she had known how immense he felt with
victory; how he contemplated her willingness to love him in a passion of
timeless wonder, watching her journey from heaven, stepping from star to
star, all the way down the dark whirling earth of his heart; and how
even while he felt a solemn agony at his unworthiness he was busily
contriving their immediate marriage. For there was a steely quality
about his love that would have been more appropriate to some vindictive
purpose.

It was apparent to him, when they went in, that Mrs. Melville understood
what was going on, for she threw him a glance which was not quite a wink
but which clearly suggested that had she been just a common body it was
conceivable that she might have winked. As soon as they were alone he
told her that he loved Ellen, that he wanted to marry her, that he had
plenty of money, that he was all right, that they must marry at once.
She did not seem to regard him as asking her permission, though he had
tried to give his demand that flavour, but rather as acquainting her
with an established fact at which she blinked in a curious confusion of
moods. The demoniac music in the dancing-hall had begun to bludgeon the
walls, and in the whirlpool of the physical vibrations of the noise and
the spiritual vibrations of his passion the little woman seemed to bob
like a cork. She was resigned and pleased, and plainly trusted him, but
at the same time she was pitifully alarmed. "Mercy me! you've not been
long.... Well, you've caught a Tartar and no mistake. Never say I didn't
warn you.... But you'll let the bairn bide for a wee bit longer! She's
but a bairn!"

It was as if she quite saw that a husband was necessary for Ellen, and
wanted her to have one, and at the same time believed that any husband
would inevitably bring her pain. He set it down as one of the despondent
misinterpretations of life that the old invent in the depression of
their physical malaise, and answered, reassuringly, insincerely, "Yes,
yes, I'll wait...." But why should they wait? They were going to be
radiantly and eternally happy. It might as well begin at once.


III

"Is it not beautiful? Is it not just beautiful?" cried Ellen. And indeed
at last it was beautiful, and warranted that excited gait, that hopping
from leg to leg and puppyish kicking up of dead leaves with which she
had come along the road from Balerno station. It had seemed to Yaverland
an undistinguished pocket of the country, and there had been nothing
that caught his attention save the wreck of a ropeworks close by the
village, which had been gutted by fire two or three nights before and
now stood with that Jane Cakebread look that burned buildings have by
daylight, its white walls blotched like a drunkard's skin with the smoke
and water, and its charred timbers sticking out under the ruins of the
upper storey like unkempt hair under a bonnet worn awry. There were men
working among the wreckage, directing each other with guttural
disparaging cries, moving efficiently yet slowly, as if the direness of
the damage had made them lose all heart. Ellen stopped to watch them,
laying her neck over the top plank of the fence as a foal might do;
there was nothing that did not interest her. But after that it had
seemed a very ordinary green-and-grey piece of Scotland, and he thought
tenderly of her love of it as one of those happy delusions that come to
the very young, who see the world suffused with beauty even as a person
who looks out of half-opened eyes sees everything fringed with prismatic
hues.

But the road had lifted, a wildness had come on the hedge; where there
had been bushes were slim wind-distorted trees, and when the wall of the
trim little estate on the right came to an end they stood suddenly in
face of a broad view. To the right of the white road that drove forward
was a wide moor of dark moss-hags, flung like a crumpled cloth on a
slope that stretched as far as the eye could see to the base of black
hills about which clambered white mists. To the left were green fields,
set with tentative assemblies of firs, which finally, where the road
dipped, drew together in a long dark wood. These things were a delicate
frieze in front of a range of hills that rolled eastwards, the colour of
clouds and almost as formless as clouds, yet carving such proud lines
against the sky that they seemed to be crouched in attitudes of pride
and for all their low height had the austere and magnificent quality of
mountains. This was a country he could like very well. Against its
immensity human life appeared as unimportant as he did not doubt that it
was in those periods when his own private affairs were not pressing, and
it gave him such a sense of the personality of inanimate things as he
had very rarely had except at sea. The fir copse by which they stood
showed as much character as any ship in her behaviour under the weather,
and these mountains and this moor showed by a sudden pale glow of
response to a Jacob's ladder of sunlight that they changed in mood under
changing skies even as the seas.

Two or three whaups rose from the moss-hags and then sailed pee-weeting
towards the hills, as if despatched by the moor to warn them of the
coming of these strangers; and it was as if the range answered shortly,
"Ay, I ken that, I ken that." The broad view was as solemn as eternity,
and at the same time there was a dancing exhilaration in the air, which,
when it was still, was sweet-flavoured with the sweetness of the firs
and the bog-myrtle, and when it was disturbed by the diamond-hard wind
was ice-cold and seemed to intoxicate the skin. There was a sound of
wheels behind them, and they stepped aside to let a carriage pass down a
track that turned aside from the road at this point and ran timorously
between the moor and the white wall of the neat estate. In it sat an old
lady, so very old that the flesh on the hand that was raised to her
bonnet was a mere ivory web between the metacarpal bones, and her eyes
had gone back to that indeterminate hue which is seen in the eyes of a
new-born baby; but she sat up straight in the open carriage and directed
on the two strangers a keen belittling gaze that without doubt extracted
everything essential in their appearance. He liked this harsh country,
these harsh, infrangible people that it bred.

"Do you not think it's rather fine?" asked Ellen, in so small and flat a
voice that he perceived she was afraid that the climax she had worked up
to hadn't come off and that he was sneering at her Pentlands. It seemed
a little surprising to him that she didn't know what was in his mind
without being told, and he hastened to tell her he thought it was
glorious. The anxiety lifted from her face at that, and she gazed at the
hills with such an exultant fixity that he was able to stare at her at
his ease. She was looking very Scotch, and like a small boy, for her
velvet tam-o'-shanter was stuck down on her head and she wore a muffler
that nearly touched her rather pink little nose. Her jacket was too big
for her and her skirt very short, showing her slender legs rising out of
large cobbler-botched nailed boots like plant-stems rising out of
flower-pots, and these extreme sartorial disproportions gave her a sort
of "father's waistcoat" look. Yet at a change of the wind, at the
slightest alteration of the calm content of their relationship, she
would disclose herself indubitably romantic as the sickle moon, as music
heard at dusk in a garden of red roses. He supposed that to every man of
his horse-power there ultimately came a Juliet, but none but him in the
whole world had a Juliet of so many merry disguises. He looked at the
range and thought that somewhere behind them was the spot where he would
tell her that he loved her. It gave him a foolish pleasure to imagine
what manner of place it would be--whether there would be grass or
heather underfoot and if the hill-birds would cry there also.

"Well, it's no use you and me seeing which of us can gape the longest if
we mean to get to Glencorse before the light goes," said Ellen. "We'd
best step forward. I'm glad you like the place. I love it. And this bit
of the road's bonny. When Rachael Wing and I were stopping up in the
ploughman's cottage at Kirktown over by Glencorse Pond we got up one
day at sunrise and came over here before the stroke of four. And if
you'll believe it, the road was thick with rabbits, running about as
bold as brass and behaving as sensibly as Christians. The poor things
ran like the wind when they saw us. I wish we could have explained we
meant no harm, for I suppose it's the one time in the day when they
count on having the world to themselves."

"I've felt like that about a jaguar," he said. "Came on it suddenly, on
a clearing by a railway camp on the Leopoldina. It had been tidying up a
monkey and was going home a bit stupid and sleepy. Lord, the sick fright
in its eyes when it saw me. I'd have given anything to be able to stand
it a drink and offer to see it home."

"Och!" she murmured abashed. "Me talking about rabbits, and you
accustomed to jaguars. I suppose you never take notice of a rabbit
except to look down your nose at it. But we can't rise to jaguars in
Scotland. But I once saw a red deer running in the woods at Taynuilt."

"I've seen a red deer too," he said, "when I was motorcycling up to Ross
this summer." It flashed across his mind then as it had flashed across
the road then, and a thought came to him which he felt shy to speak, and
then said quickly and caught in his breath at the end, "The sunset was
on it. It looked the colour of your hair."

"Well, if it did," she cried with sudden petulance, "pity me, that has
to carry on a human head what looks natural on a wild beast's back. Och,
come along! Let's run. I like running. I'm cold. There's a bonny bridge
where the road dips, over the tail of Thriepmuir. Let's run." And for a
hundred yards or so she ran like the red deer by his side, and then
stopped for some reason that was not lack of breath. "I don't like
this," she said half laughingly. "I've a poor envious nature. I'm used
to running everybody else off their feet, and here you're holding back
to keep with me. I feel I'm being an object of condescension. We'll
walk, if you please."

Yaverland said, "Oh, what nonsense! I was just thinking how rippingly
you ran."

"Havers!" she replied. "You were thinking nothing of the sort. You were
wondering what for I carried an iron-monger's shop in my pocket. But
yon rattling's just a tin with some coconuts I've in it that I made last
night and slipped in in case you'd like it, rubbing up against my
protractor."

"But why in Heaven's name," Yaverland asked, "do you carry a protractor
about with you?"

"Off and on I try and keep up my Euclid and do a rider over my lunch,
and I just keep a protractor handy."

Yaverland stopped. "Ellen," he said, "I haven't known you very long."
There was the faintest knitting of her brows, and he added evenly, "I
may call you Ellen, mayn't I? This modern comradeship between men and
women...." "Och, yes," beamed Ellen, fascinated by the talismanic
catchword, and he felt a little ashamed because he had used one of her
pure enthusiasms for his own purposes. Sometimes he was conscious of a
detestable adroitness in his relations with women; it was not
respectful; it was half-brother to the carneying art of the seducer, but
he could not take back the insincerity. "As I say, I haven't known you
very long. But may I ask you a favour?"

"Surely," said Ellen.

"Turn out your pockets."

"But why?"

"I want to see what's in 'em."

"Well," said Ellen resignedly, "there are worse vices than
inquisitiveness. Both pockets?"

"We'll start with the one with the coconut ice and the protractor,
please."

"It's too cold to sit by the roadside and sort them, so you'll have to
take them from me as I get them out. Well, there's the protractor, and
there's the coconut ice. Have a bit? Ah, well, I notice that
grown-up--that people older than me don't seem to care for sweeties
before their dinner. I wonder why. And there's a magnetic compass I
picked up on George the Fourth Bridge. There's a kind of pleasure in
finding the north, don't you think? And--fancy this being here! I
thought I'd lost it long ago. It's a wee garnet I found on the beach at
Elie. I was set up all the afternoon with finding a precious stone. I
would like fine to be a miner in the precious stone mines in Mexico. If
I was a boy I would go. And the rest's just papers. Here's notes on a
Geographical Society lecture on the geology of Yellowstone Park I went
to last spring. Very instructive it was. And here's a diagram I did when
I was working for the Bible examination on the Second Book of Kings--the
lines of the House of Israel and the House of Judah drawn to scale on
square paper, five years to a square and set parallel so that you can
see which buddy was ruling on the one throne when another buddy was on
the other. I came out fifth in all Scotland. And this is a poem I wrote.
It's not a good poem. The subject was excellent--reflections of an
absinthe-drinker condemned to death for the murder of his mistress--but
I couldn't give it the treatment it desairved. No, you will _nut_ see
it. I'll just tear it up. There. It'll do the whaups no harm scattering
over the moor, for they've no æsthetic sensibilities. But I shouldn't be
surprised if you had, though I've heard that the English don't care much
for art. I'm not much good at the poetry, but I have the grace to know
it, and so I've just given it up. I make my own blouses, though I know I
can't equal the professional product that's sold in the shops, because
it comes cheaper. But with the Carnegie library handing out the
professional product for nothing, I see no reason why I should write my
own poems. That's all in this pocket. But I think there's more in the
other. Oh, mercy, there's nothing at all except this pair of woollen
gloves I had forgotten. Not another thing. And no wonder. There's a hole
in it the size of an egg. Now, if that isn't vexatious. I had some real
nice things in that pocket. A wee ammonite, I remember. Och, well, it
can't be helped. I'm afraid you've seen nothing very thrilling after
all."

"Oh yes, I have," said Yaverland.

"Indeed you've not. Yet certainly you're looking tickled to death. No
wonder Scotch comedians have such a success when they go among the
English if they're all as easily amused as you."

"Your pockets are like a boy's," he said. "In a way, you're awfully like
a boy."

"I wish I was," she answered bitterly. "But I'm a girl, and I've nothing
before me. No going to sea for me as there was for you." But they were
nearly at the bridge now, and she was changed to a gay child because
she loved this spot. She ran forward, crying, "Is it not beautiful?
Look, you didn't think there was this grand loch stretching away there!
And look how the firs stand at the water's edge. The day Rachael and I
came there was a clump of bell-heather just on that point of rock. A
bonny pinky red it was. And look how Bavelaw Avenue marches up the hill!
Is it not just fine?"

Her moment of desperate complaint had not moved him at all, nor did he
perceive that her joy at the beauty of the place was more intense than
anything a happy person would have felt, that her loud laughter bore as
bitter a history of wretchedness as a starving man's grunt over a crust.
He was not convinced that these sudden darkenings of her eyes and voice,
and her flights from these moments into the first opportunity of gaiety,
represented any real contest with pain. Life must be lovely and amusing
for such a lovely and amusing person. These were but youth's moody
fandangoes. He could look on them as calmly as on the soaring and
swooping of a white sea-bird. So he stood on the bridge, leaving her
soul to its own devices while he appreciated the view. Surely this
country was not real, but an imagination of Ellen's mind. It was so like
her. It was beautiful and solitary even as she was. The loch that
stretched north-east from the narrow neck of water under the bridge was
fretted to a majesty of rage by the winds that blew from the black hills
around it; but it ended in a dam that was pierced in the middle with
some metallic spider's web of engineering; even so would romantic and
utilitarian Ellen have designed a loch. And the firs which formed a
glade of gloom by the waterside, which by their soughing uttered the
very song of melancholy's soul, were cut by the twirling wind into
shapes like quips; that too was like Ellen. And this magnificent avenue
that began on the other side of the bridge, and solemnly ascended the
hillside as if to a towered palace that certainly was not there, was not
unfit walking for the princess that had no king for father.

But as the wonder of the place became familiar, that fever of discomfort
which had been vexing Ellen all that day returned. There was, she felt,
some remedy for it quite close at hand; but she did not know what it
could be. If she leapt from a height she might lift this curious burden
from her heart. She scrambled up on the stone parapet of the bridge and
jumped back to earth; and he, because it was the kind of thing a boy
might have done, took no notice. But she shivered because this tangible
lump of misery was still within her. She must run about, or the beating
of her heart would become an agony. "Rachael and I found a water-rat
under the bridge," she cried; "preening its whiskers it was, quite the
thing, till it saw us and ran off in a terrible fuff. Let's go and see
if there's one now." She turned round, stared for a minute at the
south-west, where ill weather discoloured the hills like a bruise, and
said reproachfully, "Surely the rain will never come to spoil to-day."
To-day was to be such a lovely holiday. And then she ran round the stone
spur of the bridge and crouched down beside the arch on the damp turf.

There was no rat there now. The water was in spate with the autumn
floods and the muddy ledge on which he had sat at his toilette was an
invisible thing that sent up a smear of weed to tremble on the surface.
But she continued to crouch down and watch the burn. Better than
anything in nature she loved running water, and this was grey and icy
and seemed to have a cold sweet smell, and she liked the slight
squeaking noises her boots made on the quaggy turf when she shifted her
balance. It was quiet here, and the gentle colours of the soft grey sky,
the stern grey stream, the amber grasses that shook perpetually in the
stream's violence, and the black stripped hawthorns that humped at the
water's border made a medicine for her eyes, which had begun to ache.

There was always peace on the Pentlands. And such bonny things happened
every minute. A bough of silver birch came floating along, doubtless a
windfall from one of those trees that stood where Thriepmuir was but the
Bavelaw burn, a furtive trickle among the moss-hags, a brown rushy
confusion between two moors. It was as bright as any flower with its
yellow leaves, and as fine as filigree; and its preservation of this
brightness and fineness through all the angry river's tumbling gave it
an air of brave integrity. She watched it benignly, and peered beneath
the bridge to see if it would have the clear course it deserved, and a
kind of despair fell on her as she saw that it would not. The ill-will
that creeps about the world is vigilant; many are the branches that fall
from the silver birch in autumn, and not one of them is forgotten by it.
Doubtless the very leaves on the bough are numbered, lest one should
sail bravely to the loch and make a good end. So there, where the shadow
lay thickest under the arch, was a patch of still black water, confined
in stagnancy by a sunk log on which alluvial mud had made a garden of
whitish grasses like the beard of an unclean old man. The impact of the
unchecked floods that rushed past made this black patch shake
perpetually, and this irregular motion gave it a sort of personality. It
suggested a dark man shaking with a suppressed passion of malice. It was
like Mr. Philip. From some submerged rottenness caught in the log
bubbles slowly floated up through the dark water, wavered a little under
the glassy surface, and then popped up and made a dirty trail of spume.
That was like the way Mr. Philip sat in the dark corner beyond the
fireplace and showed by the way the whites of his eyes turned about that
something bad had come into his mind, and let a space of silence fall so
that one thought he was not going to say it after all, and then it would
come out suddenly, cool and as mean as mean could be and somehow
unanswerable.

With a twingeing hope that it would not be so, she watched the silver
birch branch hesitate, yield to the under-ebb, and lie at last helpless
on the black stagnancy, which continued to vibrate with an air of
malice. Soon its pretty leaves were waterlogged, and it sank down to bed
with the grassy rottenness beside the whitish grasses. It had had no
chance, any more than she herself had when Mr. Philip contrived that
although she should run away from him all day, there would come a time
when they stood face to face in the little room where no one came, and
stared and drawled until she said the silly bairn-like thing that gave
him the chance to make a fool of her. It was all right to be here on the
Pentlands enjoying herself, but on Monday she would have to go back and
work under Mr. Philip. She could not go on like this. She would have to
kill herself. She would jump over the Dean Bridge. Mother would just
have to go and live with Aunt Bessie at Bournemouth.

Yaverland spoke behind her, indolently, because he felt he had all the
rest of his life to be happy with her. "Where's this Rachael Wing you
talk about? Aren't you still pals?"

Ellen swallowed her unshed tears. "'Deed, yes," she said, "but she's
gone to London to be an actress. I wish I knew how she was getting on.
She's never written since the first month."

"Probably she's having hard luck."

"Not Rachael. She's not like me. I always was a poor creature beside
her. Anybody could see that Rachael had a wonderful life before her.
She's not a bit like me."

"But that's just what you look like."

"Havers!" she said dully. "And me so pairfectly miserable!" As soon as
the words were out of her mouth she was frozen with horror. In the
presence of one who was both a man and English she had admitted the
disgraceful fact that she was not an imperial creature insolent with
success and well pleased with the earth her footstool. She scrambled to
her feet and ran coltishly past him and over the bridge, hiding her face
and calling gaily, "Come on! I want to get up on the hills!" And he
followed slowly, thinking pretty things about her.

When he drew abreast of her she had pulled off her tam-o'-shanter and
taken out her hairpins, and her hair was blowing sideways across her
breast and back. "It's good to feel the wind through one's hair," she
said. "I wish I had short hair like a man's."

"Why don't you cut yours off then?"

"I somehow feel it would be a shame when I have such a deal of it," she
answered innocently, and fell to chattering of the Spanish military nun
that de Quincey wrote about. She had passed herself off as a man all
right. Did he think a girl could go the length of that anywhere
nowadays? No? Surely there was somewhere? Oh, she was a child, a little
child, and it was not fair to talk to her of love for a little while
yet. It might be dangerous, for he had heard that sometimes, when a girl
was sought by men too soon, her girlhood tried to hold her back from
womanhood by raising obscure terrors that might last as long as life. He
would wait until she was eighteen. Yet when the avenue bent at right
angles half up the hillside, and they drew together as an army of winds
marched down upon them from the mountains, she looked at him through her
scattered hair, and her face was wholly a woman's. So might a woman
smile who was drowning under a deep tide and loved to drown so; yet from
a brave wisdom in her eyes it could be seen that she was abandoning
herself not to death but to life. This, beyond all doubt, was adult
love, though she herself was not aware of it. He had only to admit it by
some significant speech or act, to rise spiritually to the occasion, and
they would be fused together as perpetual lovers.

He was conscious again as he had been when she sat with the coins before
her in the little dining-room in Hume Park Square, of an involuntary
austerity in his passion which, while he did not see the sense of it, he
recognised to be the authentic note of love. A moment ago, when she
still seemed a child, he had been thinking what fun it would be to kiss
her suddenly on the very tip of that pink little nose which moved when
she talked as a rabbit's does when it eats, to lay hold of her hands
roughly and see how far those ink-stained fingers, still pliable as
children's are, would bend back towards her wrist. But now that she was
a woman the passion between them was so strong that the delight of
touching her beloved flesh would have been too great for human nerves to
support, and it would have turned to pain. The mutual knowledge that
they loved would be enough to work as many miracles on the visible and
invisible world as either of their hearts could stand. "I love you," was
what he had to say....

It was the strangest thing in the world that he could not say it. He
could not even make a kind movement of his body, a protective slackening
of his step and overhanging of her spindrift delicacy with his great
height, that might have intimated to her that they were dear friends. He
found himself walking woodenly a pace away from her, and though his soul
shouted something hidden round the corner of his mind, it would not let
his lips articulate the desperate cry. He stared at the passing moment
as a castaway, gagged, and bound to a raft of pirates, might wake from
a delirious sleep, stare dumbly up at the steep side of a galleon that
rides slowly, and know that with it rides away his chance of life
because he cannot speak. Love of this girl meant infinite joy and a
relief such as nothing before had ever promised him from the black
regiment of moods that had for long beleaguered him, self-hatred, doubt
of the value of any work on this damned earth, a recurrent tendency to
brood on his mother's wrongs until he was a little mad; and if he did
not win her life would be more tormenting in its patent purposelessness
than even he, with his immense capacity for abstract rage, had ever
known. And yet it was utterly beyond him to speak the necessary words.
And the army of winds passed down to the plains and there was stillness,
the trunks of the trees ceased to groan and the dead leaves did not race
among their feet, and she shook back her hair and was no longer a woman.
She leaned towards him and spoke rapidly, reverting to the subject of
women soldiers, and unquestionably the spirit of childhood lodged upon
her lips.

Granted that there was such a thing as future life, though, mind you,
she found the evidence in support of it miserably weak, did he not think
that the canonisation of Joan of Arc must have been a terrible smack in
the face for St. Paul? He made himself forget in laughter the priceless
moment that had passed, and he told himself, as sternly as once in South
America he had had to tell himself that he must stop drinking, that her
mother had been right, and he must not make love to her because she was
too young.

There was a curious colour of relief about this decision, and it was
with a kind of gusto that he kept repeating it to himself all the long
way that spread about before them after they passed Bavelaw Castle, the
whitewashed farmhouse that was the anti-climax of the avenue. Two
servant-girls were laying clothes on a bleaching-green within its dykes,
the one taking them down from a clothes-line, the other laying them down
on the grass, and they were exchanging cries that seemed at that
distance wordless expressions of simple being like the calls of the
whaups that circled above them. Here was a district remote from all
human complexity, in which it was very sweet to walk with this young
girl.

The road stopped, for this was no place where the marketing could spin
along to any business, and two grassy tracks went forward, both marked
by bare, uninscribed posts, as if they led to destinations too unvisited
to need a name. The one they did not take climbed over the grey shoulder
of the range, and the other brought them into an eastward valley where
there was for the moment no wind and a serenity that was surely
perpetual. The cries of the hill-birds did but drill little holes in the
clear hemisphere of silence that lay over this place. The slopes on
either side, thickly covered with mats of heather and bristling mountain
herbage, and yet lean and rocky, were like the furry sides of emaciated
animals, and up above bare black summits confronted the sky. It was the
extremity of bleak beauty. And, unafraid of the grimness, Ellen ran on
ahead, her arms crooked back funnily because she had her hands in her
pocket to keep the coconut-ice tin from rattling against the protractor,
her red hair streaming a yard behind. He absorbed the sight of her so
greedily that it immediately seemed as if it were a recollected sight
over which he had pondered and felt tenderness for many years, and he
wondered if perhaps he had seen someone like her before. But of course
he never had. There was no one in the world like her.

"Listen, we're coming to the waterfall! Do you not hear it!" she cried
back to him; and they listened together, smiling because it was such fun
to do anything together, to the risping, whistling sound of a wind-blown
waterfall. "It comes down peat-red," she told him gloatingly, and with
an air of showing off a private treasure she led him to the grey fold in
the hills where the Logan Burn tumbled down a spiral staircase of dark
polished rock. She ran about the pools at its feet, crying that this wee
one was red as rust, that this big one was red as a red rose--was it
not, if you looked in the very middle? But suddenly she looked up into
his face and asked, "You'll have seen grand waterfalls out in Brazil?"

"Yes," he said, "but I like this as well, and I would rather be here
than anywhere else in the world."

"Tell me the names of some of the big waterfalls," she insisted,
uninterested in the loving things that he had said.

"Well, the falls of Paulo Affonso are pretty good."

"Paulo Affonso!" she repeated, her face avaricious with the desire for
adventure, "I will go there some day...."

That she should feel so intensely about something which did not concern
himself roused his jealousy, and he set himself to interrupt her train
of thought by saying boisterously, "This is a ripping place! What's it
like above the fall? Let's climb it." He strolled closer to the
waterfall to see if there was an easy way up the rock, but was recalled
by a ready, embarrassed murmur from her.

"I can't...."

He imagined she was moved by shame at his greater strength, as she had
been when they ran together, and he said encouragingly:

"Why not? You've got nailed boots."

But she continued to stand stiffly on a rock by the edge of the red
pool, and stared over his head at the spray and repeated, "I can't."

He wondered from her blush if in his ignorance of girls he had done
something to offend her, and turned away; but she misunderstood that,
and cried fierily:

"Och, I'm not feared! I've done it twenty times. But I took a vow. Oh,"
she faltered, suddenly the youngest of all articulate things, "you'll
laugh at me!"

"I won't!" he answered fiercely and gripped one of her hands.

"It was like this," she said, looking round-eyed and dewily solemn like
a child in church. "Climbing up there used to be a great pleasure to me.
I used to come here a lot with Rachael Wing. And then I heard Victor
Grayson speak--oh, he is a wonderful man; he seemed hardly airthly; you
felt you had to make some sacrifice. I made a vow I'd never climb it
again till I had done something for the social revolution. And I've not
done a thing yet."

They exchanged a long, confiding look, a mutual pressure of their souls;
but before he could say something reverently sympathetic she had uttered
a sharp exclamation, and was looking past him at the waterfall, which a
sudden gust of wind had blown out from the rock like a lady's skirt. "If
we were climbing that now, yon spray would be on our faces, and I love
the prick of cold water!" she burst out. "Whatever for did I make that
daft-like vow? A lot of good it's like to do the social revolution! I
really am a fool sometimes!"

Was there ever such a child, Yaverland asked himself triumphantly, as if
he had proved a disputed point. He persuaded himself that the exquisite
exhibition of her personality which delighted him all through the meal
they presently shared on the rock beside this red pool was vouchsafed to
him only because he had been wise enough not to treat her as a woman.
She was as spontaneous as a little squirrel that plays unwatched in the
early morning at the fringe of the wood. There was no movement of her
beautiful bright-coloured person, no upward or downward singing of her
soft Scotch voice, that did not precisely express some real action of
her soul. But if he had spoken only one word of love it would not have
been so. She would have blurred her clear gestures by traditional
languors, she would have kept her mind busy draping her with the graces
expected of a courted maiden instead of letting it run enquiringly about
the marvels of the earth; for the old wives and the artists have been so
busy with this subject of love that they have made a figure of the
lover, and the young woman who finds herself a bride can no more behave
naturally than a young man who finds himself a poet. Oh, he was doing
the sensible thing. There was no day in his life which he was more
certain that he had spent wisely than this which he dawdled away playing
with Ellen as a little boy might play with a little girl, on the edge of
the two lochs to which this glen led. By the first, a dull enough
stretch of water had it not been for its name, which she loved and made
him love by repeating it, "Loganlee, Loganlee." She made him go on ahead
for a few yards and then ran to him, clapping her hands, because he had
come to a halt on the bridge that spanned a little tributary to the
loch.

"There, I knew you'd stop! There's no stranger ever gets across this
bridge without stopping and looking over. They call it the Lazy Brig.
The old folk say it's because there's a fairy sitting by the burn, a
gossiping buddy who casts a spell on strangers so that he can have a
good look at them and talk about them afterwards to the other fairies."
But at the second loch, Glencorse Pond, she nearly quarrelled with him,
though she was pleased with his evident awe at the place. Here black
wild hills ran down to a half-moon of wind-fretted water, near a mile
long, and dark trees stood on its banks with such a propriety of
desolate beauty that it seemed as if it must be a conscious work of art;
one could believe that the scene had been wrought by some winged artist
divine enough to mould mountains yet possessed by an ecstasy of human,
grief. There was a little island on the loch, a knoll of sward so
thickly set with tall swaying firs that from this distance it looked
like a bunch of draggled crow's feathers set in the water, and from this
there ran to the northern shore a broad stone causeway, so useless that
it provoked the imagination and made the mind's eye see a string of
hatchet-faced men, wrapped in cloaks and swinging lanthorns, passing
that way at midnight. It was, Ellen said, a reservoir; but it was no
ordinary reservoir, for under its waters lay an ancient chapel and its
graveyard.

"Mrs. Bonar, the ploughman's wife who lives in the cottage up yonder on
Bell's Hill--do you see it?--told me she'd often seen the ghosts rising
up through the water at night. And I said to her, 'That's most
interesting. And what do the ghosts look like?' 'Och, the very dead spit
of thon incandescent mantles my daughter has in her wee flat in
Edinburgh.' Was that not a fine way for a ghost to look?"

He laughed at that, but presently laughed at a private jest of his own,
and so fell into disgrace. For in answer to her enquiring gaze he said,
"A reservoir with a churchyard at the bottom of it. I wondered what
cocktail Edinburgh took to keep itself so gay." To his surprise, tears
came into her eyes. "Oh, you English!" she snapped. "Cackling at the
Scotch is your one accomplishment."

But they soon made friends. The skies intervened to patch it up between
them, for presently there broke out a huge windy conflagration of a
sunset, which was itself so fine a scarlet show and wrought such magical
changes on the common colour of things that she had constantly to call
his attention by little intimate cries and tuggings at the sleeve. This
was not soft summer glow, no liquefaction of tints; but the world
became mineral as they looked. The field by the road was changed from a
dull winter green to a greenish copper; the bramble bushes cast long
steel-blue shadows, and their scarlet and purple leaves looked like
snips of painted tin; and the Glencorse Burn on the other side of the
field was overhung by bare trees of gold. Every window of the farmhouse
across the valley was a loophole of flame; and here it was evident, from
the passing of a multitude of figures about the farm buildings and a
babblement that drove in gusts across the valley, there was happening
some event that matched the prodigiousness of the strange appearance
lent it by the sunset.

"There's an awful argy-bargying at Little Vantage," said Ellen, "I
wonder what's going on."

When they crossed over the burn and turned into the road that led back
to the farmhouse they found the dykes plastered with intimations of a
sale of live stock. "Ah, it's a roup! Old Mr. Gumley must be dead, poor
soul!" And indeed the road was lined with farmers' gigs, paint and
brass-work blazing with the evening light till they looked like fiery
chariots that would presently lift to heaven. About the yard gate there
was a great press of hale farmers, gilt and ruddy from the sunset they
faced, and vomiting jests at each other out of their great bearded
mouths; and in the yard sheep with golden fleece and cattle as bright as
dragons ran hither and thither before the sticks of boys who looked like
demons with the orange glow on their faces, and who cursed and spat to
show they would some-day be men. Richard and Ellen had to stand back for
a moment while a horse was led out; and as it passed a paunchy farmer
jocularly struck it between the eyes and roared, "Ye're no for me, ye
auld mare, wi' your braw beginnings of the ringbone!" And there was so
much glee at the mention of deformity in the thick voice, and so much
patience in the movement of the mare's long unshapely head, that the
incident was as unpleasing as if it had been an ill-favoured spinster
who had been insulted. Yaverland was roused suddenly by the tiniest
sound of a whimper from Ellen.

"What's the matter?" he asked tenderly.

"Nothing," she quivered. "There's something awful sad about the evening
sometimes. I've got an end of the world feeling." And indeed there was
something awesome and unnatural about this quiet hour in which there was
so much light and so little heat, in this furnace of the skies from
which there flowed so glacial a wind. "Supposing the end of the world is
like this," said Ellen, nearly crying. "A lot of beefy, red-faced angels
buying us up and taking us off to their own places without a word to us
of where we're to go to, and commenting most unfeelingly on all our
failings...."

"You funny person," he murmured, "you're tired. Probably hungry. Where's
that cottage you talked about where they'll give us tea?"

"Over yonder," she quavered, "but I'm not wanting any tea."

But just then a gig drew up beside them, driven by an old man and laden
with a couple of tin trunks and a cornucopia of a woman, who had
snatched the reins out of the old man's hands. "What's this? A roup at
Little Vantage! Feyther, what's happened?" The old man shook his head.
"Feyther, ye niver ken onything." She raised a megaphonic voice.
"Moggie! Moggie Gumley!" A fat young woman with a soap-shining face ran
out of the farmhouse. "Wha's calling me? Och, it's you, Mistress
Cairns!" "Ay, it's me. What's ta'en ye all here? I've been awa' for two
months keepin' hoose for ma brither Jock while his wife's been in the
Infirmary wi' her chumer. I didn't think I'd come back to find a roup at
Little Vantage." "So ye've not haird?" gasped the fat young woman
delightedly. "Feyther's deid o' his dropsy, and Alec and me's awa' to
Canady this day fortnight." She panted it out with so honest a joy in
the commotion, so innocent a disregard of the tragedy of death and
emigration, that Yaverland and Ellen had to turn away and laugh; and he
drew her across the road to the cottage.

The door was opened before they got there. "It's me, Mrs. Lawson!" said
Ellen. "Indeed, I kenned that!" replied the housewife. "I was keeking
out of the window when you came up the road, and I said to masel',
'There's Miss Melville, and she'll be wanting her tea,' so I awa' and
popped the kettle on. Bring your gentleman in. He's a new face, but he's
welcome. Ye'll pardon the parlour being a' of a reek wi' tobaccy, but
Mr. Laidlaw and Mr. Borthwick cam' in and had a cup o' tea and a bit of
a crack. They were both bidding at the roup and some business thegither.
I think Mr. Laidlaw means to buy Cornhaven off Mr. Borthwick and give it
to his son John, wha's married on a Glasca girl, a shelpit wee thing wi'
a Glesca accent like skirling pipes played by a drunken piper." They
watched her while she set the table with tea and scones and strawberry
jam and cheese, and smiled rather vacantly at her stream of gossip,
their natural liking for the woman struggling against their sense of the
superfluity of everybody on earth except each other. When she left them
they ate and drank almost without speech, soberly delighted by the
mellowing of the world that followed the dwindling of the sunset fires.
All things seemed to become more modest and reconciled; and farmers
hawked out their last jests at one another, mounted their gigs and drove
home; and the flocks of sheep and droves of cattle pattered by, bleating
and lowing not so heartrendingly.

Ellen rose, went over to the mantelpiece and stroked the china dogs, and
sat down in an armchair by the fire. "This has been a lovely day," she
murmured. She joined her hands behind her head and crossed her knees and
smiled blindishly into the shadow; and his heart turned over in him. All
his life he would remember her just as she was then: the lovely attitude
of body that was at once angular and softly sensuous, like a
blossom-laden branch; the pure pearl colour of her skin, the pure bright
colours of her hair and eyes and mouth; the passionate and funny, shrewd
and credulous pattern of her features; and that dozing smile, that
looked as if her soul had ceased to run up and down enquiringly and was
resting awhile to enjoy the sweetness that was its own climate. He would
never forget her as she was looking then. She might turn away from him,
she might get old, she might die, but the memory of her as she was at
that moment would endure for ever in his heart, an eternally living
thing. He was aware, reluctantly enough, for he hated such mystical
knowledge, and would have given the world to see life as a plain round
of dicing and drinking and wenching, that real love was somehow a cruel
thing for women; that the hour when she became his wife would be as
illimitably tragic as it would be illimitably glorious. But love was
also very kind to women, since it enabled them to live always at their
loveliest in their lover's memories, there perpetually exempt from the
age and ugliness that even the bravest of them seemed pitifully to fear.

Yet, of course love was not so kind to every woman. No one remembered
his mother as he would remember Ellen. He began to ponder what his
mother must have been like when she was that age, and it marked a
certain difference between him and other men, that he was grudgingly
surprised that the girl he meant to marry was as beautiful as his
mother. Certainly, he reflected, with a bitter, gloating grief, Marion
Yaverland must have been beautiful enough to deserve a lodging in some
man's memory. She must have been brilliantly attractive in the obvious
physical sense to have overcome the repulsion that her spirit and wit
must certainly have aroused in such a man as his father; and though he
suppressed his earliest memories of her because they introduced that
other who had shared his nursery, he had many pictures in his mind which
showed her brown and red-lipped and subtle with youth, and not the dark,
silent sledge-hammer of a woman that she had latterly become.

There came to him a memory of a distant winter afternoon, so far distant
that he could not have been more than four or five, when they had come
back from doing their Christmas shopping at Prittlebay, and he had
grizzled, as tired children do, at the steepness of the hill that
climbed from Roothing station to Yaverland's End, always a stiff pull,
and that day a brown muck of trodden snow. She had looked round with her
hard proud stare to make sure that nobody was watching them, and then
spread out her crimson cloak and danced backwards in front of him, and
cried out loving little gibes at his heavy footedness, her own vitality
flashing about her like lightning. When she was younger still, and had
not wept so much, she must often have glowed very beautifully under her
lover's eyes. It was a pity that she had chosen to love that thief, who
stole the memories of her glorious moments as he had stolen her good
repute and peace of mind, and crept away with the loot to the tomb on
the hillside where his son could not pursue him. As he thought of the
unmitigated quality of his mother's lot he hated other women for their
cheerful lives; and Ellen, who had felt that his mood had turned from
her, and was watching his face, said to herself: "He has some trouble
that he is not telling me. Well, why should he? We are almost
strangers." Suddenly she felt very weak and lonely, and put her hands
over her face.

Mrs. Lawson put her head round the door. "You young people's letting the
clock run on. Nae doot ye're douce and souple walkers, but if ye want to
catch the Edinburgh bus ye'll hev none too much time."

Yaverland and Ellen both started forward, and their eyes met. "Oh, we
must hurry!" she exclaimed, with a pale distress that puzzled him by its
intensity. Yet she made him wait while she pinned up her hair; and that
almost made him suspect her as a minx, for she looked so pretty with her
arms above her head and her white fingers shuttling in and out of her
red hair. But when they got into the lane outside she hurried towards
the high road as if she fled from something, catching her breath
sobbingly when the darkness was so thick that she could not run,
although he told her many times that there was no need for haste. "See,"
he said, as they took their stand at the cross-roads, "the bus isn't
anywhere in sight yet." But she did not answer him, and he became aware
that she was trembling. "Are you cold? Would you like my coat?" he
asked, but she murmured a little broken mouseish refusal. Could it
possibly be that she was frightened of being alone with him in the dark?
He had to own to himself that she would have been afraid of him if she
had known some of the things that he had done, although he did not admit
that her fear would be anything more than a child's harsh judgment of
matters it did not understand. But no rumours could have reached her
ears, for he had always lived very secretly, even beyond the needs of
discretion, since he knew that the passive sort of women with whom, for
the most part, he had had dealings have an enormous power of
self-deception, and could, as the years went on, if there were no
witnesses to dispute it, pretend to themselves that what had happened
with him was no reality but only a naughty dream that had come to them
between sleeping and waking.

It came to him like a feeling of sickness that it was not absolutely
impossible that those Christians, in spite of that personal
ridiculousness which he had noticed in nearly all of them, were right.
It might be that sin was sin and left a stain, and that those things
which had appeared to him as innocently sweet as a bathe in a summer
sea, and which he had believed to end utterly with dawn and the stealthy
shutting of a door, had somehow left him loathsome to this girl. He
perceived that there might have been a meaning adverse to him in the way
she had delayed, in despite of her own wish to hurry, and pinned up her
hair. Perhaps she had seen something in his face which made her shiver
with apprehension that his hands might touch it; not because it was her
hair, but because they were his hands and had acquired a habit of
fingering women's beauties. But indeed he was not like that. He sweated
with panic, and raged silently against this streak of materialism in
women that makes them so grossly dwell on the physical events in a man's
life. This agony of tenderness he felt for her now, this passion of
worship that kept half his mind inactive yet tense, like a devotee
contemplating the altar, was more real than anything he had ever felt
for those other women.

The bus came down the road to them and he stepped forward, shouting and
lifting his stick. But it swept on, packed with soldiers in red coats,
who sent out into the darkness behind them a fan of song. "It's the
soldiers from the barracks at Glencorse, bother them," sighed Ellen.
"And dear knows when there's a train." She spoke with such a flat
extremity of despair that he peered at her through the darkness and
found that her head had fallen back and her eyes were almost closed.
Evidently she had been overcome by one of those sudden prostrations to
which young people are liable when they have spilt out their strength
too recklessly. He remembered how once, when the _Gondomar_ had been
scuttling for two days at the fringe of a cyclone, he had seen a
cabin-boy lean back against a mast and become suddenly statuesque with
inertia, with such a queer pinching of the mouth as hers. "It's all
right," he said comfortingly. "There's a train in a quarter of an
hour." She must have heard him, for she began to walk towards the
station lights that twinkled up the road, but she answered in a tone
that sounded as if her mind was inaccessible with somnolence, "I'm half
asleep."

The train was in when they reached the station, and he told her to take
a seat in it while he got the tickets. But she did not. Its carriages
were not yet lit, and it looked black and cold and cheerless, like those
burned buildings they had seen at Balerno; and anyway, she did not want
to take that train. She would have liked to turn back with him through
the dark avenues into the Pentlands. The sunset, which had somehow been
as vexing as it was beautiful, would by then have receded utterly before
the kind, sleepy darkness, undisturbed there in the valley by the
wee-est cottage light. It would be good to lie down for the night on the
heather of some ledge on the hillside where one could hear the Logan
Burn talking as it ran from the fall, and to look up and see Mr.
Yaverland sitting in that nice slouching way he had, a great black shape
against the stars. But that was a daft idea. She was annoyed for
thinking of anything so foolish, and when he came out and chid her for
standing about on the windy platform she found nothing on her lips but a
cross murmur.

That did not really matter, for one could not hurt grown-up people. They
were always happy. Everybody in the world was happy except her. Without
doubt he would think her quite mad if he knew that she was in the grip
of a depression that seemed to be wringing misery out of her body and
brain as one wrings water out of a bathing-dress, so when they got into
the train she turned away, muttered yawningly that she was very tired,
and buried her face in the crook of her arm so that he might think she
slept. It puzzled her that she felt so disappointed. What had she
expected to happen to-day that hadn't happened? Everything had been
lovely. Mr. Yaverland had talked most interestingly, and the hills had
been very beautiful. She was ashamed of all those tears that she shed
more frequently than one would have expected from an intending rival of
Pierpont Morgan, but these present tears filled her with terror because
they were so utterly irrational. Irrational, too, was the sudden picture
that flashed on her mind's eye of Mr. Philip sitting in the opposite
corner of the carriage, screwing up his dark face with mocking laughter.
"Mr. Philip is driving me mad," she thought to herself. "Some day soon
I'll find myself in Morningside Asylum, sticking flowers in my hair and
flattering myself I'm Queen Victoria. But I will not go mad. I am going
to get on. I am going to be great. But am I? I think I am not." Her face
made a wet contorted mask against her sleeve, and a swallowed sob was as
sharp in her throat as a fishbone; and there struck through her like an
impaling sword a certainty which she could not understand, but which was
surely a certificate that there was to be no more happiness, that even
if Mr. Philip ceased to persecute her she would still be hungry and
tormented.

Perhaps if she could go to some new country she would escape from this
misery. She saw a sky like stretched blue silk, stamped with the black
monograms of palms; a purple bay shaped like a shell and edged with a
white embroidery of surf. Surely such fair weather killed with sweetness
such coarse plants as her stupid gloom, as the foul weather here killed
with its coarseness all sweet-flowering southern plants. She turned to
Yaverland to ask him if he could help her to find work abroad, but she
became aware that she was in the grip of an unreasonable emotion that
prevented her from this. It was as horrible to her to see the coldly
logical apparatus of her mind churning out these irrational conclusions
as it would have been for her to find her mother babbling in
drunkenness; and this feeling that for Yaverland to know of her misery
would be a culminating humiliation that she could not face seemed
disgustingly mad. So she threw herself into a black drowse of misery
unfeatured by specific ideas, until she began to think smilingly of the
way his eyebrows grew; they were very thick and dark and perfectly level
save for a piratical twist in the middle. But she became conscious that
he was standing over her, and her heart almost stopped. He said, "I
think we're just coming into Edinburgh." There was no reason why she
should feel chilled and desolate when he said that. She must be going
out of her mind.

And he, since she had shown by the simplicity of her movements that she
was not afraid of him, was quite happy.

He could see the picture of himself sitting beside the sleeping child as
if it were printed in three colours on glossy paper. But he was a little
troubled lest she had walked too far, and as they went up the stone
steps from the station to Princes Street he bent over her and asked in a
tone of tenderness that he enjoyed using, "Are you tired?"

"Oh, very tired," said Ellen, drooping her head, and aping a fatigue
greater than anything she had ever felt in all her young life.


CHAPTER IV

I


Mr. Philip was crossing Princes Street when he saw them standing in the
white circle under the electric standard by the station steps. The
strong light fell on them like a criticism, and it seemed to him brazen
the way they stood there being so handsome that the passers-by turned
about to stare at them. Doubtless, since folks were such fools, they
were whispering that the two made a fine pair. Surely it was the vilest
indecency that there, under his very eyes, that great hulking chap from
Rio bent his head and spoke to Ellen, and she answered him?

"She's standing there making herself as conspicuous as if she were a
street girl!" he screamed to himself, and other shouts filled his ears,
and he became aware that a cursing driver had pulled up his horse a foot
away and that the loafers at the kerb were lifting jeering cries. He
charged it one more offence to Ellen's account that she had caused him
to make a fool of himself, and vowed he would never think of her again,
and ran among the people to see where she had gone. Yaverland was
leading her very quickly along towards the North Bridge, and she was now
nothing but a dark shape that might, he thought with a glee that he did
not understand, have belonged to some ageing woman with a bony body and
a sallow face. But then he saw against the lit pavement her narrow feet
treading that gait that was like a grave, slow dance, and he realised
with agony that it was no use lying to himself and pretending that this
was anybody but Ellen--Ellen, who was far different from every other
woman in the world and more desirable. She slowly turned, as if her
spirit had felt this rage at the fact of her running at her heels, and
wished to have it out with him. He gripped his stick and raised a hand
to hide his working mouth, and waited for the moment when she would see
his face, but it did not come.

The man Yaverland had put out his great ham of a hand and hailed a cab.
When Mr. Philip tried to stop a cab he usually had to run alongside it,
and often the driver was most impudent, but this swaggering bully
checked the thing on the instant, and handed in Ellen and drove off in
style as if he was a duke with his duchess in their own carriage. What
did they want in a cab anyway? He followed the black trundling square on
its spidery wheels as it turned round by the Register House to cross the
North Bridge, and imagined the fine carryings on they were doubtless
having in the dark in there. He called Ellen a name he had not thought
of before.

There was nothing to be done about it. He stood for a while at the
railing of that strange garden of concrete walks and raised parterres
and ventilating-shafts that lies at this end of Princes Street, built on
the roof of the sunk market. Its rectilinear aspect pleased him. It was
not romantic, the gates were locked, and one could be sure that there
were no lovers trysting there. Presently he moved along towards the West
End, keeping still on the side of the street where there were no men and
girls prancing about and grinning at each other like dirty apes under
the lights, but only empty gardens with locked gates. What had those two
been doing? They had come in by train. Unless they had travelled a very
long journey it must have been dark before they started. They had been
in the country alone together when it was quite dark. There came to him
memories of sounds he had once heard when walking through a twilit wood,
the crackling of twigs, a little happy cry of distress, and again the
crackling of twigs; he had been compelled by something, which was not
specially in him but was a part of the damned way life went, to stand
and listen, though he knew it was not decent. He saw before him Ellen's
face lying white on her spilt red hair, and it added to his anguish that
he could not see it clearly, but had to peer at this enraging vision
because he could not make out what her expression would be. He had seen
her look a thousand ways during these last few weeks when she had kept
on drawing his attention to her with her simpering girl's tricks, but he
could not imagine how she would look then. It seemed as if she were
defying his imagination as she defied him every day in the office, and
he turned his mind away from the matter in a frenzy, but began soon to
wonder what those two had been doing. They had come in by train. Unless
they had travelled a very long journey it must have been dark before
they started....

He knew he must not go on like this, and looked round him. He had passed
the classic portico of the Art Gallery and was walking now by the wilder
section of the gardens, where the street lights shone back from the
shining leaves of bushes and made them look like glazed paper, and with
their glare made the trees behind seem such flat canvas trees as they
set about the stage at theatres when there is need for a romantic glade
for a lovers' meeting. How often had Ellen met Yaverland?

He ran across the road. It would be better among the people. It was not
so bad if you did not watch them and see how happy they were. Everybody
in the world was happy except him. No doubt Ellen and her Yaverland were
just bursting with merriment in that cab. Would they be at home yet? She
would be telling him all the office jokes. Well, she might, for all he
cared. He knew fine that young Innes called him Mr. Philip
Hop-o'-my-Thumb behind his back, and he didn't give a straw for it. He
stopped in front of a picture-postcard shop that was hung from top to
bottom of its window with strings of actresses' photographs, and stood
there with a jaunty rising and falling of the heels, bestowing an
exaggerated attention on the glossy black and white patterns that
indicated the glittering facades of these charmers' smiles, the milky
smoothness of their bean-fed femininity. Ah, these were the really fine
women that it was worth troubling your head about, from whose satin
slippers, it was well known, dukes and the like drank champagne. Who
would bother about a wee typist when there were women like these in the
world?

But as he looked at them he perceived that there was not one so
beautiful as Ellen, and he walked waveringly on, wrathful at the way she
insisted on being valuable when he wanted to despise her. A woman who
had been watching him for some time, and who knew from a wide experience
that he was in one of those aching miseries which make men turn to such
as she, slipped from the shadows and murmured to him. She was taller
than he, and had to bend her long slender neck that he might hear. He
hated her for being a streetwalker and for being taller than he, and
began to swear at her. But before he could get the words out of his
mouth she had wiped the smile from her pale oval face with the adeptness
of a proud woman who had long preserved her pride in the fields of
contempt, and glided away with a dignity that denied what she was and
what had happened. That struck him as a monstrous breach of the social
contract, for surely if a woman was a bad woman she ought to stay still
until one had finished swearing at her.

But all these women were vile. There was no measure to the vileness that
Ellen had brought on him. For it was all her fault, since he never would
have gone with that woman in London if it had not been for the way she
had carried on the evening before. At the thought of that night in
Piccadilly he began to hurry along the street, pushing in and out among
the people as if he insanely hoped to lose the humiliating memory as one
can lose a dog, until he remembered how he had had to hurry along beside
the London woman because she was a great striding creature and he found
it difficult to keep step, and then he walked slowly. It had all been so
ugly, and it was a fraud too. It had been his belief that the advantage
of prostitution was that it gave one command over women like Ellen
without bringing on one the trouble that would certainly follow if one
did ill to Ellen; for even if nobody ever found out, she would look at
one with those eyes. But this woman was not in the least like Ellen. He
had chosen her rather than the girl in the white boots at the other side
of the pavement because he thought she had hair like Ellen, but when she
took her hat off he saw that she had not. It was funny stuff, with an
iridescence on it as if she had been rubbing it with furniture polish.
Her flat, too, was not kept as Ellen would have kept it. And she had not
been kind, as Ellen, when she moved softly as a cloud about the office
fetching him things, or sat listening, with chin cupped in her hands and
a hint of tears, to the story of his disappointment about the Navy; had
fraudulently led him to believe what women were to men. She had been a
cruel beast. For when she had got him to be so very wicked she might
have spared him some of the nastiness, and not said those awful leering
things so loud. Never would he forgive Ellen for dragging him down to
those depths.

He was walking away from Princes Street to his own home now, and the
decent grey vacuity of the streets soothed him. If he only had the sense
to stay in the district of orderly houses where he belonged, and behaved
accordingly, and did not go talking with people beneath him, he could
not come to harm. But that would not alter the fact that he had once
come to harm. As he passed the house at the corner of his street he saw
that a "To Let" board had been put up since the morning. He wondered why
the Allardyces were leaving it. He had been at school with the boys. He
and Willie Allardyce had tied tenth in the mile race at the last school
sports in which he had taken part before he left the Academy. He
remembered how they had all stood at the starting-post in the windy
sunshine, straight lads in their singlets and shorts, utterly uninvolved
in anything but this clean thing of running a race; the women were all
behind the barriers, tolerated spectators, and one was too busy to see
them; his clothing had been stiff with sweat, and when he wriggled his
body the cool air passed between his damp vest and his damp flesh,
giving him a cold, pure feeling. Well, he was not a boy any longer. The
Allardyces were moving; everything was changing this way and that;
nothing would be the same again....

The solidity of his father's house, the hall into which he let himself,
with its olive green wallpaper, its aneroid barometer, an oil-painting
of his mother's father, Mr. Laurie of the Bank of Scotland, made him
feel better. He reminded himself that he belonged to one of the most
respected families in Edinburgh, and that there was no use getting upset
about things that nobody would ever find out, and he went into the
dining-room and poured himself out a glass of whisky, looking round with
deep satisfaction at his prosperous surroundings. There was a very
handsome red wallpaper, and a blazing fire that chased the tawny lights
and shadows on the leviathanic mahogany furniture and set a sparkle on
the thick silver and fine glass on the spread table. "Mhm!" he sighed
contentedly, and raised the tumbler to his lips. But the smell of the
whisky recalled to him the flavour of that Piccadilly woman's kisses.

The room seemed to contract and break out into soiled pink valances. He
put down his glass, groaned, and made his mind blank, and was
immediately revisited by the thought of Ellen's face on her spilt red
hair. An ingenious thought struck him, and he hurried from the room. He
met one of his sisters in the passage, and said, "Away, I want to speak
to father." It was true that she was not preventing him from doing so,
but the gesture of dominance over the female gave him satisfaction.

There was a little study at the back of the house which was lined from
top to bottom with soberly bound and unrecent books, and dominated by a
bust of Sir Walter Scott supported on a revolving bookcase which
contained the Waverley Novels, Burns' Poems, and Chambers' Dictionary,
which had an air of having been put there argumentatively, as a
manifesto of the Scottish view that intellect is their local industry.
Here, in a fog of tobacco smoke, Mr. Mactavish James reclined like a
stranded whale, reading the London _Law Journal_ and breathing
disparagingly through both mouth and nose at once, as he always did when
in contact with the English mind. He did not look up when Mr. Philip
came in, but indicated by a "Humph!" that he was fully aware of the
entrance. There was an indefinable tone in this grunt which made Mr.
Philip wonder whether he had not been overmuch influenced in seeking
this interview by the conventional view of the parental relationship. He
sometimes suspected that his father regarded him with accuracy, rather
than with the indulgence that fathers habitually show to their only
sons. But he went at it.

"Father, you'll have to speak to yon Melville girl."

Mr. Mactavish James did not raise his eyes, but enquired with the
faintest threat of mockery, "What's she been doing to you, Philip?"

"She's not been doing anything to me. What could she do? But I've just
seen her in Princes Street with yon fellow Yaverland, the client from
Rio. They were coming out of the station and they took a cab."

"What for should they not?"

"You can't have a typist prancing about with clients at this time of
night."

"It's airly yet," said Mr. Mactavish James mildly, continuing to turn
over the pages of the _Law Journal_. "We've not had our dinners yet.
Though from the way the smell of victuals is roaring up the back stairs
we shouldn't be long."

"Father, people were looking at them. They--they were holding hands." He
forced himself to believe the lie. "You can't have her carrying on like
that with clients. It'll give the office a bad name."

At last his father raised his eyes, which, though bleared with age, were
still the windows of a sceptical soul, and let them fall. "Ellen is a
good girl, Philip," he said.

The young man began a gesture of despair, which he restrained lest those
inimical eyes should lift again. This was not a place, he well knew,
where sentimental values held good, where the part of a young and
unprotected girl would be taken against the son of the house out of any
mawkish feeling that youth or weakness of womanhood deserved especial
tenderness. It was the stronghold of his own views, its standards were
his own. And even here it was insisted that Ellen was a person of value.
There seemed nothing in the world that would give him any help in his
urgent need to despise her, to think of her as dirt, to throw on her the
onus of all the vileness that had happened to him. He broke out, "If
she's a good girl she ought to behave as such! You must speak to her,
father. There'll be a scandal in the town!"

Mr. Mactavish James seemed to have withdrawn his mind from the
discussion, for he had taken out his appointment diary, which could
surely have nothing to do with the case. But when Mr. Philip had turned
towards the door, the old man said, amiably enough, "Ay, I'll speak to
Nelly. I'll speak to her on Monday afternoon. The morning I must be up
at the Court of Session. But in the afternoon I'll give the girl a
word."

It was on the tip of Mr. Philip's tongue to cry, "Thank you, father,
thank you!" but he remembered that this was merely a matter of office
discipline that was being settled, and no personal concern of his. So he
said, "I think it would be wise, father," and went out of the room. He
ran upstairs whistling. It would be a great come-down for her that had
always been such a pet of his father's to be spoken to about her
conduct....


II

The door had swung ajar, so Mr. Mactavish James in his seat at his desk
was able to look into the further room and keep an eye on Ellen, who was
sitting with her back to him, supporting her bright head on her hand and
staring fixedly down at something on the table. Her appearance
entertained him, as it always did. He chuckled over the shapeless blue
overall, just like a bairn's, that she wore on her neat wee figure, and
the wild shining hair which resembled nothing so much as a tamarisk
hedge in a high wind, though she would have barked like a terrier at
anyone who suggested that it was not as neatly a done head as any in
Edinburgh. But he was very anxious about her. For some moments now she
had not moved, and this immobility was so unnatural in her that he knew
she must be somehow deeply hurt, as one who sees a bird quite still
knows that it is dead or dying. "Tuts, tuts," he sighed. "This must be
looked to. She is the bonniest lassie that I've ever seen. Excepting
Isabella Kingan." His right hand, which had been lying listlessly on the
desk before him, palm upwards, turned over when he thought of Isabella
Kingan. The fingers crooked, and it became an instrument of will, like
the hand of a young man.

But he was really quite old, nearly seventy, and well on the way to lose
the human obsession of the importance of humanity; so his attention
began to note, as if they were not less significant than Ellen's agony,
the motes that were dancing in the bar of pale autumn sunshine that lay
athwart the room. "It is a queer thing," his mind droned on, "that when
I came here when I was young I saw there was a peck of dust in every
room, and I blamed old Mr. Logan for keeping on yon dirty old wife of a
caretaker. I said to myself that when I was the master I would have it
like a new pin and put a decent buddy in the basement. And now Mr. Logan
is long dead, and the old wife is long dead, and I have had things my
own way these many years, but the place is still foul as a lum, and I
keep on yon slut of a Mrs. Powell. Ah well! Ah well!" He pondered, with
a Scotch sort of enjoyment, on the frustration of youth's hopes and the
progress of mortality in himself, until a movement of Ellen's bright
head, such a jerk as might have been caused by a silent sob, brought his
thoughts back to beauty and his small personal traffic with it.

"I do not know why she should mind me of Isabella Kingan. She is not
like her. Isabella was black as a wee crow. It is just that they're both
very bonny. I wonder what has happened to Isabella. She must be
sixty-five. I saw her once in Glasgow, in Sauchiehall Street, after she
was married, but she would not speak. Yet what else could I have done? I
had my way to make, and it was known up and down the length of Edinburgh
that her mother kept a sweetie shop in Leith Walk, and she had a cousin
who was a policeman in the town. No, no, it would not have been a
suitable marriage."

He moved restlessly in his chair, vexed by a sense of guilt, which
although he immediately mitigated it into a suspicion that he might have
behaved more wisely, made his memory maliciously busy opening doors
which he had believed he had locked. But he was so expert in the
gymnastic art of standing well with himself and the world that he could
turn each recollected incident to a cause of self-approbation before he
had begun to flush. For a few moments, using the idioms of Burns'
love-lyrics, which were the only dignified and unobscene references to
passion he had ever encountered, he thought of that night when he had
persuaded little Isabella to linger in the fosse of shadow under the
high wall in Canaan Lane and give up her mouth to his kisses, her tiny
warm dove's body to his arms. Never in all the forty-five intervening
years had he seen such a wall on such a night, its base in velvety
darkness and its topmost half shining ghostly as plaster does in
moonlight, without his hands remembering the queer pleasure it had been
to crush crisp muslin, without his heart remembering the joy it had been
to coax from primness its first consent to kisses. Before he could
reproach himself for having turned that perfect hour into a shame to her
who gave it by his later treachery, he began to reflect what a steady
young fellow he had been to have known no other amorous incident in all
his unmarried days than this innocent fondling on a summer's night.

But there pressed in on him the recollection of how she had dwined away
when she realised that, though he had kissed her, he did not mean to
marry her. He saw again the pale face she ever after wore; he remembered
how, when he met her in the street, she used at first to droop her head
and blush, until her will lifted her chin like a bearing-rein and she
forced herself to a proud blank stare, while her small stature worked to
make her crinoline an indignant spreading majesty behind her. Yet, after
all, she was not the only person to be inconvenienced, for he had fashed
himself a great deal over the business and had slept very badly for a
time. He exhorted her reproachful ghost not to be selfish. Besides, she
had somehow brought it on herself by looking what she did; for her dark
eyes, very bright, yet with a kind of bloom on them, and her full though
tiny underlip had always looked as if it would be very easy to make her
cry, and she had had a preference for wearing grey and brown and such
modest colours that made it plain she feared to be noticed. To display a
capacity for pain so visibly was just to invite people to test it. If
she had been a girl who could look after herself, doubtless she would
have got him. He paid her the high compliment of wishing that she had,
although he had done very well out of the marriages he had made, for his
first wife, Annie Logan, had brought him his partnership in the firm,
and his second, Christian Lawrie, had brought him a deal of money. But
Isabella had been such a bonny wee thing.

His skin became alive again, and remembered the few responding kisses
that he had wheedled from her, contacts so shy that they might have been
the poisings of a moth. He shuddered, and said, "Ech! Somebody's walking
over my grave!" though, indeed, what had happened was that his youth had
risen from its grave. He decided to be generous to Isabella and not bear
her a grudge for causing him this revisiting heartache. With the softest
pity that the lot of beauty in this world should be so hard, though
quite without self-condemnation, he thought how very sure the poor girl
must have been that he meant to marry her before she abandoned that
proud physical reserve that was the protecting integument of her
sensitive soul. That sensitiveness seemed fair ridiculous when things
were going well with him; but once or twice in his life, when he had
been ill, it had appeared so dreadful that he had desired either to be
young again and give a different twist to things, or to die utterly and
know no after-life.

No, dealing unkindly with the lasses was an ill thing to do. It made one
depressed afterwards even if it paid, just as cheating the widow and
orphan did. His eyes went back to Ellen, who had moved again. "I must
settle this business of Nelly's," he thought. "Of course, Philip is
quite right. It would not be suitable. Besides, he is getting on nicely
with Bob McLennan's girl, and that would be a capital match even for us.
But I must put things straight for my Nelly, my poor wee Nelly." He
rose, first feeling for his crutch, for he was fair dying on his legs
with the gout, and padded slowly towards the open door.

And at the sound of that soft bearish tread Ellen felt as if she were
going to die. There had arrived at last that moment for which she had
waited with an increasing faintness all that day, since the moment when
Mr. Philip had caught her in front of the mantelpiece mirror. She had
gone to look at herself out of curiosity, to see whether she had in any
way been changed by the extraordinary emotions that had lately visited
her. For she had spent two horrible nights of hatred for Yaverland. She
had begun to hate him quite suddenly when he brought her home to say
good-night to her mother. There had broken out the usual tumult in the
dancing-hall, and he had raised his head with an intent delighted look
that at first she watched happily, because she loved to see his face,
which too often wore gravity like a dark mask, grow brilliant with
interest. But he quickly deleted that expression and shot a furtive
glance at her, as if he feared she might have overheard his thoughts,
and she saw that he was anxious that she should not share some
imagination that had given him pleasure.

She went and sat on a low stool by the fire, turning her face away from
him. So he was as little friendly as the rest of the world. Surely it
was plain enough that she lived in the extremity of destitution. The
only place that was hers was this drab little room with the shaking
walls and peeling chairs; the only person that belonged to her was her
mother, who was very dear but very old and grieving; and though
everybody else on earth seemed to have acquired a paradise on easy
terms, nobody would let her look in at theirs. It appeared that he was
just like the others. She folded her arms across her breast to compress
her swelling misery, while he sat there, cruelly not hurrying, and said
courteous things that afterwards repeated themselves in her ear all
night, each time a little louder, till by the dawn they had become
ringing proclamations of indifference.

Yaverland had turned on the doorstep as he left and told her that,
though he believed he had to motor-cycle to Glasgow the next day to see
one of his directors there, it was just possible there might be a
telephone message at his hotel telling him he need not do so; and he had
asked that if this were so might he spend the time with her instead.
Because of this she had lived all Sunday in the dread of his coming. Yet
very often she found herself arrested in the midst of some homely
action, letting some tap run on to inordinate splashings, some pot boil
to an explosion of flavoured fumes, because she was brooding with an
infatuated smile on his rich colours and rich ways, on the slouch by
which he dissembled the strength of his body, the slow speech by which
he dissembled the violence of his soul. But there returned at once her
hatred of him, and she would long to lay her hand in his confidingly as
if in friendship, and then drive her nails suddenly into his flesh, so
that she would make a fool of him as well as hurt him. At that she would
draw her cold hands across her hot brow, and wonder why she should think
so malignantly of one who had been so kind--so much kinder than anybody
else had ever been to her, although she had no claim upon him. Yet she
knew that no argument could alter the fixed opinion of her spirit that
Yaverland's kingly progress through the world, which a short time ago
she had watched with such a singing of the veins as she knew when she
saw lightning, was an insult to her lesser height, her contemned sex,
her obscurity. The chaos in herself amazed her. The glass showed her
that she was very pale, and she wondered if such pallor was a sign of
madness. "I will not go daft!" she whimpered, and began rubbing her
cheeks with her knuckles to bring back the colour; and saw among the
quiet reflected things the queer face, its features pulled every way
with derision, of Mr. Philip.

He said twangingly, "Ten minutes past nine, Miss Melville!"

Her heart was bursting with the thought of what made-up tales of vanity
he would spin from this. "Later than that. Later than that," she told
him wildly. "And I have been here since dear knows when, and there is
nobody ready to give me work."

He shot out a finger. "What's that by your machine?"

She noticed that his finger was shaking, and that he too was very pale,
and she forgot to feel rage or anything but immeasurable despair that
she should have to live in this world where everyone was either
inscrutably cruel or mad. She murmured levelly, dreamily, "Why, papers
that you have just put down. I will type them at once. I will type them
at once."

For a time he stood behind her at the hearth, breathing snortingly, and
at times seeming to laugh; said in a half-voice, "A fire fit to roast an
ox!" and for a space was busy moving lumps of coal down into the grate.
A silence followed before he came to the other side of her table and
said, "Stop that noise. I want to speak to you." The gesture was rude,
but it was picoteed with a faint edge of pitifulness. The way he put his
hand to his head suggested that he was in pain, so she shifted her hands
from the keys and looked up vigilantly, prepared to be kind if he had
need of it, for of course people in pain did not know what they were
doing. But since there was no sense in letting people think they could
just bite one's head off and nothing to pay, she said with spirit, "But
it's ten minutes past nine, and what's this by my machine?"

Mr. Philip bowed his head with an air of meekness; he seemed to sway
under the burden of his extreme humility, to be feeling sick under the
strain of his extreme forbearance. He went on in a voice which implied
that he was forgiving her freely for an orgy of impertinence. "Will you
please take a note, Miss Melville, that Mr. Mactavish James wants to
speak to you this afternoon?"

"He usually does," replied Ellen.

"Ah, but this is a special occasion," said Mr. Philip, with so genial
an expression that she stared up at him, her eyebrows knit and her mouth
puckering back a smile, her deep hopeful prepossession, which she held
in common with all young people, that things really happened prettily,
making her ready to believe that it was all a mistake and he was about
to announce a treat or a promotion. And he, reading this ridiculous sign
of youth, bent over her, prolonging his kind beam and her response to
it, so that afterwards, when he undeceived her, there should be no doubt
at all that she had worn that silly air of expecting something nice to
be given to her, and no doubt that he had seen and understood and jeered
at it. Then the wave of his malice broke and soused her. "Things have
come to a head, Miss Melville! There's been a client complaining!"

She drew herself up. "A client complaining!" she cried, and he hated her
still more, for she had again eluded him. She had forgotten him and the
trap he had laid to make a fool of her in her suspicion that someone had
dared to question her efficiency. "Well, what's that to do with me?
Whoever's been complaining--and no doubt if your clients once began at
that game they wouldn't need to stop between now and the one o'clock
gun--it's not likely I'm among his troubles. So far as my work goes I'm
practically infallible."

"It's not your work that's been spoken of," said Mr. Philip, laughing.
"Perhaps we might call it your play."

He had begun to speak, as he always did when they were alone, in a thick
whisper, as if they were doing something unlawful together. He had drawn
near to her, as he always did, and was hunching his shoulders and making
wriggling recessive movements such as a man might make who stood in
darkness among moving pollutions. But his glee had gone. It had grown
indeed to a grey effervescence that set a tremor working over his
features, made him speak in shaken phrases, and unsteadied everything
about him except the gloating stare which he bent on her bowed head
because he was eager to see her face, which surely would look plain with
all her colour gone. "There's just a limit to everything, Miss Melville,
a limit to everything. You seem to have come to it. Ay, long ago, I have
been thinking! You'd better know at once that you were seen late on
Saturday night, hanging about with a man. It sounded like yon chemist
chap from the description. You were seen entering a cab and driving
away. I won't tell you"--he stepped backwards, swelled a little, and
became the respectable man who has to hem a dry embarrassed cough before
he speaks of evil--"what the client made of it all." And then he bent
again in that contracted, loathing attitude, as if they were standing in
an unspacious sewer and she had led him there, and with that viscous
sibilance he said many things which she could not fully understand, but
which seemed to mean that under decent life there was an oozy mud and
she had somehow wallowed in it. "But doubtless you'll be able to give a
satisfactory explanation of the incident," he finished; and as she
continued to bow her head, so that he could not see the effects of this
misery which he had so adroitly thrust upon her, he leant over her
crying out he hardly knew what, save that they were persecuting things.

But when she slowly raised her chin he saw with rage that though he had
spoilt the colour of her skin with fear, and made her break up the
serene pattern of her features with twitching efforts to hold back her
tears, he had not been able to destroy the secondary meaning of her
face. It had ceased to be pretty; it no longer offered lovely untroubled
surfaces to the lips. But it still proclaimed that she was indubitably
precious as a diamond is indubitably hard; it still calmly declared that
if evil had come out of his meeting with her it had been contrived out
of innocence by some dark alchemy of his own soul; it still moved him to
a madness of unprofitable loyalty and tenderness. In every way he was
defeated. It seemed now the least of his miseries that he had failed to
destroy his father's persuasion that Ellen was a person of value, for it
was so much worse, it opened the door to so long a procession of noble
and undesired desires, that he had not been able to destroy. That same
persuasion in himself. He counted it a fresh grievance against her, and
planned to pay it out with cruelty, that she had made him waste all his
efforts. For though he had certainly made her cry, he could not count
that any great triumph, since under the shower of her weeping her gaiety
was dancing like a draggled elf. "Och me!" she was saying. "You want me
to give you an explanation? But when I've got an appointment to talk
the matter over with the head of the firm, what for would I waste my
time talking it over with the junior partner?" And she began to type as
if she was playing a jig.

He made a furious movement of the hands. She thought contemptuously,
"The wee thing he is! Even if he struck me I should not be afraid. Now,
if it were Yaverland, I should be terrified...." The idea struck through
her like a pleasure, until there fell upon her as the completion of a
misery that had seemed complete, like the last extreme darkness which
falls on a dark night when the last star is found by the clouds, the
recollection that Yaverland also was detestable. Ah, this was a piece of
foolishness between Mr. Philip and herself. In a world where misery was
the prevailing climate, where there were men like Yaverland, who could
effortlessly deal out pain right and left by simply being themselves, it
was so foolish that one who had surely had a natural turn for being
nice, who had been so very nice that firelit evening when they had
talked secrets, should put himself about to hurt her. Her eyes followed
him imploringly as he went towards the door, and she cried out silently
to him, begging him to be kind. But when he turned and looked over his
shoulder she remembered his tyranny, and hardened her piteous gaze into
a stare of loathing. It added to her sense of living in a deep cell of
madness, fathoms below the rays of reason, that she had an illusion that
in his eyes she saw just that same change from piteousness to loathing.
For of course it could not be so.

