The grief of the sultan for the loss of his daughter confined him
to his chamber for a whole month. Before he had fully recovered
his strength he sent for me: "Prince," said he, "attend to the
commands I now give you; your life must answer if you do not
carry them into execution." I assured him of exalt obedience;
upon which he went on thus: "I have constantly lived in perfect
felicity, but by your arrival all the happiness I possessed has
vanished; my daughter is dead, her governor is no more, and it is
only through a miracle that I am myself yet alive You are the
cause of all these misfortunes, under which it is impossible that
I should be comforted; depart hence therefore in peace, without
farther delay, for I must myself perish if you remain any longer.
I am persuaded that your presence brings misfortune with it.
Depart, and take care never to appear again in my dominions. No
consideration whatever shall hinder me from making you repent
your temerity should you violate my injunction." I was going to
speak, but he prevented me by words full of anger; and I was
obliged to quit the palace, rejected, banished, an outcast from
the world. Before I left the city I went into a bagnio, here I
caused my beard and eyebrows to be shaved, and put on a
calender's habit. I began my journey, not so much deploring my
own miseries, as the death of the two fair princesses, of which I
have been the occasion. I passed through many countries without
making myself known; at last I resolved to come to Bagdad, in
hopes of getting myself introduced to the commander of the
faithful, to move his compassion by relating to him my
unfortunate adventures. I arrived this evening, and the first man
I met was this calender, our brother, who spoke before me. You
know the remaining part, madam, and the cause of my having the
honour to be here.

When the second calender had concluded his story, Zobeide, to
whom he had addressed his speech, said, "It is well, you are at
liberty." But instead of departing, he also petitioned the lady
to shew him the same favour vouchsafed to the first calender, and
went and sat down by him.


               The History of the Third Calender.


My story, most honourable lady, very much differs from what you
have already heard. The two princes who have spoken before me
have each lost an eye by the pure effects of their destiny, but
mine I lost through my own fault, and by hastening to seek my own
misfortune, as you shall hear by the sequel of the story.

My name is Agib, and I am the son of a sultan who was called
Cassib. After his death I took possession of his dominions, and
continued in the city where he had resided. It is situated on the
sea-coast, has one of the finest and safest harbours in the
world, an arsenal capable of fitting out for sea one hundred and
fifty men of war, besides merchantmen and light vessels. My
kingdom is composed of several fine provinces upon the main land,
besides a number of valuable islands, which lie almost in sight
of my capital.

My first object was to visit the provinces: I afterwards caused
my whole fleet to be fitted out, and went to my islands to gain
the hearts of my subjects by my presence, and to confirm them in
their loyalty. These voyages gave me some taste for navigation,
in which I took so much pleasure, that I resolved to make some
discoveries beyond my own territories; to which end I caused ten
ships to be fitted out, embarked, and set sail.

Our voyage was very pleasant for forty days successively, but on
the forty-first night the wind became contrary, and withal so
boisterous that we were near being lost: about break of day the
storm abated, the clouds dispersed, and the weather became fair.
We reached an island, where we remained two days to take in fresh
provisions; and then put off again to sea. After ten days' sail
we were in hopes of seeing land, for the tempests we had
experienced had so much abated my curiosity, that I gave orders
to steer back to my own coast; but I perceived at the same time
that my pilot knew not where we were. Upon the tenth day, a
seaman being sent to look out for land from the mast head, gave
notice that on starboard and larboard he could see nothing but
sky and sea, but that right a-head he perceived a great
blackness.

The pilot changed colour at this account, and throwing his turban
on the deck with one hand, and beating his breast with the other,
cried, "Oh, Sir, we are all lost; not one of us can escape; and
with all my skill it is not in my power to effect our
deliverance." Having spoken thus, he lamented like a man who
foresaw unavoidable ruin; his despondence threw the whole ship's
crew into consternation. I asked him what reason he had thus to
despair? He exclaimed, "The tempest has brought us so far out of
our course, that to-morrow about noon we shall be near the black
mountain, or mine of adamant, which at this very minute draws all
your fleet towards it, by virtue of the iron in your ships; and
when we approach within a certain distance, the attraction of the
adamant will have such force, that all the nails will be drawn
out of the sides and bottoms of the ships, and fasten to the
mountain, so that your vessels will fall to pieces and sink.

"This mountain," continued the pilot, "is inaccessible. On the
summit there is a dome of fine brass, supported by pillars of the
same metal, and on the top of that dome stands a horse, likewise
of brass, with a rider on his back, who has a plate or lead fixed
to his breast, upon which some talismanic characters are
engraver. Sir, the tradition is, that this statue is the chief
cause why so many ships and men have been lost and sunk in this
place, and that it will ever continue to be fatal to all those
who have the misfortune to approach, until it shall be thrown
down."

The pilot having finished his discourse, began to weep afresh,
and all the rest of the ship's company did the same. I had no
other thought but that my days were there to terminate. In the
mean time every one began to provide for his own safety, and to
that end took all imaginable precaution; and being uncertain of
the event, they all made one another their heirs, by virtue of a
will, for the benefit of those that should happen to be saved.

The next morning we distinctly perceived the black mountain.
About noon we were so near, that we found what the pilot had
foretold to be true; for all the nails and iron in the ships flew
towards the mountain, where they fixed, by the violence of the
attraction, with a horrible noise; the ships split asunder, and
their cargoes sunk into the sea. All my people were drowned, but
God had mercy on me, and permitted me to save myself by means of
a plank, which the wind drove ashore just at the foot of the
mountain. I did not receive the least hurt, and my good fortune
brought me to a landing place, where there were steps that led up
to the summit of the mountain.

At the sight of these steps, for there was not a space of ground
either on the right or left whereon a man could set his foot, I
gave thanks to God; and recommended myself to his holy
protection, as I began to ascend the steps, which were so narrow,
that had the wind raged it would have thrown me into the sea.
But, at last, I reached the top, without accident. I went into
the dome, and kneeling on the ground, gave God thanks for his
mercies.

I passed the night under the dome. In my sleep an old grave man
appeared to me, and said, "Hearken, Agib; as soon as thou art
awake dig up the ground under thy feet: thou wilt find a bow of
brass, and three arrows of lead, that are made under certain
constellations, to deliver mankind from the many calamities that
threaten them. Shoot the three arrows at the statue, and the
rider will fall into the sea, but the horse will fall by thy
side; thou must bury it in the place where thou findest the bow
and arrows: this being done, the sea will swell and rise to the
foot of the dome. When it has come so high, thou wilt perceive a
boat with one man holding an oar in each hand; this man is also
of metal, but different from that thou hast thrown down; step on
board, but without mentioning the name of God, and let him
conduct thee. He will in ten days' time bring thee into another
sea, where thou shalt find an opportunity to return to thy
country, provided, as I have told thee, thou dost not mention the
name of God during the whole voyage."

This was the substance of the old man's discourse. When I awoke I
felt much comforted by the vision, and did not fail to observe
everything that he had commanded me. I took the bow and arrows
out of the ground, shot at the horseman, and with the third arrow
I overthrew him; he fell into the sea, and the horse fell by my
side; I buried it in the place whence I took the bow and arrows.
In the mean time, the sea swelled and rose up by degrees. When it
came as high as the foot of the dome upon the top of the
mountain, I saw, afar off, a boat rowing towards me, and I
returned God thanks that everything succeeded according to my
dream.

At last the boat made land, and I perceived the man was made of
metal, as I had dreamt. I stept aboard, and took great heed not
to pronounce the name of God, neither spoke I one word. I sat
down, and the man of metal began to row off from the mountain. He
rowed without ceasing till the ninth day, when I saw some
islands, which gave me hopes that I should escape all the danger
that I feared. The excess of my joy made me forget what I was
forbidden: "Blessed be God," said I; "God be praised."

I had no sooner spoken these words, than the boat sunk with the
man of metal, leaving me upon the surface. I swam the remaining
part of the day towards that land which appeared nearest. A very
dark night succeeded, and not knowing where I was, I swam at
random. My strength at last began to fail, and I despaired of
being able to save myself, but the wind began to blow hard, and a
wave vast as a mountain threw me on a flat, where it left me, and
retreated. I made haste ashore, fearing another wave might wash
me back. The first thing I did was to strip, wring the water out
of my clothes, and lay them on the dry sand, which was still warm
from the heat of the day.

Next morning the sun dried my clothes; I put them on, and went
forward to discover what sort of country I was in. I had not
walked far before I found I was upon a desert, though a very
pleasant, island, as it displayed several sorts of trees and wild
shrubs bearing fruit; but I perceived it was far from the
continent, which much diminished the joy I felt at having escaped
the danger of the seas. Nevertheless, I recommended myself to God
and prayed him to dispose of me according to his will.
Immediately after, I saw a vessel coming from the main land,
before the wind, directly towards the island. I doubted not but
they were coming to anchor there; and being uncertain what sort
of people they might be, whether friends or foes, I thought it
not safe to be seen. I got up into a very thick tree, from whence
I might safely view them. The vessel came into a little creek,
where ten slaves landed, carrying a spade and other instruments
for digging up the ground. They went towards the middle of the
island, where I saw them stop, and dig for a considerable time,
after which I thought I perceived them lift up a trap door. They
returned again to the vessel, and unloaded several sorts of
provisions and furniture, which they carried to the place where
they had been digging: they then descended, which made me suppose
it led to a subterraneous dwelling.

I saw them once more go to the ship, and return soon after with
an old man, who led in his hand a handsome lad of about fourteen
or fifteen years of age. They all descended when the trap door
had been opened. After they had again come up, they let down the
trap door, covered it over with earth, and returned to the creek
where the ship lay, but I saw not the young man in their company.
This made me believe that he had staid behind in the
subterraneous place, a circumstance which exceedingly surprised
me.

The old man and the slaves went on board, and getting the vessel
under weigh, steered their course towards the main land. When I
perceived they had proceeded to such a distance that I could not
be seen by them, I came down from the tree, and went directly to
the place where I had seen the ground broken. I removed the earth
by degrees, till I came to a stone that was two or three feet
square. I lifted it up, and found that it covered the head of a
flight of stairs, which were also of stone. I descended, and at
the bottom found myself in a large room, furnished with a carpet,
a couch covered with tapestry, and cushions of rich stuff, upon
which the young man sat, with a fan in his hand. These things,
together with fruits and flower-pot standing about him, I saw by
the light of two wax tapers. The young man, when he perceived me
was considerably alarmed; but to quiet his apprehensions, I said
to him as I entered, "Whoever you are, Sir, do not fear; a
sultan, and the son of a sultan, as I am, is not capable of doing
you any injury: on the contrary, it is probable that your good
destiny may have brought me hither to deliver you out of this
tomb, where it seems you have been buried alive, for reasons to
me unknown. But what surprises me (for you must know that I have
been witness to all that hath passed since your coming into this
island), is, that you suffered yourself to be entombed in this
place without any resistance."

The young man felt assured at these words, and with a smiling
countenance requested me to take a seat by him. When I had
complied, he said "Prince, I am to acquaint you with what will
surprise you by its singularity.

"My father is a merchant jeweller, who, by his industry and
professional skill, has acquired considerable property. He has
many slaves, and also agents, whom he employs as supercargoes in
his own ships, to maintain his correspondence at the several
courts, which he furnishes with precious stones.

"He had been long married without having issue, when it was
intimated to him in a dream that he should have a son, though his
life would be but short; at which he was much concerned when he
awoke. Some days after, my mother acquainted him that she was
with child, and what she supposed to be the time of her
conception agreed exactly with the day of his dream. At the end
of nine months she was brought to bed of me; which occasioned
great joy in the family.

"My father, who had observed the very moment of my birth,
consulted astrologers about my nativity; and was answered, 'Your
son shall live happily till the age of fifteen, when his life
will be exposed to a danger which he will hardly be able to
escape. But if his good destiny preserve him beyond that time, he
will live to a great age. It will be' (said they) 'when the
statue of brass, that stands upon the summit of the mountain of
adamant, shall be thrown into the sea by prince Agib, son of king
Cassib; and, as the stars prognosticate, your son will be killed
fifty days afterwards by that prince.'

"My father took all imaginable care of my education until this
year, which is the fifteenth of my age. He had notice given him
yesterday, that the statue of brass had been thrown into the sea
about ten days ago. This news alarmed him much.

"Upon the prediction the astrologers, he sought by all means
possible to falsify my horoscope, and to preserve my life. He
took the precaution to form this subterranean habitation to hide
me in, till the expiration of the fifty days after the throwing
down of the statue; and therefore, as it is ten days since this
happened, he came hastily hither to conceal me, and promised at
the end of forty days to return and fetch me away. For my own
part I am sanguine in my hopes, and cannot believe that prince
Agib will seek for me in a place under ground, in the midst of a
desert island."

While the jeweller's son was relating this story, I laughed at
the astrologers who had foretold that I should take away his
life; for I thought myself so far from being likely to verify
their prediction, that he had scarcely done speaking, when I told
him with great joy, "Dear Sir, trust in the goodness of God, and
fear nothing; consider it as a debt you had to pay; but that you
are acquitted of it from this hour. I rejoice that after my
shipwreck I came so fortunately hither to defend you against all
who would attempt your life. I will not leave you till the forty
days have expired, of which the foolish astrologers have made you
apprehensive; and in the mean while I will do you all the service
in my power: after which, with leave of your father and yourself,
I shall have the benefit of getting to the main land in your
vessel; and when I am returned into my kingdom, I will remember
the obligations I owe you, and endeavour to demonstrate my
gratitude by suitable acknowledgments."

This discourse encouraged the jeweller's son, and inspired him
with confidence. I took care not to inform him I was the very
Agib whom he dreaded, lest I should alarm his fears, and used
every precaution not to give him any cause to suspect who I was.
We passed the time in various conversation till night came on. I
found the young man of ready wit, and partook with him of his
provisions, of which he had enough to have lasted beyond the
forty days, though he had had more guests than myself. After
supper we conversed for some time; and at last retired to bed.

The next morning, when he arose, I held the basin of water to
him; I also provided dinner, and at the proper time placed it on
the table: after we had dined I invented a play for our
amusement, not only for that day, but for those that followed. I
prepared supper after the same manner as I had done the dinner;
and having supped, we retired to bed as before. We had sufficient
time to contrast mutual friendship and esteem for each other. I
found he loved me; and I on my part regarded him with so much
affection, that I often said to myself, "Those astrologers who
predicted to his father that his son should die by my hand were
impostors; for it is not possible that I could commit so base a
crime."  In short, madam, we spent thirty-nine days in the
pleasantest manner possible in this subterraneous abode.

The fortieth day appeared: and in the morning, when the young man
awoke, he said to me with a transport of joy that he could not
restrain, "Prince, this is the fortieth day, and I am not dead,
thanks to God and your good company. My father will not fail to
make you, very shortly, every acknowledgment of his gratitude for
your attentions, and will furnish you with every necessary
accommodation for your return to your kingdom: but," continued
he, "while we are waiting his arrival, I beg you will provide me
some warm water in that portable bath, that I may wash my body
and change my dress, to receive my father with the more respect."

I set the water on the fire, and when it was hot poured it into
the moveable bath; the youth went in, and I both washed and
rubbed him. At last he came out, and laid himself down in his bed
that I had prepared. After he had slept a while, he awoke, and
said, "Dear prince, pray do me the favour to fetch me a melon and
some sugar, that I may eat some to refresh me."

Out of several melons that remained I took the best, and laid it
on a plate; and as I could not find a knife to cut it with, I
asked the young man if he knew where there was one. "There is
one," said he, "upon this cornice over my head:" I accordingly
saw it there, and made so much haste to reach it, that, while I
had it in my hand, my foot being entangled in the carpet, I fell
most unhappily upon the young man, and the knife pierced his
heart.

At this spectacle I cried out with agony. I beat my head, my
face, and breast; I tore my clothes; I threw myself on the ground
with unspeakable sorrow and grief! "Alas!" I exclaimed, "there
were only some hours wanting to have put him out of that danger
from which he sought sanctuary here; and when I thought the
danger past, then I became his murderer, and verified the
prediction. But, O Lord!" said I, lifting up my face and my hands
to heaven, "I intreat thy pardon, and if I be guilty of his
death, let me not live any longer."

After this misfortune I would have embraced death without any
reluctance, had it presented itself to me. But what we wish,
whether it be good or evil, will not always happen according to
our desire. Nevertheless, considering that all my tears and
sorrows would not restore the young man to life, and, the forty
days being expired, I might be surprised by his father, I quitted
the subterranean dwelling, laid down the great stone upon the
entrance, and covered it with earth.

I had scarcely done, when, casting my eyes upon the sea towards
the main land, I perceived the vessel coming to fetch away the
young man. I began then to consider what I had best do. I said to
myself, "If I am seen by the old man, he will certainly seize me,
and perhaps cause me to be massacred by his slaves, when he has
discovered that his son is killed: all that I can allege to
justify myself will not convince him of my innocence. It is
better then to withdraw while it is in my power, than to expose
myself to his resentment."

There happened to be near a large tree thick with leaves, which I
ascended in hopes of concealment, and was no sooner fixed in a
place where I could not be perceived, than I saw the vessel come
to the creek where she lay the first time.

The old man with his slaves landed immediately, and advanced
towards the subterranean dwelling, with a countenance that shewed
some hope; but when they saw the earth had been newly removed,
they changed colour, particularly the old man. They lifted up the
stone, and went down; they called the young man by his name, but
he not answering, their fears increased. They proceeded to seek
him; and at length found him lying upon the bed with the knife in
his heart, for I had not power to take it out. At this sight they
cried out lamentably, which increased my sorrow: the old man fell
down in a swoon. The slaves, to give him air, brought him up in
their arms, and laid him at the foot of the tree where I was
concealed; but notwithstanding all the pains they took to recover
him, the unfortunate father continued a long while insensible,
and made them more than once despair of his life; but at last he
came to himself. The slaves then brought up his son's corpse,
dressed in his best apparel, and when they had made a grave they
buried it. The old man, supported by two slaves, and his face
covered with tears, threw the first earth upon the body, after
which the slaves filled up the grave.

This being done, all the furniture was brought up, and, with the
remaining provisions, put on board the vessel. The old man,
overcome with sorrow, and not being able to stand, was laid upon
a litter, and carried to the ship, which stood out to sea, and in
a short time was out of sight.

After the old man and his slaves were gone, I was left alone upon
the island. I lay that night in the subterranean dwelling, which
they had shut up, and when the day came, I walked round the
island, and stopped in such places as I thought most proper for
repose.

I led this wearisome life for a whole month. At the expiration of
this time I perceived that the sea had receded; that the island
had increased in dimensions; the main land too seemed to be
drawing nearer. In fact, the water sunk so low, that there
remained between me and the continent but a small stream, which I
crossed, and the water did not reach above the middle of my leg.
I walked so long a way upon the slime and sand that I was very
weary: at last I got upon more firm ground, and when I had
proceeded some distance from the sea, I saw a good way before me
something that resembled a great fire, which afforded me some
comfort; for I said to myself, I shall find here some persons, it
not being possible that this fire should kindle of itself. As I
drew nearer, however, I found my error, and discovered that what
I had taken for a fire was a castle of red copper, which the
beams of the sun made to appear at a distance like flames.

I stopped in the neighbourhood of the castle, and sat down to
admire its noble structure, and to rest myself. Before I had
taken such a view of this magnificent building as it deserved, I
saw ten handsome young men coming along, as if they had been
taking a walk; but what surprised me was, that they were all
blind of the right eye. They were accompanied by an old man, who
was very tall, and of a venerable aspect.

I could not suppress my astonishment at the sight of so many half
blind men in company, and every one deprived of the same eye. As
I was conjecturing by what adventure these men could come
together, they approached, and seemed glad to see me. After the
first salutations, they inquired what had brought me thither. I
told them my story would be somewhat tedious, but if they would
take the trouble to sit down, I would satisfy their curiosity.
They did so, and I related to them all that had happened to me
since I had left my kingdom, which filled them with astonishment.

After I had concluded my account, the young gentlemen prayed me
to accompany them into the castle. I accepted their offer, and we
passed through a great many halls, ante-chambers, bed-chambers,
and closets, very well furnished, and came at last into a
spacious hall, where there were ten small blue sofas set round,
separate from one another, on which they sat by day and slept at
night. In the middle of this circle stood an eleventh sofa, not
so high as the rest, but of the same colour, upon which the old
man before-mentioned sat down, and the young gentlemen occupied
the other ten. But as each sofa could only contain one man, one
of the young men said to me, "Comrade, sit down upon that carpet
in the middle of the room, and do not inquire into anything that
concerns us, nor the reason why we are all blind of the right
eye; be content with what you see, and let not your curiosity
extend any farther."

The old man having sat a short time, arose, and went out; but he
returned in a minute or two, brought in supper, distributed to
each man separately his proportion, and likewise brought me mine,
which I ate apart, as the rest did; and when supper was almost
ended, he presented to each of us a cup of wine.

They thought my story so extraordinary, that they made me repeat
it after supper, and it furnished conversation for a good part of
the night. One of the gentlemen observing that it was late, said
to the old man, "You do not bring us that with which we may
acquit ourselves of our duty." At these words the old man arose,
and went into a closet, and brought out thence upon his head ten
basins, one after another, all covered with blue stuff; he placed
one before every gentleman, together with a light.

They uncovered their basins, which contained ashes, coal-dust,
and lamp-black; they mixed all together, and rubbed and bedaubed
their faces with it in such a manner as to make themselves look
very frightful. After having thus blackened themselves, they wept
and lamented, beating their heads and breasts, and crying
continually, "This is the fruit of our idleness and debauches."

They continued this strange employment nearly the whole of the
night, and when they left off, the old man brought them water,
with which they washed their faces and hands; they changed all
their clothes, which were spoiled, and put on others; so that
they exhibited no appearance of what they had been doing.

You may judge how uneasy I felt all this time. I wished a
thousand times to break the silence which had been imposed upon
me, and ask questions; nor was it possible for me to sleep that
night.

The next day, soon after we had arisen, we went out to walk, and
then I said to them, "Gentlemen, I declare to you, that I must
renounce the law which you prescribed to me last night, for I
cannot observe it. You are men of sense, you have convinced me
that you do not want understanding; yet, I have seen you do such
actions as none but madmen could be capable of. Whatever
misfortune befalls me, I cannot forbear asking, why you bedaubed
your faces with black? How it has happened that each of you has
but one eye? Some singular circumstance must certainly be the
cause; therefore I conjure you to satisfy my curiosity." To these
pressing instances they answered only, that it was no business of
mine to make such inquiries, and that I should do well to hold my
peace.

We passed that day in conversation upon indifferent subjects; and
when night was come and every man had supped, the old man brought
in the blue basins, and the young gentlemen as before bedaubed
their faces, wept and beat themselves, crying, "This is the fruit
of our idleness and debauches," and continued the same actions
the following night. At last, not being able to resist my
curiosity, I earnestly prayed them to satisfy me, or to shew me
how to return to my own kingdom; for it was impossible for me to
keep them company any longer, and to see every night such an odd
exhibition, without being permitted to know the reason.

One of the gentlemen answered on behalf of the rest, "Do not
wonder at our conduit in regard to yourself, and that hitherto we
have not granted your request: it is out of kindness, to save you
the pain of being reduced to the same condition with ourselves.
If you have a mind to try our unfortunate destiny, you need but
speak, and we will give you the satisfaction you desire." I told
them I was resolved on it, let what would be the consequence.
"Once more," said the same gentleman, "we advise you to restrain
your curiosity: it will cost you the loss of your right eye." "No
matter," I replied; "be assured that if such a misfortune befall
me, I will not impute it to you, but to myself."

He farther represented to me, that when I had lost an eye I must
not hope to remain with them, if I were so disposed, because
their number was complete, and no addition could be made to it. I
told them, that it would be a great satisfaction to me never to
part from such agreeable gentlemen, but if there were a necessity
for it, I was ready to submit; and let it cost me what it would,
I begged them to grant my request.

The ten gentlemen perceiving that I was so fixed in my
resolution, took a sheep, killed it, and after they had taken off
the skin, presented me with a knife, telling me it would be
useful to me on an occasion which they would soon explain. "We
must sew you in this skin," said they, "and then leave you; upon
which a bird of a monstrous size, called a roc, will appear in
the air, and taking you for a sheep, will pounce upon you, and
soar with you to the sky: but let not that alarm you; he will
descend with you again, and lay you on the top of a mountain.
When you find yourself on the ground, cut the skin with your
knife, and throw it off. As soon as the roc sees you, he will fly
away for fear, and leave you at liberty. Do not stay, but walk on
till you come to a spacious castle, covered with plates of gold,
large emeralds, and other precious stones: go up to the gate,
which always stands open, and walk in. We have each of us been in
that castle; but will tell you nothing of what we saw, or what
befell us there; you will learn by your own experience. All that
we can inform you is, that it has cost each of us our right eye,
and the penance which you have been witness to, is what we are
obliged to observe in consequence of having been there. The
history of each of us is so full of extraordinary adventures,
that a large volume would not contain them. But we cannot explain
ourselves farther."

When the gentleman had thus spoken, I wrapt myself in the sheep's
skin, held fast the knife which was given me; and after the young
gentlemen had been at the trouble to sew the skin about me, they
retired into the hall, and left me alone. The roc they spoke of
soon arrived; he pounced upon me, took me in his talons like a
sheep, and carried me up the summit of the mountain.

When I found myself on the ground, I cut the skin with the knife,
and throwing it off, the roc at the sight of me flew sway. This
roc is a white bird, of a monstrous size; his strength is such,
that he can lift up elephants from the plains, and carry them to
the tops of mountains, where he feeds upon them.

Being impatient to reach the castle, I lost no time; but made so
much haste, that I got thither in half a day's journey, and I
must say that I found it surpassed the description they had given
me of its magnificence.

The gate being open, I entered a square court, so large that
there were round it ninety-nine gates of wood of sanders and
aloes, and one of gold, without reckoning those of several superb
staircases, that led to apartments above, besides many more which
I could not see. The hundred doors I spoke of opened into gardens
or store-houses full of riches, or into apartments which
contained many things wonderful to be seen.

I saw a door standing open just before me, through which I
entered into a large hall. Here I found forty young ladies of
such perfect beauty as imagination could not surpass: they were
all most sumptuously appareled. As soon as they saw me they
arose, and without waiting my salutations, said to me, with
demonstrations of joy, "Noble Sir, you are welcome." And one thus
addressed me in the name of the rest, "We have long been in
expectation of such a gentleman as you; your mien assures us,
that you are master of all the good qualities we can desire; and
we hope you will not find our company disagreeable or unworthy of
yours."

They obliged me, notwithstanding all the opposition I could make,
to sit down on a seat that was higher than their own; and when I
expressed my uneasiness, "That is your place," said they, "you
are at present our lord, master, and judge, and we are your
slaves, ready to obey your commands."

Nothing, madam, so much astonished me, as the solicitude and
eagerness of those fair ladies to do me all possible service. One
brought hot water to wash my feet, a second poured sweet scented
water on my hands; others brought me all kinds of necessaries,
and change of apparel; others again brought in a magnificent
collation; and the rest came with glasses in their hands to fill
me delicious wines, all in good order, and in the most charming
manner possible. I ate and drank; after which the ladies placed
themselves about me, and desired an account of my travels. I gave
them a full relation of my adventures, which lasted till night
came on.

When I had finished my narrative to the forty ladies, some of
them who sat nearest me staid to keep me company, whilst the
rest, seeing it was dark, rose to fetch tapers. They brought a
prodigious number, which by the wonderful light they emitted
exhibited the resemblance of day, and they disposed them with so
much taste as to produce the most beautiful effect possible.

Other ladies covered a table with dry fruits, sweetmeats, and
everything proper to relish the liquor; a side-board was set out
with several sorts of wine and other liquors. Some of the ladies
brought in musical instruments, and when everything was ready,
they invited me to sit down to supper. The ladies sat down with
me, and we continued a long while at our repast. They that were
to play upon the instruments and sing arose, and formed a most
charming concert. The others began a kind of ball, and danced two
and two, couple after couple, with admirable grace.

It was past midnight ere these amusements ended. At length one of
the ladies said to me, "You are doubtless wearied by the journey
you have taken to-day; it is time for you to retire to rest; your
lodging is prepared: but before you depart choose which of us you
like best to be your bedfellow." I answered, "That I knew not how
to make my own choice, as they were all equally beautiful, witty,
and worthy of my respects and service, and that I would not be
guilty of so much incivility as to prefer one before another."

The lady who had spoken to me before answered, "We are very well
satisfied of your civility, and find it is your fear to create
jealousy among us that occasions your diffidence; but let not
this hinder you. We assure you, that the good fortune of her whom
you choose shall cause no feeling of the kind; for we are agreed
among ourselves, that every one of us shall in her turn have the
same honour; and when forty days are past, to begin again;
therefore make your selection, and lose no time to take the
repose you need." I was obliged to yield to their entreaties, and
offered my hand to the lady who spoke, and who, in return, gave
me hers. We were conducted to a sumptuous apartment, where they
left us; and then every one retired to her own chamber.

I was scarcely dressed next morning, when the other thirty-nine
ladies came into my chamber, all in different dresses from those
they had worn the day before: they bade me good-morrow, and
inquired after my health. After which they conveyed me to a bath,
where they washed me themselves, and whether I would or no,
served me with everything I needed; and when I came out of the
bath, they made me put on another suit much richer than the
former.

We passed the whole day almost constantly at table; and when it
was bed-time, they prayed me again to make choice of one of them
for my companion In short, madam, not to weary you with
repetitions, I must tell you that I continued a whole year among
those forty ladies, and received them into my bed one after
another: and during all the time of this voluptuous life, we met
not with the least kind of trouble. When the year was expired, I
was greatly surprised that these forty ladies, instead of
appearing with their usual cheerfulness to ask me how I did,
entered my chamber one morning all in tears. They embraced me
with great tenderness one after another, saying, "Adieu, dear
prince, adieu! for we must leave you." Their tears affected. I
prayed them to tell me the reason of their grief, and of the
separation they spoke of. "Fair ladies, let me know," said I, "if
it be in my power to comfort you, or if my assistance can be any
way useful to you." Instead of returning a direct answer,
"Would," said they, "we had never seen or known you! Several
gentlemen have honoured us with their company before you; but
never one of them had that comeliness, that sweetness, that
pleasantness of humour, and that merit which you possess; we know
not how to live without you." After they had spoken these words,
they began to weep bitterly. "My dear ladies," said I, "have the
kindness not to keep me any longer in suspense: tell me the cause
of your sorrow." "Alas!" said they, "what but the necessity of
parting from you could thus afflict us? Perhaps we shall never
see you more; but if it be your wish we should, and if you
possess sufficient self-command for the purpose, it is not
impossible but that we may again enjoy the pleasure of your
company." "Ladies," I replied, "I understand not what you mean;
pray explain yourselves more clearly."

"Well," said one of them, "to satisfy you, we must acquaint you
that we are all princesses, daughters of kings. We live here
together in the manner you have seen; but at the end of every
year we are obliged to be absent forty days upon indispensable
duties, which we are not permitted to reveal: and afterwards we
return again to this castle. Yesterday was the last of the year;
to day we must leave you, and this circumstance is the cause of
our grief. Before we depart we will leave you the keys of
everything, especially those of the hundred doors, where you will
find enough to satisfy your curiosity, and to relieve your
solitude during our absence. But for your benefit, and our own
personal interests, we recommend you to forbear opening the
golden door; for if you do we shall never see you again; and the
apprehension of this augments our grief. We hope, nevertheless,
that you will attend to our advice; your own peace, and the
happiness of your life, depends upon your compliance; therefore
take heed. If you suffer yourself to be swayed by a foolish
curiosity, you will do yourself a considerable injury. We conjure
you to avoid the indiscretion, and to give us the satisfaction
finding you here again at the end of forty days. We would
willingly take the key of the golden door with us; but that it
would be an affront to a prince like you to question your
discretion and firmness."

This speech of the fair princesses grieved me extremely. I
omitted not to declare how much their absence would afflict me. I
thanked then for their good advice, assuring them that I would
follow it, and expressed my willingness to perform what was much
more difficult, to secure the happiness of passing the rest of my
days with ladies of such beauty and accomplishments. We separated
with much tenderness, and after I had embraced them all, they
departed, and I remained alone in the castle.

The agreeableness of their company, their hospitality, their
musical entertainments, and other amusements, had so much
absorbed my attention during the whole year, that I neither had
time nor desire to see the wonders contained in this enchanted
palace. I did not even notice a thousand curious objects that
every day offered themselves to my view, so much was I charmed by
the beauty of those ladies, and the pleasure they seemed to take
in promoting my gratification. Their departure sensibly afflicted
me; and though their absence was to be only forty days, it seemed
to me an age to live without them.

I determined not to forget the important advice they had given
me, not to open the golden door; but as I was permitted to
satisfy my curiosity in everything else, I took the first of the
keys of the other doors, which were hung in regular order.

I opened the first door, and entered an orchard, which I believe
the universe could not equal. I could not imagine any thing to
surpass it, except that which our religion promises us after
death. The symmetry, the neatness, the admirable order of the
trees, the abundance and diversity of unknown fruits, their
freshness and beauty, delighted my senses.

Nor must I omit to inform you, that this delicious orchard was
watered in a very particular manner. There were channels so
artificially and proportionately dug, that they carried water in
considerable quantities to the roots of such trees as required
much moisture. Others conveyed it in smaller quantities to those
whose fruits were already formed: some carried still less to
those whose fruits were swelling, and others carried only so much
as was just requisite to water those which had their fruits come
to perfection, and only wanted to be ripened. They far exceeded
in size the ordinary fruits of our gardens. Lastly, those
channels that watered the trees whose fruit was ripe had no more
moisture than just what would preserve them from withering.

I should never have tired in examining and admiring so delightful
a place; nor have left it, had I not conceived a still higher
idea of the other things which I had not seen. I went out at last
with my mind filled with the wonders I had viewed: I shut the
door, and opened the next.

Instead of an orchard, I found here a flower garden, which was no
less extraordinary in its kind. It contained a spacious plot, not
watered so profusely as the former, but with greater niceness,
furnishing no more water than just what each flower required. The
roses, jessamines, violets, daffodils, hyacinths, anemonies,
tulips, pinks, lilies, and an infinite number of flowers, which
do not grow in other places but at certain times, were there
flourishing all at once, and nothing could be more delicious than
the fragrant smell which they emitted.

I opened the third door, and found a large aviary, paved with
marble of several fine and uncommon colours. The trellis work was
made of sandal wood and wood of aloes. It contained a vast number
of nightingales, gold-finches, canary birds, larks, and other
rare singing-birds, which I had never heard of; and the vessels
that held their seed and water were of the most precious jasper
or agate.

Besides, this aviary was so exceedingly neat, that, considering
its extent, I judged there must be not less than a hundred
persons to keep it clean; but all this while not one appeared,
either here or in the gardens I had before examined; and yet I
could not perceive a weed, or any thing superfluous or offensive
to sight. The sun went down, and I retired, charmed with the
chirping notes of the multitude of birds, who then began to perch
upon such places as suited them for repose during the night. I
went to my chamber, resolving on the following days to open all
the rest of the doors, excepting that of gold.

The next day I opened the fourth door. If what I had seen before
was capable of exciting my surprise, what I now beheld
transported me into perfect ecstacy. I entered a large court
surrounded with buildings of an admirable structure, the
description of which I will omit, to avoid prolixity.

This building had forty doors, all open, and through each of them
was an entrance into a treasury: several of these treasuries
contained as much wealth as the largest kingdoms. The first was
stored with heaps of pearls: and, what is almost incredible, the
number of those stones which are most precious, and as large as
pigeons' eggs, exceeded the number of those of the ordinary size.
In the second treasury, there were diamonds, carbuncles, and
rubies; in the third, emeralds; in the fourth, ingots of gold; in
the fifth, money; in the sixth, ingots of silver; and in the two
following, money. The rest contained amethysts, chrysolites,
topazes, opals, turquoises, and hyacinths, with all the other
stones known to us, without mentioning agate, jasper, cornelian,
and coral, of which there was a store house filled, not only with
branches, but whole trees.

Filled with astonishment and admiration at the view of all these
riches, I exclaimed, "If all the treasures of the kings of the
universe were gathered together in one place, they could not
equal the value of these. How fortunate am I to possess all this
wealth with so many admirable princesses!"

I will not tire you, madam, with a detail of all the other
objects of curiosity and value which I discovered on the
following day. I shall only say, that thirty-nine days afforded
me but just as much time as was necessary to open ninety-nine
doors, and to admire all that presented itself to my view, so
that there was only the hundredth door left, which I was
forbidden to open.

The fortieth day after the departure of those charming princesses
arrived, and had I but retained so much self-command as I ought
to have had, I should have been this day the happiest of all
mankind, whereas now I am the most unfortunate. They were to
return the next day, and the pleasure of seeing them again ought
to have restrained my curiosity: but through my weakness, which I
shall ever repent, I yielded to the temptations of the evil
spirit, who allowed me no rest till I had involved myself in the
misfortunes I have since suffered.

I opened that fatal door! But before I had moved my foot to
enter, a smell pleasant enough, but too powerful for my senses,
made me faint away. However, I soon recovered: but instead of
taking warning from this incident to close the door, and restrain
my curiosity, after waiting some time for the external air to
correct the effluvia of the place, I entered, and felt myself no
longer incommoded. I found myself in a spacious vaulted
apartment, the pavement of which was strewed with saffron. It was
illuminated by several large tapers which emitted the perfume of
aloes and ambergris, and were placed in candlesticks of solid
gold. This light was augmented by gold and silver lamps, burning
perfumed oils of various kinds.

Among the many objects that attracted my attention was a black
horse, of the most perfect symmetry and beauty that ever was
beheld. I approached in order the better to observe him, and
found he had on a saddle and bridle of massive gold, curiously
wrought. One part of his manger was filled with clean barley and
sesame, and the other with rose-water. I laid hold of his bridle,
and led him out to view him by daylight. I mounted, and
endeavoured to make him move: but finding he did not stir, I
struck him with a switch I had taken up in his magnificent
stable. He had no sooner felt the blow, than he began to neigh in
a most horrible manner, and extending his wings, which I had not
before perceived, flew up with me into the air. My thoughts were
fully in keeping my seat; and considering the fear that had
seized me, I sat well. At length he directed his course towards
the earth, and lighted upon the terrace of a castle, and, without
giving me time to dismount, shook me out of the saddle with such
force, as to throw me behind him, and with the end of his tail he
struck out my eye.

Thus it was I became blind of one eye. I then recollected the
predictions of the ten young gentlemen. The horse again took
wing, and soon disappeared. I got up much vexed at the misfortune
I had brought upon myself. I walked upon the terrace, covering my
eye with one of my hands, for it pained me exceedingly, and then
descended, and entered into a hall. I soon discovered by the ten
sofas in a circle, and the eleventh in the middle, lower than the
rest, that I was in the castle whence I had been carried by the
roc.

The ten young gentlemen were not in the hall when I entered; but
came in soon after, attended by the old man. They seemed not at
all surprised to see me, nor at the loss of my eye; but said, "We
are sorry that we cannot congratulate you on your return, as we
could wish; but we are not the cause of your misfortune." "I
should do you wrong," I replied, "to lay it to your charge; I
have only myself to accuse." "If," said they, "it be a subject of
consolation to the afflicted to know that others share their
sufferings, you have in us this alleviation of your misfortune.
All that has happened to you we have also endured; we each of us
tasted the same pleasures during a year; and we had still
continued to enjoy them, had we not opened the golden door, when
the princesses were absent. You have been no wiser than we, and
have incurred the same punishment. We would gladly receive you
into our company, to join with us in the penance to which we are
bound, and the duration of which we know not. But we have already
stated to you the reasons that render this impossible: depart,
therefore, and proceed to the court of Bagdad, where you will
meet with the person who is to decide your destiny." After they
had explained to me the road I was to travel, I departed.

On the road I caused my beard and eye-brows to be shaven, and
assumed a calender's habit. I have had a long journey, but at
last I arrived this evening, and met these my brother calenders
at the gate, being strangers as well as myself. We were mutually
surprised at one another, to see that we were all blind of the
same eye; but we had not leisure to converse long on the subject
of our misfortunes. We have only had time enough to bring us
hither, to implore those favours which you have been generously
pleased to grant us.

The third calender having finished this relation of his
adventures, Zobeide addressed him and his fellow calenders thus:
"Go wherever you think proper, you are at liberty." But one of
them answered, "Madam, we beg you to pardon our curiosity, and
permit us to hear the stories of those gentlemen who have not yet
spoken." Then the lady turned to the caliph, the vizier Jaaffier,
and Mesrour, and said to them, "It is now your turn to relate
your adventures, therefore speak."

The grand vizier who had all along been the spokesman, answered
Zobeide: "Madam, in order to obey you, we need only repeat what
we have already said. We are merchants of Moussol come to Bagdad
to sell our merchandize, which lies in the khan where we lodge.
We dined today with several other persons of our condition, at a
merchant's house of this city; who, after he had treated us with
choice dainties and excellent wines, sent for men and women
dancers, and musicians. The great noise we made brought in the
watch, who arrested some of the company, and we had the good
fortune to escape: but it being already late, and the door of our
khan shut up, we knew not whither to retire. We chanced as we
passed along this street to hear mirth at your house, which made
us determine to knock at your gate. This is all the account that
we can give you, in obedience to your commands."

Zobeide having heard this statement, seemed to hesitate what to
say, which the calenders perceiving, prayed her to grant the same
favour to the three Moussol merchants as she had done to them.
"Well then," said she, "you shall all be equally obliged to me; I
pardon you all, provided you immediately depart."

Zobeide having given this command in a tone that signified she
would be obeyed, the caliph, the vizier Mesrour, the three
calenders, and the porter departed, without saying one word: for
the presence of the seven slaves with their weapons awed them
into silence. As soon as they had quitted the house, and the gate
was closed after them, the caliph said to the calenders, without
making himself known, "You gentlemen, who are newly come to town,
which way do you design to go, since it is not yet day?" "It is
this," they replied, "that perplexes us." "Follow us," resumed
the caliph, "and we will convey you out of danger." He then
whispered to the vizier, "Take them along with you, and tomorrow
morning bring them to me; I will cause their history to be put in
writing, for it deserves a place in the annals of my reign."

The vizier Jaaffier took the three calenders along with him; the
porter went to his quarters, and the caliph and Mesrour returned
to the palace. The caliph went to bed, but could not sleep, being
perplexed by the extraordinary things he had seen and heard. But
above all, he was most concerned to know the history of Zobeide;
what reason she could have to be so severe to the two black
bitches, and why Amene had her bosom so scarred. Day began to
appear whilst he was thinking upon these things; he arose and
went to his council chamber, and sat upon his throne.

The grand vizier entered soon after, and paid his respects as
usual. "Vizier," said the caliph, "the affairs that we have to
consider at present are not very pressing; that of the three
ladies and the two black bitches is the most urgent: my mind
cannot rest till I am thoroughly satisfied, in all those matters
that have so much surprised me. Go, bring those ladies and the
calenders at the same time; make haste, and remember that I
impatiently expect your return."

The vizier who knew his master's quick and fiery temper, hastened
to obey, and went to the ladies, to whom he communicated, in a
civil way, the orders with which he was charged, to bring them
before the caliph, without taking any notice of what had passed
the night before at their house.

The ladies put on their veils, and went with the vizier As he
passed his own house, he took along with him the three calenders,
who in the interval had learnt that they had seen and spoken with
the caliph, without knowing him. The vizier conducted them to the
palace with so much expedition, that the caliph was much pleased.
This prince, that he might observe proper decorum before the
officers of his court who were then present, ordered that the
ladies should be placed behind the hangings of the door which led
to his own chamber, and placed the three calenders near his
person, who, by their respectful behaviour, sufficiently evinced
that they were not ignorant before whom they had the honour to
appear.

When the ladies were thus disposed of, the caliph turned towards
them, and said, "When I acquaint you that I was last night in
your house, disguised in a merchant's habit, you may probably be
alarmed, lest you may have given me offence; you may perhaps
believe that I have sent for you for no other purpose than to
shew some marks of my resentment; but be not afraid; you may rest
assured that I have forgotten all that has past, and am well
satisfied with your conduct. I wish that all the ladies of Bagdad
had as much discretion as you evinced before me. I shall always
remember the moderation with which you acted, after the rudeness
of which we were guilty. I was then a merchant of Moussol, but am
at present Haroon al Rusheed, the fifth caliph of the glorious
house of Abbas, and hold the place of our great prophet. I have
only sent for you to know who you are, and to ask for what reason
one of you, after severely whipping the two black bitches, wept
with them? And I am no less curious to know, why another of you
has her bosom so full of scars."

Though the caliph pronounced these words very distinctly, the
three ladies heard him well enough, yet the vizier out of
ceremony, repeated them.

Zobeide, after the caliph by his address had encouraged her,
began thus:


                     The Story of Zobeide.


Commander of the faithful, the relation which I am about to give
your majesty is singularly extraordinary. The two black bitches
and myself are sisters by the same father and mother; and I shall
acquaint you by what strange accident they came to be
metamorphosed. The two ladies who live with me, and are now here,
are also my sisters by the father's side, but by another mother:
she that has the scars upon her breast is named Amene; the name
of the other is Safie, and my own Zobeide.

After our father's death, the property that he left was equally
divided among us, and as soon as these two sisters received their
portions, they left me to live with their mother. My other two
sisters and myself stayed with our mother, who was then alive,
and who when she afterwards died left each of us a thousand
sequins. As soon as we had received our portions, the two eldest
(for I am the youngest) married, and left me alone. Some time
after, my eldest sister's husband sold all that he had, and with
that money and my sister's portion they went both into Africa,
where her husband, by riotous living and debauchery' spent all;
and finding himself reduced to poverty, found a pretext for
divorcing my sister, and put her away.

She returned to this city, and having suffered incredible
hardships by the way, came to me in so lamentable a condition
that it would have moved the hardest heart to compassion to
behold her. I received her with every possible tenderness, and
inquiring into the cause of her distress, she told me with tears
how inhumanly her husband had behaved towards her. Her
misfortunes affected me: and I mingled my tears with hers. I took
her to a bath, clothed her with my own apparel, and thus
addressed her: "Sister, you are the elder, and I esteem you as my
mother: during your absence, God has blest the portion that fell
to my share, and the employment I follow of breeding silk-worms.
Assure yourself there is nothing I have but is at your service,
and as much at your disposal as my own."

We lived very comfortably together for some months. As we were
one day conversing about our third sister, and wondering we
received no intelligence of her, she came in as bad a condition
as the eldest: her husband had treated her after the same manner;
and I received her likewise with the same affection as I had done
the former.

Some time after, my two sisters, on presence that they would not
be chargeable to me, told me they intended to marry again. I
observed, that if putting me to expense was the only reason, they
might lay those thoughts aside, and be welcome to remain: for
what I had would be sufficient to maintain us all three, in a
manner answerable to our condition. "But," I added, "I rather
believe you wish to marry again; I shall feel much surprised if
such be the case. After the experience you have had of the little
satisfaction there is in wedlock, is it possible you dare venture
a second time? You know how rare it is to meet with a husband
perfectly virtuous and deserving. Believe what I say, and let us
live together as comfortably as we can." All my persuasion was in
vain; they were resolved to marry, and soon accomplished their
wishes. But after some months were past, they returned again, and
begged my pardon a thousand times for not following my advice.
"You are our youngest sister," said they, "but abundantly more
wise than we; if you will vouchsafe to receive us once more into
your house, and account us your slaves, we shall never commit a
similar fault again." My answer was, "Dear sisters, I have not
altered my mind with respect to you since we last parted: come
again, and take part of what I have." Upon this I embraced them,
and we lived together as before.

We continued thus a whole year in perfect love and harmony.
Seeing that God had increased my small stock, I projected a
voyage, to embark some of it in a commercial speculation. To this
end,  I went with my two sisters to Bussorah, where I bought a
ship ready fitted for sea, and laded her with such merchandise as
I had carried with me from Bagdad. We set sail with a fair wind,
and soon cleared the Persian gulf; when we had reached the open
sea, we steered our course to the Indies; and the twentieth day
saw land. It was a very high mountain, at the bottom of which we
perceived a great town: having a fresh gale, we soon reached the
harbour, and cast anchor.

I had not patience to wait till my sisters were dressed to go
along with me, but went ashore alone in the boat. Making directly
to the gate of the town, I saw there a great number of men upon
guard, some sitting, and others standing with sticks in their
hands; and they had all such dreadful countenances that I was
greatly alarmed; but perceiving they remained stationary, and did
not so much as move their eyes, I took courage, and went nearer,
when I found they were all turned into stones. I entered the town
and passed through several streets, where at different intervals
stood men in various attitudes, but all motionless and petrified.
In the quarter inhabited by the merchants I found most of the
shops shut, and in such as were open I likewise found the people
petrified.

Having reached a vast square, in the heart of the city, I
perceived a large folding gate, covered with plates of gold,
which stood open; a curtain of silk stuff seemed to be drawn
before it: a lamp hung over the entrance. After I had surveyed
the building, I made no doubt but it was the palace of the prince
who reigned over that country: and being much astonished that I
had not met with one living creature, I approached in hopes to
find some. I lifted up the curtain, and was surprised at
beholding no one but the guards in the vestibule all petrified;
some standing, some sitting, and some lying.

I came to a large court, where I saw before me a stately
building, the windows of which were inclosed with gates of messy
gold: I concluded it to be the queen's apartments. I entered; and
in a large hall I found several black eunuchs turned into stone.
I went from thence into a room richly furnished, where I
perceived a lady in the same situation. I knew it to be the
queen, by the crown of gold on her head, and a necklace of pearls
about her neck, each of them as large as a nut; I approached her
to have a nearer view of it, and never beheld a finer objets.

I stood some time admiring the riches and magnificence of the
room; but above all, the carpet, the cushions, and the sofas,
which were all ornamented with Indian stuff of gold, and
representations of men and beasts in silver, admirably executed.

I quitted the chamber where the petrified queen was, and passed
through several other apartments and closets richly furnished,
and at last came into a large room, where there was a throne of
massive gold, raised several steps above the floor, and enriched
with large enchased emeralds, and upon the throne there was a bed
of rich stuff embroidered with pearls. What surprised me most was
a sparkling light which came from above the bed. Being curious to
know whence it proceeded, I ascended the steps, and lifting up my
head, saw a diamond as large as the egg of an ostrich, lying upon
a low stool; it was so pure, that I could not find the least
blemish in it, and it sparkled with so much brilliancy, that when
I saw it by day-light I could not endure its lustre.

At the head of the bed there stood on each side a lighted
flambeau, but for what use I could not comprehend; however, it
made me imagine that there was some living creature in this
place; for I could not believe that the torches continued thus
burning of themselves. Several other rarities detained my
curiosity in this room, which was inestimable in value, were it
only for the diamond I mentioned.

The doors being all open, or but half shut, I surveyed some other
apartments, that were as beautiful as those I had already seen. I
looked into the offices and store-rooms, which were full of
riches. In short, the wonders that everywhere appeared so wholly
engrossed my attention, that I forgot my ship and my sisters, and
thought of nothing but gratifying my curiosity. In the mean time
night came on, which reminded me that it was time to retire. I
proposed to return the way I had entered, but I could not find
it; I lost myself among the apartments; and perceiving I was come
back again to the large room, where the throne, the couch, the
large diamond, and the torches stood, I resolved to take my
night's lodging there, and to depart the next morning early, to
get aboard my ship. I laid myself down upon a couch, not without
some dread to be alone in a desolate place; and this fear
hindered my sleep.

About midnight I heard a voice like that of a man reading the
Koraun, after the same manner, and in the same tone as it is read
in our mosques. Being extremely glad to hear it, I immediately
arose, and taking a torch in my hand, passed from one chamber to
another on that side from whence the sound proceeded. I came to
the closet-door, and stood still, not doubting that it came from
thence. I set down my torch upon the ground, and looking through
a window, found it to be an oratory. It had, as we have in our
mosques, a niche, to direct us whither we are to turn to say our
prayers: there were also lamps hung up, and two candlesticks with
large tapers of white wax burning.

I saw a little carpet laid down like those we have to kneel upon
when we say our prayers, and a comely young man sat on this
carpet reading with great devotion the Koraun, which lay before
him on a desk. At this sight I was transported with admiration. I
wondered how it came to pass that he should be the only living
creature in a town where all the people were turned into stones,
and I did not doubt but there was something in the circumstance
very extraordinary.

The door being only half shut, I opened it, went in, and standing
upright before the niche, I repeated this prayer aloud: "Praise
be to God, who has favoured us with a happy voyage, and may he be
graciously pleased to protect us in the same manner, until we
arrive again in our own country. Hear me, O Lord, and grant my
request."

The young man turned his eyes towards me, and said, "My good
lady, pray let me know who you are, and what has brought you to
this desolate city? And, in return, I will you who I am, what has
happened to me, why the inhabitants of this city are reduced to
the state you see them in, and why I alone am safe in the midst
of such a terrible disaster."

I told him in a few words whence I had come, what had made me
undertake the voyage, and how I safely arrived at the port after
twenty days' sailing; when I had done, I prayed him to perform
his promise, and told him how much I was struck by the frightful
desolation which I had seen in the city.

"Lady," said the young man, "have patience for a moment." At
these words he shut the Koraun, put it into a rich case, and laid
it in the niche. I took that opportunity to observe him, and
perceiving in him so much good nature and beauty, I felt emotions
I had never known before. He made me sit down by him, and before
he began his discourse, I could not forbear saying, with an air
that discovered the sentiments I felt, "Amiable sir, dear object
of my soul, I can scarcely have patience to wait for an account
of all these wonderful objects that I have seen since I came into
your city; and my curiosity cannot be satisfied too soon:
therefore pray, sir, let me know by what miracle you alone are
left alive among so many persons that have died in so strange a
manner."

"Madam," said the young man, "by the prayer you just now
addressed to him, you have given me to understand that you have a
knowledge of the true God. I will acquaint you with the most
remarkable effect of his greatness and power. You must know, that
this city was the metropolis of a mighty kingdom, over which the
sultan my father reigned. That prince, his whole court, the
inhabitants of the city, and all his other subjects, were magi,
worshippers of fire, and of Nardoun, the ancient king of the
giants, who rebelled against God.

"But though I was born of an idolatrous father and mother, I had
the good fortune in my youth to have a governess who was a good
Moosulmaun. 'Dear prince,' would she oftentimes say, 'there is
but one true God; take heed that you do not acknowledge and adore
any other.' She taught me to read Arabic, and the book she gave
me to study was the Koraun. As soon as I was capable of
understanding it, she explained to me all the passages of this
excellent book, and infused piety into my mind, unknown to my
father or any other person. She happened to die, but not before
she had perfectly instructed me in all that was necessary to
convince me of the truth of the Moosulmaun religion. After her
death I persisted with constancy in the belief of its divinity:
and I abhor the false god Nardoun, and the adoration of fire.

"About three years and some months ago, a thundering voice was
suddenly sounded so distinctly, through the whole city, that
nobody could miss hearing it. The words were these: 'Inhabitants,
abandon the worship of Nardoun, and of fire, and worship the only
God who shews mercy.'

"This voice was heard three years successively, but no one was
converted. On the last day of that year, at four o'clock in the
morning, all the inhabitants were changed in an instant into
stone, every one in the condition and posture they happened to be
in. The sultan, my father, shared the same fate, for he was
metamorphosed into a black stone, as he is to be seen in this
palace, and the queen, my mother, had the like destiny.

"I am the only person who did not suffer under that heavy
judgment, and ever since I have continued to serve God with more
fervency than before. I am persuaded, dear lady, that he has sent
you hither for my comfort, for which I render him infinite
thanks; for I must own that this solitary life is extremely
irksome."

All these expressions, and particularly the last, greatly
increased my love for him. "Prince," said I, "there is no doubt
but Providence has brought me into your port, to afford you an
opportunity of withdrawing from this dismal place. The ship I
came in may serve in some measure to convince you that I am in
some esteem at Bagdad, where I have left considerable property;
and I dare engage to promise you sanctuary there, until the
mighty commander of the faithful, vicegerent to our prophet whom
you acknowledge, shew you the honour that is due to your merit.
This renowned prince lives at Bagdad, and as soon as he is
informed of your arrival in his capital, you will find that it is
not in vain to implore his assistance. It is impossible you can
stay any longer in a city where all the objects you behold must
renew your grief: my vessel is at your service, where you may
absolutely command as you shall think fit." He accepted the
offer, and we conversed the remainder of the night concerning our
embarkation.

As soon as it was day we left the palace, and went aboard my
ship, where we found my sisters, the captain, and the slaves, all
much troubled at my absence. After I had presented my sisters to
the prince, I told them what had hindered my return the day
before, how I had met with the young prince, his story, and the
cause of the desolation of so fine a city.

The seamen were taken up several days in unlading the merchandize
I brought with me, and embarking in its stead all the precious
things in the palace, such as jewels, gold, and money. We left
the furniture and goods, which consisted of an infinite quantity
of plate, &c., because our vessel could not carry it, for it
would have required several vessels more to convey to Bagdad all
the riches that we might have chosen to take with us.

After we had laden the vessel with what we thought most
desirable, we took such provisions and water aboard as were
necessary for our voyage (for we had still a great deal of those
provisions left that we had taken in at Bussorah); at last we set
sail with a wind as favourable as we could wish.

The young prince, my sisters and myself, enjoyed ourselves for
some time very agreeably. But alas! this good understanding did
not last long, for my sisters grew jealous of the friendship
between the prince and myself, and maliciously asked me one day,
what we should do with him when we came to Bagdad? I perceived
immediately that they put this question on purpose to discover my
inclinations; therefore, resolving to put it off with a jest, I
answered, "I will take him for my husband;" and upon that,
turning myself to the prince, said, "Sir, I humbly beg of you to
give your consent, for as soon as we come to Bagdad I desire to
offer you my person to be your slave, to do you all the service
that is in my power, and to resign myself wholly to your
commands."

The prince replied, "I know not, madam, whether you be in jest or
no; but for my part, I seriously declare before these ladies,
your sisters, that from this moment I heartily accept your offer,
not with any intention to have you as a slave, but as my lady and
mistress: nor will I pretend to have any power over your
actions." At these words my sisters changed colour, and I could
perceive afterwards that they did not love me as before.

We entered the Persian gulf, and had come within a short distance
of Bussorah (where I hoped, considering the fair wind, we might
have arrived the day following), when in the night, while I was
asleep, my sisters watched their opportunity, and threw me
overboard. They did the same to the prince, who was drowned. I
floated some minutes on the water, and by good fortune, or rather
miracle, I felt ground. I went towards a dark spot, that, by what
I could discern, seemed to be land, and proved to be a flat on
the coast, which, when day appeared, I found to be a desert
island, lying about twenty miles from Bussorah. I soon dried my
clothes in the sun, and as I walked along I found several kinds
of fruit, and likewise fresh water, which gave me some hopes of
preserving my life.

I had just laid myself down to rest in a shade, when I perceived
a very large winged serpent coming towards me, with an irregular
waving movement, and hanging out its tongue, which induced me to
conclude it had received some injury. I instantly arose, and
perceived that it was pursued by a larger serpent which had hold
of its tail, and was endeavouring to devour it. This perilous
situation of the first serpent excited my pity, and instead of
retreating I assumed courage to take up a stone that lay near me,
and to throw it with all my strength at the other, which I hit
upon the head and killed. The other, finding itself at liberty,
took wing and flew away. I looked after it for some time till it
disappeared. I then sought another shady spot for repose, and
fell asleep.

Judge what was my surprise when I awoke, to see standing by me a
black woman of lively and agreeable features, who held in her
hand two bitches of the same colour, fastened together. I sat up,
and asked her who she was? "I am," said she, "the serpent whom
you lately delivered from my mortal enemy. I did not know in what
way I could better requite the important services you have
rendered me than by what I have just done. The treachery of your
sisters was well known to me, and to avenge your wrongs, as soon
as I was liberated by your generous assistance, I called together
several of my companions, fairies like myself, conveyed into your
storehouses at Bagdad all the lading of your vessel, and
afterwards sunk it.

"These two black bitches are your sisters, whom I have
transformed into this shape. But this punishment will not
suffice; and my will is that you treat them hereafter in the way
I shall direst."

As soon as she had thus spoken the fairy took me under one of her
arms, and the two bitches under the other, and conveyed us to my
house in Bagdad; where I found in my storehouses all the riches
with which my vessel had been laden. Before she left me, she
delivered to me the two bitches, and said, "If you would not be
changed into a similar form, I command you, in the name of him
that governs the sea, to give each of your sisters every night
one hundred lashes with a rod, as the punishment of the crime
they have committed against yourself, and the young prince, whom
they have drowned." I was forced to promise obedience. Since that
time I have whipped them every night, though with regret, whereof
your majesty has been a witness. My tears testify with how much
sorrow and reluctance I perform this painful duty; and in this
your majesty may see I am more to be pitied than blamed. If there
be any thing else relating to myself that you desire to know, my
sister Amene will give you full information in the relation of
her story.

After the caliph had heard Zobeide with much astonishment, he
desired his grand vizier to request Amene to acquaint him
wherefore her breast was disfigured with so many scars.

Amene addressed herself to the caliph, and began her story after
this manner:


                      The Story of Amene.


Commander of the faithful, to avoid repeating what your majesty
has already heard in my sister's story, I shall only add, that
after my mother had taken a house for herself to live in, during
her widowhood, she gave me in marriage, with the portion my
father left me, to a gentleman who had one of the best estates in
the city.

I had scarcely been a year married when I became a widow, and was
left in possession of all my husband's property, which amounted
to 90,000 sequins. The interest of this money was sufficient to
maintain me very honourably. When the first six months of my
mourning was over, I caused to be made for me ten different
dresses, of such magnificence that each came to a thousand
sequins; and at the end of the year I began to wear them.

One day, while I was alone engaged in my domestic affairs, I was
told that a lady desired to speak to me. I gave orders that she
should be admitted. She was a person advanced in years; she
saluted me by kissing the ground, and said to me kneeling, "Dear
lady, excuse the freedom I take to trouble you, the confidence I
have in your charity makes me thus bold. I must acquaint your
ladyship that I have an orphan daughter, who is to be married
this day. She and I are both strangers, and have no acquaintance
in this town; which much perplexes me, for we wish the numerous
family with whom we are going to ally ourselves to think we are
not altogether unknown and without credit: therefore, most
beautiful lady, if you would vouchsafe to honour the wedding with
your presence, we shall be infinitely obliged, because the ladies
of our country, when informed that a lady of your rank has strewn
us this respect, will then know that we are not regarded here as
unworthy and despised persons. But, alas! madam, if you refuse
this request, how great will be our mortification! we know not
where else to apply."

This poor woman's address, which she spoke with tears, moved my
compassion. "Good woman," said I, "do not afflict yourself, I
will grant you the favour you desire; tell me whither I must go,
and I will meet you as soon as I am dressed." The old woman was
so transported with joy at my answer, that she kissed my feet
before I had time to prevent her. "My compassionate lady," said
she, rising, "God will reward the kindness you have shewed to
your servants, and make your heart as joyful as you have made
theirs. You need not at present trouble yourself; it will be time
enough for you to go when I call for you in the evening. So
farewell, madam, till I have the honour to see you again."

As soon as she was gone, I took the suit I liked best, with a
necklace of large pearls, bracelets, pendents for my ears, and
rings set with the finest and most sparkling diamonds; for my
mind presaged what would befall me.

When the night closed in, the old woman called upon me, with a
countenance full of joy. She kissed my hands, and said, "My dear
lady, the relations of my son-in-law, who are the principal
ladies of the city, are now met together; you may come when you
please; I am ready to conduct you." We immediately set out; she
walked before me, and I was followed by a number of my women and
slaves properly dressed for the occasion. We stopt in a wide
street, newly swept and watered, at a spacious gate with a lamp,
by the light of which I read this inscription in golden letters
over the entrance: "This is the everlasting abode of pleasure and
joy." The old woman knocked, and the gate was opened immediately.

I was conducted towards the lower end of the court, into a large
hall, where I was received by a young lady of admirable beauty.
She drew near, and after having embraced me, made me sit down by
her upon a sofa, on which was raised a throne of precious wood
set with diamonds. "Madam," said she, "you are brought hither to
assist at a wedding; but I hope it will be a different wedding
from what you expected. I have a brother, one of the handsomest
men in the world: he is fallen so much in love with the fame of
your beauty, that his fate depends wholly upon you, and he will
be the unhappiest of men if you do not take pity on him. He knows
your quality, and I can assure you he is in no respect unworthy
of your alliance. If my prayers, madam, can prevail, I shall join
them with his, and humbly beg you will not refuse the proposal of
being his wife."

After the death of my husband I had not thought of marrying
again. But I had no power to refuse the solicitation of so
charming a lady. As soon as I had given consent by my silence,
accompanied with a blush, the young lady claps her hands, and
immediately a closet-door opened, out of which came a young man
of a majestic air, and so graceful a behaviour, that I thought
myself happy to have made so great a conquest. He sat down by me,
and I found from his conversation that his merits far exceeded
the eulogium of his sister.

When she perceived that we were satisfied with one another, she
claps her hands a second time, and out came a Cauzee, who wrote
our contract of marriage, signed it himself, and caused it to be
attested by four witnesses he brought along with him. The only
condition that my new husband imposed upon me was, that I should
not be seen by nor speak to any other man but himself, and he
vowed to me that, if I complied in this respect, I should have no
reason to complain of him. Our marriage was concluded and
finished after this manner; so I became the principal actress in
a wedding to which I had only been invited as a guest.

About a month after our marriage, having occasion for some
stuffs, I asked my husband's permission to go out to buy them,
which he granted; and I took with me the old woman of whom I
spoke before, she being one of the family, and two of my own
female slaves.

When we came to the street where the merchants reside, the old
woman said, "Dear mistress, since you want silk stuffs, I must
take you to a young merchant of my acquaintance, who has a great
variety; and that you may not fatigue yourself by running from
shop to shop, I can assure you that you will find in his what no
other can furnish." I was easily persuaded, and we entered a shop
belonging to a young merchant who was tolerably handsome. I sat
down, and bade the old woman desire him to shew me the finest
silk stuffs he had. The woman desired me to speak myself; but I
told her it was one of the articles of my marriage contract not
to speak to any man but my husband, which I ought to keep.

The merchant shewed me several stuffs, of which one pleased me
better than the rest; but I bade her ask the price. He answered
the old woman, "I will not sell it for gold or money, but I will
make her a present of it, if she will give me leave to kiss her
cheek." I ordered the old woman to tell him, that he was very
rude to propose such a freedom. But instead of obeying me, she
said, "What the merchant desires of you is no such great matter;
you need not speak, but only present him your cheek." The stuff
pleased me so much, that I was foolish enough to take her advice.
The old woman and my slaves stood up, that nobody might see, and
I put up my veil; but instead of kissing me, the merchant bit me
so violently as to draw blood.

The pain and my surprise were so great, that I fell down in a
swoon, and continued insensible so long, that the merchant had
time to escape. When I came to myself, I found my cheek covered
with blood: the old woman and my slaves took care to cover it
with my veil, that the people who came about us could not
perceive it, but supposed I had only had a fainting fit.

The old woman who accompanied me being extremely troubled at this
accident, endeavoured to comfort me. "My dear mistress," said
she, "I beg your pardon, for I am the cause of this misfortune,
having brought you to this merchant, because he is my countryman:
but I never thought he would be guilty of such a villainous
action. But do not grieve; let us hasten home, I will apply a
remedy that shall in three days so perfectly cure you, that not
the least mark shall be visible." The fit had made me so weak,
that I was scarcely able to walk. But at last I got home, where I
again fainted, as I went into my chamber. Meanwhile, the old
woman applied her remedy; I came to myself, and went to bed.

My husband came to me at night, and seeing my head bound up,
asked me the reason. I told him I had the head-ache, which I
hoped would have satisfied him, but he took a candle, and saw my
cheek was hurt: "How comes this wound?" said he. Though I did not
consider myself as guilty of any great offence, yet I could not
think of owning the truth. Besides, to make such an avowal to a
husband, I considered as somewhat indecorous; I therefore said,
"That as I was going, under his permission, to purchase some silk
stuff, a porter, carrying a load of wood, came so near to me, in
a narrow street, that one of the sticks grazed my cheek; but had
not done me much hurt." This account put my husband into a
violent passion. "This act," said he, "shall not go unpunished. I
will to-morrow order the lieutenant of the police to seize all
those brutes of porters, and cause them to be hanged." Fearful of
occasioning the death of so many innocent persons, I said, "Sir,
I should be sorry so great a piece of injustice should be
committed. Pray refrain; for I should deem myself unpardonable,
were I to be the cause of so much mischief." "Then tell me
sincerely," said he, "how came you by this wound." I answered,
"That it was occasioned by the inadvertency of a broom-seller
upon an ass, who coming behind me, while he was looking another
way, his ass came against me with so much violence, that I fell
down, and hurt my cheek upon some glass." "If that is the case,"
said my husband, "to-morrow morning, before sun-rise, the grand
vizier Jaaffier shall be informed of this insolence, and cause
all the broom-sellers to be put to death." "For the love of God,
Sir," said I, "let me beg of you to pardon them, for they are not
guilty." "How, madam," he demanded, "what then am I to believe?
Speak, for I am resolved to know the truth from your own mouth."
"Sir," I replied, "I was taken with a giddiness, and fell down,
and that is the whole matter."

At these words my husband lost all patience. "I have," said he,
"too long listened to your falsehoods." As he spoke he clapped
his hands, and in came three slaves: "Pull her out of bed," said
he, "and lay her in the middle of the floor." The slaves obeyed,
one holding me by the head, another by the feet; he commanded the
third to fetch a cimeter, and when he had brought it, "Strike,"
said he, "cut her in two, and then throw her into the Tygris.
This is the punishment I inflict on those to whom I have given my
heart, when they falsify their promise." When he saw that the
slave hesitated to obey him, "Why do you not strike?" said he.
"What do you wait for?"

"Madam," said the slave then, "you are near the last moment of
your life, consider if you have any thing to dispose of before
you die." I begged permission to speak one word, which was
granted me. I lifted up my head, and casting an affectionate look
on my husband, said, "Alas! to what a condition am I reduced!
must I then die in the prime of my youth!" I could say no more,
for my tears and sighs choked my utterance. My husband was not at
all moved, but, on the contrary, went on to reproach me; and it
would have been in vain to attempt a reply. I had recourse to
intreaties and prayers; but he had no regard to them, and
commanded the slaves to proceed to execution. The old woman, who
had been his nurse, came in just at that moment, fell down upon
her knees, and endeavoured to appease his wrath. "My son," said
she, "since I have been your nurse and brought you up, let me beg
the favour of you to grant me her life. Consider, that he who
kills shall be killed, and that you will stain your reputation,
and forfeit the esteem of mankind. What will the world say of
such sanguinary violence?" She spoke these words in such an
affecting manner, accompanied with tears, that she prevailed upon
him at last to abandon his purpose.

"Well then," said he to his nurse, "for your sake I will spare
her life; but she shall bear about her person some marks to make
her remember her offence." When he had thus spoken, one of the
slaves, by his order, gave me upon my sides and breast so many
blows, with a little cane, that he tore away both skin and flesh,
which threw me into a swoon. In this state he caused the same
slaves, the executioners of his fury, to carry me into a house,
where the old woman took care of me. I kept my bed four months;
at last I recovered: the scars which, contrary to my wish, you
saw yesterday, have remained ever since.

As soon as I was able to walk, and go abroad, I resolved to
retire to the house which was left me by my first husband, but I
could not find the site whereon it had stood. My second husband,
in the heat of his resentment, was not satisfied with the
demolition of that, but caused every other house in the same
street to be razed to the ground. I believe such an act of
violence was never heard of before; but against whom could I
complain? The perpetrator had taken good care to conceal himself.
But suppose I had discovered him, is it not easily seen that his
conduct must have proceeded from absolute power? How then could I
dare to complain?

Being left thus destitute and helpless, I had recourse to my dear
sister Zobeide, whose adventures your majesty has just heard. To
her I made known my misfortune; she received me with her
accustomed goodness, and advised me to bear my ambition patience.
"This is the way of the world," said she, "which either robs us
of our property, our friends, or our lovers; and some times of
all together." In confirmation of her remark, she at the same
time gave me an account of the loss of the young prince,
occasioned by the jealousy of her two sisters. She told me also
by what accident they were transformed into bitches: and in the
last place, after a thousand testimonials of her love towards me,
she introduced me to my youngest sister, who had likewise taken
sanctuary with her after the death of her mother.

Having returned our grateful acknowledgments to God for having
thus brought us together, we resolved to preserve our freedom,
and never again to separate. We have now long enjoyed this
tranquil life. As it was my business to manage the affairs of the
house, I always took pleasure in going myself to purchase what we
wanted. I happened to go abroad yesterday for this purpose, and
the things I bought I caused to be carried home by a porter, who
proving to be a sensible and jocose fellow, we kept with us for a
little diversion. Three calenders happened to come to our door as
it began to grow dark, and prayed us to give them shelter till
the next morning We admitted them upon certain conditions which
they agreed to observe; and after we had made them sit at table
with us, they in their own way entertained us with a concert of
music. At this time we heard knocking at our gate. This proceeded
from three merchants of Moussol, men of good appearance, who
begged the same favour which the calenders had obtained before.
We consented upon the same conditions, but neither of them kept
their promise. Though we had power, as well as justice on our
side, to punish them, yet we contented ourselves with demanding
from them the history of their lives; and afterwards confined our
revenge to dismissing them, after they had done, and denying them
the asylum they requested.

The caliph was well pleased to be thus informed of what he
desired to know; and publicly expressed his admiration of what he
had heard.

The caliph having satisfied his curiosity, thought himself
obliged to shew his generosity to the calender princes, and also
to give the three ladies some proof of his bounty. He himself,
without making use of his minister, the grand vizier, spoke to
Zobeide. "Madam, did not this fairy, that shewed herself to you
in the shape of a serpent, and imposed such a rigorous command
upon you, tell you where her place of abode was? Or rather, did
she not promise to see you, and restore those bitches to their
natural shape?"

"Commander of the faithful," answered Zobeide, "I forgot to tell
your majesty that the fairy left with me a bundle of hair,
saying, that her presence would one day be of use to me; and
then, if I only burnt two tufts of this hair, she would be with
me in a moment, though she were beyond mount Caucasus." "Madam,"
demanded the caliph, "where is the bundle of hair?" She answered,
"Ever since that time I have been so careful of it, that I always
carry it about me." Upon which she pulled it out, opened the case
which contained it, and shewed it to him. "Well then," said the
caliph, "let us bring the fairy hither; you could not call her in
a better time, for I long to see her."

Zobeide having consented, fire was brought in, and she threw the
whole bundle of hair into it. The palace at that instant began to
shake, and the fairy appeared before the caliph in the form of a
lady very richly dressed.

"Commander of the faithful," said she to the prince, "you see I
am ready to receive your commands. The lady who gave me this call
by your order did me essential service. To evince my gratitude, I
revenged her of her sisters' inhumanity, by changing them to
bitches; but if your majesty commands me, I will restore them to
their former shape."

"Generous fairy," replied the caliph, "you cannot do me a greater
pleasure; vouchsafe them that favour, and I will find some means
to comfort them for their hard penance. But besides, I have
another boon to ask in favour of that lady, who has had such
cruel usage from an unknown husband. As you undoubtedly know all
things, oblige me with the name of this barbarous wretch, who
could not be contented to exercise his outrageous and unmanly
cruelty upon her person, but has also most unjustly taken from
her all her substance. I only wonder how such an unjust and
inhuman action could be performed under my authority, and even in
my residence, without having come to my knowledge."

"To oblige your majesty," answered the fairy, "I will restore the
two bitches to their former state, and I will so cure the lady of
her scars, that it shall never appear she was so beaten; and I
will also tell you who it was that abused her."

The caliph sent for the two bitches from Zobeide's house, and
when they came, a glass of water was brought to the fairy by her
desire. She pronounced over it some words which nobody
understood; then throwing some part of it upon Amene, and the
rest upon the bitches, the latter became two ladies of surprising
beauty, and the scars that were upon Amene disappeared. After
which the fairy said to the caliph, "Commander of the faithful, I
must now discover to you the unknown husband you enquire after.
He is very nearly related to yourself, for it is prince Amin,
your eldest son, who falling passionately in love with this lady
from the fame of her beauty, by stratagem had her brought to his
house, where he married her. As to the blows he caused to be
given her, he is in some measure excusable; for the lady his
spouse had been a little too easy, and the excuses she had made
were calculated to lead him to believe she was more faulty than
she really was. This is all I can say to satisfy your curiosity."
At these words she saluted the caliph, and vanished.

The prince being filled with admiration, and having much
satisfaction in the changes that had happened through his means,
acted in such a manner as will perpetuate his memory to all ages.
First, he sent for his son Amin, told him that he was informed of
his secret marriage, and how he had ill-treated Amene upon a very
slight cause. Upon this the prince did not wait for his father's
commands, but received her again immediately.

After which the caliph declared that he would give his own heart
and hand to Zobeide, and offered the other three sisters to the
calenders, sons of sultans, who accepted them for their brides
with much joy. The caliph assigned each of them a magnificent
palace in the city of Bagdad, promoted them to the highest
dignities of his empire, and admitted them to his councils.

The chief Cauzee of Bagdad being called, with witnesses, wrote
the contracts of marriage; and the caliph in promoting by his
patronage the happiness of many persons who had suffered such
incredible calamities, drew a thousand blessings upon himself.


                THE STORY OF SINBAD THE VOYAGER.


In the reign of the same caliph Haroun al Rusheed, whom I have
already mentioned, there lived at Bagdad a poor porter called
Hindbad. One day, when the weather was excessively hot, he was
employed to carry a heavy burden from one end of the town to the
other. Being much fatigued, and having still a great way to go,
he came into a street where a refreshing breeze blew on his face,
and the pavement was sprinkled with rose-water. As he could not
desire a better place to rest and recruit himself, he took off
his load and sat upon it, near a large mansion.

He was much pleased that he stopped in this place; for the
agreeable smell of wood of aloes, and of pastils that came from
the house, mixing with the scent of the rose-water, completely
perfumed and embalmed the air. Besides, he heard from within a
concert of instrumental music, accompanied with the harmonious
notes of nightingales, and other birds, peculiar to the climate.
This charming melody, and the smell of several sorts of savoury
dishes, made the porter conclude there was a feast, with great
rejoicings within. His business seldom leading him that way, he
knew not to whom the mansion belonged; but to satisfy his
curiosity, he went to some of the servants, whom he saw standing
at the gate in magnificent apparel, and asked the name of the
proprietor. "How," replied one of them, "do you live in Bagdad,
and know not that this is the house of Sinbad, the sailor, that
famous voyager, who has sailed round the world?" The porter, who
had heard of this Sinbad's riches, could not but envy a man whose
condition he thought to be as happy as his own was deplorable:
and his mind being fretted with these reflections, he lifted up
his eyes to heaven, and said loud enough to be heard, "Almighty
creator of all things, consider the difference between Sinbad and
me! I am every day exposed to fatigues and calamities, and can
scarcely get coarse barley-bread for myself and my family, whilst
happy Sinbad profusely expends immense riches, and leads a life
of continual pleasure. What has he done to obtain from thee a lot
so agreeable? And what have I done to deserve one so wretched?"
Having finished his expostulation, he struck his foot against the
ground, like a man absorbed in grief and despair.

Whilst the porter was thus indulging his melancholy, a servant
came out of the house, and taking him by the arm, bade him follow
him, for Sinbad, his master, wanted to speak to him.

Sir, your majesty may easily imagine, that the repining Hindbad
was not a little surprised at this compliment. For, considering
what he had said, he was afraid Sinbad had sent for him to punish
him: therefore he would have excused himself, alleging, that he
could not leave his burden in the middle of the street. But
Sinbad's servants assured him they would look to it, and were so
urgent with him, that he was obliged to yield.

The servants brought him into a great hall, where a number of
people sat round a table, covered with all sorts of savoury
dishes. At the upper end sat a comely venerable gentleman, with a
long white beard, and behind him stood a number of officers and
domestics, all ready to attend his pleasure. This personage was
Sinbad. The porter, whose fear was increased at the sight of so
many people, and of a banquet so sumptuous, saluted the company
trembling. Sinbad bade him draw near, and seating him at his
right hand, served him himself, and gave him excellent wine, of
which there was abundance upon the sideboard.

When the repast was over, Sinbad addressed his conversation to
Hindbad; and calling him brother, according to the manner of the
Arabians, when they are familiar one with another, enquired his
name and employment.

"My lord," answered he, "my name is Hindbad." "I am very glad to
see you," replied Sinbad; "and I daresay the same on behalf of
all the company: but I wish to hear from your own mouth what it
was you lately said in the street." Sinbad had himself heard the
porter complain through the window, and this it was that induced
him to have him brought in.

At this request, Hindbad hung down his head in confusion, and
replied, "My lord, I confess that my fatigue put me out of
humour, and occasioned me to utter some indiscreet words, which I
beg you to pardon." "Do not think I am so unjust," resumed
Sinbad, "as to resent such a complaint. I consider your
condition, and instead of upbraiding, commiserate you. But I must
rectify your error concerning myself. You think, no doubt, that I
have acquired, without labour and trouble, the ease and
indulgence which I now enjoy. But do not mistake; I did not
attain to this happy condition, without enduring for several
years more trouble of body and mind than can well be imagined.
Yes, gentlemen," he added, speaking to the whole company, "I can
assure you, my troubles were so extraordinary, that they were
calculated to discourage the most covetous from undertaking such
voyages as I did, to acquire riches. Perhaps you have never heard
a distinct account of my wonderful adventures, and the dangers I
encountered, in my seven voyages; and since I have this
opportunity, I will give you a faithful account of them, not
doubting but it will be acceptable."

As Sinbad wished to relate his adventures chiefly on the porter's
account, he ordered his burden to be carried to the place of its
destination, and then proceeded.


                       The First Voyage.


I inherited from my father considerable property, the greater
part of which I squandered in my youth in dissipation; but I
perceived my error, and reflected that riches were perishable,
and quickly consumed by such ill managers as myself. I farther
considered, that by my irregular way of living I wretchedly
misspent my time; which is, of all things, the most valuable. I
remembered the saying of the great Solomon, which I had
frequently heard from my father; That death is more tolerable
than poverty. Struck with these reflections, I collected the
remains of my fortune, and sold all my effects by public auction.
I then entered into a contract with some merchants, who traded by
sea. I took the advice of such as I thought most capable of
assisting me: and resolving to improve what money I had, I went
to Bussorah, and embarked with several merchants on board a ship
which we had jointly fitted out.

We set sail, and steered our course towards the Indies, through
the Persian gulf, which is formed by the coasts of Arabia Felix
on the right, and by those of Persia on the left, and, according
to common opinion is seventy leagues wide at the broadest place.
The eastern sea, as well as that of the Indies, is very spacious.
It is bounded on one side by the coasts of Abyssinia, and is
4,500 leagues in length to the isles of Vakvak. At first I was
troubled with the sea-sickness, but speedily recovered my health,
and was not afterwards subject to that complaint.

In our voyage we touched at several islands, where we sold or
exchanged our goods. One day, whilst under sail, we were becalmed
near a small island, but little elevated above the level of the
water, and resembling a green meadow. The captain ordered his
sails to be furled, and permitted such persons as were so
inclined to land; of this number I was one.

But while we were enjoying ourselves in eating and drinking, and
recovering ourselves from the fatigue of the sea, the island on a
sudden trembled, and shook us terribly.

The trembling of the island was perceived on board the ship, and
we were called upon to re-embark speedily, or we should all be
lost; for what we took for an island proved to be the back of a
sea monster. The nimblest got into the sloop, others betook
themselves to swimming; but for myself I was still upon the back
of the creature, when he dived into the sea, and I had time only
to catch hold of a piece of wood that we had brought out of the
ship to make a fire. Meanwhile, the captain, having received
those on board who were in the sloop, and taken up some of those
that swam, resolved to improve the favourable gale that had just
risen, and hoisting his sails pursued his voyage, so that it was
impossible for me to recover the ship.

Thus was I exposed to the mercy of the waves. I struggled for my
life all the rest of the day and the following night. By this
time I found my strength gone, and despaired of saving my life,
when happily a wave threw me against an island, The bank was high
and rugged; so that I could scarcely have got up, had it not been
for some roots of trees, which fortune seemed to have preserved
in this place for my safety. Having reached the land, I lay down
upon the ground half dead, until the sun appeared. Then, though I
was very feeble, both from hard labour and want of food, I crept
along to find some herbs fit to eat, and had the good luck not
only to procure some, but likewise to discover a spring of
excellent water, which contributed much to recover me. After this
I advanced farther into the island, and at last reached a fine
plain, where at a great distance I perceived a horse feeding. I
went towards it, fluctuating between hope and fear, for I knew
not whether in advancing I was more likely to endanger or to
preserve my life. As I approached, I perceived it to be a very
fine mare, tied to a stake. Whilst I was admiring its beauty, I
heard from beneath the voice of a man, who immediately appeared,
and asked me who I was? I related to him my adventure, after
which, taking me by the hand, he led me into a cave, where there
were several other people, no less amazed to see me than I was to
see them.

I partook of some provisions which they offered me. I then asked
them what they did in such a desert place? to which they
answered, that they were grooms belonging to Maha-raja, sovereign
of the island; that every year, at the same season, they brought
thither the king's mares, and fastened them as I had seen, until
they were covered by a sea-horse, who afterwards endeavoured to
destroy the mares; but was prevented by their noise, and obliged
to return to the sea. The mares when in foal were taken back, and
the horses thus produced were kept for the king's use, and called
seahorses. They added, that they were to return home on the
morrow, and had I been one day later, I must have perished,
because the inhabited part of the island was at a great distance,
and it would have been impossible for me to have got thither
without a guide.

While they entertained me thus, the horse came out of the sea, as
they had told me, covered the mare, and afterwards would have
devoured her; but upon a great noise made by the grooms, he left
her, and plunged into the sea.

Next morning they returned with their mares to the capital of the
island, took me with them, and presented me to the Maha-raja. He
asked me who I was, and by what adventure I had come into his
dominions? After I had satisfied him, he told me he was much
concerned for my misfortune, and at the same time ordered that I
should want nothing; which commands his officers were so generous
and careful as to see exactly fulfilled.

Being a merchant, I frequented men of my own profession, and
particularly enquired for those who were strangers, that perchance I
might hear news from Bagdad, or find an opportunity to return. For the
Maha-raja's capital is situated on the sea-coast, and has a fine
harbour, where ships arrive daily from the different quarters of the
world. I frequented also the society of the learned Indians, and took
delight to hear them converse; but withal, I took care to make my
court regularly to the Maha-raja, and conversed with the governors and
petty kings, his tributaries, that were about him. They put a thousand
questions respecting my country; and I being willing to inform myself
as to their laws and customs, asked them concerning every thing which
I thought worth knowing.

There belongs to this king an island named Cassel. They assured
me that every night a noise of drums was heard there, whence the
mariners fancied that it was the residence of Degial. I
determined to visit this wonderful place, and in my way thither
saw fishes of 100 and 200 cubits long, that occasion more fear
than hurt; for they are so timorous, that they will fly upon the
rattling of two sticks or boards. I saw likewise other fish about
a cubit in length, that had heads like owls.

As I was one day at the port after my return, a ship arrived, and
as soon as she cast anchor, they began to unload her, and the
merchants on board ordered their goods to be carried into the
customhouse. As I cast my eye upon some bales, and looked to the
name, I found my own, and perceived the bales to be the same that
I had embarked at Bussorah. I also knew the captain; but being
persuaded that he believed me to be drowned, I went, and asked
him whose bales these were? He replied, that they belonged to a
merchant at Bagdad, called Sinbad, who came to sea with him; but
one day, being near an island, as was supposed, he went ashore,
with several other passengers, upon this island, which was only a
monstrous fish, that lay asleep upon the the sur-face of the
water: but as soon as he felt the heat of the fire they had
kindled upon his back, to dress some victuals, began to move, and
dived under water. Most of the persons who were upon him
perished, and among them the unfortunate Sinbad. Those bales
belonged to him, and I am resolved to trade with them until I
meet with some of his family, to whom I may return the profit. "I
am that Sinbad," said I, "whom you thought to be dead, and those
bales are mine."

When the captain heard me speak thus, "Heavens!" he exclaimed,
"whom can we trust in these times? There is no faith left among
men. I saw Sinbad perish with my own eyes, as did also the
passengers on board, and yet you tell me you are that Sinbad.
What impudence is this? To look on you, one would take you to be
a man of probity, and yet you tell a horrible falsehood, in order
to possess yourself of what does not belong to you." "Have
patience," replied I; "do me the favour to hear what I have to
say." "Very well," said he, "speak, I am ready to hear you." Then
I told him how I had escaped, and by what adventure I met with
the grooms of Maha-raja, who had brought me to his court.

His confidence began to abate upon this declaration, and he was
at length persuaded that I was no cheat: for there came people
from his ship who knew me, paid me great compliments, and
expressed much joy at seeing me alive. At last he recollected me
himself, and embracing me, "Heaven be praised," said he, "for
your happy escape. I cannot express the joy it affords, me; there
are your goods, take and do with them as you please." I thanked
him, acknowledged his probity, and in requital, offered him part
of my goods as a present, which he generously refused.

I took out what was most valuable in my bales, and presented them
to the Maha-raja, who, knowing my misfortune, asked me how I came
by such rarities. I acquainted him with the circumstance of their
recovery. He was pleased at my good luck, accepted my present,
and in return gave me one much more considerable. Upon this, I
took leave of him, and went aboard the same ship, after I had
exchanged my goods for the commodities of that country. I carried
with me wood of aloes, sandal, camphire, nutmegs, cloves, pepper,
and ginger. We passed by several islands, and at last arrived at
Bussorah, from whence I came to this city, with the value of
100,000 sequins. My family and I received one another with all
the transports of sincere affection. I bought slaves of both
sexes, and a landed estate, and built a magnificent house. Thus I
settled myself, resolving to forget the miseries I had suffered,
and to enjoy the pleasures of life.

Sinbad stopped here, and ordered the musicians to proceed with
their concert, which the story had interrupted. The company
continued enjoying themselves till the evening, and it was time
to retire, when Sinbad sent for a purse of 100 sequins and giving
it to the porter, said, "Take this, Hindbad, return to your home,
and come back to-morrow to hear more of my adventures." The
porter went away, astonished at the honour done, and the present
made him. The account of this adventure proved very agreeable to
his wife and children, who did not fail to return thanks to God
for what providence had sent him by the hand of Sinbad.

Hindbad put on his best apparel next day, and returned to the
bountiful traveller, who received him with a pleasant air, and
welcomed him heartily. When all the guests had arrived, dinner
was served, and continued a long time. When it was ended, Sinbad,
addressing himself to the company, said, "Gentlemen, be pleased
to listen to the adventures of my second voyage; they deserve
your attention even more than those of the first." Upon which
every one held his peace, and Sinbad proceeded.


                       The Second Voyage.


I designed, after my first voyage, to spend the rest of my days
at Bagdad, as I had the honour to tell you yesterday; but it was
not long ere I grew weary of an indolent life. My inclination to
trade revived. I bought goods proper for the commerce I intended,
and put to sea a second time with merchants of known probity. We
embarked on board a good ship, and after recommending ourselves
to God, set sail. We traded from island to island, and exchanged
commodities with great profit. One day we landed in an island
covered with several sorts of fruit-trees, but we could see
neither man nor animal. We went to take a little fresh air in the
meadows, along the streams that watered them. Whilst some
diverted themselves with gathering flowers, and other fruits, I
took my wine and provisions, and sat down near a stream betwixt
two high trees, which formed a thick shade. I made a good meal,
and afterwards fell asleep. I cannot tell how long I slept, but
when I awoke the ship was gone.

I was much alarmed at finding the ship gone. I got up and looked
around me, but could not see one of the merchants who landed with
me. I perceived the ship under sail, but at such a distance, that
I lost sight of her in a short time.

I leave you to guess at my melancholy reflections in this sad
condition: I was ready to die with grief. I cried out in agony;
beat my head and breast, and threw myself upon the ground, where
I lay some time in despair, one afflicting thought being
succeeded by another still more afflicting. I upbraided myself a
hundred times for not being content with the produce of my first
voyage, that might have sufficed me all my life. But all this was
in vain, and my repentance too late.

At last I resigned myself to the will of God. Not knowing what to
do, I climbed up to the top of a lofty tree, from whence I looked
about on all sides, to see if I could discover any thing that
could give me hopes. When I gazed towards the sea I could see
nothing but sky and water; but looking over the land I beheld
something white; and coming down, I took what provision I had
left, and went towards it, the distance being so great, that I
could not distinguish what it was.

As I approached, I thought it to be a white dome, of a prodigious
height and extent; and when I came up to it, I touched it, and
found it to be very smooth. I went round to see if it was open on
any side, but saw it was not, and that there was no climbing up
to the top as it was so smooth. It was at least fifty paces
round.

By this time the sun was about to set, and all of a sudden the
sky became as dark as if it had been covered with a thick cloud.
I was much astonished at this sudden darkness, but much more when
I found it occasioned by a bird of a monstrous size, that came
flying toward me. I remembered that I had often heard mariners
speak of a miraculous bird called Roc, and conceived that the
great dome which I so much admired must be its egg. In short, the
bird alighted, and sat over the egg. As I perceived her coming, I
crept to the egg, so that I had before me one of the legs of the
bird, which was as big as the trunk of a tree. I tied myself
strongly to it with my turban, in hopes that the roc next morning
would carry me with her out of this desert island. After having
passed the night in this condition, the bird flew away as soon as
it was daylight, and carried me so high, that I could not discern
the earth; she afterwards descended with so much rapidity that I
lost my senses. But when I found myself on the ground, I speedily
untied the knot, and had scarcely done so, when the roc, having
taken up a serpent of a monstrous length in her bill, flew away.

The spot where it left me was encompassed on all sides by
mountains, that seemed to reach above the clouds, and so steep
that there was no possibility of getting out of the valley. This
was a new perplexity: so that when I compared this place with the
desert island from which the roc had brought me, I found that I
had gained nothing by the change.

As I walked through this valley, I perceived it was strewed with
diamonds, some of which were of a surprising bigness. I took
pleasure in looking upon them; but shortly saw at a distance such
objects as greatly diminished my satisfaction, and which I could
not view without terror, namely, a great number of serpents, so
monstrous, that the least of them was capable of swallowing an
elephant. They retired in the day-time to their dens, where they
hid themselves from the roc their enemy, and came out only in the
night.

I spent the day in walking about in the valley, resting myself at
times in such places as I thought most convenient. When night
came on, I went into a cave, where I thought I might repose in
safety. I secured the entrance, which was low and narrow, with a
great stone to preserve me from the serpents; but not so far as
to exclude the light. I supped on part of my provisions, but the
serpents, which began hissing round me, put me into such extreme
fear, that you may easily imagine I did not sleep. When day
appeared, the serpents retired, and I came out of the cave
trembling. I can justly say, that I walked upon diamonds, without
feeling any inclination to touch them. At last I sat down, and
notwithstanding my apprehensions, not having closed my eyes
during the night, fell asleep, after having eaten a little more
of my provision. But I had scarcely shut my eyes, when something
that fell by me with a great noise awaked me. This was a large
piece of raw meat; and at the same time I saw several others fall
down from the rocks in different places.

I had always regarded as fabulous what I had heard sailors and
others relate of the valley of diamonds, and of the stratagems
employed by merchants to obtain jewels from thence; but now I
found that they had stated nothing but truth. For the fact is,
that the merchants come to the neighbourhood of this valley, when
the eagles have young ones, and throwing great joints of meat
into the valley, the diamonds, upon whose points they fall, stick
to them; the eagles, which are stronger in this country than any
where else, pounce with great force upon those pieces of meat,
and carry them to their nests on the precipices of the rocks to
feed their young: the merchants at this time run to their nests,
disturb and drive off the eagles by their shouts, and take away
the diamonds that stick to the meat.

Until I perceived the device I had concluded it to be impossible
for me to get from this abyss, which I regarded as my grave; but
now I changed my opinion, and began to think upon the means of my
deliverance.

I began to collect together the largest diamonds I could find,
and put them into the leather bag in which I used to carry my
provisions. I afterwards took the largest of the pieces of meat,
tied it close round me with the cloth of my turban, and then laid
myself upon the ground with my face downward, the bag of diamonds
being made fast to my girdle.

I had scarcely placed myself in this posture when the eagles
came. Each of them seized a piece of meat, and one of the
strongest having taken me up, with the piece of meat to which I
was fastened, carried me to his nest on the top of the mountain.
The merchants immediately began their shouting to frighten the
eagles; and when they had obliged them to quit their prey, one of
them came to the nest where I was. He was much alarmed when he
saw me; but recovering himself, instead of enquiring how I came
thither began to quarrel with me, and asked, why I stole his
goods? "You will treat me," replied I, "with more civility, when
you know me better. Do not be uneasy, I have diamonds enough for
you and myself, more than all the other merchants together.
Whatever they have they owe to chance, but I selected for myself
in the bottom of the valley those which you see in this bag." I
had scarcely done speaking, when the other merchants came
crowding about us, much astonished to see me; but they were much
more surprised when I told them my story. Yet they did not so
much admire my stratagem to effect my deliverance, as my courage
in putting it into execution.

They conducted me to their encampment, and there having opened my
bag, they were surprised at the largeness of my diamonds, and
confessed that in all the courts which they had visited they had
never seen any of such size and perfection. I prayed the
merchant, who owned the nest to which I had been carried (for
every merchant had his own), to take as many for his share as he
pleased. He contented himself with one, and that too the least of
them; and when I pressed him to take more, without fear of doing
me any injury, "No," said he, "I am very well satisfied with
this, which is valuable enough to save me the trouble of making
any more voyages, and will raise as great a fortune as I desire."

I spent the night with the merchants, to whom I related my story
a second time, for the satisfaction of those who had not heard
it. I could not moderate my joy when I found myself delivered
from the danger I have mentioned. I thought myself in a dream,
and could scarcely believe myself out of danger.

The merchants had thrown their pieces of meat into the valley for
several days. And each of them being satisfied with the diamonds
that had fallen to his lot, we left the place the next morning,
and travelled near high mountains, where there were serpents of a
prodigious length, which we had the good fortune to escape. We
took shipping at the first port we reached, and touched at the
isle of Roha, where the trees grow that yield camphire. This tree
is so large, and its branches so thick, that one hundred men may
easily sit under its shade. The juice, of which the camphire is
made, exudes from a hole bored in the upper part of the tree, is
received in a vessel, where it thickens to a consistency, and
becomes what we call camphire; after the juice is thus drawn out,
the tree withers and dies.

In this island is also found the rhinoceros, an animal less than
the elephant, but larger than the buffalo. It has a horn upon its
nose, about a cubit in length; this horn is solid, and cleft
through the middle, upon this may be seen white lines,
representing the figure of a man. The rhinoceros fights with the
elephant, runs his horn into his belly, and carries him off upon
his head but the blood and the fat of the elephant running into
his eyes, and making him blind, he falls to the ground; and then,
strange to relate! the roc comes and carries them both away in
her claws, for food for her young ones.

I pass over many other things peculiar to this island, lest I
should be troublesome to you. Here I exchanged some of my
diamonds for merchandize. From hence we went to other islands,
and at last, having touched at several trading towns of the
continent, we landed at Bussorah, from whence I proceeded to
Bagdad. There I immediately gave large presents to the poor, and
lived honourably upon the vast riches I had brought, and gained
with so much fatigue.

Thus Sinbad ended the relation of the second voyage, gave Hindbad
another hundred sequins, and invited him to come the next day to
hear the account of the third. The rest of the guests returned to
their homes, and came again the following day at the same hour,
and one may be sure the porter did not fail, having by this time
almost forgotten his former poverty. When dinner was over, Sinbad
demanded attention, and gave them an account of his third voyage,
as follows.


                           The Third Voyage.


I soon lost in the pleasures of life the remembrance of the
perils I had encountered in my two former voyages; and being in
the flower of my age, I grew weary of living without business,
and hardening myself against the thought of any danger I might
incur, went from Bagdad to Bussorah with the richest commodities
of the country. There I embarked again with some merchants. We
made a long voyage, and touched at several ports, where we
carried on a considerable trade. One day, being out in the main
ocean, we were overtaken by a dreadful tempest, which drove us
from our course. The tempest continued several days, and brought
us before the port of an island, which the captain was very
unwilling to enter; but we were obliged to cast anchor. When we
had furled our sails, the captain told us, that this, and some
other neighbouring islands, were inhabited by hairy savages, who
would speedily attack us; and though they were but dwarfs, yet
our misfortune was such, that we must make no resistance, for
they were more in number than the locusts; and if we happened to
kill one of them, they would all fall upon us and destroy us.

This account of the captain, continued Sinbad put the whole
company into great consternation and we soon found that what he
had told us was but too true; an innumerable multitude of
frightful savages, about two feet high, covered all over with red
hair, came swimming towards us, and encompassed our ship. They
spoke to us as they came near, but we understood not their
language; they climbed up the sides of the ship with such agility
as surprised us. We beheld all this with dread, but without
daring to defend ourselves, or to divert them from their
mischievous design. In short, they took down our sails, cut the
cable, and hauling to the shore, made us all get out, and
afterwards carried the ship into another island from whence they
had come. All voyagers carefully avoided the island where they
left us, it being very dangerous to stay there, for a reason you
shall presently hear; but we were forced to bear our affliction
with patience.

We went forward into the island, where we gathered some fruits
and herbs to prolong our lives as long as we could; but we
expected nothing but death. As we advanced, we perceived at a
distance a vast pile of building, and made towards it. We found
it to be a palace, elegantly built, and very lofty, with a gate
of ebony of two leaves, which we forced open. We entered the
court, where we saw before us a large apartment, with a porch,
having on one side a heap of human bones, and on the other a vast
number of roasting spits. We trembled at this spectacle, and
being fatigued with travelling, fell to the ground, seized with
deadly apprehension, and lay a long time motionless.

The sun set, and whilst we were in the lamentable condition I
have described, the gate of the apartment opened with a loud
crash, and there came out the horrible figure of a black man, as
tall as a lofty palm-tree. He had but one eye, and that in the
middle of his forehead, where it looked as red as a burning coal.
His fore-teeth were very long and sharp, and stood out of his
mouth, which was as deep as that of a horse. His upper lip hung
down upon his breast. His ears resembled those of an elephant,
and covered his shoulders; and his nails were as long and crooked
as the talons of the greatest birds. At the sight of so frightful
a giant, we became insensible, and lay like dead men.

At last we came to ourselves, and saw him sitting in the porch
looking at us. When he had considered us well, he advanced
towards us, and laying his hand upon me, took me up by the nape
of my neck, and turned round as a butcher would do a sheep's
head. After having examined me, and perceiving me to be so lean
that I had nothing but skin and bone, he let me go. He took up
all the rest one by one, and viewed them in the same manner. The
captain being the fattest, he held him with one hand, as I would
do a sparrow, and thrust a spit through him; he then kindled a
great fire, roasted, and ate him in his apartment for his supper.
Having finished his repast, he returned to his porch, where he
lay and fell asleep, snoring louder than thunder. He slept thus
till morning. As to ourselves, it was not possible for us to
enjoy any rest, so that we passed the night in the most painful
apprehension that can be imagined. When day appeared the giant
awoke, got up, went out, and left us in the palace.

When we thought him at a distance, we broke the melancholy
silence we had preserved the whole of the night, and filled the
palace with our lamentations and groans. Though we were several
in number, and had but one enemy, it never occurred to us to
effect our deliverance by putting him to death. This enterprize
however, though difficult of execution, was the only design we
ought naturally to have formed.

We thought of several other expedients, but determined upon none;
and submitting ourselves to what it should please God to order
concerning us, we spent the day in traversing the island,
supporting ourselves with fruits and herbs as we had done the day
before. In the evening we sought for some place of shelter, but
found none; so that we were forced, whether we would or not, to
return to the palace.

The giant failed not to return, and supped once more upon one of
our companions, after which he slept, and snored till day, and
then went out and left us as before. Our situation appeared to us
so dreadful, that several of my comrades designed to throw
themselves into the sea, rather than die so painful a death; and
endeavoured to persuade the others to follow their example. Upon
which one of the company answered, "That we were forbidden to
destroy ourselves: but even if that were not the case, it was
much more reasonable to devise some method to rid ourselves of
the monster who had destined us to so horrible a fate."

Having thought of a project for this purpose, I communicated it
to my comrades, who approved it. "Brethren," said I, "you know
there is much timber floating upon the coast; if you will be
advised by me, let us make several rafts capable of bearing us,
and when they are done, leave them there till we find it
convenient to use them. In the mean time, we will carry into
execution the design I proposed to you for our deliverance from
the giant, and if it succeed, we may remain here patiently
awaiting the arrival of some ship to carry us out of this fatal
island; but if it happen to miscarry, we will take to our rafts,
and put to sea. I admit that by exposing ourselves to the fury of
the waves, we run a risk of losing our lives; but is it not
better to be buried in the sea than in the entrails of this
monster, who has already devoured two of our number?" My advice
was approved, and we made rafts capable of carrying three persons
on each.

We returned to the palace towards the evening, and the giant
arrived shortly after. We were forced to submit to seeing another
of our comrades roasted. But at last we revenged ourselves on the
brutish giant in the following manner. After he had finished his
cursed supper, he lay down on his back, and fell asleep. As soon
as we heard him snore, according to his custom, nine of the
boldest among us, and myself, took each of us a spit, and putting
the points of them into the fire till they were burning hot, we
thrust them into his eye all at once, and blinded him. The pain
made him break out into a frightful yell: he started up, and
stretched out his hands, in order to sacrifice some of us to his
rage: but we ran to such places as he could not reach; and after
having sought for us in vain, he groped for the gate, and went
out, howling in agony.

We quitted the palace after the giant, and came to the shore,
where we had left our rafts, and put them immediately to sea. We
waited till day, in order to get upon them, in case the giant
should come towards us with any guide of his own species, but we
hoped if he did not appear by sun-rising, and gave over his
howling, which we still heard, that he would prove to be dead;
and if that happened to be the case, we resolved to stay in that
island, and not to risk our lives upon the rafts: but day had
scarcely appeared, when we perceived our cruel enemy, accompanied
with two others almost of the same size, leading him; and a great
number more coming before him at a quick pace.

We did not hesitate to take to our rafts, and put to sea with all
the speed we could. The giants, who perceived this, took up great
stones, and running to the shore, entered the water up to the
middle, and threw so exactly, that they sunk all the rafts but
that I was upon; and all my companions, except the two with me,
were drowned. We rowed with all our might, and got out of the
reach of the giants. But when we got out to sea, we were exposed
to the mercy of the waves and winds, and tossed about, sometimes
on one side, and sometimes on another, and spent that night and
the following day under the most painful uncertainty as to our
fate; but next morning we had the good fortune to be thrown upon
an island, where we landed with much joy. We found excellent
fruit, which afforded us great relief, and recruited our
strength.

At night we went to sleep on the sea-shore but were awakened by
the noise of a serpent of surprising length and thickness, whose
scales made a rustling noise as he wound himself along. It
swallowed up one of my comrades, notwithstanding his loud cries,
and the efforts he made to extricate himself from it; dashing him
several times against the ground, it crushed him, and we could
hear it gnaw and tear the poor wretch's bones, though we had fled
to a considerable distance. The following day, to our great
terror, we saw the serpent again, when I exclaimed, "O heaven, to
what dangers are we exposed! We rejoiced yesterday at having
escaped from the cruelty of a giant and the rage of the waves,
now are we fallen into another danger equally dreadful."

As we walked about, we saw a large tall tree upon which we
designed to pass the following night, for our security; and
having satisfied our hunger with fruit, we mounted it according.
Shortly after, the serpent came hissing to the foot of the tree;
raised himself up against the trunk of it, and meeting with my
comrade, who sat lower than I, swallowed him at once, and went
off.

I remained upon the tree till it was day, and then came down,
more like a dead man than one alive, expecting the same fate with
my two companions. This filled me with horror, and I advanced
some steps to throw myself into the sea; but the natural love of
life prompting us to prolong it as long as we can, I withstood
this dictate of despair, and submitted myself to the will of God,
who disposes of our lives at his pleasure.

In the mean time I collected together a great quantity of small
wood, brambles, and dry thorns, and making them up into
faggots, made a wide circle with them round the tree, and also
tied some of them to the branches over my head. Having done this,
when the evening came, I shut myself up within this circle, with
the melancholy satisfaction, that I had neglected nothing which
could preserve me from the cruel destiny with which I was
threatened. The serpent failed not to come at the usual hour, and
went round the tree, seeking for an opportunity to devour me, but
was prevented by the rampart I had made; so that he lay till day,
like a cat watching in vain for a mouse that has fortunately
reached a place of safety. When day appeared, he retired, but I
dared not to leave my fort until the sun arose.

I felt so much fatigued by the labour to which it had put me, and
suffered so much from his poisonous breath, that death seemed
more eligible to me than the horrors of such a state. I came down
from the tree, and, not thinking of the resignation I had the
preceding day resolved to exercise, I ran towards the sea, with a
design to throw myself into it.

God took compassion on my hopeless state; for just as I was going
to throw myself into the sea, I perceived a ship at a
considerable distance. I called as loud as I could, and taking
the linen from my turban, displayed it, that they might observe
me. This had the desired effect; the crew perceived me, and the
captain sent his boat for me. As soon as I came on board, the
merchants and seamen flocked about me, to know how I came into
that desert island; and after I had related to them all that had
befallen me, the oldest among them said to me, they had several
times heard of the giants that dwelt in that island, that they
were cannibals, and ate men raw as well as roasted; and as to the
serpents, they added, that there were abundance in the island
that hid themselves by day, and came abroad by night. After
having testified their joy at my escaping so many dangers, they
brought me the best of their provisions; and the captain, seeing
that I was in rags, was so generous as to give me one of his own
suits. We continued at sea for some time, touched at several
islands, and at last landed at that of Salabat, where sandal wood
is obtained, which is of great use in medicine. We entered the
port, and came to anchor. The merchants began to unload their
goods, in order to sell or exchange them. In the mean time, the
captain came to me, and said, "Brother, I have here some goods
that belonged to a merchant, who sailed some time on board this
ship, and he being dead, I design to dispose of them for the
benefit of his heirs, when I find who they are." The bales he
spoke of lay on the deck, and shewing them to me, he said, "There
are the goods; I hope you will take care to sell them, and you
shall have factorage." I thanked him for thus affording me an
opportunity of employing myself, because I hated to be idle.

The clerk of the ship took an account of all the bales, with the
names of the merchants to whom they belonged. And when he asked
the captain in whose name he should enter those he had given me
the charge of; "Enter them," said the captain, "in the name of
Sinbad." I could not hear myself named without some emotion; and
looking stedfastly on the captain, I knew him to be the person
who, in my second voyage, had left me in the island where I fell
asleep, and sailed without me, or sending to see for me. But I
could not recollect him at first, he was so much altered since I
had seen him.

I was not surprised that he, believing me to be dead, did not
recognize me. "Captain," said I, "was the merchant's name, to
whom those bales belonged, Sinbad?" "Yes," replied he, "that was
his name; he came from Bagdad, and embarked on board my ship at
Bussorah. One day, when we landed at an island to take in water
and other refreshments, I knew not by what mistake, I sailed
without observing that he did not re-embark with us; neither I
nor the merchants perceived it till four hours after. We had the
wind in our stern, and so fresh a gale, that it was not then
possible for us to tack about for him." "You believe him then to
be dead?" said I. "Certainly," answered he. "No, captain," I
resumed; "look at me, and you may know that I am Sinbad, whom you
left in that desert island."

The captain, continued Sinbad, having considered me attentively,
recognized me. "God be praised," said he, embracing me; "I
rejoice that fortune has rectified my fault. There are your
goods, which I always took care to preserve." I took them from
him, and made him the acknowledgments to which he was entitled.

From the isle of Salabat, we went to another, where I furnished
myself with cloves, cinnamon, and other spices. As we sailed from
this island, we saw a tortoise twenty cubits in length and
breadth. We observed also an amphibious animal like a cow, which
gave milk; its skin is so hard, that they usually make bucklers
of it. I saw another, which had the shape and colour of a camel.

In short, after a long voyage, I arrived at Bussorah, and from
thence returned to Bagdad, with so much wealth that I knew not
its extent. I gave a great deal to the poor, and bought another
considerable estate in addition to what I had already.

Thus Sinbad finished the history of his third voyage; gave
another hundred sequins to Hindbad, invited him to dinner again
the next day, to hear the story of his fourth voyage. Hindbad and
the company retired; and on the following day, when they
returned, Sinbad after dinner continued the relation of his
adventures.


                       The Fourth Voyage.


The pleasures and amusements which I enjoyed after my third
voyage had not charms sufficient to divert me from another. My
passion for trade, and my love of novelty, again prevailed. I
therefore settled my affairs, and having provided a stock of
goods fit for the traffic I designed to engage in, I set out on
my journey. I took the route of Persia, travelled over several
provinces, and then arrived at a port, where I embarked. We
hoisted our sails, and touched at several ports of the continent,
and some of the eastern islands, and put out to sea: we were
overtaken by such a sudden gust of wind, as obliged the captain
to lower his yards, and take all other necessary precautions to
prevent the danger that threatened us. But all was in vain our
endeavours had no effect; the sails were split in a thousand
pieces, and the ship was stranded; several of the merchants and
seamen were drowned and the cargo was lost.

I had the good fortune, with several of the merchants and
mariners, to get upon some planks, and we were carried by the
current to an island which lay before us. There we found fruit
and spring water, which preserved our lives. We staid all night
near the place where we had been cast ashore, without consulting
what we should do; our misfortune had so much dispirited us that
we could not deliberate.

Next morning, as soon as the sun was up, we walked from the
shore, and advancing into the island, saw some houses, which we
approached. As soon as we drew near, we were encompassed by a
great number of negroes, who seized us, shared us among them, and
carried us to their respective habitations.

I, and five of my comrades, were carried to one place; here they
made us sit down, and gave us a certain herb, which they made
signs to us to eat. My comrades not taking notice that the blacks
ate none of it themselves, thought only of satisfying their
hunger, and ate with greediness. But I, suspecting some trick,
would not so much as taste it, which happened well for me; for in
little time after, I perceived my companions had lost their
senses, and that when they spoke to me, they knew not what they
said.

The negroes fed us afterwards with rice, prepared with oil of
cocoa-nuts; and my comrades, who had lost their reason, ate of it
greedily. I also partook of it, but very sparingly. They gave us
that herb at first on purpose to deprive us of our senses, that
we might not be aware of the sad destiny prepared for us; and
they supplied us with rice to fatten us; for, being cannibals,
their design was to eat us as soon as we grew fat. This
accordingly happened, for they devoured my comrades, who were not
sensible of their condition; but my senses being entire, you may
easily guess that instead of growing fat, as the rest did, I grew
leaner every day. The fear of death under which I laboured,
turned all my food into poison. I fell into a languishing
distemper, which proved my safety; for the negroes, having killed
and eaten my companions, seeing me to be withered, lean, and
sick, deferred my death.

Meanwhile I had much liberty, so that scarcely any notice was taken of
what I did, and this gave me an opportunity one day to get at a
distance from the houses, and to make my escape. An old man, who saw
me, and suspected my design, called to me as loud as he could to
return; but instead of obeying him, I redoubled my speed, and quickly
got out of sight. At that time there was none but the old man about
the houses, the rest being abroad, and not to return till night, which
was usual with them. Therefore, being sure that they could not arrive
time enough to pursue me, I went on till night, when I stopped to rest
a little, and to eat some of the provisions I had secured; but I
speedily set forward again, and travelled seven days, avoiding those
places which seemed to be inhabited, and lived for the most part upon
cocoa-nuts, which served me both for meat and drink. On the eighth day
I came near the sea, and saw some white people like myself, gathering
pepper, of which there was great plenty in that place. This I took to
be a good omen, and went to them without any scruple.

The people who gathered pepper came to meet me as soon as they
saw me, and asked me in Arabic who I was, and whence I came? I
was overjoyed to hear them speak in my own language, and
satisfied their curiosity, by giving them an account of my
shipwreck, and how I fell into the hands of the negroes. "Those
negroes," replied they, "eat men, and by what miracle did you
escape their cruelty?" I related to them the circumstances I have
just mentioned, at which they were wonderfully surprised.

I staid with them till they had gathered their quantity of
pepper, and then sailed with them to the island from whence they
had come. They presented me to their king, who was a good prince.
He had the patience to hear the relation of my adventures, which
surprised him; and he afterwards gave me clothes, and commanded
care to be taken of me.

The island was very well peopled, plentiful in everything, and
the capital a place of great trade. This agreeable retreat was
very comfortable to me after my misfortunes, and the kindness of
this generous prince completed my satisfaction. In a word, there
was not a person more in favour with him than myself; and,
consequently, every man in court and city sought to oblige me; so
that in a very little time I was looked upon rather as a native
than a stranger.

I observed one thing, which to me appeared very extraordinary.
All the people, the king himself not excepted, rode their horses
without saddle, bridle, or stirrups. This made me one day take
the liberty to ask the king how it came to pass? His majesty
answered, that I talked to him of things which nobody knew the
use of in his dominions.

I went immediately to a workman, and gave him a model for making
the stock of a saddle. When that was done, I covered it myself
with velvet and leather, and embroidered it with gold. I
afterwards went to a smith, who made me a bit, according to the
pattern I shewed him, and also some stirrups. When I had all
things completed, I presented them to the king, and put them upon
one of his horses. His majesty mounted immediately, and was so
pleased with them, that he testified his satisfaction by large
presents. I could not avoid making several others for the
ministers and principal officers of his household, who all of
them made me presents that enriched me in a little time. I also
made some for the people of best quality in the city, which
gained me great reputation and regard.

As I paid my court very constantly to the king, he said to me one
day, "Sinbad, I love thee; and all my subjects who know thee,
treat thee according to my example. I have one thing to demand of
thee, which thou must grant." "Sir," answered I, "there is
nothing but I will do, as a mark of my obedience to your majesty,
whose power over me is absolute." "I have a mind thou shouldst
marry," replied he, "that so thou mayst stay in my dominions, and
think no more of thy own country." I durst not resist the
prince's will, and he gave me one of the ladies of his court,
noble, beautiful, and rich. The ceremonies of marriage being
over, I went and dwelt with my wife, and for some time we lived
together in perfect harmony. I was not, however, satisfied with
my banishment, therefore designed to make my escape the first
opportunity, and to return to Bagdad; which my present
settlement, how advantageous soever, could not make me forget.

At this time the wife of one of my neighbours, with whom I had
contrasted a very strict friendship, fell sick, and died. I went
to see and comfort him in his affliction, and finding him
absorbed in sorrow, I said to him as soon as I saw him, "God
preserve you and grant you a long life." "Alas!" replied he, "how
do you think I should obtain the favour you wish me? I have not
above an hour to live." "Pray," said I, "do not entertain such a
melancholy thought; I hope I shall enjoy your company many
years." "I wish you," he replied, "a long life; but my days are
at an end, for I must be buried this day with my wife. This is a
law which our ancestors established in this island, and it is
always observed inviolably. The living husband is interred with
the dead wife, and the living wife with the dead husband. Nothing
can save me; every one must submit to this law."

While he was giving me an account of this barbarous custom, the very
relation of which chilled my blood, his kindred, friends, and
neighbours, came in a body to assist at the funeral. They dressed the
corpse of the woman in her richest apparel, and all her jewels, as if
it had been her wedding-day; then they placed her on an open coffin,
and began their march to the place of burial. The husband walked at
the head of the company, and followed the corpse. They proceeded to a
high mountain, and when they had reached the place of their
destination, they took up a large stone, which covered the mouth of a
deep pit, and let down the corpse with all its apparel and jewels.
Then the husband, embracing his kindred and friends, suffered himself
to be put into another open coffin without resistance, with a pot of
water, and seven small loaves, and was let down in the same manner.
The mountain was of considerable length, and extended along the
sea-shore, and the pit was very deep. The ceremony being over, the
aperture was again covered with the stone, and the company returned.

It is needless for me to tell you that I was a most melancholy
spectator this funeral, while the rest were scarcely moved, the
custom was to them so familiar. I could not forbear communicating
to the king my sentiment respecting the practice: "Sir," I said,
"I cannot but feel astonished at the strange usage observed in
this country, of burying the living with the dead. I have been a
great traveller, and seen many countries, but never heard of so
cruel a law." "What do you mean, Sinbad?" replied the king: "it
is a common law. I shall be interred with the queen, my wife, if
she die first." "But, Sir," said I, "may I presume to ask your
majesty, if strangers be obliged to observe this law?" "Without
doubt," returned the king (smiling at the occasion of my
question), "they are not exempted, if they be married in this
island."

I returned home much depressed by this answer; for the fear of my
wife's dying first, and that I should be interred alive with her,
occasioned me very uneasy reflections. But there was no remedy; I
must have patience, and submit to the will of God. I trembled
however at every little indisposition of my wife. Alas! in a
little time my fears were realized, for she fell sick, and died.

Judge of my sorrow; to be interred alive, seemed to me as
deplorable a termination of life as to be devoured by cannibals.
It was necessary, however, to submit. The king and all his court
expressed their wish to honour the funeral with their presence,
and the most considerable people of the city did the same. When
all was ready for the ceremony, the corpse was put into a coffin,
with all her jewels and her most magnificent apparel. The
procession began, and as second actor in this doleful tragedy, I
went next the corpse, with my eyes full of tears, bewailing my
deplorable fate. Before we reached the mountain, I made an
attempt to affect the minds of the spectators: I addressed myself
to the king first, and then to all those that were round me;
bowing before them to the earth, and kissing the border of their
garments, I prayed them to have compassion upon me. "Consider,"
said I, "that I am a stranger, and ought not to be subject to
this rigorous law, and that I have another wife and children in
my own country." Although I spoke in the most pathetic manner, no
one was moved by my address; on the contrary, they ridiculed my
dread of death as cowardly, made haste to let my wife's corpse
into the pit, and lowered me down the next moment in an open
coffin, with full of water and seven loaves. In short, the fatal
ceremony being performed, they covered over the mouth of the pit,
notwithstanding my grief and piteous lamentations.

As I approached the bottom, I discovered by the aid of the little
light that came from above the nature of this subterranean place,
it seemed an endless cavern, and might be about fifty fathom
deep. I was annoyed by an insufferable stench proceeding from the
multitude of bodies which I saw on the right and left; nay, I
fancied that I heard some of them sigh out their last. However,
when I got down, I immediately left my coffin, and getting at a
distance from the bodies, held my nose, and lay down upon the
ground, where I stayed a considerable time, bathed in tears. At
last, reflecting on my melancholy case, "It is true," said I,
"that God disposes all things according to the degrees of his
providence; but, unhappy Sinbad, hast thou any but thyself to
blame that thou art brought to die so strange a death? Would to
God thou hadst perished in some of those tempests which thou hast
escaped! then thy death had not been so lingering, and so
terrible in all its circumstances. But thou hast drawn all this
upon thyself by thy inordinate avarice. Ah, unfortunate wretch!
shouldst thou not rather have remained at home, and quietly
enjoyed the fruits of thy labour?"

Such were the vain complaints with which I filled the cave,
beating my head and breast out of rage and despair, and
abandoning myself to the most afflicting thoughts. Nevertheless,
I must tell you, that instead of calling death to my assistance
in that miserable condition, I felt still an inclination to live,
and to do all I could to prolong my days. I went groping about,
with my nose stopped, for the bread and water that was in my
coffin, and took some of it. Though the darkness of the cave was
so great that I could not distinguish day and night, yet I always
found my coffin again, and the cave seemed to be more spacious
and fuller of bodies than it had appeared to be at first. I lived
for some days upon my bread and water, which being all spent, I
at last prepared for death.

As I was thinking of death, I heard the stone lifted up from the
mouth of the cave, and immediately the corpse of a man was let
down When reduced to necessity, it is natural to come to extreme
resolutions. While they let down the woman I approached the place
where her coffin was to be put, and as soon as I perceived they
were again covering the mouth of the cave, gave the unfortunate
wretch two or three violent blows over the head, with a large
bone; which stunned, or, to say the truth, killed her. I
committed this inhuman action merely for the sake of the bread
and water that was in her coffin, and thus I had provision for
some days more. When that was spent, they letdown another dead
woman, and a living man; I killed the man in the same manner,
and, as there was then a sort of mortality in the town, by
continuing this practice I did not want for provisions.

One day after I had dispatched another woman, I heard something
tread, and breathing or panting as it walked. I advanced towards
that side from whence I heard the noise, and on my approach the
creature puffed and blew harder, as if running away from me. I
followed the noise, and the thing seemed to stop sometimes, but
always fled and blew as I approached. I pursued it for a
considerable time, till at last I perceived a light, resembling a
star; I went on, sometimes lost sight of it, but always found it
again, and at last discovered that it came through a hole in the
rock, large enough to admit a man.

Upon this, I stopped some time to rest, being much fatigued with
the rapidity of my progress: afterwards coming up to the hole, I
got through, and found myself upon the sea shore. I leave you to
guess the excess of my joy: it was such, that I could scarcely
persuade myself that the whole was not a dream.

But when I was recovered from my surprise, and convinced of the
reality of my escape, I perceived what I had followed to be a
creature which came out of the sea, and was accustomed to enter
the cavern and feed upon the bodies of the dead.

I examined the mountain, and found it to be situated betwixt the
sea and the town, but without any passage to or communication
with the latter; the rocks on the sea side being high and
perpendicularly steep. I prostrated myself on the shore to thank
God for this mercy, and afterwards entered the cave again to
fetch bread and water, which I ate by daylight with a better
appetite than I had done since my interment in the dark cavern.

I returned thither a second time, and groped among the coffins
for all the diamonds, rubies, pearls, gold bracelets, and rich
stuffs I could find; these I brought to the shore, and tying them
up neatly into bales, with the cords that let down the coffins, I
laid them together upon the beach, waiting till some ship might
appear, without fear of rain, for it was then the dry season.

After two or three days, I perceived a ship just come out of the
harbour, making for the place where I was. I made a sign with the
linen of my turban, and called to the crew as loud as I could.
They heard me, and sent a boat to bring me on board, when they
asked by what misfortune I came thither; I told them that I had
suffered shipwreck two days before, and made shift to get ashore
with the goods they saw. It was fortunate for me that these
people did not consider the place where I was, nor enquire into
the probability of what I told them; but without hesitation took
me on board with my goods. When I came to the ship, the captain
was so well pleased to have saved me, and so much taken up with
his own affairs, that he also took the story of my pretended
shipwreck upon trust, and generously refused some jewels which I
offered him.

We passed by several islands, and among others that called the
isle of Bells, about ten days' sail from Serendib, with a regular
wind, and six from that of Kela, where we landed. This island
produces lead mines, Indian canes, and excellent camphire.

The king of the isle of Kela is very rich and powerful, and the
isle of Bells, which is about two days journey in extent, is also
subject to him. The inhabitants are so barbarous that they still
eat human flesh. After we had finished our traffic in that
island, we put to sea again, and touched at several other ports;
at last I arrived happily at Bagdad with infinite riches, of
which it is needless to trouble you with the detail. Out of
gratitude to God for his mercies, I contributed liberally towards
the support of several mosques, and the subsistence of the poor,
gave myself up to the society of my kindred and friends, enjoying
myself with them in festivities and amusements.

Here Sinbad finished the relation of his fourth voyage, which
appeared more surprising to the company than the three former. He
made a new present of one hundred sequins to Hindbad, whom he
requested to return with the rest next day at the same hour to
dine with him, and hear the story of his fifth voyage. Hindbad
and the other guests took their leave and retired. Next morning
when they all met, they sat down at table, and when dinner was
over, Sinbad began the relation of his fifth voyage as follows.


                       The Fifth Voyage.


The pleasures I enjoyed had again charms enough to make me forget
all the troubles and calamities I had undergone, but could not
cure me of my inclination to make new voyages. I therefore bought
goods, departed with them for the best sea-port; and there, that
I might not be obliged to depend upon a captain, but have a ship
at my own command, I remained till one was built on purpose, at
my own charge. When the ship was ready, I went on board with my
goods; but not having enough to load her, I agreed to take with
me several merchants of different nations with their merchandize.

We sailed with the first fair wind, and after a long navigation
the first place we touched at was a desert island, where we found
an egg of a roe, equal in size to that I formerly mentioned.
There was a young roc it just ready to be hatched, and its bill
had begun to appear.

The merchants whom I had taken on board, and who landed with me,
broke the egg with hatchets, and made a hole in it, pulled out
the young roc piecemeal, and roasted it. I had earnestly
intreated them not to meddle with the egg, but they would not
listen to me.

Scarcely had they finished their repast, when there appeared in
the air at a considerable distance from us two great clouds. The
captain whom I had hired to navigate my ship, knowing by
experience what they meant, said they were the male and female
roc that belonged to the young one, and pressed us to re-embark
with all speed, to prevent the misfortune which he saw would
otherwise befall us. We hastened on board, and set sail with all
possible expedition.

In the mean time, the two roes approached with a frightful noise,
which they redoubled when they saw the egg broken, and their
young one gone. They flew back in the direction they had come,
and disappeared for some time, while we made all the sail we
could to endeavour to prevent that which unhappily befell us.

They soon returned, and we observed that each of them carried between
its talons stones, or rather rocks, of a monstrous size. When they
came directly over my ship, they hovered, and one of them let fall a
stone, but by the dexterity of the steersman it missed us, and falling
into the sea, divided the water so that we could almost see the
bottom. The other roe, to our misfortune, threw his messy burden so
exactly upon the middle of the ship, as to split it into a thousand
pieces. The mariners and passengers were all crushed to death, or
sunk. I myself was of the number of the latter; but as I came up
again, I fortunately caught hold of a piece of the wreck, and swimming
sometimes with one hand, and sometimes with the other, but always
holding fast my board, the wind and the tide favouring me, I came to
an island, whose shore was very steep. I overcame that difficulty,
however, and got ashore.

I sat down upon the grass, to recover myself from my fatigue,
after which I went into the island to explore it. It seemed to be
a delicious garden. I found trees everywhere, some of them
bearing green, and others ripe fruits, and streams of fresh pure
water running in pleasant meanders. I ate of the fruits, which I
found excellent; and drank of the water, which was very light and
good.

When night closed in, I lay down upon the grass in a convenient
spot, but could not sleep an hour at a time, my mind being
apprehensive of danger. I spent best part of the night in alarm,
and reproached myself for my imprudence in not remaining at home,
rather than undertaking this last voyage. These reflections
carried me so far, that I began to form a design against my life;
but daylight dispersed these melancholy thoughts. I got up, and
walked among the trees, but not without some fears.

When I was a little advanced into the island, I saw an old man,
who appeared very weak and infirm. He was sitting on the bank of
a stream, and at first I took him to be one who had been
shipwrecked like myself. I went towards him and saluted him, but
he only slightly bowed his head. I asked him why he sat so still,
but instead of answering me, he made a sign for me to take him
upon my back, and carry him over the brook, signifying that it
was to gather fruit.

I believed him really to stand in need of my assistance, took him
upon my back, and having carried him over, bade him get down, and
for that end stooped, that he might get off with ease; but
instead of doing so (which I laugh at every time I think of it)
the old man, who to me appeared quite decrepit, clasped his legs
nimbly about my neck, when I perceived his skin to resemble that
of a cow. He sat astride upon my shoulders, and held my throat so
tight, that I thought he would have strangled me, the
apprehension of which make me swoon and fall down.

Notwithstanding my fainting, the ill-natured old fellow kept fast
about my neck, but opened his legs a little to give me time to
recover my breath. When I had done so, he thrust one of his feet
against my stomach, and struck me so rudely on the side with the
other, that he forced me to rise up against my will. Having
arisen, he made me walk under the trees, and forced me now and
then to stop, to gather and eat fruit such as we found. He never
left me all day, and when I lay down to rest at night, laid
himself down with me, holding always fast about my neck. Every
morning he pushed me to make me awake, and afterwards obliged me
to get up and walk, and pressed me with his feet. You may judge
then, gentlemen, what trouble I was in, to be loaded with such a
burden of which I could not get rid.

One day I found in my way several dry calebashes that had fallen
from a tree. I took a large one, and after cleaning it, pressed
into it some juice of grapes, which abounded in the island;
having filled the calebash, I put it by in a convenient place,
and going thither again some days after, I tasted it, and found
the wine so good, that it soon made me forget my sorrow, gave me
new vigour, and so exhilarated my spirits, that I began to sing
and dance as I walked along.

The old man, perceiving the effect which this liquor had upon me,
and that I carried him with more ease than before, made me a sign
to give him some of it. I handed him the calebash, and the liquor
pleasing his palate, he drank it all off. There being a
considerable quantity of it, he became drunk immediately, and the
fumes getting up into his head, he began to sing after his
manner, and to dance with his breech upon my shoulders. His
jolting made him vomit, and he loosened his legs from about me by
degrees. Finding that he did not press me as before, I threw him
upon the ground, where he lay without motion; I then took up a
great stone, and crushed his head to pieces.

I was extremely glad to be thus freed for ever from this
troublesome fellow. I now walked towards the beach, where I met
the crew of a ship that had cast anchor, to take in water. They
were surprised to see me, but more so at hearing the particulars
of my adventures. "You fell," said they, "into the hands of the
old man of the sea, and are the first who ever escaped strangling
by his malicious tricks. He never quitted those he had once made
himself master of, till he had destroyed them, and he has made
this island notorious by the number of men he has slain; so that
the merchants and mariners who landed upon it, durst not advance
into the island but in numbers at a time."

After having informed me of these things, they carried me with
them to the ship; the captain received me with great kindness,
when they told him what had befallen me. He put out again to sea,
and after some days' sail, we arrived at the harbour of a great
city, the houses of which were built with hewn stone.

One of the merchants who had taken me into his friendship invited
me to go along with him, and carried me to a place appointed for
the accommodation of foreign merchants. He gave me a large bag,
and having recommended me to some people of the town, who used to
gather cocoa-nuts, desired them to take me with them. "Go," said
he, "follow them, and act as you see them do, but do not separate
from them, otherwise you may endanger your life." Having thus
spoken, he gave me provisions for the journey, and I went with
them.

We came to a thick forest of cocoa-trees, very lofty, with trunks
so smooth that it was not possible to climb to the branches that
bore the fruit. When we entered the forest we saw a great number
of apes of several sizes, who fled as soon as they perceived us,
and climbed up to the top of the trees with surprising swiftness.

The merchants with whom I was, gathered stones and threw them at
the apes on the trees. I did the same, and the apes out of
revenge threw cocoa-nuts at us so fast, and with such gestures,
as sufficiently testified their anger and resentment. We gathered
up the cocoa-nuts, and from time to time threw stones to provoke
the apes; so that by this stratagem we filled our bags with
cocoa-nuts, which it had been impossible otherwise to have done.

When we had gathered our number, we returned to the city, where
the merchant, who had sent me to the forest, gave me the value of
the cocoas I brought: "Go on," said he, "and do the like every
day, until you have got money enough to carry you home." I
thanked him for his advice, and gradually collected as many
cocoa-nuts as produced me a considerable sum.

The vessel in which I had come sailed with some merchants, who
loaded her with cocoa-nuts. I expected the arrival of another,
which anchored soon after for the like loading. I embarked in her
all the cocoa-nuts I had, and when she was ready to sail, took
leave of the merchant who had been so kind to me; but he could
not embark with me, because he had not finished his business at
the port.

We sailed towards the islands, where pepper grows in great
plenty. From thence we went to the isle of Comari, where the best
species of wood of aloes grows, and whose inhabitants have made
it an inviolable law to themselves to drink no wine, and suffer
no place of debauch. I exchanged my cocoa in those two islands
for pepper and wood of aloes, and went with other merchants a
pearl-fishing. I hired divers, who brought me up some that were
very large and pure. I embarked in a vessel that happily arrived
at Bussorah; from thence I returned to Bagdad, where I made vast
sums of my pepper, wood of aloes, and pearls. I gave the tenth of
my gains in alms, as I had done upon my return from my other
voyages, and endeavoured to dissipate my fatigues by amusements
of different kinds.

When Sinbad had finished his story, he ordered one hundred
sequins to be given to Hindbad, who retired with the other
guests; but next morning the same company returned to dine with
rich Sinbad; who, after having treated them as formerly,
requested their attention, and gave the following account of his
sixth voyage.


                       The Sixth Voyage.


Gentlemen, you long without doubt to know, how, after having been
shipwrecked five times, and escaped so many dangers, I could
resolve again to tempt fortune, and expose myself to new
hardships? I am, myself, astonished at my conduct when I reflect
upon it, and must certainly have been actuated by my destiny. But
be that as it may, after a year's rest I prepared for a sixth
voyage, notwithstanding the intreaties of my kindred and friends,
who did all in their power to dissuade me.

Instead of taking my way by the Persian gulf, I travelled once
more through several provinces of Persia and the Indies, and
arrived at a sea-port, where I embarked in a ship, the captain of
which was bound on a long voyage. It was long indeed, and at the
same time so unfortunate, that the captain and pilot lost their
course. They however at last discovered where they were, but we
had no reason to rejoice at the circumstance. Suddenly we saw the
captain quit his post, uttering loud lamentations. He threw off
his turban, pulled his beard, and beat his head like a madman. We
asked him the reason, and he answered, that he was in the most
dangerous place in all the ocean. "A rapid current carries the
ship along with it, and we shall all perish in less than a
quarter of an hour. Pray to God to deliver us from this peril; we
cannot escape, if he do not take pity on us." At these words he
ordered the sails to be lowered; but all the ropes broke, and the
ship was carried by the current to the foot of an inaccessible
mountain, where she struck and went to pieces, yet in such a
manner that we saved our lives, our provisions, and the best of
our goods.

This being over, the captain said to us, "God has done what
pleased him. Each of us may dig his grave, and bid the world
adieu; for we are all in so fatal a place, that none shipwrecked
here ever returned to their homes." His discourse afflicted us
sensibly, and we embraced each other, bewailing our deplorable
lot.

The mountain at the foot of which we were wrecked formed part of
the coast of a very large island. It was covered with wrecks, and
from the vast number of human bones we saw everywhere, and which
filled us with horror, we concluded that multitudes of people had
perished there. It is also incredible what a quantity of goods
and riches we found cast ashore. All these objects served only to
augment our despair. In all other places, rivers run from their
channels into the sea, but here a river of fresh water runs out
of the sea into a dark cavern, whose entrance is very high and
spacious. What is most remarkable in this place is, that the
stones of the mountain are of crystal, rubies, or other precious
stones. Here is also a sort of fountain of pitch or bitumen, that
runs into the sea, which the fish swallow, and evacuate soon
afterwards, turned into ambergris: and this the waves throw up on
the beach in great quantities. Trees also grow here, most of
which are wood of aloes, equal in goodness to those of Comari.

To finish the description of this place, which may well be called
a gulf, since nothing ever returns from it, it is not possible
for ships to get off when once they approach within a certain
distance. If they be driven thither by a wind from the sea, the
wind and the current impel them; and if they come into it when a
land-wind blows, which might seem to favour their getting out
again, the height of the mountain stops the wind, and occasions a
calm, so that the force of the current carries them ashore: and
what completes the misfortune is, that there is no possibility of
ascending the mountain, or of escaping by sea.

We continued upon the shore in a state of despair, and expected
death every day. At first we divided our provisions as equally as
we could, and thus every one lived a longer or shorter time,
according to his temperance, and the use he made of his
provisions.

Those who died first were interred by the survivors, and I paid
the last duty to all my companions: nor are you to wonder at
this; for besides that I husbanded the provision that fell to my
share better than they, I had some of my own which I did not
share with my comrades; yet when I buried the last, I had so
little remaining, that I thought I could not long survive: I dug
a grave, resolving to lie down in it, because there was no one
left to inter me. I must confess to you at the same time, that
while I was thus employed, I could not but reproach myself as the
cause of my own ruin, and repented that I had ever undertaken
this last voyage. Nor did I stop at reflections only, but had
well nigh hastened my own death, and began to tear my hands with
my teeth.

But it pleased God once more to take compassion on me, and put it
in my mind to go to the bank of the river which ran into the
great cavern. Considering its probable course with great
attention, I said to myself, "This river, which runs thus under
ground, must somewhere have an issue. If I make a raft, and leave
myself to the current, it will convey me to some inhabited
country, or I shall perish. If I be drowned, I lose nothing, but
only change one kind of death for another; and if I get out of
this fatal place, I shall not only avoid the sad fate of my
comrades, but perhaps find some new occasion of enriching myself.
Who knows but fortune waits, upon my getting off this dangerous
shelf, to compensate my shipwreck with usury."

I immediately went to work upon large pieces of timber and
cables, for I had choice of them, and tied them together so
strongly, that I soon made a very solid raft. When I had
finished, I loaded it with some bulses of rubies, emeralds,
ambergris, rock-crystal, and bales of rich stuffs. Having
balanced my cargo exactly, and fastened it well to the raft, I
went on board with two oars that I had made, and leaving it to
the course of the river, resigned myself to the will of God.

As soon as I entered the cavern, I lost all light, and the stream
carried me I knew not whither. Thus I floated some days in
perfect darkness, and once found the arch so low, that it very
nearly touched my head, which made me cautious afterwards to
avoid the like danger. All this while I ate nothing but what was
just necessary to support nature; yet, notwithstanding my
frugality, all my provisions were spent. Then a pleasing stupor
seized upon me. I cannot tell how long it continued; but when I
revived, I was surprised to find myself in an extensive plain on
the brink of a river, where my raft was tied, amidst a great
number of negroes. I got up as soon as I saw them, and saluted
them. They spoke to me, but I did not understand their language.
I was so transported with joy, that I knew not whether I was
asleep or awake; but being persuaded that I was not asleep, I
recited the following words in Arabic aloud: "Call upon the
Almighty, he will help thee; thou needest not perplex thyself
about any thing else: shut thy eyes, and while thou art asleep,
God will change thy bad fortune into good."

One of the blacks, who understood Arabic, hearing me speak thus,
came towards me, and said, "Brother, be not surprised to see us,
we are inhabitants of this country, and came hither to-day to
water our fields, by digging little canals from this river, which
comes out of the neighbouring mountain. We observed something
floating upon the water, went to see what it was, and, perceiving
your raft, one of us swam into the river, and brought it thither,
where we fastened it, as you see, until you should awake. Pray
tell us your history, for it must be extraordinary; how did you
venture yourself into this river, and whence did you come?" "I
begged of them first to give me something to eat, and then I
would satisfy their curiosity. They gave me several sorts of
food, and when I had satisfied my hunger, I related all that had
befallen me, which they listened to with attentive surprise. As
soon as I had finished, they told me, by the person who spoke
Arabic and interpreted to them what I said, that it was one of
the most wonderful stories they had ever heard, and that I must
go along with them, and tell it their king myself; it being too
extraordinary to be related by any other than the person to whom
the events had happened. I assured them that I was ready to do
whatever they pleased."

They immediately sent for a horse, which was brought in a little
time; and having helped me to mount, some of them walked before
to shew the way, while the rest took my raft and cargo and
followed.

We marched till we came to the capital of Serendib, for it was in
that island I had landed. The blacks presented me to their king;
I approached his throne, and saluted him as I used to do the
kings of the Indies; that is to say, I prostrated myself at his
feet. The prince ordered me to rise, received me with an obliging
air, and made me sit down near him. He first asked me my name,
and I answered, "People call me Sinbad the voyager, because of
the many voyages I have undertaken, and I am a citizen of
Bagdad." "But," resumed he, "how came you into my dominions, and
from whence came you last?"

I concealed nothing from the king; I related to him all that I
have told you, and his majesty was so surprised and pleased, that
he commanded my adventures to be written in letters of gold, and
laid up in the archives of his kingdom. At last my raft was
brought in, and the bales opened in his presence; he admired the
quantity of wood of aloes and ambergris, but, above all, the
rubies and emeralds, for he had none in his treasury that
equalled them.

Observing that he looked on my jewels with pleasure, and viewed
the most remarkable among them one after another, I fell
prostrate at his feet, and took the liberty to say to him, "Sir,
not only my person is at your majesty's service, but the cargo of
the raft, and I would beg of you to dispose of it as your own."
He answered me with a smile, "Sinbad, I will take care not to
covet any thing of yours, or to take any thing from you that God
has given you; far from lessening your wealth, I design to
augment it, and will not let you quit my dominions without marks
of my liberality." All the answer I returned were prayers for the
prosperity of that nobly minded prince, and commendations of his
generosity and bounty. He charged one of his officers to take
care of me, and ordered people to serve me at his own expence.
The officer was very faithful in the execution of his commission,
and caused all the goods to be carried to the lodgings provided
for me.

I went every day at a set hour to make my court to the king, and
spent the rest of my time in viewing the city, and what was most
worthy of notice.

The isle of Serendib is situated just under the equinoctial line;
so that the days and nights there are always of twelve hours
each, and the island is eighty parasangs in length, and as many
in breadth.

The capital stands at the end of a fine valley, in the middle of
the island, encompassed by mountains the highest in the world.
They are seen three days' sail off at sea. Rubies and several
sorts of minerals abound, and the rocks are for the most part
composed of a metalline stone made use of to cut and polish other
precious stones. All kinds of rare plants and trees grow there,
especially cedars and cocoa-nut. There is also a pearl-fishing in
the mouth of its principal river; and in some of its valleys are
found diamonds. I made, by way of devotion, a pilgrimage to the
place where Adam was confined after his banishment from Paradise,
and had the curiosity to go to the top of the mountain.

When I returned to the city, I prayed the king to allow me to
return to my own country, and he granted me permission in the
most obliging and most honourable manner. He would needs force a
rich present upon me; and when I went to take my leave of him, he
gave me one much more considerable, and at the same time charged
me with a letter for the commander of the faithful, our
sovereign, saying to me, "I pray you give this present from me,
and this letter to the caliph, and assure him of my friendship."
I took the present and letter in a very respectful manner, and
promised his majesty punctually to execute the commission with
which he was pleased to honour me. Before I embarked, this prince
sent for the captain and the merchants who were to go with me,
and ordered them to treat me with all possible respect.

The letter from the king of Serendib was written on the skin of a
certain animal of great value, because of its being so scarce,
and of a yellowish colour. The characters of this letter were of
azure, and the contents as follows:

"The king of the Indies, before whom march one hundred elephants,
who lives in a palace that shines with one hundred thousand
rubies, and who has in his treasury twenty thousand crowns
enriched with diamonds, to caliph Haroon al Rusheed.

"Though the present we send you be inconsiderable, receive it
however as a brother and a friend, in consideration of the hearty
friendship which we bear for you, and of which we are willing to
give you proof. We desire the same part in your friendship,
considering that we believe it to be our merit, being of the same
dignity with yourself. We conjure you this in quality of a
brother. Adieu."

The present consisted first, of one single ruby made into a cup,
about half a foot high, an inch thick, and filled with round
pearls of half a drachm each. 2. The skin of a serpent, whose
scales were as large as an ordinary piece of gold, and had the
virtue to preserve from sickness those who lay upon it. 3. Fifty
thousand drachms of the best wood of aloes, with thirty grains of
camphire as big as pistachios. 4. A female slave of ravishing
beauty, whose apparel was all covered over with jewels.

The ship set sail, and after a very successful navigation we
landed at Bussorah, and from thence I went to Bagdad, where the
first thing I did was to acquit myself of my commission.

Scheherazade stopped, because day appeared, and next night
proceeded thus.

I took the king of Serendib's letter, and went to present myself
at the gate of the commander of the faithful, followed by the
beautiful slave, and such of my own family as carried the
presents. I stated the reason of my coming, and was immediately
conducted to the throne of the caliph. I made my reverence, and,
after a short speech, gave him the letter and present. When he
had read what the king of Serendib wrote to him, he asked me, if
that prince were really so rich and potent as he represented
himself in his letter? I prostrated myself a second time, and
rising again, said, "Commander of the faithful, I can assure your
majesty he doth not exceed the truth. I bear him witness. Nothing
is more worthy of admiration than the magnificence of his palace.
When the prince appears in public, he has a throne fixed on the
back of an elephant, and marches betwixt two ranks of his
ministers, favourites, and other people of his court; before him,
upon the same elephant, an officer carries a golden lance in his
hand; and behind the throne there is another, who stands upright,
with a column of gold, on the top of which is an emerald half a
foot long, and an inch thick; before him march a guard of one
thousand men, clad in cloth of gold and silk, and mounted on
elephants richly caparisoned.

"While the king is on his march, the officer, who is before him on the
same elephant, cries from time to time, with a loud voice, 'Behold the
great monarch, the potent and redoubtable sultan of the Indies, whose
palace is covered with one hundred thousand rubies, and who possesses
twenty thousand crowns of diamonds. Behold the monarch greater than
Solomon, and the powerful Maha-raja.' After he has pronounced those
words, the officer behind the throne cries in his turn, 'This monarch,
so great and so powerful, must die, must die, must die.' And the
officer before replies, 'Praise be to him who lives for ever.'

"Farther, the king of Serendib is so just, that there are no
judges in his dominions. His people have no need of them. They
understand and observe justice rigidly of themselves."

The caliph was much pleased with my account. "The wisdom of that
king," said he, "appears in his letter, and after what you tell
me, I must confess, that his wisdom is worthy of his people, and
his people deserve so wise a prince." Having spoken thus, he
dismissed me, and sent me home with a rich present.

Sinbad left off, and his company retired, Hindbad having first
received one hundred sequins; and next day they returned to hear
the relation of his seventh and last voyage.


                  The Seventh and Last Voyage.


Being returned from my sixth voyage, said Sinbad, I absolutely
laid aside all thoughts of travelling; for, besides that my age
now required rest, I was resolved no more to expose myself to
such risks as I had encountered; so that I thought of nothing but
to pass the rest of my days in tranquillity. One day as I was
treating my friends, one of my servants came and told me that an
officer of the caliph's enquired for me. I rose from table, and
went to him. "The caliph," he said, "has sent me to tell you,
that he must speak with you." I followed the officer to the
palace, where being presented to the caliph, I saluted him by
prostrating myself at his feet. "Sinbad," said he to me, "I stand
in need of your service; you must carry my answer and present to
the king of Serendib. It is but just I should return his
civility."

This command of the caliph was to me like a clap of thunder.
"Commander of the faithful," I replied, "I am ready to do
whatever your majesty shall think fit to command; but I beseech
you most humbly to consider what I have undergone. I have also
made a vow never to go out of Bagdad." Hence I took occasion to
give him a full and particular account of all my adventures,
which he had the patience to hear out.

As soon as I had finished, "I confess," said he, "that the things
you tell me are very extraordinary, yet you must for my sake
undertake this voyage which I propose to you. You will only have
to go to the isle of Serendib, and deliver the commission which I
give you. After that you are at liberty to return. But you must
go; for you know it would not comport with my dignity, to be
indebted to the king of that island." Perceiving that the caliph
insisted upon my compliance, I submitted, and told him that I was
willing to obey. He was very well pleased, and ordered me one
thousand sequins for the expences of my journey.

I prepared for my departure in a few days, and as soon as the
caliph's letter and present were delivered to me, I went to
Bussorah, where I embarked, and had a very happy voyage. Having
arrived at the isle of Serendib, I acquainted the king's
ministers with my commission, and prayed them to get me speedy
audience. They did so, and I was conducted to the palace in an
honourable manner, where I saluted the king by prostration,
according to custom. That prince knew me immediately, and
testified very great joy at seeing me. "Sinbad," said he, "you
are welcome; I have many times thought of you since you departed;
I bless the day on which we see one another once more." I made my
compliment to him, and after having thanked him for his kindness,
delivered the caliph's letter and present, which he received with
all imaginable satisfaction.

The caliph's present was a complete suit of cloth of gold, valued
at one thousand sequins; fifty robes of rich stuff, a hundred of
white cloth, the finest of Cairo, Suez, and Alexandria; a vessel
of agate broader than deep, an inch thick, and half a foot wide,
the bottom of which represented in bass relief a man with one
knee on the ground, who held bow and an arrow, ready to discharge
at a lion. He sent him also a rich tablet, which, according to
tradition, belonged to the great Solomon. The caliph's letter was
as follows:

"Greeting, in the name of the sovereign guide of the right way,
from the dependent on God, Haroon al Rusheed, whom God hath set
in the place of vicegerent to his prophet, after his ancestors of
happy memory, to the potent and esteemed Raja of Serendib.

"We received your letter with joy, and send you this from our
imperial residence, the garden of superior wits. We hope when you
look upon it, you will perceive our good intention and be pleased
with it. Adieu."

The king of Serendib was highly gratified that the caliph
answered his friendship. A little time after this audience, I
solicited leave to depart, and had much difficulty to obtain it.
I procured it however at last, and the king, when he dismissed
me, made me a very considerable present. I embarked immediately
to return to Bagdad, but had not the good fortune to arrive there
so speedily as I had hoped. God ordered it otherwise.

Three or four days after my departure, we were attacked by
corsairs, who easily seized upon our ship, because it was no
vessel of force. Some of the crew offered resistance, which cost
them their lives. But for myself and the rest, who were not so
imprudent, the corsairs saved us on purpose to make slaves of us.

We were all stripped, and instead of our own clothes, they gave
us sorry rags, and carried us into a remote island, where they
sold us.

I fell into the hands of a rich merchant, who, as soon as he
bought me, carried me to his house, treated me well, and clad me
handsomely for a slave. Some days after, not knowing who I was,
he asked me if I understood any trade? I answered, that I was no
mechanic, but a merchant, and that the corsairs, who sold me, had
robbed me of all I possessed. "But tell me," replied he, "can you
shoot with a bow?" I answered, that the bow was one of my
exercises in my youth. He gave me a bow and arrows, and, taking
me behind him upon an elephant, carried me to a thick forest some
leagues from the town. We penetrated a great way into the wood,
and when he thought fit to stop, he bade me alight; then shewing
me a great tree, "Climb up that," said he, "and shoot at the
elephants as you see them pass by, for there is a prodigious
number of them in this forest, and if any of them fall, come and
give me notice." Having spoken thus, he left me victuals, and
returned to the town, and I continued upon the tree all night.

I saw no elephant during that time, but next morning, as soon as
the sun was up, I perceived a great number. I shot several arrows
among them, and at last one of the elephants fell, when the rest
retired immediately, and left me at liberty to go and acquaint my
patron with my booty. When I had informed him, he gave me a good
meal, commended my dexterity, and caressed me highly. We went
afterwards together to the forest, where we dug a hole for the
elephant; my patron designing to return when it was rotten, and
take his teeth to trade with.

I continued this employment for two months, and killed an
elephant every day, getting sometimes upon one tree, and
sometimes upon another. One morning, as I looked for the
elephants, I perceived with extreme amazement, that, instead of
passing by me across the forest as usual, they stopped, and came
to me with a horrible noise, in such number that the plain was
covered, and shook under them. They encompassed the tree in which
I was concealed, with their trunks extended, and all fixed their
eyes upon. At this alarming spectacle I continued immoveable, and
was so much terrified, that my bow and arrows fell out of my
hand.

My fears were not without cause; for after the elephants had
stared upon me some time, one of the largest of them put his
trunk round the foot of the tree, plucked it up, and threw it on
the ground; I fell with the tree, and the elephant taking me up
with his trunk, laid me on his back, where I sat more like one
dead than alive, with my quiver on my shoulder. He put himself
afterwards at the head of the rest, who followed him in troops,
carried me a considerable way, then laid me down on the ground,
and retired with all his companions. Conceive, if you can, the
condition I was in: I thought myself in a dream. After having
lain some time, and seeing the elephants gone, I got up, and
found I was upon a long and broad hill, almost covered with the
bones and teeth of elephants. I confess to you, that this object
furnished me with abundance of reflections. I admired the
instinct of those animals; I doubted not but that was their
burying place, and that they carried me thither on purpose to
tell me that I should forbear to persecute them, since I did it
only for their teeth. I did not stay on the hill, but turned
towards the city, and, after having travelled a day and a night,
I came to my patron. I met no elephant in my way, which made me
think they had retired farther into the forest, to leave me at
liberty to come back to the hill without any obstacle.

As soon as my patron saw me; "Ah, poor Sinbad," exclaimed he, "I
was in great trouble to know what was become of you. I have been
at the forest, where I found a tree newly pulled up, and a bow
and arrows on the ground, and after having sought for you in
vain, I despaired of ever, seeing you more. Pray tell me what
befell you, and by what good chance thou art still alive." I
satisfied his curiosity, and going both of us next morning to the
hill, he found to his great joy that what I had told him was
true. We loaded the elephant which had carried us with as many
teeth as he could bear; and when we were returned, "Brother,"
said my patron, "for I will treat you no more as my slave, after
having made such a discovery as will enrich me, God bless you
with all happiness and prosperity. I declare before him, that I
give you your liberty. I concealed from you what I am now going
to tell you.

"The elephants of our forest have every year killed us a great
many slaves, whom we sent to seek ivory. For all the cautions we
could give them, those crafty animals destroyed them one time or
other. God has delivered you from their fury, and has bestowed
that favour upon you only. It is a sign that he loves you, and
has some use for your service in the world. You have procured me
incredible wealth. Formerly we could not procure ivory but by
exposing the lives of our slaves, and now our whole city is
enriched by your means. Do not think I pretend to have rewarded
you by giving you your liberty, I will also give you considerable
riches. I could engage all our city to contribute towards making
your fortune, but I will have the glory of doing it myself."

To this obliging declaration I replied, "Patron, God preserve
you. Your giving me my liberty is enough to discharge what you
owe me, and I desire no other reward for the service I had the
good fortune to do to you and your city, but leave to return to
my own country." "Very well," said he, "the monsoon will in a
little time bring ships for ivory. I will then send you home, and
give you wherewith to bear your charges." I thanked him again for
my liberty and his good intentions towards me. I staid with him
expecting the monsoon; and during that time, we made so many
journeys to the hill, that we filled all our warehouses with
ivory. The other merchants, who traded in it, did the same, for
it could not be long concealed from them.

The ships arrived at last, and my patron, himself having made
choice of the ship wherein I was to embark, loaded half of it
with ivory on my account, laid in provisions in abundance for my
passage, and besides obliged me to accept a present of some
curiosities of the country of great value. After I had returned
him a thousand thanks for all his favours, I went aboard. We set
sail, and as the adventure which procured me this liberty was
very extraordinary, I had it continually in my thoughts.

We stopped at some islands to take in fresh provisions. Our
vessel being come to a port on the main land in the Indies, we
touched there, and not being willing to venture by sea to
Bussorah, I landed my proportion of the ivory, resolving to
proceed on my journey by land. I made vast sums of my ivory,
bought several rarities, which I intended for presents, and when
my equipage was ready, set out in company with a large caravan of
merchants. I was a long time on the way, and suffered much, but
endured all with patience, when I considered that I had nothing
to fear from the seas, from pirates, from serpents, or from the
other perils to which I had been exposed.

All these fatigues ended at last, and I arrived safe at Bagdad. I
went immediately to wait upon the caliph, and gave him an account
of my embassy. That prince said he had been uneasy, as I was so
long in returning, but that he always hoped God would preserve
me. When I told him the adventure of the elephants, he seemed
much surprised, and would never have given any credit to it had
he not known my veracity. He deemed this story, and the other
relations I had given him, to be so curious, that he ordered one
of his secretaries to write them in characters of gold, and lay
them up in his treasury. I retired well satisfied with the
honours I received, and the presents which he gave me; and ever
since I have devoted myself wholly to my family, kindred, and
friends.

Sinbad here finished the relation of his seventh and last voyage,
and then addressing himself to Hindbad, "Well, friend," said he,
"did you ever hear of any person that suffered so much as I have
done, or of any mortal that has gone through so many
vicissitudes? Is it not reasonable that, after all this I should
enjoy a quiet and pleasant life?" As he said this, Hindbad drew
near to him, and kissing his hand, said, "I must acknowledge,
sir, that you have gone through many imminent dangers; my
troubles are not comparable to yours: if they afflict me for a
time, I comfort myself with the thoughts of the profit I get by
them. You not only deserve a quiet life, but are worthy of all
the riches you enjoy, because you make of them such a good and
generous use. May you therefore continue to live in happiness and
joy till the day of your death!" Sinbad gave him one hundred
sequins more, received him into the number of his friends,
desired him to quit his porter's employment, and come and dine
every day with him, that he might have reason to remember Sinbad
the voyager.


                       THE THREE APPLES.


The Caliph Haroon al Rusheed one day commanded the grand vizier
Jaffier to come to his palace the night following. "Vizier," said
he, "I will take a walk round the town, to inform myself what
people say, and particularly how they are pleased with my
officers of justice. If there be any against whom they have cause
of just complaint, we will turn them out, and put others in their
stead, who shall officiate better. If, on the contrary, there be
any that have gained their applause, we will have that esteem for
them which they deserve." The grand vizier being come to the
palace at the hour appointed, the caliph, he, and Mesrour the
chief of the eunuchs, disguised themselves so that they could not
be known, and went out all three together.

They passed through several places, and by several markets. As
they entered a small street, they perceived by the light of the
moon, a tall man, with a white beard, who carried nets on his
head, and a staff in his hand. "To judge from his appearance,"
said the caliph, "that old man is not rich; let us go to him and
inquire into his circumstances." "Honest man," said the vizier,
"who art thou?" The old man replied, "Sir, I am a fisher, but one
of the poorest and most miserable of the trade. I went from my
house about noon a fishing, and from that time to this I have not
been able to catch one fish; at the same time I have a wife and
small children, and nothing to maintain them."

The caliph, moved with compassion, said to the fisherman, "Hast
thou the courage to go back and cast thy net once more? We will
give thee a hundred sequins for what thou shalt bring up." At
this proposal, the fisherman, forgetting all his day's toil, took
the caliph at his word, and returned to the Tigris, accompanied
by the caliph, Jaaffier, and Mesrour; saying to himself as he
went, "These gentlemen seem too honest and reasonable not to
reward my pains; and if they give me the hundredth part of what
they promise, it will be an ample recompence."

They came to the bank of the river, and the fisherman, having
thrown in his net, when he drew it again, brought up a trunk
close shut, and very heavy. The caliph made the grand vizier pay
him one hundred sequins immediately, and sent him away. Mesrour,
by his master's order, carried the trunk on his shoulder, and the
caliph was so very eager to know what it contained, that he
returned to the palace with all speed. When the trunk was opened,
they found in it a large basket made of palm-leaves, shut up, and
the covering of it sewed with red thread. To satisfy the caliph's
impatience, they would not take time to undo it, but cut the
thread with a knife, and took out of the basket a package wrapt
up in a sorry piece of hanging, and bound about with a rope;
which being untied, they found, to their great amazement, the
corpse of a young lady, whiter than snow, all cut in pieces.

The astonishment of the caliph was great at this dreadful
spectacle. His surprise was instantly changed into passion, and
darting an angry look at the vizier, "Thou wretch," said he, "is
this your inspection into the actions of my people? Do they
commit such impious murders under thy ministry in my capital, and
throw my subjects into the Tigris, that they may cry for
vengeance against me at the day of judgment? If thou dost not
speedily avenge the murder of this woman, by the death of her
murderer, I swear by heaven, that I will cause thee and forty
more of thy kindred to be impaled." "Commander of the faithful,"
replied the grand vizier, "I beg your majesty to grant me time to
make enquiry." "I will allow thee no more," said the caliph,
"than three days."

The vizier Jaaffier went home in great perplexity. "Alas!" said
he "how is it possible that in such a vast and populous city as
Bagdad, I should be able to detect a murderer, who undoubtedly
committed the crime without witness, and perhaps may be already
gone from hence? Any other vizier than I would take some wretched
person out of prison, and cause him to be put to death to satisfy
the caliph; but I will not burden my conscience with such a
barbarous action; I will rather die than preserve my life by the
sacrifice of another innocent person."

He ordered the officers of the police and justice to make strict
search for the criminal. They sent their servants about, and they
were not idle themselves, for they were no less concerned in this
matter than the vizier. But all their endeavours were to no
purpose; what pains soever they took they could not discover the
murderer; so that the vizier concluded his life to be lost.

The third day being arrived, an officer came to the unfortunate
minister, with a summons to follow him, which the vizier obeyed.
The caliph asked him for the murderer. He answered, "Commander of
the faithful, I have not found any person that could give me the
least account of him." The caliph, full of fury and rage, gave
him many reproachful words, and ordered that he and forty
Bermukkees should be impaled at the gate of the palace.

In the mean while the stakes were preparing, and orders were sent
to seize forty Bermukkees in their houses; a public crier was
sent about the city by the caliph's order, to cry thus: "Those
who have a desire to see the grand vizier Jaaffier impaled, with
forty of his kindred, let them come to the square before the
palace."

When all things were ready, the criminal judge, and many officers
belonging to the palace, having brought out the grand vizier with
the forty Bermukkees, set each by the stake designed for him. The
multitude of people that filled the square could not without
grief and tears behold this tragical sight; for the grand vizier
and the Bermukkees were loved and honoured on account of their
probity, bounty, and impartiality, not only in Bagdad, but
through all the dominions of the caliph.

Nothing could prevent the execution of this prince's severe and
irrevocable sentence, and the lives of the most deserving people
in the city were just going to be sacrificed, when a young man of
handsome mien pressed through the crowd till he came up to the
grand vizier, and after he had kissed his hand, said, "Most
excellent vizier, chief of the emirs of this court, and comforter
of the poor, you are not guilty of the crime for which you stand
here. Withdraw, and let me expiate the death of the lady that was
thrown into the Tigris. It is I who murdered her, and I deserve
to be punished for my offence."

Though these words occasioned great joy to the vizier, yet he
could not but pity the young man, in whose look he saw something
that instead of evincing guilt was engaging: but as he was about
to answer him, a tall man advanced in years, who had likewise
forced his way through the crowd, came up to him, saying, "Do not
believe what this young man tells you, I killed that lady who was
found in the trunk, and this punishment ought only to fall upon
me. I conjure you in the name of God not to punish the innocent
for the guilty." "Sir," said the young man to the vizier, "I do
protest that I am he who committed this vile act, and nobody else
had any concern in it." "My son," said the old man, "it is
despair that brought you hither, and you would anticipate your
destiny. I have lived a long while in the world, and it is time
for me to be gone; let me therefore sacrifice my life for yours."
"Sir," said he again to the vizier, "I tell you once more I am
the murderer; let me die without delay."

The controversy between the old and the young man induced the
grand vizier to carry them both before the caliph, to which the
judge criminal consented, being glad to serve the vizier. When he
came before the prince, he kissed the ground seven times, and
spake after this manner: "Commander of the faithful, I have
brought here before your majesty this old and this young man,
each of whom declares himself to be the sole murderer of the
lady." The caliph asked the criminals which of them it was that
so cruelly murdered the lady, and threw her into the Tigris? The
young man assured him it was he, but the old man maintained the
contrary. "Go," said the caliph to the grand vizier, "and cause
them both to be impaled." "But, Sir," said the vizier, "if only
one of them be guilty, it would be unjust to take the lives of
both." At these words the young man spoke again, "I swear by the
great God, who has raised the heavens so high, that I am the man
who killed the lady, cut her in pieces, and about four days ago
threw her into the Tigris. I renounce my part of happiness
amongst the just at the day of judgment, if what I say be not
truth; therefore I am he that ought to suffer." The caliph being
surprised at this oath, believed him; especially since the old
man made no answer. Whereupon, turning to the young man,
"Wretch," said he, "what made thee commit that detestable crime,
and what is it that moves thee to offer thyself voluntarily to
die?" "Commander of the faithful," said he, "if all that has past
between that lady and me were set down in writing, it would be a
history that might be useful to other men." "I command thee then
to relate it," said the caliph. The young man obeyed, and began
his history.


  The Story of the Lady who was Murdered, and of the Young Man her
                            Husband.


Commander of the faithful, this murdered lady was my wife,
daughter of this old man, who is my uncle by the father's side.
She was not above twelve years old, when eleven years ago he gave
her to me. I have three children by her, all boys, yet alive, and
I must do her the justice to say, that she never gave me the
least occasion for offence; she was chaste, of good behaviour,
and made it her whole business to please me. And on my part I
ardently loved her, and in every thing rather anticipated than
opposed her wishes.

About two months ago she fell sick; I took all imaginable care of
her, and spared nothing that could promote her speedy recovery.
After a month thus passed she began to grow better, and expressed
a wish to go to the bath. Before she went, "Cousin," said she
(for so she used to call me out of familiarity), "I long for some
apples; if you would get me any, you would greatly please me. I
have longed for them a great while, and I must own it is come to
that height, that if I be not satisfied very soon, I fear some
misfortune will befall me." "I will cheerfully try," said I, "and
do all in my power to make you easy."

I went immediately round all the markets and shops in the town to
seek for apples, but I could not get one, though I offered to pay
a sequin a piece. I returned home much dissatisfied at my
failure; and for my wife, when she returned from the bagnio, and
saw no apples, she became so very uneasy, that she could not
sleep all night. I got up by times in the morning, and went
through all the gardens, but had no better success than the day
before; only I happened to meet an old gardener, who told me,
that all my pains would signify nothing, for I could not expect
to find apples any where but in your majesty's garden at
Bussorah. As I loved my wife passionately, and would not neglect
to satisfy her, I dressed myself in a traveller's habit, and
after I had told her my design, went to Bussorah, and made my
journey with such speed, that I returned at the end of fifteen
days with three apples, which cost me a sequin apiece, for as
there were no more left, the gardener would not let me have them
for less. As soon as I came home, I presented them to my wife,
but her longing had ceased, she satisfied herself with receiving
them, and laid them down by her. In the mean time she continued
sickly, and I knew not what remedy to procure for her relief.

Some few days after I returned from my journey, sitting in my
shop in the public place where all sorts of fine stuffs are sold,
I saw an ugly, tall, black slave come in, with an apple in his
hand, which I knew to be one of those I had brought from
Bussorah. I had no reason to doubt it, because I was certain
there was not one to be had in Bagdad, nor in any of the gardens
in the vicinity. I called to him, and said, "Good slave, pr'ythee
tell me where thou hadst this apple?" "It is a present" (said he,
smiling) "from my mistress. I went to see her to-day, and found
her out of order. I saw three apples lying by her, and asked her
where she had them. She told me the good man, her husband, had
made a fortnight's journey on purpose, and brought them to her.
We had a collation together; and, when I took my leave of her, I
brought away this apple."

This account rendered me distracted. I rose, shut up my shop, ran
home with all speed, and going to my wife's chamber, looked
immediately for the apples, and seeing only two, asked what was
become of the third. My wife, turning her head to the place where
the apples lay, and perceiving there were but two, answered me
coldly, "Cousin, I know not what is become of it." At this reply
I was convinced what the slave had told me was true; and giving
myself up to madness and jealousy, drew my knife from my girdle,
and thrust it into the unfortunate creature's throat. I
afterwards cut off her head, and divided her body into four
quarters, which I packed up in a bundle, sewed it up with a
thread of red yarn, put all together in a trunk, and when night
came, carried it on my shoulder down to the Tigris, where I sunk
it.

The two youngest of my children were asleep, the third was out;
but at my return, I found him sitting by my gate, weeping. I
asked him the reason; "Father," said he, "I took this morning
from my mother, without her knowledge, one of those three apples
you brought her, and kept it a long while; but, as I was playing
some time ago with my little brother in the street, a tall slave
passing by snatched it out of my hands, and carried it away. I
ran after him, demanding it back, and besides told him, that it
belonged to my mother, who was sick; and that you had made a
fortnight's journey to procure it; but all to no purpose, he
would not restore it. And as I still followed him, crying out, he
turned and beat me, and then ran away as fast as he could from
one lane to another, till at length I lost sight of him. I have
since been walking without the town expecting your return, to
pray you, dear father, not to tell my mother of it, lest it
should make her worse!" When he had thus spoken he fell a weeping
again more bitterly than before.

My son's account afflicted me beyond measure. I then found myself
guilty of an enormous crime, and repented too late of having so
easily believed the calumnies of a wretched slave, who, from what
he had learnt of my son, had invented that fatal falsehood.

My uncle here present came just at that time to see his daughter,
but instead of finding her alive, understood from me that she was
dead, for I concealed nothing from him; and without staying for
his censure, declared myself the greatest criminal in the world.

Upon this, instead of reproaching me, he joined his tears with
mine, and we together wept three days without intermission, he
for the loss of a daughter whom he had loved tenderly; and I for
the loss of a beloved wife, of whom I had deprived myself in so
cruel a manner by giving too easy credit to the report of a lying
slave.

This, commander of the faithful, is the sincere confession your
majesty required from me. You have now heard all the
circumstances of my crime, and I must humbly beg of you to order
the punishment due for it; how severe soever it may be, I shall
not in the least complain, but esteem it too easy and light.

The caliph was much astonished at the young man's relation. But
this just prince, finding he was rather to be pitied than
condemned, began to speak in his favour: "This young man's
crime," said he, "is pardonable before God, and excusable with
men. The wicked slave is the sole cause of this murder; it is he
alone that must be punished: wherefore," continued he, looking
upon the grand vizier, "I give you three days' time to find him
out; if you do not bring him within that space, you shall die in
his stead." The unfortunate Jaaffier, had thought himself out of
danger, was perplexed at this order of the caliph; but as he
durst not return any answer to the prince, whose hasty temper he
knew too well, he departed from his presence, and retired
melancholy to his house, convinced that he had but three days to
live; for he was so fully persuaded that he should not find the
slave, that he made not the least enquiry after him. "Is it
possible," said he, "that in such a city as Bagdad, where there
is an infinite number of negro slaves, I should be able to find
him out that is guilty? Unless God be pleased to interpose as he
hath already to detest the murderer, nothing can save my life."

He spent the first two days in mourning with his family, who sat
round him weeping and complaining of the caliph's cruelty. The
third day being arrived, he prepared himself to die with courage,
as an honest minister, and one who had nothing to trouble his
conscience; he sent for notaries and witnesses' who signed his
will. After which he took leave of his wife and children, and
bade them farewell. All his family were drowned in tears, so that
there never was a more sorrowful spectacle. At last a messenger
came from the caliph to tell him that he was out of all patience,
having heard nothing from him concerning the negro slave whom he
had commanded him to search for; "I am therefore ordered," said
the messenger, "to bring you before his throne." The afflicted
vizier, obeyed the mandate, but as he was going out, they brought
him his youngest daughter, about five or six years of age, to
receive his last blessing.

As he had a particular affection for that child, he prayed the
messenger to give him leave to stop a moment, and taking his
daughter in his arms, kissed her several times: as he kissed her,
he perceived she had something in her bosom that looked bulky,
and had a sweet scent. "My dear little one," said he, "what hast
thou in thy bosom?" "My dear father," she replied, "it is an
apple which our slave Rihan sold me for two sequins."

At these words apple and slave, the grand vizier, uttered an
exclamation of surprise, intermixed with joy, and putting his
hand into the child's bosom, pulled out the apple. He caused the
slave, who was not far off, to be brought immediately, and when
he came, "Rascal," said he, "where hadst thou this apple?" "My
lord," replied the slave, "I swear to you that I neither stole it
in your house, nor out of the commander of the faithful's garden;
but the other day, as I was passing through a street where three
or four children were at play, one of them having it in his hand,
I snatched it from him, and carried it away. The child ran after
me, telling me it was not his own, but belonged mother, who was
sick; and that his father, to satisfy her longing, had made a
long journey, and brought home three apples, whereof this was
one, which he had taken from his mother without her knowledge. He
said all he could to prevail upon me to give it him back, but I
refused, and so brought it home, and sold it for two sequins to
the little lady your daughter."

Jaaffier could not reflect without astonishment that the
mischievousness of a slave had been the cause of an innocent
woman's death, and nearly of his own. He carried the slave along
with him, and when he came before the caliph, gave the prince an
exact account of what the slave had told him, and the chance
which led him to the discovery of his crime.

Never was any surprise so great as that of the caliph, yet he
could not refrain from falling into excessive fits of laughter.
At last he recovered himself, and with a serious air told the
vizier, that since his slave had been the occasion of murder, he
deserved an exemplary punishment. "I must own it," said the
vizier, "but his guilt is not unpardonable: I remember the
wonderful history of a vizier, of Cairo, and am ready to relate
it, upon condition that if your majesty finds it more astonishing
than that which gives me occasion to tell it, you will be pleased
to pardon my slave." "I consent," said the caliph; "but you
undertake a hard task, for I do not believe you can save your
slave, the story of the apples being so very singular." Upon
this, Jaaffier began his story thus:


   The Story of Noor ad Deen Ali and Buddir ad Deen Houssun.


Commander of the faithful, there was formerly a sultan of Egypt,
a strict observer of justice, gracious, merciful, and liberal,
and his valour made him terrible to his neighbours. He loved the
poor, and protected the learned, whom he advanced to the highest
dignities. This sultan had a vizier, who was prudent, wise,
sagacious, and well versed in all sciences. This minister had two
sons, who in every thing followed his footsteps. The eldest was
called Shumse ad Deen Mahummud, and the younger Noor ad Deen Ali.
The latter was endowed with all the good qualities that man could
possess.

The vizier their father being dead, the sultan caused them both
to put on the robes of a vizier, "I am as sorry," said he, "as
you are for the loss of your father; and because I know you live
together, and love one another cordially, I will bestow his
dignity upon you conjointly; go, and imitate your father's
conduct."

The two new viziers humbly thanked the sultan, and retired to
make due preparation for their father's interment. They did not
go abroad for a month, after which they repaired to court, and
attended their duties. When the sultan hunted, one of the
brothers accompanied him, and this honour they had by turns. One
evening as they were conversing together after a cheerful meal,
the next day being the elder brother's turn to hunt with the
sultan, he said to his younger brother, "Since neither of us is
yet married, and we live so affectionately together, let us both
wed the same day sisters out of some family that may suit our
quality. What do you think of this plan?" "Brother," answered the
other vizier, "there cannot be a better thought; for my part, I
will agree to any thing you approve." "But this is not all," said
the elder; "my fancy carries me farther: Suppose both our wives
should conceive the first night of our marriage, and should
happen to be brought to bed on one day, yours of a son, and mine
of a daughter, we will give them to each other in marriage."
"Nay," said Noor ad Deen aloud, "I must acknowledge that this
prospect is admirable; such a marriage will perfect our union,
and I willingly consent to it. But then, brother," said he
farther, "if this marriage should happen, would you expect that
my son should settle a jointure on your daughter?" "There is no
difficulty in that," replied the other; "for I am persuaded, that
besides the usual articles of the marriage contract, you will not
fail to promise in his name at least three thousand sequins,
three landed estates, and three slaves." "No," said the younger
"I will not consent to that; are we not brethren, and equal in
title and dignity? Do not you and I know what is just? The male
being nobler than the female, it is your part to give a large
dowry with your daughter. By what I perceive, you are a man that
would have your business done at another's charge."

Although Noor ad Deen spoke these words in jest, his brother
being of a hasty temper, was offended, and falling into a passion
said, "A mischief upon your son, since you prefer him before my
daughter. I wonder you had so much confidence as to believe him
worthy of her; you must needs have lost your judgment to think
you are my equal, and say we are colleagues. I would have you to
know, that since you are so vain, I would not marry my daughter
to your son though you would give him more than you are worth."
This pleasant quarrel between two brothers about the marriage of
their children before they were born went so far, that Shumse ad
Deen concluded by threatening: "Were I not to-morrow," said he,
"to attend the sultan, I would treat you as you deserve; but at
my return, I will make you sensible that it does not become a
younger brother to speak so insolently to his elder as you have
done to me." Upon this he retired to his apartment in anger.

Shumse ad Deen rising early next morning, attended the sultan,
who went to hunt near the pyramids. As for Noor ad Deen, he was
very uneasy all night, and supposing it would not be possible to
live longer with a brother who had treated him with so much
haughtiness, he provided a stout mule, furnished himself with
money and jewels, and having told his people that he was going on
a private journey for two or three days, departed.

When out of Cairo, he rode by way of the desert towards Arabia;
but his mule happening to tire, was forced to continue his
journey on foot. A courier who was going to Bussorah, by good
fortune overtaking him, took him up behind him. As soon as the
courier reached that city, Noor ad Deen alighted, and returned
him thanks for his kindness. As he went about to seek for a
lodging, he saw a person of quality with a numerous retinue, to
whom all the people shewed the greatest respect, and stood still
till he had passed. This personage was grand vizier, to the
sultan of Bussorah, who was passing through the city to see that
the inhabitants kept good order and discipline.

This minister casting his eyes by chance on Noor ad Deen Ali,
perceiving something extraordinary in his aspect, looked very
attentively upon him, and as he saw him in a traveller's habit,
stopped his train, asked him who he was, and from whence he came?
"Sir," said Noor ad Deen, "I am an Egyptian, born at Cairo, and
have left my country, because of the unkindness of a near
relation, resolved to travel through the world, and rather to die
than return home." The grand vizier, who was a good-natured man,
after hearing these words, said to him, "Son, beware; do not
pursue your design; you are not sensible of the hardships you
must endure. Follow me; I may perhaps make you forget the
misfortunes which have forced you to leave your own country."

Noor ad Deen followed the grand vizier, who soon discovered his
good qualities, and conceived for him so great an affection, that
one day he said to him in private, "My son, I am, as you see, so
far gone in years, that it is not probable I shall live much
longer. Heaven has bestowed on me only one daughter, who is as
beautiful as you are handsome, and now fit for marriage. Several
nobles of the highest rank at this court have sought her for
their sons, but I would not grant their request. I have an
affection for you, and think you so worthy to be received into my
family, that, preferring you before all those who have demanded
her, I am ready to accept you for my son-in-law. If you like the
proposal, I will acquaint the sultan my master that I have
adopted you by this marriage, and intreat him to grant you the
reversion of my dignity of grand vizier in the kingdom of
Bussorah. In the mean time, nothing being more requisite for me
than ease in my old age, I will not only put you in possession of
great part of my estate, but leave the administration of public
affairs to your management."

When the grand vizier had concluded this kind and generous
proposal, Noor ad Deen fell at his feet, and expressing himself
in terms that demonstrated his joy and gratitude, assured him,
that he was at his command in every way. Upon this the vizier
sent for his chief domestics, ordered them to adorn the great
hall of his palace, and prepare a splendid feast. He afterwards
sent to invite the nobility of the court and city, to honour him
with their company; and when they were all met (Noor ad Deen
having made known his quality), he said to the noblemen present,
for he thought it proper to speak thus on purpose to satisfy
those to whom he had refused his alliance, "I am now, my lords,
to discover a circumstance which hitherto I have keep a secret. I
have a brother, who is grand vizier to the sultan of Egypt. This
brother has but one son, whom he would not marry in the court of
Egypt, but sent him hither to wed my daughter in order that both
branches of our family may be united. His son, whom I knew to be
my nephew as soon as I saw him, is the young man I now present to
you as my son-in-law. I hope you will do me the honour to be
present at his wedding, which I am resolved to celebrate this
day." The noblemen, who could not be offended at his preferring
his nephew to the great matches that had been proposed, allowed
that he had very good reason for his choice, were willing to be
witnesses to the ceremony, and wished that God might prolong his
days to enjoy the satisfaction of the happy match.

The lords met at the vizier of Bussorah's palace, having
testified their satisfaction at the marriage of his daughter with
Noor ad Deen Ali, sat down to a magnificent repast, after which,
notaries came in with the marriage contrast, and the chief lords
signed it; and when the company had departed, the grand vizier
ordered his servants to have every thing in readiness for Noor ad
Deen Ali, to bathe. He had fine new linen, and rich vestments
provided for him in the greatest profusion. Having bathed and
dressed, he was perfumed with the most odoriferous essences, and
went to compliment the vizier, his father-in-law, who was
exceedingly pleased with his noble demeanour. Having made him sit
down, "My son," said he, "you have declared to me who you are,
and the office you held at the court of Egypt. You have also told
me of a difference betwixt you and your brother, which occasioned
you to leave your country. I desire you to make me your entire
confidant, and to acquaint me with the cause of your quarrel; for
now you have no reason either to doubt my affection, or to
conceal any thing from me."

Noor ad Deen informed him of every circumstance of the quarrel; at
which the vizier, burst out into a fit of laughter, and said, "This is
one of the strangest occurrences I ever heard. Is it possible, my son,
that your quarrel should rise so high about an imaginary marriage? I
am sorry you fell out with your elder brother upon such a frivolous
matter; but he was also wrong in being angry at what you only spoke in
jest, and I ought to thank heaven for that difference which has
procured me such a son-in-law. But," continued the vizier, "it is
late, and time for you to retire; go to your bride, my son, she
expects you: to-morrow, I will present you to the sultan, and hope he
will receive you in such a manner as shall satisfy us both." Noor ad
Deen Ali took leave of his father-in-law, and retired to his bridal
apartment.

It is remarkable that Shumse ad Deen Mahummud happened also to
marry at Cairo the very same day that this marriage was
solemnized at Bussorah, the particulars of which are as follow:

After Noor ad Deen Ali left Cairo, with an intention never to
return, his elder brother, who was hunting with the sultan of
Egypt, was absent for a month; for the sultan being fond of the
chase, continued it often for so long a period. At his return,
Shumse ad Deen was much surprised when he understood, that under
presence of taking a short journey his brother departed from
Cairo on a mule the same day as the sultan, and had never
appeared since. It vexed him so much the more, because he did not
doubt but the harsh words he had used had occasioned his flight.
He sent a messenger in search of him, who went to Damascus, and
as far as Aleppo, but Noor ad Deen was then at Bussorah. When the
courier returned and brought no news of him, Shumse ad Deen
intended to make further inquiry after him in other parts; but in
the meantime matched with the daughter of one of the greatest
lords in Cairo, upon the same day in which his brother married
the daughter of the grand vizier, of Bussorah.

At the end of nine months the wife of Shumse ad Deen was brought
to bed of a daughter at Cairo, and on the same day the lady of
Noor ad Deen was delivered of a son at Bussorah, who was called
Buddir ad Deen Houssun.

The grand vizier, of Bussorah testified his joy for the birth of
his grandson by gifts and public entertainments. And to shew his
son-in-law the great esteem he had for him, he went to the
palace, and most humbly besought the sultan to grant Noor ad Deen
Ali his office, that he might have the comfort before his death
to see his son in-law made grand vizier, in his stead.

The sultan, who had conceived a distinguished regard for Noor ad
Deen when the vizier, had presensed him upon his marriage, and
had ever since heard every body speak well of him, readily
granted his father-in-law's request, and caused Noor ad Deen
immediately to be invested with the robe and insignia of the
vizarut, such as state drums, standards, and writing apparatus of
gold richly enamelled and set with jewels.

The next day, when the father saw his son-in-law preside in
council, as he himself had done, and perform all the offices of
grand vizier, his joy was complete. Noor ad Deen Ali conducted
himself with that dignity and propriety which shewed him to have
been used to state affairs, and engaged the approbation of the
sultan, and reverence and affection of the people.

The old vizier of Bussorah died about four years afterwards with
great satisfaction, seeing a branch of his family that promised
so fair to support its future consequence and respectability.

Noor ad Deen Ali, performed his last duty to him with all
possible love and gratitude. And as soon as his son Buddir ad
Deen Houssun had attained the age of seven years, provided him an
excellent tutor, who taught him such things as became his birth.
The child had a ready wit, and a genius capable of receiving all
the good instructions that could be given.

After Buddir ad Deen had been two years under the tuition of his
master, who taught him perfectly to read, he learnt the Koran by
heart. His father put him afterwards to other tutors, by whom his
mind was cultivated to such a degree, that when he was twelve
years of age he had no more occasion for them. And then, as his
physiognomy promised wonders, he was admired by all who saw him.

Hitherto his father had kept him to study, but now he introduced
him to the sultan, who received him graciously. The people who
saw him in the streets were charmed with his demeanour, and gave
him a thousand blessings.

His father proposing to render him capable of supplying his
place, accustomed him to business of the greatest moment, on
purpose to qualify him betimes. In short, he omitted nothing to
advance a son he loved so well. But as he began to enjoy the
fruits of his labour, he was suddenly seized by a violent fit of
sickness; and finding himself past recovery, disposed himself to
die a good Mussulmaun.

In that last and precious moment he forgot not his son, but
called for him, and said, "My son, you see this world is
transitory; there is nothing durable but in that to which I shall
speedily go. You must therefore from henceforth begin to fit
yourself for this change, as I have done; you must prepare for it
without murmuring, so as to have no trouble of conscience for not
having acted the part of a really honest man. As for your
religion, you are sufficiently instructed in it, by what you have
learnt from your tutors, and your own study; and as to what
belongs to an upright man, I shall give you some instructions, of
which I hope you will make good use. As it is a necessary thing
to know one's self, and you cannot come to that knowledge without
you first understand who I am, I shall now inform you.

"I am a native of Egypt; my father, your grandfather, was first
minister to the sultan of that kingdom. I had myself the honour
to be vizier, to that sultan, and so has my brother, your uncle,
who I suppose is yet alive; his name is Shumse ad Deen Mahummud.
I was obliged to leave him, and come into this country, where I
have raised myself to the high dignity I now enjoy. But you will
understand all these matters more fully by a manuscript that I
shall give you."

At the same time, Noor ad Deen Ali gave to his son a memorandum
book, saying, "Take and read it at your leisure; you will find,
among other things, the day of my marriage, and that of your
birth. These are circumstances which perhaps you may hereafter
have occasion to know, therefore you must keep it very
carefully."

Buddir ad Deen Houssun being sincerely afflicted to see his
father in this condition, and sensibly touched with his
discourse, could not but weep when he received the memorandum
book, and promised at the same time never to part with it.

That very moment Noor ad Deen fainted, so that it was thought he
would have expired; but he came to himself again, and spoke as
follows:

"My son, the first instruction I give you, is, Not to make
yourself familiar with all sorts of people. The way to live happy
is to keep your mind to yourself, and not to tell your thoughts
too easily.

"Secondly, Not to do violence to any body whatever, for in that
case you will draw every body's hatred upon you. You ought to
consider the world as a creditor, to whom you owe moderation,
compassion, and forbearance.

"Thirdly, Not to say a word when you are reproached; for, as the
proverb says, 'He that keeps silence is out of danger.' And in
this case particularly you ought to practice it. You also know
what one of our poets says upon this subject, 'That silence is
the ornament and safe-guard of life'; That our speech ought not
to be like a storm of hail that spoils all. Never did any man yet
repent of having spoken too little, whereas many have been sorry
that they spoke so much.

"Fourthly, To drink no wine, for that is the source of all vices.

"Fifthly, To be frugal in your way of living; if you do not
squander your estate, it will maintain you in time of necessity.
I do not mean you should be either profuse or niggardly; for
though you have little, if you husband it well, and lay it out on
proper occasions, you will have many friends; but if on the
contrary you have great riches, and make but a bad use of them,
all the world will forsake you, and leave you to yourself."

In short, the virtuous Noor ad Deen continued till the last
aspiration of his breath to give good advice to his son; and when
he was dead he was magnificently interred.

Noor ad Deen was buried with all the honours due to his rank.
Buddir ad Deen Houssun of Bussorah, for so he was called, because
born in that city, was with grief for the death of his father,
that instead of a month's time to mourn, according to custom, he
kept himself shut up in tears and solitude about two months,
without seeing any body, or so much as going abroad to pay his
duty to his sovereign. The sultan being displeased at his
neglect, and looking upon it as a alight, suffered his passion to
prevail, and in his anger, called for the new grand vizier, (for
he had created another on the death of Noor ad Deen), commanded
him to go to the house of the deceased, and seize upon it, with
all his other houses, lands, and effects, without leaving any
thing for Buddir ad Deen Houssun, and to confine his person.

The new grand vizier, accompanied by his officers, went
immediately to execute his commission. But one of Buddir ad Deen
Houssun's slaves happening accidentally to come into the crowd,
no sooner understood the vizier's errand, than he ran before to
give his master warning. He found him sitting in the vestibule of
his house, as melancholy as if his father had been but newly
dead. He fell down at his feet out of breath, and alter he had
kissed the hem of his garment, cried out, "My lord, save yourself
immediately." The unfortunate youth lifting up his head,
exclaimed, "What news dost thou bring?" "My lord," said he,
"there is no time to be lost; the sultan is incensed against you,
has sent to confiscate your estates, and to seize your person."

The words of this faithful and affectionate slave occasioned
Buddir ad Deen Houssun great alarm. "May not I have so much
time," said he, "as to take some money and jewels along with me?"
"No, Sir," replied the slave, "the grand vizier, will be here
this moment; be gone immediately, save yourself." The unhappy
youth rose hastily from his sofa, put his feet in his sandals,
and after he had covered his head with the skirt of his vest,
that his face might not be known, fled, without knowing what way
to go, to avoid the impending danger.

He ran without stopping till he came to the public burying-ground, and
as it was growing dark, resolved to pass that night in his father's
tomb. It was a large edifice, covered by a dome, which Noor ad Deen
Ali, as is common with the Mussulmauns, had erected for his sepulture.
On the way Buddir ad Deen met a Jew, who was a banker and merchant,
and was returning from a place where his affairs had called him, to
the city.

The Jew, knowing Buddir ad Deen, stopped, and saluted him very
courteously.

Isaac the Jew, after he had paid his respects to Buddir ad Deen
Houssun, by kissing his hand, said, "My lord, dare I be so bold
as to ask whither you are going at this time of night alone, and
so much troubled? Has any thing disquieted you?" "Yes," said
Buddir ad Deen, "a while ago I was asleep, and my father appeared
to me in a dream, looking very fiercely upon me, as if much
displeased. I started out of my sleep in alarm, and came out
immediately to go and pray upon his tomb."

"My lord," said the Jew (who did not know the true reason why
Buddir ad Deen had left the town), "your father of happy memory,
and my good lord, had store of merchandize in several vessels,
which are yet at sea, and belong to you; I beg the favour of you
to grant me the refusal of them before any other merchant. I am
able to pay down ready money for all the goods that are in your
ships: and to begin, if you will give me those that happen to
come in the first that arrives in safety, I will pay you down in
part of payment a thousand sequins," and drawing out a bag from
under his vest, he shewed it him sealed up with one seal.

Buddir ad Deen Houssun being banished from home, and dispossessed
of all that he had in the world, looked on this proposal of the
Jew as a favour from heaven, and therefore accepted it with joy.
"My lord," said the Jew, "then you sell me for a thousand sequins
the lading of the first of your ships that shall arrive in port?"
"Yes," answered Buddir ad Deen, "I sell it to you for a thousand
sequins; it is done." Upon this the Jew delivered him the bag of
a thousand sequins, and offered to count them, but Buddir ad Deen
said he would trust his word. "Since it is so, my lord," said he,
"be pleased to favour me with a small note of the bargain we have
made." As he spoke, he pulled the inkhorn from his girdle, and
taking a small reed out of it neatly cut for writing, presented
it to him with a piece of paper. Buddir ad Deen Houssun wrote
these words:

"This writing is to testify, that Buddir ad Deen Houssun of
Bussorah, has sold to Isaac the Jew, for the sum of one thousand
sequins, received in hand, the lading of the first of his ships
that shall arrive in this port."

This note he delivered to the Jew, after having stamped it with
his seal, and then took his leave of him.

While Isaac pursued his journey to the city, Buddir ad Deen made
the best of his way to his father's tomb. When he came to it, he
prostrated himself to the ground, and, with his eyes full of
tears, deplored his miserable condition. "Alas!" said he,
"unfortunate Buddir ad Deen, what will become of thee? Whither
canst thou fly for refuge against the unjust prince who
persecutes thee? Was it not enough to be afflicted by the death
of so dear a father? Must fortune needs add new misfortunes to
just complaints?" He continued a long time in this posture, but
at last rose up, and leaning his head upon his father's
tombstone, his sorrows returned more violently than before; so
that he sighed and mourned, till, overcome with heaviness, he
sunk upon the floor, and drops asleep.

He had not slept long, when a genie, who had retired to the
cemetery during the day, and was intending, according to his
custom, to range about the world at night, entered the sepulchre,
and finding Buddir ad Deen lying on his back, was surprised at
his beauty.

When the genie had attentively considered Buddir ad Deen Houssun,
he said to himself, "To judge of this creature by his beauty, he
would seem to be an angel of the terrestrial paradise, whom God
has sent to put the world in a flame by his charms." At last,
after he had satisfied himself with looking at him, he tool; a
flight into the air, where meeting by chance with a perie, they
saluted one another; after which he said to her, "Pray descend
with me into the cemetery, where I dwell, and I will shew you a
beauty worthy your admiration." The perie consented, and both
descended in an instant; they came into the tomb. "Look," said
the genie, shewing her Buddir ad Deen Houssun, "did you ever see
a youth more beautiful?"

The perie having attentively observed Buddir ad Deen, replied, "I
must confess that he is a very handsome man, but I am just come
from seeing an objets at Cairo, more admirable than this; and if
you will hear me, I will relate her unhappy fate." "You will very
much oblige me," answered the genie. "You must know then," said
the perie, "that the sultan of Egypt has a vizier, Shumse ad Deen
Mahummud, who has a daughter most beautiful and accomplished. The
sultan having heard of this young lady's beauty, sent the other
day for her father, and said, 'I understand you have a daughter
to marry; I would have her for my bride: will not you consent?'
The vizier, who did not expect this proposal, was troubled, and
instead of accepting it joyfully, which another in his place
would certainly have done, he answered the sultan: 'May it please
your majesty, I am not worthy of the honour you would confer upon
me, and I most humbly beseech you to pardon me, if I do not
accede to your request. You know I had a brother, who had the
honour, as well as myself, to be one of your viziers: we had some
difference together, which was the cause of his leaving me
suddenly. Since that time I have had no account of him till
within these four days, that I heard he died at Bussorah, being
grand vizier to the sultan of that kingdom.

"'He has left a son, and there having been an agreement between
us to match our children together, I am persuaded he intended
that match when he died; and being desirous to fulfil the promise
on my part, I conjure your majesty to grant me permission.'

"The sultan of Egypt, provoked at this denial of his vizier said
to him in anger which he could not restrain: 'Is this the way in
which you requite my condescension in stooping so low as to
desire your alliance? I know how to revenge your presumption in
daring to prefer another to me, and I swear that your daughter
shall be married to the most contemptible and ugly of my slaves.'
Having thus spoken, he angrily commanded the vizier to quit his
presence. The vizier retired to his palace full of confusion, and
overwhelmed in despair.

"This very day the sultan sent for one of his grooms, who is
hump-backed, big-bellied, crook legged, and as ugly as a
hobgoblin; and after having commanded the vizier to marry his
daughter to this ghastly slave, he caused the contract to be made
and signed by witnesses in his own presence. The preparations for
this fantastical wedding are all ready, and this very moment all
the slaves belonging to the lords of the court of Egypt are
waiting at the door of a bath, each with a flambeau in his hand,
for the crook-back groom, who is bathing, to go along with them
to his bride, who is already dressed to receive him; and when I
departed from Cairo, the ladies met for that purpose were going
to conduct her in her nuptial attire to the hall, where she is to
receive her hump-backed bridegroom, and is this minute expecting
him. I have seen her, and do assure you, that no person can
behold her without admiration."

When the perie left off speaking, the genie said to her, "Whatever you
think or say, I cannot be persuaded that the girl's beauty exceeds
that of this young man." "I will not dispute it with you," answered
the perie; "for I must confess he deserves to be married to that
charming creature, whom they design for hump-back; and I think it were
a deed worthy of us to obstruct the sultan of Egypt's injustice, and
put this young gentleman in the room of the slave." "You are in the
right," answered the genie; "I am extremely obliged to you for so good
a thought; let us deceive him. I consent to your revenge upon the
sultan of Egypt; let us comfort a distressed father, and make his
daughter as happy as she thinks herself miserable. I will do my utmost
endeavours to make this project succeed, and I am persuaded you will
not be backward. I will be at the pains to carry him to Cairo before
he awakes, and afterwards leave it to your care to carry him
elsewhere, when we have accomplished our design."

The perie and the genie having thus concerted what they had to do, the
genie lifted up Buddir ad Deen Houssun gently, and with an
inconceivable swiftness conveyed him through the air and set him down
at the door of a building next to the bath, whence hump-back was to
come with a train of slaves that waited for him. Buddir ad Deen awoke,
and was naturally alarmed at finding himself in the middle of a city
he knew not; he was going to cry out, but the genie touched him gently
on the shoulder, and forbad him to speak. He then put a torch in his
hand, saying, "Go, and mix with the crowd at the door of the bath;
follow them till you come into a hall, where they are going to
celebrate a marriage. The bridegroom is a hump-backed fellow, and by
that you will easily know him. Put yourself at the right hand as you
go in, open the purse of sequins you have in your bosom, distribute
them among the musicians and dancers as they go along; and when you
are got into the hall, give money also to the female slaves you see
about the bride; but every time you put your hand in your purse, be
sure to take out a whole handful, and do not spare them. Observe to do
everything exactly as I have desired you; be not afraid of any person,
and leave the rest to a superior power, who will order matters as he
thinks fit."

Buddir ad Deen, being well instructed in all that he was to do,
advanced towards the door of the bath. The first thing he did was
to light his torch at that of a slave; and then mixing among them
as if he belonged to some noblemen of Cairo, he marched along as
they did, and followed humpback, who came out of the bath, and
mounted a horse from the sultan's own stable.

Buddir ad Deen coming near to the musicians, and men and women
dancers, who went just before the bridegroom, pulled out time
after time whole handfuls of sequins, which he distributed among
them: and as he thus gave his money with an unparalleled grace
and engaging mien, all who received it fixed their eyes upon him;
and after they had a full view of his face, they found him so
handsome that they could not withdraw their attention.

