As soon as it was found that the ship really did move, and that nothing
was going to blow up, everybody began to praise her, and the trial was
pronounced a great success.

Although at the trial the boat proved very slow, the builder is so
enthusiastic about her that he says he is confident she will be able to
move through the water at the rate of sixty miles an hour.

If this feat is accomplished, the three thousand miles of sea that
divide us from Europe will be crossed in two days and two hours.

                                               G.H. ROSENFELD.


LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


     _Editor_ GREAT ROUND WORLD.

     DEAR SIR: Can you tell me more about the map-holder
     mentioned in No. 47?             W.J.B.


DEAR SIR:

If you refer to the map-holder for bicycles, we would suggest that you
apply to A.G. Spalding & Co., Broadway, New York.          EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     Will you please explain in the next issue of THE GREAT ROUND
     WORLD who are eligible to seats in the House of Lords and in
     the House of Commons? By thus doing you will greatly oblige
     one who is very much interested in your paper.


                                Respectfully yours,
                                               N.R.
     MORRISTOWN, N.J.


DEAR FRIEND:

The House of Peers (or House of Lords) is composed of all the peers of
the United Kingdom, the representative Scottish peers, the Irish
representative peers, and the lords spiritual.

A peer is the holder of one of the five degrees of nobility,--duke,
marquis, earl, viscount, or baron. These men have their seats in the
House of Lords by right of birth, and take possession of them when they
come of age.

The House of Peers takes its origin from the body of lords and barons
who were summoned to the king's councils in olden times. Besides the
peers who sit in the House of Lords by right, and who are distinguished
as the lords temporal, there are twenty-six other lords who also form a
part of this body, and who are known as the lords spiritual. These are
the two English archbishops and twenty-four bishops.

The House of Commons is composed entirely of men who are elected by the
vote of the people.

There are no restrictions whatever of birth, education, or religion. Any
freeman who is elected can sit in the House. At one time an endeavor was
made to exclude a man who had been elected because he refused to take
the oath which is administered to all members of Parliament before they
can take their seats. This was Charles Bradlaugh. He said he did not
believe in an oath, but offered to affirm, or give his word instead. The
House of Commons refused to accept this, and Mr. Bradlaugh was not
allowed to take his seat. He afterward stated that he was willing to
take the oath as a matter of form, but this was again objected to. For
six years he struggled for his seat, and at last was allowed to take it,
after going through the form of the oath.

A cobbler has sat in the House of Commons and helped make laws for the
people, and the members of Parliament are of all ranks and ages.

In England, however, men of fortune and family take more interest in the
affairs of the nation than they do with us, and the majority of the
members of the House of Commons are wealthy land-owners, baronets, and
knights, who have large interests at stake, and young men of good family
who have been educated with the express idea of going into Parliament as
soon as they were able to find an opening.

                                               EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     I am one of your subscribers, and think THE GREAT ROUND
     WORLD a very interesting little paper. Do you think the man
     that went up in the balloon will succeed in finding the
     North Pole? I hope he will, and when he comes back give us a
     good history of it. And do you think that Cuba will get its
     freedom? I hope it will.

                                             Yours truly,
     NEW PHILADELPHIA PA.,                          LAURA G.


DEAR LAURA:

Great fears are entertained that Professor Andrée has fallen a victim to
his love for science, and is one more of the unfortunate men who have
lost their lives in their search for the Pole.

In regard to Cuba--unless Spain really gives the Cubans liberal home
rule that they can be happy under, they will certainly fight until they
are free.

                                               EDITOR.


We have received a batch of delightful letters from a school in Foxboro,
Mass. We take great pleasure in printing the three following.    EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     Your paper came this week. As we read the notes I thought
     they were quite interesting. I should like to see one of
     those meteorites you told us about. I shall be very glad
     when your next paper comes, so I can read about Lieutenant
     Peary. The school is going to write to you and tell you how
     we liked your paper.

                                      Yours truly,
     FOXBORO, MASS.                           C. IRENE B.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     We received our paper this morning. We have only read two
     stories, but we think we shall like it. Our teacher read us
     about Lieutenant Peary, and about the meteorites he got from
     Greenland, and about the Tennessee bicycle. Each one in the
     school wrote a letter. We are going to select the best ones
     and send them to you. Yours truly,

                                               RALPH E.
     FOXBORO, MASS.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     We received our paper to-day. I think we shall like THE
     GREAT ROUND WORLD very much. Our teacher read about the
     meteorites and the bicycles. Each one of us is writing a
     letter. Yours truly,

                                               HARWOOD W.

     P.S.--I have hurt my right fingers and can't write very
     well, but am learning to use my left hand.

     FOXBORO, MASS.


Every one ought to learn to write with their left hand. In England boys
and girls are taught to write with both hands. There is a book published
explaining the method.               EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     Can you give me further information relative to condensed
     food described on page 1267 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD? What
     the probable cost will be; where can it be obtained; how
     soon before it can be bought; and any other facts you may
     know relative thereto, and greatly oblige,

     Yours truly,                     E.A.H.


DEAR SIR:

For further information about the condensed food, we would suggest that
you address the New York Condensed Food Co., New York.         EDITOR.