    III. "The poor father was ready to fall down dead; but he
    grasped the broken oar which was before him, jumped up, and
    called in a faltering voice,--'Arrigozzo! Arrigozzo!' This was
    but for a moment. Receiving no answer, he ran to the top of the
    rock; looked at all around, ran his eye over all who were safe,
    one by one, but could not find his son among them. Then seeing
    the count, who had so lately been finding fault {276} with his
    son's name, he roared out,--'Dog, are you here?' And,
    brandishing the broken oar, he rushed forward to strike him on
    the head. Bice uttered a cry, Ottorino was quick in warding off
    the blow; in a minute, Lupo, the falconer, and the boatmen,
    disarmed the frantic man; who, striking his forehead with both
    hands, gave a spring, and threw himself into the lake.

    "He was seen fighting with the angry waves, overcoming them with
    a strength and a courage which desperation alone can
    give."--_Marco Viconti_, vol. i. chap. 5.

IV. A passage that has probably already occurred to the mind of the
reader, Mucklebackit mending the cable in which his son had been lost:

    "'There is a curse either on me or on this auld black bitch of a
    boat, that I have hauled up high and dry, and pitched and
    clouted sae mony years, that she might drown my poor Steenie at
    the end of them, an' be d----d to her!' And he flung his hammer
    against the boat, as if she had been the intentional cause of
    his misfortune"--_Antiquary_, vol. ii. chap. 13. Cadell, 1829.

    V. "Giton præcipuè, _ex dolore in rabiem efferatus_, tollit
    clamorem, me, utrâque manu impulsum, præcipitat super
    lectum."--Petron. _Arb. Sat._ cap. 94.

The classical reader will at once recognise the force of the words
"rabiem," "efferatus," "præcipitat," in this passage. The expression
"utrâque manu" may not at first sight arrest his attention. It seems
always used to express the most intense eagerness; see

    "Ijecit utramque laciniæ manum."--Pet. _Arb. Sat._ 14.

    "Utrâque manu Deorum beneficia tractat."--Ib. 140.

    "Upon which Menedemus, incensed at his insolence,
    answered,--'Nothing is more necessary than the preservation of
    Lucullus;' and thrust him back _with both hands_."--Plutarch,
    _Life of Lucullus_.

    "Women have a sort of natural tendency to cross their husbands:
    they lay hold _with both hands_ [à deux mains] on all occasions
    to contradict and oppose them, and the first excuse serves for a
    plenary justification."--Montaigne, _Essays_, book 2. chap. 8.

    "Marmout, deceived by the seemingly careless winter attitude of
    the allies, left Ciudad Rodrigo unprotected within their reach
    and Wellington jumped _with both feet_ upon the devoted fortress
    of Napier," _Pen. War_, vol. iv. p. 374.

Any apology for the unwarrantable length of this discursive despatch,
would, of course, only make matters worse.

C. FORBES.

Temple.

       *       *       *       *       *

ETYMOLOGICAL NOTES.

1. _Gnatch._--"The covetous man dares not gnatch" (Hammond's
_Catechism_). From this, and the examples in Halliwell's _Dictionary_,
the sense seems to be "to move." Is it related to "gnake?"

2. _Pert._--I lately met with an instance of the use of this word in the
etymological sense _peritus_: "I beant peart at making button-holes,"
said a needlewoman.

3. _Rococo._--A far-fetched etymology suggests itself. A wealthy noble
from the north might express his admiration for the luxuries of Paris by
the Russian word [Cyrillic: roskosha], or Polish _roskosz_. A Frenchman,
catching the sound, might apply it to anything extravagant enough to
astonish a barbarian.

4. _Cad._--The letters from Scotland ascribed to a Captain Burtt,
employed in surveying the forfeited estates, give an account of the
"cawdies," or errand boys, of Edinburgh.

5. _Fun_, perhaps Irish, _fonamhad_, jeering, mockery (Lhuyd,
_Archæologia Britannica_).

6. _Bumbailiff._--The French have _pousse-cul_, for the follower or
assistant to the sergeant.

7. Epergne, perhaps _épargne_, a save-all or hold-all. Here seems no
more difficulty in the transfer of the name than in that of chiffonier,
from a rag-basket to a piece of ornamental furniture.

8. _Doggrel._--Has the word any connexion with _sdrucciolo_?

9. _Derrick._--A spar arranged to form an extempore crane. I think
Derrick was the name of an executioner.

10. _Mece_, A.-S., a knife. The word is found in the Sclavonic and
Tartar dialects. I thinly I remember some years ago reading in a
newspaper of rioters armed with "pea makes." I do not remember any other
instance of its use in English.

F.Q.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISTAKES IN GIBBON.

The following references may be of use to a future editor of Gibbon; Mr.
Milman has not, I believe, rectified any of the mistakes pointed out by
the authors cited.

    In the Netherlands ... 50,000 in less than fifty years were ...
    sacrificed to the intolerance of popery. (Fra Paolo, _Sarpi
    Conc. Trid._ 1. i. p. 422. ed. sec. Grotius, in his _Annal.
    Belq._ 1. v. pp. 1G, 17. duod., including _all_ the persecutions
    of Charles V, makes the number 100,000. The supposed
    contradiction between these two historians supplied Mr. Gibbon
    with an argument by which he satisfied himself that be had
    completely demolished the whole credibility of Eusebius's
    history. See conclusion of his 16th book.) [Mendham's _Life of
    Pius V._, p. 303. and note; compare p. 252., where Gibbon's
    attack on Eusebius is discussed.]

In Forster's _Mahometanism Unveiled_, several of Gibbon's statements are
questioned. I have not the book at hand, and did not think the
corrections very important when I read it some time {277} back. The
reader who has it may see pp. 339. 385. 461-2. 472. 483. 498. of the
second volume.

In Dr. Maitland's _Dark Ages_, p. 229. seq. note, a gross blunder is
pointed out.

See too the _Gentlemans Magazine_, July, 1839, p. 49.

Dr. Maitland, in his _Facts and Documents relating to the ancient
Albigenses and Waldenses_, p. 217. note, corrects an error respecting
the _Book of Sentences_.

    "Gibbon, speaking of this _Book of Sentences_, in a note on his
    54th chapter, says, 'Of a list of criminals which fills nineteen
    folio pages, only _fifteen_ men and _four_ women were delivered
    to the secular arm.' Vol. v. p. 535. I believe he should have
    said _thirty-two_ men and _eight_ women; and imagine that he was
    misled by the fact that the index-maker most commonly (but by no
    means always) states the nature of the sentence passed on each
    person. From the book, however, it appears that forty persons
    were so delivered, viz., twenty-nine Albigenses, seven
    Waldenses, and four Beguins."

The following mistake was pointed out by the learned Cork correspondent
of the _Gentleman's Magazine_, I think in 1838; it has misled the writer
of the article "Anicius", in Smith's _Dictionary of Ancient Biography_,
and is not corrected by Mr. Milman (Gibbon, chap. xxxi. note 14 and
text):--

    "During the first five ages, the name of the Anicians was
    unknown. The earliest date in the annals of Pighius is that of
    M. Anicius Gallus, Tr. Plebis A.U.C. 506. Another Tribune, Q.
    Anicius, A.U.C. 508, is distinguished by the epithet
    Prænestinus."

We learn from Pliny, _H.N._ xxxiii. 6., that Q. Anicius Prænestinus was
the colleague as curule ædile of Flavius, the famous _scriba_ of Appius
Cæcus, B.C. 304, A.U.C. 450. (See Fischer, _Röm. Zeittafeln_, p. 61-2.)
Pliny's words are--

    "[Flavius] tantam gratiam plebis adeptus est ... ut ædilis
    curulis crearetur cum Q. Anicio Prænestino."

Gibbon's chapter on Mahomet seems to be particularly superficial; it is
to be hoped that a future editor will correct it by the aid of Von
Hammer's labours.

J.E.B. MAYOR.

Marlborough College.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES

_"Ockley's History of the Saracens," and unauthentic Works._--At the end
of a late edition of Washington Irving's _Life of Mahomet_, those "who
feel inclined to peruse further details of the life of Mahomet, or to
pursue the course of Saracenic history," are referred to _Ockley_.
Students should be aware of the character of the histories they peruse.
And it appears, from a note in Hallam's _Middle Ages_ (vol. ii. p.
168.), that Wakidi, from whom Ockley translated his work, was a "mere
fabulist," as Reiske observes, in his preface to Abulfeda.

Query, Would it not be well, if some of your more learned correspondents
would communicate to students, through the medium of "NOTES AND
QUERIES," a list of such books as are genuine but not authentic; and
authentic but not genuine, or altogether spurious? or would point out
the sources from which such information can be obtained?

P.H.F.


_The Hippopotamus._--Your correspondent L. (Vol. ii., p. 35.) says,
"None of the Greek writers appear to have seen a live hippopotamus:" and
again, "The hippopotamus, being an inhabitant of the Upper Nile, was
imperfectly known to the ancients." Herodotus says (ii. 71.) that this
animal was held sacred by the Nomos of Papremis, but not by the other
Egyptians. The city of Papremis is fixed by Bähr in the west of the
Delta (ad ii. 63.); and Mannert conjectured it to be the same as the
later Xoïs, lying between the Sebennytic and Canopic branches, but
nearer to the former. Sir Gardner Wilkinson says, several
representations of the hippopotamus were found at Thebes, one of which
he gives (_Egyptians_, vol. iii. pl. xv.). Herodotus' way of speaking
would seem to show that he was describing from his own observation: he
used Hecatæus, no doubt, but did not blindly copy him. Hence, I think,
we may infer that Herodotus himself saw the hippopotamus, and that this
animal was found, in his day, even as far north as the Delta: and also,
that the species is gradually dying out, as the aurochs is nearly gone,
and the dodo quite. The crocodile is no longer found in the Delta.

E.S. JACKSON


_America._--The probability of a short western passage to India is
mentioned in _Aristotle de Coelo_, ii., near the end.

F.Q.


_Pascal's Lettres Provinciales._--I take the liberty of forwarding to
you the following "Note," suggested by two curious blunders which fell
under my notice some time ago.

In Mr. Stamp's reprint of the Rev. C. Elliott's _Delineation of
Romanism_ (London, 8vo. 1844), I find (p. 471., in note) a long
paragraph on Pascal's _Lettres Provinciales_:--

    "This exquisite production," says the English editor, "_is
    accompanied, in some editions of it, with the learned and
    judicious observations of Nicole_, who, under the fictitious
    name of Guillaume Wendrock, has fully demonstrated the truths of
    those facts which Pascal had advanced without quoting his
    authorities; and has placed, in a full and striking light,
    several interesting circumstances which that great man had
    treated with perhaps too much brevity. _These letters ... were
    translated into Latin by Ruchelius_."

