"I believe that is what I said!" Redburn could not understand the
youth's agitation. He knew that the sister of Ned Harris had a secret;
was this Fearless Frank in any way connected with it, and if so, how?
"Do you know her?"

"Her other name is--"

"Harris--Anita Harris, in full. Do you know her, or aught of her?"

"I--I--I did, once!" was the slow reply. "Where is she; I want to see
her?"

Redburn took a moment to consider.

Would it be best to permit a meeting between the two until he should
be able to learn something more definite concerning the secret? If Ned
Harris were here would he sanction such a meeting? No! something told
the young miner that he would not; something warned him that it could
result in no good to allow the scarlet youth an interview with sad,
sweet-faced Anita.

"You cannot see her!" he at last said, decidedly. "There is a reason
why you two should never meet again, and if you remain in the gulch,
as you will be obliged to, for the present, you must give me your word
of honor that you will not go near yonder cabin."

Fearless Frank had expected this; therefore he was not surprised.
Neither did Redburn know how close he had shied his stone at the real
truth.

"I promise," McKenzie said, after a moment's deliberation, "on my
honor, that I will not approach the cabin, providing you will furnish
me my meals and lodgings elsewhere. If Anita comes to me, what then?"

"I will see that she does not," Redburn answered, positively.
Gradually he was assuming full control of things, in the absence of
Harris, himself. "Miss Terry, you may ride down to yonder cabin, and
tell Anita I sent you. Pilgrim, you can come along with me."

"No; I will accompany Alice as far as where your forces are
stationed," said Frank, and then they rode down the slope, Redburn
turning toward where the road-agents sat upon their horses in a
compact body, with Deadwood Dick at their head.

As the miner drew nigh and came to a standstill, the Prince of the
road rode forward to his side.

"Well--?" he said, interrogatively, his voice heavy yet pleasant; "I
suppose you desire to know what bizness we've got in your cornfield,
eh, stranger?"

"That's about the dimensions of it, yes," replied Redburn, at once
conceiving a liking for the young road-agent, in whom he thought he
saw a true gentleman, in the disguise of a devil. "I came over to
learn the object you have in view, in invading our little valley, if
you have no objections in telling."

"Certainly not. As you may have guessed already, we are a band of
road-agents, whose field of action we have lately confined to the
Black Hills country. I have the honor of being the leader, and you
have doubtless heard of me--Deadwood Dick, the 'Road-Agent Prince,' as
the _Pioneer_ persists in terming me. Just at present, things are
rather sultry in the immediate vicinity of Deadwood, so far as we are
concerned, and we sought this locality to escape a small army of the
Deadwood military, who have been nosing around after us for the past
week."

"Well--?"

"Well, we happened to see a man and woman come this way, and believing
that it must lead to somewhere or other, we followed, and here we are,
out of the reach of the blue-coats, but, I take it, _in_ the way of a
party of secret miners. Is it not so?"

"No, not necessarily so, unless you put yourselves in the way. You
wish to remain quartered here for the present?"

"If not contrary to your wishes, we should like to, yes."

"I have no objections to offer, providing you will agree to two
points."

"And what are they, may I ask?"

"These. That you will camp at the mouth of the passage, and thus keep
out any other intruders that may come; second, that you will keep your
men to this side or the valley, and not interfere with any of our
laborers."

"To which I eagerly agree. You shall experience no inconvenience from
our presence here; you furnish us a haven of safety from the pursuing
soldiers; we in return will extend you our aid in repelling a host of
fortune-seekers who may any moment come down this way in swarms."

"Very well; that settles it, then. You keep your promise, and all will
go well."

The two shook hands: then Redburn turned and strode back to dismiss
his forces, while Dick and his men took up their position at the place
where the fissure opened into the gulch. Here they made preparations
to camp. Redburn, while returning to his men, heard a shout of joy,
and looking up, saw, to his surprise, that the old "General" and Alice
Terry were locked in each other's arms, in a loving embrace.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote D: This crusher is said to have been the first introduced
into the Black Hills]


CHAPTER XIII.

AT THE CABIN.


What did it mean?

Had the old hump-backed, bow-legged mine-locater gone crazy, or was he
purposely insulting the beautiful maiden? Fearless Frank stood aside,
apparently offering no objections to the hugging, and the Indians did
likewise.

At least Miss Terry made no serious attempts to free herself from the
"General's" bear-like embrace.

A few bounds brought Redburn to the spot, panting, breathless,
perspiring. "What is the meaning of this disgraceful scene?" he
demanded, angrily.

"Disgraceful!" The old "General" set Miss Terry down on her feet,
after giving her a resounding smack, and turned to stare at the young
miner, in astonishment. "Disgraceful! Waal, young man, ter tell the
solid Old Testament truth, more or less--consider'bly less o' more 'n
more o' less--I admire yer cheek, hard an' unblushin' as et ar'. Ye
call my givin' this pretty piece o' feminine gander a squar', fatherly
sort o' a hug, _disgraceful_, do ye? Think et's all out o' ther bounds
o' propriety, do ye?"

"I look at it in that light, yes," Redburn replied.

"Haw! haw! haw!" and the General shook his fat sides with immoderate
laughter. "Why, pilgrim-tender-fut, this 'ere hundred an' twenty-six
pounds o' feminine gender b'longs to me--ter yours, truly, Walsingham
Nix--an' I have a parfec' indervidual right ter hug an' kiss her as
much as I please, wi'out brookin' enny interference frum you. Alice,
dear, this ar' Harry Redburn, ginerall sup'intendent o' ther Flower
Pocket gold-mines, an' 'bout as fair specimen as they make, nowadays.
Mr. Redburn, I'll formally present you to Miss Alice Terry, _my
darter!_"

Redburn colored, and was not a little disconcerted on account of his
blunder; but he rallied in a moment, and acknowledged the introduction
with becoming grace and dignity.

"You must excuse my interference," he said, earnestly. "I saw the old
'General' here taking liberties that no stranger should take, and
knowing nothing of the relationship existing between you, I was
naturally inclined to think that he was either drunk or crazy;
therefore I deemed it necessary to investigate. No offense, I hope."

"Of course not." and Alice smiled one of her sweetest smiles. "You did
perfectly right and are deserving of no censure, whatever."

After a few moments of desultory conversation, Redburn took the
"General" to one side, and spoke on the subject of Fearless Frank and
Anita Harris--of his action in the matter, and so forth. Nix--or
Terry, as the latter was evidently his real name--heartily coincided
with his views, and both agreed that it was best not to let the
Scarlet Boy come within range of Anita, or, at least, not till Ned
Harris should return, when he could do as he chose.

Accordingly it was decided that Fearless Frank should be set to work
in the quartz mine, that being the furthest from the cabin, and he
could eat and sleep either in the mine or in the crusher building,
whichever he liked best.

After settling this point the two men rejoined the others, and Frank
was apprised of their decision. He made no remarks upon it, but it was
plain to see that he was anything but satisfied. His wild spirit
yearned for constant freedom.

The Utes were dismissed and sent back to their work; the "General"
strolled off with McKenzie toward the quartz mine; it devolved upon
Redburn to escort Alice to the cabin, which he did with pleasure, and
gave her an introduction to sweet, sad-faced Anita, who awaited their
coming in the open doorway.

The two girls greeted each other with warmth; it was apparent that
they would become fast friends when they learned more of each other.

As for Redburn, he was secretly enamored with the "General's" pretty
daughter; she was beautiful, and evidently accomplished, and her
progenitor was financially well-to-do. What then was lacking to make
her a fitting mate for any man? Redburn pondered deeply on this
subject, as he left the girls together, and went out to see to his
duties in the mines.

He found Terry and Fearless Frank in the quartz mine, looking at the
swarthy-skinned miners; examining new projected slopes; suggesting
easier methods for working out different lumps of gold-bearing rock.
While the former's knowledge of practical mining was extended, the
latter's was limited.

"I think thet thar ar' bigger prospects yet, in further," the old
locater was saying. "I ain't much varsed on jeeological an'
toppygraffical formation, myself, ye see; but then, it kinder 'peers
to me thet this quartz vein ar' a-goin' to hold out fer a consider'ble
time yet."

"Doubtless. More straight digging an' less slopes I should think would
be practicable," McKenzie observed.

"I don't see it!" said Redburn, joining them. "Sloping and
transversing discovers new veins, while line work soon plays out. I
think things are working in excellent order at present."

They all made a tour of the mine which had been dug a considerable
distance into the mountain. The quartz was ordinarily productive, and
being rather loosely thrown together was blasted down without any
extra trouble. After a short consultation, Redburn and the "General"
concluded to place Frank over the Utes as superintendent and
mine-boss, as they saw that he was not used to digging, blasting or
any of the rough work connected with the mine, although he was
clear-headed and inventive.

When tendered the position it was gratefully accepted by him, he
expressing it his intention to work for the interest of his employers
as long as he should stay in the gulch.

Night at last fell over the Flower Pocket gold-mines, and work ceased.

The Utes procured their own food--mainly consisting of fish from the
little creek and deer and mountain birds that could be brought down at
almost any hour from the neighboring crags--and slept in the open air.
Redburn had McKenzie a comfortable bed made in the crusher-house, and
sent him out a meal fit for a prince.

As yet, Anita knew nothing of the scarlet youth's identity;--scarcely
knew, in fact, that he was in the valley.

At the cabin, the evening meal was dispatched with a general
expression of cheerfulness about the board. Anita seemed less downcast
than usual, and the vivacious Alice made life and merriment for all.
She was witty where wit was proper, and sensible in an unusual degree.

Redburn was infatuated with her. He watched her with an expression of
fondness in his eyes; he admired her every gesture and action; he saw
something new to admire in her, each moment he was in her society.

When the evening meal was cleared away, he took down the guitar, and
sung several ballads, the old "General" accompanying him with his rich
deep bass, and Alice with her clear birdlike alto; and the sweet
melody of the trio's voices called forth round after round of
rapturous applause from the road-agents camped upon the slope, and
from the Utes who were lounging here and there among the flower-beds
of the valley. But of the lot, Deadwood Dick was the only one bold
enough to approach the cabin, he came sauntering along and halted on
the threshold, nodding to the occupants of the little apartment with a
nonchalance which was not assumed.

"Good-evening!" he said, tipping his sombrero, but taking care not to
let the mask slip from his face. "I hope mine is not an intrusion.
Hearing music, I was loth to stay away, for I am a great lover of
music;--it is the one passion that appeals to my better nature."

He seated himself on the little stone step, and motioned for Redburn
to proceed.

One of those inside the cabin had been strangely affected at the sight
of Dick, and that person was Anita. She turned deathly pale, her eyes
assumed an expression of affright, and she trembled violently, as she
first saw him. The Prince of the Road, however, if he saw her, noticed
not her agitation; in fact, he took not the second glance at her while
he remained at the cabin. His eyes were almost constantly fastening
upon the lovely face and form of Alice.

Thinking it best to humor one who might become either a powerful enemy
or an influential friend, Redburn accordingly struck up a lively air,
_a la banjo_, and in exact imitation of a minstrel, rendered "Gwine to
Get a Home, Bymeby." And the thunders of _encore_ that came from the
outside listeners, showed how surely he had touched upon a pleasant
chord. He followed that with several modern serio-comic songs, all of
which were received well and heartily applauded.

"That recalls memories of good old times," said the road-agent, as he
leaned back against the door-sill, and gazed at the mountains, grand,
majestic, stupendous, and the starlit sky, azure, calm and serene.
"Recalls the days of early boyhood, that were gay, pure, and happy.
Ah! ho!"

He heaved a deep sign, and his head dropped upon his breast.

A deathlike silence pervaded the cabin; that one heartfelt sigh
aroused a sensation of pity in each of the four hearts that beat
within the cabin walls.

That the road-agent was a gentleman in disguise, was not to be
gainsayed; all felt that, despite his outlawed calling, he was
deserving of a place among them, in his better moods.

As if to accord with his mood, Alice began a sweet birdlike song, full
of tender pathos, and of quieting sympathy.

It was a quaint Scottish melody,--rich in its honeyed meaning, sweetly
weird and pitiful; wonderfully soothing and nourishing to a weeping
spirit.

Clear and flute-like the maiden's cultured voice swelled out on the
still night air, and the mountain echoes caught up the strains and
lent a wild peculiar accompaniment.

Deadwood Dick listened, with his head still bowed, and his hands
clasped about one knee;--listened in a kind of fascination, until the
last reverberations of the song had died out in a wailing echo; then
he sprung abruptly to his feet, drew one hand wearily across the
masked brow; raised his sombrero with a deft movement, and bowed
himself out--out into the night, where the moon and stars looked down
at him, perhaps with more lenience than on some.

Alice Terry rose from her seat, crossed over to the door, and gazed
after the straight handsome form, until it had mingled with the other
road-agents, who had camped upon the slope. Then she turned about, and
sat down on the couch beside Anita.

"You are still, dear," she said, stroking the other's long, unconfined
hair. "Are you lonely? If not why don't you say something?"

"I have nothing to say," replied Anita, a sad, sweet smile playing
over her features. "I have been too much taken up with the music to
think of talking."

"But, you are seldom talkative."

"So brother used to tell me. He said I had lost my heart, and tongue."

Redburn was drumming on the window-casing with his fingers;--a sort of
lonely tattoo it was.

"You seemed to be much interested in the outlaw. Miss Terry," he
observed, as if by chance the thought had just occurred to him, when,
in reality, he was downright jealous. "Had you two ever met--"

"Certainly not, sir," and Alice flashed him an inquiring glance. "Why
do you ask?"

"Oh! for no reason, in particular, only I fancied that song was meant
especially for him."

Redburn, afterward, would have given a hundred dollars to have
recalled those words, for the haughty, half-indignant look Alice gave
him instantly showed him he was on the wrong track.

If he wished to court her favor, it must be in a different way, and he
must not again give her a glimpse of his jealous nature.

"You spoke of a brother," said Alice, turning to Anita. "Does he live
here with you?"

"Yes, when not away on business. He has now been absent for over a
month."

"Indeed! Is he as sweet, sad, and silent as yourself?"

"Oh! no; Ned is unlike me; he is buoyant, cheerful, pleasant."

"Ned? What is his full name, dear?"

"Edward Harris."

Alice grew suddenly pale and speechless, as she remembered the
handsome young miner whom Fearless Frank had slain in the duel, just
outside of Deadwood. This, then, was his sister; and evidently she as
yet knew nothing of his sad fate.

"Do you know aught concerning Edward Harris?" Redburn asked, seeing
her agitation. Alice considered a moment.

"I do," she answered, at last. "This Fearless Frank, whom I came here
with, had a duel with a man, just above Deadwood, whose name was
Edward Harris!"

"My God;--and his fate--?"

"He was instantly killed, and left lying where he dropped!"

There was a scream of agony, just here, and a heavy fall.

Anita had fainted!


CHAPTER XIV.

THE TRANSIENT TRIUMPH.


Redburn sprung from his seat, ran over to her side, and raised her
tenderly in his arms.

"Poor thing!" he murmured, gazing into her pale, still face, "the
shock was too much for her. No wonder she fainted." He laid her on the
couch, and kept off the others who crowded around.

"Bring cold water!" he ordered, "and I will soon have her out of this
fit."

Alice hastened to obey, and Anita's face and hands were bathed in the
cooling liquid until she began to show signs of returning
consciousness.

"You may now give me the particulars of the affair," Redburn said,
rising and closing the door, for a chilly breeze was sweeping into the
cabin.

Alice proceeded to comply with his request by narrating what had
occurred and, as nearly as possible, what had been said. When she had
concluded, he gazed down for several moments thoughtfully into the
face of Anita. There was much yet that was beyond his powers of
comprehension--a knotty problem for which he saw no immediate
solution.

"What do you think about it, "General"?" he asked, turning to the
mine-locater. "Have we sufficient evidence to hang this devil in
scarlet?"

"Hardly, boyee, hardly. 'Peers te me, 'cordin' to ther gal's tell,
thet thar war a fair shake all around, an' as duelin' ar' more or less
ther fashun 'round these parts,--considera'bly more o' less 'n less o'
more--et ain't law-fell ter yank a critter up by ther throat!"

"I know it is not, according to the customs of this country of the
Black Hills; but, look at it. That fellow, who I am satisfied is a
black-hearted knave, has not only taken the life of poor Harris, but,
very probably, has given his sister her death-blow. The question is:
should he go unpunished in the face of all this evidence?"

"Yes. Let him go; _I_ will be the one to punish him!"

It was Anita who spoke. She had partly arisen on the couch; her face
was streaked with water and slightly haggard; her hair blew unconfined
about her neck and shoulders; her eyes blazed with a wild, almost
savage fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Let him go!" she repeated, more of fierceness in her voice than
Redburn had ever heard there, before. "He shall not escape my
vengeance. Oh, my poor, poor dead brother!"

She flung herself back upon the couch, and gave herself up to a wild,
passionate, uncontrollable outburst of tears and sobs--the wailings of
a sorrowing heart. For a long time she continued to weep and sob
violently; then came a lull, during which she fell asleep, from
exhaustion--a deep sleep. Redburn and Alice then carried her into an
adjoining room, where she was left under the latter's skillful care.
Awhile later the cabin was wrapped in silence.

When morning sunlight next peeped down into the Flower Pocket, it
found everything generally astir. Anita was up and pursuing her
household duties, but she was calm, now, even sadder than before,
making a strange contrast to blithe, gaysome Alice, who flitted about,
here and there, like some bright-winged butterfly surrounded by a halo
of perpetual sunshine.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unknown to any one save themselves, two men were within the valley of
the Flower Pocket gold-mines--there on business, and that business
meant bloodshed. They were secreted in among the foothills on the
western side of the flowering paradise, at a point where they were not
observed, and at the same time were the observers of all that was
going on in front of them.

How came they here, when the hand of Deadwood Dick guarded the only
accessible entrance there was to the valley? The answer was: they came
secretly through the pass on the night preceding the arrival of the
road-agents, and had been lying in close concealment ever since.

The one was an elderly man of portly figure, and the other a young,
dandyish fellow, evidently the elder's son, for they resembled each
other in every feature. We make no difficulty to recognizing them as
the same precious pair whom Outlaw Dick captured from the stage, only
to lose them again through the treachery of two of his own band.

Both looked considerably the worse for wear, and the gaunt, hungry
expression on their features, as the morning sunlight shone down upon
them, declared in a language more adequate than words, that they were
beginning to suffer the first pangs of starvation.

"We cannot hold out at this rate much longer!" the elder Filmore
cried, as he watched the bustle in the valley below. "I'm as empty as
a collapsed balloon, and what's more, we're in no prospects of
immediate relief."

Filmore, the younger, groaned aloud in agony of spirit.

"Curse the Black Hills and all who have been fools enough to inhabit
them, anyhow!" he growled, savagely; "just let me get back in the land
of civilization again, and you can bet your bottom dollar I'll know
enough to stay there."

"Bah! this little rough experience will do you good. If we only had a
square meal or two and a basket of sherry, I should feel quite at
home. Nothing but a fair prospect of increasing our individual
finances would ever have lured me into this outlandish place. But
money, you know, is the root of all--"

"Evil!" broke in the other, "and after three months' wild-goose-chase
you are just as destitute of the desired root as you were at first."

"True, but we have at least discovered one of the shrubs at the bottom
of which grows the root."

"You refer to Deadwood Dick?"

"I do. He is here in the valley, and he must never leave it alive.
While we have the chance we must strike the blow that will forever
silence his tongue."

"Yes; but what about the girl? She will be just as much in the way, if
not a good deal more so."

"We can manage her all right when the proper time arrives. Dick is our
game, now."

"He may prove altogether too much game. But, now that we are counting
eggs, how much of the 'lay' is to be mine, when this boy and girl are
finished?" he queried.

"How much? Well, that depends upon circumstances. The girl _may_ fall
to you."

"The girl? Bah! I'd rather be excused."

       *       *       *       *       *

The day passed without incident in the mines. The work went steadily
on, the sounds of the crusher making strange music for the mountain
echoes to mock.

Occasionally the crack of a rifle announced that either a road-agent
or a Ute miner had risked a shot at a mountain sheep, bird, or deer.
Generally their aim was attended with success, though sometimes they
were unable to procure the slaughtered game.

Redburn, on account of his clear-headedness and business tact, had
full charge of both mines, the "General" working under him in the
shaft, and Fearless Frank in the quartz mine.

When questioned about his duel with Harris by Redburn, McKenzie had
very little to say; he seemed pained when approached on the subject;
would answer no questions concerning the past; was reserved and at
times singularly haughty.

During the day Anita and Alice took a stroll through the valley, but
the latter had been warned, and fought shy of the quartz mine; so
there was no encounter between Anita and Fearless Frank.

Deadwood Dick joined them as they were returning to the cabin, loaded
down with flowers--flowers of almost every color and perfume.

"This is a beautiful day," he remarked, pulling up a daisy, as he
walked gracefully along. "One rarely sees so many beauties centered in
one little valley like this--beautiful landscape and mountain scenery,
beautiful flowers beneath smiling skies, and lovely women, the chief
center of attraction among all."

"Indeed!" and Alice gave him a coquettish smile; "you are flattering,
sir road-agent. You, at least, are not beautiful, in that horrible
black suit and villainous mask. You remind me of a picture I have seen
somewhere of the devil in disguise; all that is lacking is the horns,
tail and cloven-foot."

Dick broke out into a burst of laughter--it was one of those wild,
terrible laughs of his, so peculiar to hear from one who was evidently
young in years.

Both of the girls were terrified, and would have fled had he not
detained them.

"Ha, ha!" he said, stepping in front of them, "do not be frightened;
don't go, ladies. That's only the way I express my amusement at
anything."

"Then, for mercy's sake, don't get amused again," said Alice,
deprecatingly. "Why, dear me, I thought the Old Nick and all his
couriers had pounced down upon us."

"Well, how do you know but what he has? _I_ may be his Satanic
majesty, or one of his envoys."

"I hardly think so; you are too much an earthly being for that. Come,
now, take off that detestable mask and let me see what you look like."

"No, indeed! I would not remove this mask, except on conditions, for
all the gold yon toiling miners are finding, which, I am satisfied, is
no small amount."

"You spoke of conditions. What are they?"

"Some time, perhaps, I will tell you, lady, but not now. See! my men
are signaling to me, and I must go. Adieu, ladies;" and in another
moment he had wheeled, and was striding back toward camp.

In their concealment the two Filmores witnessed this meeting between
Dick and the two girls.

"So there are females here, eh?" grunted the elder, musingly. "From
observation I should say that Prince Dick was a comparative stranger
here."

"That is my opinion," groaned Clarence, his thoughts reverting to his
empty stomach. "Did you hear that laugh a moment ago? It was more like
the screech of a lunatic than anything else."

"Yes; he is a young tiger. There is no doubt of that to my mind."

"And we shall have to keep on the alert to take him. He came to the
cabin last night. If he does to-night we can mount him!"

Before night the elder Filmore succeeded in capturing a wild goose
that had strayed down with the stream from somewhere above. This was
killed, dressed and half cooked by a brushwood fire which they
hazarded in a fissure in the hillside whereto they had hidden. This
fowl they almost ravenously devoured, and thus thoroughly satisfied
their appetites. They now felt a great deal better, ready for the work
in hand--of capturing and slaying the dare-devil Deadwood Dick.

As soon as it was dark they crept, like the prowling wolves they were,
down into the valley, and positioned themselves midway between the
cabin and the road-agent's camp, but several yards apart, with a lasso
held above the grass between them, to serve as a "trip-up."

The sky had become overcast with dense black clouds, and the gloom to
the valley was quite impenetrable. From their concealment the two
Filmores could hear Redburn, Alice and the "General" singing up at
the cabin, and it told them to be on their guard, as Dick might now
come along at any moment.

Slowly the minutes dragged by, and both were growing impatient, when
the firm tread of "the Prince" was heard swiftly approaching. Quickly
the lasso was drawn taut. Dick, not dreaming of the trap, came boldly
along, tripped, and went sprawling to the ground. The next instant his
enemies were on him, each with a long murderous knife in hand.


CHAPTER XV.

TO THE RESCUE!


The suddenness of the onslaught prevented Deadwood Dick from raising a
hand to defend himself, and the two strong men piling their combined
weights upon him, had the effect to render him utterly helpless. He
would have yelled to apprise his comrades of his fate, but Alexander
Filmore, ready for the emergency, quickly thrust a cob of wood into
his mouth, and bound it there with strong strings.

The young road-agent was a prisoner.

"Hal ha!" leered the elder Filmore, peering down into the masked
face--"ha! ha! my young eaglet; so I have you at last, have I? After
repeated efforts to get you in my power, I have at last been rewarded
with success, eh? Ha! ha! the terrible scourge of the Black Hills lies
here at my feet, mine to do with as I shall see fit."

"Shall we settle him, and leave him lying here, where his gang can
find him?" interrupted the younger Filmore, who, now that his blood
was up, cared little what he did. "You give him one jab, and I will
guarantee to finish him with the second!"

"No! no! boy; you are too hasty. Before we silence him, forever, we
must ascertain, if possible, where the girl is."

"But, he'll never tell us."

"We have that yet to find out. It is my opinion that we can bring him
to terms, somehow. Take hold, and we will carry him back to our hole
in the hill."

Deadwood Dick was accordingly seized by the neck and heels, and borne
swiftly and silently toward the western side of the gulch, up among
the foothills, into the rift, where the plotters had lain concealed
since their arrival. Here he was placed upon the ground in a sitting
posture, and his two enemies crouched on either side of him, like
beasts ready to spring upon their prey.

Below in the valley, the Utes had kindled one solitary fire, and this
with a starlike gleam of light from the cabin window, was the only
sign of life to be seen through the night's black shroud. The trio in
the foothills were evidently quite alone.

Alexander Filmore broke the silence.

"Well, my gay Deadwood Dick, Prince of the Road, I suppose you wish to
have the matter over with, as soon as possible"

The road-agent nodded.

"Better let him loose in the jaws," suggested Filmore the younger; "or
how else shall we get from him what we must know? Take out his gag.
I'll hold my six against his pulsometer. If he squawks, I'll silence
him, sure as there is virtue in powder and ball!"

The elder, after some deliberation, acquiesced, and Dick was placed in
possession of his speaking power, while the muzzle of young Filmore's
revolver pressed against his breast, warned him to silence and
obedience.

"Now," said the elder Filmore, "just you keep mum. If you try any
trickery, it will only hasten your destruction, which is inevitable!"

Deadwood Dick gave a little laugh.

"You talk as if you were going to do something toward making me the
center of funeralistic attraction."

"You'll find out, soon enough, young man. I have not pursued you so
long, all for nothing, you may rest assured. Your death will be the
only event that can atone for all the trouble you have given me, in
the past."

"_Is_ that so? Well, you seem to hold all the _trump_ cards, and I
reckon you ought to win, though I can't see into your inordinate
thirst for _diamonds_, when _spades_ will eventually triumph. Had I a
_full hand_ of _clubs_, I am not so sure but what I could _raise_ you,
_knaves_ though you are!"

"I think not; when kings win, the game is virtually up. We hold
altogether to high cards for you, at present, and _beg_ as you may, we
shall not _pass_ you."

"Don't be too sure of it. The best trout often slips from the hook,
when you are sanguine that you have at last been immoderately
successful. But, enough of this cheap talk. Go on and say your say, in
as few words as possible, for I am in a hurry."

Both Filmore, Sr., and Filmore, Jr., laughed at this--it sounded so
ridiculously funny to hear a helpless prisoner talk of being in a
hurry.

"Business must be pressing!" leered the elder, savagely. "Don't be at
all scared. We'll start you humming along the road to Jordan soon
enough, if that's what you want. First, however, we desire you to
inform us where we can find the girl, as we wish to make a clean
sweep, while we are about it."

"Do you bathe your face in alum-water?" abruptly asked the road-agent,
staring at his captor, quizzically. "Do you?"

"Bathe in _alum_-water? Certainly not, sir. Why do you ask?"

"Because the hardness of you cheek is highly suggestive of the use of
some similar application."

Alexander Filmore stared at his son a moment, at loss to comprehend;
but, as it began to dawn upon him that he was the butt of a hard hit,
he uttered a frightful curse.

"My cheek and your character bear a close resemblance, then!" he
retorted, hotly. "Again I ask you, will you tell me where the girl
is?"

"No! you must take me for an ornery mule, or some other kind of an
animal, if you think I would deliver her into _your_ clutches. No! no!
my scheming knaves, I will not. Kill me if you like, but it will not
accomplish your villainous ends. She has all of the papers, and can
not only put herself forward at the right time, but can have you
arrested for my murder!"

"Bah! we can find her, as we have found you; so we will not trifle.
Clarence, get ready; and when I count one--two--three--pull the
trigger, and I'll finish him with my knife!"

"All right; go ahead; I'm ready!" replied the dutiful son.

Fearless Frank sat upon a bowlder in the mouth of the quartz mine,
listening to the strains of music that floated up to him from the
cabin out in the valley, and puffing moodily away at a grimy old pipe
he had purchased, together with some tobacco, from one of the Utes,
with whom he worked.

He had not gone down to the crusher-house for his supper; he did not
feel hungry, and was more contented here, in the mouth of the mine,
where he could command a view of all that was going on in the valley.
With his pipe for a companion he was as happy as he could be, deprived
as he was from association with the others of his color, who had
barred him out in the cold.

Once or twice during the day, on coming from within, to get a breath
of pure air, he had caught a glimpse of Anita as she flitted about the
cabin engaged at her household duties, and the yearning expression
that unconsciously stole into his dark eyes, spoke of a passion within
his heart, that, though it might be slumbering, was not extinct--was
there all the same, in all its strength and ardor. Had he been granted
the privilege of meeting her, he might have displaced the barrier that
rose between them; but now, nothing remained for him but to toil away
until Redburn should see fit to send him away, back into the world
from which he came.

Would he want to go, when that time came? Hardly, he thought, as he
sat there and gazed into the quiet vale below him, so beautiful even
in darkness. There was no reason why he should go back again adrift
upon the bustling world.

He had no relatives--no claims that pointed him to go thither; he was
as free and unfettered as the wildest mountain eagle. He had no one to
say where he should and where he should not go; he liked one place
equally as well as another, providing there was plenty of provender
and work within easy range; he had never thought of settling down,
until now, when he had come to the Flower Pocket valley, and caught a
glimpse of Anita--Anita whom he had not seen for years; on whom he had
brought censure, reproach and--

A step among the rocks close at hand startled him from a reverie into
which he had fallen, and caused him to spill the tobacco from his
pipe.

A slight trim figure stood a few yards away, and he perceived that two
extended hands clasped objects, whose glistening surface suggested
that they were "sixes" or "sevens."

"Silence!" came in a clear, authoritative voice. "One word more than I
ask you, and I'll blow your brains out. Now, what's your name?"

"Justin McKenzie's my name. Fearless Frank generally answers me the
purpose of a nom de plume," was the reply.

"Very good," and the stranger drew near enough for the Scarlet Boy to
perceive that he was clad in buck-skin; well armed; wore a Spanish
sombrero, and hair long, down over the square shoulders. "I'm Calamity
Jane."

If McKenzie uttered an ejaculation of surprise, it was not to be
wondered at, for he had heard many stories, in Deadwood, concerning
the "dare-devil gal dressed up in men's toggery."

"Calamity Jane?" he echoed, picking up his pipe. "Where in the world
did _you_ come from, and how did you get here, and what do you want,
and--"

"One at a time, please. I came from Deadwood with Road-Agent Dick's
party--unknown to them, understand you. That answers two questions.
The third is, I want to be around when there's any fun going on; and
it's lucky I'm here now. I guess Dick has just got layed out by two
fellows in the valley below here, and they've slid off with him over
among the foot-hills yonder. I want you to stub along after me, and
lend the voices of your sixes, if need be. I'm going to set him at
liberty!"

"I'm at your service," Frank quickly replied. Excitement was one of
his passions; adventure was another.

"Are you well heeled?"

"I reckon. Always make it a point to be prepared for wild beasts and
the like, you know."

"A good idea. Well, if you are ready, we'll slide. I don't want them
toughs to get the drop on Dick if I can help it."

"Who are they?"

"Who--the toughs?"

"Yes; they that took the road-agent"

"I don't know 'm. Guess they're tender-foots--some former enemies of
his, without doubt. They propose to quiz a secret about some girl out
of him, and then knife him. We'll have to hurry or they'll get their
work in ahead of us."

They left the mouth of the mine, and skurried down into the valley,
through the dense shroud of gloom.

Calamity Jane led the way; she was both fleet of foot and cautious.

Let us look down on the foot-hill camp, and the two Fillmores who are
stationed on either side of their prisoner.

The younger presses the muzzle of his revolver against Deadwood Dick's
heart; the elder holds a long gleaming knife upheld in his right hand.

"One!" he counts, savagely.

"Two!"--after a momentary pause. Another lapse of time, and then--

"Hold! gentlemen; that will do!" cries a clear ringing voice; and
Calamity Jane and McKenzie, stepping out of the darkness, with four
gleaming "sixes" in hand, confirm the pleasant assertion!


CHAPTER XVI.

THE ROAD-AGENT'S MERCY--CONCLUSION.

