  Introduction                                               235
  Construction of the Medicine Lodge                         237
  First day                                                  237
    Personators of the gods                                  237
  Second day                                                 239
    Description of the sweat houses                          239
    Sweat houses and masks                                   242
    Preparation of the sacred reeds (cigarettes)
        and prayer-sticks                                    242
  Third day                                                  244
    First ceremony                                           244
    Second ceremony                                          245
    Third ceremony                                           247
    Fourth ceremony (night)                                  248
  Fourth day                                                 249
    First ceremony                                           249
    Second ceremony                                          250
    Third ceremony                                           250
    Fourth ceremony                                          252
    Fifth ceremony                                           253
    Sixth ceremony                                           253
    Foods brought into the lodge                             256
  Fifth day                                                  257
    First ceremony                                           257
    Second ceremony                                          259
    Third ceremony                                           260
  Sixth day                                                  261
  Seventh day                                                263
  Eighth day                                                 265
  Ninth day                                                  269
    First ceremony                                           269
    Second ceremony                                          270
      Song of the Etsethle                                   272
      Prayer to the Etsethle                                 272
    Conclusion--the dance                                    273
  Myths of the Navajo                                        275
    Creation of the sun                                      275
    Hasjelti and Hostjoghon                                  277
    The floating logs                                        278
    Naiyenesgony and Tobaidischinni                          279
    The brothers                                             280
    The old man and woman of the first world                 284


ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                              Page.
   Plate I. Map of the provinces of Tusayan and Cibola          12
        II. Old Mashongnavi, plan                               14
       III. General view of Awatubi                             16
        IV. Awatubi (Talla-Hogan), plan                         18
         V. Standing walls of Awatubi                           20
        VI. Adobe fragment in Awatubi                           22
       VII. Horn House ruin, plan                               24
      VIII. Bat House                                           26
        IX. Mishiptonga (Jeditoh)                               28
         X. A small ruin near Moen-kopi                         30
        XI. Masonry on the outer wall of the Fire-House,
              detail                                            32
       XII. Chukubi, plan                                       34
      XIII. Payupki, plan                                       36
       XIV. General view of Payupki                             38
        XV. Standing walls of Payupki                           40
       XVI. Plan of Hano                                        42
      XVII. View of Hano                                        44
     XVIII. Plan of Sichumovi                                   46
       XIX. View of Sichumovi                                   48
        XX. Plan of Walpi                                       50
       XXI. View of Walpi                                       52
      XXII. South passageway of Walpi                           54
     XXIII. Houses built over irregular sites, Walpi            56
      XXIV. Dance rock and kiva, Walpi                          58
       XXV. Foot trail to Walpi                                 60
      XXVI. Mashongnavi, plan                                   62
     XXVII. Mashongnavi with Shupaulovi in distance             64
    XXVIII. Back wall of a Mashongnavi house-row                66
      XXIX. West side of a principal row in Mashongnavi         68
       XXX. Plan of Shupaulovi                                  70
      XXXI. View of Shupaulovi                                  72
     XXXII. A covered passageway of Shupaulovi                  74
    XXXIII. The chief kiva of Shupaulovi                        76
     XXXIV. Plan of Shumopavi                                   78
      XXXV. View of Shumopavi                                   80
     XXXVI. Oraibi, plan                                 In pocket.
    XXXVII. Key to the Oraibi plan, also showing
              localization of gentes                            82
   XXXVIII. A court of Oraibi                                   84
     XXXIX. Masonry terraces of Oraibi                          86
        XL. Oraibi house row, showing court side                88
       XLI. Back of Oraibi house row                            90
      XLII. The site of Moen-kopi                               92
     XLIII. Plan of Moen-kopi                                   94
      XLIV. Moen-kopi                                           96
       XLV. The Mormon mill at Moen-kopi                        98
      XLVI. Hawikuh, plan                                      100
     XLVII. Hawikuh, view                                      102
    XLVIII. Adobe church at Hawikuh                            104
      XLIX. Ketchipanan, plan                                  106
         L. Ketchipauan                                        108
        LI. Stone church at Ketchipauan                        110
       LII. K'iakima, plan                                     112
      LIII. Site of K'iakima, at base of Tâaaiyalana           114
       LIV. Recent wall at K'iakima                            116
        LV. Matsaki, plan                                      118
       LVI. Standing wall at Pinawa                            120
      LVII. Halona excavations as seen from Zuñi               122
     LVIII. Fragments of Halona wall                           124
       LIX. The mesa of Tâaaiyalana, from Zuñi                 126
        LX. Tâaaiyalana, plan                                  128
       LXI. Standing walls of Tâaaiyalana ruins                130
      LXII. Remains of a reservoir on Tâaaiyalana              132
     LXIII. Kin-tiel, plan (also showing excavations)          134
      LXIV. North wall of Kin-tiel                             136
       LXV. Standing walls of Kin-tiel                         138
      LXVI. Kinna-Zinde                                        140
     LXVII. Nutria, plan                                       142
    LXVIII. Nutria, view                                       144
      LXIX. Pescado, plan                                      146
       LXX. Court view of Pescado, showing corrals             148
      LXXI. Pescado houses                                     150
     LXXII. Fragments of ancient masonry in Pescado            152
    LXXIII. Ojo Caliente, plan                           In pocket.
     LXXIV. General view of Ojo Caliente                       154
      LXXV. House at Ojo Caliente                              156
     LXXVI. Zuñi, plan                                   In pocket.
    LXXVII. Outline plan of Zuñi, showing distribution
              of oblique openings                              158
   LXXVIII. General inside view of Zuñi, looking west          160
     LXXIX. Zuñi terraces                                      162
      LXXX. Old adobe church of Zuñi                           164
     LXXXI. Eastern rows of Zuñi                               166
    LXXXII. A Zuñi court                                       168
   LXXXIII. A Zuñi small house                                 170
    LXXXIV. A house-building at Oraibi                         172
     LXXXV. A Tusayan interior                                 174
    LXXXVI. A Zuñi interior                                    176
   LXXXVII. A kiva hatchway of Tusayan                         178
  LXXXVIII. North kivas of Shumopavi, from the northeast       180
    LXXXIX. Masonry in the north wing of Kin-tiel              182
        XC. Adobe garden walls near Zuñi.                      184
       XCI. A group of stone corrals near Oraibi               186
      XCII. An inclosing wall of upright stones at
              Ojo Caliente                                     188
     XCIII. Upright blocks of sandstone built into an
              ancient pueblo wall                              190
      XCIV. Ancient wall of upright rocks in southwestern
              Colorado                                         192
       XCV. Ancient floor-beams at Kin-tiel                    194
      XCVI. Adobe walls in Zuñi                                196
     XCVII. Wall coping and oven at Zuñi                       198
    XCVIII. Cross-pieces on Zuñi ladders                       200
      XCIX. Outside steps at Pescado                           202
         C. An excavated room at Kin-tiel                      204
        CI. Masonry chimneys of Zuñi                           206
       CII. Remains of a gateway in Awatubi                    208
      CIII. Ancient gateway, Kin-tiel                          210
       CIV. A covered passageway in Mashongnavi                212
        CV. Small square openings in Pueblo Bonito             214
       CVI. Sealed openings in a detached house of Nutria      216
      CVII. Partial filling-in of a large opening in
              Oraibi, converting it into a doorway             218
     CVIII. Large openings reduced to small windows, Oraibi    220
       CIX. Stone corrals and kiva of Mashongnavi              222
        CX. Portion of a corral in Pescado                     224
       CXI. Zuñi eagle-cage                                    226
      CXII. A, Rainbow over eastern sweat house;
              B, Rainbow over western sweat house              240
     CXIII. Blanket rug and medicine tubes                     242
      CXIV. Blanket rug and medicine tubes                     244
       CXV. Masks: 1, Naiyenesyong; 2, 3, Tobaidischinne;
              4, 5, Hasjelti; 6, Hostjoghon; 7, Hostjobokon;
              8, Hostjoboard                                   246
      CXVI. Blanket rug and medicine tubes                     248
     CXVII. 1, Pine boughs on sand bed; 2, Apache basket
              containing yucca suds lined with corn pollen;
              3, Basket of water surface covered with pine
              needles                                          250
    CXVIII. Blanket rug and medicine tubes and sticks          252
      CXIX. Blanket rug and medicine tube                      258
       CXX. First sand painting                                260
      CXXI. Second sand painting                               262
     CXXII. Third sand painting                                264
    CXXIII. Fourth sand painting                               266


                                                              Page.
Fig. 1. View of the First Mesa                                  43
     2. Ruins, Old Walpi mound                                  47
     3. Ruin between Bat House and Horn House                   51
     4. Ruin near Moen-kopi, plan                               53
     5. Ruin 7 miles north of Oraibi                            55
     6. Ruin 14 miles north of Oraibi (Kwaituki)                56
     7. Oval fire-house ruin, plan. (Tebugkihu)                 58
     8. Topography of the site of Walpi                         64
     9. Mashongnavi and Shupaulovi from Shumopavi               66
    10. Diagram showing growth of Mashongnavi                   67
    11. Diagram showing growth of Mashongnavi                   68
    12. Diagram showing growth of Mashongnavi                   69
    13. Topography of the site of Shupaulovi                    71
    14. Court kiva of Shumopavi                                 75
    15. Hampassawan, plan                                       84
    16. Pinawa, plan                                            87
    17. Nutria, plan; small diagram, old wall                   94
    18. Pescado, plan, old wall diagram                         95
    19. A Tusayan wood-rack                                    103
    20. Interior ground plan of a Tusayan room                 108
    21. North kivas of Shumopavi from the southwest            114
    22. Ground plan of the chief-kiva of Shupaulovi            122
    23. Ceiling-plan of the chief-kiva of Shupaulovi           123
    24. Interior view of a Tusayan kiva                        124
    25. Ground-plan of a Shupaulovi kiva                       125
    26. Ceiling-plan of a Shupaulovi kiva                      125
    27. Ground-plan of the chief-kiva of Mashongnavi           126
    28. Interior view of a kiva hatchway in Tusayan            127
    29. Mat used in closing the entrance of Tusayan kivas      128
    30. Rectangular sipapuh in a Mashongnavi kiva              131
    31. Loom-post in kiva floor at Tusayan                     132
    32. A Zuñi chimney showing pottery fragments embedded in
          its adobe base                                       139
    33. A Zuñi oven with pottery scales embedded in
          its surface                                          139
    34. Stone wedges of Zuñi masonry exposed in a
          rain-washed wall                                     141
    35. An unplastered house wall in Ojo Caliente              142
    36. Wall decorations in Mashongnavi, executed in pink
          on a white ground                                    146
    37. Diagram of Zuñi roof construction                      149
    38. Showing abutment of smaller roof-beams over
          round girders                                        151
    39. Single stone roof-drains                               153
    40. Trough roof-drains of stone                            153
    41. Wooden roof-drains                                     154
    42. Curved roof-drains of stone in Tusayan                 154
    43. Tusayan roof-drains; a discarded metate and a gourd    155
    44. Zuñi roof-drain, with splash-stones on roof below      156
    45. A modern notched ladder in Oraibi                      157
    46. Tusayan notched ladders from Mashongnavi               157
    47. Aboriginal American forms of ladder                    158
    48. Stone steps at Oraibi with platform at corner          161
    49. Stone steps, with platform at chimney, in Oraibi       161
    50. Stone steps in Shumopavi                               162
    51. A series of cooking pits in Mashongnavi                163
    52. Pi-gummi ovens of Mashongnavi                          163
    53. Cross sections of pi-gummi ovens of Mashongnavi        163
    54. Diagrams showing foundation stones of a Zuñi oven      164
    55. Dome-shaped oven on a plinth of masonry                165
    56. Oven in Pescado exposing stones of masonry             166
    57. Oven in Pescado exposing stones of masonry             166
    58. Shrines in Mashongnavi                                 167
    59. A poultry house in Sichumovi resembling an oven        167
    60. Ground-plan of an excavated room in Kin-tiel           168
    61. A corner chimney-hood with two supporting poles,
          Tusayan                                              170
    62. A curved chimney-hood of Mashongnavi                   170
    63. A Mashongnavi chimney-hood and walled-up fireplace     171
    64. A chimney-hood of Shupaulovi                           172
    65. A semi-detached square chimney-hood of Zuñi            172
    66. Unplastered Zuñi chimney-hoods,
          illustrating construction                            173
    67. A fireplace and mantel in Sichumovi                    174
    68. A second-story fireplace in Mashongnavi                174
    69. Piki stone and chimney-hood in Sichumovi               175
    70. Piki stone and primitive andiron in Shumopavi          176
    71. A terrace fireplace and chimney of Shumopavi           177
    72. A terrace cooking-pit and chimney of Walpi             177
    73. A ground cooking-pit of Shumopavi covered with
          a chimney                                            178
    74. Tusayan chimneys                                       179
    75. A barred Zuñi door                                     183
    76. Wooden pivot hinges of a Zuñi door                     184
    77. Paneled wooden doors in Hano                           185
    78. Framing of a Zuñi door panel                           186
    79. Rude transoms over Tusayan openings                    188
    80. A large Tusayan doorway, with small transom openings   189
    81. A doorway and double transom in Walpi                  189
    82. An ancient doorway in a Canyon de Chelly cliff ruin    190
    83. A symmetrical notched doorway in Mashongnavi           190
    84. A Tusayan notched doorway                              191
    85. A large Tusayan doorway with one notched jamb          192
    86. An ancient circular doorway, or "stone-close,"
          in Kin-tiel                                          193
    87. Diagram illustrating symmetrical arrangement of
          small openings in Pueblo Bonito                      195
    88. Incised decoration on a rude window-sash in Zuñi       196
    89. Sloping selenite window at base of Zuñi wall
          on upper terrace                                     197
    90. A Zuñi window glazed with selenite                     197
    91. Small openings in the back wall of a Zuñi
          house cluster                                        198
    92. Sealed openings in Tusayan                             199
    93. A Zuñi doorway converted into a window                 201
    94. Zuñi roof-openings                                     202
    95. A Zuñi roof-opening with raised coping                 203
    96. Zuñi roof-openings with one raised end                 203
    97. A Zuñi roof-hole with cover                            204
    98. Kiva trap-door in Zuñi                                 205
    99. Halved and pinned trap-door frame of a Zuñi kiva       206
   100. Typical sections of Zuñi oblique openings              208
   101. Arrangement of mealing stones in a Tusayan house       209
   102. A Tusayan grain bin                                    210
   103. A Zuñi plume-box                                       210
   104. A Zuñi plume-box                                       210
   105. A Tusayan mealing trough                               211
   106. An ancient pueblo form of metate                       211
   107. Zuñi stools                                            213
   108. A Zuñi chair                                           213
   109. Construction of a Zuñi corral                          215
   110. Gardens of Zuñi                                        216
   111. "Kishoni," or uncovered shade, of Tusayan              218
   112. A Tusayan field shelter, from southwest                219
   113. A Tusayan field shelter, from northeast                219
   114. Diagram showing ideal section of terraces,
          with Tusayan names                                   223
   115. Exterior lodge                                         236
   116. Interior lodge                                         237
   117. Gaming ring                                            238
   118. Sweat house                                            240


       *       *       *       *       *

            REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR.

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL.


  Smithsonian Institution,
  Bureau of Ethnology,
  _Washington, D.C., October 1, 1887_.

SIR: I have the honor to submit my Eighth Annual Report as Director of
the Bureau of Ethnology.

The first part presents an explanation of the plan and operations of
the Bureau; the second consists of a series of papers on anthropologic
subjects, prepared by my assistants to illustrate the methods and
results of the work of the Bureau.

I desire to express my thanks for your earnest support and your wise
counsel relating to the work under my charge.

I am, with respect, your obedient servant,


[Signature:] J. W. Powell


  Prof. S. P. LANGLEY,
    _Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution._


       *       *       *       *       *

              EIGHTH ANNUAL REPORT

                     of the

              BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY.

           By J. W. POWELL, Director.

       *       *       *       *       *


INTRODUCTION.


The prosecution of research among the North American Indians, as
directed by act of Congress, was continued during the fiscal year
1886-'87.

The general plan upon which the work has been prosecuted has been
explained in former reports and has not been changed. After certain
lines of investigation had been decided upon, they were confided to
persons trained in their pursuit, with the intention that the results of
their labors, when completed or well advanced, should be presented from
time to time in the publications of the Bureau provided for by law.
A brief statement of the work upon which each one of the special
students was actively engaged during the fiscal year is furnished below,
but this statement does not embrace all the studies undertaken or
services rendered by them, since particular lines of research have been
suspended in this, as in former years, in order to prosecute unto
substantial completeness work regarded as of paramount importance. From
this cause delays have been occasioned in the completion of several
treatises and monographs, already partly in type, which otherwise would
have been published.

Invitation is renewed for the assistance of explorers, writers, and
students who are not and may not desire to be officially connected with
the Bureau. Their contributions, whether in the shape of suggestions or
of extended communications, will be gratefully acknowledged, and will
always receive proper credit if published either in the series of
reports or in monographs or bulletins, as the liberality of Congress may
in future allow.

The items now reported upon are presented in three principal divisions.
The first relates to the publication made; the second, to the work
prosecuted in the field; and the third, to the office work, which
largely consists of the preparation for publication of the results of
field work, with the corrections and additions obtained from the
literature relating to the subjects discussed and by correspondence.


PUBLICATION.


The only publication actually issued during the year was the Fourth
Animal Report of the Bureau of Ethnology to the Smithsonian Institution,
1882-'83. It is an imperial octavo volume of lxiii + 532 pages,
illustrated by 83 plates, of which 11 are colored, and 564 figures in
the text. The official report of the Director, occupying 39 pages
(pp. xxv-lxiii), is accompanied by the following papers:

Pictographs of the North American Indians, a preliminary paper, by
Garrick Mallery; pp. 3-256, Pls. I-LXXXIII, Figs. 1-209.

Pottery of the Ancient Pueblos, by William H. Holmes; pp. 257-360, Figs.
210-360.

Ancient Pottery of the Mississippi Valley, by William H. Holmes; pp.
361-436, Figs. 361-463.

Origin and Development of Form and Ornament in Ceramic Art, by William
H. Holmes; pp. 437-465, Figs. 464-489.

A Study of Pueblo Pottery, as illustrative of Zuñi culture growth, by
Frank Hamilton Cushing; pp. 467-521, Figs. 490-564.


FIELD WORK.


The field work of the year is divided into (1) mound explorations and
(2) general field studies, embracing those relating to social customs,
institutions, linguistics, pictography, and other divisions of
anthropology.


MOUND EXPLORATIONS.

WORK OF PROF. CYRUS THOMAS.

The work of exploring the mounds of the eastern United States was, as in
previous years, under the charge of Prof. Cyrus Thomas.

Although Prof. Thomas and his assistants have devoted a large portion of
the year to the study of the collections made in the division of mound
exploration and to the preparation of a report of its operations for the
last five years, yet some field work of importance has been done.

Prof. Thomas in person examined the more important ancient works of New
York and Ohio. He gave special attention to the latter, with a view of
determining where new and more accurate descriptions, surveys, and
illustrations were necessary. It was found requisite to undertake a
careful resurvey and description of a number of the well known works in
Ohio. This reexamination was the more necessary in view of the light
shed on the origin and use of these monuments by the explorations which
had been carried on in West Virginia, western North Carolina, and
eastern Tennessee.

Mr. J. P. Rogan continued his work as assistant until the close of
November, when he voluntarily resigned his position to enter upon other
engagements. A portion of his time during the first month was occupied
in arranging and preparing for shipment the collection purchased of Mrs.
McGlashan, in Savannah, Georgia. The rest of his time was employed in
exploring mounds along the upper Savannah River in Georgia and South
Carolina and along the lower Yazoo River in Mississippi.

Mr. J. W. Emmert continued to act as field assistant until the end of
February, when the field work closed. His labors, with the exception of
a short visit to central New York, were confined to eastern Tennessee,
chiefly Blount, Monroe, and Loudon counties, where numerous extensive
and very interesting groups are found in the section formerly occupied
by the Cherokees. Prof. Thomas thought it necessary to devote
considerable attention to the ancient works of that region, as it is
probable that there and in western North Carolina is to be found the key
that will materially assist in solving the problem of the peculiar works
of Ohio. The results of these explorations are of unusual interest,
independent of their supposed bearing on the Ohio mounds.

Mr. James D. Middleton, who has been a constant assistant in the
division since its organization, after completing some investigations
begun in southern Illinois, visited western Kentucky for the purpose of
investigating the works of that section, but was soon afterwards called
to Washington to take part in the office work. During the month of June
he visited and made a thorough survey of the extensive group of works
near Charleston, West Virginia, of which Colonel Norris had made a
partial exploration, the latter having been prevented from completing it
by the sickness which immediately preceded his death. During the same
month Mr. Middleton commenced the survey of the Ohio works before
alluded to, obtaining some valuable results in the short time before the
close of the year.

Mr. Gerard Fowke was also engaged for a short time in field work in
western Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Kentucky, but was called early in autumn
to Washington to assist in office work.


GENERAL FIELD STUDIES.

WORK OF MR. A. S. GATSCHET.

During October and December Mr. Albert S. Gatschet was engaged in
gathering historic and linguistic data in Louisiana, Texas, and the
portion of Mexico adjoining the Rio Grande, which region contains the
remnants of a number of tribes whose language and linguistic affinity
are practically unknown. After a long search Mr. Gatschet found a small
settlement of Biloxi Indians at Indian Creek, five or six miles west of
Lecompte, Rapides Parish, Louisiana, where they gain a livelihood as day
laborers. Most of them speak English more than their native tongue; in
fact, about two-thirds of the thirty-two survivors speak English only.
The vocabulary obtained by him discloses the interesting fact that the
Biloxi belong to the Siouan linguistic family.

He heard of about twenty-five of the Tunika tribe still living in their
old homes on the Marksville Prairie, Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana. An
excellent vocabulary was obtained of their language at Lecompte,
Louisiana, and a careful comparison of this with other Indian languages
shows that the Tunika is related to none, but represents a distinct
linguistic family. He was unable to collect any information in regard to
the Karankawa tribe, concerning which little is known except that they
lived upon the Texan coast near Lavaca Bay.

Leaving Laredo County, Texas, he visited Camargo, in Tamaulipas, Mexico,
finding near San Miguel the remnants of the Comecrudo tribe, or, as they
are called by the whites, Carrizos. Only the older men and women still
remember their language. The full-blood Comecrudos seen were tall and
thin, some of them with fairer complexions than the Mexicans.
Subsequently the Cotoname language, formerly spoken in the same
district, was studied and found to be a distinctly related dialect of
Comecrudo. Both of them belong to the Coahuiltecan family. From the
Comecrudo Mr. Gatschet obtained the names of a number of extinct tribes
which formerly lived in their vicinity, but of which no representatives
are left. These are the Casas Chiquitas, Tejones (or "Raccoons"), Pintos
or Pakawas, Miakkan, and Cartujanos. He next visited the Tlaskaltec
Indians, who live in the city of Saltillo. Of these Indians about two
hundred still speak their own language, which is almost identical with
the Aztec, although largely mixed with Spanish.

WORK OF MR. JEREMIAH CURTIN.

Mr. Jeremiah Curtin was engaged from the middle of March to June 1 in
completing investigations begun the previous year into the history,
myths, and language of the Iroquois Indians at Versailles, Cattaraugus
County, New York. The material obtained by him is of great interest and
value.

WORK OF DR. W. J. HOFFMAN.

Dr. W. J. Hoffman proceeded early in August to Paint Rock, North
Carolina, to secure sketches of pictographs upon the canyon walls of the
French Broad River near that place. Owing to disintegration of the
sandstone rocks, the painted outlines of animals and other figures are
becoming slowly obliterated, though sufficient remained to show their
similarity to others in various portions of the region which it is
believed was occupied by the Cherokee Indians. Similar outlines were
reported to have been formerly visible on the same river, as well as on
the Tennessee, near Knoxville, Tennessee, though no traces of them were
found.

The next place visited was a few miles distant from and northwest of
Liberty, Tazewell County, Virginia, where some painted characters still
remain in a good state of preservation. They are on the sandstone cliffs
near the summit of the mountains and consist of human figures, birds,
and other forms, appearing to resemble artistically those of North
Carolina. Five miles eastward, on the same range, is a single
diamond-shaped cluster of red and black marks, no other forms being
visible. This rock is known in the surrounding country as the
"Handkerchief Rock," because of its resemblance to an outspread colored
handkerchief. He then proceeded to Charleston, West Virginia, obtaining
copies of petroglyphs on Big Horse Creek, 12 miles southwest of that
place, and at several points along the Kanawha River. It was learned
that 20 miles south of Charleston, on the reputed trail leading from the
Kanawha Valley into Kentucky, "painted trees" formerly marked the
direction of the trails leading into the Cherokee country, and into
Kentucky. These trees bore various marks in red, but no accurate
information pertaining to the precise form of the characters could be
ascertained. At the other points mentioned characters were noticed
resembling in general those found in other portions of the Eastern and
Middle States known to have been occupied by tribes of the Algonquian
linguistic family.

The "Indian God-Rock," 115 miles north of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, on
the Alleghany River, was next examined and sketches were made of the
figures. This rock is an immense bowlder, the sculptured face of which
is about 15 feet high and from 8 to 10 feet broad, and lies at the
water's edge. The figures upon the lower surface are being gradually
obliterated by erosion from floating logs and driftwood during seasons
of high water, while those upon the upper portions are being ruined by
the visitors who cut names and dates over and upon the sculptured
surfaces. Another place visited was on the Susquehanna River, 3 miles
below Columbia, Pennsylvania. Here a small stream empties into the river
from the east, along whose course several rocks were found bearing
deeply cut and polished grooves, indicating a nearly east and west
direction. These rocks are believed to be on the line of one of the
Indian trails leading to the Delaware River, similar to that at
Conowingo, Maryland, which was the last locality inspected, and which is
known as "Bald Friar." A large mass of rock projecting from the bed of
the river is almost covered with numerous circles, cup-shaped
depressions, human forms, and ellipses, strongly resembling characters
from other points in the regions formerly occupied by the Algonquian
family. Measurements and sketches of these petroglyphs were made, with a
view to future reproduction upon models.


OFFICE WORK.


The Director, Maj. J. W. POWELL, has continued the work of the
linguistic classification of the Indian tribes in North America north of
Mexico, and in connection with it is preparing a map upon a linguistic
basis showing the original habitat of the tribes. The work is now far
advanced.

