We all had our pleasant morning dreams, he said, but they usually
disappeared after we had had our cold bath; and the country, which was
no longer rich, but poor, must take its douche. His own dream is of a
beautifully centralised control, directing all our traffic agencies
(save tramways and shipping) into the most convenient channels; and he
won't be happy till he gets it. But judging by some of the speeches
that followed he too may have a frigid disillusionment when the Bill
comes up against the "interests" in Committee. Mr. T.P. O'CONNOR,
on behalf of Liverpool, described it as the product of "an old
bureaucracy and a young Parliamentarian," and Mr. RENWICK declared
that, if it passed, the Manchester Ship Canal would be "between
the devil and the deep sea," surely an uncalled-for attack on
Cottonopolis.

Upon the adjournment, Col. CLAUDE LOWTHER again raised the question of
the payment of German indemnities, and Mr. BONAR LAW again declared
that the policy of the Government was to demand the largest amount
that Germany could pay, but not to demand what we knew she couldn't
pay. It would have saved him a lot of trouble if at the General
Election the Government spokesmen had insisted as much upon the second
half of the policy as they did upon the first.

_Tuesday, March 18th_.--GILBERT'S fanciful description of the "most
susceptible Chancellor" is justified by the way in which the present
occupant of the Woolsack and his predecessors vie with one another in
the endeavour to secure the favour of the fair sex. Today it was
Lord HALDANE'S turn to oblige, and he brought in a Bill to enable
Scotswomen to become Advocates and Law Agents. Lord HALSBURY'S
contribution to the work of feminine emancipation has not yet been
announced. The rumour that a deputation of ladies recently approached
him with a proposal that they should be eligible for judicial
office--"Scarlet and ermine are _so_ becoming"--and that he put them
off with the old joke about there being "enough old women on the Bench
already" is, of course, apocryphal.

Not infrequently in the official reports of the Lords' debates a
speech begins thus: "Lord ---- (_who was indistinctly heard_)." The
Commons' report might well adopt this salutary practice as a warning
to Members who persistently mumble, or who address their remarks to
the body of the House instead of to the SPEAKER. Ministers are the
worst offenders. One of them was asked this afternoon, for example,
whether the Judicial Adviser to the SULTAN had discouraged the use of
the English language in the Egyptian Courts, but all we could hear of
the _sotto voce_ conversation between him and his interrogator was
that "er--er--language--er--had--been--er--er--misunderstood."

Some savages, travellers tell us, are unable to count beyond five.
Some Ministers, on the other hand, show an inability to reckon except
in millions. Mr. CHURCHILL, when asked how many soldiers were not
receiving the recent increase of pay, remarked casually that the
numbers were "not so very great--half-a-million would cover them."
Happily these "sloppy statistics" (to recall a phrase used by Mr.
ASQUITH during the Tariff Reform controversy) do not appeal to the
FOOD-CONTROLLER. He, being invited to say whether the Government had
made "approximately £2,400,000" by the charge on cattle-sales, replied
that the amount was "approximately" £3,449,939; and we felt that he
was cut to the heart at not being able to give the odd shillings and
pence.

The renewed debate on the Transportation Bill revealed a good deal
of opposition. Roadmen thought it an excellent project for railways;
railwayman were all in favour of its being applied to docks; and
dockmen had no objection to its being tried on the roads. But none of
them wanted it for his own particular interest. Sir EDWARD CARSON'S
objections were both particular and general. Belfast would be ruined
if its port were controlled by "a nest of politicians" in Dublin, but
apart from that he doubted whether the promised economies would
be realised in any direction. Ministers were "gluttons for
centralisation," and would, he prophesied, incur the usual fate of
gluttons, acute indigestion.

Mr. BONAR LAW, while admitting that he himself would not have voted
for the Bill five years ago, declared that the War had made it
essential. That seemed to be the general opinion, for the second
reading was agreed to without a division.

_Wednesday, March 19th_.--Lord MALMESBURY, who has lately been the
victim of a burglary, attributed it to housebreakers having been
demobilised before policemen. Whether this was done on the ground that
they conducted "one man businesses," or because someone in Whitehall
assumed that the wielders of the centre-bit must be "pivotal," I do
not know, but an Army Order requiring Commanding Officers to keep
the balance even between criminals and coppers seems to be urgently
needed.

The Bishops were delighted to hear from Lord ERNLE that his department
includes a Hop-Controller, and are going to ask him to turn his
attention to the Jazz.

Museums could not be opened just yet, said Lord STANMORE, because some
eight thousand officials of various departments were at present lodged
in these buildings. To judge by the comments of the public Press,
there are several hundreds more who ought to be kept there.

_Thursday, March 20th_.--Lord WINTERTON wanted to know what the
Government was doing to counteract Mr. BERNARD SHAW'S alleged
anti-British propaganda in the United States. Mr. CECIL HARMSWORTH
thought Professor OMAN'S recent memorandum would prove a sufficient
counterblast. He had, however, no objection to adding Mr. SHAW'S
latest pamphlet to "the large budget of Shavian literature" already at
the Foreign Office, where, it is said, the clerks on night-duty like
to beguile their leisure with light fiction.

Late in the evening Mr. BONAR LAW announced the intentions of the
Government with regard to the coal industry. It would adopt Mr.
Justice SANKEY'S report, giving the men a large portion of their
demands. If the miners still persisted in striking--well, the State
would strike too, with all its might; otherwise there was an end of
government in this country. The cheers which greeted this statement
seriously annoyed Mr. JACK JONES, who sits for Silvertown, and
maintains the explosive reputation of his constituency.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE CROWN OF OLD KING COAL.

TRYING IT ON.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CROSSING-SWEEPER.

  Five years ago he swept the snow,
  Or the mud, or the dust or the leaves that blow,
    Or stood at the corner "dossing";
  Picking up rubbish and dangerous rind
  That careless people had left behind,
        He swept the crossing.

  And still he sweeps and clears the way
  In blizzard and mist and soaking spray,
    Out on the Channel tossing;
  Picking up mines of a devilish kind
  That unscrupulous people have left behind,
        He sweeps the crossing.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "COAL STRIKE POPSTONED."

    _Provincial Paper_.

Much the best thing to do with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

DRAMATISTS TO THE RESCUE.

In view of the theory developed by the Ministry of Reconstruction's
Sub-Committee on Organisation and Conditions of Domestic Service,
that "the attitude adopted by the Press and the Stage is usually an
unfortunate one, as servants are frequently represented as comic or
flippant characters, and are held up to ridicule," a meeting of our
leading dramatists was hastily convened last evening by Lady
HEADFORT (who, it will be remembered, is all for calling her maids
"Home-birds") to engage their sympathetic co-operation in aid of
mistresses, housekeepers and employers generally. What the stage
has taken away the stage must give back: that is Lady HEADFORT'S
contention. Not that the domestic problem will even then be settled;
there will probably still be difficulty in persuading W.A.A.C.s and
Land Women and Munitioners who have tasted blood to descend below
stairs again; but perhaps a little help will be forthcoming. Hence
this influential gathering.

Sir SQUIRE BANCROFT, who presided, said that the domestic problem
was one of great seriousness. Personally he rarely descended to the
servants' hall, but he did not pretend to be unaware of the usefulness
of such regions and of our dependence upon them. There must be give
and take. If the stage had been guilty of too much levity in its
portraiture of domestic servants, then, in the interests of all of us,
it must make what our lively neighbours call the _amende honorable_.

Sir JAMES BARRIE said that no one could hold him personally to blame.
His plays had always exhibited domestic servants in a most favourable
light. Not only was a butler the hero of _The Admirable Crichton_, a
maidservant the heroine of _A Kiss for Cinderella_ and a charwoman the
heroine of _The Old Lady Shows Her Medals_, but the actual authorship
of _Peter Pan_ was given to the smallest nursemaid on record.

Mr. SOMERSET MAUGHAM also claimed to be on the side of the home-birds.
Had he not in _Smith_ written a part of strong parlour-maid interest
for Miss MARIE LÖHR?

Mr. G.B. SHAW said that there was no need for the meeting at all,
because he was just putting the finishing touches to a witty drama
which would settle the whole question. In this play, which, he could
tell them on the best authority in the world, his own, was a work of
surpassing genius, the Irish Question, which had baffled statesmen and
philosophers for centuries, is settled once and for all by the wisdom
and presence of mind of a Kerry kitchenmaid.

The Chairman said that perhaps the meeting might as well proceed with
its discussion, since there was always the possibility that the run
of Mr. SHAW'S play might not equal that of his last, which, he
understood, had just been produced in New York and had come off almost
at once.

Mr. HENRY ARTHUR JONES said that if any branch of art could effect
social transformations it was the drama. Personally he looked upon the
stage as only one degree less powerful than the Senate and vastly more
serious than the Church. Its first duty was to instruct, elevate and
reform; to amuse was never its true function. Hence, if the dramatists
of the country cared to take up the task of remedying the servant
shortage, the matter would be quickly settled. But only, added the
speaker with extreme gravity, if the authors of the pernicious rubbish
known as _revue_ were first gagged and bound.

Mr. MAX PEMBERTON said that, although he had given up _revue_ writing
in favour of transforming farcical plays, he felt that he might make
an appeal to the authors of _revue_ (who often exceeded the audience
in number) to join in this very laudable campaign. Speaking as one of
the two-and-twenty Hippodromios, although no longer in that capacity,
he would appeal to his successors to paint life below stairs in such
resplendent hues that the desire instantly to take service would be
implanted in every female bosom.

Mr. ALFRED SUTRO, speaking at the moment not so much as a dramatist as
a man without a cook, said that he agreed heartily with the sentiments
of the gentleman who had just sat down.

Sir ARTHUR WING PINERO said that he was always willing to help worthy
causes and was as ready to write a play for the object in view as, not
long since, he had been to write one to encourage economy. But it was
useless unless the company chosen would co-operate. The dramatist did
not stand alone. So long as the ordinary stage idea of a parlourmaid
was a saucy nymph with a feather brush and very short skirts, so long
would dramatists strive in vain to exalt her calling. He was prepared
to do his best, but feared that the actors' traditions would prove too
strong.

Mr. WALTER MELVILLE said that he hoped nothing would be done to tamper
with such traditions as Sir ARTHUR complained of. It was the duty of a
stage servant to begin plays and to be funny. The curtain of a farce
should rise on a butler and a parlourmaid remarking on the fact that
master was suspiciously late last night; and the butler should be
amorous, bibulous and peculative, and the parlourmaid coy and trim.
Similarly, footmen should be haughty and drop their aitches, cooks
short-tempered, red and fat, and office-boys knowing and cheeky. The
public expected it, and the public ought to have it because the public
paid.

There being no further remarks, the meeting dispersed, the various
speakers returning sadly home to perform the household duties.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "EX-KAISER TO PAP THE PENALTY."

    _Sunday Paper_.

We always feared he would get off with a soft punishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:_Docker_ (_by way of concluding a heated argument with
Scotsman_). "WELL, GO UP THERE, THEN, AN' TALK TO YOUR BLINKIN'
SCOTCH PALS."]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR POPULAR GUIDES.

    "HOW INFLUENZA MAY BE SPREAD."

    _Headline in a Daily Paper_.

       *       *       *       *       *

A correspondent writes: "It may interest you to know that I recently
received the following statement from a provincial branch of a
floor-cloth company:--

    'Owing to some of the principal ingredients used in the
    manufacture of floor coverings having been taken over by the
    Ministry of Food, the price of the material is again advanced.'

Have you noticed it at all in your soup?"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HOUSE-HUNTER

Unless something is done for Higgins without delay the nation must
prepare to face a tremendous rise in the rate of mortality among
house-agents.

Soon after he came back from the War he began to adopt a threatening
attitude (as the police-court witnesses say) towards these gentlemen.
Recently he has gone beyond the threatening stage. If rumour can be
trusted, he has thrown at least six of them through their office
windows. He has taken a dislike to the whole tribe. They are, in his
opinion, a gang of criminals for whom no punishment could be too
severe, because they impose upon the public in general and Higgins in
particular, by continuing in business as if they were in a position to
let houses when, as a matter of fact, there are no houses for them to
let.

Higgins wants a house. Yes, incredible though it may sound, this man,
who for years has been content to dwell in a dug-out or consort with
creeping things in the confines of a canvas tent, and even on occasion
make his bed beneath the starry dome of heaven, with nothing in
between, has now developed a craving for a residence built of bricks
and mortar.

What is more, he expects the house-agents to find it for him, and,
since he considers the whole thing from the purely personal point of
view, their excuses for failing to do so are of no avail. The fact
that half a million other people want houses is nothing to him. He
ignores it. He believes that the house-agentry of the country has
hatched a gigantic conspiracy to keep him, Higgins, out of a home.

I have done _my_ best to put him out of his misery. After seeing the
poor wretch wear himself (and his boots) out in useless journeying to
and from the places where house-agents pretend to work I thought of a
scheme--not strictly original--for obtaining a house and presented it
to him without hope of reward.

"You are committing and error," I said.

