    "_MANUSCRIPT._--LOCKE'S (John, _an Attorney living at Publow, and
    father of the illustrious Metaphysician of the same name_) Common-Place
    Book, containing Matters (relating to the Hundreds of Chew, Chewton,
    Kainsham, Brewton, Catsashe, Norton Ferris, Horethorne, Froome,
    Wellowe, Whitstone, Wells Forum, Portbury, Bathe Forum, Winterstoke,
    Bempstone, Kilmersdon, Brent, Hartliffe and Bedminster, Hampton and
    Claverton, and Phillips Norton Liberties, Glaston, Queene Camell, &c.)
    of daily use to him as Court Keeper to Col. Alex. Popham, a Magistrate
    and Leader of Parliamentary Forces in Somersetsh., _variously dated
    from 1629 to 1655, all in the handwriting of the elder John
    Locke_,--also many entries by other hands of other matters, in the
    remaining leaves of the same volume, many of which are probably in the
    handwriting of the afterwards distinguished younger John Locke, _4to.
    original vellum wrapper, 12l. 12s._

    Contains:--

    Entries of Bailments and Bindings over of Prosecutors in cases of
    Felony which occurred in the neighbourhood of Pensford, for the Assizes
    at Bath, Taunton, Bridgewater, and Wells, 1630-31.

    Appointment at Bathe of Overseers of Woollen Cloth, 1631, for Chew,
    Dundry, Chewstoke, Ubley, Mids. Norton, Kainsham, Publow, Kelston,
    Mounton Coombe, Bathford, Bathwicke, Freshford, Weston, Froome, Rode,
    Beckington, Lullington, Berkley, Chew, Mells, and Leigh, Colsford,
    Hampton et Claverton, Batheaston, Charterhouse Hinton, with the names
    of the Overseers.

    Scotch Postures (Humorous).

    Names of the Tithings in the Hundreds of Chew, Chewton, and Kainsham.

    Abp. Usher on the Liturgie and Episcopall Government, 1640.

    The Sums of the Payment of each Tithing of the above hundreds of the
    1st of 15th and 10th of the Subsidy of 3-15ths and 10ths to K. James,
    to declare war against Spain, 1623-4.

    The Yearlie Proportion of the Severall Hundreds of the Easterne
    Division of the Countie towarde the releife of the Hospitall,
    1632.--Ditto, Westerne Division.

    The Yearlie Rate for the Maymed Soldiers of every Hundred and Libertie
    within this County of Somerset.

    The Rate of Kainsham Hundred, with the amount of each Parish.

    A Rate devised at Hinton in 1601, for the raising of 100 men for
    Ireland, with consent of the Bath Magistrates, and their names.

    The number and proportion of Shipping within Englande and Wales, to be
    made readie against Mar. 1, 1635.

    Hundred of Kainsham, Quarterlie Payment of each tithing to the
    Hospitalls and Maymed Soldiers.

    A Rate made at Pensford 23rd Sept., 1635, for the raising of 160l.
    {338}

    The Assizes holden at Bathe, 24th July, 1637, before the Right Honble.
    S. Fynch,--the Names of the Justices (among whom are John Stowell,
    Ralph Hopton, John Horner, Rob. Hopton, John Harington, &c.), and the
    Names of the Grand Jury.

    Subsidie 17th Charles:--A Particular how each Tithing within the
    Hundreds of Chew, Chewton, and Kainsham stands chardged, for the
    Reliefe of his Maties Army and the Northerne parte of the Kingdom,
    Thomas Hunt of Dundry, Collector.

    The Protestation by Order of Parliament, 5^o Maij, 1641,--with Jo.
    Locke's acceptance of the Protestation in the Parish Church of Publoe,
    3rd Apr., 1642.

    Kainsham:--The "Purblinde, Partiall, and Innovated Rate" of this Hund.,
    24th Sept., 1649.

    Kainsham Hund.--A Rate for Ship-money--with the Particulars of every
    Tithing, Parish, and Particular Person chardged--contains the name of
    every rateable person in the parishes of Burnet, Preston, Stanton Drew,
    Stanton Prior, Salford, Publoe, Marksbury, Chelworth, Shrubwell,
    Belluton, Compton Dando, Farmborrow, Chewton, Whitchurch, Charlton,
    Brislington, and Kainsham, with the amount of this celebrated tax
    assessed to each person.

    The Names of the Lords Lieutenants nominated by the Howse of Comons,
    1641.

    The Muster Roll of the Collonell Sir Rawfe Hopton, Knight, his Band of
    200 foote Soldiers, within the Eastern Division, and Regiment of the
    Countie of Somerset.--Bathe, xxi^o xxij^{do} Maij, 1639.--(Contains, a
    List of the Officers, "William Tynte," &c.--a list of bearers of Pikes,
    with the Names of the Soldiers and of the gentlemen or tithings for
    whom they serve,--also a similar list of the bearers of "Shott.")

    A list of Parishes in the Deaneries of Froome and Bedminster, with the
    name of the Clergyman of each, the arms supplied by him, and the Names
    of the men who bore them.

    A Rate for raising £41-00-03 per mensem, in the hund. of Kainsham, for
    Generall Fairfax Army, 1648.

    Several Papers relating to Differences concerning Rates between the In
    Hundred and Out Hundred of Kainsham.

    Particulars and Value of Feer's Tenement, in Belluton, now in the
    possession of Henry Stickland, given in by him this day, 24 Dec., 1655.

    Rente to my Landlord, Coll. Alex. Popham, out of the 3 Tenements I hold
    in Publoe, and the Lives thereon at the time of their obtaining, 1650.

    A Receipt for his Rente at Publoe, 3. 8bris & 11 Dec., 1638.

    _The above are in the handwriting of Jo. Locke, the elder; in another
    hand, on blank covers, left by the former, are_--Propositions on

      Philosophy:--Phisicke, Ethike, and Dialectike.
      De Providentia Dei et ad genus.
      De Prædestinatione.
      Propositiones Catholicæ.

    N.B. One of the later chapters of the Essay on the Human Understanding
    is treated under propositions nearly identical with the leaf of the MS.
    which is described in the preceding four lines.

      Copia Actus locationis Mensæ Dominicæ in Ecclesia S. Gregorij
          Civitatis London.
      Character of Drunkenness (_Rhyme_), &c. &c.

    At the end, in several hands, are various receipts: one in the elder
    Locke's handwriting, 'The Weapon Salve, and the use thereof, as it was
    sent unto mee as a most excellent and rare secret from my Cosin
    Alderman John Locke[5], of Bristoll, in his Letter, dat. 5^o Apr.
    1650,'--also 'To make Shineing Inke', signed 'J L: Ox:'

    On the last leaf is a record of the Births, Marriages and Deaths of the
    Locke Family, from 1603 to 1624, including that of John Locke, the
    father, 29 April, 1606."

[Footnote 5: High Sheriff of Bristol in 1626, and the Mayor of Bristol in
1641 who refused admittance to the royal forces. See Barrett and Seyer.]

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Defoe's Anticipations_ (Vol. iii., p. 287.).--Defoe had probably seen the
English translation, or rather abridgment, of Father Dos Santos's _Ethiopia
Oriental_, in Purchas's _Pilgrimes_ (vol. ii. 1544, fol. ed.), in which
some hints are given of the great lake (nyassi, _i. e._ sea) Maravi, which
lies nearly parallel with the eastern coast, and was known to D'Anville, in
whose map _Massi_ is misengraved for Niassi. A very careful examination of
the Portuguese expeditions across the continent of Africa has been given by
Mr. Cooley, in the _Journal of the Royal Geographical Society_ (vol. xv. p.
185.; xvi. p. 138.), and he has ascertained, approximately, the extent and
position of that great lake, which, from distrust of D'Anville, one of the
most exact geographers, had been expunged from all modern maps. It is
considerably to the N. and E. of the Nyami lately determined, and of much
greater extent.

ANATOL.

_Epitaph in Hall's Discovery_ (Vol. iii., p. 242.).--The work entitled
_Discovery of a New World, or a Description of the South Indies, hitherto
unknown, by an English Mercury, imprinted by E. Blount_, no date, 12mo., is
not, as our correspondent supposes, very rare, nor is it by Bishop Hall. It
is a free translation, or rather paraphrase, and an excellent one in its
way, by John Healey, of Bishop Hall's very entertaining _Mundus Alter et
Idem_, first published in 12mo., Francof., without date, afterwards
reprinted with Campanella's _Civitas Solis_ and Bacon's _Atlantis_ at
Utrecht, 1643, 24mo., and subsequently included in the edition of Bishop
Hall's works by Pratt, 10 vols., Lond., 1808, 8vo. The epitaph quoted is
not a satire upon any statesman of the time. The writer is describing the
Land of Changeableness, or, as it is called in the Latin original, "Variana
vel Moronia Mobilis," and gives in the course of his description this
epitaph on Andreas Vortunius (a vertendo), or, as he is styled in the
English {339} translation, "Andrew Turncoate." The epitaph occurs in p.
132. of the Latin edition of 1643, and is evidently, as indicated by the
marginal notes, an imitation or parody of the famous one on Æelia Lælia
Crispis, which has exercised the ingenuity of so many writers, and of which
our own countryman, Richard White, of Basingstoke, the historian, has given
three different interpretations. See his _Ælia Lælia Crispis, Epitaphium
Antiquum quod in Agro Bononiensi adhuc videtur, a diversis interpretatum
varie, novissime autem a Richardo Vito explicatum_, Padua, 1568, 4to. An
article on this epitaph and its various interpreters, of whom I have
collected about forty, might be made a very interesting one.

JAMES CROSSLEY.

    [We wish MR. CROSSLEY--than whom no one is more competent--would favour
    us with such an article. The following communication from MR. FORBES is
    only one of several we have received, showing that the interest in this
    enigma is not abated.]

_Epitaph in Hall's Discovery_ (Vol. iii., p. 242.).--When this epitaph is
assigned to its right owner, it may perhaps throw some light on its
twin-brother--the epitaph on "Ælia Lælia Crispis"--"_about which many of
the learned have puzzled their heads_." (See _Encyc. Brit._, article
"Ænigma.") I enclose a copy of this epitaph, which you can use or not, as
you please. If you think that it might help to "unearth" Mister Andrew
Turnecoate, you may perhaps like to lay it before your readers; if, on the
other hand, that it would but increase the difficulty of the operation by
distracting attention needlessly, you can hand it over to "the Editor's
best friend"--the fire.

        "D. M.

     Ælia Lælia Crispis,
     Nec vir, nec mulier,
        Nec androgyna
    Nec puella, nec juvenis,
          Nec anus;
    Nec casta, nec meretrix,
         Nec pudica;
         Sed omnia;
          Sublata
   Neque fame, neque ferro,
       Neque veneno;
        Sed omnibus:
    Nec coelo, nec terris,
         Nec aquis,
      Sed ubique jacet.
    Lucius Agatho Priscius,
    Nec maritus, nec amator,
      Nec necessarius;
  Neque moerens, neque gaudens,
        Neque flens;
           Hanc,
    Nec molem, nec pyramidem,
       Nec sepulchrum,
         Sed omnia,
    Scit et nescit, cui posuerit."

C. FORBES.

_Saint Thomas of Lancaster._--The following passage in Fuller's _Worthies_
(of Yorkshire) does not seem to have been noticed by either of your
correspondents who replied to MR. R. M. MILNES' Query in Vol. i., p. 181.:

