'We had no sooner explained our loss to the Mongol chief, than he said
to us cheerfully: "Sirs Lamas, do not permit sorrow to invade your
hearts. Your animals cannot be lost; in these plains there are neither
robbers nor associates of robbers. I will send in quest of your
horses. If we do not find them, you may select what others you please
in their place from our herd. We would have you leave this place as
happy as you came to it."' Eight horses darted off in pursuit; the
missionaries were invited to take tea in the interim, and in two hours
the strayed cattle were recovered. We should like to know in what
other country travellers would be so treated?

Regal personages in these regions observe the characteristic simple
manners of the country. Our pilgrims were pursuing their solitary way,
when the tramping of many horses and the sound of many voices
disturbed the silence of the desert. A large caravan belonging to the
queen of Mourguevan overtook them, and a mandarin addressed them.

'Sirs, where is your country?'

'We come from the west.'

'Through what districts have your beneficial shadows passed?'

'We have come from Tolon Noor.'

'Has peace accompanied your progress?'

'Hitherto we have journeyed in all tranquillity. And you--are you at
peace, and what is your country?'

'We are Khalkhas of the kingdom of Mourguevan.'

After some other Oriental queries and answers, her majesty comes up.
The cavalcade halted, and the camels formed into a semicircle, the
centre being occupied by a close four-wheeled carriage. Two mandarins,
'decorated with the blue button,' opened the door, and handed out the
queen, who was attired in a long silk robe.

'Sirs Lamas,' said she, raising her hands, 'is this place auspicious
for an encampment?'

'Royal pilgrim of Mourguevan,' said we, 'you may light your fires here
in all security. For ourselves, we must proceed on our way, for the
sun was already high when we folded our tent.'

The Tartars are divided into two grand classes--lamas and laymen. The
former act as priests, lawyers, physicians, painters, decorators, &c.,
and in fact monopolise every learned and liberal art and profession.
Of course, they are held in high repute; and our travellers having,
like Joseph Wolff, adopted sacerdotal costume, they were everywhere
received with the honours and respect awarded to the indigenous
clergy. It will duly appear, from subsequent illustrations, that mere
ecclesiasticism did not secure the hospitality and kindness which they
experienced at all hands; but even after making allowance for the
national devotion to the cloth, the attentions shewed by the Mongols
are often marked by a delicate sense of the hospitable. On one
occasion, M. Huc and his companions encountered an unusual storm of
rain and wind. After travelling several weary miles, Samdad contrived
to erect the tent in a place that, for the locality, was tolerable,
but no more. 'My spiritual fathers,' observed the guide, 'I told you
we should not die to-day of thirst, but I am not at all sure that we
don't run some risk of dying of hunger.' In point of fact, there
seemed no possibility of making a fire. There was not a tree, not a
shrub, not a root to be seen. As to argols, the rain had long since
reduced that combustible of the desert to a liquid pulp. The pilgrims
were about to partake of the primitive fare of meal steeped in cold
water--a cheerless beverage to three men drenched to the skin--when at
the critical juncture up came two Tartars.

'Sirs Lamas, this day the heavens have fallen. You doubtless have been
unable to make a fire.'

'Alas! how should we make a fire? we have no argols.'

'Men are all brothers, and belong to each other; but laymen should
honour and serve the holy ones: therefore it is that we have come to
make a fire for you.'

The fire soon blazed and crackled, and a hot repast speedily rejoiced
the jaded frames of the two priests and the imp Samdad.

The domiciliary hospitalities of the Tartars are frank and artless,
forming a marked contrast to the formal reception of strangers among
the Chinese. 'On entering, you give the word of peace, _amor_ or
_mendon_, to the company generally. You then seat yourself on the
right of the head of the family, whom you find squatting on the floor
opposite the entrance. Next, everybody takes from a purse, suspended
at his girdle, a little snuff-bottle, and mutual pinches accompany
such phrases as these: "Is the pasturage with you rich and abundant?"
"Are your herds in fine condition?" "Did you travel in peace?" "Does
tranquillity prevail?" The mistress then silently holds out her hand
to the visitor. He as silently takes from his breast-pocket a small
wooden bowl, the indispensable _vade mecum_ of all Tartars, and
presents it to the hostess, who fills it with tea and milk, and
returns it.' In higher families, a table is spread with butter,
oatmeal, millet, cheese, all in small boxes of polished wood; and
these luxuries are all mixed in the everlasting tea. Amongst the
uppermost aristocratic classes, fermented milk is proffered; but
Europeans would perhaps regard this liquor as more honoured by being
set aside than indulged in.

We now proceed to exhibit some traits of Tartar character, as
developed in their intercourse with their Asiatic brethren. As usual,
a horseman overtakes or meets the travellers; and after the customary
salutations, the missionaries inquired why he and his brethren did not
cultivate corn, instead of allowing every field to run to grass.

'We Mongols,' replied this stranger, 'are formed for living in tents,
and pasturing cattle. So long as we kept to that in the kingdom of
Gechekten, we were rich and happy. Now, ever since the Mongols have
set themselves to cultivating the land, and building houses, they have
become poor. The _Kitats_ (Chinese) have taken possession of the
country: flocks, herds, lands, houses--all have passed into their
hands. There remain to us only a few prairies, on which still live
under their tents such of the Mongols as have not been forced by utter
destitution to emigrate to other lands.'

'But if the Chinese are so baneful to you, why did you allow them to
penetrate into your country?'

'We took pity on these wicked Kitats, who came to us weeping, to
solicit our charity. We allowed them, through pure compassion, to
cultivate a few patches of land. The Mongols insensibly followed their
example, and abandoned the nomadic life. They drank the wine of the
Kitats, and smoked their tobacco on credit; they bought their
manufactures on credit, at double the real value. When the day of
payment came, there was no money ready, and the Mongols had to yield
to the violence of their creditors houses, lands, flocks, everything.'

'But could you not seek justice from the tribunals?'

'Justice from the tribunals! That is out of the question. The Kitats
are skilful to talk and to lie. It is impossible for a Mongol to gain
a suit against a Kitat. Sirs Lamas, the kingdom of Gechekten is
undone!'

After-experience amply corroborated the truth of these statements.
'The commercial intercourse between the Tartars and the Chinese is
revoltingly iniquitous on the part of the latter. So soon as the
Mongols arrive in a trading town, they are snapped up by some Chinese,
who carry them off, as it were, by main force to their houses, give
them tea for themselves, and forage for their horses, and cajole them
in every conceivable way. The Mongols take all they hear to be
perfectly genuine, and congratulate themselves--conscious, as they
are, of their inaptitude for business--upon their good-fortune in thus
meeting with brothers _Ahaton_, as they say, in whom they can place
full confidence, and who will undertake to manage their whole business
for them. A good dinner, provided in the back-shop, completes the
illusion--and when once the Chinese has established his hold, he
employs all the resources of a skilful and utterly unprincipled
knavery. He keeps his victim in his house, eating, drinking, and
smoking one day after another, until his subordinates have sold all
the poor man's cattle, or whatever else he has to sell, and bought for
him in return the commodities he requires, at prices double and treble
the market value. But so plausible is the Chinese, and so simple is
the Tartar, that the latter invariably departs with the most entire
confidence in the immense philanthropy of the former, and with a
promise to return, when he has other goods to sell, to the
establishment where he has been treated so fraternally.'

The missionaries were themselves mistaken for Tartars when they
visited the 'Blue Town,' and every kind of imposition was attempted to
be practised on them. The hotel scouts assailed them at their first
entry, and almost compelled them, by physical force, to become their
guests; shopkeepers cozened on all hands; and even bankers
condescended to cheat. Messrs Gabet and Huc wished to exchange silver
for Chinese coin current. The Tartars can weigh, but cannot calculate,
and accordingly the bank-teller of Blue Town, after gravely consulting
his _souan-pan_ (exchange-table), announced the value to be about a
thousand _sapeks_ less than it should have been. The missionaries
remonstrated, and a colleague was called in to check the sum, but he,
with due gravity, declared that the first was right. A bystander
interfered, and declared in favour of the strangers. 'Sirs Lamas,'
said the banker, 'your mathematics are better than mine.' 'Oh, not at
all,' replied we, with a profound bow; 'your souan-pan is excellent;
but who ever heard of a calculator always exempt from error?' These
phrases were, it seems, rigorously required under the circumstances by
Chinese politeness. Whenever any person in China is compromised by any
awkward incident, those present always carefully refrain from any
observation which may make him blush, or, as the Chinese call it, take
away his face. A further proof of Chinese cupidity was afforded by the
admission of a gentleman, whom we may take the liberty of denominating
an Oriental bagman. This worthy arrived at an inn after our travellers
had secured all the accommodation.

'Peace and happiness unto you, Sirs Lamas; do you need the whole of
your room, or can you accommodate me?'

'Why not? We are all brothers, and should serve each other.'

'Words of excellence! You are Tartars, I am Chinese; yet comprehending
the claims of hospitality, you act upon the truth that all men are
brothers.'

'Whither are you bound? Are you going to buy up salt or catsup for
some Chinese company?'

'No; I represent a great commercial house at Peking, and I am
collecting some debts from the Tartars.... You, like myself, are
Tartar-eaters--you eat them by prayers, I by commerce. And why not?
The Mongols are poor simpletons, and we may as well get their money as
anybody else.... Oh, we devour them; we pick them clean! Whatever they
see, when they come into our towns, they want; and when we know who
they are, and where we can find them, we let them have goods upon
credit of course at a considerable advance upon the price, and upon
interest at 30 and 40 per cent., which is quite right and necessary.
In China, the emperor's laws do not allow this; it is only done with
the Tartars. Well, they don't pay the money, and the interest goes on
until there is a good sum owing, worth the coming for. When we come
for it, we take all the cattle and sheep and horses we can get hold of
for the interest, and leave the capital debt and future interest to be
paid next time, and so it goes on from one generation to another. Oh,
a Tartar debt is a gold-mine!'

