 After that, my prestige was gone. The
rustics, instead of crawling about their wickets, took to walking
in and smacking me. This would not have mattered, if any of the
Drumthwacket team could have held a catch, and if the wicket-keeper
had not let SMITH off four times in one over. My character was lost,
and all was ended with me north of the Grampians, where the wickets
are peculiarly suitable to my style of delivery.

As to batting, there is little that is pleasant to confess. As soon as
I got a distant view of a ball, I was ever tempted to whack wildly in
its direction. There was no use in waiting for it, the more I looked
at it the less I liked it. So I whacked, and, if you always do this,
a ball will sometimes land on the driving part of the bat, and then it
usually happened that my companion, striving for a five or a six, ran
me out. If he did not, I did not stay long. The wicket-keeper was a
person whose existence I always treated as _une quantité négligeable_,
and sometimes the ball would bound off his pads into the stumps. The
fielders would occasionally hold a catch, anything _may_ happen. On
the other hand there was this to be said for my style of batting,
that the most experienced Cricketer could not tell where or in what
direction I would hit any given ball. If it was on the off, that was
no reason why I should not bang it to square-leg, a stroke which has
become fashionable since my time, but in those old days, you did not
often see it in first-class Cricket. It was rather regarded as "an
agrarian outrage." Foreigners and ladies would find Cricket a more
buoyant diversion if all the world, and especially LEWIS HALL and
SHREWSBURY, played on my principles. Innings would not last so long.
Not so many matches would be drawn. The fielders would not catch cold.

To speak of fielding is to revive unspeakable sorrows. For a
short-sighted man, whose fingers are thumbs, no post in the field
is exactly grateful. I have been at long-leg, and, watching the game
intently, have perceived the batters running, and have heard cries of
"well fielded!" These cries were ironical. The ball had been hit past
me, but I was not fortunate enough to observe the circumstance. A
fielder of this _calibre_ always ends by finding his way to short-leg.
A prudent man can do a good deal here by watching the umpire, dodging
when he dodges, and getting behind him on occasion. But I was not
prudent. I observed that a certain player hit very much behind the
leg, so there, "in the mad pride of intellectuality," I privily
stationed myself. He _did_ it very fine, very fine indeed, into my
eye. The same misfortune has attended me at short-slip; it should have
been a wicket, it was a black eye, or the loss of a tooth or two, as
might happen. In fact, I sometimes wonder myself at the contemptuous
frankness of my own remarks on the fielding at Lord's. For if a catch
could be missed (and most catches can), I was the man to miss it.
Swift ones used to hit me and hurt me, long ones I always misjudged,
little simple poppy ones spun out of my fingers. Now the unlucky thing
about Cricket, for a Duffer, is that your misfortunes do not hurt
yourself alone. It is not as in a single at Golf, it is not as in
fishing, or riding, or wherever you have no partner. To drop catches
is to madden the bowler not unnaturally, and to lengthen the period
of leather-hunting. Cricket is a social game, and its proficients
soon give the cold shoulder to the Duffer. He has his place, however,
in the nature of things. It is he who keeps up the enthusiasm, who
remembers every run that anybody I made in any given match. In fact,
at Cricket, the Duffer's mission is to be a "judge of the game;" I
don't mean an Umpire, very far from that. If you once let the Duffer
umpire he could ruin the stoutest side, and secure victory to the
feeblest. I may say that, at least in this capacity, I have proved
really useful to my party in country matches. But, in the long run,
my capacity even for umpiring came to be doubted, and now I am only
a critic of Cricket. There is none more relentless, not one with a
higher standard, at least where no personal feelings are concerned.
For I have remarked that, if a Cambridge man writes about an Oxford
victory (which he seldom has to do), or if an Oxford man writes on a
Cambridge victory (a frequent affliction), he always leaves you with
the impression that, in spite of figures, his side had at least a
moral triumph. These admirable writers have all been Duffers.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TIMES CHANGE.

_Shade of William the Conqueror._ "WHAT! THE PEOPLE OBJECT TO
ENCLOSING A FEW ACRES OF THIS OPEN SPACE FOR STATE PURPOSES--FOR THEIR
OWN BENEFIT? BY THE SPLENDOUR OF HEAVEN! I SHOULD HAVE LIKED TO HAVE
HEARD THE VARLETS OBJECT TO MY MAKING MILES OF IT SUCH--FOR _MINE_!"

_Secretary for War._ "AH, YOUR MAJESTY HAD IN _YOUR_ TIMES NO _TIMES_
TO RECKON WITH!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

TIMES CHANGE.

    ["The 'Ranges Act' constitutes ... a standing menace to rights
    of common wherever commons and open spaces exist."--_The
    Times_.]

  "The old order changes, yielding place to new."
    By Phoebus, you are right, mellifluous TENNYSON!
  Could Norman WILLIAM this conjuncture view,
    He'd greet our Progress with--well, scarce a benison;
  He, though ranked high 'midst monarchs and commanders,
  Had the same weakness as our troops in Flanders.

  ROBERT the Devil's ruthless son would clear
    A county to make coverts, deer-runs, chaces.
  What had he thought of modern notions queer
    Concerning Common Rights and Open Spaces?
  "The People--who are varlets!--still oppose them,
  Whether the Powers that be make or enclose them!"

  "The People _versus_ Powers that Be!" Ah, yes!
    Imperious Norman, that's a modern trial
  That's always being argued more or less;
    The Press keeps now such vigilant espial
  On every grasping would-be public plunderer.
  You, Sire, had not to reckon with "The Thunderer!"

  Times change, stark soldier, and we have the _Times_
    Premier to check and snub Chief Secretaries.
  Counting land-grabbing high among earth's crimes
    Would have amazed you! Public judgment varies.
  You and your wolf-hound, WILLIAM, would not now
  Try a "clean sweep,"--without a general row.

  Ask OTTO! He is somewhat in your style,
    But he could tell you what new risks environ
  The ancient art of Ruling. You may smile
    At Print and Paper _versus_ Blood and Iron,
  But Sovereign and Crown, though loved by many,
  Stand now no chance against the Popular Penny.

  Ask Malwood's Squire again! He knows right well
    The New Democracy,--and the New Forest;
  _Our_ great Plantagenet, a true blue "Swell,"
    Fights for the People when their need is sorest.
  In Norman BILLY he'd own small belief;
  The People's WILLIAM is _his_ favourite chief.

  Your ghostly presence in these verdant glades
    Might startle STANHOPE, musing on his Ranges,
  But not the angriest of Royal Shades
    May now arrest the progress of Time's changes.
  True, much is yielded yet to Swelldom's "Sport,"
  But some aver that even _its_ time is short.

  No, Clearances and Rights of Common, now
    Own not the sway of autocrats capricious.
  Small use, great Shade, to knit that haughty brow,
    And swear _your_ action would be expeditious.
  The days of Curfew and of Forest Law
  Are passed. _We_'re swayed by Justice--and Free Jaw!

       *       *       *       *       *

"FOR VALUE RECEIVED."--Aldgate Ward changed Alderman LUSK for one
POUND.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WHAT OUR ARTIST HAS TO PUT UP WITH, BEFORE HE TURNS
LIKE A CRUSHED WORM.

_Our Art Critic_ (_patronisingly_). "HA--HUM! WELL, YOUR COLOUR IS
FAIRLY DECENT, AND YOU HAVE NICISH FEELING FOR LIGHT AND SHADE, AND
_CHIAROSCURO_. BUT WHERE YOB ALWAYS FAIL TO PLEASE, SOMEHOW, IS IN
YOUR _EXECUTION_!"

_Our Artist_. "MY _EXECUTION_? AH! JUST SO. I'VE NO DOUBT THAT
_YOURS_, NOW WOULD BE MORE GENERALLY POPULAR!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM PARLIAMENTARY EXAMINATION PAPER.

_Question_.--Explain the term "Standing Orders."

_Answer_ 1.--It means that when a visitor to the House has an order
for the Speaker's Gallery, and can't find a seat, he then becomes one
of the Standing Orders.--SISTE VIATOR.

_Answer_ 2.--When a friendly M.P. sees three of us waiting for him,
takes us to the bar of the House, and orders drinks all round, which
we take standing.--BIBENDUM EST.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIA FOR THE IRISH!--"An amended estimate of the present Paddy Crop
has been published by the Local Government." (_Vide Times_ for Feb.
15.) What more can the most thorough Home-Rulers want, if they would
only be content to make their home in Burmah instead of Ireland?
"Local Government" can soon be developed, for 'tis but Home Rule in
the bud, and the "Paddy Crop" is already there.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOTTO FOR THE NEW RECORDER OF THE CITY OF LONDON.--"HALL There!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"COMBINING AMUSEMENT WITH INSTRUCTION."

(_A SKETCH AT THE COLLECTION OF INSTRUMENTS OF TORTURE._)

    SCENE--_The Maddox Street Galleries. A large and appropriately
    lighted room. Upon walls of a sombre crimson, various
    Implements of Torture are arranged with considerable taste,
    and an eye for decorative effect, the central space being
    reserved for more elaborate contrivances in wood and iron.
    Visitors discovered inspecting the Exhibition by the aid of
    the excellent Catalogues, with the subdued appreciation of
    persons conscious that they are spending a very pleasant and
    profitable afternoon._

_Mr. Charnelhouse Goole_ (_as he enters, to Mrs. C.G._). Now, my dear,
the first thing I want to see is that Iron Maiden there's so much talk
about. I wonder whereabouts it is!

_Mrs. C.G._ I think _that_ must be it, up at the other end of the
room. But don't you _think_, dear, it would be nicer to see the
_other_ things first, and keep that for the _last_?

_Mr. C.G._ (_struck by the refinement of this suggestion_). Well,
upon, my word, AMINA, I almost think it would!

_Mr. Frederic Frivell_ (_to his wife, whom he takes a marital pleasure
in shocking_). What fun those old fellows must have had in those days,
mustn't they?

_Mrs. Frivell_ (_a serious lady_). I don't think fun is at _all_ the
right word, FREDERIC. I do _wish_ you wouldn't take these things so
lightly. I'm sure it's melancholy enough to look at all these horrid
machines, and think--

_Mr. F._ That Torture is a lost art? Isn't that what you were going to
say? But it's _not_, you know; we've refined it--that's all. Look at
the Photographer, and the Interviewer, and the Pathetic Reciter, and
the--

    [_Mrs. F. endeavours to convince him that she didn't mean that
    at all, and that he is comparing totally different things._

_An Aphoristic Uncle_ (_to an irreverent Nephew_). No. 89. "A
Long-spiked Wooden Roller, known as a 'Spiked Hare.'" You see, TOM,
my boy, the victim was--(_Describes the process._) "Some of the old
writers describe this torture as being most fearful," so the Catalogue
tells us.

_Tom-my-boy_ (_after inspecting the spikes_). Well, do you know,
Uncle, I shouldn't be at all surprised if the old Johnnies weren't so
far out.

_The Aph. Uncle._ Another illustration, my boy, of "Man's inhumanity
to Man"!

_Tom-my-boy._ Not bad for you, Uncle--only you cribbed it out of the
Catalogue, you know! [_The A.U. gives him up._

