One of our corps of Philosophers (a trifle visionary, perhaps) has been
speculating as to certain possible (or, perhaps, impossible) results
flowing from the practice among publishers of ante-dating their monthly
issues. Thus, supposing that the world should be destroyed by fire (and
why not? it is bad enough) on the 15th of May, 1870, and a cover of,
say, _Putnam's_ for June, carried up by an air-current, should, after
floating about ever so long in space, finally descend on some friendly
planet--we will say, Venus. Here it would naturally get picked up by an
archaeologist, (who would be on the spot looking out for it,) and the
interesting relic would be promptly and reverently deposited among the
other Vestiges of Creation, in the Royal Cabinet. In the course of
years, some historian would probably have occasion to turn over these
curiosities, and would presently light on the scorched but still legible
waif. "Why," says he, in astonishment, "I thought the earth was burnt on
the 15th of May! To be sure, it was _in the night_, and nobody saw it
go, [think of that, conceited Worldling!] but it was missed by somebody
the day after. But here we have a document from the late unfortunate
planet dated the first of June!"

Of course, upon this the History of the Universe would have to be
rewritten, or that odd fortnight would play the mischief somewhere!

       *       *       *       *       *

A Boston Boy.

HUB-BUB.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Curses Come Home to Roost."

They are putting the Fifth Avenue pavement in front of the City Hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

To Politicians.

Will the working of the Fifteenth Amendment oblige a candidate to show
his Color before election?

       *       *       *       *       *

So We Go!

We notice, with much agitation and a reasonable amount of grief, that
somebody in Philadelphia (possibly Miss ANNA DICKINSON) has invented a
machine for the laundry called The King Washer! A few years ago it would
have been The Queen Washer; but in these days the name seems to indicate
that to Man, unhappy Man, will speedily be committed the destinies of
the weekly washing. Oh! the rubbing, the rinsing, the wringing. But Mr.
PUNCHINELLO has already communicated to Mrs. PUNCHINELLO his sentiments
upon this subject. Under no circumstances will he get at the family
linen. He must make a stand somewhere, and he makes it here.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let them Bark.

Miss BARKALOW has been admitted to practice at the bar in St. Louis. We
have frequently before seen young ladies at a bar, where others
practiced more than they did; but we do not see why, if Miss BARKALOW
wishes to bark aloud, she should not be allowed to bark, aloud or
otherwise. Barking may be particularly good in a cross-examination; but
we presume that a lady attorney's bark will be always worse than her
bite.

       *       *       *       *       *

"She Stoops to Conquer."

The girl with the Grecian Bend.

       *       *       *       *       *

Query.

Is it allowable for a Temperance man to be Cordial to his friends?

       *       *       *       *       *

Weak as Water.

Our cynical friend A. QUARIUS writes us from Philadelphia, that
considering the manner in which the Sunday liquor law is enforced in
that city, he thinks his native place is still entitled--perhaps more
than ever entitled to be called the city of Rye-tangles. This is
ungrateful.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPIRITUAL SUSCEPTIBILITY OF CATS.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO: Our Society has been very learnedly debating as to
whether Cats are susceptible of spiritual impressions; and, although the
burden of opinion inclines to the negative of the question, I am firmly
persuaded there is much to justify a contrary judgment.

As I slept the other night, neither dreaming nor holding psychological
intercourse of any description with outsiders, I was awakened suddenly
about the first hour of the morning by a noise. I am quite certain it
was a noise, and have therefore no hesitation in so recording it. The
new moon hung athwart the western sky, and a few fleecy clouds were
chasing each other like snow-drifts across the blue vault of the night.
I may likewise note the fact that the stars were doing what they usually
do, notwithstanding the difference of opinion that sometimes exists as
to what that is. It was the evening after "wash-day," and family linen,
in graceful curves and undulating outlines, everywhere met the eye as it
turned from contemplating the stars to contemplating the clothes-lines
in the gardens. But I wander. The noise? Ah! yes. Well, it was not like
the collision of two hard substances, but rather of the heavy "thud"
order of sound, like the descent of a solid into a soft substance; say,
for instance, of a flat-iron into a jar of unrisen buck-wheat batter. I
glanced along the ghostly battalions of family linen; along the fences
traversed by feline sentries; along the latticed arbors; but nothing to
indicate the origin of the alarm could be discovered, and as at that
moment a breeze stirred in the apartment, producing a chilling
sensation, I thought it prudent to jump back into bed.

Next morning, upon making my usual visit to note the progress of the
early bulbs in the flower-beds, I encountered at the further end of the
garden the remains of a cat--a portly and ancient grimalkin of the
sterner sex. Close at hand was a bottle lying face downward, and corked.
I raised it--first in my hands, and then to my lips. The cork fell out,
accidentally as it were, and, as a consequence, death. "Poor thing!" I
murmured; "poor--" and a portion of the contents glided carelessly down
my throat. I perceived that the liquid was "Old Rye." As I stooped down,
tears would have come to my eyes; but it was useless, seeing that the
breath had left the unfortunate's body. Nevertheless, I rested my hand a
moment upon his head, and then glided it in a semi-professional manner
along the line of dorsal elevation, until I came to a deep depression in
his backbone, which corresponded exactly with the convexity of the
bottle. Then I saw at once how it was; this missile, (in the heat of
passion, being mistaken for an empty one, probably,) had been hurled by
some treacherous hand upon the unsuspecting Tom, striking him midway
between the root of the tail and the base of the brain, causing instant
suspension of his vertebral communications, "Poor thing! You were the
victim of a Catastrophe. You were also the victim of the bottle. The
'Rye' was too heavy for you, and should have been drawn milder." This
said, I turned sadly away to find a burial spade, and it then occurred
to me that this little incident was kindly meant to confirm my view that
cats are susceptible, even to a fatal extent, of spiritual
impressions--especially when conveyed by spirits of "Old Rye."

GOBBO.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the Tombs.

When a drunken man has been locked up for beating his wife, it is
reasonable to suppose that he must feel rather the worse for lick her.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PERSONAL GOSSIP.

(From the Daily Press.)

"A SON OF ONE OF OUR WEALTHIEST RESIDENTS DISPLAYS GREAT TALENTS AS A
SCULPTOR. HE IS BUT NINE YEARS OLD."]

       *       *       *       *       *

A BIT OF NATURAL HISTORY.

Naturalists tell us that the _Aye-aye_ is a small animal of Madagascar,
with sharp teeth, long claws, and a tail; which eats whatever it can
grab, and says nothing day or night but _aye-aye_. Now, we find that,
AGASSIZ to the contrary notwithstanding, this strange and not very
useful animal is indigenous to the State of Pennsylvania. It especially
frequents Harrisburg; and may be seen and heard any day there, in the
Senate or House. Being an active member of that House, your
correspondent has been present during the passage of three hundred bills
within a week or two, in about one hundred and ten of which he had some
personal interest.

Lifting his eyes one day from his newspaper, when the Speaker took the
vote on an "Act to amend the Incorporation of the City of Philadelphia,"
which your correspondent happened to know included the presentation of a
three-story brownstone front to each of a committee of six members of
the House, he found there was not one member in his seat; but, in the
place of a few, there was a company of these remarkable _Aye-ayes_,
responding duly to the call for a vote; but never a _no_ among them. No,
no!

Now, your correspondent holds the deliberate opinion that, in several
respects, these aforesaid small animals of Madagascar might be an
improvement upon the average Pennsylvania legislators. And, if your
correspondent had to do with getting up the other one hundred and ninety
bills, as he did the one hundred and ten, all right: Otherwise, _not_.
How does PUNCHINELLO regard it?

Yours, LEGISLATOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Augean Job.

PUNCHINELLO has telegraphed to Governor GEARY his approval of the
"Sewage Utilization" bill at Harrisburg, on one condition: that the
first piece of work be finished up by the members of the Pennsylvania
Legislature with their own hands; that work to be, to make up into
_decent_ manure, _deodorized_ and _disinfected_, all bills passed at the
late session of their House and Senate. Since, however, complete
deodorization is probably _impossible_, PUNCHINELLO advises also that
the said members be required to cart all their stuff out to the Bad
Lands of Nebraska, and remain there to make the best use of it; or else
make a contract with Captain HALL to ship it and them to the Arctic
regions at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the Finances.

Says Crispin, "Did not somebody say it was BOUTWELL in the Treasury now?
A great mistake. About well, to be sure! When the newspaper men have
111-1/2 of gold, and I haven't a round dollar! Where did they get it?
And then the legal tender question. I never asked but _one_ tender
question in all my life, and that was to SUSAN and she said, Yes. And
then we were legally married. Nobody ought to ask such questions _out
loud_; it's not _decent_. And _fine answering_ an't much better.
Financiering, is it? Ah! well. _Specious assumption_, too; but that
requires brass, and I want _gold_. Meantime, who's got a twenty-five
cent note?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Massachusetts Flats.

Massachusetts must abound in Flats. Its Legislature is annually agitated
from the sands of Cape Cod to the hills of Berkshire over the question.
It is said to be wisdom to set a rogue to catch a rogue. Is it equally
so to set a flat to catch one?

       *       *       *       *       *

NATIONAL TAXIDERMY.

[Illustration 'P']

PUNCHINELLO has for some time past carefully considered the subject of
our national tariff of imposts, (_that is to say, he happened to see, in
a Tribune, the other day, that lucifer matches were now to be stamped
separately, and not by the box, as heretofore_) and he has come to the
conclusion, after duly weighing in his mind all the arguments for and
against the present system of taxation, (_that is to say, he made up his
mind the minute he read the article_,) that what the present tariff
needs, is a more thorough application and a better classification; or,
what the technologists call Taxonomy, which term is suggested to him by
a work on the subject which he has been recently studying. (_That is to
say, he looked in the dictionary to find out what Taxidermy meant, and
seeing Taxonomy there, snapped it up for a sort of collateral pun_.) As
an illustration of what our impost legislators (or imposters) ought to
be, let us take the Taxidermist. He is one who takes from an animal
every thing but his skin and bones, and stuffs him up afterward with all
sorts of nonsense. Now, our National Taxidermists ought to take a lesson
from their original. Many of the good people of the United States have
much more left them than their skin and bones. Why is not all that
taken? The condition of the ordinary stuffed animal of the shops is
strikingly significant of what should be expected of loyal communities.
(_That is to say, communities which vote a certain ticket which need not
be named here_.) It is often said that there are things which flesh and
blood will not bear. Now, a thorough system of Taxidermy remedies all
this. A stuffed 'possum, for instance, having no flesh or blood, will
bear any thing. When the people of this country are thoroughly cleaned
out, they will be just as docile. Among the things which PUNCHINELLO
would recommend as fit subjects of taxation, is a man's expenses. They
have not been taxed yet. If he pays for his income, why not for his
outgoes? The immense sums that are annually expended in this country for
this, that, and the other thing ought certainly to yield a revenue to
the government. (_That is to say, there ought to be a new army of
collectors and assessors appointed. P. knows lots of good men out of
office_.) And then there's a man's time. Why not tax that? Nearly every
man spends a lot of time, and he ought to pay for it. As it would be our
tax, it could not be a very minute tax, although it is only the second
tax which we have suggested. (_That is to say--- something pun-ny_.) And
besides these things, there's energy. We often hear of a man's energies
being taxed; but, so far as the matter is apparent to the naked eye, it
is difficult to see whose energies are taxed for the good of the
government at the present day. This subject should certainly be
investigated. (_That is to say, a committee of Congressmen should be
appointed, with power to send for persons, papers, and extra
compensation_.) Politics, too. Every man has his politics, (_that is to
say, every man except Bennett_,) and they ought to be taxed, if for no
other reason than the great impetus the measure would give to the
erection of fences throughout the land. And letters, too. If every one
sent by the mail should yield one cent to the Treasury, how the currency
would be inflated in that locality! (_That is to say, in the locality to
which the collectors would abscond_.) But it is impossible, with the
limited time at his disposal, for PUNCHINELLO to enter into a full
examination and elucidation of this subject. (_That is to say, he can't
think of any more illustrations just now, and the printer wouldn't stand
any more, if he could_.) But it must be admitted that the great task of
opening up the country, of which we hear so much, will never be complete
until the Washington skinners and stuffers get us all into the prepared
specimen condition. (_That is to say, when the people are all willing
to_ "_dry up_.")

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHN CHINAMAN'S BILLING AND COOING.--Pigeon English.

       *       *       *       *       *

CABLE NEWS.

(EXCLUSIVELY FOR PUNCHINELLO.)

QUEEN ISABELLA has sent her compliments to Señor CASTELAR, as well as to
General PRIM, informing them that, on the whole, she thinks she will
_not_ return to the throne of Spain. It does not agree with her quiet
and refined tastes and habits to live so much in public. All she wants
now is a little _château en Espagne_. She proposes to send her son,
Prince of ASTURIAS, to Professor CASTELAR, to study modern history. Is
it not odd, by the way, that a country so long _Mad-rid-den_ as Spain,
should have now a governor with such a name as PRIM? But, what's in a
name? BOURBON, by any other name, would smell as sweet. Some, however,
prefer Old Rye. I prefer _water_ to both; _especially_ to BOURBON.

It's an old story that _two positives make a negative_. Paris news tells
us that a late will case has exemplified this. COMTE, you know, was a
_positive_ philosopher. He had a positive wife. She had a will of her
own. He wrote a will of his own. Consequently, it got into court. Mme.
COMTE it seems, who did not agree with the philosophy while the
philosopher lived, wanted his MSS. after his death. Positively, the
court did not see it in that light; and so the negative came out. It was
a case of no go, or _non-ego_, as HEGEL might have called it. Did you
ever read HEGEL? I didn't; and I advise you not to begin. It won't pay.
I am told that he divided all things into Egos, She goes, and Non-egos,
or No-goes. The latter particularly; So do I.

But to return to Spain; or rather to Paris. Don FRANÇOIS D'ASSISSI has,
it appears, suddenly discovered that his wife is not Queen of Spain so
much as she was. Much less so. So, he has found her company rather
expensive than agreeable; and proposes to abdicate it. Not so _very_
much of an ass, is he? Bravo for Don FRANÇOIS!

In London, _to-morrow_ will be made famous in literature by _the_ great
dinner in honor of the advent of PUNCHINELLO. Mr. PUNCH is talked of to
preside. An unprecedented rush for tickets has begun. More about it in
my next.

PRIME.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cutting.

We see extensively advertised the "Saxon Razor;" but have not yet
summoned up sufficient courage to try this article, which "no
gentleman's dressing-case should be without." We cannot dispossess our
minds of the apprehension of cutting ourselves, remembering that line
descriptive of the combat between FITZ-JAMES and RODERICK DHU, in which
it is said, that,

    "----thrice the Saxon blade drank blood."

       *       *       *       *       *

Musical.

The vocal abilities of hens are admitted; but they rarely attempt the
Chro-matic scale.

       *       *       *       *       *

De Jure.

No man can now be a juror who knows any thing about the case which he is
to try. Thus a juryman was challenged in the MCFARLAND case merely
because he belonged to Dr. BELLOWS's church. It was held that he might
possibly have got Wind of the matter while listening to the Doctor's
discourse.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOK NOTICES.

AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL. By LOUISA M. ALCOTT. Boston: ROBERTS BROTHERS.
New-York: D. APPLETON & Co.

The author of "Little Women" seeks, and not without success, to draw
from her "Old-Fashioned Girl" a contrast and a moral. She presents to
our view two young ladies of opposite "styles." One is fresh and rural:
the other isn't. The difference between country and city bringing-up is
the point aimed at; and the difference is about as great as that between
the warbling of woodside birds and the jingle of one of OFFENBACH'S
tunes on a corner barrel-organ. The book is neatly set forth, with
illustrations by Messrs. ROBERTS, BROTHERS, of Boston.

RED AS A ROSE IS SHE. By the author of "Cometh up as a Flower," etc.
New-York: D. APPLETON & Co.

A readable book, notwithstanding that there are several naughty
characters in it, or perhaps _because_ there are. Probably it depicts
with truth the kind of society presented. If so, all the worse for
society. Shall we never again have healthful, virtuous novels of the old
school, such as "Tom Jones?" The book is published in tasteful form by
Messrs. D. APPLETON & Co.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. STEWART & CO.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                         ARE OFFERING                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Extraordinary Inducements,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                IN PRICE, STYLE, AND QUALITY,                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                       TO HOUSEKEEPERS                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                              IN                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Linens, Sheetings,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                DAMASKS, NAPKINS, TOWELLINGS,                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                DRESS LINENS, PRINTED LINENS,                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                 FLANNELS, BLANKETS, QUILTS,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                   COUNTERPANES, SHEETINGS,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Bleached and Brown Cottons,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |             Standard American Prints, etc., etc.             |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 4th Ave., 9th and 10th Sts.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. Stewart & Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |              HAVE OPENED A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF               |
  |                                                              |
  |                  LADIES' PARIS MADE DRESSES                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                             AND                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        WALKING SUITS,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                 In Silk, Poplin, and Linen,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                     ENTIRE NEW DESIGNS.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                     FRENCH SILK CLOAKS,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                             AND                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                    SHORT STREET SACQUES.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |        Children's Cloaks, Ladies' Breakfast Jackets,         |
  |                                                              |
  |              Ladies' Pique, Swiss, and Cambric               |
  |                                                              |
  |               Morning Robes and Walking Suits,               |
  |                                                              |
  |                    LADIES' UNDERGARMENTS                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Of every description.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |            French, German, and Domestic Corsets,             |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Woven and hand-made.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                        JUST RECEIVED.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |               AT EXTREMELY ATTRACTIVE PRICES,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |              Fourth Ave., Ninth and Tenth Sts.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |  _The two great objects of a learner's ambition ought to be  |
  | to speak a foreign language idiomatically, and to pronounce  |
  |    it correctly; and these are the objects which are most    |
  |        carefully provided for in the_ MASTERY SYSTEM.        |
  |                                                              |
  |                  The Mastery of Languages;                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                             OR,                              |
  |                                                              |
  |         THE ART OF SPEAKING LANGUAGES IDIOMATICALLY.         |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BY THOMAS PRENDERGAST.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |             _I. Hand-Book of the Mastery Series.             |
  |               II. The Mastery Series. French.                |
  |               III. The Mastery Series. German.               |
  |              IV. The Mastery Series. Spanish._               |
  |                                                              |
  |                     PRICE 50 CENTS EACH.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |  _From Professor E. M. Gallaudet, of the National Deaf Mute  |
  |                          College._                           |
  |                                                              |
  | "The results which crowned the labor of the first week were  |
  |   so astonishing that he fears to detail them fully, lest    |
  | doubts should be raised as to his credibility. But this much |
  |  he does not hesitate to claim, that, after a study of less  |
  |  than two weeks, he was able to sustain conversation in the  |
  |   newly-acquired language on a great variety of subjects."   |
  |                                                              |
  |                   FROM THE ENGLISH PRESS.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |    "The principle may be explained in a line--it is first    |
  |  learning the language, and then studying the grammar, and   |
  | then learning (or trying to learn) the language."--_Morning  |
  |                            Star_.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |       "We know that there are some who have given Mr.        |
  |   Prendergast's plan a trial, and discovered that in a few   |
  |          weeks its results had surpassed all their           |
  |                  expectations."--_Record_.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |  "A week's patient trial of the French Manual has convinced  |
  |        me that the method is sound."--_Papers for the        |
  |                        Schoolmaster_.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |      "The simplicity and naturalness of the system are       |
  |              obvious."--_Herald_ (Birmingham.)               |
  |                                                              |
  | "We know of no other plan which will infallibly lead to the  |
  |        result in a reasonable time."--_Norfolk News_.        |
  |                                                              |
  |                   FROM THE AMERICAN PRESS.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | "The system is as near as can be to the one in which a child |
  |                   to talk."--_Troy Whig_.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |   "We would advise all who are about to begin the study of   |
  |    languages to give it a trial."--_Rochester Democrat_.     |
  |                                                              |
  |           "For European travellers this volume is            |
  |                invaluable."--_Worcester Spy_.                |
  |                                                              |
  | Either of the above volumes sent by mail free to any part of |
  |            the United States on receipt of price.            |
  |                                                              |
  |                D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers,                |
  |                                                              |
  |            90, 92, and 94 Grand Street, New York.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                    RED AS A ROSE IS SHE.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                       _Third Edition._                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                      D. APPLETON & CO.,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                 90, 92, and 94 Grand Street,                 |
  |                                                              |
  |             Have now ready the Third Edition of              |
  |                                                              |
  |                    RED AS A ROSE IS SHE.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |          By the Author of "Cometh up as a Flower."           |
  |                                                              |
  |             1 vol. 8vo. Paper Covers, 60 cents.              |
  |                                                              |
  |             From the New York _Evening Express_.             |
  |                                                              |
  |    "This is truly a charming novel; for half its contents    |
  | breathe the very odor of the flower it takes as its title."  |
  |                                                              |
  |              From the Philadelphia _Inquirer_.               |
  |                                                              |
  |   "The author can and does write well; the descriptions of   |
  |   scenery are particularly effective, always graphic, and    |
  |                     never overstrained."                     |
  |                                                              |
  |               D. A. & Co.