Baboons may be rendered docile in confinement; though they almost always
retain the disposition to revenge an injury. At the Cape, they are often
caught when young, and brought up with milk; perhaps Jerry was so
nurtured; and Kolben tells us, that they will become as watchful over
their master's property as the most valuable house-dog is in Europe.
Many of the Hottentots believe they can speak, but that they avoid doing
so lest they should be enslaved, and compelled to work! What a libel
upon human nature is conveyed in this trait of savage credulity. The
bitterest reproofs of man's wickedness are not only to be found in the
varnished lessons of civilization. Here is a touching piece of
simplicity upon which James Montgomery might found a whole poem.

Baboons, in their native countries, are sometimes hunted with dogs, but
their chase is often fatal to the assailants. Mr. Burchell tells us that
several of his dogs were wounded by the bites of baboons, and two or
three dogs were thus bitten asunder. A species of baboon common in
Ceylon, often attains the height of man. It is very fearless; and Bishop
Heber relates that an acquaintance of his having on one occasion shot a
young baboon, the mother came boldly up and wrested the gun out of his
hand without doing him any injury.

       *       *       *       *       *

By way of pendent, we add the present state of THE ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY,
from the report just completed.

Gross amount of the income of last year             £17,633[3]
Being an increase over the preceding year of          1,857
Receipts of four months of the past year              3,330
Receipts of corresponding months of the present year  3,755
_Receipts of the Society since its formation_
  In 1827                                           £ 4,079
     1828                                            11,515
     1829                                            13,991
     1830                                            15,806
     1831                                            17,662[3]
                                                     -------
Total since its formation                           £63,053

_Visiters to the Gardens_.

In 1830--224,745 paying    9,773£
   1831--258,936          11,425£

_Visiters to the Museum_.

In 1831--11,636 paying       333£
Number of Fellows          2,074

    [3] These items, which are not quite correct, are from the
    _Morning Chronicle_ report.

The Society have obtained a grant of nine acres and a half of land, in
the Regent's Park, contiguous to their gardens; and they intend to
devote 1,000_l_. annually to the improvement of the Museum.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CURFEW BELL.

(_To the Editor_.)


Observing in your No. 543, some remarks relating to the ancient custom
of ringing the Curfew Bell, and that _Reginald_, your correspondent, had
withheld the name of the village where he heard the Curfew rang, I am
led to suppose that it may not be uninteresting to your readers to be
informed, that at Saint Helen's Church, Abingdon, this custom is still
continued; the bell is rung at eight o'clock every night, and four
o'clock every morning, during the winter months; why it is rung in the
morning I do not know; perhaps some of your readers can inform me. There
are eight bells in Saint Helen's tower, but the fifth or sixth is
generally used as the Curfew, to distinguish it from the death-bell, for
which purpose the tenor is used, and is rung at the same time at night
if a death has happened in the course of the day, and for that night
supersedes the necessity of ringing the Curfew. The Curfew Bell is rung,
and not tolled, as _Reginald_ states: therefore, what he heard, I
suppose to have been the death bell.       M.D.

(_From another Correspondent_.)

The custom of tolling the Curfew is still retained in the town of
Sandwich, to which place your correspondent, _Reginald_, no doubt
alludes, as the sea-shore is distant about two miles; hence is
distinctly visible the red glare of the Lighthouse on Ramsgate Pier, as
also the North Foreland.        G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


COIN OF EDWARD III.

(_For the Mirror_.)


A beautiful gold coin, a noble of the reign of Edward III., was
discovered, some time since, by the workmen employed in excavating the
river Witham, in the city of Lincoln. The coin is in excellent
preservation. The impress represents the half-length figure of Edward in
a ship, holding a sword in the right hand, and in the left a sceptre and
shield, with the inscription "EDWARDUS DEI GRA. REX ANGL., DYS. HYB. ET
AGT." On the shield are the arms of England and France quarterly. On the
reverse, a cross fleury with lionaux, inscribed, "JESVS AUTEM TRANSIENS
PER MEDIUM ILLORUM IBAT." These coins are very scarce, and remarkable as
being the first impressed with the figure of a ship; this is said to
have been done to commemorate the victory obtained by Edward over the
French fleet off Sluys, on Midsummer-day, 1340, and which is supposed to
have suggested to Edward the idea of claiming superiority over every
other maritime power--a dominion which his successors have now
maintained for nearly five hundred years.       W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


PENDERELL JEWEL.

(_For the Mirror_.)


An ancient medal, or coin, ornamented with jewels, was purchased, a few
years since, of one of the descendants of Penderell, to whom it was
presented by Charles II., as a valuable token of his gratitude for
certain protection afforded by him to that prince, when endeavouring to
effect his escape in disguise from England, in the year 1648. It
consists of a gold coin of Ferdinand II., dated 1638, surrounded by a
row of sixteen brilliants enchased in silver, enriched with blue enamel,
and bearing the motto, "_Usque ad aris fidelis_." The reverse is also
enameled, and the jewel is intended to be worn as an ornament to the
person.       W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


PECUNIARY COMPENSATION FOR PERSONAL INJURIES.

(_For the Mirror_.)


The present laws which enable a person to obtain pecuniary compensation
for personal injuries, appear to be founded on very ancient precedent.
Mr. Sharon Turner, in his History of the Anglo-Saxons, gives a statement
of the sums at which our ancestors valued the various parts of their
earthly tenements. He says "Homer is celebrated for discriminating the
wounds of his heroes with anatomical precision. The Saxon legislators
were not less anxious to distinguish between the different wounds to
which the body is liable, and which from their laws, we infer that they
frequently suffered. In their most ancient laws these were the
punishments:

"The loss of an eye or of a leg, appears to have been considered as the
most aggravated injury that could arise from an assault, and was
therefore punished by the highest fine, or fifty shillings.

"To be made lame, was the next most considerable offence, and the
compensation for it was thirty shillings.

"For a wound which caused deafness, twenty-five shillings.

"To lame the shoulder, divide the chine bone, cut off the thumb, pierce
the diaphragm, or to tear off the hair and fracture the skull, was each
punished by a fine of twenty shillings.

"For cutting off the little finger, eleven shillings.

"For cutting off the great toe, or for tearing off the hair entirely,
ten shillings.

"For piercing the nose, nine shillings.

"For cutting off the fore finger, eight shillings.

"For cutting off the gold-finger, for every wound in the thigh, for
wounding the ear, for piercing both cheeks, for cutting either nostril,
for each of the front teeth, for breaking the jaw bone, for breaking an
arm, six shillings.

"For seizing the hair so as to hurt the bone, for the loss of either of
the eye teeth, or the middle finger, four shillings.

"For pulling the hair so that the bone become visible, for piercing the
ear or one cheek, for cutting off the thumb nail, for the first double
tooth, for wounding the nose with the fist, for wounding the elbow, for
breaking a rib, or for wounding the vertebrae, three shillings.

"For every nail (probably of the fingers) and for every tooth beyond the
first double tooth, one shilling.

"For seizing the hair, fifty scoettas.

"For the nail of the great toe, thirty scoettas.

"For every other nail, ten scoettas."

W.A.R.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE COSMOPOLITE.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE POETRY OF ANCIENT DAYS.

(_For the Mirror_.)


  Little Jack Horner, sat in a corner,
    Eating a Christmas pie,
  He pulled out a plum with his finger and thumb,
    And said what a good boy am I.

Of all the poems that delight our infancy, there is no one perhaps which
makes a more lasting impression on the memory and the imagination, than
the preceding. The name of its author is lost in the shades of remote
antiquity; and even the century when it first made its appearance, has
eluded the vigilance of antiquarian research. Before entering upon its
poetical merits, we must observe a striking peculiarity in the diction:
there is not a single word in it, but that is of Anglo-Saxon origin, so
that it may be considered as an admirable specimen of pure English, and
as calculated to inspire the infant mind with a distaste for the
numerous exotic terms, which, in the present age, disfigure our
language. It has been well remarked in the review of that ancient poem,
Jack and Jill, that the reader's interest in the hero and heroine is not
divided with subordinate characters. But the poem of Jack Horner
possesses this excellence in a more eminent degree; in the former the
interest, is divided between two, in the latter it is concentrated in
one; and, notwithstanding the ingenuity of the reviewer, it must be
confessed that so little is indicated by the poet, as to the character
of Jack and Jill, that we feel no more interest in their fate, tragical
as it is, than if they were designated by the letters X and Y of
algebraical notoriety; or by the names of those personages, who figure
in legal fictions, John Doe and Richard Roe.

Not so with Jack Horner: the very incident recorded in the first line
lets us into his character; he is evidently a lover of solitude and of
solitary contemplation. He is not, however, a gloomy ascetic; he takes
into his corner a Christmas pie, and, while he leisurely gratifies his
palate, his mind feasts on the higher luxury of an approving conscience.
It has been said that the man who loves solitude must be either an angel
or a demon. Horner had more of the former in his composition; he retired
from the busy haunts of his playmates not to meditate mischief, but to
feast upon the pie, which had probably been given him as a reward for
his good conduct, and indulge in the delightful thoughts to which the
consciousness of deserving it gave rise. But here it may be objected,
why instead of eating his pie in a corner, did he not share it with his
companions? The remark is pertinent, but the circumstance only evinces
the admirable management of the poet; to represent his hero without a
defect would be to outrage nature, and to render imitation hopeless.
Horner, it must be admitted, with all his excellence, was too fond of
good eating; it is in vain to deny it; his deliberately pulling out a
plum with his finger and thumb, shows the epicure, not excited by the
voracity of hunger, but evidently aiming to protract his enjoyment. The
exclamation which follows savours of vanity; but when his youth is
recollected, this will be deemed a venial error, and it must also be
considered that his few faults were probably compensated by a
constellation of excellencies. This poem has been imitated, (I will not
say successfully, for its beautiful simplicity is in fact inimitable,)
by one of the greatest statesmen and classical scholars of the present
century, Mr. Canning; and it is melancholy to reflect that, while a
monument is erecting to the memory of the latter and his name lives in
the mouths of men, all traces of that original poet, whose inspirations
he sought to imitate, are entirely lost. The lines of Mr. Canning are to
be found in his "Loves of the Triangles:"

  Thus youthful Homer rolled the roguish eye.
  Culled the dark plum from out the Christmas pie,
  And cried in self applause, how good a boy am I.

P.Q.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANECDOTE GALLERY.


       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGE THE FIRST.


Previously to the King's arrival in this country, a proclamation had
been issued, offering, in case the Pretender should land in any part of
the British isles, the sum of 100,000_l_. for his apprehension. At the
first masquerade which the King attended in this country, an unknown
lady, in a domino, invited him to drink a glass of wine at one of the
side-tables; he readily assented, and the lady filling a bumper, said,
"Here, mask, the Pretender's health."--Then filling another glass, she
presented it to the King, who received it with a smile, saying, "I
drink, with all my heart, to the health of every unfortunate prince."

The person of the King, says Walpole, is as perfect in my memory as if I
saw him but yesterday: it was that of an elderly man, rather pale, and
exactly like his pictures and coins; not tall, of an aspect rather good
than august, with a dark tie wig, a plain coat, waistcoat and breeches,
of snuff-coloured cloth, with stockings of the same colour, and a blue
riband over all.

He often dined, after shooting, at Sir Robert Walpole's house on
Richmond Hill; where he indulged his partiality for punch to such an
extent, that the Duchess of Kendal enjoined the Germans who usually
accompanied him, to restrain him from drinking too much: but they went
about their task with so little address, that the King took offence, and
silenced them by the coarsest epithets in their mother tongue.

He appears to have entertained a very low opinion of the political
integrity of his courtiers, and the honesty of his household. He laughed
at the complaints made by Sir Robert Walpole against the Hanoverians,
for selling places; and would not believe that the custom was not
sanctioned by his English advisers and attendants. Soon after his first
arrival in this country, a favourite cook, whom he had brought from
Hanover grew melancholy, and wanted to return home. The King having
inquired why he wanted to quit his household, the fellow replied, "I
have long served your Majesty honestly, not suffering any thing to be
embezzled in your kitchen; but here, the dishes no sooner come from your
table, than one steals a fowl, another a pig, a third a joint of meat, a
fourth a pie, and so on, till the whole is gone; and I cannot bear to
see your Majesty so injured!" The King, laughing heartily, said, "My
revenues here enable me to bear these things; and, to reconcile you to
your place, do you steal like the rest, and mind you take enough." The
cook followed this advice, and soon became a very expert thief.

Toland says, in a pamphlet published about the year 1705, I need give no
more particular proof of the King's frugality in laying out the public
money, than that all the expenses of his court, as to eating, drinking,
fire, candles, and the like, are duly paid every Saturday night; the
officers of his army receive their pay every month, and all the civil
list are cleared every half year. He was greatly annoyed by the want of
confidence in his economy, displayed by his British subjects; lamenting
to his private friends that he had left his electorate to become a
begging King; and adding, that he thought it very hard to be constantly
opposed in his application for supplies, which it was his intention to
employ for the benefit of the nation.

The account of the death of George the First was first brought to
Walpole, in a dispatch from Townshend, who had accompanied that monarch
to the continent. The minister instantly repaired to the palace at
Richmond. The new King had then retired to take his usual afternoon nap.
On being informed that his father was dead, he could scarcely be brought
to put faith in the intelligence, until told that the minister was
waiting in the ante-chamber with Lord Townshend's despatch. At length,
he received Walpole, who, kneeling, kissed his hand, and inquired whom
he would please to appoint to draw up the address to the Privy Council.
"Sir Spencer Compton," replied the King, an answer which signified Sir
Robert's dismissal.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEATH OF QUEEN CAROLINE.


When very near her end, she inquired of one of the physicians in
attendance, "How long can this last?" "Your Majesty will soon be eased
of your pains," was the reply. "The sooner the better," said the Queen:
and she then most fervently engaged in extempore prayer. Shortly
afterwards, she twice desired that cold water might be thrown over her,
to support her strength, while her family put up a final petition in her
behalf. "Pray aloud," said she, "that I may hear you." She then faintly
joined them in repeating the Lord's prayer; and, at its conclusion,
calmly laid down, waved her hand, and expired.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGE THE SECOND.


At one period, while the Duke of Newcastle was in power, in the reign of
George II. many serious complaints were made relative to the settlement
of public accounts. The King, at length, became acquainted with the
alleged grievances, and warmly remonstrated with the Duke on his
carelessness and inattention; protested that he was determined, at once
for his own satisfaction and that of his aggrieved people, to look into
the papers himself. "Is your Majesty in earnest?" asked the Duke. The
King replied in the affirmative, and the Duke promised to send him the
accounts. At an early hour on the following morning, the King was
disturbed by an extraordinary noise in the courtyard of his palace, and,
looking out of the window, he perceived a cart or a wagon laden with
books and papers, which, on inquiry he found had been sent by the Duke
of Newcastle. Shortly afterwards the minister himself appeared, and the
King asked him what he meant by sending a wagon-load of stationery to
the palace. "These are the documents relative to the public accounts,"
replied his grace, "which your Majesty insisted on examining; and there
is no other mode of forwarding them except by carts or wagons. I expect
a second load will arrive in a few minutes." "Then, my Lord Duke,"
replied the King, "you may make a bonfire of them for me. I would rather
be a galley-slave than go through the rubbish; so away with it, and
countermand the cart which you say is coming; but pray let me hear no
more complaints on this subject."

On another occasion, he sent, in a fury, for the duke's brother, Mr.
Pelham, and inquired, in a coarse and angry manner, why the civil list
had not been paid. Pelham replied that he had been compelled to use the
money for some public and more important purpose. The King, however,
would not admit of this excuse; and swore, if the arrears were not
instantly paid, he would get another minister. "I am determined," said
he, "not to be the only master in my dominions who does not pay his
servants' wages." One day, it appears that he was actually without a
shilling in his pocket; for it is related that a half idiot labourer
while the King was inspecting the progress of some repairs at
Kensington, having asked his Majesty for something to drink, the King,
although offended, was yet ashamed to refuse the fellow, and put his
hand into the usual receptacle of his cash; but, to his surprise and
confusion, found it empty. "I have no money," said he, angrily. "Nor I
either," quoth the labourer; "and for my part, I can't think what has
become of it all."

Few men were more deeply impressed with the value of money, although he
occasionally startled those about him, by being unexpectedly liberal, as
in the cases of his donation to the university of Cambridge, and his
submitting to the extortion of the Dutch innkeeper. One evening while
passing by a closet in which wood was kept for the use of the
bed-chamber, he dropped some guineas, one of which having rolled under
the door, he said to the page in waiting, "We must get out this guinea:
let us remove the fuel." In a short time, with the attendant's aid, he
found the guinea, which, however, he gave to his fellow-labourer, as a
reward for the exertions of the latter, in helping him to take the wood
out of the closet, observing, "I do not like any thing to be lost, but I
wish every man to receive the value of his work."

Of the hastiness of George the Second's temper, several examples have
been given: but it was never, perhaps, more ludicrously displayed than
in his first interview with Dr. Ward. The King having been afflicted for
some time with a violent pain in his thumb, for which his regular
medical attendants could afford him no relief, he sought the assistance
of Ward, whose famous pills and drops were then in great estimation. The
doctor, being aware of the King's complaint, went to the palace, at the
time commanded, with, it is said, a specific concealed in the hollow of
his hand. On being admitted to his Majesty's presence, he, of course,
proceeded to examine the royal thumb; which he suddenly wrenched with
such violence, that the King called him a cursed rascal, and
condescended to kick his shins. He soon found, however, that the doctor,
had as it were, magically relieved his thumb from pain: and so grateful
did he feel to Ward, whom he now termed his Esculapius, that he
prevailed on him to accept a handsome carriage and horses, and shortly
afterwards, presented his nephew, who subsequently became a general,
with an ensigncy in the guards.--_From the Georgian Era_.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF A READER.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE HUNCHBACK.

_A Play, by James Sheridan Knowles_.


It would be rather _mal-apropos_ to write the Beauties of the Hunchback,
but such a term is elliptically applicable to the following passages
from Mr. Knowles's clever and original play:--


INSIGNIFICANT ENEMIES.

  Is't fit you waste your choler on a burr?
  The nothings of the town; whose sport it is
  To break their villain jests on worthy men,
  The graver still the fitter! Fie, for shame!
  Regard what such would say? So would not I,
  No more than heed a cur.


HONOURABLE SUCCESS.

  What merit to be dropp'd on fortune's hill?
  The honour is to mount it.
  *   *   *   Knowledge, industry,
  Frugality, and honesty;--the sinews
  The surest help the climber to the top,
  And keep him there.


WISE PRECEPT.

                           Better owe
  A yard of land to labour, than to chance
  Be debtor for a rood!


THE TOWN.

  Nine times in ten the town's a hollow thing,
  Where what things are is naught to what they show;
  Where merit's name laughs merit's self to scorn!
  Where friendship and esteem that ought to be
  The tenants of men's hearts, lodge in their looks
  And tongues alone. Where little virtue, with
  A costly keeper, passes for a heap;
  A heap for none, that has a homely one!
  Where fashion makes the law--your umpire which
  You bow to, whether it has brains or not.
  Where Folly taketh off his cap and bells,
  To clap on Wisdom, which must bear the jest!
  Where, to pass current you must seem the thing,
  The passive thing, that others think, and not
  Your simple, honest, independent self!


LOVE.

  Say but a moment, still I say I love you.
  Love's not a flower that grows on the dull earth;
  Springs by the calendar; must wait for sun--
  For rain;--matures by parts,--must take its time
  To stem, to leaf, to bud, to blow. It owns
  A richer soil, and boasts a quicker seed!
  You look for it, and see it not; and lo!
  E'en while you look, the peerless flower is up,
  Consumate in the birth!

  In joining contrasts lieth love's delight.
  Complexion, stature, nature, mateth it,
  Not with their kinds, but with their opposites.
  Hence hands of snow in palms of russet lie;
  The form of Hercules affects the sylph's
  And breasts that case the lion's fear-proof heart,
  Find their lov'd lodge in arms where tremors dwell!
  Haply for this, on Afric's swarthy neck,
  Hath Europe's priceless pearl been seen to hang,
  That makes the orient poor! So with degrees,
  Rank passes by the circlet-graced brow
  Upon the forehead bare of notelessness,
  To print the nuptial kiss!


COUNTRY LIFE.

  The life I'd lead!
  But fools would fly from it; for O! 'tis sweet!
  It finds the heart out, be there one to find;
  And corners in't where store of pleasures lodge,
  We never dream'd were there! It is to dwell
  'Mid smiles that are not neighbours to deceit;
  Music whose melody is of the heart
  And gifts that are not made for interest,--
  Abundantly bestow'd, by nature's cheek,
  And voice, and hand! It is to live on life,
  And husband it! It is to constant scan
  The handiwork of heaven! It is to con
  Its mercy, bounty, wisdom, power! It is
  To nearer see our God!


JEALOUSY.

  A dreadful question is it, when we love,
  To ask if love's return'd! I did believe
  Fair Julia's heart was mine--I doubt it now.
  But once last night she danced with me, her hand
  To this gallant and that engaged, as soon
  As asked for! Maid that loved would scarce do this!
  Nor visit we together as we used,
  When first she came to town.  She loves me less
  Than once she did--or loves me not at all.
  Misfortune liketh company: it seldom
  Visits its friends alone.


A MAIDEN HEART.

  A young woman's heart,
  Is not a stone to carve a posey on!
  Which knows not what is writ on't--which you may buy,
  Exchange or sell,--keep or give away,
  It is a richer--yet a poorer thing!
  Priceless to him that owns and prizes it;
  Worthless when own'd, not priz'd; which makes the man
  That covets it, obtains it, and discards it,--
  A fool, if not a villain.


A CURATE'S SON.

  Better be a yeoman's son!
  Was it the rector's son, he might be known,
  Because the rector is a rising man,
  And may become a bishop.  He goes light.
  The curate ever hath a loaded back.
  He may be called yeoman of the church
  That sweating does his work, and drudges on
  While lives the hopeful rector at his ease.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHARACTER OF GEORGE THE FOURTH.


In the third and concluding volume of the _Life and Reign of George
IV_., (a portion of Dr. Lardner's _Cabinet Library_,) we find the
following summary of the earthly career of the late King--shaded with
some admixture of severity, but, altogether, to be commended for the
manliness and unflinching spirit in which it is written. Our
contemporary biography sadly lacks vigorous and plain-speaking summaries
of character.

"In the events and achievements which give interest and lustre to his
regency and reign, George IV. had personally no share. He was but
contemporary with them. To the progress of science, of literature, of
legislation, he was a stranger. The jealous limitations of the regal
power,--the independence, enterprise, and social advancement of the
nation, would account and afford excuse for this: but were he absolute
as Louis XIV.,--obeyed and imitated with the same implicit
servility,--the higher purposes of intellectual being were beyond his
range. With the fine arts his relations were more close and personal.
The progress of architecture was sudden and astonishing, during the
epoch which will bear his name. London, before his accession to the
executive power, was a rich, populous, elegantly built capital, but
without a due proportion of prominent structures characterized by
architectural grandeur, beauty, or curiosity. In a few years magnificent
lines and masses of building were begun and completed; but they were
mainly the growth of wealth, vanity, speculation, and peace. Where his
influence was directly felt it proved unfortunate. He lavished millions
in creating vicious models, and fantastic styles of architecture, and
brought into fashion artists without capacity or taste. There was not in
his kingdom a more discerning judge of painting; but he had no
imagination for the higher class of art. He preferred the exquisite and
humorous realities of the Dutch painters to the poetic or historic
schools of Italy; and, though a studious collector, he gave no great
impulse to native talent. In music he had both taste and skill: he
encouraged an art which formed one of his enjoyments; and if his
patronage has brought forth no composer of the first order, the cause
may exist in some circumstances of national inaptitude.

"It is necessary to go back some centuries for an English king to whom
he bears the nearest likeness in _ensemble_ of character. The parallel
at first sight may be thought injurious, but the likeness will upon
consideration be found striking and complete. George IV. had in his
youth the eclat of personal endowment, education, and accomplishment,--
of success in the fashionable exercises and graces of his age,--and of
that reckless prodigality which obtains popular homage and applause in a
prince. Henry VIII. in his youth was one of the most brilliant
personages of Europe. A fine person,--the accomplishments of his time in
literature and the arts,--the display of gorgeous prodigality,--raised
him to a sort of chivalrous rivalry with Francis I. In mental culture he
excelled George IV., who owes much of his reputation for capacity and
acquirement to an imposing manner, and the eagerness to applaud a
prince: stripped of this charm, his ideas and language appeared worse
than common when he put them on paper. Both had the same dominant
ambition to be distinguished and imitated, as the arbiters of fashion in
dress for the costliness, splendour, or novelty of their toilet. Henry
VIII. and George IV. surrounded themselves with the men most
distinguished for wit and talent, with a remarkable coincidence of
motive, as ministering to their vanity or pleasures; but as soon as they
became troublesome or useless, both cast them off with the same careless
indifference. Henry VIII., it is true, sacrificed to his own caprices,
or to court intrigue, the lives of those whom he had chosen for his
social familiarity;--whilst George IV. merely turned off his so called
friends, and thought of them no more. But such is the difference between
barbarism and tyranny on the one side, and civilization and freedom on
the other: that which was death in the former, is but court disgrace in
the latter. George IV. was not cruel--he had even a certain
susceptibility; the spectacle of human suffering revolted him: but
suffering to affect him must have been present to his sense. Was Henry
VIII. gratuitously cruel? That does not appear. He took no pleasure for
itself in shedding blood, and avoided being a witness of it. Had he been
obliged to look on whilst Anne Boleyn and Sir Thomas More were bleeding,
he probably would have spared them. He sacrificed them to his impulses
from mere selfish indifference. With their wives and mistresses Henry
VIII. and George IV. were governed by the same self-indulgent
despotism--the same animal disgusts. Henry VIII. had six wives, and sent
one to the scaffold as the prelude to his marriage with another. George
IV. had only one wife, but she suffered the persecutions of six; and if
she escaped decapitation or divorce, it was from no failure of
inclination or instruments. Henry VIII. was the tyrant of his people,
and George IV. was not: yet is there even here a similitude. Both
surrendered their understandings to their ministers, upon the condition
of subserviency to their personal desires. What George would have been
in the age of Henry it might be ungracious to suppose; but it may be
asserted that Henry, had he been reserved for the close of the
eighteenth century, would have a very different place in opinion and
history as a king and as a man,--such are the beneficent, humanizing
influences of knowledge, civilization, the spirit of religious
tolerance, and laws mutually guarding and guarded by public liberty!"

       *       *       *       *       *


AN ECLIPSE AT BOOSSA.

(_From Landers' Travels, vol. ii._)


"About ten o'clock at night, when we were sleeping on our mats, we were
suddenly awoke by a great cry of distress from innumerable voices,
attended by a horrid clashing and clattering noise, which the hour of
the night tended to make more terrific. Before we had time to recover
from our surprise, old Pascoe rushed breathless into our hut, and
informed us with a trembling voice that 'the sun was dragging the moon
across the heavens.' Wondering what could be the meaning of so strange
and ridiculous a story, we ran out of the hut half dressed, and we
discovered that the moon was totally eclipsed. A number of people were
gathered together in our yard, in dreadful apprehension that the world
was at an end, and that this was but the 'beginning of sorrows.' We
learnt from them that the Mahomedan priests residing in the city, having
personified the sun and moon, had told the king and the people that the
eclipse was occasioned through the obstinacy and disobedience of the
latter luminary. They said that for a long time previously the moon had
been displeased with the path she had been compelled to take through the
heavens, because it was filled with thorns and briers, and obstructed
with a thousand other difficulties; and therefore that, having watched
for a favourable opportunity, she had this evening deserted her usual
track, and entered into that of the sun. She had not, however, travelled
far up the sky, on the forbidden road, before the circumstance was
discovered by the sun, who immediately hastened to her in his anger, and
punished her dereliction by clothing her in darkness, forcing her back
to her own territories, and forbidding her to shed her light upon the
earth. This story, whimsical as it may seem, was received with implicit
confidence in its truth by the king and queen and most of the people of
Boossà; and the cause of the noises which we had heard, and which were
still continuing with renewed vehemence, was explained to us by the fact
that they were all 'assembled together in the hope of being able to
frighten away the sun to his proper sphere, and leave the moon to
enlighten the world as at other times.' This is much after the manner of
many savage nations.

