Sardis, the ancient capital of the kingdom of Lydia, is situated on the
river Pactolus, in the fertile plain below Mount Tmolus. Wealth, pomp,
and luxury characterised this city from very ancient times. The story of
Croesus, its last King, is frequently alluded to by historians, as
affording a remarkable example of the instability of human greatness.
This Monarch considered himself the happiest of human beings, but being
checked by the philosopher Solon for his arrogance, he was offended, and
dismissed the sage from his Court with disgrace. Not long afterwards,
led away by the ambiguous answers of the oracles, he conducted a large
army into the field against Cyrus, the future conqueror of Babylon, but
was defeated, and obliged to return to his capital, where he shut
himself up. Hither he was soon followed and besieged by Cyrus, with a
far inferior force; but, at the expiration of fourteen days, the
citadel, which had been deemed impregnable, was taken by a stratagem,
and Croesus was condemned to the flames. When the sentence was about to
be executed, he was heard to invoke the name of Solon, and the curiosity
of Cyrus being excited, he asked the cause; and, having heard his
narrative, ordered him to be set free, and subsequently received him
into his confidence.

[Illustration: SARDIS.]

Under the Romans, Sardis declined in importance, and, being destroyed by
an earthquake, for some time lay desolate, until it was rebuilt by the
Roman Emperor Tiberius.

The situation of Sardis is very beautiful, but the country over which it
looks is almost deserted, and the valley is become a swamp. The hill of
the citadel, when seen from the opposite bank of the Hermus, appears of
a triangular form; and at the back of it rise ridge after ridge of
mountains, the highest covered with snow, and many of them bearing
evident marks of having been jagged and distorted by earthquakes. The
citadel is exceedingly difficult of ascent; but the magnificent view
which it commands of the plain of the Hermus, and other objects of
interest, amply repays the risk and fatigue. The village, small as it
is, boasts of containing one of the most remarkable remains of
antiquity in Asia; namely, the vast Ionic temple of the heathen goddess
Cybele, or the earth, on the banks of the Pactolus. In 1750, six columns
of this temple were standing, but four of them have since been thrown
down by the Turks, for the sake of the gold which they expected to find
in the joints.

Two or three mills and a few mud huts, inhabited by Turkish herdsmen,
contain all the present population of Sardis.

       *       *       *       *       *


MARTELLO TOWERS.


[Illustration: Letter A.]

At a time when there appeared to be good reason for believing that the
invasion of England was contemplated, the Government turned their
attention to the defence of such portions of the coast as seemed to
present the greatest facility for the landing of a hostile force. As the
Kentish coast, from East Were Bay to Dymchurch, seemed more especially
exposed, a line of Martello Towers was erected between these two points,
at a distance from each other of from one-quarter to three-quarters of a
mile. Other towers of the same kind were erected on various parts of the
coast where the shore was low, in other parts of England, but more
particularly in the counties of Sussex and Suffolk. Towers of this
construction appear to have been adopted, owing to the resistance that
was made by the Tower of Martella, in the Island of Corsica, to the
British forces under Lord Hood and General Dundas, in 1794. This tower
which was built in the form of an obtruncated cone--like the body of a
windmill--was situated in Martella, or Martle Bay. As it rendered the
landing of the troops difficult, Commodore Linzee anchored in the bay to
the westward, and there landed the troops on the evening of the 7th of
February, taking possession of a height that commanded the tower. As the
tower impeded the advance of the troops, it was the next day attacked
from the bay by the vessels _Fortitude_ and _Juno_; but after a
cannonade of two hours and a half, the ships were obliged to haul off,
the _Fortitude_ having sustained considerable damage from red-hot shot
discharged from the tower. The tower, after having been cannonaded from
the height for two days, surrendered; rather, it would appear, from the
alarm of the garrison, than from any great injury that the tower had
sustained. The English, on taking possession of the fort, found that the
garrison had originally consisted of thirty-three men, of whom two only
were wounded, though mortally. The walls were of great thickness, and
bomb-proof; and the parapet consisted of an interior lining of rush
matting, filled up to the exterior of the parapet with sand. The only
guns they had were two 18-pounders.

The towers erected between East Were Bay and Dymchurch (upwards of
twenty) were built of brick, and were from about 35 feet to 40 feet
high: the entrance to them was by a low door-way, about seven feet and a
half from the ground; and admission was gained by means of a ladder,
which was afterwards withdrawn into the interior. A high step of two
feet led to the first floor of the tower, a room of about thirteen feet
diameter, and with the walls about five feet thick. Round this room
were loopholes in the walls, at such an elevation, that the men would be
obliged to stand on benches in the event of their being required to
oppose an attack of musketry. Those benches were also used as the
sleeping-places of the garrison. On this floor there was a fire-place,
and from the centre was a trap-door leading downwards to the ammunition
and provision rooms. The second floor was ascended by similar means.

[Illustration: MARTELLO TOWER ON THE KENTISH COAST.]

       *       *       *       *       *


TURKISH CUSTOMS.


[Illustration: Letter C.]

Characteristically indolent, the fondness for a sedentary life is
stronger, perhaps, with the Turks, than with any other people of whom we
read. It is difficult to describe the gravity and apathy which
constitute the distinguishing features of their character: everything in
their manners tends to foster in them, especially in the higher classes,
an almost invincible love of ease and luxurious leisure. The general
rule which they seem to lay down for their guidance, is that taking the
trouble to do anything themselves which they can possibly get others to
do for them; and the precision with which they observe it in some of the
minutest trifles of domestic life is almost amusing. A Turkish
gentleman, who has once composed his body upon the corner of a sofa,
appears to attach a certain notion of grandeur to the keeping of it
there, and it is only something of the gravest importance that induces
him to disturb his position. If he wishes to procure anything that is
within a few steps of him, he summons his slaves by clapping his hands
(the Eastern mode of "ringing the bell"), and bids them bring it to him:
his feelings of dignity would be hurt by getting up to reach it himself.
Of course, this habit of inaction prevails equally with the female sex:
a Turkish lady would not think of picking up a fallen handkerchief, so
long as she had an attendant to do it for her. As may be supposed, the
number of slaves in a Turkish household of any importance is very great.

[Illustration: TURKISH FEMALE SLAVE.]

The position of women in Eastern countries is so totally unlike that
which they hold in our own happy land, that we must refer expressly to
it, in order that the picture of domestic life presented to us in the
writings of all travellers in the East may be understood. Amongst all
ranks, the wife is not the friend and companion, but the slave of her
husband; and even when treated with kindness and affection, her state is
still far below that of her sisters in Christian lands. Even in the
humblest rank of life, the meal which the wife prepares with her own
hands for her husband, she must not partake of with him. The
hard-working Eastern peasant, and the fine lady who spends most of her
time in eating sweet-meats, or in embroidery, are both alike dark and
ignorant; for it would be accounted a folly, if not a sin, to teach them
even to read.

Numerous carriers, or sellers of water, obtain their living in the East
by supplying the inhabitants with it. They are permitted to fill their
water-bags, made of goat-skins, at the public fountains. This goat-skin
of the carrier has a long brass spout, and from this the water is poured
into a brass cup, for any one who wishes to drink. Many of these are
employed by the charitable, to distribute water in the streets; and they
pray the thirsty to partake of the bounty offered to them in the name of
God, praying that Paradise and pardon may be the lot of him who affords
the refreshing gift.

[Illustrated: TURKISH WATER-CARRIER]

The Dancing Dervises are a religious order of Mohamedans, who affect a
great deal of patience, humility, and charity. Part of their religious
observance consists in dancing or whirling their bodies round with the
greatest rapidity imaginable, to the sound of a flute; and long practice
has enabled them to do this without suffering the least inconvenience
from the strange movement.

In Eastern countries, the bread is generally made in the form of a large
thin cake, which is torn and folded up, almost like a sheet of paper;
it can then be used (as knives and forks are not employed by the
Orientals) for the purpose of rolling together a mouthful of meat, or
supping up gravy and vegetables, at the meals.

[Illustration: DANCING DERVISE.]

       *       *       *       *       *


ON STUDY.


Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. The chief use
for delight is in privateness and retiring; for ornament, is in
discourse; and for ability, is in the judgment and disposition of
business. For expert men can execute, and perhaps judge of particulars
one by one; but the general counsels, and the plots, and marshalling of
affairs, come best from those that are learned. To spend too much time
in studies, is sloth; to use them too much for ornament, is affectation;
to make judgment wholly by their rules, is the humour of a scholar. They
perfect nature, and are perfected by experience; for natural abilities
are like natural plants, that need pruning by duty; and studies
themselves do give forth directions too much at large, except they be
bounded in by experience. Crafty men contemn studies, simple men admire
them, and wise men use them: for they teach not their own use, but that
is a wisdom without them, and above them, won by observation. Read not
to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for granted; not to
find talk and discourse, but to weigh and consider. Some books are to be
tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested:
that is, some books are to be read only in parts; others to be read, but
not curiously; and some few to be read wholly, and with diligence and
attention. Some books also may be read by deputy, and extracts made of
them by others; but that should be only in the less important arguments,
and the meaner sorts of books; else distilled books are like common
distilled waters, flashy things. Reading maketh a full man; conference a
ready man; and writing an exact man. And, therefore, if a man write
little, he had need have a great memory; if he confer little, he had
need have a present wit; and if he read little, he had need have much
cunning, to seem to know that he doth not.

BACON.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SHORES OF GREECE.


    He who hath bent him o'er the dead
    Ere the first day of death is fled;
    The first dark day of nothingness.
    The last of danger and distress:
    Before Decay's effacing fingers,
    Have swept the lines where beauty lingers,
    And mark'd the mild, angelic air,
    The rapture of repose that's there;
    The fix'd, yet tender traits that streak
    The languor of the placid cheek.

    And, but for that sad shrouded eye,
      That fires not--wins not--weeps not--now;
      And, but for that chill, changeless brow,
    Whose touch thrills with mortality,
    And curdles to the gazer's heart,
    As if to him it could impart
    The doom he dreads, yet dwells upon:
    Yes, but for these, and these alone
    Some moments--ay, one treacherous hour--
    He still might doubt the tyrant's power;
    So fair, so calm, so softly seal'd,
    The first, last look by death reveal'd.

      Such is the aspect of this shore;
    'Tis Greece, but living Greece no more!
      So coldly sweet--so deadly fair--
      We start, for soul is wanting there:
      Hers is the loveliness in death
      That parts not quite with parting breath;
      But beauty, with that fearful bloom,
      That hue which haunts it to the tomb:
      Expression's last receding ray,
      A gilded halo hovering round decay,
      The farewell beam of feeling past away!
    Spark of that flame--perchance of Heavenly birth,
    Which gleams, but warms no more its cherish'd earth!

    BYRON.

[Illustration: SUBTERRANEAN CHAPEL, GREECE.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FORT OF ATTOCK.


[Illustration: Letter A.]

Attock is a fort and small town in the Punjaub, on the left or east bank
of the Indus, 942 miles from the sea, and close below the place where it
receives the water of the Khabool river, and first becomes navigable.
The name, signifying _obstacle_, is supposed to have been given to it
under the presumption that no scrupulous Hindoo would proceed westward
of it; but this strict principle, like many others of similar nature, is
little acted on. Some state that the name was given by the Emperor
Akbar, because he here found much difficulty in crossing the river. The
river itself is at this place frequently by the natives called Attock.
Here is a bridge, formed usually of from twenty to thirty boats, across
the stream, at a spot where it is 537 feet wide. In summer, when the
melting of the snows in the lofty mountains to the north raises the
stream so that the bridge becomes endangered, it is withdrawn, and the
communication is then effected by means of a ferry.

The banks of the river are very high, so that the enormous accession
which the volume of water receives during inundation scarcely affects
the breadth, but merely increases the depth. The rock forming the banks
is of a dark-coloured slate, polished by the force of the stream, so as
to shine like black marble. Between these, "one clear blue stream shot
past." The depth of the Indus here is thirty feet in the lowest state,
and between sixty and seventy in the highest, and runs at the rate of
six miles an hour. There is a ford at some distance above the confluence
of the river of Khabool; but the extreme coldness and rapidity of the
water render it at all times very dangerous, and on the slightest
inundation quite impracticable. The bridge is supported by an
association of boatmen, who receive the revenue of a village allotted
for this purpose by the Emperor Akbar, and a small daily pay as long as
the bridge stands, and also levy a toll on all passengers.

On the right bank, opposite Attock, is Khyrabad--a fort built, according
to some, by the Emperor Akbar, according to others by Nadir Shah. This
locality is, in a military and commercial point of view, of much
importance, as the Indus is here crossed by the great route which,
proceeding from Khabool eastward through the Khyber Pass into the
Punjaub, forms the main line of communication between Affghanistan and
Northern India. The river was here repeatedly crossed by the British
armies, during the late military operations in Affghanistan; and here,
according to the general opinion, Alexander, subsequently Timur, the
Tartar conqueror, and, still later, Nadir Shah, crossed; but there is
much uncertainty on these points.

[Illustration: THE FORT OF ATTOCK.]

The fortress was erected by the Emperor Akbar, in 1581 to command the
passage; but, though strongly built of stone on the high and steep bank
of the river, it could offer no effectual resistance to a regular
attack, being commanded by the neighbouring heights. Its form is that of
a parallelogram: it is 800 yards long and 400 wide. The population of
the town, which is inclosed within the walls of the fort, is estimated
at 2000.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ORDER OF NATURE.


[Illustration: Letter S.]

    See through this air, this ocean, and this earth,
    All matter quick, and bursting into birth.
    Above, how high progressive life may go!
    Around, how wide! how deep extend below!
    Vast chain of Being! which from God began,
    Natures ethereal, human, angel, man,
    Beast, bird, fish, insect, what no eye can see
    No glass can reach; from Infinity to thee
    From thee to Nothing.--On superior pow'rs
    Were we to press, inferior might on ours;
    Or in the full creation leave a void,
    Where one step broken the great scale's destroyed
    From Nature's chain whatever link you strike,
    Tenth or ten-thousandth, breaks the chain alike.

    And, if each system in gradation roll
    Alike essential to th' amazing whole,
    The least confusion but in one, not all
    That system only, but the whole must fall.
    Let earth unbalanc'd from her orbit fly,
    Planets and suns run lawless through the sky;
    Let ruling angels from their spheres be hurl'd,
    Being on being wreck'd, and world on world,
    Heav'n's whole foundations to the centre nod,
    And Nature trembles to the throne of God:
    All this dread Order break--for whom? for thee?
    Vile worm!--Oh, madness! pride! impiety!

    What if the foot, ordain'd the dust to tread,
    Or hand to toil, aspired to be the head?
    What if the head, the eye, or ear, repined
    To serve--mere engines to the ruling Mind?
    Just as absurd for any part to claim
    To be another, in this general frame:
    Just as absurd to mourn the tasks or pains,
    The great directing Mind of All ordains.

    All are but parts of one stupendous whole
    Whose body Nature is, and God the Soul:
    That changed through all, and yet in all the same,
    Great is in earth as in th' ethereal frame,
    Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
    Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees,
    Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
    Spreads undivided, operates unspent;
    Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part,
    As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart;
    As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns,
    As the rapt seraph that adores and burns:
    To him no high, no low, no great, no small;
    He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all.

    Cease then, nor Order Imperfection name:
    Our proper bliss depends on what we blame.
    Know thy own point: This kind, this due degree
    Of blindness, weakness, Heav'n bestows on thee.
    Submit--in this, or any other sphere,
    Secure to be as blest as thou canst bear:
    Safe in the hand of one disposing Pow'r
    Or in the natal, or the mortal hour.
    All Nature is but Art, unknown to thee;
    All Chance, Direction which thou canst not see;
    All Discord, Harmony not understood;
    All partial Evil, universal Good:
    And, spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite,
    One truth is clear, WHATEVER is, is RIGHT.

    POPE.

       *       *       *       *       *


LORD CLARENDON.


[Illustration: Letter T.]

This celebrated statesman, who flourished in the reigns of Charles I.
and II., took a prominent part in the eventful times in which he lived.
He was not of noble birth, but the descendant of a family called Hyde,
which resided from a remote period at Norbury, in Cheshire. He was
originally intended for the church, but eventually became a lawyer,
applying himself to the study of his profession with a diligence far
surpassing that of the associates with whom he lived. In 1635, he
attracted the notice of Archbishop Laud, which may be regarded as the
most fortunate circumstance of his life, as it led to his introduction
to Charles I. In consequence of the ability displayed by him in the
responsible duties he was called to perform, that Monarch offered him
the office of Solicitor-General. But this Hyde declined, preferring, as
he said, to serve the King in an unofficial capacity. After the battle
of Naseby, Hyde was appointed one of the council formed to attend, watch
over, and direct the Prince of Wales. After hopelessly witnessing for
many months a course of disastrous and ill-conducted warfare in the
West, the council fled with the Prince, first to the Scilly Islands,
near Cornwall, and thence to Jersey. From this place, against the wishes
of Hyde, the Prince, in 1640, repaired to his mother, Henrietta, at
Paris, leaving Hyde at Jersey, where he remained for two years, engaged
in the composition of his celebrated "History of the Rebellion." In May,
1648, Hyde was summoned to attend the Prince at the Hague; and here they
received the news of the death of Charles I., which is said to have
greatly appalled them. After faithfully following the new King in all
his vicissitudes of fortune, suffering at times extreme poverty, he
attained at the Restoration the period of his greatest power. In 1660,
his daughter Anne was secretly married to the Duke of York; but when,
after a year, it was openly acknowledged, the new Lord Chancellor
received the news with violent demonstrations of indignation and grief.
Hyde, in fact, never showed any avidity for emoluments or distinction;
but when this marriage was declared, it became desirable that some mark
of the King's favour should be shown, and he was created Earl of
Clarendon. He subsequently, from political broils, was compelled to
exile himself from the Court, and took up his residence at Montpellier,
where, resuming his literary labours, he completed his celebrated
History, and the memoir of his life. After fruitlessly petitioning King
Charles II. for permission to end his days in England, the illustrious
exile died at Rouen, in 1674, in the sixty-fifth year of his age.

[Illustration: STATUE OF LORD CLARENDON.]

       *       *       *       *       *


OWLS.


[Illustration: Letter I.]

It is now generally known that the Owl renders the farmer important
service, by ridding him of vermin, which might otherwise consume the
produce of his field; but in almost every age and country it has been
regarded as a bird of ill omen, and sometimes even as the herald of
death. In France, the cry or hoot is considered as a certain forerunner
of misfortune to the hearer. In Tartary, the owl is looked upon in
another light, though not valued as it ought to be for its useful
destruction of moles, rats, and mice. The natives pay it great respect,
because they attribute to this bird the preservation of the founder of
their empire, Genghis Khan. That Prince, with his army, happened to be
surprised and put to flight by his enemies, and was forced to conceal
himself in a little coppice. An owl settled on the bush under which he
was hid, and his pursuers did not search there, as they thought it
impossible the bird would perch on a place where any man was concealed.
Thenceforth his countrymen held the owl to be a sacred bird, and every
one wore a plume of its feathers on his head.

One of the smallest of the owl tribe utters but one melancholy note now
and then. The Indians in North America whistle whenever they chance to
hear the solitary note; and if the bird does not very soon repeat his
harmless cry, the speedy death of the superstitious hearer is foreboded.
It is hence called the death bird. The voices of all carnivorous birds
and beasts are harsh, and at times hideous; and probably, like that of
the owl, which, from the width and capacity of its throat, is in some
varieties very powerful, may be intended as an alarm and warning to the
birds and animals on which they prey, to secure themselves from the
approach of their stealthy foe.

Owls are divided into two groups or families--one having two tufts of
feathers on the head, which have been called ears or horns, and are
moveable at pleasure, the others having smooth round heads without
tufts. The bills are hooked in both. There are upwards of sixty species
of owls widely spread over almost every part of the known world; of
these we may count not fewer than eight as more or less frequenting this
country. One of the largest of the tribe is the eagle hawk, or great
horned owl, the great thickness of whose plumage makes it appear nearly
as large as the eagle. Some fine preserved specimens of this
noble-looking bird may be seen in the British Museum. It is a most
powerful bird; and a specimen was captured, with great difficulty, in
1837, when it alighted upon the mast-head of a vessel off
Flamborough-head.

The amiable naturalist, Mr. Waterton, who took especial interest in the
habits of the owl, writes thus on the barn owl:--"This pretty aerial
wanderer of the night often comes into my room, and, after flitting to
and fro, on wing so soft and silent that he is scarcely heard, takes his
departure from the same window at which he had entered. I own I have a
great liking for the bird; and I have offered it hospitality and
protection on account of its persecutions, and for its many services to
me; I wish that any little thing I could write or say might cause it to
stand better with the world than it has hitherto done."

[Illustration: OWLS IN A CASTLE KEEP.]

       *       *       *       *       *


CHATTERTON.


[Illustration]

This gifted young poet was the son of a schoolmaster at Bristol, where
he was born, in 1752. On the 24th of August, 1770, he was found dead,
near a table covered with the scraps of writings he had destroyed, in a
miserable room in Brook-street, Holborn. In Redcliffe churchyard,
Bristol, a beautiful monument has been erected to the memory of the
unfortunate poet.

    O God! whose thunders shake the sky,
      Whose eye this atom globe surveys,
    To Thee, my only rock, I fly--
      Thy mercy in thy justice praise.

    Oh, teach me in the trying hour,
      When anguish swells the dewy tear,
    To still my sorrows, own Thy power,
      Thy goodness love, Thy justice fear.

    Ah! why, my soul, dost thou complain,
      Why, drooping, seek the dark recess?
    Shake off the melancholy chain,
      For God created all to bless.

    But, ah! my breast is human still:
      The rising sigh, the falling tear,
    My languid vitals' feeble rill,
      The sickness of my soul declare.

    CHATTERTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


SMYRNA.


[Illustration: Letter T.]

This city and sea-port of Natolia, in Asia, is situate towards the
northern part of a peninsula, upon a long and winding gulf of the same
name, which is capable of containing the largest navy in the world. The
city is about four miles round, presenting a front of a mile long to the
water; and when approached by sea, it resembles a capacious amphitheatre
with the ruins of an ancient castle crowning its summit. The interior of
the city, however, disappoints the expectations thus raised, for the
streets are narrow, dirty, and ill-paved, and there is now scarcely a
trace of those once splendid edifices which rendered Smyrna one of the
finest cities in Asia Minor. The shops are arched over, and have a
handsome appearance: in spite of the gloom which the houses wear, those
along the shore have beautiful gardens attached to them, at the foot of
which are summer-houses overhanging the sea. The city is subject to
earthquakes and the plague, which latter, in 1814, carried off above
50,000 of the inhabitants.

About midnight, in July, 1841, a fire broke out at Smyrna, which, from
the crowded state of the wooden houses, the want of water, and the
violence of the wind, was terribly destructive. About 12,000 houses were
destroyed, including two-thirds of the Turkish quarter, most of the
French and the whole of the Jewish quarters, with many bazaars and
several mosques, synagogues, and other public buildings. It was
calculated that 20,000 persons were deprived of shelter and food, and
the damage was estimated at two millions sterling.

[Illustration: SMYRNA.]

The fine port of Smyrna is frequented by ships from all nations,
freighted with valuable cargoes, both outward and inward. The greater
part of the trading transactions is managed by Jews, who act as brokers,
the principals meeting afterwards to conclude the bargains.

In 1402 Smyrna was taken by Tamerlane, and suffered very severely. The
conqueror erected within its walls a tower constructed of stones and the
heads of his enemies. Soon after, it came under the dominion of the
Turks, and has been subsequently the most flourishing city in the
Levant, exporting and importing valuable commodities to and from all
parts of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENTLENESS.


[Illustration: Letter I.]

I begin with distinguishing true gentleness from passive tameness of
spirit, and from unlimited compliance with the manners of others. That
passive tameness which submits, without opposition, to every
encroachment of the violent and assuming, forms no part of Christian
duty; but, on the contrary, is destructive of general happiness and
order. That unlimited complaisance, which on every occasion falls in
with the opinions and manners of others, is so far from being a virtue,
that it is itself a vice, and the parent of many vices. It overthrows
all steadiness of principle; and produces that sinful conformity with
the world which taints the whole character. In the present corrupted
state of human manners, always to assent and to comply is the very worst
maxim we can adopt. It is impossible to support the purity and dignity
of Christian morals without opposing the world on various occasions,
even though we should stand alone. That gentleness, therefore, which
belongs to virtue, is to be carefully distinguished from the mean spirit
of cowards, and the fawning assent of sycophants. It renounces no just
right from fear. It gives up no important truth from flattery. It is
indeed not only consistent with a firm mind, but it necessarily requires
a manly spirit, and a fixed principle, in order to give it any real
value. Upon this solid ground only, the polish of gentleness can with
advantage be superinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the most determined regard for virtue and
truth, but to harshness and severity, to pride and arrogance, to
violence and oppression. It is properly that part of the great virtue of
charity, which makes us unwilling to give pain to any of our brethren.
Compassion prompts us to relieve their wants. Forbearance prevents us
from retaliating their injuries. Meekness restrains our angry passions;
candour, our severe judgments. Gentleness corrects whatever is
offensive in our manners, and, by a constant train of humane attentions,
studies to alleviate the burden of common misery. Its office, therefore,
is extensive. It is not, like some other virtues, called forth only on
peculiar emergencies; but it is continually in action, when we are
engaged in intercourse with men. It ought to form our address, to
regulate our speech, and to diffuse itself over our whole behaviour.

We must not, however, confound this gentle "wisdom which is from above"
with that artificial courtesy, that studied smoothness of manners, which
is learned in the school of the world. Such accomplishments the most
frivolous and empty may possess. Too often they are employed by the
artful as a snare; too often affected by the hard and unfeeling as a
cover to the baseness of their minds. We cannot, at the same time, avoid
observing the homage, which, even in such instances, the world is
constrained to pay to virtue. In order to render society agreeable, it
is found necessary to assume somewhat that may at least carry its
appearance. Virtue is the universal charm. Even its shadow is courted,
when the substance is wanting. The imitation of its form has been
reduced into an art; and in the commerce of life, the first study of all
who would either gain the esteem or win the hearts of others, is to
learn the speech and to adopt the manners of candour, gentleness, and
humanity. But that gentleness which is the characteristic of a good man
has, like every other virtue, its seat in the heart; and let me add,
nothing except what flows from the heart can render even external
manners truly pleasing. For no assumed behaviour can at all times hide
the real character. In that unaffected civility which springs from a
gentle mind there is a charm infinitely more powerful than in all the
studied manners of the most finished courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense of what we owe to HIM who made us,
and to the common nature of which we all share. It arises from
reflections on our own failings and wants, and from just views of the
condition and the duty of man. It is native feeling heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart which easily relents; which feels
for every thing that is human, and is backward and slow to inflict the
least wound. It is affable in its address, and mild in its demeanour;
ever ready to oblige, and willing to be obliged by others; breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, courtesy to strangers, long-suffering
to enemies. It exercises authority with moderation; administers reproof
with tenderness; confers favours with ease and modesty. It is unassuming
in opinion, and temperate in zeal. It contends not eagerly about
trifles; slow to contradict, and still slower to blame; but prompt to
allay dissension and to restore peace. It neither intermeddles
unnecessarily with the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the secrets
of others. It delights above all things to alleviate distress; and if it
cannot dry up the falling tear, to sooth at least, the grieving heart.
Where it has not the power of being useful, it is never burdensome. It
seeks to please rather than to shine and dazzle, and conceals with care
that superiority, either of talent or of rank, which is oppressive to
those who are beneath it. In a word, it is that spirit and that tenour
of manners which the Gospel of Christ enjoins, when it commands us "to
bear one another's burdens; to rejoice with those who rejoice, and to
weep with those who weep; to please every one his neighbour for his
good; to be kind and tender-hearted; to be pitiful and courteous; to
support the weak, and to be patient towards all men."

BLAIR.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE IGUANA.


The Iguana (_Cyclura colei_) is not only of singular aspect, but it may
be regarded as the type of a large and important group in the Saurian
family, which formed so conspicuous a feature in the ancient fauna of
this country. The iguana attains a large size in Jamaica, whence the
present specimen was obtained, not unfrequently approaching four feet
in length. In colour it is a greenish grey. It is entirely herbivorous,
as are all its congeners. Its principal haunt in Jamaica is the low
limestone chain of hills, along the shore from Kingston Harbour and Goat
Island, on to its continuation in Vere.

[Illustration: THE IGUANA.]

The iguanas which are occasionally taken in the savannahs adjacent to
this district are considered by Mr. Hill (an energetic correspondent of
the Zoological Society who resides in Spanish Town, and who has paid
great attention to the natural history of the island) to be only stray
visitants which have wandered from the hills. The allied species of
_Cyclura_, which are found on the American continent, occur in
situations of a very different character, for they affect forests on the
bank of rivers, and woods around springs, where they pass their time in
trees and in the water, living on fruits and leaves. This habit is
preserved by the specimen in the Zoological Society's Gardens, which we
have seen lying lazily along an elevated branch. Its serrated tail is a
formidable weapon of defence, with which, when alarmed or attacked, it
deals rapid blows from side to side. When unmolested it is harmless and
inoffensive, and appears to live in perfect harmony with the smaller
species of lizards which inhabit the same division of the house.

       *       *       *       *       *


HENRY IV.'S SOLILOQUY ON SLEEP.


    How many thousands of my poorest subjects
    Are at this hour asleep! O gentle Sleep,
    Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
    That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down,
    And steep my senses in forgetfulness;
    Why rather, Sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
    Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
    And hush'd with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,
    Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
    Under the canopies of costly state,
    And lull'd with sounds of sweetest melody?
    O thou dull God! why liest thou with the vile
    In loathsome beds, and leav'st the kingly couch,
    A watch-case to a common larum-bell?
    Wilt thou, upon the high and giddy mast,
    Seal up the shipboy's eyes, and rock his brains
    In cradle of the rude imperious surge;
    And in the visitation of the winds,
    Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
    Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them
    With deaf'ning clamours in the slipp'ry shrouds,
    That with the hurly Death itself awakes:
    Can'st thou, O partial Sleep! give thy repose
    To the wet seaboy in an hour so rude,
    And in the calmest and the stillest night,
    With all appliances and means to boot,
    Deny it to a King? Then, happy lowly clown!
    Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.

    SHAKSPEARE

       *       *       *       *       *


ELEGY, WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.


[Illustration]


    The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
    The lowing herds Mind slowly o'er the lea,
    The ploughman homeward plods his weary way
    And leaves the world to darkness and to me.

    Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
    And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
    Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
    And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;

    Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
    The moping owl does to the moon complain
    Of such as, wand'ring near her secret bower,
    Molest her ancient solitary reign.

    Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
    Where heaves the turf in many a mould'ring heap,
    Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
    The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.

    The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
    The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
    The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
    No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.

    For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
    Or busy housewife ply her evening care;
    No children run to lisp their sire's return,
    Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.

    Oft did the harvest to their sickle yield,
    Their furrow oft the stubborn glebe has broke:
    How jocund did they drive their team afield!
    How bow'd the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!

[Illustration]

    Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
    Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
    Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
    The short and simple annals of the poor.

    The boast of Heraldry, the pomp of Pow'r,
    And all that Beauty, all that Wealth e'er gave,
    Await alike th' inevitable hour--
    The paths of glory lead but to the grave.

    Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
    If Mem'ry o'er their tombs no trophies raise,
    Where through the long-drawn aisle, and fretted vault,
    The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.

    Can storied urn or animated bust
    Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
    Can Honour's voice provoke the silent dust,
    Or Flatt'ry sooth the dull, cold ear of Death?

    Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
    Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
    Hands that the rod of empire might have sway'd,
    Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.

    But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
    Rich with the spoils of time, did ne'er unroll;
    Chill Penury repress'd their noble rage,
    And froze the genial current of the soul.

    Full many a gem of purest ray serene
    The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear:
    Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
    And waste its sweetness on the desert air.

    Some village Hampden, that with dauntless breast
    The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
    Some mute inglorious Milton, here may rest,
    Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.

    Th' applause of list'ning senates to command,
    The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
    To scatter plenty o'er a smiling land,
    And read their hist'ry in a nation's eyes,

    Their lot forbade: nor circumscribed alone
    Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
    Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
    And shut the gates of mercy on mankind;

    The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
    To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
    Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
    With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.

    Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife
    Their sober wishes never learn'd to stray;
    Along the cool sequester'd vale of life
    They kept the noiseless tenour of their way.

    Yet ev'n these bones from insult to protect,
    Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
    With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture deck'd,
    Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.

    Their names, their years, spelt by th' unletter'd Muse,
    The place of fame and elegy supply;
    And many a holy text around she strews,
    That teach the rustic moralist to die.

    For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
    This pleasing anxious being e'er resign'd,
    Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
    Nor cast one longing, ling'ring look behind?

    On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
    Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
    Ev'n from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
    Ev'n in our ashes live their wonted fires.

    For thee, who, mindful of th' unhonour'd dead,
    Dost in these lines their artless tale relate;
    If chance, by lonely Contemplation led,
    Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,

[Illustration]

    Haply some hoary-headed swain may say,
    "Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn,
    Brushing with hasty steps the dew away,
    To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.

    "There, at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
    That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
    His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
    And pore upon the brook that bubbles by.

    "Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
    Mutt' ring his wayward fancies he would rove;
    Now drooping, woful, wan, like one forlorn,
    Or crazed with care, or cross'd in hopeless lore.

    "One morn, I miss'd him on th' accustom'd hill,
    Along the heath, and near his fav'rite tree;
    Another came, nor yet beside the rill,
    Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he;

    "The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
    Slow through the churchway path we saw him borne.
    Approach and read (for thou can'st read) the lay,
    Graved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn."

[Illustration: THE EPITAPH.]

    Here rests his head upon the lap of Earth--
    Youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown:
    Fair Science frown'd not on his humble birth,
    And Melancholy mark'd him for her own.

    Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
    Heav'n did a recompense as largely send:
    He gave to Mis'ry all he had--a tear;
    He gain'd from Heav'n, 'twas all he wish'd--a friend.

    No farther seek his merits to disclose,
    Or draw his frailties from their dread abode;
    (There they alike in trembling hope repose)
    The bosom of his Father and his God.

    GRAY.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH.


[Illustration: Letter M.]

Marvellous indeed have been the productions of modern scientific
investigations, but none surpass the wonder-working Electro-magnetic
Telegraphic Machine; and when Shakspeare, in the exercise of his
unbounded imagination, made _Puck_, in obedience to _Oberon's_ order to
him--

    "Be here again
    Ere the leviathan can swim a league."

reply--

    "I'll put a girdle round the earth
    In forty minutes"--

how little did our immortal Bard think that this light fanciful offer of
a "fairy" to "the King of the Fairies" would, in the nineteenth century,
not only be substantially realised, but surpassed as follows:--

The electric telegraph would convey intelligence more than twenty-eight
thousand times round the earth, while Puck, at his vaunted speed, was
crawling round it only ONCE!

On every instrument there is a dial, on which are inscribed the names of
the six or eight stations with which it usually communicates. When much
business is to be transacted, a boy is necessary for each of these
instruments; generally, however, one lad can, without practical
difficulty, manage about three; but, as the whole of them are ready for
work by night as well as by day, they are incessantly attended, in
watches of eight hours each, by these satellite boys by day and by men
at night.

As fast as the various messages for delivery, flying one after another
from the ground-floor up the chimney, reach the level of the
instruments, they are brought by the superintendent to the particular
one by which they are to be communicated; and its boy, with the
quickness characteristic of his age, then instantly sets to work.

His first process is by means of the electric current to sound a little
bell, which simultaneously alarms all the stations on his line; and
although the attention of the sentinel at each is thus attracted, yet it
almost instantly evaporates from all excepting from that to the name of
which he causes the electric needle to point, by which signal the clerk
at that station instantly knows that the forthcoming question is
addressed to _him_; and accordingly, by a corresponding signal, he
announces to the London boy that he is ready to receive it. By means of
a brass handle fixed to the dial, which the boy grasps in each hand, he
now begins rapidly to spell off his information by certain twists of his
wrists, each of which imparts to the needles on his dial, as well as to
those on the dial of his distant correspondent, a convulsive movement
designating the particular letter of the telegraphic alphabet required.
By this arrangement he is enabled to transmit an ordinary-sized word in
three seconds, or about twenty per minute. In the case of any accident
to the wire of one of his needles, he can, by a different alphabet,
transmit his message by a series of movements of the single needle, at
the reduced rate of about eight or nine words per minute.

While a boy at one instrument is thus occupied in transmitting to--say
Liverpool, a message, written by its London author in ink which is
scarcely dry, another boy at the adjoining instrument is, by the reverse
of the process, attentively reading the quivering movements of the
needles of his dial, which, by a sort of St. Vitus's dance, are rapidly
spelling to him a message, _viâ_ the wires of the South Western Railway,
say from Gosport, which word by word he repeats aloud to an assistant,
who, seated by his side, writes it down (he receives it about as fast as
his attendant can conveniently write it); on a sheet of; paper, which,
as soon as the message is concluded, descends to the "booking-office."
When inscribed in due form, it is without delay despatched to its
destination, by messenger, cab, or express, according to order.

SIR F.B. HEAD.

[Illustration: WORKING THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE RAINBOW.


    How glorious is thy girdle cast
      O'er mountain, tower, and town,
    Or mirror'd in the ocean vast--
      A thousand fathoms down!

    As fresh in yon horizon dark,
      As young thy beauties seem,
    As when the eagle from the ark
      First sported in thy beam.

    For faithful to its sacred page,
      Heaven still rebuilds thy span,
    Nor let the type grow pale with age,
      That first spoke peace to man.

    CAMPBELL.

[Illustration: A LUNAR RAINBOW.]

The moon sometimes exhibits the extraordinary phenomenon of an iris or
rainbow, by the refraction of her rays in drops of rain during the
night-time. This appearance is said to occur only at the time of full
moon, and to be indicative of stormy and rainy weather. One is described
in the _Philosophical Transactions_ as having been seen in 1810, during
a thick rain; but, subsequent to that time, the same person gives an
account of one which perhaps was the most extraordinary of which we have
any record. It became visible about nine o'clock, and continued, though
with very different degrees of brilliancy, until past two. At first,
though a strongly marked bow, it was without colour, but afterwards
became extremely vivid, the red, green, and purple being the most
strongly marked. About twelve it was the most splendid in appearance.
The wind was very high at the time, and a drizzling rain falling
occasionally.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOPE


[Illustration: THOMAS CAMPBELL, "THE BARD OF HOPE."]

    At summer eve, when Heaven's ethereal bow
    Spans with bright arch the glittering hills below,
    Why to yon mountain turns the musing eye,
    Whose sunbright summit mingles with the sky?
    Why do those cliffs of shadowy tint appear
    More sweet than all the landscape smiling near?
    'Tis distance lends enchantment to the view,
    And robes the mountain in its azure hue.
    Thus, with delight, we linger to survey,
    The promised joys of life's unmeasured way;
    Thus from afar each dim-discovered scene
    More pleasing seems than all the past hath been;
    And every form that fancy can repair
    From dark oblivion, glows divinely there.
    Auspicious Hope! in thy sweet garden, grow
    Wreaths for each toil, a charm for every woe.
    Won by their sweets, in nature's languid hour,
    The way-worn pilgrim seeks thy summer bower;
    Then, as the wild bee murmurs on the wing,
    What peaceful dreams thy handmaid spirits bring!
    What viewless forms th' Eolian organ play,
    And sweep the furrow'd lines of anxious care away!
    Angel of life! thy glittering wings explore
    Earth's loneliest bounds and ocean's wildest shore.
    Lo! to the wintry winds the pilot yields
    His bark, careering o'er unfathom'd fields;
    Now on Atlantic waves he rides afar
    Where Andes, giant of the western star,
    With meteor-standard to the winds unfurl'd,
    Looks from his throne of clouds o'er half the world.
    Poor child of danger, nursling of the storm,
    Sad are the woes that wreck thy manly form!
    Rocks, waves, and winds the shatter'd bark delay--
    Thy heart is sad, thy home is far away.
    But Hope can here her moonlight vigils keep,
    And sing to charm the spirit of the deep.
    Swift as yon streamer lights the starry pole,
    Her visions warm the watchman's pensive soul.
    His native hills that rise in happier climes;
    The grot that heard his song of other times;
    His cottage home, his bark of slender sail,
    His glassy lake, and broomwood-blossom'd vale,
    Rush in his thought; he sweeps before the wind,
    And treads the shore he sigh'd to leave behind!

    _Pleasures of Hope._

       *       *       *       *       *


LIGHTHOUSES.


[Illustration: Letter H.]

Hartlepool Lighthouse is a handsome structure of white freestone--the
building itself being fifty feet in height; but, owing to the additional
height of the cliff, the light is exhibited at an elevation of nearly
eighty-five feet above high-water mark. On the eastern side of the
building is placed a balcony, supporting a lantern, from which a small
red light is exhibited, to indicate that state of the tide which will
admit of the entrance of ships into the harbour; the corresponding
signal in the daytime being a red ball hoisted to the top of the
flag-staff. The lighthouse is furnished with an anemometer and tidal
gauge; and its appointments are altogether of the most complete
description. It is chiefly, however, with regard to the system adopted
in the lighting arrangements that novelty presents itself.

The main object, in the instance of a light placed as a beacon to warn
mariners of their proximity to a dangerous coast, is to obtain the
greatest possible intensity and amount of penetrating power. A naked or
simple light is therefore seldom, if ever employed; but whether it
proceed from the combustion of oil or gas, it is equally necessary that
it should be combined with some arrangement of optical apparatus, in
order that the rays emitted may be collected, and projected in such a
direction as to render them available to the object in view; and in all
cases a highly-polished metal surface is employed as a reflector.

[Illustration: HARTLEPOOL LIGHTHOUSE.]

In the Hartlepool Lighthouse the illuminative medium is _gas_. The
optical apparatus embraces three-fourths of the circumference of the
circle which encloses the light, and the whole of the rays emanating
from that part of the light opposed to the optical arrangement are
reflected or refracted (as the case may be), so that they are projected
from the lighthouse in such a direction as to be visible from the
surface of the ocean.

       *       *       *       *       *


INTEGRITY.


[Illustration: Letter C.]

Can anything (says Plato) be more delightful than the hearing or the
speaking of truth? For this reason it is that there is no conversation
so agreeable that of a man of integrity, who hears without any intention
to betray, and speaks without any intention to deceive. As an advocate
was pleading the cause of his client in Rome, before one of the
praetors, he could only produce a single witness in a point where the
law required the testimony of two persons; upon which the advocate
insisted on the integrity of the person whom he had produced, but the
praetor told him that where the law required two witnesses he would not
accept of one, though it were Cato himself. Such a speech, from a person
who sat at the head of a court of justice, while Cato was still living,
shows us, more than a thousand examples, the high reputation this great
man had gained among his contemporaries on account of his sincerity.

[Illustration]

2. As I was sitting (says an ancient writer) with some senators of
Bruges, before the gate of the Senate-House, a certain beggar presented
himself to us, and with sighs and tears, and many lamentable gestures,
expressed to us his miserable poverty, and asked our alms, telling us at
the same time, that he had about him a private maim and a secret
mischief, which very shame restrained him from discovering to the eyes
of men. We all pitying the case of the poor man, gave him each of us
something, and departed. One, however, amongst us took an opportunity to
send his servant after him, with orders to inquire of him what that
private infirmity might be which he found such cause to be ashamed of,
and was so loth to discover. The servant overtook him, and delivered his
commission: and after having diligently viewed his face, breast, arms,
legs, and finding all his limbs in apparent soundness, "Why, friend,"
said he, "I see nothing whereof you have any such reason to complain."
"Alas! sir," said the beggar, "the disease which afflicts me is far
different from what you conceive, and is such as you cannot discern; yet
it is an evil which hath crept over my whole body: it has passed through
my very veins and marrow in such a manner that there is no member of my
body that is able to work for my daily bread. This disease is by some
called idleness, and by others sloth." The servant, hearing this
singular apology, left him in great anger, and returned to his master
with the above account; but before the company could send again to make
further inquiry after him, the beggar had very prudently withdrawn
himself.

3. Action, we are assured, keeps the soul in constant health; but
idleness corrupts and rusts the mind; for a man of great abilities may
by negligence and idleness become so mean and despicable as to be an
incumbrance to society and a burthen to himself. When the Roman
historians described an extraordinary man, it generally entered into his
character, as an essential, that he was _incredibili industriâ,
diligentiâ singulari_--of incredible industry, of singular diligence and
application. And Cato, in Sallust, informs the Senate, that it was not
so much the arms as the industry of their ancestors, which advanced the
grandeur of Rome, and made her mistress of the world.

DR. DODD.

       *       *       *       *       *


RAFT OF GAMBIER ISLANDERS


The group in the Pacific Ocean called the Gambier Islands are but thinly
inhabited, but possess a good harbour. Captain Beechey, in his
"Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific and Behring's Straits," tells us
that several of the islands, especially the largest, have a fertile
appearance. The Captain gives an interesting account of his interview
with some of the natives, who approached the ship in rafts, carrying
from sixteen to twenty men each, as represented in the Engraving.

[Illustration: RAFT OF GAMBIER ISLANDERS.]

"We were much pleased," says the Captain, "with the manner of lowering
their matting sail, diverging on different courses, and working their
paddles, in the use of which they had great power, and were well
skilled, plying them together, or, to use a nautical phrase, 'keeping
stroke.' They had no other weapons but long poles, and were quite naked,
with the exception of a banana leaf cut into strips, and tied about
their loins; and one or two persons wore white turbans." They timidly
approached both the ship and the barge, but would upset any small boats
within their reach; not, however, from any malicious intention, but from
thoughtlessness and inquisitiveness. Captain Beechey approached them in
the gig, and gave them several presents, for which they, in return,
threw him some bundles of paste, tied up in large leaves, which was the
common food of the natives. They tempted the Captain and his crew with
cocoa-nuts and roots, and invited their approach by performing ludicrous
dances; but, as soon as the visitors were within reach, all was
confusion. A scuffle ensued, and on a gun being fired over their heads,
all but four instantly plunged into the sea. The inhabitants of these
islands are stated to be well-made, with upright and graceful figures.
Tattooing seems to be very commonly practised, and some of the patterns
are described as being very elegant.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHRISTIAN FREEDOM.


    "He is the freeman whom the truth makes free,"
    Who first of all the bands of Satan breaks;
    Who breaks the bands of sin, and for his soul,
    In spite of fools, consulteth seriously;
    In spite of fashion, perseveres in good;
    In spite of wealth or poverty, upright;
    Who does as reason, not as fancy bids;
    Who hears Temptation sing, and yet turns not
    Aside; sees Sin bedeck her flowery bed,
    And yet will not go up; feels at his heart
    The sword unsheathed, yet will not sell the truth;
    Who, having power, has not the will to hurt;
    Who feels ashamed to be, or have a slave,
    Whom nought makes blush but sin, fears nought but God;
    Who, finally, in strong integrity
    Of soul, 'midst want, or riches, or disgrace
    Uplifted, calmly sat, and heard the waves
    Of stormy Folly breaking at his feet,
    Nor shrill with praise, nor hoarse with foal reproach,
    And both despised sincerely; seeking this
    Alone, the approbation of his God,
    Which still with conscience witness'd to his peace.
    This, this is freedom, such as Angels use,
    And kindred to the liberty of God!

    POLLOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE POLAR REGIONS.


The adventurous spirit of Englishmen has caused them to fit out no less
than sixty expeditions within the last three centuries and a half, with
the sole object of discovering a north-west passage to India. Without
attempting even to enumerate these baffled essays, we will at once carry
our young readers to these dreary regions--dreary, merely because their
capabilities are unsuited to the necessities which are obvious to all,
yet performing their allotted office in the economy of the world, and
manifesting the majesty and the glory of our great Creator.

[Illustration: SIR JAMES ROSS'S SHIPS BESET IN A PACK OF ICE.]

Winter in the Arctic Circle is winter indeed: there is no sun to
gladden with his beams the hearts of the voyagers; but all is wrapt in
darkness, day and night, save when the moon chances to obtrude her faint
rays, only to make visible the desolation of the scene. The approach of
winter is strongly marked. Snow begins to fall in August, and the ground
is covered to the depth of two or three feet before October. As the cold
augments, the air bears its moisture in the form of a frozen fog, the
icicles of which are so sharp as to be painful to the skin. The surface
of the sea steams like a lime-kiln, caused by the water being still
warmer than the superincumbent atmosphere. The mist at last clears, the
water having become frozen, and darkness settles on the land. All is
silence, broken only by the bark of the Arctic fox, or by the loud
explosion of bursting rocks, as the frost penetrates their bosoms.

The crews of exploring vessels, which are frozen firmly in the ice in
winter, spend almost the whole of their time in their ships, which in
Sir James Ross's expedition (in 1848-49) were well warmed and
ventilated. Where there has not been sufficient warmth, their
provisions--even brandy--became so frozen as to require to be cut by a
hatchet. The mercury in a barometer has frozen so that it might be
beaten on an anvil.

As Sir James Ross went in search of Sir John Franklin, he adopted
various methods of letting him know (if alive) of assistance being at
hand. Provisions were deposited in several marked places; and on the
excursions to make these deposits, they underwent terrible fatigue, as
well as suffered severely from what is termed "snow blindness." But the
greatest display of ingenuity was in capturing a number of white foxes,
and fastening copper collars round their necks, on which was engraved a
notice of the position of the ships and provisions. It was possible that
these animals, which are known to travel very far in search of food,
might be captured by the missing voyagers, who would thus be enabled to
avail themselves of the assistance intended for them by their noble
countrymen. The little foxes, in their desire to escape, sometimes tried
to gnaw the bars of their traps; but the cold was so intense, that their
tongues froze to the iron, and so their captors had to kill them, to
release them from their misery, for they were never wantonly destroyed.

The great Painter of the Universe has not forgotten the embellishment of
the Pole. One of the most beautiful phenomena in nature is the Aurora
Borealis, or northern lights. It generally assumes the form of an arch,
darting flashes of lilac, yellow, or white light towards the heights of
heaven. Some travellers state that the aurora are accompanied by a
crackling or hissing noise; but Captain Lyon, who listened for hours,
says that this is not the case, and that it is merely that the
imagination cannot picture these sudden bursts of light as unaccompanied
by noise.

We will now bid farewell to winter, for with returning summer comes the
open sea, and the vessels leave their wintry bed. This, however, is
attended with much difficulty and danger. Canals have to be cut in the
ice, through which to lead the ships to a less obstructed ocean; and,
after this had been done in Sir James Ross's case, the ships were hemmed
in by a pack of ice, fifty miles in circumference, and were carried
along, utterly helpless, at the rate of eight or ten miles daily, for
upwards of 250 miles--the navigators fearing the adverse winds might
drive them on the rocky coast of Baffin's Bay. At length the wind
changed, and carried them clear of ice and icebergs (detached masses of
ice, sometimes several hundred feet in height) to the open sea, and back
to their native land.

With all its dreariness, we owe much to the ice-bound Pole; to it we
are indebted for the cooling breeze and the howling tempest--the
beneficent tempest, in spite of all its desolation and woe. Evil and
good in nature are comparative: the same thing does what is called harm
in one sense, but incalculable good in another. So the tempest, that
causes the wreck, and makes widows of happy wives and orphans of joyous
children, sets in motion air that would else be stagnant, and become the
breath of pestilence and the grave.

[Illustration: MIDSUMMER NIGHT IN THE ARCTIC REGIONS.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CROWN JEWELS.


[Illustration: Letter A.]

All the Crown Jewels, or Regalia, used by the Sovereign on great state
occasions, are kept in the Tower of London, where they have been for
nearly two centuries. The first express mention made of the Regalia
being kept in this palatial fortress, occurs in the reign of Henry III.,
previously to which they were deposited either in the Treasury of the
Temple, or in some religious house dependent upon the Crown. Seldom,
however, did the jewels remain in the Tower for any length of time, for
they were repeatedly pledged to meet the exigences of the Sovereign. An
inventory of the jewels in the Tower, made by order of James I., is of
great length; although Henry III., during the Lincolnshire rebellion, in
1536, greatly reduced the value and number of the Royal store. In the
reign of Charles II., a desperate attempt was made by Colonel Blood and
his accomplices to possess themselves of the Royal Jewels.

The Regalia were originally kept in a small building on the south side
of the White Tower; but, in the reign of Charles I., they were
transferred to a strong chamber in the Martin Tower, afterwards called
the Jewel Tower. Here they remained until the fire in 1840; when being
threatened with destruction from the flames which were raging near them,
they were carried away by the warders, and placed for safety in the
house of the Governor. In 1841 they were removed to the new Jewel-House,
which is much more commodious than the old vaulted chamber in which they
were previously shown.

[Illustration: QUEEN'S CROWN.]

The QUEEN'S, or IMPERIAL CROWN was made for the coronation of her
present Majesty. It is composed of a cap of purple velvet, enclosed by
hoops of silver, richly dight with gems, in the form shown in our
Illustration. The arches rise almost to a point instead of being
depressed, are covered with pearls, and are surmounted by an orb of
brilliants. Upon this is placed a Maltese or cross pattee of
brilliants. Four crosses and four _fleurs-de-lis_ surmount the circlet,
all composed of diamonds, the front cross containing the "inestimable
sapphire," of the purest and deepest azure, more than two inches long,
and an inch broad; and, in the circlet beneath it, is a rock ruby, of
enormous size and exquisite colour, _said_ to have been worn by the
Black Prince at the battle of Cressy, and by Henry V. at the battle of
Agincourt. The circlet is enriched with diamonds, emeralds, sapphires,
and rubies. This crown was altered from the one constructed expressly
for the coronation of King George IV.: the superb diadem then weighed
5-1/2 lb., and was worn by the King on his return in procession from the
Abbey to the Hall at Westminster.

[Illustration: OLD IMPERIAL CROWN.]

The OLD IMPERIAL CROWN (St. Edward's) is the one whose form is so
familiar to us from its frequent representation on the coin of the
realm, the Royal arms, &c. It was made for the coronation of Charles
II., to replace the one broken up and sold during the Civil Wars, which
was said to have been worn by Edward the Confessor. It is of gold, and
consists of two arches crossing at the top, and rising from a rim or
circlet of gold, over a cap of crimson velvet, lined with white taffeta,
and turned up with ermine. The base of the arches on each side is
covered by a cross pattee; between the crosses are four _fleurs-de-lis_
of gold, which rise out of the circle: the whole of these are splendidly
enriched with pearls and precious stones. On the top, at the
intersection of the arches, which are somewhat depressed, are a mound
and cross of gold the latter richly jewelled, and adorned with three
pearls, one on the top, and one pendent at each limb.

[Illustration: PRINCE OF WALES'S CROWN.]

The PRINCE OF WALES'S CROWN is of pure gold, unadorned with jewels. On
occasions of state, it is placed before the seat occupied by the
Heir-Apparent to the throne in the House of Lords.

[Illustration: QUEEN'S DIADEM.]

[Illustration: TEMPORAL SCEPTRE.]

The QUEEN'S DIADEM was made for the coronation of Marie d'Este, consort
of James II., it is adorned with large diamonds, and the upper edge of
the circlet is bordered with pearls.

The TEMPORAL SCEPTRE of Queen Victoria is of gold, 2 feet 9 inch in
length; the staff is very plain, but the pommel is ornamented with
rubies, emeralds, and diamonds. The _fleurs-de-lis_ with which this
sceptre was originally adorned have been replaced by golden leaves,
bearing the rose, shamrock, and thistle. The cross is variously
jewelled, and has in the centre a large table diamond.

[Illustration: SPIRITUAL SCEPTRE.]

Her Majesty's SPIRITUAL SCEPTRE, Rod of Equity, or Sceptre with the
Dove, is also of gold, 3 feet 7 inches long, set with diamonds and other
precious stones. It is surmounted by an orb, banded with rose diamonds,
bearing a cross, on which is the figure of a dove with expanded wings.

The QUEEN'S IVORY SCEPTRE was made for Maria d'Este, consort of James
II. It is mounted in gold, and terminated by a golden cross, bearing a
dove of white onyx.

[Illustration: AMPULLA.]

The ampulla is an antique vessel of pure gold, used for containing the
holy oil at coronations. It resembles an eagle with expanded wings, and
is finely chased: the head screws off at the middle of the neck for
pouring in the oil; and the neck being hollow to the beak the latter
serves as a spout, through which the consecrated oil is poured into

[Illustration: ANOINTING SPOON.]

The ANOINTING SPOON, which is also of pure gold: it has four pearls in
the broadest part of the handle, and the bowl of the spoon is finely
chased within and without; by its extreme thinness, it appears to be
ancient.

[Illustration: QUEEN'S CORONATION BRACELETS.]

The ARMILLAE, or BRACELETS, are of solid fine gold, chased, 1-1/2 inch
in breadth, edged with rows of pearls. They open by a hinge, and are
enamelled with the rose, _fleur-de-lis_, and harp.

[Illustration: IMPERIAL ORB.]

The IMPERIAL ORB, or MOUND, is an emblem of sovereignty, said to have
been derived from Imperial Rome, and to have been first adorned with the
cross by Constantine, on his conversion to Christianity. It first
appears among the Royal insignia of England on the coins of Edward the
Confessor. This orb is a ball of gold, 6 inches in diameter, encompassed
with a band of gold, set with emeralds, rubies, and pearls. On the top
is a remarkably fine amethyst, nearly 1-1/2 inch high, which serves as
the foot or pedestal of a rich cross of gold, 32 inches high, encrusted
with diamonds; having in the centre, on one side, a sapphire, and an
emerald on the other; four large pearls at the angles of the cross, a
large pearl at the end of each limb, and three at the base; the height
of the orb and cross being 11 inches.

The QUEEN'S ORB is of smaller dimensions than the preceding, but of
similar materials and fashion.

[Illustration: GOLDEN SALT-CELLAR OF STATE.]

[Illustration: STATE SALT-CELLARS.]

The SALT-CELLARS are of singular form and rich workmanship. The most
noticeable is--the _Golden Salt-cellar of State,_ which is of pure gold,
richly adorned with jewels, and grotesque figures in chased work. Its
form is castellated: and the receptacles for the salt are formed by the
removal of the tops of the turrets.

In the same chamber with the Crowns, Sceptres, and other Regalia used in
the ceremonial of the Coronation, is a very interesting collection of
plate, formerly used at Coronation festivals; together with fonts, &c.
Amongst these are

The QUEEN'S BAPTISMAL FONT, which is of silver, gilt, tastefully chased,
and surmounted by two figures emblematical of the baptismal rite: this
font was formerly used at the christening of the Royal family; but a new
font of more picturesque design, has lately be n manufactured for her
Majesty.

[Illustration: QUEEN'S BAPTISMAL FONT.]

There are, besides, in the collection, a large Silver Wine Fountain,
presented by the corporation of Plymouth to Charles II.; two massive
Coronation Tankards, of gold; a Banqueting Dish, and other dishes and
spoons of gold, used at Coronation festivals; besides a
beautifully-wrought service of Sacramental Plate, employed at the
Coronation, and used also in the Chapel of St. Peter in the Tower.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT IS TIME?


[Illustration: Letter I.]

    I ask'd an aged man, a man of cares,
    Wrinkled and curved, and white with hoary hairs:
    "Time is the warp of life," he said; "Oh tell
    The young, the fair, the gay, to weave 't well!"
    I ask'd the ancient, venerable dead--
    Sages who wrote, and warriors who bled:
    From the cold grave a hollow murmur flow'd--
    "Time sow'd the seed we reap in this abode!"
    I ask'd a dying sinner, ere the tide
    Of life had left his veins: "Time?" he replied,
    "I've lost it! Ah, the treasure!" and he died.
    I ask'd the golden sun and silver spheres,
    Those bright chronometers of days and years:
    They answer'd: "Time is but a meteor's glare,"
    And bade me for Eternity prepare.
    I ask'd the Seasons, in their annual round,
    Which beautify or desolate the ground;
    And they replied (no oracle more wise):
    "'Tis Folly's blank, and Wisdom's highest prize!"
    I ask'd a spirit lost, but oh! the shriek
    That pierced my soul! I shudder while I speak.
    It cried, "A particle! a speck! a mite
    Of endless years--duration infinite!"
    Of things inanimate, my dial I
    Consulted, and it made me this reply:
    "Time is the season fair of living well--
    The path of glory, or the path of hell."
    I ask'd my Bible, and methinks it said:
    "Time is the present hour--the past is fled:
    Live! live to-day; to-morrow never yet
    On any human being rose or set."
    I ask'd old Father Time himself at last,
    But in a moment he flew swiftly past--
    His chariot was a cloud, the viewless wind
    His noiseless steeds, which left no trace behind.
    I ask'd the mighty Angel who shall stand
    One foot on sea, and one on solid land;
    "By Heaven!" he cried, "I swear the mystery's o'er;
    Time was," he cried, "but time shall be no more!"

    REV. J. MARSDEN.

       *       *       *       *       *


SIMPLICITY IN WRITING.


[Illustration: Letter F.]

Fine writing, according to Mr. Addison, consists of sentiments which are
natural without being obvious. There cannot be a juster and more concise
definition of fine writing.

Sentiments which are merely natural affect not the mind with any
pleasure, and seem not worthy to engage our attention. The pleasantries
of a waterman, the observations of a peasant, the ribaldry of a porter
or hackney-coachman; all these are natural and disagreeable. What an
insipid comedy should we make of the chit-chit of the tea-table, copied
faithfully and at full length! Nothing can please persons of taste but
nature drawn with all her graces and ornament--_la belle nature_; or, if
we copy low life, the strokes must be strong and remarkable, and must
convey a lively image to the mind. The absurd _naïveté_ of Sancho Panza
is represented in such inimitable colours by Cervantes, that it
entertains as much as the picture of the most magnanimous hero or
softest lover.

The case is the same with orators, philosophers, critics, or any author
who speaks in his own person without introducing other speakers or
actors. If his language be not elegant, his observations uncommon, his
sense strong and masculine, he will in vain boast his nature and
simplicity. He may be correct, but he never will be agreeable. 'Tis the
unhappiness of such authors that they are never blamed nor censured. The
good fortune of a book and that of a man are not the same. The secret
deceiving path of life, which Horace talks of--_fallentis semita
vitae_--may be the happiest, lot of the one, but is the greatest
misfortune that the other can possibly fall into.

On the other hand, productions which are merely surprising, without
being natural, can never give any lasting entertainment to the mind. To
draw chimaeras is not, properly speaking, to copy or imitate. The
justness of the representation is lost, and the mind is displeased to
find a picture which bears no resemblance to any original. Nor are such
excessive refinements more agreeable in the epistolary or philosophic
style, than in the epic or tragic. Too much ornament is a fault in every
kind of production. Uncommon expressions, strong flashes of wit, pointed
similes, and epigrammatic turns, especially when laid too thick, are a
disfigurement rather than any embellishment of discourse. As the eye, in
surveying a Gothic building, is distracted by the multiplicity of
ornaments, and loses the whole by its minute attention to the parts; so
the mind, in perusing a work overstocked with wit, is fatigued and
disgusted with the constant endeavour to shine and surprise. This is the
case where a writer over-abounds in wit, even though that wit should be
just and agreeable. But it commonly happens to such writers, that they
seek for their favourite ornaments even where the subject affords them
not; and by that means have twenty insipid conceits for one thought that
is really beautiful.

There is no subject in critical learning more copious than this of the
just mixture of simplicity and refinement in writing; and, therefore,
not to wander in too large a field, I shall confine myself to a few
general observations on that head.

First, I observe, "That though excesses of both kinds are to be avoided,
and though a proper medium ought to be studied in all productions; yet
this medium lies not in a point, but admits of a very considerable
latitude." Consider the wide distance, in this respect, between Mr. Pope
and Lucretius. These seem to lie in the two greatest extremes of
refinement and simplicity which a poet can indulge himself in, without
being guilty of any blameable excess. All this interval may be filled
with poets, who may differ from each other, but may be equally
admirable, each in his peculiar style and manner. Corneille and
Congreve, who carry their wit and refinement somewhat farther than Mr.
Pope (if poets of so different a kind can be compared together), and
Sophocles and Terence, who are more simple than Lucretius, seem to have
gone out of that medium wherein the most perfect productions are to be
found, and are guilty of some excess in these opposite characters. Of
all the great poets, Virgil and Racine, in my opinion, lie nearest the
centre, and are the farthest removed from both the extremities.

My second observation on this head is, "That it is very difficult, if
not impossible, to explain by words wherein the just medium betwixt the
excesses of simplicity and refinement consists, or to give any rule by
which we can know precisely the bounds betwixt the fault and the
beauty." A critic may not only discourse very judiciously on this head
without instructing his readers, but even without understanding the
matter perfectly himself. There is not in the world a finer piece of
criticism than Fontenelle's "Dissertation on Pastorals;" wherein, by a
number of reflections and philosophical reasonings, he endeavours to fix
the just medium which is suitable to that species of writing. But let
any one read the pastorals of that author, and he will be convinced,
that this judicious critic, notwithstanding his fine reasonings, had a
false taste, and fixed the point of perfection much nearer the extreme
of refinement than pastoral poetry will admit of. The sentiments of his
shepherds are better suited to the toilets of Paris than to the forests
of Arcadia. But this it is impossible to discover from his critical
reasonings. He blames all excessive painting and ornament, as much as
Virgil could have done had he written a dissertation on this species of
poetry. However different the tastes of men may be, their general
discourses on these subjects are commonly the same. No criticism can be
very instructive which descends not to particulars, and is not full of
examples and illustrations. 'Tis allowed on all hands, that beauty, as
well as virtue, lies always in a medium; but where this medium is placed
is the great question, and can never be sufficiently explained by
general reasonings.

I shall deliver it as a third observation on this subject, "That we
ought to be more on our guard against the excess of refinement than that
of simplicity; and that because the former excess is both less beautiful
and more dangerous than the latter."

It is a certain rule that wit and passion are entirely inconsistent.
When the affections are moved, there is no place for the imagination.
The mind of man being naturally limited, it is impossible all his
faculties can operate at once; and the more any one predominates, the
less room is there for the others to exert their vigour. For this reason
a greater degree of simplicity is required in all compositions, where
men and actions and passions are painted, than in such as consist of
reflections and observations. And as the former species of writing is
the more engaging and beautiful, one may safely, upon this account, give
the preference to the extreme of simplicity above that of refinement.

We may also observe, that those compositions which we read the oftenest,
and which every man of taste has got by heart, have the recommendation
of simplicity, and have nothing surprising in the thought when divested
of that elegance of expression and harmony of numbers with which it is
cloathed. If the merit of the composition lies in a point of wit, it may
strike at first; but the mind anticipates the thought in the second
perusal, and is no longer affected by it. When I read an epigram of
Martial, the first line recalls the whole; and I have no pleasure in
repeating to myself what I know already. But each line, each word in
Catullus has its merit; and I am never tired with the perusal of him. It
is sufficient to rim over Cowley once; but Parnel, after the fiftieth
reading, is fresh as at the first. Besides, it is with books as with
women, where a certain plainness of manner and of dress is more engaging
than that glare of paint and airs and apparel which may dazzle the eye
but reaches not the affections. Terence is a modest and bashful beauty,
to whom we grant every thing, because he assumes nothing, and whose
purity and nature make a durable though not a violent impression upon
us.

But refinement, as it is the less beautiful, so it is the more dangerous
extreme, and what we are the aptest to fall into. Simplicity passes for
dulness when it is not accompanied with great elegance and propriety.
On the contrary, there is something surprising in a blaze of wit
and conceit. Ordinary readers are mightily struck with it, and
falsely imagine it to be the most difficult, as well as most
excellent way of writing. Seneca abounds with agreeable faults, says
Quinctilian--_abundat dulcibus vitiis_; and for that reason is the more
dangerous and the more apt to pervert the taste of the young and
inconsiderate.

I shall add, that the excess of refinement is now more to be guarded
against than ever; because it is the extreme which men are the most apt
to fall into, after learning has made great progress, and after eminent
writers have appeared in every species of composition. The endeavour to
please by novelty leads men wide of simplicity and nature, and fills
their writings with affectation and conceit. It was thus that the age of
Claudius and Nero became so much inferior to that of Augustus in taste
and genius; and perhaps there are at present some symptoms of a like
degeneracy of taste, in France as well as in England.

HUME.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOHN HAMPDEN.


The celebrated patriot, John Hampden, was descended from an ancient
family in Buckinghamshire, where he was born in 1594. On leaving the
University, he entered the inns of court, where he made considerable
progress in the study of the law. He was chosen to serve in the
Parliament which assembled at Westminster, February, 1626, and served in
all the succeeding Parliaments in the reign of Charles I. That Monarch
having quarrelled with his Parliament, was obliged to have recourse to
the open exercise of his prerogative in order to supply himself with
money. From the nobility he desired assistance; from the City of London
he required a loan of £100,000. The former contributed but slowly; the
latter at length gave a flat denial. To equip a fleet, an apportionment
was made, by order of the Council, amongst all the maritime towns, each
of which was required, with the assistance of the adjoining counties, to
furnish a certain number of vessels or amount of shipping. The City of
London was rated at twenty ships. And this was the first appearance in
the present reign of ship-money--a taxation which had once been imposed
by Elizabeth, on a great emergency, but which, revived and carried
further by Charles, produced the most violent discontent.

[Illustration: STATUE OF JOHN HAMPDEN.]

In 1636, John Hampden became universally known by his intrepid
opposition to the ship-money, as an illegal tax. Upon this he was
prosecuted, and his conduct throughout the transaction gained him great
credit and reputation. When the Long Parliament began, the eyes of all
were fixed upon him as the father of his country. On the 3rd of January,
1642, the King ordered articles of high treason, and other
misdemeanours, to be prepared against Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hampden, and
four other members of the House of Commons, and went to the House to
seize them, but they had retired. Mr. Hampden afterwards made a
celebrated speech in the House to clear himself from the charge brought
against him.

In the beginning of the civil war Hampden commanded a regiment of foot,
and did good service at the battle of Edgehill; but he received a mortal
wound in an engagement with Prince Rupert, in Chalgrave-field, in
Oxfordshire, and died in 1648. Hampden is said to have possessed in a
high degree talents for gaining and preserving popular influence, and
great courage, industry, and strength of mind, which procured him great
ascendancy over other men.

       *       *       *       *       *


OTHELLO'S HISTORY.


[Illustration: Letter H.]

    Her father loved me; oft invited me;
    Still question'd me the story of my life,
    From year to year: the battles, sieges, fortunes,
    That I have past.
    I ran it through, even from my boyish days
    To the very moment that he bade me tell it.
    Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
    Of moving incidents by flood and field,
    Of hair-breadth 'scapes in the imminent deadly breach,
    Of being taken by the insolent foe,
    And sold to slavery; of my redemption thence,
    And 'portance in my travels' history;
    Wherein of antres vast, and deserts idle,
    Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,
    It was my hint to speak--such was the process;
    And of the cannibals that each other eat--
    The Anthropophagi--and men whose heads
    Do grow beneath their shoulders. These things to bear
    Would Desdemona seriously incline:
    still the house affairs would draw her thence;
    Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
    She'd come again, and with a greedy ear
    Devour up my discourse; which I observing,
    Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
    To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart,
    That I would all my pilgrimage relate,
    Whereof by parcels she had something heard
    But not intentively: I did consent;
    And often did beguile her of her tears,
    When I did speak of some distressful stroke
    That my youth suffer'd. My story being done,
    She gave me for my pains a world of sighs;
    She swore--in faith 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
    'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful;
    She wish'd she had not heard it; yet she wish'd
    That Heaven had made her such a man: she thank'd me;
    And bade me if I had a friend that loved her,
    I should but teach him how to tell my story,
    And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake;
    She loved me for the dangers I had pass'd,
    And I loved her that she did pity them.
    This only is the witchcraft I have used:
    Here comes the lady; let her witness it.

    SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


FILIAL LOVE.


[Illustration: Letter V.]

Verily duty to parents is of the first consequence; and would you, my
young friends, recommend yourselves to the favour of your God and
Father, would you imitate the example of your adorable Redeemer,
and be made an inheritor of his precious promises; would you enjoy
the peace and comforts of this life, and the good esteem of your
fellow-creatures--Reverence your parents; and be it your constant
endeavour, as it will be your greatest satisfaction, to witness your
high sense of, and to make some returns for the obligations you owe to
them, by every act of filial obedience and love.

Let their commands be ever sacred in your ears, and implicitly obeyed,
where they do not contradict the commands of God: pretend not to be
wiser than they, who have had so much more experience than yourselves;
and despise them not, if haply you should be so blest as to have gained
a degree of knowledge or of fortune superior to them. Let your carriage
towards them be always respectful, reverent, and submissive; let your
words be always affectionate and humble, and especially beware of pert
and ill-seeming replies; of angry, discontented, and peevish looks.
Never imagine, if they thwart your wills, or oppose your inclinations,
that this ariseth from any thing but love to you: solicitous as they
have ever been for your welfare, always consider the same tender
solicitude as exerting itself, even in cases most opposite to your
desires; and let the remembrance of what they have done and suffered for
you, ever preserve you from acts of disobedience, and from paining those
good hearts which have already felt so much for you, their children.

The Emperor of China, on certain days of the year, pays a visit to his
mother, who is seated on a throne to receive him; and four times on his
feet, and as often on his knees, he makes her a profound obeisance,
bowing his head even to the ground.

Sir Thomas More seems to have emulated this beautiful example; for,
being Lord Chancellor of England at the same time that his father was a
Judge of the King's Bench, he would always, on his entering Westminster
Hall, go first to the King's Bench, and ask his father's blessing before
he went to sit in the Court of Chancery, as if to secure success in the
great decisions of his high and important office.

DR. DODD.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUEEN MARY'S BOWER, CHATSWORTH.


[Illustration: Letter W.]

When the widowed Mary, Queen of Scots, left France, where she had dwelt
since her fifth year--where she had shared in the education of the
French King's own daughters, in one of the convents of the kingdom, and
been the idol of the French Court and people, it is said that, as the
coast of the happy land faded from her view, she continued to exclaim,
"Farewell, France! farewell, dear France--I shall never see thee more!"
And her first view of Scotland only increased the poignancy of these
touching regrets. So little pains had been taken to "cover over the
nakedness and poverty of the land," that tears sprang into her eyes,
when, fresh from the elegant luxurious Court of Paris, she saw the
wretched ponies, with bare, wooden saddles, or dirty and ragged
trappings, which had been provided to carry her and her ladies from the
water-side to Holyrood. And then the palace itself; how different from
the palaces in which she had lived in France! Dismal and small, it
consisted only of what is now the north wing. The state-room and the
bed-chamber which were used by her yet remain, with the old furniture,
and much of the needle-work there is said to have been the work of her
hands. During her long and melancholy imprisonment in England, the art
of needle-work and reading were almost her only mode of relieving the
dreary hours.

From the moment Mary of Scotland took the fatal resolution of throwing
herself upon the supposed kindness and generosity of Elizabeth, her fate
was sealed, and it was that of captivity, only to be ended by death.
She was immediately cut off from all communication with her subjects,
except such as it was deemed proper to allow; and was moved about from
place to place, the better to ensure her safety. The hapless victim
again and again implored Elizabeth to deal generously and justly with
her. "I came," said she, in one of her letters, "of mine own accord; let
me depart again with yours: and if God permit my cause to succeed, I
shall be bound to you for it." But her rival was unrelenting, and, in
fact, increased the rigours of her confinement. Whilst a prisoner at
Chatsworth, she had been permitted the indulgence of air and exercise;
and the bower of Queen Mary is still shown in the noble grounds of that
place, as a favourite resort of the unfortunate captive. But even this
absolutely necessary indulgence was afterwards denied; she was wholly
confined to the Castle of Fotheringay, and a standing order was issued
that "she should be shot if she attempted to escape, or if others
attempted to rescue her."

[Illustration: QUEEN MARY'S BOWER, AT CHATSWORTH.]

Burns, in his "Lament of Mary, Queen of Scots," touchingly expresses the
weary feelings that must have existed in the breast of the Royal
captive:--

    "Oh, soon to me may summer suns
      Nae mair light up the morn!
    Nae mair to me the autumn winds
      Wave o'er the yellow corn!
    And in the narrow house of death,
      Let winter round me rave;
    And the next flowers that deck the spring,
      Bloom on my peaceful grave."

       *       *       *       *       *


TUBULAR RAILWAY BRIDGES.


In the year 1850, a vast line of railway was completed from Chester to
Holyhead, for the conveyance of the Royal mails, of goods and
passengers, and of her Majesty's troops and artillery, between London
and Dublin--Holyhead being the most desirable point at which to effect
this communication with Ireland. Upon this railway are two stupendous
bridges, which are the most perfect examples of engineering skill ever
executed in England, or in any other country.

The first of these bridges carries the railway across the river Conway,
close to the ancient castle built by Edward I. in order to bridle his
new subjects, the Welsh.

The Conway bridge consists of a tube, or long, huge chest, the ends of
which rest upon stone piers, built to correspond with the architecture
of the old castle. The tube is made of wrought-iron plates, varying in
thickness from a quarter of an inch to one inch, riveted together, and
strengthened by irons in the form of the letter T; and, to give
additional strength to the whole, a series of cells is formed at the
bottom and top of the tube, between an inner ceiling and floor and the
exterior plates; the iron plates which form the cells being riveted and
held in their places by angle irons. The space between the sides of the
tube is 14 feet; and the height of the whole, inclusive of the cells, is
22 feet 3-1/2 inches at the ends, and 25 feet 6 inches at the centre.
The total length of the tube is 412 feet. One end of the tube is fixed
to the masonry of the pier; but the other is so arranged as to allow for
the expansion of the metal by changes of the temperature of the
atmosphere, and it therefore, rests upon eleven rollers of iron, running
upon a bed-plate; and, that the whole weight of the tube may not be
carried by these rollers, six girders are carried over the tube, and
riveted to the upper parts of its sides, which rest upon twelve balls of
gun-metal running in grooves, which are fixed to iron beams let into the
masonry.

The second of these vast railway bridges crosses the Menai Straits,
which separate Caernarvon from the island of Anglesey. It is constructed
a good hundred feet above high-water level, to enable large vessels to
sail beneath it; and in building it, neither scaffolding nor centering
was used.

The abutments on either side of the Straits are huge piles of masonry.
That on the Anglesey side is 143 feet high, and 173 feet long. The wing
walls of both terminate in splendid pedestals, and on each are two
colossal lions, of Egyptian design; each being 25 feet long, 12 feet
high though crouched, 9 feet abaft the body, and each paw 2 feet 1
inches. Each weighs 30 tons. The towers for supporting the tube are of a
like magnitude with the entire work. The great Britannia Tower, in the
centre of the Straits, is 62 feet by 52 feet at its base; its total
height from the bottom, 230 feet; it contains 148,625 cubic feet of
limestone, and 144,625 of sandstone; it weighs 20,000 tons; and there
are 387 tons of cast iron built into it in the shape of beams and
girders. It sustains the four ends of the four long iron tubes which
span the Straits from shore to shore. The total quantity of stone
contained in the bridge is 1,500,000 cubic feet. The side towers stand
at a clear distance of 460 feet from the great central tower; and,
again, the abutments stand at a distance from the side towers of 230
feet, giving the entire bridge a total length of 1849 feet,
corresponding with the date of the year of its construction. The side
or land towers are each 62 feet by 52 feet at the base, and 190 feet
high; they contain 210 tons of cast iron.

[Illustration: CONWAY CASTLE AND TUBULAR BRIDGE.]

The length of the great tube is exactly 470 feet, being 12 feet longer
than the clear space between the towers, and the greatest span ever yet
attempted. The greatest height of the tube is in the centre--30 feet,
and diminishing towards the end to 22 feet. Each tube consists of sides,
top and bottom, all formed of long, narrow wrought-iron plates, varying
in length from 12 feet downward. These plates are of the same
manufacture as those for making boilers, varying in thickness from
three-eighths to three-fourths of an inch. Some of them weigh nearly 7
cwt., and are amongst the largest it is possible to roll with any
existing machinery. The connexion between top, bottom, and sides is made
much more substantial by triangular pieces of thick plate, riveted in
across the corners, to enable the tube to resist the cross or twisting
strain to which it will be exposed from the heavy and long-continued
gales of wind that, sweeping up the Channel, will assail it in its lofty
and unprotected position. The rivets, of which there are 2,000,000--each
tube containing 327,000--are more than an inch in diameter. They are
placed in rows, and were put in the holes red hot, and beaten with heavy
hammers. In cooling, they contracted strongly, and drew the plates
together so powerfully that it required a force of from 1 to 6 tons to
each rivet, to cause the plates to slide over each other. The weight of
wrought iron in the great tube is 1600 tons.

Each of these vast bridge tubes was constructed on the shore, then
floated to the base of the piers, or bridge towers, and raised to its
proper elevation by hydraulic machinery, the largest in the world, and
the most powerful ever constructed. For the Britannia Bridge, this
consisted of two vast presses, one of which has power equal to that of
30,000 men, and it lifted the largest tube six feet in half an hour.

The Britannia tubes being in two lines, are passages for the up and down
trains across the Straits. Each of the tubes has been compared to the
Burlington Arcade, in Piccadilly; and the labour of placing this tube
upon the piers has been assimilated to that of raising the Arcade upon
the summit of the spire of St. James's Church, if surrounded with water.

Each line of tube is 1513 feet in length; far surpassing in size any
piece of wrought-iron work ever before put together; and its weight is
5000 tons, being nearly equal to that of two 120-gun ships, having on
board, ready for sea, guns, provisions, and crew. The plate-iron
covering of the tubes is not thicker than the hide of an elephant, and
scarcely thicker than the bark of an oak-tree; whilst one of the large
tubes, if placed on its end in St. Paul's churchyard, would reach 107
feet higher than the cross of the cathedral.

[Illustration: CONSTRUCTING THE BRITANNIA TUBULAR BRIDGE.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MARINERS OF ENGLAND.


    Ye mariners of England!
      Who guard our native seas,
    Whose flag has braved a thousand years
      The battle and the breeze,
    Your glorious standard launch again,
      To match another foe,
    And sweep through the deep
      While the stormy tempests blow;
    While the battle rages long and loud,
      And the stormy tempests blow.

    The spirits of your fathers
      Shall start from every wave!
    For the deck it was their field of fame,
      And Ocean was their grave;
    Where Blake and mighty Nelson fell,
      Your manly hearts shall glow,
    As ye sweep through the deep,
      While the stormy tempests blow;
    While the battle rages long and loud,
      And the stormy tempests blow.

    Britannia needs no bulwarks,
      No towers along the steep;
    Her march is o'er the mountain waves,
      Her home is on the deep:
    With thunders from her native oak,
      She quells the floods below,
    As they roar on the shore,
      When the stormy tempests blow;
    When the battle rages long and loud,
      And the stormy tempests blow.

    The meteor-flag of England
      Shall yet terrific burn,
    Till danger's troubled night depart,
      And the star of peace return.
    Then, then, ye ocean-warriors!
      Our song and feast shall flow
    To the fame of your name,
      When the storm has ceased to blow;
    When the fiery fight is heard no more,
      And the storm has ceased to blow.

    CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *


KAFFIR LETTER-CARRIER.


"I knew" (says the pleasing writer of "Letters from Sierra Leone") "that
the long-looked-for vessel had at length furled her sails and dropped
anchor in the bay. She was from England, and I waited, expecting every
minute to feast my eyes upon at least one letter; but I remembered how
unreasonable it was to suppose that any person would come up with
letters to this lonely place at so late an hour, and that it behoved me
to exercise the grace of patience until next day. However, between ten
and eleven o'clock, a loud shouting and knocking aroused the household,
and the door was opened to a trusty Kroo messenger, who, although one of
a tribe who would visit any of its members in their own country with
death, who could 'savey white man's book,' seemed to comprehend
something of our feelings at receiving letters, as I overheard him
exclaim, with evident glee, 'Ah! massa! here de right book come at
last.' Every thing, whether a brown-paper parcel, a newspaper, an
official despatch, a private letter or note is here denominated a
'book,' and this man understood well that newspapers are never received
so gladly amongst 'books' from England as letters." The Kaffir, in the
Engraving, was sketched from one employed to convey letters in the South
African settlements; he carries his document in a split at the end of a
cane.

[Illustration: KAFFIR LETTER-CARRIER.]

It is a singular sight in India to see the catamarans which put off from
some parts of the coast, as soon as ships come in sight, either to bear
on board or to convey from thence letters or messages. These frail
vessels are composed of thin cocoa-tree logs, lashed together, and big
enough to carry one, or, at most, two persons. In one of these a small
sail is fixed, and the navigator steers with a little paddle; the float
itself is almost entirely sunk in the water, so that the effect is very
singular--a sail sweeping along the surface with a man behind it, and
apparently nothing to support them. Those which have no sails are
consequently invisible and the men have the appearance of treading the
water and performing evolutions with a racket. In very rough weather the
men lash themselves to their little rafts but in ordinary seas they
seem, though frequently washed off, to regard such accidents as mere
trifles, being naked all but a wax cloth cap in which they keep any
letters they may have to convey to ships in the roads, and swimming like
fish. Their only danger is from sharks, which are said to abound. These
cannot hurt them while on their floats; but woe be to them if they catch
them while separated from that defence. Yet, even then, the case is not
quite hopeless, since the shark can only attack them from below; and a
rapid dive, if not in very deep water, will sometimes save them.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SEASONS.


SPRING.


[Illustration: Letter C.]

    Come, gentle Spring, ethereal mildness, come,
    And from the bosom of yon dropping cloud,
    While music wakes around, veil'd in a shower
    Of shadowing roses, on our plains descend.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Hail! Source of Being! Universal Soul
    Of heaven and earth! Essential Presence, hail;
    To Thee I bend the knee; to Thee my thought
    Continual climb; who, with a master hand.
    Hast the great whole into perfection touch'd.
    By Thee the various vegetative tribes,
    Wrapt in a filmy net, and clad with leaves,
    Draw the live ether, and imbibe the dew:
    By Thee disposed into congenial soils,
    Stands each attractive plant, and sucks and swells
    The juicy tide--a twining mass of tubes.
    At thy command the vernal sun awakes
    The torpid sap, detruded to the root
    By wintry winds, that now in fluent dance,
    And lively fermentation, mounting, spreads
    All this innumerous-colour'd scene of things.
    As rising from the vegetable world
    My theme ascends, with equal wing ascend
    My panting Muse! And hark! how loud the woods
    Invite you forth in all your gayest trim.
    Lend me your song, ye nightingales! oh, pour
    The mazy running soul of melody
    Into my varied verse! while I deduce
    From the first note the hollow cuckoo sings,
    The symphony of spring, and touch a theme
    Unknown to fame, the passion of the groves.

[Illustration: SPRING.]


SUMMER.


[Illustration: Letter F.]

    From bright'ning fields of ether fair disclosed,
    Child of the Sun, refulgent Summer comes,
    In pride of youth, and felt through nature's depth:
    He comes attended by the sultry hours,
    And ever-fanning breezes on his way;
    While from his ardent look the turning Spring
    Averts his blushing face, and earth and skies,
    All-smiling, to his hot dominion leaves.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Cheer'd by the milder beam, the sprightly youth
    Speeds to the well-known pool, whose crystal depth
    A sandy bottom shows. Awhile he stands
    Gazing the inverted landscape, half afraid
    To meditate the blue profound below;
    Then plunges headlong down the circling flood.
    His ebon tresses, and his rosy cheek,
    Instant emerge: and through the obedient wave,
    At each short breathing by his lip repell'd,
    With arms and legs according well, he makes,
    As humour leads, an easy-winding path;
    While from his polish'd sides a dewy light
    Effuses on the pleased spectators round.

    This is the purest exercise of health.
    The kind refresher of the Summer heats:
    Nor, when cold Winter keens the brightening flood,
    Would I, weak-shivering, linger on the brink.
    Thus life redoubles, and is oft preserved
    By the bold swimmer, in the swift elapse
    Of accident disastrous.

[Illustration: SUMMER.]


AUTUMN.


[Illustration: Letter C.]

    Crown'd with the sickle and the wheaten sheaf,
    While Autumn nodding o'er the yellow plain
    Comes jovial on, the Doric reed once more,
    Well pleased, I tune. Whatever the wintry frost
    Nitrous prepared, the various-blossom'd Spring
    Put in white promised forth, and Summer suns
    Concocted strong, rush boundless now to view,
    Full, perfect all, and swell my glorious theme.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Hence from the busy, joy-resounding fields
    In cheerful error let us tread the maze
    Of Autumn, unconfined; and taste, revived,
    The breath of orchard big with bending fruit.
    Obedient to the breeze and beating ray,
    From the deep-loaded bough a mellow shower
    Incessant melts away. The juicy pear
    Lies in a soft profusion scatter'd round.
    A various sweetness swells the gentle race,
    By Nature's all-refining hand prepared;
    Of tempered sun, and water, earth, and air,
    In ever-changing composition mix'd.
    Such, falling frequent through the chiller night,
    The fragrant stores, the wide projected heaps
    Of apples, which the lusty-handed year,
    Innumerous, o'er the blushing orchard shakes.

[Illustration: AUTUMN.]


WINTER.


[Illustration: Letter S.]

    See, Winter comes to rule the varied year,
    Sullen and sad, with all his rising train--
    Vapours, and clouds, and storms. Be these my theme,
    These--that exalt the soul to solemn thought
    And heavenly musing. Welcome, kindred glooms;
    Congenial horrors, hail: with frequent foot,
    Pleased have I, in my cheerful morn of life,
    When nursed by careless solitude I lived,
    And sung of nature with unceasing joy;
    Pleased have I wander'd through your rough domain,
    Trod the pure virgin snows, myself as pure;
    Heard the winds roar, and the big torrent burst,
    Or seen the deep-fermenting tempest brew'd
    In the grim evening sky.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Nature! great parent! whose unceasing hand
    Rolls round the seasons of the changeful year,
    How mighty, how majestic are thy works!
    With what a pleasing dread they swell the soul,
    That sees astonish'd, and astonish'd sings!
    Ye, too, ye winds! that now begin to blow
    With boisterous sweep, I raise my voice to you.
    Where are your stores, ye powerful beings, say,
    Where your aerial magazines reserved
    To swell the brooding terrors of the storm?
    In what far distant region of the sky,
    Hush'd in deep silence, sleep ye when 'tis calm?

           *       *       *       *       *

    'Tis done; dread Winter spreads his latest glooms,
    And reigns tremendous o'er the conquer'd year.
    How dead the vegetable kingdom lies!
    How dumb the tuneful! Horror wide extends
    His desolate domain. Behold, fond man!
    See here thy pictured life! Pass some few years
    Thy flowering spring, thy summer's ardent strength,
    And sober autumn fading into age,
    The pale concluding winter comes at last
    The shuts the scene. Ah! whither now are fled
    Those dreams of greatness? those unsolid hopes
    Of happiness? those longings after fame?
    Those restless cares? those busy bustling days?
    Those gay-spent festive nights? those veering thoughts,
    Lost between good and ill, that shared thy life?
    All now are vanish'd; virtue sole survives,
    Immortal, never-failing friend of man--
    His guide to happiness on high.

    THOMSON.

[Illustration: WINTER.]

[Illustration: AND PALE CONCLUDING WINTER COMES AT LAST, AND SHUTS THE
SCENE.]

       *       *       *       *       *


ON MUSIC.


[Illustration: Letter T.]

There are few who have not felt the charms of music, and acknowledged
its expressions to be intelligible to the heart. It is a language of
delightful sensations, that is far more eloquent than words: it breathes
to the ear the clearest intimations; but how it was learned, to what
origin we owe it, or what is the meaning of some of its most affecting
strains, we know not.

We feel plainly that music touches and gently agitates the agreeable and
sublime passions; that it wraps us in melancholy, and elevates us to
joy; that it dissolves and inflames; that it melts us into tenderness,
and rouses into rage: but its strokes are so fine and delicate, that,
like a tragedy, even the passions that are wounded please; its sorrows
are charming, and its rage heroic and delightful. As people feel the
particular passions with different degrees of force, their taste of
harmony must proportionably vary. Music, then, is a language directed to
the passions; but the rudest passions put on a new nature, and become
pleasing in harmony: let me add, also, that it awakens some passions
which we perceive not in ordinary life. Particularly the most elevated
sensation of music arises from a confused perception of ideal or
visionary beauty and rapture, which is sufficiently perceivable to fire
the imagination, but not clear enough to become an object of knowledge.
This shadowy beauty the mind attempts, with a languishing curiosity, to
collect into a distinct object of view and comprehension; but it sinks
and escapes, like the dissolving ideas of a delightful dream, that are
neither within the reach of the memory, nor yet totally fled. The
noblest charm of music, then, though real and affecting, seems too
confused and fluid to be collected into a distinct idea.

Harmony is always understood by the crowd, and almost always mistaken by
musicians. The present Italian taste for music is exactly correspondent
to the taste for tragi-comedy, that about a century ago gained ground
upon the stage. The musicians of the present day are charmed at the
union they form between the grave and the fantastic, and at the
surprising transitions they make between extremes, while every hearer
who has the least remainder of the taste of nature left, is shocked at
the strange jargon. If the same taste should prevail in painting, we
must soon expect to see the woman's head, a horse's body, and a fish's
tail, united by soft gradations, greatly admired at our public
exhibitions. Musical gentlemen should take particular care to preserve
in its full vigour and sensibility their original natural taste, which
alone feels and discovers the true beauty of music.

If Milton, Shakspeare, or Dryden had been born with the same genius and
inspiration for music as for poetry, and had passed through the
practical part without corrupting the natural taste, or blending with it
any prepossession in favour of sleights and dexterities of hand, then
would their notes be tuned to passions and to sentiments as natural and
expressive as the tones and modulations of the voice in discourse. The
music and the thought would not make different expressions; the hearers
would only think impetuously; and the effect of the music would be to
give the ideas a tumultuous violence and divine impulse upon the mind.
Any person conversant with the classic poets, sees instantly that the
passionate power of music I speak of, was perfectly understood and
practised by the ancients--that the Muses of the Greeks always sung, and
their song was the echo of the subject, which swelled their poetry into
enthusiasm and rapture. An inquiry into the nature and merits of the
ancient music, and a comparison thereof with modern composition, by a
person of poetic genius and an admirer of harmony, who is free from the
shackles of practice, and the prejudices of the mode, aided by the
countenance of a few men of rank, of elevated and true taste, would
probably lay the present half-Gothic mode of music in ruins, like those
towers of whose little laboured ornaments it is an exact picture, and
restore the Grecian taste of passionate harmony once more to the delight
and wonder of mankind. But as from the disposition of things, and the
force of fashion, we cannot hope in our time to rescue the sacred lyre,
and see it put into the hands of men of genius, I can only recall you to
your own natural feeling of harmony and observe to you, that its
emotions are not found in the laboured, fantastic, and surprising
compositions that form the modern style of music: but you meet them in
some few pieces that are the growth of wild unvitiated taste; you
discover them in the swelling sounds that wrap us in imaginary grandeur;
in those plaintive notes that make us in love with woe; in the tones
that utter the lover's sighs, and fluctuate the breast with gentle pain;
in the noble strokes that coil up the courage and fury of the soul, or
that lull it in confused visions of joy; in short, in those affecting
strains that find their way to the inmost recesses of the heart,

    Untwisting all the chains that tie
    The hidden soul of harmony.--_Milton_.

USHER.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AFFLICTED POOR.


    Say ye--oppress'd by some fantastic woes,
    Some jarring nerve that baffles your repose,
    Who press the downy couch while slaves advance
    With timid eye to read the distant glance;
    Who with sad pray'rs the weary doctor tease,
    To name the nameless, ever new disease;
    Who with mock patience dire complaint endure,
    Which real pain, and that alone, can cure:
    How would ye bear in real pain to lie,
    Despised, neglected, left alone to die?
    How would ye bear to draw your latest breath,
    Where all that's wretched paves the way for death?

    Such is that room which one rude beam divides,
    And naked rafters form the sloping sides;
    Where the vile bands that bind the thatch are seen,
    And lath and mud are all that lie between,
    Save one dull pane that coarsely patch'd gives way
    To the rude tempest, yet excludes the day:
    There, on a matted flock with dust o'erspread,
    The drooping wretch reclines his languid head!
    For him no hand the cordial cup supplies,
    Nor wipes the tear which stagnates in his eyes;
    No friends, with soft discourse, his pangs beguile.
    Nor promise hope till sickness wears a smile.

    CRABBE.

[Illustration: GEORGE CRABBE.]

       *       *       *       *       *


MIDNIGHT THOUGHTS.


[Illustration: Letter T.]

    Thou, who didst put to flight
    Primeval silence, when the morning stars,
    Exulting, shouted o'er the rising ball:
    O Thou! whose word from solid darkness struck
    That spark, the sun, strike wisdom from my soul;
    My soul which flies to thee, her trust her treasure,
    As misers to their gold, while others rest:
    Through this opaque of nature and of soul,
    This double night, transmit one pitying ray,
    To lighten and to cheer. Oh, lead my mind,
    (A mind that fain would wander from its woe,)
    Lead it through various scenes of life and death,
    And from each scene the noblest truths inspire.
    Nor less inspire my conduct, than my song;
    Teach my best reason, reason; my best will
    Teach rectitude; and fix my firm resolve
    Wisdom to wed, and pay her long arrear;
    Nor let the phial of thy vengeance, pour'd
    On this devoted head, be pour'd in vain.

    The bell strikes One. We take no note of time
    But from its loss; to give it then a tongue
    Is wise in man. As if an angel spoke,
    I feel the solemn sound. If heard aright,
    It is the knell of my departed hours.
    Where are they? with the years beyond the flood!
    It is the signal that demands dispatch:
    How much is to be done! My hopes and fears
    Start up alarm'd, and o'er life's narrow verge
    Look down--on what? A fathomless abyss!
    A dread eternity! How surely mine!
    And can eternity belong to me,
    Poor pensioner on the bounties of an hour?
    How poor, how rich, how abject, how august,
    How complicate, how wonderful is man!
    How passing wonder He who made him such!
    Who center'd in our make such strange extremes--
    From different natures, marvellously mix'd:
    Connexion exquisite! of distant worlds
    Distinguish'd link in being's endless chain!
    Midway from nothing to the Deity;
    A beam ethereal--sullied and absorpt!
    Though sullied and dishonour'd, still divine!
    Dim miniature of greatness absolute!
    An heir of glory! a frail child of dust!
    Helpless immortal! insect infinite!
    A worm! a god! I tremble at myself,
    And in myself am lost. At home a stranger.
    Thought wanders up and down, surprised, aghast,
    And wondering at her own. How reason reels!
    Oh, what a miracle to man is man!
    Triumphantly distress'd! what joy! what dread
    Alternately transported and alarm'd!
    What can preserve my life, or what destroy?
    An angel's arm can't snatch me from the grave;
    Legions of angels can't confine me there.
    'Tis past conjecture; all things rise in proof.
    While o'er my limbs sleep's soft dominion spread,
    What though my soul fantastic measures trod
    O'er fairy fields, or mourn'd along the gloom
    Of pathless woods, or down the craggy steep
    Hurl'd headlong, swam with pain the mantled pool,
    Or scaled the cliff, or danced on hollow winds
    With antic shapes, wild natives of the brain!
    Her ceaseless flight, though devious, speaks her nature
    Of subtler essence than the trodden clod:
    Active, aerial, towering, unconfined,
    Unfetter'd with her gross companion's fall.
    Even silent night proclaims my soul immortal:
    Even silent night proclaims eternal day!
    For human weal Heaven husbands all events;
    Dull sleep instructs, nor sport vain dreams in vain.

    YOUNG.

       *       *       *       *       *


FAREWELL.


[Illustration: Letter N.]

    Nay, shrink not from that word "Farewell!"
    As if 'twere friendship's final knell--
      Such fears may prove but vain:
    So changeful is life's fleeting day,
    Whene'er we sever, Hope may say,
    We part to meet again!

    E'en the last parting earth can know,
    Brings not unutterable woe
      To souls that heav'nward soar:
    For humble Faith, with steadfast eye,
    Points to a brighter world on high,
    Where hearts, that here at parting sigh,
    May meet--to part no more!

    BARTON.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


VOCABULARY OF WORDS USED IN THE ILLUSTRATED LONDON READING BOOK.


       *       *       *       *       *

[We have considered that it would be useful to the young reader to have
a ready means of reference, in the READING BOOK itself, to all unusual
words of one syllable, and all the words of two syllables and above,
that occur in the various lessons. In the following pages will be found,
properly accentuated, all the more difficult polysyllables, with their
meanings, derived from Johnson, Walker, and other competent
authorities.]

       *       *       *       *       *


ABA'NDON, _v.a._ give up; resign, or quit; forsake; leave

ABI'LITY, _s._ capacity; qualification; power

A'BJECT, _a._ mean; being of no hope or regard; destitute

ABLU'TION, _s._ the act of cleansing or washing clean; water used in
    washing

ABO'LISH, _v.a._ make void; put an end to; destroy

ABO'UND, _v.n._ have in great plenty; be in great plenty

ABRE'AST, _ad._ side by side

ABRU'PTLY, _ad._ hastily; suddenly; without the due forms of preparation

A'BSOLUTE, _a._ positive; certain; unlimited

A'BSTRACT, _s._ the smaller quantity containing the virtue or power of
    the greater

ABSTRU'SE, _a._ hidden; difficult

ABU'NDANT, _a._ plentiful

ABU'TMENT, _s._ that which borders upon another

ACA'DEMY, _s._ (from _Academus_, an Athenian, who founded a public
    school at Athens, which after him was called Academia, _Latin_),
    place of education; an assembly or society of men, uniting for the
    promotion of some art

A'CCENT, _s._ the sound of a syllable; a modification of the voice
    expressive of the passions or sentiments; the marks made upon
    syllables to regulate their pronunciation

A'CCIDENT, _s._ that which happens unforeseen; chance

ACCO'MPANY, _v.n._ associate with; become a companion to

ACCO'MPLICE, _s._ an associate; partner

ACCO'MPLISHMENT, _s._ ornament of mind or body; acquirement

ACCO'ST, _v.a._ speak to; address; salute

ACCO'UNT, _s._ the state or result of a computation--as, the _account_
    stands thus between us; narrative; value

ACCO'UTRE, _v.a._ dress; equip

A'CCURACY, _s._ exactness; nicety

ACCU'STOM, _v._ to habituate; to inure

ACQUI'RE, _v.a._ gain; obtain; attain

A'CRID, _a._ having a hot biting taste; bitter

A'CRIMONY, _s._ sharpness; severity; bitterness of thought or language

ACRO'POLIS, _s._ a citadel; the highest part of a city

ACTI'VITY, _s._ quickness; nimbleness

ACU'TE, _a._ sharp, not blunt; sharp, not dull; not stupid; vigorous;
    powerful in operation

ADAMA'NTINE, _a._ made of adamant; having the qualities of adamant, viz.
    hardness, indissolubility

ADA'PT, _v.a._ admit, justify; yield; permit

ADIEU', _ad._ used elliptically for _à Dieu je vous commende_, at the
    parting of friends; farewell

A'DMIRABLE, _a._ to be admired; of power to excite wonder

ADMIRA'TION, _s._ wonder

ADMI'T, _v.a._ suffer to enter; allow

ADO'PT, _v.a._ take a son by choice; make him a son who is not so by
    birth; place any person or thing in a nearer relation than they have
    by nature or something else

ADRO'ITNESS, _s._ dexterity; readiness

ADU'LT, _s._ a person above the age of boyhood or girlhood

ADVA'NCE, _v.a._ improve; forward; propose

ADVA'NTAGE, _s._ superiority; opportunity

ADVE'NTURE, _s._ chance; hazard; an enterprise in which something must
    be left to hazard

ADVE'NTURER, _s._ he that puts himself into the hands of chance

ADVE'NTUROUS, _a._ bold; daring; courageous; inclined to adventures

ADVE'RSITY, _s._ affliction; calamity; misfortune; the public misery

ADVE'RTISEMENT, _s._ something advertised; the public notice of a thing

A'DVOCATE, _s._ he that pleads a cause

AE'OLIAN, _a._ an epithet applied to lyric poetry, because Sappho and
    Alcaeus were natives of Lesbos in Aeolia, and wrote in the Aeolic
    dialect

AE'RIAL, _a._ belonging to the air; lofty

AFFABI'LITY, _s._ civility; condescension; easiness of manners

AFFE'CT, _v.a._ act upon; produce effect in any other thing; move the
    passions; aim at; aspire to

AFFECTA'TION, _s._ an elaborate appearance; false pretence

AFFE'CTION, _s._ state of being affected by any cause or agent; love;
    kindness; good-will to some person; passionate regard

AFFE'CTIONATE, _a._ full of affection; fond; tender; warm; benevolent

AFFI'NITY, _s._ connection with

AGGRE'SSION, _s._ first act of injury

A'GONY, _s._ the pangs of death; any violent pain in body or mind

AGRE'EABLE, _a._ suitable to; pleasing

A'GRICULTURE, _s._ the science of making land productive

A'LABASTER, _s._ a kind of soft marble, easier to cut and less durable
    than the other kinds

ALA'RUM, _s._ notice of any approaching danger; any tumult or
    disturbance

A'LIEN, _s._ foreigner; stranger

A'LKALI, _s._ any substance which, when mingled with acid, produces
    effervescence and fermentation

ALLEGO'RY, _s._ a figurative discourse, in which something is contained
    other than is literally understood

ALLE'VIATE, _v.a._ make light; ease; soften

ALLO'W, _v.a._ permit; give leave

A'LPHABET, _s._ the order of the letters, or elements of speech

ALTERA'TION, _s._ the act of changing; the change made

A'LTITUDE, _s._ height of place; space measured upward

AL'TOGETHER, _ad._ completely; without exception

AMA'LGAMATE, _v.a._ to unite metals with silver

AMA'ZEMENT, _s._ height of admiration; astonishment

AMBI'GUOUS, _a._ using doubtful expressions; doubtful; having two
    meanings

AMBI'TION, _s._ the desire of preferment or honour; the desire of
    anything great or excellent

AMBI'TIOUS, _a._ fond of power; desirous of power

AME'RICAN, _s._ native of America

A'METHYST, _s._ a precious stone of a violet colour

A'MIABLE, _a._ kind; gentle; good natured; loving; not selfish

AMMUNI'TION, _s._ military stores, applied to artillery

AMPHITHE'ATRE, _s._ a building in a circular or oval form, having its
    area encompassed with rows of seats one above another

AMPU'LLA, _s._ (pronounced _am-poo-la_) a vessel of pure gold, used for
    containing the holy oil at coronations

AMU'SE, _v.a._ entertain with tranquillity; draw on from time to time

ANA'LOGY, _s._ resemblance between things with regard to some
    circumstances or effects

ANATO'MICAL, _a._ relating or belonging to anatomy

ANA'TOMY, _s._ the art of dissecting the body; the doctrine of the
    structure of the body

A'NCESTOR, _s._ one from whom a person descends

A'NCIENT, _a._ old; past; former

A'NECDOTE, _s._ something yet unpublished; biographical history;
    personal history

ANEMO'METER, _s._ an instrument to measure the force of the wind

ANGE'LIC, _a._ resembling angels; belonging to angels

A'NIMAL, _s._ a living creature

ANIMA'LCULE, _s._ a small animal, generally applied to those which
    cannot be seen without a microscope

ANIMO'SITY, _s._ vehemence of hatred; passionate malignity

ANNIHILATE, _v.a._ reduce to nothing; destroy

ANNO'Y, _v.a._ incommode; vex; tease; molest

A'NNUAL, _a._ that comes yearly

A'NTELOPE, _s._ a goat with curled or wreathed horns

ANTHROPO'PHAGI, _s._ man-eaters; cannibals

ANTI'CIPATE, _v.a._ take an impression of something which is not yet as
    if it really was

A'NTIQUARY, _s._ a man studious of antiquity

ANTI'QUE, _a._ ancient; old; odd; of old fashion

ANTI'QUITY, _s._ old times; remains of old times

A'NTRE, _s._ a cavern

ANXI'ETY, _s._ perplexity; lowness of spirits

ANXIOUS, _a._ disturbed about some uncertain event

A'PATHY, _s._ exemption from feeling or passion

APO'CALYPSE, _s._ the Book of Revelations

APO'LOGY, _s._ defence; excuse

APO'STLE, _s._ a person sent with commands, particularly applied to
    those whom our Saviour deputed to preach the Gospel

APOSTO'LIC, _a._ delivered or taught by the Apostles

APPARA'TUS, _s._ tools; furniture; show; instruments

APPE'AR, _v.n._ be visible; in sight

APPEARANCE, _s._ the act of coming into sight; phenomenon; apparition;
    presence

APPE'NDAGE, _s._ something added to another thing without being
    necessary to its essence

    A'PPETITE _s._ hunger; violent longing

    APPLA'USE _s._ approbation loudly expressed; praise

APPLICATION, _s._ close study; intenseness of thought; attention; the
    act of applying; the act of applying anything to another.

APPORTIONMENT, _s._ dividing into portions

APPRECIATE, _v.a._ set a price on anything; esteem

APPRO'ACH, _v n._ draw near; somewhat resemble

APPROBATION, _s._ the act of approving, or expressing himself pleased,
    or satisfied; support

APPRO'PRIATENESS, _s._ a fitness to be appropriated

APPROPRIATION, _s._ the application of something to a certain purpose

AQUA'TIC, _a._ that inhabits the water; that grows in the water

A'QUEDUCT, _s._ a conveyance, tunnel, or way made for carrying water

ARA'TOO, _s._ a bird of the parrot kind

AR'BALIST, _s._ a naturalist who make trees his study

A'RBITRABY, _o._ despotic; absolute; depending on no rule

ARBU'TUS, _s._ a strawberry tree

ARCA'DE, _s._ a continued arch; a walk arched over

ARCHBI'SHOP, _s._ a bishop of the first class, who superintends the
    conduct of other bishops

ARCHITE'CTURE, _s._ the art or science of building

A'RCTIC, _a._ northern; lying under the Arctos or Bear

A'RDUOUS, _a._ lofty; difficult

ARI'SE, _v.n._ mount upward; get up; proceed

ARMI'LLA, _s._ a bracelet, or jewel worn on the arm

A'RMY, _s._ collection of armed men; a great number

AROMA'TIC, _a._ spicy; fragrant; strong-scented

ARRI'VE, _v.n._ reach any place; happen

ARRA'NGE, _v.a._ put in the proper order for any purpose

ARRA'NGEMENT, _s._ the act of putting In proper order, the state of
    being put in order

ARRA'Y, _s._ order, chiefly of war; dress

A'RROGANCE, _s._ the act or quality of taking much upon one's self

A'RROW, _s._ the pointed weapon which is shot from a bow

A'RTICLE, _s._ a part of speech; a single clause of an account; term

ARTI'CULATE, _v.a._ form words; speak as a man; draw up in articles;
    make terms

A'RTIFICE, _s._ trick; fraud; stratagem; art; trade

ARTIFI'CIAL, _a._ made by art; not natural

ARTI'LLERY, _s._ weapons of war; cannon; great ordinance

A'RTISAN, _s._ professor of any art

ASCE'NDANCY, _s._ influence; power

ASPE'RSE, _v.a._ bespatter with censure or calumny

A'SPIC, _s._ the name of a small serpent

ASSA'ILANT, _s._ one that assails

ASSE'MBLY, _s._ a company met together

ASSE'RT, _v.a._ to declare positively; maintain; to defend either by
    words or actions; claim

ASSIDU'ITY, _s._ diligence

ASSI'MILATE, _v.a._ bring to a likeness; turn to its own nature by
    digestion

ASSISTANCE, _s._ help

ASSISTANT, _s._ a helper

ASSI'ZE, _s._ a jury; any court of justice; the ordinance or statute

ASSO'CIATE, _s._ a partner; a confederate; a companion

ASSU'RE, _v.a._ give confidence by a firm promise

ASTO'NISHMENT, _s._ amazement

ASTRO'NOMY, _s._ the science of the motions, distances, &c. of the stars

A'THEISM, _s._ the disbelief of a god

ATHE'NIAN, _s._ a native of Athens

A'TMOSPHERE, _s._ the air that encompasses the solid earth on all sides

ATRO'CIOUS, _a._ wicked in a high degree; enormous

ATTA'CH, _v.a._ arrest; fix one's interest; win; lay hold on

ATTA'CK, _v.a._ to make an assault

ATTA'IN, _v.a._ gain; procure; reach

ATTAINMENT, _s._ an acquisition; an accomplishment

ATTE'MPT, _v.a._ venture upon; try; endeavour

ATTE'NDANT, _s._ one that attends; one that is present at anything

ATTENTION, _s._ the act of attending; the act of bending the mind upon
    it

ATTE'NTIVE, _a._ regardful; full of attention

ATTI'RE, _s._ clothing; dress; equipment

A'TTITUDE, _s._ position; expression

ATTRA'CT, _v.a._ draw to something; allure; invite

ATTRA'CTIVE, _a._ having the power to draw anything; inviting

ATTRIBUTE, _v.a._ to ascribe; to yield as due; to impute as a cause

AU'DITOR, _s._ a hearer

    AURO'RA-BOREA'LIS, _a._ electrical light streaming in the night from
    the north; the northern lights or streamers

AUSTE'RITY, _s._ severity; cruelty

AUTHENTIC, _a._ genuine

AU'THOR, _s._ the first beginner or mover of anything; a writer in
    general

AUTHO'RITY, _s._ power; rule; influence; support; legal power

AU'TUMN, _s._ the season of the year between summer and winter

AVAILABLE, _a._ profitable; powerful; advantageous

AVALA'NCHE, _s._ immense mass of snow or ice

A'VERAGE, _s._ a middle proportion

AVI'DITY, _s._ eagerness; voracity; greediness

AVO'ID, _v.a._ shun; shift off; quit

AWA'KE, _v.a._ rouse out of sleep; put into new action

AW'KWARD, _a._ clumsy; inelegant; unready

A'ZURE, _s._ blue; faint blue


    **


BA'CCHANALS, _s._ the drunken feasts of Bacchus; fabulous personages who
    assisted at the festivals of Bacchus

BALCO'NY, _s._ a frame before the window of a room

BALLO'ON, _s._ a large hollow ball of silk, filled with gas, which makes
    it rise in the air

BA'NDIT, _s._ a man outlawed

BA'NISH, _v.a._ condemn to leave one's country; drive away

BA'NISHMENT, _s._ the act of banishing another; the state of being
    banished

BARBA'RIAN, _s._ a savage; a man uncivilized

BA'RBAROUS, _a._ savage; ignorant; cruel

BA'RREN, _a._ unfruitful; sterile; scanty

BARRIC'ADE, _v.a._ stop up a passage; hinder by stoppage

BASA'LT, _s._ a variety of trap rock

BASA'LTIC, _a._ relating to basalt

BASTI'LE, _s._ (pronounced _basteel_) a jail; formerly the state prison
    of France

BA'TTER, _v.a._ beat; shatter; beat down

BA'TTLE, _s._ a fight; an encounter between opposite enemies

BEA'CON, _s._ something raised on an eminence to direct

BEA'RABLE, _a._ that which is capable of being borne

BEAU'TY, _s._ a particular grace or feature; a beautiful person

BECO'ME, _v.a._ befit; be suitable to the person

BEDE'CK, _v.a._ to deck; to adorn; to grace

BE'DSTEAD, _s._ the frame on which the bed is placed

BEHI'ND, _ad._ out of sight; not yet in view; remaining

BEHO'VE, _v.n._ to be fit

BELI'EVE, _v.n._ to have a firm persuasion of anything

BENEFA'CTOR, _s._ one that does good

BE'NEFIT, _s._ a kindness; a favour conferred; an advantage

BENE'VOLENT, _a._ kind; having good-will

BENI'GHT, _v.a._ involve in darkness; surprise with the coming on of
    night

BENI'GNANT, _a._ kind; generous; liberal

BE'NISON, _s._ a blessing

BENU'MB, _v.a._ make torpid; stupify

BESIE'GE, _v.a._ to beleaguer; to lay siege to

BESPRE'NT, _v. def._ besprinkled

BESTO'W, _v.a._ give; confer upon; lay up

BETWE'EN, _prep._ in the middle space; from one to another; noting
    difference of one from another

BI'LBERRY, _s._ the fruit of a plant so called

BO'ATMAN, _s._ he that manages a boat

BO'DY, _s._ material substance of an animal; matter; person; collective
    mass; main part; main army

BO'RDER, _s._ edge; edge of a country; a bank raised round a garden and
    set with flowers

BO'UNTEOUS, _a._ liberal; kind; generous

BOUQUE'T, _s._ (pronounced _boo-kay_) a nosegay

BOWSPRI'T, _s._ (a sea term) the mast that runs out at the bow of a ship

BRA'CELET, _s._ an ornament for the arms

BRA'CH, _s._ a she hound

BRA'CKISH, _a._ salt; somewhat salt

BRI'LLIANCY, _s._ brightness; lustre

BRI'LLIANT, _s._ a diamond of the finest cut

BRI'LLIANT, _a._ shining; sparkling; full of lustre

BU'BBLE, _s._ a small bladder of water; anything which wants solidity
    and firmness

BU'LKY, _a._ of great size or stature

BU'LWARK, _s._ a fortification; a security

BUO'YANCY, _s._ the quality of floating

BU'RDENSOME, _a._ grievous

BU'RIAL, _s._ interment; the act of putting anything under earth or
    water

BU'RY, _v.a._ inter; put in the grave; conceal

BU'TTRESS, _s._ a prop; a wall built to support another


CA'DENCE, _s._ the fall of the voice; state of sinking, decline

CALA'MITY, _s._ misfortune; cause of misery; distress

CA'LCULATE, _v.a._ reckon; adjust

CAL'CULA'TION, _s._ a practice or manner of reckoning; a reckoning

CA'LEDO'NIANS, _s._ the ancient inhabitants of Scotland

CAMPA'IGN, _s._ a large, open, level tract of land; the time for which
    any army keeps the field

CA'NADA, _s._ a province of the British possessions in America

CANA'L, _s._ any course of water made by art; a passage through which
    any of the juices of the body flow

CANA'RY, _s._ an excellent singing-bird--so called from its native
    place, the Canary Islands

CA'NNIBAL, _s._ a savage that eats his fellow-men taken in war

CA'PABLE, _a._ susceptible; intelligent; qualified for; able to receive;
    capacious; able to understand

CAPA'CIOUS, _a._ wide; large

CAPA'CITY, _s._ power; ability; state; condition; character

CAPERCA'ILZIE, _s._ (pronounced _cap-per-kail-zeh_) cock of the wood

CA'PITAL, _s._ the upper part of a pillar; the chief city of a nation or
    kingdom

CA'PITAL, _a._ applied to letters--large, such as are written at the
    beginning or heads of books

CA'PTAIN, _s._ a chief commander

CA'PTIVE, _s._ a prisoner

CAPTI'VITY, _s._ imprisonment; subjection by the fate of war; bondage;
    slavery; servitude

CA'PTURE, _v.a._ take prisoner; bring into a condition of servitude

CA'RAVAN, _s._ a conveyance; a troop or body of merchants or pilgrims,
    as they travel in the East

CARE'ER, _s._ a course; full speed; course of action

CA'RGO, _s._ the lading of a ship

CARNI'VOROUS, _a._ flesh-eating

CA'ROB, _s._ a plant bearing a nutritious fruit so called

CA'RRIAGE, _s._ the act of carrying or transporting; vehicle; conduct

CA'RRION, _s._ the carcase of something not proper for food

CA'RRONA'DE, _s._ a short iron cannon

CA'RRY, _v.a._ convey from a place; transport; bring forward; bear

CAR'TILAGE, _s._ a smooth and solid body, softer than a bone, but harder
    than a ligament

CARTILA'GINOUS, _a._ consisting of cartilages

CA'RTRIDGE, _s._ a case of paper or parchment filled with gunpowder,
    used for greater expedition in loading

CASCA'DE, _s._ a cataract; a waterfall

CA'STELLATED, _a._ that which is turretted or built in the form of a
    castle

CATAMARA'N, _s._ a rude species of boat

CA'TARACT, _s._ a waterfall

CATA'STROPHE, _s._ a final event

CATHE'DRAL, _s._ the head church of a diocese

CA'VALRY, _s._ horse soldiery

CA'VERN, _s._ a hollow place in the ground

CA'VIL, _s._ a false or frivolous objection

CA'VITY, _s._ a hole; a hollow place

CE'DAR, _s._ a kind of tree; it is evergreen, and produces flowers

CE'LEBRATE, _v.a._ praise; commend; mention in a set or solemn manner

CELE'BRITY, _s._ transaction publicly splendid

CELE'RITY, _s._ quickness

CELE'STIAL, _a._ heavenly

CE'METERY, _s._ a place where the dead are deposited

CE'NTRE, _s._ the middle

CE'NTURY, _s._ a hundred years

CEREMO'NIOUS, _a._ full of ceremony

CE'REMONY, _s._ form in religion; form of civility

CE'RTAIN, _a._ sure; unquestionable; regular; particular kind

CHAO'TIC, _a._ confused

CHA'PTER, _s._ a division of a book; the place in which assemblies of
    the clergy are held

CHARACTERI'SE, _v.a._ to give a character of the particular quality of
    any man

CHARACTERI'STIC, _s._ that which constitutes the character

CHARACTERI'STICALLY, _ad._ constituting the character

CHA'RITY, _s._ kindness; love; good-will; relief given to the poor

CHA'TEAU, _s._ (pronounced _shat-oh_) a castle

CHA'TTER, _v.a._ make a noise by collision of the teeth; talk idly or
    carelessly

CHE'RUB, _s._ a celestial spirit, next in order to the seraphim

CHRI'STENDOM, _s._ the collective body of Christianity

CHRI'STIAN, _s._ a professor of the religion of Christ

CHRO'NICLE, _s._ a register of events in order of time; a history

CHRO'NICLER, _s._ a writer of chronicles; a historian

CHRONO'METER, _s._ an instrument for the exact measuring of time

CI'PHER, _s._ a figure, as 1, 2

CI'RCUIT, _s._ a circular band

CI'RCUIT, _s._ ring; round; stated journey repeated at intervals

CIRCU'MFERENCE, _s._ the space enclosed in a circle

CIRCUMSCRI'BE, _v.a._ enclose in certain lines or boundaries; bound;
    Limit

CI'RCUMSTANCE, _s._ something relative to a fact; incident; event

CI'STERN, _s._ a receptacle of water for domestic uses; reservoir

CI'STUS, _s._ rock-rose

CI'TADEL, _s._ a fortress; a place of defence

CI'TIZEN, _s._ a freeman of a city; townsman

CI'TY, _s._ a corporate town that hath a bishop

CI'VIL, _a._ political; not foreign; gentle; well bred; polite

CIVI'LITY, _s._ politeness; complaisance

CI'VILIZA'TION, _s._ civilising manners

CI'VILIZE, _v.a._ reclaim from savageness and brutality

CLA'MOUR, _s._ noise; tumult; disturbance

CLA'RION, _s._ a trumpet

CLI'MATE, _s._ a region, or tract of land, differing from another by the
    temperature of the air

CLU'STER, _s._ a bunch

CO'GNIZANCE, _s._ trial; a badge by which one is known

COLLE'CT, _v.a._ gather together; bring into one place; gain from
    observation

COLLO'QUIAL, _a._ that relates to common conversation

COLO'NIAL, _a._ that which relates to a colony

CO'LONIST, _s._ one that colonises; one that dwells in a colony

COLO'SSAL, _a._ of enormous magnitude; large

CO'LOUR, _s._ the appearance of bodies to the eye only; hue; appearance

CO'LUMN, _s._ a round pillar; a long file or row of troops; half a page,
    when divided into two equal parts by a line passing down the middle

COLU'MNAR, _a._ formed in columns

COMBINA'TION, _s._ a union; a joining together

CO'MFORTABLE, _a._ admitting comfort; dispensing comfort

COMMA'NDER, _s._ a general; chief; leader

COMMEMORA'TION, _s._ an act of public celebration

COMME'NCE, _v.a._ to begin

CO'MMERCE, _s._ intercourse; exchange of one thing for another; trade

COMME'RCIAL, _a._ that which relates to commerce

CO'MMINUTE, _v.a._ to grind; to pulverise

COMMO'DITY, _s._ wares; merchandise

COMMONWE'ALTH, _s._ a polity; an established form of civilized life;
    public; republic

COMMU'NICATE, _v.a._ impart knowledge; reveal

COMMU'NITY, _s._ the commonwealth; the body politic; common possession

COMPA'NION, _s._ a partner; an associate

CO'MPANY, _s._ persons assembled together; a band; a subdivision of a
    regiment of foot

CO'MPARABLE, _a._ capable of being compared; of equal regard

COMPA'RE, _v.n._ make one thing the measure of another; find a likeness
    of one thing with another

COMPA'RISON, _s._ the act of comparing; state of being compared;
    comparative estimate

COMPE'TE, _v.a._ to vie; to contend; to strive; to endeavour to outstrip

COMPLA'INT, _s._ representation of pains or injuries; malady;
    remonstrance against

COMPLAI'SANCE, _s._ civility; desire of pleasing

COMPLE'TION, _s._ accomplishment; act of fulfilling

COMPLI'ANCE, _s._ the act of yielding to any design or demand

CO'MPLICATE, _v.a._ to render difficult and incomprehendable; to join
    one with another

COMPOSI'TION, _s._ a mass formed by mingling different ingredients;
    written work

COMPREHE'ND, _v.a._ comprise; include; conceive; understand

CONCE'AL, _v.a._ hide; keep secret; cover

CONCE'IT, _s._ vain pride

CONCE'NTRIC, _a._ having one common centre

CONCE'PTION, _s._ the act of conceiving; state of being conceived;
    notion; sentiment

CONCE'SSION, _s._ the act of granting or yielding

CONCI'LIATE, _v.a._ to gain; to win; to reconcile

CONCI'SE, _a._ short; brief; not longer than is really needful

CONCO'CT, _v.a._ to devise

CO'NCORD, _s._ agreement between persons or things; peace; union; a
    compact

CONCU'SSION, _s._ the state of being shaken

CONDE'NSE, _v.n._ to grow close and weighty

CONDI'TION, _s._ rank; property; state

CO'NDOR, _s._ a monstrous bird in America

CONDU'CT, _v.a._ lend; accompany; manage

CONE, _s._ a solid body, of which the base is circular, but which ends
    in a point

CONFE'R, _v.a._ compare; give; bestow; contribute; conduce

CO'NFERENCE, _s._ formal discourse; an appointed meeting for discussing
    some point by personal debate

CONFE'SS, _v.a._ acknowledge a crime; own; avow; grant

CONFI'NEMENT, _s._ imprisonment; restraint of liberty

CO'NFLUENCE, _s._ the joining together of rivers; a concourse; the act
    of joining together

CONFORMA'TION, _s._ the form of things as relating to each other; the
    act of producing suitableness or conformity to anything

CONFO'RMITY, _s._ similitude; consistency

CONGE'NER, _s._ a thing of the same kind or nature

CONGE'NIAL, _a._ partaking of the same genius

CONGLO'MERATE, _v.a._ to gather into a ball, like a ball of thread

CO'NICAL, _a._ in the shape of a cone

CONJE'CTURE, _s._ guess; imperfect knowledge; idea

CONNEC'TION, _s._ union

CO'NQUER, _v.a._ gain by conquest; win; subdue

CO'NQUEROR, _s._ a victor; one that conquers

CO'NQUEST, _s._ a victory

CO'NSCIENCE, _s._ the faculty by which we judge of the goodness or
    wickedness of ourselves

CO'NSCIOUS, _a._ endowed with the power of knowing one's own thoughts
    and actions; bearing witness by the dictates of conscience to
    anything

CONSCRI'PTION, _s._ an enrolling or registering

CO'NSECRATE, _v.a._ to make sacred; to canonize

CO'NSEQUENCE, _s._ that which follows from any cause or principle;
    effect of a cause

CO'NSEQUENT, _a._ following by rational deduction; following as the
    effect of a cause

CONSI'DERABLE, _a._ worthy of consideration; important; valuable

CONSI'ST, _v.n._ subsist; be composed; be comprised

CONSI'STENCE, _s._ state with respect to material existence; degree of
    denseness or rarity

CONSI'STENCY, _s._ adhesion; agreement with itself or with any other
    thing

CONSPI'CUOUS, _a._ obvious to the sight

CO'NSTANT, _a._ firm; fixed; certain; unvaried

CONSTELLA'TION, _s._ a cluster of fixed stars; an assemblage of
    splendours

CONSTERNA'TION, _s._ astonishment; amazement; wonder

CO'NSTITUTE, _v.a._ give formal existence; produce; erect; appoint
    another in an office

CONSTRU'CT, _v.a._ build; form; compile

CONSTRU'CTION, _s._ the act of building; structure; form of building

CONSTR'UCTIVE, _a._ by construction

CONSU'MPTION, _s._ the act of consuming; waste; a disease; a waste of
    muscular flesh

CO'NTACT, _s._ touch; close union

CONTA'GIOUS, _a._ infectious; caught by approach

CONTA'IN, _v.a._ hold; comprehend; restrain

CONTE'MPLATE, _v.a._ study; meditate; muse; think studiously with long
    attention

CONTEMPLA'TION, _s._ meditation; studious thought

CONTE'MPLATIVE, _a._ given to thought or study

CONTE'MPORARY, _s._ one who lives at the same time with another

CONTE'MPTIBLE, _a._ worthy of contempt, of scorn; neglected; despicable

CO'NTEST, _s._ dispute; difference; debate

CONTE'ST, _v.a._ to strive; to vie; to contend

CONTI'GUOUS, _a._ meeting so as to touch

CO'NTINENT, _s._ land not disjoined by the sea from other lands; that
    which contains anything; one of the quarters of the globe

CONTI'NGENCY, _s._ accidental possibility

CONTI'NUE, _v.n._ remain in the same state; last; persevere

CONTRA'CT, _v.a._ to shrink up; to grow short; to bargain

CO'NTRARY, _a._ opposite; contradictory; adverse

CONTRI'VANCE, _s._ the act of contriving; scheme; plan; plot

CONVE'NIENCE, _s._ fitness; ease; cause of ease

CONVE'NIENT, _a._ fit; suitable; proper; well adapted

CO'NVENT, _s._ an assembly of religious persons; a monastery; a nunnery

CO'NVERSE, _s._ conversation; acquaintance; familiarity

CONVE'RSION, _s._ change from one state to another

CONVE'RT, _v.a._ change into another substance; change from one religion
    to another; turn from a bad to a good life; apply to any use

CONVE'Y, _v.a._ carry; transport from one place to another; bring;
    transfer

CONVU'LSIVE, _a._ that gives twitches or spasms

CO'PIOUS, _a._ plentiful; abundant

CO'PPICE, _s._ a low wood; a place overrun with brushwood

CO'RDIAL, _a._ reviving; hearty; sincere

CORONA'TION, _s._ the act of crowning a King

CORPORA'TION, _s._ a body politic, constituted by Royal charter

CORPO'REAL, _a._ having a body; material; not spiritual

CORRE'CT, _v.a._ punish; discipline; remark faults; take away fault

CORRESPONDENCE, _s._ intercourse; relation; friendship

CO'UNCILLOR, _s._ one that gives counsel

COU'NTENANCE, _s._ the form of the face; air; look; calmness of look;
    patronage

CO'UNTRY, _s._ a tract of land; a region; rural parts

CO'URAGE, _s._ bravery; boldness

CO'VERING, _s._ dress; anything spread over another

CRA'FTY, _a._ cunning; knowing; scheming; politic

CRA'TER, _s._ the bowl, opening, or funnel of a volcano

CREA'TION, _s._ the act of creating; universe

CREA'TOR, _s._ the Divine Being that created all things

CRE'ATURE, _s._ a being created; a general term for man

CRE'VICE, _s._ a crack; a cleft; a narrow opening

CRI'MINAL, _s._ a man accused; a man guilty of a crime

CRI'MINA'LITY, _s._ the act of being guilty of a crime

CRI'TIC, _s._ a judge; otherwise a censurer

CRI'TICAL, _a._ relating to criticism

CRO'CODILE, _s._ an amphibious voracious animal, in shape like a lizard

CROO'KED, _a._ bent; winding; perverse

CRU'ELTY, _s._ inhumanity; savageness; act of intentional affliction

CRU'SADE, _s._ an expedition against the infidels; a holy war

CRY'STAL, _s._ crystals are hard, pellucid, and naturally colourless
    bodies, of regular angular figures

CU'LPABLE, _a._ criminal; guilty; blamable

CU'LTIVATE, _v.a._ forward or improve the product of the earth by manual
    industry; improve

CULTIVA'TION, _s._ improvement in general

CU'POLA, _s._ a dome

CU'RFEW, _s._ an evening peal, by which the Conqueror willed that every
    man should rake up his fire and put out his light

CURIO'SITY, _s._ inquisitiveness; nice experiment; an object of
    curiosity; rarity

CU'RIOUS, _a._ inquisitive; desirous of information; difficult to
    please; diligent about; elegant; neat; artful

CU'RRENT, _a._ passing from hand to hand; authoritative; common; what is
    now passing

CU'STOM, _s._ habit; fashion; practice of buying of certain persons

CY'MBAL, _s._ a kind of musical instrument

CY'PRESS, _s._ a tall straight tree. It is the emblem of mourning


DALMA'TIA, _s._ a province of Austria

DALMA'TIAN, _a._ belonging to Dalmatia

DA'MAGE, _s._ mischief; hurt; loss

DA'NGER, _s._ risk; hazard; peril

DA'NGEROUS, _a._ hazardous; perilous

DA'STARDLY, _ad._ cowardly; mean; timorous

DA'UNTED, _a._ discouraged

DECE'PTION, _s._ the act or means of deceiving; cheat; fraud; the state
    of being deceived

DECLI'NE, _v.a._ shun; avoid; refuse; bring down

DE'CORATE, _v.a._ adorn; embellish; beautify

DECORA'TION, _s._ ornament; added beauty

DE'DICATE, _v.a._ to inscribe

DEFA'CE, _v.a._ destroy; raze; ruin; disfigure

DEFE'CTIVE, _a._ wanting the just quantity; full of defects; imperfect;
    faulty

DEFE'NCE, _s._ guard; protection; resistance

DEFI'CIENCY, _s._ want; something less than is necessary; imperfection

DEGE'NERACY, _s._ departure from the virtue of our ancestors

DEGE'NERATE, _a._ unworthy; base

DE'ITY, _s._ divinity; the nature and essence of God; fabulous Rod; the
    supposed divinity of a heathen god

DE'LICACY, _s._ daintiness; softness; feminine beauty; nicety; gentle
    treatment; smallness

DE'LICATE, _s._ fine; soft; pure; clear; unable to bear hardships;
    effeminate

DELI'CIOUS, _a._ sweet; delicate; agreeable

DELI'GHT, _v.a._ please; content; satisfy

DELI'NEATE, _v.a._ to paint; to represent; to describe

DELI'VER, _v.a._ set free; release; give; save; surrender

DE'LUGE, _v.a._ flood

DE'LUGE, _v.a._ drown; lay totally under water; overwhelm; cause to sink

DEME'ANOUR, _s._ carriage; behaviour

DEMO'LISH, _v.a._ raze; destroy; swallow up

DEMONSTRA'TION, _s._ the highest degree of argumental evidence

DENO'MINATE, _v.a._ to name anything

DEPA'RTMENT, _s._ separate allotment; province or business assigned to a
    particular person

DEPO'RTMENT, _s._ carriage; bearing

DEPO'SIT, _s._ a pledge; anything given as a security

DEPO'SIT, _v.a._ lay up; lay aside

DEPRA'VITY, _s._ corruption

DE'PREDA'TION, _s._ a robbing; a spoiling; waste

DEPRI'VE, _v.a._ bereave one of a thing; hinder; debar from

DE'RVISE, _s._ a Turkish priest

DESCE'NDANT, _s._ the offspring of an ancestor

DESCRI'BE, _v.a._ mark out; define

DESCRI'PTION, _s._ the sentence or passage in which anything is
    described

DESCRY', _v.a._ give notice of anything suddenly discovered; detect;
    discover

DE'SERT, _s._ a wilderness; solitude; waste country

DESE'RVE, _v.a._ be entitled to reward or punishment

DESI'GN, _s._ an intention; a purpose; a scheme

DESIGNA'TION, _s._ appointment; direction; intention to design

DESI'RE, _v.a._ wish; long for; intreat

DE'SOLATE, _a._ without inhabitants; solitary; laid waste

DESPA'TCH, _s._ to send away hastily; to do business quickly; to put to
    death

DE'SPERATE, _a._ without hope; rash; mad; furious

DE'SPICABLE, _a._ worthy of scorn; contemptible

DESPI'SE, _v.a._ scorn; condemn; slight; abhor

DE'SPOTISM, _s._ absolute power

DESTINA'TION, _s._ the place where it was our destiny to go; fate; doom

DE'STINE, _v.a._ doom; devote

DE'STINY, _s._ doom; fate

DE'STITUTE, _a._ forsaken; abject; in want of

DESTRO'Y, _v.a._ lay waste; make desolate; put an end to

DESTRU'CTION, _s._ the act of destroying; the state of being destroyed;
    ruin

DETA'CH, _v.a._ separate; disengage

DETA'CHMENT, _s._ a body of troops sent out from the main army

DETE'R, _v.a._ fright from anything

DETERMINA'TION, _s._ absolute direction to a certain end; the result of
    deliberation; judicial decision

DETE'RMINE, _v.a._ fix; settle; resolve; decide

DETE'STABLE, _a._ hateful; abominable; odious

DETRA'CTION, _s._ the withdrawing or taking off from a thing

DETRU'DE, _v.a._ thrust down; force into a lower place

DEVASTA'TION, _s._ waste; havoc; desolation; destruction

DEVE'LOP, _v.a._ to disentangle; to disengage from something that
    enfolds and conceals

DEVIA'TION, _s._ the act of quitting the right way; wandering

DEVO'TE, _v.a._ dedicate; consecrate

DE'VOTEE, _s._ one erroneously or superstitiously religious; a bigot

DEVO'TION, _s._ piety; prayer; strong affection; power

DE'XTEROUS, _a._ subtle; full of expedients; expert; active; ready

DIABO'LICAL, _a._ devilish

DI'ADEM, _s._ the mark of Royalty worn on the head

DI'AL, _s._ a plate marked with lines, where a hand or shadow shows the
    hour

DI'ALECT, _s._ subdivision of a language; style; manner of expression

DI'ALOGUE, _s._ a discussion between two persons

DIA'METER, _s._ the straight line which, passing through the centre of a
    circle, divides it into two equal parts

DI'AMOND, _s._ the most valuable and hardest of all the gems; a
    brilliant

DI'FFER, _v.n._ be distinguished from; contend; be of a contrary opinion

DI'FFERENT, _a._ distinct; unlike; dissimilar

DIFFICULTY, _s._ hardness; something hard to accomplish; distress;
    perplexity in affairs

DI'GNITY, _s._ rank of elevation; grandeur of mien; high place

DILA'TE, _v n._ widen; grow wide; speak largely

DI'LIGENCE, _s._ industry; assiduity

DIMI'NISH, _v.a._ to make less

DIMI'NUTIVE, _a._ small; narrow; contracted

DIRE'CT, _v.a._ aim at a straight line; regulate; order; command;
    adjust; mark out a certain course

DIRE'CTION, _s._ tendency of motion impressed by a certain impulse;
    order; command; prescription

DIRE'CTLY, _ad._ immediately; apparently; in a straight line

DISAGRE'EABLE, _a._ unpleasing; offensive

DISA'STROUS, _a._ calamitous

DISCI'PLE, _s._ a scholar; one that professes to receive instruction
    from another

DISCIPLINE, _s._ education; the art of cultivating the mind; a state of
    subjection

DISCONCE'RT, _v.a._ unsettle the mind; discompose

DISCOU'RAGE, _v.a._ depress; deprive of confidence

DISCO'VER, _v.a._ disclose; bring to light; find out

DISCO'VERY, _s._ the act of finding anything hidden

DISCRI'MINATION, _s._ the state of being distinguished from other
    persons or things; the mark of distinction

DISHO'NOUR, _s._ reproach; disgrace; ignominy

DISLO'DGE, _v.a._ to go to another place; to drive or remove from a
    place

DISMA'NTLE, _v.a._ strip; deprive of a dress; strip a town of its
    outworks; loose

DISMA'Y, _s._ fall of courage; desertion of mind

DISOBE'DIENCE, _s._ the act of disobeying; inattention to the words of
    those who have right to command

DISO'RDER, _s._ irregularity; tumult; sickness

DISPA'RAGEMENT, _s._ reproach; disgrace; indignity

DISPLA'Y, _v.a._ exhibit; talk without restraint

DISPOSI'TION, _s._ order; method; temper of mind

DISQUI'ETUDE, _s._ uneasiness

DI'SREGARD, _v.a._ to slight; to neglect

DI'SSIPATE, _v.a._ scatter every way; disperse; scatter the attention

DISSO'LVE, _v.n._ be melted; fall to nothing

DISTANCE, _s._ remoteness in place; retraction of kindness; reserve

DISTE'MPER, _s._ disease; malady; bad constitution of the mind

DISTI'NCTION, _s._ the act of discerning one as preferable to the other;
    note of difference; honourable note of superiority; discernment

DISTINCTLY, _ad._ not confusedly; plainly; clearly

DISTRE'SS, _s._ calamity; misery; misfortune

DISTRI'BUTE, _v.a._ to deal out; to dispensate

DI'STRICT, _s._ region; country; territory

DIVE'RGE, _v.n._ send various ways from one point

DIVE'RSIFY, _v.a._ make different from another

DIVE'RSION, _s._ the act of turning anything off from its course

DIVE'RSITY, _s._ difference; dissimilitude; unlikeness; variety

DIVI'DE, _v.a._ part one whole in different pieces; separate; deal out

DI'VIDEND, _s._ a share

DO'CILE, _a._ teachable; easily instructed; tractable

DOMA'IN, _s._ dominion; possession; estate; empire

DOME'STIC, _a._ belonging to the house; private

DOME'STICATE, _v.a._ make domestic; withdraw from the public

DOMI'NION, _s._ sovereign authority; power; territory

DO'RSAL, _a._ pertaining to the back

DO'UBLE, _a._ two of a sort; in pairs; twice as much

DRAMA'TIC, _a._ representable by action

DRA'MATIST, _s._ author of dramatic compositions

DRAW'INGROOM, _s._ a room to which company withdraw--originally
    withdrawing-room

DRE'ADFUL, _a._ terrible; frightful

DRE'ARINESS, _s._ gloominess; sorrowfulness

DRE'ARY, _a._ sorrowful; gloomy; dismal; horrid

DU'CAT, _s._ a coin struck by Dukes; in silver valued at about four
    shillings and sixpence, in gold at nine shillings and sixpence

DURA'TION, _s._ power of continuance; length of continuance

DU'RING, _prep._ for the time of the continuance


EA'RLY, _ad._ soon; betimes

EA'RTHQUAKE, _s._ tremour or convulsion of the earth

EA'STERN, _a._ belonging to the east; lying to the east; oriental

EA'SY, _a._ not difficult; ready; contented; at rest

ECLI'PSE, _s._ an obscuration of the heavenly luminaries; darkness;
    obscuration

ECO'NOMY, _s._ frugality; discretion of expense; system of matter

E'DIFICE, _s._ a fabric; a building

EDI'TION, _s._ publication of anything, particularly of a book

EDUCA'TION, _s._ formation of manners in youth

EFFE'CT, _s._ that which is produced by an operating cause; success;
    purpose; meaning; consequence

EFFE'CTUAL, _a._ productive of effects; expressive of facts

EFFE'MINACY, _s._ softness; unmanly delicacy

E'FFLUENCE, _s._ what issues from some other principle

E'FFULGENCE, _s._ lustre; brightness; splendour

EFFU'SE, _v.a._ to pour out; to spill, to shed

EJA'CULATION, _s._ an exclamation

ELA'BORATE, _a._ finished with care

ELE'CTRIC, _a._ relating to electricity

    ELE'CTRO-MA'GNETISM, _s._ a branch of electrical science

E'LEGANCE, _s._ beauty, rather soothing than striking; beauty without
    grandeur

E'LEGY, _s._ a mournful song; short poem without points or turns

E'LEPHANT, _s._ a large quadruped

E'LEVA'TED, _a._ exalted; raised up; progressed in rank

ELEVA'TION, _s._ the act of raising up aloft; exaltation

ELOCU'TION, _s._ the power of fluent speech; the power of expression;
    eloquence; flow of language

E'LOQUENCE, _s._ the power or speaking with fluency and elegance

ELU'DE, _v.a._ to mock by unexpected escape

E'MANATE, _v.a._ to issue; to flow from something else

EMBA'LM, _v.a._ impregnate a body with aromatics, that it may resist
    putrefaction

EMBA'RK, _v.n._ to go on board a ship; to engage in any affair

EMBROI'DERY, _s._ variegated work; figures raised upon a ground

E'MERALD, _s._ a precious stone of a green colour

EME'RGE, _v.n._ to issue; to proceed; to rise

EME'RGENCY, _s._ the act of rising into view; any sudden occasion;
    pressing necessity

E'MINENCE, _s._ loftiness; height; summit; distinction

E'MINENT, _a._ celebrated; renowned

EMI'T, _v.a._ to send forth; to let fly; to dart

EMO'LUMENT, _s._ profit; advantage

E'MPEROR, _s._ a monarch of title and dignity superior to a king

EMPLO'Y, _v.a._ busy; keep at work; use as materials; trust with the
    management of any affairs; use as means

E'MULATE, _v.a._ to vie

EMULA'TION, _s._ rivalry; desire of superiority

ENA'BLE, _v.a._ make able; confer power

ENCA'MPMENT, _s._ the act of encamping or pitching tents; a camp

ENCHA'NTMENT, _s._ magical charms; spells; irresistible influence

ENCI'RCLING, _a._ environing; surrounding

ENCLO'SE, _v.a._ part from things or grounds common by a fence;
    surround; encompass

ENCOU'NTER, _v.a._ meet face to face; attack

ENCRO'ACHMENT, _s._ an unlawful gathering in upon another man; advance
    into the territories or rights of another

ENDA'NGER, _v.a._ put in hazard; incur the danger of

ENDU'RANCE, _s._ continuance; lastingness; delay

E'NEMY, _s._ foe; antagonist; any one who regards another with
    malevolence

ENERGE'TIC, _a._ operative; active; vigorous

E'NERGY, _s._ activity; quickness; vigour

ENGA'GE, _v.a._ employ; stake; unite; enlist; induce; fight

ENGINE'ER, _s._ one who manages engines; one who directs the artillery
    of an army

ENGRA'VER, _s._ a cutter in wood or other matter

ENGRA'VING, _s._ the work of an engraver

ENGRO'SS, _v.a._ thicken; increase in bulk; fatten; to copy in a large
    hand

ENJO'Y, _v.a._ feel or perceive with pleasure; please; delight

ENLA'RGEMENT, _s._ increase; copious discourse

ENNO'BLE, _v.a._ to dignify; to exalt; to make famous

ENO'RMOUS, _a._ wicked beyond the common measure; exceeding in bulk the
    common measure

ENQUI'RY, _s._ interrogation; examination; search

ENRA'GE, _v.a._ irritate; make furious

ENSNA'RE, _v.a._ entrap; entangle in difficulties or perplexities

E'NTERPRISE, _s._ an undertaking of hazard; an arduous attempt

E'NTERPRISING, _a._ fond of enterprise

ENTHU'SIASM, _s._ a vain belief of private revelation; beat of
    imagination; elevation of fancy

E'NTRAILS, _s._ the intestines; internal parts

ENU'MERATE, _v.a._ reckon up singly; number

ENVE'LOPEMENT, _s._ covering; inwrapment

E'PIC, _a._ narrative

EPI'STLE, _s._ a letter

EPI'STOLARY, _a._ transacted by letters; relating to letters

E'QUAL, _a._ even; uniform; in just proportion

EQUITY, _s._ justice; impartiality

ERE'CT, _a._ upright; bold; confident

ERE'CT, _v.a._ raise; build; elevate; settle

E'RMINE, _s._ an animal found in cold countries, of which the fur is
    valuable, and used for the adornment of the person. A fur worn by
    judges in England

ERRO'NEOUS, _a._ wrong; unfounded; false; misled by error

ERU'PTION, _s._ the act of bursting out; sudden excursion of a hostile
    kind

ESCO'RT, _v.a._ convoy; guard from place to place

ESPE'CIAL, _a._ principal; chief

ESPE'CIALLY, _ad._ principally; chiefly; in an uncommon degree

ESPLANA'DE, _s._ the empty space between a citadel and the outskirts of
    a town

ESSE'NTIAL, _a._ necessary to the constitution or existence of anything;
    important in the highest degree

ESTA'BLISHMENT, _s._ settlement; fixed state

ESTRA'NGE, _v.a._ keep at a distance; withdraw

ETE'RNAL, _a._ without beginning or end; perpetual; unchanging

ETE'RNALLY, _ad._ incessantly; for evermore

ETE'RNITY, _s._ duration without beginning or end

ETHE'REAL, _a._ belonging to the higher regions

EVA'PORATE, _v.a._ to drive away in fumes

E'VENING, _s._ the close of the day; beginning of night

EVE'NTUALLY, _ad._ in the event; in the last result

E'VIDENT, _a._ plain; notorious

EXA'CT, _a._ nice; not deviating from rule; careful

EXA'MINE, _v.a._ search into; make inquiry into

EXA'MPLE, _s._ copy or pattern

E'XCAVATE, _v.a._ hollow; cut into hollows

EXCE'L, _v.a._ to outgo in good qualities; to surpass

E'XCELLENCE, _s._ the state of abounding in any good quality; dignity;
    goodness

E'XCELLENT, _a._ eminent in any good quality; of great value

EXCE'PT, _prep._ exclusively of; unless

EXCE'SSIVE, _a._ beyond the common proportion

EXCI'TE, _v.a._ rouse; animate

EXCLU'DE, _v.a._ shut out; debar

EXCLU'SIVE, _a._ having the power of excluding or denying admission

EXCRU'CIATE, _v.a._ torture; torment

EXCU'RSION, _s._ an expedition into some distant part

EXCU'RSIVE, _a._ rambling; deviating

EXECU'TION, _s._ performance; practice; slaughter

EXE'MPLARY, _a._ such as may give warning to others; such as may attract
    notice and imitation

E'XERCISE, _s._ labour of the mind or body

EXE'RTION, _s._ the act of exerting; effort

EXHI'BIT, _v.a._ to offer to view; show; display

EXHIBI'TION, _s._ the act of exhibiting; display

EXHI'LARATE, _v.a._ make cheerful; cheer; enliven

EXI'STENCE, _s._ state of being

EXPA'ND, _v.a._ to spread; to extend on all sides

EXPA'NSE, _s._ a body widely extended without inequalities

EXPE'DIENT, _s._ that which helps forward as means to an end

EXPEDI'TION, _s._ an excursion

EXPE'L, _v.a._ drive away; banish; eject

EXPE'RIENCE, _s._ knowledge gained by practice

EXPE'RIENCED, _a._ wise by long practice

EXPE'RIMENT, _s._ a trial of anything

EXPI'RE, _v.a._ breathe out; close; bring to an end

EXPLO'SION, _s._ an outburst; a sudden crash

EXPO'RT, _v.a._ carry out of a country

EXPO'SE, _v.a._ lay open; make bare; put in danger

EXPRE'SSION, _s._ the form of language in which any thoughts are
    uttered; the act of squeezing out anything

E'XQUISITE, _a._ excellent; consummate; complete

EXTE'MPORE, _ad._ without premeditation; suddenly

EXTE'ND, _v.a._ stretch out; diffuse; impart

EXTE'NSIVE, _a._ large; wide; comprehensive

EXTE'RIOR, _a._ outward; external

EXTE'RNAL, _a._ outward

EXTI'NGUISH, _v.a._ put out; destroy; obscure

EXTI'RPATE, _v.a._ root out; eradicate

E'XTRACT, _s._ the chief parts drawn from anything

EXTRAO'RDINARY, _a._ different from common order and method; eminent;
    remarkable

EXTRA'VAGANT, _a._ wasteful; not saving; otherwise, improbable, false

EXTRE'MELY, _ad._ greatly; very much; in the utmost degree

EXTRE'MITY, _s._ the utmost point; highest degree; parts at the greatest
    distance


FACI'LITY, _s._ ease; dexterity; affability

FA'CTORY, _s._ a house or district inhabited by traders in a distant
    country; traders embodied in one place

FA'CULTY, _s._ the power of doing anything; ability

FAMI'LIAR, _a._ domestic; free; well known; common; unceremonious

FAMI'LIARITY, _s._ easiness of conversation; acquaintance

FA'MILY, _s._ those who live in the same house; household; race; clans

FA'MOUS, _a._ renowned; celebrated

FANA'TICISM, _s._ madness; frenzy; insanity

FANTA'STIC, _a._ whimsical; fanciful; imaginary

FA'RTHER, _ad._ at a greater distance; beyond this

FA'SHION, _v.a._ form; mould; figure; make according to the rule
    prescribed by custom

FA'TAL, _a._ deadly; mortal; appointed by destiny

FATI'GUE, _s._ weariness

FATI'GUE, _v.a._ tire; weary

FAUN, _s._ a kind of rural deity

FA'VOURITE, _s._ a person or thing beloved; one regarded with favour

FE'ATHER, _s._ plume of birds

FE'ATURE, _s._ the cast or make of the face; any lineament or single
    part of the face

FE'ELING, _s._ the sense of touch; sensibility; tenderness; perception

FERMENTA'TION, _s._ a slow motion of the particles of a mixed body,
    arising usually from the operation of some active acid matter; as
    when leaven or yeast ferments bread or wort

FERO'CITY, _s._ savageness; wildness; fierceness

FE'RTILE, _a._ fruitful; abundant; plenteous

FERTI'LITY, _s._ abundance; fruitfulness

FE'STAL, _a._ festive; joyous; gay

FE'STIVAL, _a._ time of feast; anniversary-day of civil or religious joy

FESTO'ON, _s._ In architecture, an ornament of carved work in the form
    of a wreath or garland of flowers or leaves twisted together

FEU'DAL, _a._ dependant; held by tenure

FI'BRE, _s._ a small thread or string

FI'CTION, _s._ a fanciful invention; a probable or improbable invention;
    a falsehood; a lie

FIDE'LITY, _s._ honesty; faithful adherence

FI'GURE, _s._ shape; person; stature; the form of anything as terminated
    by the outline

FI'LIAL, _a._ pertaining to a son; befitting a son; becoming the
    relation of a son

FI'RMAMENT, _s._ sky; heavens

FLA'GON, _s._ a vessel with a narrow mouth

FLA'MBEAU, _s._ (pronounced _flam-bo_) a lighted torch

FLA'VOUR, _s._ power of pleasing the taste; odour

    FLEUR-DE-LIS, _s._ (French for a lily, pronounced _flúr-de-lee_) a
    term applied in architecture and heraldry

FLE'XIBLE, _a._ capable of being bent; pliant; not brittle; complying:
    obsequious; ductile; manageable

FLOAT, _v.n._ to swim on the surface of water; to move without labour in
    a fluid; to pass with a light irregular course; _v.a._ to cover with
    water

FLO'RIDNESS, _s._ freshness of colour

FLO'URISH, _v.a._ and _v.n._ yield; prosper; wield; adorn

FLU'CTUATE, _v.n._ roll to and again, as water in agitation; be in an
    uncertain state

FLU'ID, _a._ anything not solid

FLU'TTER, _v.n._ move irregularly; take short flights with great
    agitation of the wines

FO'LIAGE, _s._ leaves; tuft of leaves

FO'LLOWING, _a._ coming after another

FOME'NT, _v.a._ cherish with heat; encourage

FO'REFATHER, _s._ ancestor

FO'REIGN, _a._ not in this country; not domestic; remote; not belonging
    to

FO'REPART, _s._ anterior part

FO'REST, _s._ a wild uncultivated tract of ground, with wood

FO'RMER, _a._ before another in time; the first of two

FO'RMIDABLE, _a._ terrible; dreadful; tremendous

FORTIFICA'TION, _s._ the science of military architecture; a place built
    for strength

FO'RTITUDE, _s._ courage; bravery; strength

FO'RWARD, _v.a._ hasten; quicken; advance

FO'RWARD, _a._ warm; earnest; quick; ready

FO'RWARD, _ad._ onward; straight before

FO'RWARDNESS, _s._ eagerness; ardour; quickness; confidence

FOSSE, _s._ a ditch; a moat

FOUNDA'TION, _s._ the basis or lower parts of an edifice; the act of
    fixing the basis; original; rise

FRA'GMENT, _s._ a part broken from the whole; an imperfect piece

FRA'NTIC, _a._ mad; deprived of understanding

FREE'STONE, _s._ stone commonly used in building, so called because it
    can be cut freely in all directions

FREIGHT, _s._ anything with which a ship is loaded; the money due for
    transportation of goods

FRE'QUENT, _a._ often done; often seen; often occurring

FRE'SCO, _s._ coolness; shade; duskiness; a picture not drawn in glaring
    light, but in dusk

FRI'CTION, _s._ the act of rubbing two bodies together

FRI'VOLOUS, _a._ trifling; wasteful; dawdling

FRO'NTIER, _s._ the limit; the utmost verge of any territory

FU'RNACE, _s._ a large fire

FU'RNISH, _v.a._ supply with what is necessary; fit up; equip; decorate


GA'BLE, _s._ the sloping roof of a building

GA'LAXY, _s._ the Milky Way

GA'LLANT, _a._ brave; daring; noble

G'ALLEY, _a._ a vessel used in the Mediterranean

GA'RDEN, _s._ piece of ground enclosed and cultivated

GA'RMENT, _s._ anything by which the body is covered

GA'RRISON, _s._ fortified place, stored with soldiers

GAUGE, _s._ a measure; a standard

GENEA'LOGY, _s._ history of the succession of families

GE'NERAL, _a._ common; usual; extensive, though not universal; public

GENERA'TION, _s._ a family; a race; an age

GE'NEROUS, _a._ noble of mind; magnanimous; open of heart

GE'NIAL, _a._ that gives cheerfulness, or supports life; natural; native

GE'NTLE, _a._ soft; mild; tame; meek; peaceable

GEOGRA'PHICAL, _a._ that which relates to geography

GEO'GRAPHY, _s._ knowledge of the earth

GE'STURE, _s._ action or posture expressive of sentiment

GI'ANT, _s._ a man of size above the ordinary rate of men; a man
    unnaturally large

GIGA'NTIC, _a._ suitable to a giant; enormous

GLA'CIER, _s._ a mountain of ice

GLA'NDULAR, _a._ having glands

GLI'STER, _v.n._ shine; to be bright

GLO'BULE, _s._ a small particle of matter of a round figure, as the red
    particles of the blood

GLO'RIOUS, _a._ noble; excellent; illustrious

GLO'SSY, _a._ shiny; smoothly polished

GO'RGEOUS, _a._ fine; magnificent; gaudy; showy

GO'SLING, _s._ a young goose; a catkin on nut-trees and pines

GO'SSAMER, _s._ the web of a male spider

GOUT, _s._ a disease attended with great pain

GO'VERNOR, _s._ one who has the supreme direction; a tutor

GRADA'TION, _s._ regular progress from one degree to another; order;
    arrangement

GRA'DUALLY, _ad._ by degrees; step by step

GRA'NDEUR, _s._ splendour of appearance; magnificence

GRANGE, _s._ a farm

GRATIFICA'TION, _s._ pleasure; something gratifying

GRA'TITUDE, _s._ duty to benefactors; desire to return benefits

GRA'VITY, _s._ weight; tendency to the centre; seriousness; solemnity

GROTE'SQUE, _a._ distorted of figure; unnatural

GUARD, _s._ part of the hilt of a sword; a man or body of men whose
    business is to watch

GUIDE, _s._ director; regulator


HABITATION, _s._ place of abode; dwelling

HABI'TUALLY, _ad._ customarily; by habit

HA'GGARD, _a._ deformed; ugly

HARA'NGUE, _v.n._ make a speech

HA'RMONIZE, _v.a._ to adjust in fit proportion

HARPO'ON, _s._ a bearded dart, with a line fastened to the handle, with
    which whales are struck and caught

HA'ZARDOUS, _a._ perilous, dangerous

HE'AVY, _a._ weighty; burdened; depressed

HE'RALDRY, _s._ the art or office of a herald; registers of genealogies

HE'RBAGE, _s._ grass; pasture; herbs collectively

HERBI'VOROUS, _a._ that eats herbs

HERE'DITARY, _a._ possessed or claimed by right of inheritance;
    descending by inheritance

HE'RETIC, _s._ one who propagates his private opinions in opposition to
    the Catholic Church

HE'YDAY, _s._ frolic; wildness

HI'DEOUS, _a._ frightful; ugly

HIPPOPO'TAMUS, _s._ a large animal--the river horse

HISTO'RIAN, _s._ a writer of facts and events

HISTO'RICAL, _a._ that which relates to history

HI'STORY, _s._ narration; the knowledge of facts and events

HO'LLOW, _a._ excavated; not solid; not sound

HO'NEY, _s._ a sweet substance produced by bees

HO'NOUR, _s._ dignity; fame; reputation; glory

HO'RIZON, _s._ the line that terminates the view

HO'SPITABLE, _a._ giving entertainment to strangers; kind to strangers

HO'TTENTO'T, _s._ a native of the south of Africa

HOWE'VER, _ad._ in whatsoever manner; at all events; happen what will;
    yet

HOWI'TZER, _s._ a kind of bomb

HU'MAN, _a._ having the qualities of a man; belonging to man

HUMA'NITY, _s._ the nature of man; benevolence

HU'MBLE, _a._ not proud; modest; low

HU'MID, _a._ wet; moist; watery

HUMI'LITY, _s._ freedom from pride; modesty

HU'NDRED, _s._ a company or body consisting of a hundred.

HU'RRICANE, _s._ a blast; a tempest

HYDRAU'LIC, _a._ relating to the conveyance of water through pipes

HY'DROGEN, _s._ a gas, one of the component parts of the atmosphere


I'CEBERG, _s._ a hill of ice; a moving island of ice

I'CICLE, _s._ a pendent shoot of ice

I'DOL, _s._ an image worshipped as God; one loved or honoured to
    adoration

IGNO'BLE, _a._ mean of birth; worthless

IGUA'NA, _s._ a reptile of the lizard species

ILLE'GAL, _a._ unlawful

ILLUMINA'TION, _s._ brightness; splendour

ILLU'MINATIVE, _a._ having the power to give light

ILLU'SION, _s._ mockery; false show

ILLU'STRATE, _v.a._ brighten with light; brighten with honour; explain;
    clear

ILLUSTRA'TION, _s._ explanation; example; exposition

ILLU'STRIOUS, _a._ conspicuous; noble; eminent

I'MAGE, _s._ a statue; a picture; an idol; a copy

IMA'GINARY, _a._ fanciful; poetical

IMAGINATION, _s._ fancy; conception; contrivance; scheme

I'MITATE, _v.a._ copy; counterfeit; resemble

IMMATE'RIAL, _a._ incorporeal; unimportant

IMMEA'SURABLE, _a._ immense; not to be measured

IMME'DIATELY, _ad._ without the intervention of any other cause or event

IMME'NSE, _a._ unlimited; unbounded; infinite

I'MMINENT, _a._ unavoidable; perilous

IMMO'RTALISE, _v.a._ to render immortal

IMMORTA'LITY, _s._ exemption from death; life never to end

IMPA'RT, _v.a._ grant; give; communicate

IMPA'RTIAL, _a._ indifferent; disinterested; just

IMPA'SSABLE, _a._ not to be passed; not admitting passage

IMPA'SSIBLE, _a._ incapable of suffering

IMPA'TIENT, _a._ not able to endure; hasty; eager

IMPERCE'PTIBLE, _a._ not to be discovered; not to be perceived; small

IMPERFE'CTION, _s._ defect; failure; fault

IMPE'RIAL, _a._ belonging to an emperor, king, or queen; regal;
    monarchical

IMPE'RIOUS, _a._ commanding; powerful

IMPE'TUOUS, _a._ violent; forcible; vehement

IMPLA'CABILITY, _s._ irreconcileable enmity

IMPLI'CITLY, _ad._ with unreserved confidence

IMPO'RT, _v.a._ carry into any country from abroad

IMPO'RTANCE, _s._ thing imported, or implied; consequence; matter

IMPO'RTANT, _a._ momentous; weighty; of great consequence; forcible

IMPO'SE, _v.a._ lay on as a burden or penalty; deceive; fix on

IMPO'SSIBLE, _a._ that which cannot be; that which cannot be done

IMPRE'GNABLE, _a._ invincible; unsubdueable

IMPRE'SSION, _s._ the act of pressing one body upon another; mark made
    by pressure; image fixed in the mind

IMPULSE, _s._ communicated love; the effect of one body upon another

IMPU'NITY, _s._ freedom from punishment; exemption from punishment

INABI'LITY, _s._ want of power; impotence

INACCE'SSIBLE, _a._ not to be reached or approached

INA'CTIVE, _a._ sluggish; slothful; not quick

INCA'LCULABLE, _a._ that which cannot be counted

INCAPA'CITATE, _v.a._ disable; weaken; disqualify

INCARNA'TION, _s._ the act of assuming body

INCE'NTIVE, _s._ that which kindles; that which provokes; that which
    encourages; spur

INCE'SSANT, _a._ unceasing; continual

I'NCIDENT, _s._ something happening beside the main design; casualty

INCLO'SURE, _s._ a place surrounded or fenced in

INCLU'DE, _v.a._ comprise; shut

INCONCE'IVABLE, _a._ incomprehensible

INCONSI'DERABLE, _a._ unworthy of notice; unimportant

INCONSI'STENT, _a._ contrary; absurd; incompatible

INCRE'DIBLE, _a._ surpassing belief; not to be credited

INCU'LCATE, _v.a._ impress by frequent admonitions

INCU'RSION, _s._ an expedition

INDENTA'TION, _s._ an indenture; having a wavy figure

I'NDICATE, _v.a._ show; point out

INDI'CTMENT, _s._ an accusation presented in a court of justice

INDIGNA'TION, _s._ wrath; anger

INDISCRI'MINATE, _a._ without choice; impartially

INDISPE'NSABLE, _a._ not to be spared; necessary

INDIVI'DUAL, _a._ single; numerically one; undivided; separate from
    others of the same species

INDU'CE, _v.a._ persuade; enforce; bring into view

INDU'LGENCE, _s._ fond kindness; tenderness; favour granted

INDU'STRIOUS, _a._ diligent; laborious

I'NDUSTRY, _s._ diligence; cheerful labour

INEQUA'LITY, _s._ difference of comparative quantity

INE'VITABLE, _a._ unavoidable

INEXHA'USTIBLE, _a._ not to be spent or consumed; incapable of being
    spent

INEXPRE'SSIBLE, _a._ not to be told; unutterable

I'NFANTRTY, _s._ a body of foot soldiers; foot soldiery

INFA'TUATE, _v.a._ to strike with folly; to deprive of understanding

INFE'RIOR, _a._ lower in place, station, or value

I'NFIDEL, _s._ an unbeliever; a Pagan; one who rejects Christianity

I'NFINITE, _a._ unbounded; unlimited; immense

INFINITE'SSIMAL, _a._ infinitely divided

INFI'NITY, _s._ immensity; endless number

INFI'RMITY, _s._ weakness of age or temper; weakness; malady

INFLA'TE, _v.a._ to swell; to make larger

INFLE'XIBLE, _a._ not to be bent; immoveable; not to be changed

INFLI'CT, _v.a._ to impose as a punishment

I'NFLUENCE, _s._ power of directing or modifying

INFLUE'NTIAL, _a._ exerting influence or power

INGE'NIOUS, _a._ witty; inventive

INGENU'ITY, _s._ wit; invention; genius; subtlety

INGLO'RIOUS, _a._ void of honour; mean; without glory

INGRA'TITUDE, _s._ unthankfulness

INHA'BITANT, _s._ dweller; one that lives in a place

INHE'RENT, _a._ existing in something else, so as to be inseparable from
    it; innate

INI'MITABLE, _a._ not able to be imitated; that which is incapable of
    imitation

INJU'RIOUS, _a._ hurtful; baneful; capable of injuring; that which
    injures; destructive

INJU'STICE, _s._ iniquity; wrong

INNU'MEROUS, _a._ innumerable; too many to be counted

INQUI'SITIVE, _a._ curious; busy in search; active to pry into
    everything

INSCRI'PTION, _s._ something written or engraved; title

I'NSECT, _s._ a small animal. Insects are so called from a separation in
    the middle of their bodies, whereby they are cut into two parts,
    which are joined together by a small ligature, as we see in wasps
    and common flies

INSE'NSIBLY, _ad._ imperceptibly; in such a manner as is not discovered
    by the senses

INSE'RT, _v.a._ place in or among other things

INSI'DIOUS, _a._ sly; diligent to entrap; treacherous

INSI'GNIA, _s._ ensigns; arms

INSIGNI'FICANT, _a._ unimportant

INSI'PID, _a._ tasteless; void of taste

INSIPI'DITY, _s._ want of taste; want of life or spirit

I'NSOLENCE, _s._ petulant contempt

INSPE'CT, _v.a._ to examine; to look over

INSPE'CTION, _s._ prying examination; superintendence

INSPIRA'TION, _s._ infusion of ideas into the mind by divine power; the
    act of drawing breath

INSTABI'LITY, _s._ inconstancy; fickleness

I'NSTANT, _a._ _instant_ is such a part of duration wherein we perceive
    no succession; present or current month

I'NSTANTLY, _ad._ immediately

I'NSTINCT, _s._ natural desire or aversion; natural tendency

INSTITU'TION, _s._ establishment; settlement; positive law

INSTRU'CT, _v.a._ teach; form by precept; form authoritatively; educate;
    model; form

INSTRU'CTION, _s._ the act of teaching; information

INSUFFI'CIENT, _a._ inadequate to any need, use, or purpose; unfit

INTE'GRITY, _s._ honesty; straightforwardness; uprightness

INTELLE'CTUAL, _a._ relating to the understanding; mental; transacted by
    the understanding

INTE'LLIGENCE, _s._ commerce of information; spirit; understanding

INTE'LLIGIBLE, _a._ possible to be understood

INTE'MPERANCE, _s._ the act of overdoing something

INTE'NSE, _a._ excessive; very great

INTE'R, _v.a._ cover under ground; to bury

INTERCE'PT, _v.a._ to hinder; to stop

I'NTERCOURSE, _s._ commerce; communication

I'NTEREST, _s._ concern; advantage; good; influence over others

INTERE'ST, _v.n._ affect; move; touch with passion

INTERLO'CUTOR, _s._ a dialogist; one that talks with another

INTERME'DIATE, _a._ intervening; interposed

INTE'RMINABLE, _a._ immense; without limits

INTE'RPRETER, _s._ one that interprets

INTERRU'PT, _v.a._ hinder the process of anything by breaking in upon it

INTERSE'CTION, _s._ point where lines cross each other

I'NTERSPACE, _s._ space between

INTERSPE'RSE, _v.a._ to scatter here and there among other things

INTERVE'NE, _v.n._ to come between

I'NTERVIEW, _s._ mutual sight; sight of each other

INTERWE'AVE, _v.a._ to intermingle; to mix one with another in a regular
    texture

I'NTIMATE, _a._ inmost; inward; near; familiar

INTONA'TION, _s._ the act of thundering

INTO'XICATE, _v.a._ to inebriate; to make drunk

I'NTRICATE, _a._ entangled; perplexed; obscure

INTRI'GUER, _s._ one that intrigues

INTRI'NSIC, _a._ inward; real; true

INTRODU'CTION, _s._ the act of bringing anything into notice or
    practice; the preface or part of a book containing previous matter

INTRU'DER, _s._ one who forces himself into company or affairs without
    right or welcome

INUNDA'TION, _s._ the overflow of waters; the flood; a confluence of any
    kind

INVA'LUABLE, _a._ precious above estimation

INVA'RIABLE, _a._ unchangeable; constant

INVESTIGATION, _s._ the act of investigating; the state of being
    investigated

INVI'NCIBLE, _a._ not capable of being conquered

INVI'SIBLE, _a._ not to be seen

I'RIS, _s._ the rainbow; the circle round the pupil of the eye

IRRA'DIATE, _v.a._ brighten; animate by heat or light; illuminate

IRRE'GULAR, _a._ deviating from rule, custom, or nature

I'RRIGATE, _v.a._ wet; moisten; water

I'RRITATE, _v.a._ provoke; tease; agitate

IRRITA'TION, _s._ provocation; stimulation

I'SLAND, _s._ a tract of land surrounded by water

I'SSUE, _v.a._ send forth

ITA'LIC, _s._ a letter in the Italian character


JA'VELIN, _s._ a spear; a dart; an implement of war

JE'ALOUSY, _s._ suspicion in love; suspicious fear; suspicious caution

JE'WEL, _s._ a precious stone; a teem

JO'CUND, _a._ merry; gay; lively

JO'URNEY, _s._ the travel of a day; passage from place to place

JO'YOUS, _a._ glad; gay; merry; giving joy

JUDI'CIOUS, _a._ prudent; wise; skilful

JU'GGLER, _s._ one who practises sleight of hand

JU'NCTION, _s._ union; coalition

JU'STIFY, _v.a._ clear from imputed guilt; maintain


KANGARO'O, _s._ an animal found in Australia

KE'RNEL, _s._ anything included in a husk; the seeds of pulpy fruits

KI'NGDOM, _s._ the territories subject to a monarch; a different class
    or order of beings, as the mineral kingdom; a region

KNI'GHTHOOD, _s._ the character or dignity of a knight

KNO'WLEDGE, _s._ information

KNU'CKLE, _s._ joints of the fingers, protuberant when the fingers close


LABU'RNUM, _s._ a kind of tree

LA'MENTABLE, _a._ deplorable

LAMENTA'TION, _s._ expression of sorrow; audible grief

LA'NCEOLATE, _a._ in a lance-like form

LA'NDSCAPE, _s._ the prospect of a country; a picture of the prospect of
    a country

LA'NGUAGE, _s._ human speech; style; manner of expression

LA'NGUOR, _s._ faintness; softness; inattention

LA'RVA, _s._ an insect in the caterpillar state

LA'TENT, _a._ concealed; invisible

LA'TERALLY, _ad._ by the side

LA'TITUDE, _s._ latent diffusion; a certain degree reckoned from the
    Equator

LA'TTER, _a._ lately done or past; mentioned last of two

LA'VA, _s._ molten substance projected from volcanoes

LE'AFLET, _s._ a small leaf

LE'GION, _s._ a body of Roman soldiers, consisting of about five
    thousand; military force; a great number

LE'NITY, _s._ mildness; gentleness

LENS, _s._ a glass spherically convex on both sides

LEVA'NT, _s._ east, particularly those coasts of the Mediterranean east
    of Italy

LEVI'ATHAN, _s._ a water-animal mentioned in the Book of Job

LI'ABLE, _a._ subject; not exempt

LI'BERAL, _a._ not mean; generous; bountiful

LI'BERATE, _v.a._ free from confinement

LI'BERTY, _s._ freedom, as opposed to slavery; privilege; permission

LICE'NTIOUSNESS, _s._ boundless liberty; contempt of just restraint

LI'CHEN, _s._ moss

LIEUTE'NANT, _s._ a deputy; in war, one who holds the next rank to a
    superior of any denomination

LI'GHTHOUSE, _s._ a house built either upon a rock or some other place
    of danger, with a light, in order to warn ships of danger

LI'NEAR, _a._ composed of lines; having the form of lines

LI'QUID, _a._ not solid; fluid; soft; clear

LI'QUOR, _s._ anything liquid; strong drink, in familiar language

LI'STEN, _v.a._ hear; attend

LI'TERALLY, _ad._ with close adherence to words

LI'TERARY, _a._ respecting letters; regarding learning

LI'TERATURE, _s._ learning; skill in letters

LI'TURGY, _s._ form of prayer

LOCA'LITY, _s._ existence in place

LOCOMO'TIVE, _a._ changing place; having the power of removing or
    changing place

LO'CUST, _s._ a devouring insect

LU'DICROUS, _a._ fantastic; laughable; whimsical

LU'MINARY, _a._ any body which gives light

LU'MINOUS, _a._ shining; enlightened

LU'NAR, _a._ that which relates to the moon

LU'PINE, _s._ a kind of pulse

LUXU'RIANT, _a._ superfluously plentiful


MACHINE, _s._ an engine; any complicated work in which one part
    contributes to the motion of another

MACHI'NERY, _s._ enginery; complicated workmanship

MAGAZI'NE, _s._ a storehouse

MA'GICAL, _a._ acted or performed by secret and invisible powers

MAGNANI'MITY, _s._ greatness of mind

MAGNA'NIMOUS, _a._ of great mind; of open heart

MAGNI'FICENT, _a._ grand in appearance; splendid; otherwise, pompous

MAJE'STIC, _a._ august; having dignity; grand

MAJO'RITY, _s._ the state of being greater; the greater number; the
    office of a major

MALE'VOLENCE, _s._ ill-will; inclination to hurt others

MA'LICE, _s._ hatred; enmity; desire of hurting

MALI'CIOUS, _a._ desirous of hurting; with wicked design

MALI'GNANT, _a._ envious; malicious; mischievous

MALI'GNITY, _s._ ill-will; enmity

MA'NDIBLE, _s._ a jaw

MA'NKIND, _s._ the race or species of human beings

MA'NNER, _s._ form; method; way; mode; sort

MANUFA'CTORY, _s._ a place where a manufacture is carried on

MANOEUVRE, _s._ a stratagem; a trick

MARA'UDER, _s._ a soldier that roves in quest of plunder

MA'RGIN, _s._ the brink; the edge

MA'RINER, _s._ a seaman

MA'RITIME, _a._ that which relates to the sea

MA'RSHAL, _v.a._ arrange; rank in order

MA'RTYR, _s._ one who by his death bears witness to the truth

MA'RVELLOUS, _a._ wonderful; strange; astonishing

MA'SONRY, _s._ the craft or performance of a mason

MA'SSACRE, _s._ butchery; murder

MA'SSIVE, _a._ heavy; weighty; ponderous; bulky; continuous

MA'STERPIECE, _s._ chief excellence

MATE'RIAL, _a._ consisting of matter; not spiritual; important

MATHEMA'TICS, _s._ that science which contemplates whatever is capable
    of being numbered or measured

MA'XIM, _s._ general principle; leading truth

ME'ASURE, _s._ that by which anything is measured; proportion; quantity;
    time; degree

MECHA'NIC, _s._ a workman

MECHA'NICAL, _a._ constructed by the laws of mechanics

ME'DAL, _s._ a piece of metal stamped in honour of some remarkable
    performance

MEDI'CINAL, _a._ having the power of healing; belonging to physic

MEDITA'TION, _s._ deep thought; contemplation

ME'DIUM, _s._ the centre point between two extremes

ME'LANCHOLY, _a._ gloomy; dismal; sorrowful

ME'LLOW, _a._ soft with ripeness; soft; unctuous

MELO'DIOUS, _a._ musical; harmonious

ME'MBRANE, _s._ a web of several sorts of fibres, interwoven for the
    wrapping up some parts; the fibres give them an elasticity, whereby
    they can contract and closely grasp the parts they contain

MEMBRA'NOUS, _a._ consisting of membranes

ME'MOIR, _s._ an account of anything

ME'MORABLE, _a._ worthy of memory; not to be forgotten

ME'MORY, _s._ the power of retaining or recollecting things past;
    recollection

MENA'GERIE, _s._ a place for keeping foreign birds and other curious
    animals

ME'NTION, _v.a._ to express in words or in writing

ME'RCHANDISE, _s._ commerce; traffic; wares; anything to be bought or
    sold

ME'RCHANTMAN, _s._ a ship of trade

META'LLIC, _a._ partaking of metal; consisting of metal

ME'TEOR, _s._ any body in the air or sky that is of a transitory nature

ME'TRICAL, _a._ pertaining to metre or numbers; consisting of verses

METROPO'LITAN, _a._ belonging to a metropolis

MI'CROSCOPE, _s._ an optical instrument, contrived to give to the eye a
    large appearance of many objects which could not otherwise be seen

MI'LITARY, _a._ engaged in the life of a soldier; soldierlike warlike;
    pertaining to war; affected by soldiers

MIND, _s._ intellectual capacity; memory; opinion

MI'NERAL, _s._ fossil body; something dug out of mines

MI'NSTER, _s._ a monastery; a cathedral church

MI'NSTRELSY, _s._ music; instrumental harmony

MINU'TE, _a._ small; little; slender

MI'RACLE, _s._ a wonder; something above human power

MIRA'CULOUS, _a._ done by miracle

MI'RROR, _s._ a looking-glass

MI'SERY, _s._ wretchedness; calamity; misfortune

MISFO'RTUNE, _s._ calamity; ill-luck

MI'SSILE, _s._ something thrown by the hand

MI'SSIONARY, _s._ one sent to propagate religion

MI'XTURE, _s._ the act of mixing; that which is added and mixed

MO'ATED, _a._ surrounded with canals by way of defence

MO'DERATE, _a._ temperate; not excessive

MODERA'TION, _s._ state of keeping a due mean between extremities

MO'DESTY, _s._ decency; purity of manners

MODULA'TION, _s._ the act of forming anything to certain proportion;
    harmony

MO'LTEN, _part. pass._ the state of being melted

MO'MENT, _s._ an individual particle of time; force; importance

MOME'NTUM, _s._ the quantity of motion in a moving body

MO'NARCH, _s._ a sovereign; a ruler; a king or queen

MO'NASTERY, _s._ a residence of monks

MO'NEY, _s._ metal coined for the purposes of commerce

MO'NKEY, _s._ an animal bearing some resemblance to man; a word of
    contempt, or slight kindness

MO'NUMENT, _s._ anything by which the memory of persons or things is
    preserved; a memorial; a tomb

MO'RALIST, _s._ one who teaches the duties of life

MORA'LITY, _s._ the doctrine of the duties of life

MO'RNING, _s._ the first part of the day

MO'RTAR, _s._ a cement for fixing bricks together; otherwise, a kind of
    cannon for firing bomb-shells; a kind of vessel in which anything is
    broken by a pestle

MO'RTIFY, _v.a._ destroy vital properties, or active powers; vex;
    humble; depict; corrupt; die away

MO'SLEM, _s._ a Mussulman; relating to the Mahometan form of religion

MOSQUE, _s._ a Mahometan temple

MO'TION, _s._ the act of changing place; action; agitation; proposal
    made

MO'ULDED, _v.n._ be turned to dust; perish in dust

MO'UNTAINOUS, _a._ hilly; full of mountains; huge

MO'VEABLE, _a._ capable of being moved; portable

MULETE'ER, _s._ mule-driver; horse-boy

MULTIPLI'CITY, _s._ more than one of the same kind; state of being many

MU'LTITUDE, _s._ a large crowd of people; a vast assembly

MU'RMUR, _v.n._ grumble; utter secret and sullen discontent

MU'SSULMAN, _s._ a Mahometan believer

MU'TILATE, _v.a._ deprive of some essential part

MU'TUALLY, _ad._ reciprocally; in return

MY'RIAD, _s._ the number of ten thousand; proverbially any great number


NA'RROW, _a._ not broad or wide; small; close; covetous; near

NA'TION, _s._ a people distinguished from another people

NA'TIVE, _a._ original; natural

NA'TIVE, _s._ one born in any place

NA'TURAL, _a._ produced or effected by nature; not forced; tender

NA'TURALIST, _s._ one who studies nature, more especially as regards
    inferior animals, plants, &c.

NA'TURE, _s._ constitution of an animated body; regular course of
    things; disposition of mind; native state or properties of anything;
    sort; species

NAU'TICAL, _a._ that which relates to a sailor

NA'VIGABLE, _a._ capable of being passed by ships or boats

NAVIGA'TOR, _s._ a sailor; seaman

NE'CESSARY, _a._ needful

NECE'SSITY, _s._ compulsion; want; need; poverty

NEGO'TIATION, _s._ treaty of business

NEI'GHBOURHOOD, _s._ vicinity; place adjoining

NE'ITHER, _pron._ not either; nor one nor other

NICHE, _s._ a hollow hi which a statue may be placed

NIDIFICA'TION, _s._ the act of building nests

NI'MBLY, _ad._ quickly; speedily; actively

NI'TROUS, _a._ impregnated with nitre

NOBI'LITY, _s._ high-mindedness; the highest class of people in
    civilized life

NO'BLE, _a._ magnificent; great; illustrious

NO'TICE, _s._ remark; heed; regard; information

NOTWITHSTA'NDING, _conj._ although; nevertheless

NO'XIOUS, _a._ hurtful; harmful; baneful; guilty

NU'MBER, _s._ many; more than one.

NU'MBERLESS, _a._ more than can be reckoned

NU'MEROUS, _a._ containing many; consisting of many

NU'TRIMENT, _s._ food


OBE'DIENCE, _s._ submission to authority

OBE'ISANCE, _s._ courtesy

O'BJECT, _s._ that about which any power or faculty is employed

OBJE'CTION, _s._ adverse argument; criminal charge; fault found; the act
    of opposing anything

OBLI'QUE, _a._ not direct; not parallel; not perpendicular

OBLI'VION, _s._ forgetfulness

OBNO'XIOUS, _a._ hateful; hurtful; injurious

OBSERVA'TION, _s._ the act of observing, noticing, or remarking; note;
    remark

OBSE'RVE, _v.a._ watch; regard attentively note; obey; follow

O'BSTINACY, _s._ stubbornness

OBSTRU'CT, _v.a._ block up; oppose; hinder

OCCA'SION, _s._ occurrence; casualty; incident; opportunity; convenience

OCCA'SION, _v.a._ cause; produce; influence

O'CCUPY, _v.a._ possess; keep; take up; employ; use

OFFE'NSIVE, _a._ displeasing; disgusting; injurious

O'FFER, _v.a._ present itself; be at hand; be present

O'FFER, _v.a._ propose; present; sacrifice

O'FFICE, _s._ a public charge or employment; agency; business

OLFA'CTORY, _a._ having the sense of smelling

O'LIVE, _s._ a plant producing oil; the fruit of the tree; the emblem of
    peace

O'MINOUS, _a._ exhibiting bad tokens of futurity

OMI'SSION, _s._ neglect of duty; neglect to do something

OMNI'POTENT, _s._ the Almighty

OMNIPRE'SENCE, _s._ unbounded presence

OMNI'SCIENCE, _s._ boundless knowledge; infinite wisdom

O'NSET, _s._ attack; storm; assault

O'PAL, _s._ a precious stone

O'PALINE, _a._ resembling opal

OPPORTU'NITY, _s._ convenience; suitableness of circumstances to any end

OPPRE'SS, _v.a._ crush by hardship or unreasonable severity; overpower;
    subdue

OPPRE'SSOR, _s._ one who harasses others with unreasonable or unjust
    severity

O'PTICAL, _a._ relating to the science of optics

O'PTICS, _s._ the science of the nature and laws of vision

O'PULENT, _a._ rich

O'RACLE, _s._ something delivered by supernatural wisdom; the place
    where, or persons of whom, the determinations of heaven are inquired

O'RAL, _a._ delivered by mouth; not written

O'RATOR, _s._ a public speaker; a man of eloquence

O'RBIT, _s._ a circle; path of a heavenly body

O'RCHARD, _s._ a garden of fruit trees

O'RCHIS, _s._ a kind of flowering plant

O'RDER, _s._ method; regularity; command; a rank or class; rule

O'RDINANCE, _s._ law; rule; appointment

O'RDINARY, _a._ established; regular; common; of low rank

O'RDNANCE, _s._ cannon; great guns

O'RGAN, _s._ natural instrument: as the tongue is the organ of speech. A
    musical instrument

ORGA'NIC, _a._ consisting of various parts co-operating with each other

O'RGANISM, _s._ organic structure

O'RIENT, _a._ eastern; oriental; bright; gaudy

ORI'GINAL, _a._ primitive; first

O'RNAMENT, _v.a._ embellish; decorate

OSCILLA'TION, _a._ the act of moving backward or forward like a pendulum

O'SSEOUS, _a._ bony; resembling bone

OSTENTA'TION, _s._ outward show; pride of riches or power

OSTRICH, _s._ a large bird

OTHERWISE, _ad._ in a different manner; by other causes; in other
    respects

OU'TLET, _s._ passage outward

OU'TSET, _s._ setting out; departure

OU'TWARD, _a._ external; opposed to _inward_.

OVERFLO'W, _v.a._ deluge; drown; overrun; fill beyond the brim

OVERTA'KE, _v.a._ catch anything by pursuit; come up to something going
    before

OVERTHRO'W, _v.a._ turn upside down; throw down; ruin; defeat; destroy

OVERWHE'LM, _v.a._ crush underneath something violent and weighty;
    overlook gloomily


PACI'FIC, _a._ mild; gentle; appeasing

PA'LACE, _a._ a royal house

PA'LTRY, _a._ worthless; contemptible; mean

PA'RADISE, _s._ the blissful region in which the first pair were placed;
    any place of felicity

PA'RALLEL, _a._ extending in the same direction; having the same
    tendency

PARALLE'LOGRAM, _s._ in geometry, a right-lined four-sided figure, whose
    opposite sides are parallel and equal

PA'RAPET, _s._ a wall breast high

PA'RCEL, _s._ a small bundle; a part of a whole

PA'RDON, _s._ forgiveness

PARO'CHIAL, _a._ belonging to a parish

    PARO'TIDA-SA'LIVART, _a._ glands so named because near the ear

PA'RTICLE, _s._ any small quantity of a greater substance; a word
    unvaried by inflection

PARTICULAR, _s._ a single instance; a minute detail of things singly
    enumerated. IN PARTICULAR, peculiarly; distinctly

PARTICULARLY, _ad._ in an extraordinary degree; distinctly

PA'SSAGE, _s._ act of passing; road; way; entrance or exit; part of a
    book

PA'SSENGER, _s._ traveller; a wayfarer; one who hires in any vehicle the
    liberty of travelling

PA'SSIONATE, _a._ moved by passion; easily moved to anger

PA'SSIVE, _a._ unresisting; suffering; not acting

PA'STORAL, _a._ rural; rustic; imitating shepherds

PATHE'TIC, _a._ affecting the passions; moving

PA'THOS, _s._ passion; warmth; affection of the mind

PA'THWAY, _s._ a road; a narrow way to be passed on foot.

PA'TIENCE, _s._ the power of suffering; perseverance

PA'TIENTLY, _ad._ with steadfast resignation; with hopeful confidence

PA'TRIARCH, _a._ one who governs by paternal right; the father and ruler
    of a family

PA'THIMONY, _s._ an estate possessed by inheritance

PA'TRIOT, _s._ one who loves his country

PA'TRON, _s._ one who countenances, supports, or protects; defender

PEA'CEABLE, _a._ not quarrelsome; not turbulent

PE'CTORAL, _a._ belonging to the breast

PECU'LIAR, _a._ appropriate; not common to other things; particular

PECULIARITY, _s._ particularity; something found only in one

PE'DESTAL, _a._ the lower member of a pillar; the basis of a statue

PE'DIMENT, _s._ an ornament that finishes the fronts of buildings, and
    serves as a decoration over gates

PE'NANCE, _s._ infliction, either public or private, suffered as an
    expression of repentance for sin

PE'NDULOUS, _a._ hanging

PE'NETRATE, _v.a._ enter beyond the surface; make way into a body;
    affect the mind

PENINSULA, _s._ laud almost surrounded by water

PE'NURY, _s._ poverty; indigence

PE'OPLE, _s._ a nation; the vulgar

PERCEI'VE, _v.a._ discover by some sensible effects; know; observe

PERCE'PTIBLE, _a._ such as may be known or observed

PERFECTION, _s._ the state of being perfect

PERFO'RM, _v.a._ execute; do; accomplish

PE'RFORATE, _v.a._ pierce with a tool; bore

PERHA'PS, _ad._ peradventure; may be

PE'RIL, _s._ danger; hazard; jeopardy

PE'RIOD, _s._ length of duration; a complete sentence from one full stop
    to another; the end or conclusion

PE'RISIH, _v.n._ die; be destroyed; be lost; come to nothing

PE'RMANENT, _a._ durable; unchanged; of long continuance

PERNI'CIOUS, _a._ destructive; baneful

PERPENDICULAR, _a._ a straight line up and down

PERPE'TUAL, _a._ never-ceasing; continual

PERPLE'X, _v.a._ disturb; distract; tease; plague

PERPLE'XITY, _s._ anxiety; entanglement

PE'RSECUTE, _v.a._ to harass or pursue with malignity

PERSEVE'RANCE, _s._ persistence in any design or attempt; constancy in
    progress

PERTINA'CITY, _s._ obstinacy; stubbornness; constancy

PERTURBA'TION, _s._ restlessness; disturbance

PERU'SAL, _s._ the act of reading

PETI'TION, _s._ request; entreaty; single branch or article of prayer

PHA'LANX, _s._ a troop of men closely embodied

PHENO'MENON, _s._ appearance

PHILOSOPHER, _s._ a man deep in knowledge

PHILOSOPHICAL, _a._ belonging to philosophy

PHILO'SOPHY, _s._ moral or natural knowledge

PHY'SICAL, _a._ relating to nature or to natural philosophy; medicinal;
    relating to health

PICTO'RIAL, _a._ produced by a painter

PIC'TURESQUE, _a._ beautiful; magnificent

PI'LCHARD, _s._ a kind of fish

PI'LGRIMAGE, _s._ a long journey

PI'OUS, _a._ careful of the duties owed by created beings to God; godly;
    religious

PI'RATE, _s._ a sea robber

PISTA'CHIO, _s._ a dry fruit of an oblong figure

PI'TIABLE, _a._ that which deserves pity

PLA'CABLE, _a._ willing or able to be appeased

PLA'INTIVE, _a._ complaining; lamenting; expressive of sorrow

PLA'NETARY, _a._ pertaining to the planets; produced by the planets

PLANTATION, _s._ a place planted; a colony

PLAU'SIBLY, _ad._ with fair show

PLEA'SANT, _a._ delightful; cheerful; merry

PLEA'SANTRY, _s._ merriment; lively talk

PLEA'SURE, _s._ delight

PLE'NTIFUL, _a._ copious; fruitful; abundant

PLI'ABLE, _a._ flexible; easy to be bent; easy to be persuaded; capable
    of being plied

PLI'ANT, _a._ bending; flexible; easy to take a form

PLU'MAGE, _s._ feathers; suit of feathers

PNY'X, _s._ a place where assemblies of the people were held

PO'ETRY, _s._ sublime thought expressed in sublime language

POI'GNANCY, _s._ power of irritation; sharpness

POI'SON, _s._ that which taken into the body destroys or injures life;
    anything infectious or malignant

POLI'TE, _a._ glossy; smooth; elegant of manners

POLITICAL, _a._ that which relates to politics; that which relates to
    public affairs; also cunning, skilful

PO'PULAR, _a._ vulgar; familiar; well known

POPULARITY, _a._ state of being favoured by the people; representation
    suited to vulgar conception

POPULA'TION, _s._ the state of a country with respect to numbers of
    people

PO'RTABLE, _a._ manageable by the hand; supportable

PO'RTION, _s._ a part; an allotment

PORTMA'NTEAU, _s._ a chest, or bag, in which clothes are carried

POSI'TION, _s._ state of being placed; situation

PO'SITIVE, _o._ absolute; particular; real; certain

POSSE'SS, _v.a._ have as an owner; be master of; seize; obtain

POSSESSION, _s._ property; the thing possessed

POSSIBLE, _a._ having the power to be or to be done; not contrary to the
    nature of things

POSTE'RITY, _s._ succeeding generations

PO'TENTATE, _s._ monarch; prince; sovereign

PO'WER, _s._ command; authority; ability; strength; faculty of the mind

PRACTICABLE, _a._ capable of being practised

PRA'CTICAL, _o._ relating to action; not merely speculative.

PRAE'TOR, _s._ a functionary among the ancient Romans

PRAI'RIE, _s._ a meadow

PRECAUTION, _s._ preservative caution; preventive measures

PRECE'PTOR, _s._ a teacher; an Instructor

PRE'CINCT, _s._ outward limit; boundary

PRECI'PITOUS, _a._ headlong; steep

PREDECE'SSOR, _s._ one who was in any state or place before another;
    ancestor

PREDOMINANCE, _s._ prevalence; ascendancy

PREDOMINANT, _a._ prevalent; ascendant; supreme influence

PREDOMINATE, _v.n._ prevail; be supreme in influence

PREFI'X, _v.a._ appoint beforehand; settle; establish; put before
    another thing

PRELI'MINARY, _a._ previous; introductory

PREJUDICE, _s._ prepossession; judgment formed beforehand; mischief;
    injury

PREPARATION, _s._ anything made by process of operation; previous
    measures

PREROGATIVE, _s._ an exclusive or peculiar privilege

PRE'SCIENT, _a._ foreknowing; prophetic

PRESENT, _a._ not past; not future; ready at hand; not absent; being
    face to face; being now in view

PRESE'NT, _v.a._ offer; exhibit

PRESE'RVE, _v.a._ save; keep; defend from destruction or any evil

PRESU'MPTION, _s._ arrogance; blind confidence

PREVE'NT, _v.a._ hinder; obviate; obstruct

PRINCIPAL, _a._ chief; capital; essential; important; considerable

PRINCIPLE, _s._ constituent part; original cause

PRO'BABLE, _a._ likely

PRO'BABLY, _a._ very likely

PROBA'TION, _s._ proof; trial; noviciate

PROCEE'D, _v.n._ pass from one thing or place to another; go forward;
    issue; arise; carry on; act; transact

PRO'CESS, _s._ course of law; course

PROCE'SSION, _s._ a train marching in ceremonious solemnity

PRODI'GIOUS, _a._ enormous; amazing; monstrous

PRO'DUCE, _s._ amount; profit; that which anything yields or brings

PRODU'CE, _v.a._ offer to the view or notice; bear; cause; effect

PRODU'CTION, _s._ the act of producing; fruit; product; composition

PROFESSION, _s._ vocation; known employment

PROFU'SE, _a._ lavish; too liberal

PROFUSION, _s._ extravagance; abundance

PRO'GRESS, _s._ course; advancement; motion forward

PROHI'BIT, _v.a._ forbid; debar; hinder

PROJE'CT, _v.a._ throw out; scheme; contrive; form in the mind

PRO'PAGATE, _v.a._ extend; widen; promote

PRO'PER, _a._ fit; exact; peculiar

PRO'PHECY, _s._ a declaration of something to come

PROPHE'TIC, _a._ foreseeing or foretelling future events

PROPORTION, _s._ symmetry; form; size; ratio

PROPOSITION, _s._ one of the three parts of a regular argument, in which
    anything is affirmed or denied; proposal

PROPRIETOR, _s._ possessor in his own right

PROPRI'ETY, _s._ accuracy; justness

PROSA'IC, _a._ belonging to or resembling prose

PROTE'CTOR, _s._ defender; supporter; guardian

PROTRU'DE, _v.a._ thrust forward

PROVI'DE, _v.a._ procure; furnish; supply; stipulate

PROVIDE'NTIAL, _a._ effected by Providence; referrible to Providence

PRO'VINCE, _s._ a conquered country; a region

PROVINCIAL, _a._ that which relates to provinces

PROVISION, _s._ the act of providing beforehand; measures taken
    beforehand; stock collected; victuals

PROVOCATION, _s._ an act or cause by which anger is raised; an appeal to
    a judge

PROXI'MITY, _s._ nearness

PTA'RMIGAN, _s._ (pronounced _tár-mi-gan_) a bird of the grouse species

PU'BLIC, _s._ the people; general view; open view

PU'LLEY, _s._ a small wheel turning on a pivot, with a furrow on its
    outside, in which a rope runs

PU'NISH, _v.a._ to chastise; to afflict with penalties or death for some
    crime

PU'NISHED, _a._ chastised

PU'PIL, _s._ a scholar; one under the care of a tutor

PU'RCHASE, _v.a._ acquire; buy for a price

PU'RITY, _s._ clearness; freedom from foulness or dirt; freedom from
    guilt; innocence

PU'RPOSE, _v.t._ intention; design; instance

PU'TRIFY, _v.n._ to rot

PU'ZZLE, _v.a._ perplex; confound; tease; entangle

PY'RAMID, _s._ a solid figure, whose base is a polygon and whose sides
    are plain triangles, their several points meeting in one

PYTHA'GORAS, _s._ the originator of the present system universe

PYTHAGORE'ANS, _s._ followers of Pythagoras


QUALIFICATION, _s._ accomplishment; that which makes any person or thing
    fit for anything

QUA'NTITY, _s._ any indeterminate weight or measure; bulk or weight; a
    portion; a part

QUA'RRY, _s._ game flown at by a hawk; a stone mine


RA'DIANT, _a._ shining; emitting rays

RAMIFICA'TION, _s._ division or separation into branches; small
    branches; branching out

RA'NCID, _a._ strong scented

RAPA'CIOUS, _a._ given to plunder; seizing by violence

RAPI'DITY, _s._ celerity; velocity; swiftness

RA'PTURE, _s._ transport; haste

RA'TTLE, _s._ a quick noise nimbly repeated; empty and loud talk; a
    plant

RA'TTLESNAKE, _s._ a kind of serpent, which has a rattle at the end of
    its tail

REA'CTION, _s._ the reciprocation of any impulse or force impressed,
    made by the body on which such an impression is made

RE'ALISE, _v.a._ bring into being or act; convert money into land.

REA'SON, _s._ the power by which man deduces one proposition from
    another; cause; ground or principle; motive; moderation

REASONABLENESS, _s.