'Yas, an' better--better any whar; but, in coorse, 'tain't natur' fur
black nor white ter stand long a workin' in th' mud and water up ter
thar knees; sech work would kill off th' very devil arter a while. But
th' white kin stand it longer nor the black, and it's 'cordin' ter
reason that he shud; for, I reckon, stranger, that the spirit and pluck
uv a man hev a durned sight ter du with work. They'll hole a man up when
he's clean down, an' how kin we expec' thet th' pore nig, who's nary a
thing ter work fur, an who's been kept under an' 'bused ever sense Adam
was a young un'--how kin we expec' he'll work like men thet own
'emselfs, an' whose faders hev been free ever sense creation? I reckon
that the parient has a heap ter du with makin' th' chile. He puts the
sperit inter 'im: doan't we see it in hosses an' critters an' sech like?
It mayn't crap eout ter onst, but it's shore ter in th' long run, and
thet's th' way th' black han't no smarter nor he is. He's been a-ground
down an' kept under fur so long thet it'll take more'n 'un gin'ration
ter bring him up. 'Tan't his fault thet he's no more sperit, an' p'raps
'tan't ourn--thet is, them on us as uses 'em right--but it war the fault
uv yer fader an' mine--yer fader stole 'em, and mine bought 'em, an'
the' both made cattle uv 'em.'

'But I had supposed the black was better fitted by nature for hard
labor, in a hot climate, than the white.'

'Wal, he arn't, an' I knows it. Th' d----d parsons an' pol'tishuns say
thet, but 'tan't so. I kin do half agin more work in a day then th' best
nig I've got, an' I've dun it, tu, time an' agin, an' it didn't hurt me
nuther. Ye knows ef a man hev a wife and young 'uns 'pendin' on him, an'
arn't much 'forehanded, he'll work like th' devil. I've dun it, an' ye
hev ef ye war ever put ter it; but th' nigs, why, the' han't got no
wives and young 'uns ter work fur--the law doan't 'low 'em ter have
any--the' han't nary a thing but thar carcasses, an' them's thar
masters'.'

'You say a man works better for being free; then you must think 'twould
be well to free the negroes.'

'In coorse, I does. Jest luk at them nigs o' mine; they're ter all
'tents an' purposes free, 'case I use 'em like men, an' the' knows the'
kin go whenever the' d----d please. See how the' work--why, one on 'em
does half as much agin as ony hard-driv' nigger in creation.'

'What would you do with them, if they were _really_ free?'

'Du with 'em? why, hire 'em, an' make twice as much eout on 'em as I
does now.'

'But I don't think the two races were meant to live together.'

'No more'n the' warn't. But 'tan't thar fault thet they's har. We han't
no right to send 'em off. We orter stand by our'n an' our faders'
doin's. The nig keers more fur his hum, so durned pore as it ar', then
ye or I does fur our'n. I'd pack sech off ter Libraria or th' devil, as
wanted ter go, but I'd hev no 'pulsion 'bout it.'

'Why, my good friend, you're half-brother to Garrison. You don't talk to
your neighbors in this way?'

'Wal, I doan't;' he replied, laughing. 'Ef I dun it, they'd treat me to
a coat uv tar, and ride me out uv th' deestrict raather sudden, I
reckon; but yer a Nuthener, an' the' all take nat'rally ter freedum,
excep' th' d----d doughfaces, an' ye aren't one on 'em, I'll swar.'

'Well, I'm not. Do many of your neighbors think as you do?'

'Reckon not many round har; but up in Cart'ret, whar I cum from, heaps
on 'em do, though the' darn't say so.'

By this time we had reached the still, and directing his attention to
the enormous quantity of rosin that had been run into the pit which I
have spoken of, I asked him why he threw so much valuable material away.

'Wal, 'tan't wuth nothin' har. Thet's th' common, an' it won't bring in
York, now, more'n a dollar forty-five. It costs a dollar an' two bits
ter get it thar an' pay fur sellin on it, an' th' barr'l's wuth the
difference. I doan't ship nuthin wuss no No. 2.'

'What is No. 2?'

He took the head from one of the barrels, and with an adze cut out a
small piece, then handing me the specimen, replied:

'Now hole thet up ter th' sun. Ye'll see though it's yaller, its clean
and clar. Thet's good No. 2, what brings now two dollars an' two bits in
New-York, an' pays me 'bout a dollar a barr'l; it's got eout o' second
yar dip, an' as it comes eout uv th' still, is run through thet ar
strainer,' pointing to a coarse wire-sieve that lay near. 'Th' common
rosum, thet th' still's runnin' on now, is made eout on th' yaller
dip--thet's th' kine o' turpentine thet runs from th' tree arter two
yar's tappin'--we call it yallar dip 'case it's allers dark. We doan't
strain common 'tall, an' it's full uv chips and dirt. It's low now, but
ef it shud ever git up, I'd tap thet ar' heap, barr'l it up, run a
little fresh-stilled inter it, an' 'twould be a'most so good as new.'

'Then it is injured by being in the ground.'

'Not much; it's jest as good fur ev'ry thing but makin' ile, puttin' it
in the 'arth sort o' takes th' sap eout on it, an' th' sap's th' ile.
Natur' sucks thet eout, I s'pose, ter make th' trees grow--I expec' my
bones 'ill fodder 'em one on these days.'

'Rosin is put to very many uses.'

'Yes, but common's used mainly for ile and soap; th' Yankees put it
inter hard yaller soap, 'case it makes it weigh, an' yer folks is up ter
them doin's, and he looked at me and gave a sly laugh. I could not deny
the 'hard' impeachment, and said nothing. Taking a specimen of very
clear light-colored rosin from a shelf in the still-house, I asked him
what that quality was worth.

'Thet ar brought seven dollars for two hundred an' eighty pounds in
York, airly this yar. It's th' very best No. 1; an' it's hard ter make,
'case ef th' still gets overhet it turns it a tinge. Thet sort is run
through two sieves, the coarse 'un, an' thet ar,' pointing to another
wire strainer, the meshes of which were as fine as those of the
flour-sieve used by housewives.

'Do your seven field-hands produce enough 'dip' to keep your still a
running?'

'No, I buys th' rest uv my naboors who han't no stills; an' th' Cunnel's
down on me 'case I pay 'em more'n he will; but I go on Franklin's
princerpel: 'A nimble sixpence's better'n a slow shillin'. A great ole
feller thet, warn't he? I've got his life.'

'And you practice on his precepts; that's the reason you've got on so
well.'

'Yas, thet an' hard knocks. The best o' doctrins arn't wuth a d----n ef
ye doan't work on 'em.'

'That is true.'

We shortly afterward went to the house, and there I passed several hours
in conversation with my new friend and his excellent wife. The lady,
after a while, showed me over the building. It was well-built,
well-arranged, and had many conveniences I did not expect to find in a
backwoods dwelling. She told me its timbers and covering were of
well-seasoned yellow pine--which will last for centuries--and that it
was built by a Yankee carpenter, whom they had ''ported' from
Charleston, paying his fare, and giving him his living and two dollars
and a half a day. It had cost as near as she 'cud reckon, 'bout two
thousan' dollars.'

It was five o'clock, when, shaking them warmly by the hand, I bade my
pleasant friends 'good-by,' and mounting my horse rode off to the
Colonel's.

The family were at supper when I returned to the mansion, and, entering
the room, I took my accustomed place at the table. None present seemed
disposed to conversation. The little that was said was spoken in a low,
subdued tone, and no allusion was made to the startling event of the
day. At last the octoroon woman asked me if I had met Mrs. Barnes at the
farmer's.

'Yes,' I replied, 'and I was greatly pleased with her. She seems one of
those rare women who would lend grace to even the lowest station.'

'She _is_ a rare woman; a true, sincere Christian. Every one loves her;
but few know all her worth; only those do who have gone to her in sorrow
and trial, as----' and her voice trembled, and her eyes moistened----
'as I have.'

And so that poor, outcast, despised, dishonored woman, scorned and cast
off by all the world, had found one sympathizing, pitying friend. Truly,
'He tempers the wind to the shorn lamb.'

When the meal was over, all but Madam P---- retired to the library.
Tommy and I fell to reading, but the Colonel shortly rose and continued
pacing up and down the apartment till the clock sounded eight. The lady
then entered, and said to him:

'The negroes are ready, David; will _you_ go, Mr. K----?'

'I think not, madam,' I replied; 'at least not now.'

I continued reading, for a time, when, tiring of the book, I laid it
down, and followed them to the little burial-ground.

The grave of Sam was open, and the plantation blacks were gathered
around it. In the centre of the group, and at the head of the rude
coffin, the Colonel was seated, and near him the octoroon woman and her
son. The old preacher was speaking.

'My chil'ren,' he said, 'she hab gone ter Him, wid har chile--gone up
dar, whar dey doan't sorrer no more, whar dey doan't weep no more, whar
all tears am wiped from dar eyes foreber. I knows she lay han's on
harseff, and dat, my chil'ren, am whot none ob us shud do, 'case we'm de
Lord's; he put us har, an' he'll take us 'way when we's fru wid our
work, not afore. We hab no right ter gwo afore. Pore Juley did--but
p'raps she cudn't help it. P'raps de great sorrer war so big in har
heart, dat she cudn't fine rest nowhar but in de cole, dark riber.
P'raps she warn't ter blame--p'raps,' and here his eyes filled--'p'raps
ole Pomp war all ter blame, fur I tole har, my chil'ren'--he could say
no more, and sinking down on a rude seat, he covered his face, and
sobbed audibly. Even the Colonel's strong frame heaved with emotion, and
not a dry eye was near. After a time the old man rose again, and with
streaming eyes, and upturned face, continued:

'Dar's One up dar, my chil'ren, dat say: 'Come unter me, all ye dat am
weary an' a heaby laden, an' I will gib you ress.' He, de good Lord, he
say dat; an' p'raps Juley hard him say it, an' dat make har gwo.' Again
his voice failed, and he sank down, weeping and moaning as if his heart
would break.

A pause followed, when the Colonel rose, and aided by Jim and two other
blacks, with his own hands nailed down the lid, and lowered the rude
coffin into the ground. Then the earth was thrown upon it, and then the
long, low chant which the negroes raise over the dead, mingling now with
sobs and moans, and breaking into a strange wild wail, went up among the
pines, and floating off on the still night air, echoed through the dark
woods, till it sounded like music from the grave. I have been in the
chamber of the dying; I have seen the young and the beautiful laid away
in the earth; but I never felt the solemn awfulness of death as I did
when, in the stillness and darkness of night, I listened to the wild
grief of that negro group, and saw the bodies of that slave mother and
her child, lowered to their everlasting rest by the side of Sam.

The morning broke bright and mellow with the rays of the winter sun,
which in Carolina lends the warmth of October to the chills of January,
when, with my portmanteau strapped, and my thin overcoat on my arm, I
gave my last 'God bless you' to the octoroon woman, and turned my face
toward home.

Jim shouted, 'All ready,' the driver cracked his whip, and we were on
our way to Georgetown.

The recent rains had hardened the roads, the bridges were repaired, and
we were whirled rapidly forward, and at one o'clock reached Bucksville.
There we met a cordial welcome, and remained to dinner. Our host pressed
us to pass the night at his house, but the Colonel had business with one
of his secession friends residing down the road--my wayside
acquaintance, Colonel A----, and desired to stay over night with him. At
three o'clock, bidding a kindly farewell to Captain B---- and his
excellent family, we were again on our way.

The sun was just sinking among the western pines, when we turned into a
broad avenue, lined with stately old trees, and rode up to the doorway
of the rice-planter. It was a large, square, dingy old house, seated on
a gentle knoll, a short half-mile from the river, along whose banks
stretched the rice-fields. We entered, and were soon welcomed by its
proprietor.

He received my friend warmly, and gave me a courteous greeting,
remarking, when I mentioned that I was homeward bound, that it was wise
to go. 'Things are very unsettled; there's no telling what a day may
bring forth; feeling is running very high, and a Northern man, whatever
his principles, is not safe here. By the way,' he added, 'did you not
meet with some little obstruction at Conwayboro, on your way up?'

'Yes, I did; a person there ordered me back, but when things began to
look serious, Scipio, the negro whom you saw with me, got me out of the
hobble.'

'Didn't he tell the gentleman that you were a particular friend of mine,
and had met me by appointment at Captain B----'s?' he asked, smiling.

'I believe he did, sir; but I assure you, _I_ said nothing of the kind,
and I think the black should not be blamed, under the circumstances.'

'Oh! no; I don't blame him. I think he did a smart thing. He might have
said you were my grandmother, if it would have served you, for that low
fellow is as fractious as the devil, and dead sure on the trigger.'

'You are very good, sir,' I replied; 'how did you hear of it?'

'A day or two afterward, B---- passed here on his way to Georgetown. I
had been riding out, and happened to be at the head of my avenue when
he was going by. He stopped, and asked if I knew you. Not knowing then
the circumstances, I said that I had met you casually at Bucksville, but
had no particular acquaintance with you. He rode on, saying nothing
further. The next morning I had occasion to go to Georgetown, and at Mr.
Fraser's office accidentally heard that Scip--who is well known and
universally liked there--was to have a public whipping that evening.
Something prompted me to inquire into it, and I was told that he had
been charged by B---- with shielding a well-known abolitionist at
Conwayboro--a man who was going through the up-country distributing such
damnable publications as the New-York _Independent_ and _Tribune_. I
knew, of course, it referred to you, and that it wasn't true. I went to
Scip and got the facts, and by stretching the truth a little, finally
got him off. There was a slight discrepancy between my two accounts of
you,' (and here he laughed heartily,) 'and B----, when we were before
the Justice, remarked on it, and came d----d near calling me a liar. It
was lucky he didn't, for if he had he'd gone to h----l before the place
was hot enough for him.'

'I can not tell you, my dear sir, how grateful I am to you for this. It
would have pained me more than I can express, if Scip had suffered for
doing a disinterested kindness to me.'

Early in the morning we were again on our way, and twelve o'clock found
us seated at a dinner of bacon, corn-bread, and waffles, in the 'first
hotel' of Georgetown. The Charleston boat was to leave at three o'clock;
and, as soon as dinner was over, I sallied out to find Scip. After a
half-hour's search I found him on 'Shackelford's wharf,' engaged in
loading a schooner bound for New-York with a cargo of cotton and
turpentine.

He was delighted to see me, and after I told him I was going home, and
might never see him again, I took his hand warmly in mine, and said:

'Scip, I have heard of the disgrace that was near being put upon you on
my account, and I feel deeply the disinterested service you did to me;
now, I _can not_ go away without doing _something_ for you--showing you
in _some_ way that I appreciate and _like_ you.'

'I likes _you_, massa,' he replied, the tears coming to his eyes; 'I tuk
ter you de bery fuss day I seed you, 'case, I s'pose'--and he wrung my
hand till it ached--'you pitied de pore brack man. But you karnt do
nuffin fur _me_, massa; I doan't want nuffin; I doan't want ter leab
har, 'case de Lord dat put me har arn't willin' I shud gwo. But you kin
do suffin, massa, fur de pore brack man, an' dat'll be doin' it fur
_me_, 'case my heart am all in dat. You kin tell dem folks up dar, whar
you lib, massa, dat we'm not like de brutes, as dey tink we is. Dat we's
got souls, an' 'telligence, an' feelin's, an' am men like demselfs. You
kin tell 'em, too, massa--'case you's edication, and kin talk--how de
pore wite man am kep' down har; how he'm ragged, an' starvin', an' ob no
account, 'case de brack man am a slave. How der chil'ren can't get no
schulein', how eben de grow'd-up ones doan't know nuffin--not eben so
much as de pore brack slave, 'case de 'stockracy want dar votes, an
cudn't get 'em ef dey 'low'd 'em larnin'. Ef your folks know'd all de
truf--ef dey know'd how boff de brack an' de pore w'ite man, am on de
groun', an' can't git up, ob demselfs--dey'd do suffin--dey'd break de
Constertution--dey'd do _suffin_ ter help us. I doan't want no one
hurted, I doan't want no one wronged; but jess tink ob it, massa, four
million ob bracks, an' nigh so many pore w'ites, wid de bressed Gospil
shinin' down on 'em, an' dey not knowin' on it. All dem--ebry one ob
'em--made in de image ob de great God, an' dey driven roun' an' 'bused
wuss dan de brutes. You's seed dis, massa, wid your own eyes, an' you
kin tell 'em on it; an' you _will_ tell 'em on it, massa;' and again he
took my hand while the tears rolled down his cheeks; 'an' Scip will
bress you fur it, massa--wid his bery lass breaf he'll bress you; an' de
good Lord will bress you, too, massa; he will foreber bress you, for
he'm on de side ob de pore an' de 'flicted; his own book say dat, an' it
am true, I knows it, fur I feels it _har_;' and he laid his hand on his
heart, and was silent.

I could not speak for a moment. When I mastered my feelings, I said: 'I
_will_ do it Scip; as God gives me strength, I _will_.'

Reader, I am keeping my word.

This is not a work of fiction. It is a record of facts, and therefore
the reader will not expect me to dispose of its various characters on
artistic principles--that is, lay them away in one of those final
receptacles for the creations of the romancer--the grave and matrimony.
Death has been among them, but nearly all are yet doing their work in
this breathing, busy world.

The characters I have introduced are real. They are not drawn with the
pencil of fancy, nor, I trust, colored with the tints of prejudice. The
scenes I have described are true. I have taken some liberties with the
names of persons and places, and, in a few instances, altered dates; but
the events themselves occurred under my own observation. No one
acquainted with the section of country I have described, or familiar
with the characters I have delineated, will question this statement.
Lest some one who has not seen the slave and the poor white man of the
South, as he actually is, should deem my picture overdrawn, I will say
that 'the half has not been told!' If the whole were related--if the
Southern system, in all its naked ugliness, were fully exposed--the
truth would read like fiction, and the baldest relation of fact like the
wildest dream of romance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The overseer was never taken. A letter which I received from Colonel
J----, shortly prior to the stoppage of the mails, informed me that Moye
had succeeded in crossing the mountains into Tennessee, where, in an
interior town, he disposed of the horse, and then made his way by an
inland route to the free States. The horse the Colonel had recovered,
but the overseer he never expected to see. Moye is now, no doubt,
somewhere in the North, and is probably at this present writing a
zealous Union man, of somewhat the same 'stripe' as the conductors of
the New-York _Herald_ and the Boston _Courier_.

I have not heard directly from Scipio, but one day last July, after a
long search, I found on one of the wharves of South street a coasting
captain who knew him well, and who had seen him the month previous at
Georgetown. He was at that time pursuing his usual avocations, and was
as much respected and trusted as when I met him.

A few days after the tidings of the fall of Sumter were received in
New-York, and when I had witnessed the spontaneous and universal
uprising of the North which followed that event, I dispatched letters to
several of my Southern friends, giving them as near as I could an
account of the true state of feeling here, and representing the utter
madness of the course the South was pursuing. One of these letters went
to my Union acquaintance whom I have called, in the preceding pages,
'Andy Jones.'

He promptly replied, and a pretty regular correspondence ensued between
us, which has continued, at intervals, even since the suspension of
intercourse between the North and the South.

Andy has stood firmly and nobly by the old flag. At the risk of every
thing, he has boldly expressed his sentiments every where. With his life
in his hand and--a revolver in each of his breeches-pockets, he walked
the streets of Wilmington when the secession fever was at its hight,
openly proclaiming his undying loyalty to the Union, and 'no man dared
gainsay him.'

But with all his patriotism, Andy keeps a bright eye on the 'main
chance.' Like his brother, the Northern Yankee, whom he somewhat
resembles and greatly admires, he never omits an opportunity of 'turning
an honest penny.' In defiance of custom-house regulations and of our
strict blockade, he has carried on a more or less regular traffic with
New-York and Boston (_via_ Halifax and other neutral ports) ever since
North-Carolina seceded. His turpentine, while it was still his property,
has been sold in the New-York market, under the very eyes of the
government officials, and, honest reader, _I_ have known of it.

By various roundabout means, I have recently received letters from him.
His last, dated in April, and brought to a neutral port by a shipmaster
whom he implicitly trusts, has reached me since the previous chapters
were written. It covers six pages of foolscap, and is written in
defiance of all grammatical and orthographical principles; but as it
conveys important intelligence in regard to some of the persons
mentioned in this narrative, I will transcribe a portion of it.

It gave me the melancholy tidings of the death of Colonel J----. He had
joined the Confederate army, and fell, bravely meeting a charge of the
Massachusetts troops, at Roanoke.

On receiving the news of his friend's death, Andy rode over to the
plantation, and found Madam P---- plunged in the deepest grief. While he
was there, a letter arrived from Charleston, with intelligence of the
dangerous illness of her son. This second blow crushed her. For several
days she was delirious and her life despaired of; but throughout the
whole, the noble corn-cracker, neglecting every thing, remained beside
her.

When she returned to herself, and had in a measure recovered her
strength, she learned that the Colonel had left no will; that she was
still a slave, and soon to be sold, with the rest of the Colonel's
_personal property_, according to law.

This is what Andy writes about the affair. I give the letter as he wrote
it, merely correcting the punctuation and enough of the spelling to make
it intelligible:

'W'en I hard thet th' Cunnel hadent leff no wil, I was hard put what ter
dew; but arter thinkin' on it over a spell, I knowed shede har on it
sumhow; so I 'cluded to tell har miseff. She tuk on d----d hard at fust,
but arter a bit, grew more calm like, and then she sed it war God's wil,
an' she wudent komplane. Ye knows I've got a wife, but w'en the ma'am
sed thet, she luk'd so like an angel, thet d----d eff I cud help puttin'
my arms round har, an' huggin' on har, till she a'moste screeched. Wal,
I toled har I'd stan' by har, eff evrithing went ter h----l, an' I wil,
by----.

'I made up mi minde to onst what ter dew. It war darned harde work tur
bee 'way from hum jess then, but I war in fur it; soe I put ter
Charleston, ter see th' Cunnel's 'oman. Wal, I seed har, an' I toled har
how th' ma'am felte, an' how mutch shede dun at makein' th' Cunnel's
money, (she made nigh th' hul on it, 'case he war alers keerles, an' tuk
no 'count uv things; eff 't'aden't been fur thet, hede made a wil,) an'
I axed har ter see thet the ma'am had free papers ter onst. An' whot der
ye s'poze she sed? Nuthin', by ----, 'cept she dident no nuthin' 'bout
bisniss, an' leff all uv sech things ter har loryer. Wal, then I went
ter him--he ar one on them slick, ily, seceshun houn's who'd sell thar
soles fur a kountterfit dollar--an' he toled me th' 'ministratur hadent
sot yit, an' he cudent dew nuthin' till he hed. Ses I: 'Ye mean th'
'oman's got ter gwo ter th' hi'est bider?' 'Yas,' he sed, 'the Cunnel's
got dets, an' the've got ter bee pade, an' th' persoonal prop'ty muste
bee sold ter dew it.' Then I sed, 'twud bee sum time 'fore thet war dun,
an' the 'oman's 'most ded an uv no use now; 'what'll ye _hire_ har tur
me fur.' He said a hun'red fur sicks months. I planked down the money
ter onst, an' put off.

'I war bilin' over, but it sumhow cum inter my hed thet the Cunnel's
'oman cudn't bee _all_ stun; so I gose thar agin, an' I toled har what
the loryer sed, an' made a reg'lar stump-'peal tew har bettur natur. I
axed har ef she'd leff the 'oman who'd made har husban's fortun', who
war the muther uv his chil'ren, who fur twenty yar hed nussed him in
sickness an' cheered him in healtf, ef shede let _thet 'oman_ bee
auckyund off ter th' hi'est bider. I axed al thet, an' what der ye think
she sed? Why, jest this. '_I_ doan't no nuthin' 'bout it, Mister Jones.
Ye raily must talke ter mi loryer; them matters I leaves 'tirely ter
him.' Then I sed I s'posed the niggers war ter bee advertist. 'O yas!'
she sed, (an' ye see she know'd a d----d site 'bout _thet_,) 'all on
'em muss bee solde, 'case ye knows I never did luv the kuntry; 'sides
_I_ cuden't karry on the plantashun, no how.' Then sed I: 'The Orleans
traders 'ill be thar, an' she wun't sell fur but one use, fur she's
hansum yit; an' ma'am, ye wun't leff a 'oman as white as you is, who fur
twenty yar hes ben a tru an' fatheful _wife_ tar yer own ded husban', (I
shudn't hev put thet in, but d----d ef I cud help it,) ye wun't put
_har_ up on the block, an' hev har struck down ter the hi'est bider, ter
bee made a d----d ---- on?'

'Wal, I s'pose she haden't forgot thet fur more'n twelve yar the Cunnel
hed _luv'd_ t'other 'oman an' onely _liked_ har; fur w'en I sed thet,
har ize snapped like h----l, an' she screetched eout thet she dident
'low no sech wurds in har hous', an' ordurd me ter leave. Mitey sqeemish
thet, warn't it? bein' as shede been fur so mony yar the Cunnel's ----,
an' th' tuther one his raal wife.

'Wal, I _did_ leav'; but I leff a piece of mi mind ahind. I toled har
I'de buy thet ar 'oman ef she cost all I war wuth and I had ter pawne my
sole ter git the money; an' I added, jest by way uv sweet'nin' the pill,
thet I owed all I hed ter har husband, an' dident furget _my_ dets ef
she did _hern_, an' ef his own wife disgraced him, I'd be d----d ef _I_
wud.

'Wal, I've got th' ma'am an' har boy ter hum, an' my 'oman hes tuk ter
har a heep. I doan't no w'en the sale's ter cum off, but ye may bet hi'
on my bein' thar, an' I'll buy har ef I hev ter go my hull pile on har,
an' borrer th' money fur ole Pomp. But _he'll_ go cheap, 'case the
Cunnel's deth nigh dun him up. It clean killed Ante Lucey. She never
held her hed up arter she heerd 'Masser Davy' war ded, fur she sot har
vary life on him. Don't ye feel consarned 'bout the ma'am--I knows ye
sot hi' on har. _I'll buy har_ shore. Thet an' deth ar th' onely things
thet I knows on, in this world, jess now, that ar SARTIN.'

Such is Andy's letter. Misspelled and profane though it be, I would not
alter a word or a syllable of it. It deserves to be written in
characters of gold and hung up in the sky, where it might be read by all
the world. And it _is_ written in the sky--in the great record book--and
it will be read when you and I, reader, meet the assembled universe, to
give account of what _we_ have done and written. God grant that our
record may show some such deed as that!

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: The whisky was kept in a back room, above ground, because
the dwelling had no cellar. The fluid was kept safely under lock and
key, and the farmer accounted for that by saying that his negroes would
steal nothing but whisky. Few country houses at the South have a
cellar--that apartment deemed so essential by Northern housekeepers. The
intervening space between the ground and the floor is there left open,
to allow of a free circulation of air.]

[Footnote 2: No regular dinner-hour is allowed the blacks on most
turpentine-plantations. Their food is usually either taken with them to
the woods or carried there by house-servants, at stated times.]


SOUTHERN RIGHTS.


  The right to poison bullets,
  The right to rifle graves,
  To cut our prisoners' gullets,
  Or treat them like our slaves;
  The right to use the savage
  To aid us in our fight,
  To freely scalp and ravage,
  Each is a Southern right.
  Call not these claims Satanic,
  They're far beyond your ken:
  How can a low mechanic
  Know aught of gentlemen?


MACCARONI AND CANVAS.

VI.


ON THE PINCIO.

With that wise foresight, shared by all European rulers, the Roman
Pincio was undoubtedly wedded to its purpose of keeping the idle ones
very busy at the very time of day when revolutionary plots find the best
hearing--before dinner. Whirling around its walks in carriages, or
gently promenading under trees, among rose-bushes, and by fountains,
while a large band of musicians play with spirit fine selections from
the last operas, or favorite airs from old ones; the eye gratified by
the sight of pleasant faces, or dwelling enraptured on the beautiful
landscape spread before it--how can the brain disengage itself to think
of Liberty, won through toil and battle, only to be preserved by
self-denial and moral strength?

