One result of the division of the accounts of the bank into two departments
is that, if through any circumstance the Bank of England be called on for a
_larger_ sum in notes or specie than the notes held in its banking
department (technically spoken of as the "Reserve") amount to, permission
has to be obtained from the government to "suspend the Bank Act" in order
to allow the demand to be met, whatever the amount of specie in the "issue
department" may be. Three times since the passing of the Bank Act--during
the crises of 1847, 1857 and 1866--authority has been given for the
suspension of that act. On one of these dates only, in 1857, the limits of
the act were exceeded; on the other two occasions the fact that the
permission had been given stayed the alarm. It should be remembered,
whenever the act of 1844 is criticized, that since it came into force there
has been no anxiety as to payment in specie of the note circulation; but
the division of the specie held into two parts is an arrangement not
without disadvantages. [Sidenote: Bank rate.] Certainly since the act of
1844 became law, the liability to constant fluctuations in the Bank's rate
of discount--one main characteristic of the English money market--has
greatly increased. To charge the responsibility of the increase in the
number of those fluctuations on the Bank Act alone would not be
justifiable, but the working of the act appears to have an influence in
that direction, as the effect of the act is to cut the specie reserve held
by the bank into two parts and to cause the smaller of these parts to
receive the whole strain of any demands either for notes or for specie.
Meanwhile the demands on the English money market are greater and more
continuous than those on any other money market in the world. Of late years
the changes in the bank rate have been frequent, and the fluctuations even
in ordinary years very severe. From the day when the act came into
operation in 1844, to the close of the year 1906, there had been more than
400 changes in the rate. The hopes which Sir Robert Peel expressed in 1844,
that after the act came into force commercial crises would cease, have not
been realized.

The number of changes in the bank rate from 1876[3] to 1906 in England,
France, Germany, Holland and Belgium were as follows:--

  England.  France.  Germany.  Holland.  Belgium.
    183       27       110       55        77

There has been frequent discussion among bankers and occasionally with the
government as to the advantage it might be to grant the Bank of England an
automatic power to augment the note issue on securities when necessary,
similar to that possessed by the Bank of Germany (_Reichsbank_). One of the
hindrances to the success of such a plan has been that the government,
acting on the advice of the treasury, required an extremely high rate of
interest, of which it would reap the advantage, to be paid on the advances
made under these conditions. Those who made these suggestions did not bear
in mind that the mere fact of so high a rate of interest being demanded
intensifies the panic, a high rate being associated as a rule with risks in
business. The object of the arrangement made between the _Reichsbank_ and
the treasury of the empire of Germany is a different one--to provide the
banking accommodation required and to prevent panic, hence a rate of only
5% has been generally charged, though in 1899 the rate was 7% for a short
time. As is often the case in business, a moderate rate has been
accompanied by higher profit. The duty on the extra issue between 1881,
when the circulation of the Bank of Germany first exceeded the authorized
limit, and the close of the year 1906 amounted to £839,052. Thus a
considerable sum was provided for the relief of taxation, while business
proceeded on its normal course. The proposal made by Mr Lowe (afterwards
Lord Sherbrooke) in 1873 was to charge 12%, a rate which presupposes panic.
Hence the negotiations came to nothing. The act of 1844 remains unaltered.
The issue on securities allowed by it to the Bank of England was originally
£14,000,000. This has since been increased under the provisions of the act
to £18,450,000 (29th March 1901). Hence against the notes issued by the
bank less gold by £4,450,000 is now held by the bank than would have been
the case had the arrangements as to the securities remained as they were in
1844.

The Bank of England has, from the date of its establishment, possessed a
practical, though perhaps not an absolutely legal, monopoly of issuing
notes in London. It became gradually surrounded by a circle of private
banks, some of considerable power.

[Sidenote: Early English banking.]

The state papers included in F. G. Hilton Price's _Handbook of London
Bankers_ (1876) contain some of the earliest records about the
establishment of banking in England. The first of these is a petition,
printed in the original Italian, to Queen Elizabeth, of Christopher
Hagenbuck and his partners in November 1581, representing "that he had
found out a method and form in which it will be possible to institute an
office into which shall enter every year a very large sum of money without
expense to your Majesty," so "that not only your Majesty will be able to be
always provided with whatever notable sum of money your Majesty may wish,
but by this means your State and people also; and it shall keep the country
in abundance and remove the extreme usuries that devour your Majesty and
your people." Hagenbuck proposed to explain his plan on condition that he
should receive "6% every year of the whole mass of money" received by the
office for twenty years. The queen agreed "to grant to the said Christopher
and partners 4% for a term of twenty years, and to confirm the said grant
under the great seal." The document is signed by Francis Walsingham, but
nothing further appears to have come of it. When we compare the date of
this document with that of the establishment of the Banco della Piazza di
Rialto at Venice, it is not unlikely that the idea of the establishment of
a bank was floating in the minds of people connected with business and had
become familiar to Hagenbuck from commerce with Venice. Other state papers
in 1621 and 1622 and again in 1662 and 1666 contain somewhat similar
proposals which however were never carried into practice.

The little _London Directory_, 1677, contains a list of goldsmiths
mentioned as keeping "running cashes." Of these firms described in 1677,
five houses were carrying on business in 1876. Three of these, or firms
immediately descended from them, Child & Co. of Temple Bar, Martin & Co. of
Lombard Street (as Martin's Bank, Ltd.), and Hoare & Co. of Fleet Street,
are still carrying on business. Barnetts, Hoare & Co. and Willis, Percival
& Co. have been absorbed since 1876, the first by Lloyds Bank (1884), the
second by the Capital and Counties (1878). Many of the goldsmiths carried
on a considerable business. Thus the books of Edward Blackwell, who was an
eminent goldsmith and banker in the reign of Charles II., show that the
king himself, the queen mother, Henrietta Maria, James, duke of York, the
prince of Orange, Samuel Pepys, the East India Company, the Goldsmiths'
Company and other city companies did business with him. Sir John Houblon,
the first governor of the Bank of England, kept an account with Blackwell,
who was, however, ruined by the closing of the exchequer in 1672. But his
son married into the family of Sir Francis Child, and his grandsons became
partners in Child's Bank.

[v.03 p.0337] Besides the banks in London already mentioned, one in the
provinces claims to have been established before the Bank of England.
Smiths' of Nottingham, since amalgamated with the Union of London Bank, is
stated to have been founded in 1688. Others also claim considerable
antiquity. The old Bank of Bristol (Bailey, Cave & Co.) was founded in
1750; the business amalgamated with Prescott & Co., Ltd., of London. The
Hull Old Bank (Pease & Co.) dated from 1754; this business also still
continues (amalgamated, 1894, with the York Union Banking Co., Ltd., and
since with Barclay & Co., Ltd.). The banks of Gurney & Co., established at
the end of the 18th century in the eastern counties, have with numerous
other banks of similar standing amalgamated with the firm of Barclay & Co.,
Ltd., of Lombard Street.

The business of banking had been carried on by the goldsmiths of the city,
who took deposits from the time of James I. onwards, and thus established
"deposit-banking" as early as that reign. This is described in a pamphlet
published in 1676, entitled _The Mystery of the New-Fashioned Goldsmiths or
Bankers Discovered_, quoted by Adam Anderson in his _History of the Great
Commercial Interests of the British Empire_, vol. ii. p. 402. During the
Civil War "the goldsmiths or new-fashioned bankers began to receive the
rents of gentlemen's estates remitted to town, and to allow them and others
who put cash into their hands some interest for it, if it remained but for
a single month in their hands, or even a lesser time. This was a great
allurement for people to put their money into their hands, which would bear
interest till the day they wanted it. And they could also draw it out by
£100 or £50, &c., at a time, as they wanted it, with infinitely less
trouble than if they had lent it out on either real or personal security.
The consequence was that it quickly brought a great quantity of cash into
their hands; so that the chief or greatest of them were now enabled to
supply Cromwell with money in advance on the revenues as his occasion
required, upon great advantage to themselves."

The Bank of England, as stated before, was incorporated by the act of 1694.
The position of the other banks at that time was defined by that act and
the act of 1697, which declared that no bank, that is, no joint-stock bank,
was "to be established within England during the continuance of the Bank of
England," and also by the act of 1708, which provided that "during the
continuance of the Bank of England, no company or partnership exceeding six
persons in England" should "borrow, owe or take up any sum or sums of money
on their bills or notes payable on demand or at any less time than six
months from the borrowing thereof." This was confirmed by the act of 1800.
No change of importance was made till the act of 1826, which prohibited
"bank notes under £5," and the second Banking Act of that year which
allowed the establishment of co-partnerships of more than six persons,
which necessarily were joint-stock companies, beyond 65 m. from London. The
act of 1833 allowed the establishment of joint-stock banks within the 65 m.
limit, and took away various restrictions of the amounts of notes for less
than £50. But the power of issuing notes was not allowed to joint-stock
banks within the 65 m. radius.

In the early days in England, issuing notes formed, as Bagehot says in his
_Lombard Street_, the introduction to the system of deposit-banking--so
much so, that a bank which had not the power of issuing notes could
scarcely exist out of London.

[Sidenote: Bank notes.]

Bank notes in England originated in goldsmiths' notes. Goldsmiths received
deposits of moneys and gave notes or receipts for such moneys payable on
demand. The London bankers continued to give their customers notes or
deposit-receipts for the sums left by them until about 1781, when in lieu
of such notes they gave them books of cheques. Before the invention of
cheque-books, the practice of issuing notes was considered so essentially
the main feature of banking, that a prohibition of issue was considered an
effectual bar against banking. Accordingly the prohibitory clause in the
act of 6 Anne, c. 50, 1707 (in Record edition), which was repeated in the
Bank of England Act 1708, 7 Anne, c. 30, § 66 (in Record edition),
prohibiting more than six persons from issuing promissory notes, was
intended to prevent any bank being formed with more than six partners, and
was so understood at the time; and it did have the effect of preventing any
joint-stock bank being formed.

The prohibition, as already related, was modified in the year 1826 and
removed in 1833. Even then the privilege of limitation of liability was not
permitted to any other bank but the Bank of England. The result was that
when joint-stock banks were first formed many persons of good means were
kept back from becoming shareholders, that is to say partners, in banks.
For up to the date of the act of 1862 permitting "limited liability," every
shareholder in a joint-stock bank was liable to the extent of the whole of
his means (see the article COMPANY). Even as late as 1858 when the Western
Bank of Scotland and 1878 when the City of Glasgow Bank failed, very great
hardship was inflicted on many persons who had trusted with over confidence
to the management of those banks. The failure of the City of Glasgow Bank
was the cause of the Companies Act of 1879, passed to enable unlimited
companies to adopt limited liability. In limited companies the shareholder
who has paid up the nominal amount of his holding is not liable for any
further amount, unless the company issues bank notes, in which case the
shareholders are liable in the same way as if the company were registered
as an unlimited company. The facilities allowed by this act were used by
almost every joint-stock bank in the United Kingdom except those banks
which were at that date limited by charter or by special act.

[Sidenote: Private banks.]

To return to the early history of banking--thus, as no bank could be formed
with more than six partners during the whole of the period from 1694 to
1826 and 1833, the majority of the banks formed throughout England and
Wales for more than a century were necessarily small and usually isolated
firms. Further, when a partner died, his capital not infrequently went out
of the business; then a fresh partner with sufficient means had to be
found, constant change was the result, and confidence, "a plant of slow
growth," could not thrive, except in those instances when a son or a
relation filled the vacancy.

The banks in the country districts had frequently branches in the small
market-towns close to them; those in London had never more than one office.
These banks were sometimes powerful and generally well managed, a
considerable number being established by members of the Society of Friends.

The restriction of partners in private banks to the number of six continued
till 1862. By the act of that year they were allowed to be ten. This power,
however, did not extend to issuing private banks, which were restricted to
six partners as before. The power of increasing bank partnerships to ten
has been made but little use of. The difficulties of carrying on business
on a large scale by private firms were augmented by certain legal
technicalities which practically rendered large private banks impossible in
ordinary circumstances. Hence banking business did not begin to assume its
present form till almost half-way through the 19th century. The gradual
change followed the passing of the acts of 1826-1833, of 1844-1845, of 1862
and of 1879. Incidentally the act of 1844 had an unexpected influence on
the constitution of the banking system. After favouring the existence of
small banks for many years, it gradually led, as the time arrived when the
establishment of large and powerful banks in England and Wales became
necessary, to their formation. No new bank of issue whatever was allowed to
be established--restrictions were placed on the English issuing
banks--private issuing banks with not more than six partners were allowed
to remain, to amalgamate with other private issuing banks and to retain
their joint issues. The joint-stock banks which possessed issues were also
allowed to continue these, but when two joint-stock banks amalgamated, the
continuing bank only retained its issue. Also when a private issuing bank
was formed into or joined a joint-stock bank, the issue lapsed.

The greater number of the provincial banks in England and Wales had been
banks of issue up to 1844. The act of 1844 [v.03 p.0338] restricted their
power of issuing notes, which at that date and even subsequently continued
to be of importance to them, in such a manner that, as Sir R. H. Inglis
Palgrave stated in giving evidence before the committee of the House of
Commons at the banking inquiry of 1875, these banks possessed in their
issues a property they could use, but were not able to sell. The statistics
forming part of Appendix 14 to the report of the select committee of the
House of Commons on banks of issue (1875) give interesting information as
to the proportion of notes in circulation to the deposits of banks in
various districts of the country and at various dates. The statements were
supplied by twenty-one banks, some in agricultural districts, some in
places where manufactures flourished, some in mixed districts, commercial
and agricultural, or industrial and manufacturing. In all of these, the
inquiry being carried as far back as 1844, the proportion of the
circulation to the banking deposits had greatly diminished in recent years.
In several cases the deposits had increased three-fold in the time. In one
case it was five times as large, in another nearly seven times, in another
nearly twelve and a half times. The proportion of the circulation to the
deposits had very largely diminished in that time. In one instance, from
being about one-third of the deposits, at which proportion it had remained
for five years consecutively, it fell to 9% at the end of the term. In
another from being 22% it had diminished to 1½% of the total. In all cases
where the detail was given it had diminished greatly.

The Bank Act of 1844 was arranged with the intention of concentrating the
note issues on the Bank of England in order to secure the monopoly of that
bank as the one issuer in England and Wales. The result was that nearly all
the provincial banks in England had by 1906 lost the right of issue.
Doubtless all were destined to do so before long, a result by which banking
in England and the industries of the country must lose the advantage which
the local issues have been to Scotland and Ireland. Had the English country
banks been allowed, as the Scottish banks were, to associate together and
to retain their issues, powerful banks would many years since have been
established throughout England and Wales, and the amalgamations of recent
years would have been carried through at a much earlier date, and on terms
much more favourable to the public.

[Sidenote: Security of note issue.]

No security was ever required to be given for the local issues in the
United Kingdom. The provisions of the acts of 1844-1845 which compel the
Irish and Scottish banks to hold specie against the notes issued beyond the
legal limit, do not make the coin held a security for them. The legislation
of 1879 which made the note issues a first charge, with unlimited
liability, on the total assets of the joint-stock banks which accepted the
principle of limited liability for the rest of their business, has been the
only recognition by the state of the duty to the note-holders of rendering
them secure. It has been a real disadvantage to England that this duty has
never been sufficiently recognized, and that the provincial note issue,
which is a very convenient power for a bank to possess, and incidentally a
considerable advantage to its customers, has been swept away without any
attempt being made to remedy its deficiencies. There may be objections
raised to a note circulation secured by the bonds of the government, but
the security of the note issues of the national banks of the United States
made against such bonds, has scarcely ever been questioned.

A different policy was followed by Sir Robert Peel in Scotland and in
Ireland from that which he established in England. By the acts of 1844-1845
the Scottish and Irish banks were allowed to exceed their authorized issues
on holding specie to the amount of the excess, and no restrictions were
placed on amalgamations among banks in these countries. In Scotland and in
Ireland notes for less than £5 continued to be allowed. The result has been
that the ten large banks in Scotland, and six of the nine banks in Ireland,
possess the power of issuing notes. The large proportion of local branches
in these countries has been greatly assisted by this power.

[Sidenote: Amounts in circulation.]

Originally, besides the Bank of England, nearly all the provincial banks in
England and Wales possessed the privilege of issue. These banks continued
their operations as previously during the time while the Bank Act was
discussed in parliament. When the arrangements which that act created were
made public, nine banks, of which eight were private and one was a
joint-stock bank, ceased to issue their notes prior to the 12th of October
1844, when the act came into operation. Of these, the Western District
Joint-Stock Banking Co. was dissolved, one of the private banks was closed,
the remaining seven issued Bank of England notes and were allowed certain
privileges for doing this. By the act of 1844 the maximum circulation of
the English issuing banks was fixed at the average circulation of the
twelve weeks before the 27th of April 1844.

The number of the banks to which the privilege of circulation was then
allowed and the amount of notes permitted were, in England:--

  207 private banks with an authorized issue of       £5,153,417
   72 joint-stock banks with an authorized issue of    3,478,230
                                                     ------------
                                                      £8,631,647

The actual circulation of the country in October 1844 was as follows:--

_Notes in Circulation_.--The monthly return of the circulation ending the
12th of October 1844 (stamps and taxes, 25th October);

                    _England._
  Bank of England                          £20,228,800
  Private banks                              4,674,162
  Joint-stock banks                          3,331,516

                    _Scotland._
  Chartered, private and joint-stock banks   2,987,665

                    _Ireland._
  Bank of Ireland                            3,597,850
  Private and joint-stock banks              2,456,261
                                           -----------
                     Total                 £37,276,254

In May 1907 the number and amounts were reduced to:--

                       Authorized Issue.     Actual Issue.
  12 private banks          £482,744           £122,536
  17 joint-stock banks     1,084,836            437,693

The reason why the actual circulation of these banks is so far below the
authorized issue is that under existing circumstances their circulation can
only extend over a very limited area. The notes of country banks are now
almost unknown except in the immediate neighbourhood of the places where
they are issued; though they may all be payable in London, yet there is
often considerable difficulty in getting them cashed.

The average circulation in 1906 was as follows:--

  Bank of England                          £28,890,000
  Private banks                                124,000
  Joint-stock banks                            429,000
                                           -----------
              Total in England             £29,443,000
  Scotland                                   7,477,000
  Ireland                                    6,452,000
                                           -----------
              Total in United Kingdom      £43,372,000

This shows an apparent increase of more than £6,000,000 since 1844. The
decrease of the country circulation in England and the increase of the
Scottish and Irish circulations may be set off against each other. The
increase is mainly in the notes of the Bank of England. In 1844 the number
of banking offices in England and Wales was 976, while in 1906 there were
more than 5880. Each of these offices must hold some till-money, and of
this Bank of England notes almost always form a part. Hence it is probable
that a large part of the increase in the circulation of the Bank of England
since 1844 is held in the tills of the banks in England and Wales, and that
the active note circulation of the United Kingdom is but little larger than
it was.

It may be added that the government received from the note circulation for
a typical year (ending 5th of April 1904), out of the profits of issue
(Bank of England) £184,930, 2s. 2d., and also composition for the duties on
the bills and notes of the banks of England and Ireland and of country
bankers, £120,768, 18s. 6d.

In 1906 the banking business of England was carried on practically by about
ten private and sixty joint-stock banks of which more than one was properly
a private firm under a joint-stock form of organization. Though the number
of individual banks had diminished, the offices had greatly increased.

The records of the numbers of banks in the United Kingdom have up to quite
recent years been very imperfect. Such as exist were made by individual
observers. The banks of England and Wales are believed to have been 350 in
number in 1792. Those registered from 1826 to 1842 were:--

[v.03 p.0339] /*    Private. Joint-stock. 1826 554 ... 1827 465 6 1833 416
35 1842 311 118 */

The number of banking offices in England and Wales was estimated by Mr.
William Leatham in 1840 as being 697. The _Banking Almanac_ for 1845 gives
the number in 1844 for England and Wales as 336 private bank offices and
640 joint-stock offices, Scotland 368 offices, Ireland 180 offices.

The number of inhabitants to each office was as follows in 1844 and 1906:--

  +-------------------+-------------+----------------+
  |                   |  Number of  |    Number of   |
  |                   |   Banking   | Inhabitants to |
  |                   |   Offices.  |   Each Office. |
  +-------------------+------+------+---------+------+
  |                   | 1844.| 1906.|   1844. | 1906.|
  | England and Wales |  976 | 5527 |  16,305 | 5885 |
  | Isle of Man       |  ... |   23 |    ...  | 2417 |
  | Scotland          |  368 | 1180 |   7,120 | 3790 |
  | Ireland           |  180 |  777 |  45,417 | 5738 |
  +-------------------+------+------+---------+------+
  | In United Kingdom | 1524 | 7507 |  17,526 | 5530 |
  +-------------------+------+------+---------+------+

In the latter years of the 18th century and the early years of the 19th,
the note circulation was a very important part of the business, but about
that date the deposits began to be, as they have continued since, far more
important. It is unfortunately impossible to give any trustworthy
statistics of the position of banking in the United Kingdom extending back
for more than forty or fifty years. Even the Scottish banks, who have been
less reticent as to their position than the English banks, did not publish
their accounts generally till 1865. The figures of the total deposits and
cash balances in the Irish joint-stock banks were published collectively
from the year 1840 by the care of Dr Neilson Hancock, but it is only of
quite recent years that any statement of the general position other than an
estimate has been possible owing to the long-continued reluctance of many
banks to allow any publication of their balance-sheets. A paper by W.
Newmarch, printed in the _Journal of the Statistical Society_ for 1851,
supplies the earliest basis for a trustworthy estimate. According to this
the total amount of deposits, including the Bank of England, in England and
Wales, Scotland and Ireland, may have been at that date from £250,000,000
to £360,000,000. The estimate in Palgrave's _Notes on Banking_ (1872),
excluding deposits in discount houses and the capitals of banks, was from
£430,000,000 to £450,000,000. The corresponding amounts at the close of
1906 were, in round figures, including acceptances &c., £997,000,000. The
total resources, including capitals and reserves and note circulation (in
round figures £177,500,000), were for 1906:--

  England and Wales--
     Bank of England and other banks   £922,297,000
  Scotland                              135,042,000
  Ireland                                73,707,000
  Isle of Man                               898,000
                                      -------------
                                     £1,131,944,000

The progressive growth in bank deposits since it has been possible to keep
a record of their amounts, affords some means of checking roughly the
correctness of the estimates of 1851 and 1872. Broadly speaking, it may be
said that the bank deposits of the United Kingdom have about doubled since
1872.

[Sidenote: Clearing.]

The purely city banks had associated themselves in a "Clearing House"
certainly by 1776. An entry in the books of the Grasshopper,[4]
namely--"1773 to quarterly charge for use of the Clearing-room of 19/6d.,"
points to an earlier and perhaps less definitely organized system of
settlement. A house was taken for the purpose in 1810, in which year the
number of banking houses who settled their accounts with each other at the
"Clearing House" was forty-six (Gilbart's _History and Principles of
Banking_, p. 78). The Bank of England has never been a member of the
Clearing House, though it "clears on one side," _i.e._ its claim on the
clearing bankers is made through the Clearing House, but the claims of the
clearing bankers on the bank are forwarded direct to Threadneedle Street
twice or thrice daily. Nor did the banks in Fleet Street or at Charing
Cross belong to it. In 1858 the clearing of country cheques was added
through arrangements made by Lord Avebury, then Sir John Lubbock. The
"country clearing" is a great assistance to business, as it enables a
cheque drawn on the most distant village in England to be dealt with as
conveniently as a cheque on London. Of the forty-nine banks in London in
1844, twenty-six were connected with the Clearing House. At that time only
private banks were allowed to be members. In 1854 the joint-stock banks
made their way into that body, and in 1906 the numbers were one private
bank and eighteen joint-stock banks who joined in the clearing--nineteen
banks in all.

Practically at the present time every large transaction in the United
Kingdom is settled by cheque, that is, by a series of ledger transfers,
notes and specie being but the small change by which the fractional amounts
are paid. A large proportion of these transactions are arranged through the
operation of the London Clearing House. This is facilitated by the fact
that every bank in the United Kingdom has an agent in London.

The annual circulation shown by the London Clearing House is more than
£12,000,000,000. No one asks what stock of gold is held by the bank on
which the cheques are drawn, or what the bank itself keeps in reserve. The
whole is taken in faith on a well-founded trust. It is the most easily
worked paper circulation and circulating medium in existence. Like the
marvellous tent of the fairy Paribanou, it expands itself to meet every
want and contracts again the moment the strain is passed. (See the article
by R. H. Inglis Palgrave on "Gold and the Banks," _Quarterly Review_,
January 1906.)

If we add to the returns of the London Clearing House those of the clearing
houses in the large towns of England, Ireland and Scotland, and the
numerous exchanges which occur daily, and the large number which the
different offices of banks with a great many branches settle among
themselves, and the number drawn by one customer of a bank and paid to
another, we may form some notion of the vast amount of the yearly turnover
in cheques. This may be roughly estimated to be at least twice as great as
that registered by the London Clearing House. The earliest authentic
statement as to the clearing is found in the _Appendix to the Second
Report, Committee of House of Commons, Banks of Issue_ (1841).

  In 1839 the figures of the London clearings
    were                                        £954,401,600, 29 banks.
  In 1840        "     "  "     "       "        978,496,800, 29   "
  In 1899        "     "  "     "       "      9,150,269,000, 19   "
  In 1900        "     "  "     "       "      8,960,170,000, 19   "
  In 1906        "     "  "     "       "     12,711,334,000, 18   "

[Sidenote: Scottish banks.]

In 1695, shortly after the establishment of the Bank of England, the
Scottish parliament passed an act for the establishment of a public bank.
Amongst the first names is that of Thomas Coutts, a name still commemorated
in one of the most substantial banks in London. The terms of the
establishment were more favourable than those connected with the
establishment of the Bank of England, for they obtained the exclusive
privilege of banking for twenty-one years without giving any consideration
whatever. It may have been the natural caution of the country, or the fact
that William III. was then king, which led to the Bank of Scotland being
prohibited under a heavy penalty from lending money under any circumstances
to the king. It is the only Scottish bank established by act of parliament.
The directors began at a very early period to receive deposits and to allow
interest thereon, also to grant cash credit accounts, a minute of the
directors respecting the mode of keeping the latter being dated so far back
as 1729.

Though the system of branches forms now so marked a feature of banking in
Scotland, a good many years had to pass before they obtained any hold. It
was not till about the year 1700 that the directors of the Bank of Scotland
established branches at Glasgow, Aberdeen, Dundee and Montrose, but so
little encouragement was given to these branches, the expenses far
exceeding the profits arising from them, that the directors resolved to
close them. In 1731 another attempt was made, and agencies were established
at Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee. But after a trial of two years they were
discontinued. It was not till 1774 that branches were again established by
the bank.

