  In fancy I saw him all weathered and browned,
  Deep crows'-feet and wrinkles his eyelids around;
  A pipe in the teeth that seemed little the worse
  For Liverpool pantiles and stringy salt-horse;
  The hairy forearm with its gaudy tattoo
  Of a bold-looking female in scarlet and blue;
  The fingers all roughened and toughened and scarred,
  With hauling and hoisting so calloused and hard,
  So crooked and stiff you would wonder that still
  They could handle with cunning and fashion with skill
  The tiny full-rigger predestined to ride
  To its cable of thread on its green-painted tide
  In its wine-bottle world, while the old world went on
  And the sailor who made it was long ago gone.

  And still as he worked at the toy on his knee
  He would spin his old yarns of the ships and the sea,
  _Thermopylæ_, _Lightning_, _Lothair_  and _Red Jacket_,
  With many another such famous old packet,
  And many a bucko and dare-devil skipper
  In Liverpool blood-boat or Colonies' clipper;
  The sail that they carried aboard the _Black Ball_,
  Their skysails and stunsails and ringtail and all,
  And storms that they weathered and races they won
  And records they broke in the days that are done.

  Or sometimes he'd sing you some droning old song,
  Some old sailors' ditty both mournful and long,
  With queer little curlycues, twiddles and quavers,
  Of smugglers and privateers, pirates and slavers,
  "The brave female smuggler," the "packet of fame
  That sails from New York and the _Dreadnought_'s her name,"
  And "all on the coast of the High Barbaree,"
  And "the flash girls of London was the downfall of he."

  In fancy I listened, in fancy could hear
  The thrum of the shrouds and the creak of the gear,
  The patter of reef-points on topsails a-shiver,
  The song of the jibs when they tauten and quiver,
  The cry of the frigate-bird following after,
  The bow-wave that broke with a gurgle like laughter.
  And I looked on my youth with its pleasure and pain,
  And the shipmate I loved was beside me again.
  In a ship in a bottle a-sailing away
  In the flying-fish weather through rainbows of spray,
  Over oceans of wonder by headlands of gleam,
  To the harbours of Youth on the wind of a dream.

C.F.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

"HIGH COMMISSIONER PAYS CALLS.

    Jerusalem, August 27.--The High Commissioner visited yesterday
    afternoon the tomb of Abraham, Sarah, Rebecca, Isaac, Jacob and
    Leah in the Cave of Makpéla at Hebron."--_Egyptian Mail_.

No flowers, by request.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT REPUDIATION.

MR. SMILLIE. "HERE, HOP IT, OR YOU'LL SPOIL THE WHOLE SHOW. YOU DON'T
COME ON TILL MY NEXT TRICK."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _M.F.H_. "WHY THE DEUCE AREN'T YOU WITH HOUNDS? THEY'RE
IN THE NEXT PARISH BY THIS."

_New Whip_ (_rib-roasting very bad cub-hunter_). "'TAIN'T SAFE TO GO
NEAR 'EM WITH THIS 'ORSE; THEY MIGHT THINK 'E WAS FOR EATIN'."]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BEN AND THE BOOT.


Whither in these littered and overcrowded islands should one flee to
escape the spectacle of outworn and discarded boots? I should go to a
mountain-top and amongst mountain-tops I should choose the highest. I
should scale the summit of Ben Nevis.

Yet it is but a few days since I saw on that proud eminence the
unmistakable remains of an ordinary walking boot.

It reposed on the perilous edge of a snowdrift that even in summer
curves giddily over the lip of the dreadful gulf over which the
eastern precipice beetles. There is ever a certain pathos about
discarded articles of apparel: a baby's outgrown shoe, a girl's
forgotten glove, an abandoned bowler; but the situation of this boot,
thus high uplifted towards the eternal stars, gave to it a mystery, a
grandeur, a sublimity that held me long in contemplation.

How came it there?

The path that winds up that grey mountain is rough; its harsh stones
and remorseless gradients take toll of leather as of flesh. Yet half a
sole and a sound upper are better than no boot; and what climber but
would postpone till after his descent the discarding of his damaged
footgear?

Could it be, I asked myself, the relic and evidence of an inhuman
crime? Was it possible that some party of climbers, arriving at the
top lunchless and desperately hungry, had sacrificed their plumpest,
disposing of his clothes over the cliff, but failing to hole out with
this tell-tale boot?

But no, I bethought me of the price of leather. They would have
reserved the boots, even at the risk of suspicion. Moreover, no one
would ever reach that exacting altitude in a state of succulence.

A glow of sympathy, a thrill of appreciation swept through me as I
realised what was at once the worthiest and the likeliest explanation.

Who shall plumb the depths of the affection of a true pedestrian for
his boots, the companions and comfort of so many a pilgrimage? Who but
the climber, the hill-tramp, knows the pang of regret with which he
faces at last the truth that his favourite boots are past repair, the
sorrow and self-reproach with which he permits them to be consigned to
Erebus?

I saw it all. As the Roman veteran hung upon the temple wall of Mars
the arms he might no longer wield, so hither came some lofty-minded
climber, bearing in devoted hands his outworn and faithful boot, to
leave it sadly and with reverence in this most worthy resting-place,
here to repose at the end of all the roads it had trod, on the highest
of all the native hills it had climbed.

W.K.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Another Impending Apology.=

    "Mr. Roberts, Member of Parliament, has arrived. Mr. Roberts is a
    tall and well-built gentleman with a posing appearance."

_Mysore Patriot_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Families supplied in 18, 12 or 6 gallon casks."--_Hertford
    brewer's notice_.

Where's your DIOGENES now?

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The dinner was in the House of Commons, and I sat next to Henry.
    I was tremendously impressed by his conversation and his clean
    Cromwellian face."

_From a famous autobiography._

It was, we trust, the CROMWELL touch rather than the cleanness that
was so impressive.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Ancient Gardener_ (_who has just been paid_). "OI SAY,
MAISTER, THERE'S SUMMAT WRONG WI' MA BRASS."

_Employer._ "WHAT'S THAT, JOHN?"

_A.G._ "WHA, SITHEE, THA'S GI'EN MA ONE TA MONY."

_Employer._ "YOU'RE VERY HONEST, JOHN."

_A.G._ "WEEL, THA SEES I THOAT IT MID 'A' BIN A TRAP."]

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW RHYMES FOR OLD CHILDREN.

THE EARWIG.

  How odd it is that our Papas
  Keep taking us to cinemas,
  But still expect the same old scares,
  The tiger-cats, the woolly bears,
  The lions on the nursery stairs
      To frighten as of old!
  Considering everybody knows
  A girl can throttle one of those
  While choking with the other hand
  The captain of a robber band,
      They leave one pretty cold.
  The lion has no status now;
  One has one's terrors, I'll allow,
  The centipede, perhaps the cow,
      But nothing in the Zoo;
  The  things that wriggle, jump or crawl,
  The things that climb about the wall,
  And I know what is worst of all--
      It is the earwig--_ugh_!

  The earwig's face is far from kind;
  He must have got a spiteful mind;
  The pincers which he wears behind
      Are poisonous, of course;
  And Nanny knew a dreadful one
  Which bit a gentleman for fun
      And terrified a horse.

  He is extremely swift and slim,
  And if you try to tread on him
      He scuttles up the path;
  He goes and burrows in your sponge
  And takes one wild terrific plunge
      When you are in the bath;
  Or else--and this is simply foul--
  He gets into a nice hot towel
      And waits till you are dried,
  And then, when Nanny does your ears,
  He _wrrriggles_ in and disappears:
  He stays in there for years and years
      And _crrrawls_  about inside.
  At last, if you are still alive,
  A lot of baby ones arrive;
      But probably you've died.

  How inconvenient it must be!
  There isn't any way, you see,
      To get him out again;
  So, when you want to frighten me
      Or really give me pain,
  Please don't go on about that bear
  And all those burglars on the stair;
  I shouldn't turn a tiny hair
      At such Victorian stuff;
  You only have to say instead,
  "THERE IS AN EARWIG IN YOUR BED"
      And that will be enough.

A.P.H.

       *       *       *       *       *


MY RIGHT-HAND MAN.

On glancing the other day through the only human column of my
newspaper--that headed "Personal"--I was much intrigued by the
advertisement of a gentleman who styled himself a "busy commercial
magnate," and who announced his urgent need of a "right-hand man." The
duties of the post were not particularised, but their importance was
made clear by the statement that "any salary within reason" would be
paid to a really suitable person.

No, I did not think of applying for the post myself; a twelve months'
adjutancy to a dyspeptic Colonel had long cured me of the desire to
bottle-wash for anyone again, however lavish the remuneration. But, I
thought to myself, it must evidently be a profitable notion to employ
a right-hand man, or why should this magnate person be so airy on the
subject of salary? Would it not then pay me to engage somebody in
a similar capacity? Increased production, in spite of Trade Union
economics, is emphatically a need of the moment. With a right-hand man
at my right hand (when he wasn't at my left) I could, I felt sure,
increase my own output enormously; and I began to plan out my daily
work under the reconstruction scheme.

I will call him "Snaggs"; that will save me the trouble of having to
write "my right-hand man" every time I want to refer to him; but when
he enters my service such economy of labour will not, of course,
be necessary. Snaggs, then, will arrive punctually at nine every
morning--no, on second thoughts he will sleep in, in case an
inspiration that needs recording arrives after I have gone to bed. (I
shrink from estimating how much wealth I have lost through going to
sleep on my nocturnal inspirations, which the most thorough search
next morning never avails to recapture; but a speaking-tube, with
alarm attachment, running into Snaggs's room will alter all that.)

His first duty of the day will be to wade through all the newspapers
and cut out any paragraphs that may serve as pegs for an article or a
set of verses. My own difficulty in this respect has always been that
I can never manage to get through more than one paper in a working
morning, and not all of that; invariably my attention gets caught
by some long and instructive but (for my purposes) hopelessly
unsuggestive dissertation on Pedigree Pigs or The Co-operative
Movement in Lower Papua, and I consequently overlook many of those
inspiring little "stories" that inform us, for example, that a
distinguished physician advocates the use of tomato-sauce as a
hair-restorer.

By the time I have finished breakfast, I reckon, Snaggs will have
found me subjects for at least a dozen effusions, neatly arranged with
a few skeleton suggestions for the treatment of each. I shall first
decide which are to be handled in prose and which in verse, and in the
case of the latter shall jot down a few words and phrases that will
obviously have to be dragged in as line-endings. Then I shall put
Snaggs on to the purely mechanical drudgery of finding all the
possible rhymes to these words (_e.g._, fascinate, assassinate,
pro-Krassinate--you know the sort of thing that's called for), and by
the time he has catalogued them all I shall have dashed off most of
the prose articles, which Snaggs will then proceed to type while I am
engaged in the comparatively simple task of piecing together the verse
jigsaws. In this way I should easily be able to earn an ordinary
week's takings in a morning.

The next task will be the placing of this material, and that is how
Snaggs's afternoons will be spent. I have always had an unnecessarily
tender feeling for editors, and often, after laboriously giving birth
to an article, have concealed it in a drawer rather than run the risk
of boring anyone with its perusal. Snaggs, however, will be fashioned
of more pachydermatous material and will daily make himself such a
nuisance that they'll give him an order, and possibly a long contract,
to get rid of him. By a proper system of book-keeping he will also
save me from the occasional blunder of sending the same article to the
same paper twice.

My wife, to whom I have submitted this brain-wave, says that the first
job to employ Snaggs on will be calling on the Bank Manager to arrange
about the overdraft which neither of us has so far had the courage to
moot. But that, I am afraid, would inspire him with foolish doubts as
to the stability of his princely salary. Perhaps it will be best if,
before actually engaging Snaggs, I convert myself into a limited
company, "for the purpose of acquiring and enlarging the business
and goodwill of the private enterprise known as Percival
Trumpington-Jones, Esq." A sufficient number of shares will be issued
to guarantee Snaggs at least his first year's screw; that done, the
proposition should be practically gilt-edged. So who's coming in on
the bargain-basement floor?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: =THE PHILANTHROPIST.=

_Customer._ "WHY, YOU'VE PUT YOUR PRICES UP AGAIN!"

_Fishmonger._ "WELL, MUM, I ASK YER, 'OW ELSE ARE WE TO FIGHT THE
PROFITEER AT 'IS OWN GAME?"]

       *       *       *       *       *


AT THE PLAY.

"THE DAISY."

I imagine that the authors who founded this play on a Hungarian
original regarded it as an ambitious piece of work. If so, they were
right in the sense that they have attempted something very much beyond
their powers. In the view of the gentleman who addressed us at the
fall of the curtain (I understand that he was one of the authors) it
offered magnificent opportunities (I think "magnificent" was the word)
for the brilliant gifts of two of the actors. Certainly it covered a
good bit of ground, what with this world and the next; for it started
with roundabouts on the Heath, and got as far away as the Judgment Day
(Hungarian style?)--and fourteen years after.

I may have a contemptibly weak stomach for this kind of thing, but I
confess that I don't care much for a representation of the Judgment
Day in a melodrama of low life. Of course low life has just as much
right as any other sort of life to be represented in a Judgment
Day scene; but it ought to behave itself there and not introduce
back-chat.

I should explain that it was a special Suicide Court, and that the
object of _The Magister_, as the Presiding Judge was named in the
programme, was to inquire into the record of the delinquent and, if
his answers were satisfactory, to allow him to revisit the scenes of
his earthly life in order to repair any little omissions that he might
have made in the hurry of departure. Unfortunately the leading case
was a bad example of suicide. It had not been deliberate; he had
simply killed himself impromptu in a tight corner to avoid arrest for
intended murder.

Worse still, when he returned to earth after a lapse of fourteen
years' purgatory (between the sixth and seventh scenes), for his
record was a rotten one and he had shown no signs of penitence, the
_revenant_ made very poor use of his hour. Returning to his wife whom
he had brutalised, he found that she had taught their girl-child to
regard him as a paragon of virtue, and most of his limited time was
spent in correcting this beautiful legend. You see, at the time of his
death he had had no chance of making the child realise how bad he was,
for the excellent reason that she had not yet been born, so he seized
this opportunity of making good that omission.

As a practical illustration of the kind of man he really had been, he
struck the child violently on the arm. We all saw him do it and we
all heard the smack, but the child assured us that she had not felt
anything. This I suppose was the author's way, ingenuous enough, of
reminding us that it was a case of spirit and not of flesh, whatever
our eyes and ears might persuade us to think of it.

Already in a previous scene there had been the same old difficulty.
While the man lay dead on his bed his spirit had been summoned by
a Higher Power (indicated in a peep-show), and his corpse sat up,
displacing the prostrate form of the widow, who had to take up a new
position, without however appearing to notice anything. It was still
sitting up when the curtain fell, and incidentally was caught in the
act of resuming its recumbent position when the curtain rose again for
the purpose of allowing the actors to receive our respectful plaudits.

Behind me I heard an American lady suggest that if they could somehow
distinguish the spirit from the body it would be better for our
illusions. To which her neighbour expressed the opinion that they
would eventually manage to do that feat. I await, less hopefully, this
development in stage mechanism. Meanwhile _Mary Rose_ has much to
answer for.

The play began promisingly enough with a scene full of colour and
humanity, of humour and pathos. We were among the roundabouts, whose
florid and buxom manageress, _Mrs. Muscat_ (admirably played by Miss
SUZANNE SHELDON), was having a quarrel of jealousy with her assistant
and late lover, "_The Daisy_," who had been seen taking notice of
Another. The dumb devotion of this child, _Julia_ (Miss MARY MERRALL),
who could never find words for her love--she said little beyond "Yuss"
and "I dunno"--was a very moving thing; and the patient stillness with
which she bore his subsequent brutality held us always under a strange
fascination.

[Illustration: "_The Daisy_" (_Mr. CAINE_). "WHAT MADE YOU TAKE A
FANCY TO ME?"

_Julia_ (_Miss MERRALL_). "I DUNNO."

(_Sympathetic appreciation of her ignorance on part of audience._)]

For the rest it was an ugly and sordid business, relieved only by the
coy confidences of the amorous _Maria_ (played by Miss GLADYS GORDON
with a nice sense of fun). Mr. HENRY CAINE, as "_The Daisy_,"
presented very effectively the rough-and-ready humour and the frank
brutality of his type; but he perhaps failed to convey the devastating
attractions which he was alleged to have for the frail sex; and his
sudden spasms of tragic emotion seemed a little out of the picture.

Apart from the painful crudity of the scene that was loosely described
as "The Other Side," the play abounded in amateurisms. For one thing
there was too much sermonising. It began with an obtrusive homily
on the part of an inspector of police, who went out of his way to
admonish _Julia_ about the danger of associating with "_The Daisy_."
Another instance was that of the bank-messenger, a person of such
self-possession and detachment that he contrived to deliver a moral
address while holding one foiled villain at the point of his revolver
and gripping the other's wrist as in a vice.

Nothing again could have been more naïve than the innocent home-coming
of the domestic carving-knive, freshly sharpened, from the grinder's
just in time to be diverted to the objects of a murderous enterprise.

Altogether, it was rather poor stuff, unworthy of the talent of many
of its interpreters and of the trouble that Miss EDITH CRAIG had spent
over its scenic effects. Perhaps the audience had been led to expect
too much, for "_The Daisy_," far from being the "wee, modest" flower
of ROBERT BURNS, had been at some pains to draw preliminary attention
to its merits.

O.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bedroom Shortage.=

    "That a woman ought to dress quietly and practically in the street
    is unquestionable."

"_Times" Fashion article_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "As the harvest season this year is late, sport will not be
    general for at least two weeks hence, when grain crops may be
    expected to be in stook. For some time to come sheep will be
    confined to the low hill-sides and pasture lands and turnip
    fields, and a few good bags were had there yesterday."--_Scotch
    Paper._

We still prefer the old-fashioned sport of partridge-shooting.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: =WAR AND SCIENCE.=

_Greek Officer._ "CAN'T YOU THINK OF SOMETHING QUICK? THE ARMY IS
WAITING AND THE ENEMY APPROACHES."

_Archimedes._ "SCIENCE IS NOT TO BE HUSTLED, GENERAL. JUST GET YOUR
ARMY TO DO A LITTLE PLAIN FIGHTING WHILE I THINK OUT A FANCY SCHEME."]

       *       *       *       *       *


SPANISH LEDGES.

SCILLY.

      The bells of Cadiz clashed for them
                When they sailed away;
      The Citadel guns, saluting, crashed for them
                Over the Bay;
      With banners of saints aloft unfolding,
      Their poops a glitter of golden moulding,
      Tambours throbbing and trumpets neighing,
      Into the sunset they went swaying.
  But the port they sought they wandered wide of,
  And they won't see Spain again this side of
                Judgment Day.

  For they're down, deep down, in Dead Man's Town,
    Twenty fathoms under the clean green waters.
  No more hauling sheets in the rolling treasure fleets,
    No more stinking rations and dread red slaughters;
  No galley oars shall bow them nor shrill whips cow them,
    Frost shall not shrivel them nor the hot sun smite,
  No more watch to keep, nothing now but sleep--
    Sleep and take it easy in the long twilight.

      The bells of Cadiz tolled for them
                Mournful and glum;
      Up in the Citadel requiems rolled for them
                On the black drum;
      Priests had many a mass to handle,
      Nuestra Señora many a candle,
      And many a lass grew old in praying
      For a sight of those topsails homeward swaying--
  But it's late to wait till a girl is bride of
  A Jack who won't be back this side of
                Kingdom Come.

  But little they care down there, down there,
    Hid from time and tempest by the jade-green waters;
  They have loves a-plenty down at fathom twenty,
    Pearly-skinned silver-finned mer-kings' daughters.
  At the gilt quarter-ports sit the Dons at their sports,
    A-dicing and drinking the red wine and white,
  While the crews forget their wrongs in the sea-maids' songs
    And dance upon the foc'sles in the grey ghost light.

PATLANDER.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "REMARKABLE OVAL SCORING." _Evening Paper Contents Bill._

We have made some remarkable scores of that shape ourselves in the
past, but we never boast about them.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "He believed that the English pronounced in the streets of
    London in, say, 200 years' time, will be much different, if not
    unintelligible, to the man of to-day."--_Daily Paper._

Just like the English in some of our newspapers.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The Secretary of State for India is not _persona grata_ either to
    the British House of Commons or to the British public. That is the
    old-fashioned English of it."--_Bangalore Daily Post._

It would be interesting to see the old-fashioned Latin of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Will any Lady Recommend Country Home of the best where 2 precious
Poms can be happy and would be looked after for 6 weeks? Surrey
preferred."--_Morning Paper._

Think of their disgust at finding themselves boarded out in Sussex or
Kent.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Young Hungarian Lady with English and German knolidgement wants
    sob with English or American Organization."--_Pester Lloyd._

        Laugh and the world laughs with you;
          Sob and you sob alone.

       *       *       *       *       *


A WAY OUT OF THE PRESENT UNREST.

"A penny for your thoughts," I said to Kathleen.

"I like that," said Kathleen indignantly. "A penny was the market
value of my thoughts in 1914. Why should butter and cheese and reels
of cotton go up more than double and my thoughts stay the same?"

"Twopence," I offered.

"I said _more_ than double," she remarked coldly.

I plunged. "Sixpence," I said.

"Done!"

"I'll put it in the collection bag for you next Sunday," I added
hastily.

"Well, I was thinking of Veronica's future. I was wondering what she
was going to be."

"When we went to the Crystal Palace," I said gently, "I rather
gathered that she wanted to be the proprietor of a merry-go-round.
They were dragons with red-plush seats."

"She might go into Parliament," said Kathleen dreamily; "I expect
women will be able to do everything by the time she's grown up. She
might be a Cabinet Minister. I don't see why she shouldn't be Prime
Minister."

"Her hair's just about the right length now," I said. "And perhaps she
could give me congenial employment. I wouldn't mind being Minister of
Transport. There's quite a good salary attached. But of course she may
have ideas of her own on the subject."

Feeling curious, I went in search of Veronica. I found her at a
private dance given by the butterflies and hollyhocks at the other end
of the lawn. When she saw me she came to meet me and made her excuses
very politely.

"We've just been wondering what you're going to be when you've stopped
being a little girl," I said.

"Me?" said Veronica calmly. "Oh, I'm going to be a fairy. You don't
want me to be anything else, do you?" she added anxiously.

Even the Prime Minister's post seemed suddenly quite flat.

"Oh, no," I said. "I think you've made a very good choice." But she
was not quite satisfied.

"I shall hate going away from you," she said. "Couldn't you come too?"

"Where?"

"To Fairyland."

"Ah!" I said, "that takes some thinking about. Could we come back if
we didn't like it?"

"N-no, I don't fink so. I've never heard of anyone doing that. But
you'll love it," she went on earnestly. "You'll be ever so tiny and
you can draw funny frost pictures wiv rainbows and fold up flowers
into buds and splash dew-water over everyfing at night and ride on
butterflies and help the birds to make nests. Fink what _fun_ to help
a bird to make a nest! You'll _love_ it!"

"Is that all?" I said sternly. "Are you keeping nothing from me? What
about witches and spells and being turned into frogs? I'm sure I
remember that in my fairy tales."

"Oh, nothing that _matters_," she said quickly. "You can always _tell_
a witch, you know, and we'll keep out of their way. An' if a nasty
fairy turns you into a frog a nice one will always turn you back quite
soon. It's all right. You mustn't worry about _that_. There won't be
any fun if you don't come too, darlin'," she ended shamelessly.

I considered.

"Veronica," I said at last, "is there such a thing as Ireland in
Fairyland? Is there an exchange that won't keep steady? Is there any
labour trouble?"

She shook her head.

"I've never heard of anyfing that sounded like those," she said; "I'm
sure there isn't."

"That decides it," I said. "We'll all come. As soon as you can
possibly arrange it."

She heaved a sigh of relief and ran off to tell the glad news to the
butterflies and hollyhocks.

So that's settled.

I think we've made a wise decision.

After all, what's a witch or two, or even a temporary existence as a
frog, compared with a coal strike?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE WAIL OF THE WASP.

  When that I was a tiny grub,
  And peevish and inclined to blub,
          Mother, my Queen,
  My infant grief you would assuage
  With promise of the ripe greengage
          And purple sheen
        Of luscious plums,
        "When Autumn comes."

  The Autumn days are flying fast;
  Across the bleak skies overcast
          Scurries the wind;
  Where are those plums of purple hue,
  Mother? I only wish that you
          Had disciplined
        My pampered youth
        To face the truth.

  The time for wasps is nearly done,
  And what is life without the sun,
          Mother, my Queen?
  Dull stupor numbs your royal head;
  Torpid my sisters lie--or dead;
          Come, let me lean
        Back on my sting
        And end the thing.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUGGESTIONS FOR A GENERAL PAPER.

(_For the benefit of the Examiners in the Oxford School of English
Literature._)

    (1) Compare, in respect of pulpit oratory, (_a_) Dr. SOUTH with
"WOODBINE WILLIE," and (_b_) Dr. MICHAEL FURSE (Bishop of St. Albans)
with the JUDICIOUS HOOKER.

    (2) Give reasons in support of Mr. BEVERLEY NICHOLLS' emendation of
the lines in _The Ancient Mariner_--

  The wedding guest he beat his breast,
    For he heard the proud SASSOON.

    (3) Re-write "Tears, idle tears" in the style of (_a_) Dr. JOHNSON,
(_b_) CALISTHENES, (_c_) the SITWELLS.

    (4) What do you know of CASANOVA, KARSAVINA, CAGLIOSTRO, KENNEDY
JONES, Captain PETER WRIGHT, EPSTEIN, ECKSTEIN and EINSTEIN? When did
Sir OLIVER LODGE say that he would not leave _ein Stein_ unturned
until he had upset the theory of Relativity?

    (5) Give a complete list of all the poets, major and minor, at present
residing on Boar's Hill, and trace their influence on the Baconian
controversy.

    (6) Distinguish by psycho-analysis between (_a_) SYDNEY SMITH
and SIDNEY LEE, (_b_) GEORGE MEREDITH and GEORGE ROBEY, noting
convergences as well as divergences of mentality, physique and
sub-conscious uplift.

    (7) Would Jason, who sailed in the _Argo_, have laid an embargo on
MARGOT as passenger or supercargo? Estimate the probable results
of her introduction to Medea, and its effect on the views and
translations of Professor GILBERT MURRAY.

    (8) What eminent Georgian critic said that TENNYSON's greatest work
was his _Idols of the Queen_?

    (9) Estimate the effect on Reconstruction if Mr. BOTTOMLEY were to
devote himself exclusively to theological studies, and Mr. WELLS were
to take up his abode permanently in Russia.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Another Impending Apology.=

    "FIRE AT CHILDREN'S HOME.
    LADY HENRY SOMERSET'S WORK."

_Daily Paper._

       *       *       *       *       *

From a Pimlico shop window:--

    "GENTLEMEN'S WAR ROBES BOUGHT."

Apparently not worth a "d."

       *       *       *       *       *
    "Professor ----, the pianist, who is trying to complete 110 hours'
    continuous playing, completed fifty-five hours on the first day."

    _Cologne Post._

That makes it too easy.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Mme. Karsavina is taller than Pavlova, but has an equally perfect
    figure. The Greeks would have bracketted her with Venus and
    Aphrodite."--_Provincial Paper._

The two last have, of course, been constantly bracketed.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Golfer (very much off his game). "ONE ROUND NEARER THE
GRAVE."]

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

(_By Mr. Punch's Staff of Learned Clerks._)


Not for a long time have I got so great a pleasure from any collection
of short sketches as now from Miss ANNE DOUGLAS SEDGWICK'S _Autumn
Crocuses_ (SECKER). Not only has the whole book a pleasant title, but
each of these stories is happily called after some flower that plays a
part in its development. I am aware of the primly Victorian sound of
such a description applied to art so modern as that of Miss SEDGWICK.
You know already (I hope) how wonderfully delicate is her almost
passionate sensibility to the finer shades of a situation. It is,
I suppose, this quality in her writing that makes me still have
reminiscent shivers when I think about that horrible little
bogie-tale, _The Third Window_; and these "Flower Pieces" (as 1860
might have called them) are no whit less subtle. I wish I had space to
give you the plots of some of them; "Daffodils," for instance, a quite
unexpected and thrilling treatment of perhaps the oldest situation of
literature; or "Staking a Larkspur," the only instance in which Miss
Sedgwick's gently smiling humour crystallizes definitely into comedy;
or "Carnations," the most brilliantly written of all. As this liberty
is denied me you must accept a plain record of very rare enjoyment and
take steps to share it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chief among the _Secrets of Crewe House_ (HODDER AND STOUGHTON),
now divulged to the mere public, are the marvellous efficiency and
superhuman success achieved by the British Enemy Propaganda Committee,
which operated in Lord CREWE'S London house under the directorate of
Lord NORTHCLIFFE. "What is propaganda?" the author asks himself on an
early page, and the right answer could have been made in four letters:
ADVT. It is endorsed by the eulogistic manner in which the Committee's
work is written up by one of them, Sir CAMPBELL STUART, K.B.E., and
illustrated by photographs of Lord NORTHCLIFFE (looking positively
Napoleonic) and of the sub-supermen. As in all great achievements, the
main principle was a simple one. A good article is best advertised by
truth; and it was the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth which the Committee, with admirable conciseness and no little
ingenuity, so promulgated that it could no longer escape notice even
in the Central Empires. Not the least of the Committee's difficulties
and achievements was to get the truth of our cause and policy so
defined as to be susceptible of unequivocal statement by poster,
leaflet, film and gramophone record. Sir CAMPBELL STUART perhaps tends
to underrate the rival show, the German propaganda organization, whose
work, if it did Germany little good, has done and is still doing
colossal harm to us. Also he tends to forget that Lord HAIG and his
little lot in France at any rate helped the Committee to effect the
breakdown of the German _moral_ in 1918 and so to win the war.

       *       *       *       *       *

