    We like the paper ever so much, and have learned a great deal
    about both the Cuban war and our government. She also read us
    the little note you had printed in the back, saying you would
    answer (and be glad to) any question we might ask.

    We pupils do not understand about the new platform at the end of
    Brooklyn Bridge, and I am going to ask a few questions. Will the
    platform carry you down as well as up? How many will it carry?
    About how large is it? Is there more than one? If so, please
    tell me how many.

                                      From your friend,
    CHEYENNE, WYO.                              ELSIE K. (age 11).


DEAR ELSIE:

In reply to your letter about the Brooklyn Bridge.

It is only arranged to save people climbing up-stairs. It is easy enough
to go down-stairs, but it is the climbing up that people dislike, and the
new elevator is to save this trouble.

It will take up three thousand passengers an hour, and if it is the
success it promises to be, six of these lazy-man's staircases will be put
into use.

It is the same size as the staircase of which it is to take the place.


=School Books Wanted=


The following school books will be taken in exchange for subscriptions for
"Great Round World" at prices named.

Send books by express prepaid. Send none which are much soiled or worn;
pages must not be torn nor missing. Mark package--"GREAT ROUND
WORLD, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City, care William Beverley
Harison."

Put your name on package and send a list by mail with your subscription
order.

=We can use Standard School Books of all kinds, send List of any you may
wish to dispose of.=

=READERS=

    Barnes'          First, 20c.   Second, 30c.   Third, 40c.
    Appleton's           "  15c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    Cyr's                "  20c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    New Franklin         "  20c.       "   30c.      "   35c.
    McGuffey's Revised   "  15c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    Stickney's           "  10c.       "   15c.      "   20c.
    Swinton's            "  20c.       "   30c.      "   40c.
    Information          "  30c.       "   30c.      "   30c.

=HISTORIES. UNITED STATES=

    Barnes'          Primary, 40c.   Large 1890 or later, 75c.
    Eggleston's   First Book, 40c.     "                  75c.
    Fiske's                            "                  75c.
    Johnston's       Shorter, 40c.     "                  75c.
    Montgomery's  Beginner's, 30c.     "                  75c.
    Sheldon's                          "                  50c.
    Thomas'                            "                  50c.


=ARITHMETICS=

    Bailey's       Mental, 15c.
    Brooks'     New  "     15c.                New Written, 30c.
    Atwood's       Part 1, 20c.                     Part 2, 35c.
    Milne's      Elements, 25c.                   Standard, 40c.
    Prince's   No. 1 to 7, 15c. each
    Sanford's     Primary, 20c.              Common School, 35c.
    Robinson's     New  "  10c.                  Rudiments, 25c.


=GEOGRAPHIES--(These must have North and South Dakota)=

    Appleton's, Barnes', Maury's, or Eclectic Elementary, 35c.
    Monteith's First, 20c. Introduction 30c. Manual, 50c.


=GRAMMARS=

    Reed & Kellogg's Elementary, 20c.         Higher, 40c.
    Whitney & Lockwood's,        35c.
    Hyde's        First Lessons, 20c.    Second Book, 40c.
    Tarbell's        First Book, 25c.       "      "  40c.


=PRIMERS--10 Cents Each=

Appleton's, Cyr's, Interstate, McGuffey's Revised, Riverside, Swinton's,
Monroe's.


=SPELLERS--10 Cents Each=

McGuffey's Revised, Gilbert's School Studies, Modern, Harrington's (2
parts in one), Babcock's, Patterson's Common School, Reed's, Sheldon's
Word Studies, Swinton's.


We can use, in addition to the ones named in this list, all kinds of
dictionaries, late editions of French and German books, Algebras, Latin
and Greek books, and in fact all kinds of late text-books. If you send a
list, prices will be given.


=History and Manuals of Vertical Writing=

    By JOHN JACKSON

       *       *       *       *       *

    Theory and Practice of Vertical Writing,   $1.25
    Teaching of Vertical Writing,                .50

       *       *       *       *       *


John Jackson, the originator of this system of vertical writing, is the
only teacher who has had the years of practice in teaching it that make
these the standard manuals for teachers and students. The adoption of
vertical writing abroad and in this country is largely due to his
persistent work and the marvellous results of his teaching. His series of
copy-books were the first to be used in this country, and are considered
by experienced teachers, who are not to be misled by mere beauty of
engravers work, to contain the only practical well-graded course of
instruction leading from primary work to the rapid and now justly
celebrated =telegraph hand=--for these books are the only ones containing
copies in this rapid writing. The telegraph hand is the style used by the
best telegraph operators in the country--and these writers are universally
acknowledged to be the most rapid writers, and writers of a hand which of
necessity must be most legible.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Copy-Books (10 numbers),     96 cents per dozen
    Copy-Pads (8 numbers),       96 cents per dozen

BOTH SERIES CONTAIN SIMILAR COPIES.

Sample sets to teachers (post-paid), 75 cents


       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City=


SIMPLE LESSONS IN THE

STUDY OF NATURE

By I.G. OAKLEY


This is a handy little book, which many a teacher who is looking for means
to offer children genuine nature study may be thankful to get hold of.

Nature lessons, to be entitled to that name, must deal with what can be
handled and scrutinized at leisure by the child, pulled apart, and even
wasted. This can be done with the objects discussed in this book; they are
under the feet of childhood--grass, feathers, a fallen leaf, a budding
twig, or twisted shell; these things cannot be far out of the way, even
within the stony limits of a city.

Nor are the lessons haphazard dashes at the nearest living thing; on the
contrary, they are virtually fundamental, whether with respect to their
relation to some of the classified sciences, or with reference to the
development of thought and power of expression in the child himself.

The illustrations are few, and scarcely more than figures; it is not meant
to be a pretty picture-book, yet is most clearly and beautifully printed
and arranged, for its material is to be that out of which pictures are
made. It will be found full of suggestions of practical value to teachers
who are carrying the miscellaneous work of ungraded schools, and who have
the unspeakable privilege of dealing with their pupils untrammelled by
cast-iron methods and account-keeping examination records.

    =_Sample copy, 50 Cents, post-paid_=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 & 5 W. 18th St. · · · New York City=


=KLEMMS'=

=RELIEF PRACTICE MAPS.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=LIST OF MAPS.=

    Small size, 9-1/2 x 11 { Plain,                       5 cents each.
                           { With Waterproofed surface   10   "    "

    Europe, Asia, Africa; North America, South America, East Central
    States, New England, Middle Atlantic States, South Atlantic
    States, Palestine, Australia.


    Large size, 10 x 15 { Plain,                     10 cents each.
                        { With Waterproofed Surface, 15   "     "

