Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Michael Wymann-Böni and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Child's First Picture Book


[Illustration: Book Cover]

[Illustration]


CHILD'S FIRST PICTURE BOOK


[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE FIRE HORSES stand ready in their stalls, and at the sound of the
alarm gong the stall chains are let down and each horse goes quickly to
his place at the engine, and the big iron collars are clamped around
their necks and off they go to the fire, with the engine, at break-neck
speed.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The Alarm]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE AUTOMOBILE FIRE ENGINE can go to the fires very swiftly. Many times
the saving of a few minutes by the firemen in reaching a fire means
stopping the blaze before it becomes too great.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A Dangerous Fire]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE BRAVE FIREMAN rescues many people who are caught in burning
buildings, in this way risking his life that others may be saved from
the smoke and flames. Many people owe their lives to the bravery of the
firemen.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE HOSE NOZZLE has been taken up to the roof of a building next the one
afire and the firemen are sending the water into the upper floors of the
burning building. The hose nozzle is very difficult for the firemen to
hold.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Hook and Ladder Truck Going to the Fire]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE FIRE ALARM is sounded by a big gong in the station from street alarm
boxes near where the fire occurs. The firemen know these alarm stations
so well that they seldom look for the address, but dash off quickly to
the correct place.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A Water Tower]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE FIREMEN'S DOG goes to every fire, running beside the horses, barking
a command to hurry. He gets to the fire hydrant first and sits there
panting until the Firemen come up to attach the hose and turn on the
water.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE ROUND HOUSE is the place where the railroad engines are kept when
they are not working. The engines are turned around on a big turn table
so each can be run on the different tracks which all lead to the
turn-table in the center.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Passing a Signal Tower]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE WATER TANK is seen frequently along the route of the railroads and
plenty of water must be taken on and carried in the engine tender to
make steam which is the power used to drive the big engines.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

AN OBSERVATION TRAIN is often made up to follow the great college boat
races, where the railroad runs along the river bank. Flat cars are used
with seats fixed on them for the spectators.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The Circus is Coming to Town]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE TRAIN FERRY carries entire trains across rivers where there are no
bridges. Some of the largest train boats have several tracks and carry a
train on each. The boats are tied in slips at the shore so that the
tracks meet exactly those on the land.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE STAGE COACH is used in the country where towns are few. The stages
meet trains at the stations and take on passengers to be carried to
their homes away from the railroad. Some of the stage routes are several
hundred miles long.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Engineer and Fireman]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE TUNNELS are passages for trains under mountains, hills and rivers.
The tunnels are dark but the trains are well lighted. Electric motors
are often used, this avoids the smoke of steam engines which is very
unpleasant in the tunnels.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Field Artillery]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Whippet Tank]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Raising Gun Up Mountainside]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Dirigible Balloon]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A Swift-going Motor Cycle With Machine Gun]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A Battle Motor Car]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Anti-aircraft Gun]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Army Band]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Aeroplane]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Blanket Tossing]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Sailor Band]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Battleship And Giant Submarine]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A Sea Sled]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Laying Mines]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Troopship Homeward Bound]

THE FLAGS OF THE ALLIES

United in defense of Freedom in the great war in Europe. May we honor
them forever, and always prove worthy of our flag which we love best.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Wooden Battleships Of Olden Days]

THE FLAGS OF THE ALLIES

These are truly the Flags of Freedom. The countries represented through
bravery and sacrifice have made the world a safe place to live in.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A Fast-going Patrol Motor Boat]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Cutter Drill]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Seaplane Destroying Submarine]