
[Sidenote: Redirection of letters.]

Parties desiring their letters and papers to be re-directed should send
an intimation to that effect in writing to the postmaster of the office
from which the letters and papers are to be re-directed.

Postmasters are allowed to re-direct letters to the known places of
residence of the parties to whom they are addressed, after allowing a
reasonable time to elapse without their being called for.


[Sidenote: No extra charge.]

Letters and papers are not subject to any additional charge when
re-directed from one post office in Canada to another post office in
Canada.


[Sidenote: Objectionable matter.]

Postmasters are instructed not to receive any letter or packet which
there is good reason to believe contains glass or anything likely to
injure the contents of the mail bag or the person of any officer of the
post office.


[Sidenote: Change.]

A postmaster is not legally bound to furnish change, but if absolutely
necessary may require that the exact amount of postage on any letter or
packet be tendered to him in current coin, or in Canada postage stamps.


[Sidenote: Civility required from Postmasters.]

Postmasters and their assistants in the above matter, as well as in all
their official intercourse with the public, are expected to afford every
accommodation, and to treat every person having business at their
offices with every courtesy.


[Sidenote: Mail couriers to receive letters <i>en route</i>.]

Mail couriers are bound to receive letters offered to them whilst on the
road between one post office and another, provided that when a letter is
so offered the distance from the nearest post office exceeds one mile.
Such letters are termed Way Letters, and are subject to the ordinary
rates of postage.


<tb>


SUGGESTIONS TO THE PUBLIC.

Facility will be given to the Post Office in the discharge of its daily
duties, and greater security afforded to the Public, by careful
attention to the following recommendations:


[Sidenote: Early posting.]

Post all letters and newspapers, &c., as early as practicable,
especially when sent in large numbers.


[Sidenote: Newspaper.]

When a number of newspapers are addressed to the same office, put them
up in one parcel.


[Sidenote: Circulars.]

When a number of circulars are posted, tie them up in a bundle, with the
addresses all in one direction.


[Sidenote: Address.]

Address letters, papers, &c., in a legible and complete manner, always
giving the name of the Post Office; and if there be more than one Post
Office of that name, the name of the county in which situated: In case
of letters going abroad, the name of the country, as well as of the town
and city, should be given in full. Letters, for example, intended for
London, England, if simply addressed "London," would be forwarded to
London, Canada West, and thus be delayed.


[Sidenote: Secure folding.]

See that every letter, newspaper, or other packet sent by post, is
securely folded and sealed. Every such packet has to be several times
handled; and even when in the mail bag, is exposed to pressure and
friction. Unless, therefore, the article be light and pliant, it should
be enclosed in strong paper, linen, parchment, or some other material
which will not readily tear or break.


[Sidenote: Newspaper covers.]

Fasten the covers of newspapers firmly, so as to prevent them from
slipping out.


[Sidenote: Letter Box.]

When dropping a letter or newspaper into a letter-box, always see that
the packet falls into the box, and does not stick in its passage.


[Sidenote: Letters for hot climates.]

