Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Allen Siddle and PG Distributed Proofreaders


THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT. AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. XIX. NO. 534.] SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1832. [PRICE 2_d_


       *       *       *       *       *


OUR LADY'S CHAPEL,

[Illustration: ST. SAVIOUR, SOUTHWARK.]

The Engraving represents the interior of the Virgin Mary's Chapel,
commonly called the Lady Chapel, and appended to the ancient collegiate
church of St. Saviour, Southwark. The exterior view of the Chapel will be
found in No. 456 of _The Mirror_. About eighteen months since part of the
western side of the High-street was removed for the approach to the New
London Bridge, when this Chapel was opened to view; but its dilapidated
appearance was rather calculated to interest antiquarian than public
curiosity. The London Bridge Committee recommended the parishioners of St.
Saviour to cause the Chapel to be pulled down, and their selfish
suggestion would have been complied with, had not some enlightened and
public-spirited individuals stepped forth to frustrate the levellers. The
parishioners now became two parties. One contended for the restoration of
the Chapel, as "one of the most chaste and elegant specimens of early
pointed architecture of the thirteenth century of which this country can
boast." The levellers, whose muckworm minds, and love of the arts is only
shown in that of money-getting--maintained that the demolition of the
Chapel would be "a pecuniary saving;" but theirs was a penny-wise and
pound-foolish spirit; for, by removing the Chapel, a greater expense would
be incurred than in its restoration. The folks could not understand plain
figures, and so resolved to take the sense and nonsense of the parish, and
the subject has been decided by a majority of 240 in favour of repairing
the Chapel. The funds for this purpose, it should be understood, were in
course of provision by public subscription, so that the blindness of party
zeal threatened to reject a special advantage--the public would find the
money if they would allow the Chapel to remain--whereas, had the
demolition taken place, the parishioners must themselves have defrayed the
consequent expenses. Historians loudly condemn the royal and noble thieves
who plundered the Coliseum and the Pantheon to build palaces, yet there
are men in our times, who would, if they could, take Dr. Johnson's hint to
pound St. Paul's Church into atoms, and with it macadamize their roads; or
fetch it away by piecemeal to build bridges with its stones, and saw up
its marble monuments into chimneypieces.

The church of St. Saviour is built in the form of a cathedral, with a nave,
side aisles, transepts, a choir, with its side aisles; and the chapel of
St. John, which now forms the vestry, and the chapel of the Virgin Mary,
or Our Lady. To the east end of the latter there has since been added a
small chapel, called the Bishop's Chapel. Another chapel, (of St. Mary
Magdalen,) was also connected with the south aisle of the church. The
parishioners seem to have hitherto neglected the Lady Chapel, and to have
shown their cupidity in ages long past. Through the influence of Dr.
Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, they were allowed to _purchase_ the church
of that wholesale sin-salesman, Henry VIII.; but after the parish had
obtained the grant of the church, they let the Lady Chapel to one Wyat, a
baker, who converted it into a bake-house. He stopped up the two doors
which communicated with the aisles of the church, and the two which opened
into the chancel, and which, though visible, still remain masoned up.[1]
In 1607, Mr. Henry Wilson, tenant of the Chapel of the Holy Virgin, found
himself inconvenienced by a tomb "of a certain cade," and applied to the
vestry for its removal, which was very "friendly" consented to, "making
the place up again in any reasonable sort."[2] In this state it continued
till the year 1624, when the vestry restored it to its original condition,
at an expense of two hundred pounds. "More than that sum," observes the
Rev. Mr. Nightingale, "I should conceive would now be required to repair
this venerable part of St. Saviour's Church in such a manner as is
absolutely necessary. The pillars have in a great degree lost their
perpendicular position: the mouldings and mullions of the windows are
distorted in the most shameful manner; the walls are rapidly hastening to
their final decay; and the whole place appears to be destined to become
once more the resort of hogs and vermin of every description. That this
should be the case is a great disgrace to the parish, and an insult
to the diocese, in which St. Saviour's Church holds so conspicuous a
character."[3]

The roof of the Chapel is divided into nine groined arches, supported by
six octangular pillars in two rows, having small circular columns at the
four points. At the back of the altar-screen of the church[4] are some
tracery compartments, probably, according to Mr. Bray, once affording
through them a view of this chapel. In the east end, on the north side,
are three lancet-shaped windows, forming one great window, divided by
slender pillars, and having mouldings, with zig-zag ornaments. The tracery
windows on the south side are masoned up, but much of the original tracery
remains. At the north-east corner are remains of sharp-pointed arches;
here also is an enclosure with table, desk, and elevated seat. This part
is, properly speaking, the Bishop's Court; but this name is common to the
whole chapel, in which the Bishop of Winchester holds his Court; and in
which are held the visitations for the Deanery of Southwark.

The annexed view was taken from the north-west entrance, and shows the
character of the groined roof, the supporting pillars, and the entrance to
the Bishop's Chapel adjoining, by an ascent of two steps; this Chapel
being named from the Tomb of Bishop Andrews, formerly standing in the
centre of it. We recommend the reader to a clever paper in the _Gentleman's
Megazine_ for the present month, in which the writer proves that Our
Lady's Chapel, so far from being an excrescence, as has been idly stated,
"bears the same relation to the church an the head does to the body."


[1] Stow--These have lately been re-opened.--ED. M.

[2] Parish Books.

[3] Hist. and Antiq. Paroch. Church, St. Saviour, Southwark, 4to. 1818.

[4] This Screen is about to be partially restored at an expense of about
    £800. now in course of subscription among the more respectable and
    intelligent parishioners.

       *       *      *      *       *


NIGHT-MARE.

(_For the Mirror_.)

  Sleeping in night-mare's thunderstorm-wove lap,
    On sunless mountain high above the pole;
  With ice for sheets, and lightning for a cap,
    And tons of loadstones weighing on his soul;
  And eye out-stretched upon some vasty map
    Of uncouth worlds, which ever onward roll
  To infinite--like Revelation's scroll.
    Now falling headlong from his mountain bed
  Down sulph'rous space, o'er dismal lakes;
    Now held by hand of air--on wings of lead
  He tries to rise--gasping--the hands' hold breaks,
    And downward he reels through shadows of the dead,
  Who cannot die though stalking in hell's flakes,
  Falling, he catches his heart-string on some hook, and--wakes.

E.H.[1]


[1] Where did the Sportsman's Letters come from?--ED.

       *       *       *       *       *


LACONICS.

There is nothing to be said in favour of fashion, and yet how many are
contented implicitly to obey its commands: its rules are not even dictated
by the standard of taste, for it is constantly running into extremes and
condemns one day what it approves the next.

There are some people so incorrigibly stupid and prosing, that wherever
they are anxious of securing respect, silence would be their best policy.

As we advance in age, it is singular what a revolution takes place in our
feelings. When we arrive at maturity an unkind word is more cutting and
distresses us more than any bodily suffering; in our youth it was the
reverse.

There is nothing so ravishing to the proud and the great (with all their
resources for enjoyment) as to be thought happy by their inferiors.

Such are the casualties of life, that the presentiment of fear is far
wiser than that of hope; and it would seem at all times more prudent to be
providing against accident, than laying out schemes of future happiness.

The character of any particular people may be looked for with best success
in their national works of talent.

There is no absurdity in approving as well as condemning the same
individual; for as few people are always in the right, so on the other
hand it is improbable they should be always in the wrong.

The most elegant flattery is at second hand; viz., to repeat over again
the praises bestowed by others.

Ignorance, simple, helpless ignorance, is not to be imputed as a fault;
but very often men are wilfully ignorant.

We have fewer enemies than we imagine: many are too indolent to care at
all about us, and if the stream of censure is running against us, the
world is too careless to oppose it. If we could hear what is said of us in
our absence we should torment ourselves without real cause, for we should
seldom hear the real sentiments of the speaker; many things are said in
mere wantonness, and many more from the desire of being brilliant.

The man who feels he is in the right is seldom dogmatical, for truth is
always calm and requires not violence to enforce her arguments: we should
desist from the contest the moment we feel anxious about victory, because
that anxiety must make us less particular about the truth.

Quickness of intellect is no proof of solidity: the deepest rivers flow on
the smoothest.

The reason why there are so few instances of heroism in modern times is
the total decay of political virtue: we are broken up into small parties
and associate only with our families, thus forgetting the public, in our
regard for private interest: the ancients were taught rather to live for
the benefit of the whole community.

An over-refined philosophy begets sensitiveness, and is as little to be
coveted as a moderate share of it is beneficial.

It seems to be the business of life to lay by fresh cause for anxiety and
discontent by increasing our estate; whereas we should rather know how to
lose it all, and yet be contented.

There are some people, who though very amiable in the main, and obliging
in their offices to others, have yet that most unhappy propensity of being
gloomy over every thing.

It is one of the wisest provisions of Fortune that the same vices which
ruin our estates, take away also the means of enjoying them by depriving
us of health.

There is more virtue in obscurity than is commonly supposed; and perhaps
there have been nobler specimens of magnanimity in low life, than even the
page of history can boast.

Knowledge of the world must be combined with study, for this, as well as
better reasons: the possession of learning is always invidious, and it
requires considerable tact to inform without a display of superiority, and
to ensure esteem, as well as call forth admiration.

Deceit has the effect of impoverishing, as well as enriching, men: the
prodigal becomes poor by pretending to be richer than he really is, while
seeming poverty is the very making of a miser.

F.

       *       *       *       *       *


STANZAS TO THE SPIRIT OF MORNING.

(_For the Mirror_.)


  Angel of morn! whose beauteous home
    In light's unfading fountain lies;
  Whose smiles dispel night's sable gloom,
    And fill with splendour earth and skies,
  While o'er the horizon pure and pale,
    Thy beams are dawning, thee I hail.

  The star that watches, pure and lone,
    In yon clear heaven so silently,
  Looks trembling from its azure throne
    Upon thy beaming glories nigh;
  And yields to thee first-born of day,
  Reluctantly its heavenly sway.

  Sweet spirit, with that early ray,
    Which steals so softly through the gloom,
  Trembling and brightening in its way,
    What beauties o'er creation come;
  Ere thy unclouded smiles arise
  In all their splendour through the skies.

  The rosy cloud--the azure sky,
    Earth--ocean, with its heaving breast,
  Where thy bright hues reflected lie,
    And there in varying beauty rest,
  Rejoice in thee; and from the grove,
  To hail thee, bursts the voice of love.

  Eternal beauty round thee dwells,
    And joy thine early steps attends,
  While music wildly breathing swells,
    And with thy gales of perfume blends:
  Pure, beautiful you smile above,
  Like youth's fond dreams of hope and love.

  Thy skies of blue, thy beaming light,
    Thy gales so balmy, wild, and free,
  Thy lustre on the mountain's height,
    Have charms beyond all else for me;
  Whilst my glad spirit fain would rise
  To hail and meet thee in the skies.

SYLVA.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF A READER.


BRITAIN'S HISTORICAL DRAMA.

We understand Mr. Pennie's design, in this volume, to be the chronological
arrangement of certain incidents of each king's reign in a series of
National Tragedies. There are four such tragedies in the present portion,
commencing with Arixina in which figure Julius Caesar, Cassfelyn, and
Cymbaline, and extending to Edwin and Elgiva: the titles of the
intervening pieces are the Imperial Pirate and the Dragon King. There is
much wild and beautiful romance in the diction, but we take the most
attractive portion to be the lyrical portion, as the Chants, Dirges, and
Choruses. We recommend them as models for the play-wrights who do such
things for the acting drama, and if the poetship to a patent theatre be
worth acceptance, we beg to commend Mr. Pennie to the notice of managers.
The poet of the King's Theatre figures in the bills of the day, and yet he
is but a translator.

It is difficult to select an entire scene for quotation, so that we take a
specimen from Arixina:

CHORUS OF BARDS.

DIRGE.
SEMI CHORUS.

  Mightiest of the mighty thou!
  Regal pearl-wreaths decked thy brow;
  On thy shield the lion shone,
  Glowing like the setting sun!
  And thy leopard helmet's frown,
  In the day of thy renown,
  O'er thy foemen terror spread,
  Grimly flashing on thy head.
  Master of the fiery steed,
  And the chariot in its speed,--
  As its scythe-wedged wheels of blood
  Through the battle's crimson flood,
  Onward rushing, put to flight
  E'en the stoutest men of might,--
  Age to age shall tell thy fame;
  Thine shall be a deathless name!
  Bards shall raise the song for thee
  In the halls of Chivalry.

  GRAND CHORUS.

  His shall he a noble pyre!
  Robes of gold shall feed the fire;
  Amber, gums, and richest pearl
  On his bed of glory hurl:
  Trophies of his conquering might,
  Skulls of foes, and banners bright,
  Shields, and splendid armour, won
  When the combat-day was done,
  On his blazing death-pile heap,
  Where the brave in glory sleep!
  And the Romans' vaunted pride,
  Their eagle-god, in blood streams dyed,
  Which, amid the battle's roar,
  From their king of ships he tore;
  Hurl it, hurl it in the flame,
  And o'er it raise the loud acclaim!
  Let the captive and the steed
  On his death-pile nobly bleed;
  Let his hawks and war-dogs share
  His glory, as they claimed his care.

  SEMI-CHORUS.

  Silent is his hall of shields
  In Rath-col's dim and woody fields,
  Night-winds round his lone hearth sing
  The fall of Prythian's warlike king!--
  Now his home of happy rest
  Is in the bright isles of the west;
  There, in stately halls of gold,
  He with the mighty chiefs of old,
  Quaffs the horn of hydromel
  To the harp's melodious swell;
  And on hills of living green,
  With airy bow of lightning sheen,
  Hunts the shadowy deer-herd fleet
  In their dim-embowered retreat.
  He is free to roam at will
  O'er sea and sky, o'er heath and hill,
  When our fathers' spirits rush
  On the blast and crimson gush
  Of the cloud-fire, through the storms,
  Like the meteor's brilliant forms,
  He shall come to the heroes' shout
  In the battle's gory rout;
  He shall stand by the stone of death,
  When the captive yields his breath;
  And in halls of revelry
  His dim spirit oft shall be.

  GRAND CHORUS.

  Shout, and fill the hirlass horn,
  Round the dirge-feast quaff till morn;
  Songs and joy sound o'er the heath,
  For he died the warrior's death!
  Garlands fling upon the fire,
  His shall be a noble pyre!
  And his tomb befit a king,
  Encircled with a regal ring
  Which shall to latest time declare,
  That a princely chief lies there,
  Who died to set his country free,
  Who fell for British liberty;
  His renown the harp shall sing
  To mail clad chief and battle-king,
  And fire the mighty warrior's soul
  Long as eternal ages roll!

The Notes to each Tragedy are very abundant. Indeed, they are of the most
laborious research. We quote an extract relative to "grinning skulls" as
terrifically interesting:

"The British warriors preserved the bones of their enemies whom they slew;
and Strabo says of the Gauls (who were, as he informs us, far less
uncivilized than the Britons, but still nearly resembled them in their
manners and customs,) that when they return from the field of battle they
bring with them the heads of their enemies fastened to the necks of their
horses, and afterwards place them before the gates of their cities. Many
of them, after being anointed with pitch or turpentine, they preserve in
baskets or chests, and ostentatiously show them to strangers, as a proof
of their valour; not suffering them to be redeemed, even though offered
for them their weight in gold. This account is also confirmed by Diodorus.
Strabo says that Posidonius declared he saw several of their heads near
the gates of some of their towns,--a horrid barbarism, continued at
Temple-bar almost down to the present period."

Lastly, _Speaking and Moving Stones_:

"Girald Cambrensis gives an account of a speaking-stone at St. David's in
Pembrokeshire. 'The next I shall notice is a very singular kind of a
monument, which I believe has never been taken notice of by any
antiquarian. I think I may call it an oracular stone: it rests upon a bed
of rock, where a road plainly appears to have been made, leading to the
hole, which at the entrance is three feet wide, six feet deep, and about
three feet six inches high. Within this aperture, on the right hand, is a
hole two feet diameter, perforated quite through the rock sixteen feet,
and running from north to south. In the abovementioned aperture a man
might lie concealed, and predict future events to those that came to
consult the oracle, and be heard distinctly on the north side of the rock,
where the hole is not visible. This might make the credulous Britons think
the predictions proceeded solely from the rock-deity. The voice on the
outside was distinctly conveyed to the person in the aperture, as was
several times tried.'--_Arch. Soc. Ant. Lond_. vol. viii.

"The moving stones, or Logans, were known to the Phoenicians as well us
the Britons. Sanconiatho, in his Phoenician History, says, that Uranus
devised the Boetylia, Gr.; Botal or Bothal, Irish; Bethel, Heb., or stones
that moved _as having life_.--Damascius, an author in the reign of
Justinian, says he had seen many of these Boetylia, of which wonderful
things were reported, in Mount Libanus, and about Heliopolis, in Syria."

The volume, a handsome octavo of more than 500 pages, has been, we
perceive, published by subscription: the list contains about 400 names,
with the King at the head. This is sterling patronage, yet not greater, if
so great, as Mr. Pennie deserves. The Preface, we think, somewhat
unnecessarily long: it needed but few words to commend the drama of our
early history to the lovers of literature, among whom we do not reckon him
who is insensible to the charms of such plays as Cymbeline, Julius Caesar,
the Winter's Tale, or Macbeth. Mr. Pennie mentions the popularity of
Pizarro, "which faintly attempts to delineate the customs of the Peruvians"
as a reason for "the hope that is in him" respecting the fate of his own
tragedies. To our minds, Pizarro is one of the most essentially dramatic
or stage-plays of all our stock pieces. It is of German origin, though
Sheridan is said to have written it over sandwiches and claret in Drury
Lane Theatre. The country, the scenery, and costume have much to do with
this stage effect, and even aid the strong excitement of conflicting
passions which pervades every act. Its representation is a scene-shifting,
fidgeting business, but its charms tempt us almost invariably to sit it
out.

Returning to Mr. Pennie's Tragedies, we must add that a more delightful
collection of notes was never appended to any poem. Would that all
commentators had so assiduously illustrated their text. Here is none of
the literary indolence by which nine out of ten works are disfigured, nor
the fiddle-faddle notes which some folks must have written in their dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *


SNATCHES FROM EUGENE ARAM.

_A Landlord's Benevolence_.--No sooner did he behold the money, than a
sudden placidity stole over his ruffled spirit:--nay, a certain benevolent
commiseration for the fatigue and wants of the traveller replaced at once,
and as by a spell, the angry feelings that had previously roused him.

_A "Rich" Man_.--One who "does not live so as not to have money to lay by."

_An old Soldier_.--Set me a talking, and let out nothing himself;--old
soldier every inch of him.

_A Scholar_.--A man not much inclined to reproduce the learning he had
acquired:--what he wrote was in very small proportion to what he read.

_Study of Mankind_.--There seems something intuitive in the science which
teaches us the knowledge of our race. Some men emerge from their seclusion,
and find, all at once, a power to dart into the minds and drag forth the
motives of those they see; it is a sort of second sight, born with them,
not acquired.

_Happiness_.--No man can judge of the happiness of another. As the moon
plays upon the waves, and seems to our eyes to favour with a peculiar beam
one long track amidst the waters, leaving the rest in comparative
obscurity; yet all the while she is no niggard in her lustre--for the rays
that meet not our eyes seem to us as though they were not, yet _she_, with
an equal and unfavouring loveliness, mirrors herself on every wave: even
so, perhaps, Happiness falls with the same brightness and power over the
whole expanse of life, though to our limited eyes she seems only to rest
on those billows from which the ray is reflected back upon our sight.

_Influence of Cities_.--When men have once plunged into the great sea of
human toil and passion, they soon wash away all love and zest for innocent
enjoyments. What was once a soft retirement, will become the most
intolerable monotony; the gaming of social existence--the feverish and
desperate chances of honour and wealth, upon which the men of cities set
their hearts, render all pursuits less exciting, utterly dull and insipid.

_Love_.--There is a mysterious influence in nature, which renders us, in
her loveliest scenes, the most susceptible to love.  *   *   In all times,
how dangerous the connexion, when of different sexes, between the scholar
and the teacher! Under how many pretences, in that connexion, the heart
finds the opportunity to speak out.

_Passion_--The doubt and the fear--the caprice and the change, which
agitate the surface, swell also the tides of passion.

_Poverty_--makes some humble but more malignant.

_Want_.--How many noble natures--how many glorious hopes--how much of the
seraph's intellect, have been crushed info the mire, or blasted into guilt,
by the mere force of physical want?

_Benevolence_.--How poor, even in this beautiful world, with the warm sun
and fresh air about us, that alone are sufficient to make us glad, would
be life, if we could not make the happiness of others.

_Eloquence_.--The magic of the tongue is the most dangerous of all spells.

_Genius_.--There is a certain charm about great superiority of intellect,
that winds into deep affections which a much more constant and even
amiability of manners in lesser men, often fails to reach. Genius makes
many enemies, but it makes sure friends--friends who forgive much, who
endure long, who exact little; they partake of the character of disciples
as well as friends.

_Experience_.--'Tis a pity that the more one sees, the more suspicious one
grows. One does not have gumption till one has been properly cheated--one
must be made a fool very often in order not to be fooled at last!

_Cat-kindness_.--Paw to-day, and claw to-morrow.

_London at Night_.--One of the greatest pleasures in the world is to walk
alone, and at night, (while they are yet crowded) through the long
lamp-lit streets of this huge metropolis. There, even more than in the
silence of woods and fields, seems to me the source of endless, various
meditation.

_How easy it is to forget!_--The summer passes over the furrow, and the
corn springs up; the sod forgets the flower of the past year; and the
battlefield forgets the blood that has been spilt upon its turf; the sky
forgets the storm; and the water the noon-day sun that slept upon its
bosom. All Nature preaches forgetfulness. Its very order is the progress
of oblivion.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


A DAY AT LULWORTH.[1]

