_Gatty._--"Now, whatever you do, don't go and be so foolish, Serena. I
shall have no pleasure at all if Sybil is frightened and you are ill.
Get up, and eat a lot of roast beef with heaps of mustard and you will
be quite well."

A little small voice called to Gatty, and also asked for beef and
mustard. "I am sure, quite sure, Gatty," said the little speaker, Winny,
"it will do me a great deal of good." "Ah," said Lilly, "I wish I was
out of this place. Do, mother, ask the captain to stop and put me down
somewhere." This little idea caused infinite amusement. Time, however,
went on, and cured us all. We had lovely weather, and began to keep
regular hours, and have allotted times of the day for different things.
All attending, whatever might be our occupations, to the captain's
summons; for when anything new was to be seen, any wonders of the
ocean, any curious bird resting its weary wings on the only haven in
sight--our little vessel, any furling of sails, or any change, so did
the good-natured captain send for us, and we joyfully obeyed the
summons, listening to all his wondrous tales, watching the rolling of
the porpoises, and the wondrous colours of the sea. As we approached a
hotter climate, everything became, in our eyes, objects of new and
strange interest. In this manner we reached Gibraltar, and landed for
the first time, having been thirteen days at sea.


CHAPTER III.


_May 16._--GIBRALTAR.--I, for one, was very glad to land, for somehow on
board ship one never seemed to be able to finish one's toilette with the
degree of niceness necessary, a lurch of the ship very often caused an
utter derangement, a rolling sea made it a matter of great difficulty
even to wash one's face, and as for tidying the hair that had been given
up, and those who did not wear caps enclosed their rough curls in nets.
We therefore migrated to the principal hotel, leaving the two boys, at
their own request, on board, under the care of Jenny and Smart. The
three elder girls were to wait on each other, and each take a little
girl in their charge, while Hargrave waited on the three elderly ladies.
We were objects of great curiosity, and many people supposed our party
to consist of a school. They were more surprised at hearing that La Luna
belonged to the school. The visitors on board of her became innumerable,
causing the good-natured captain a world of trouble. Every day he came
and reported himself, as he called it, to his commanding officer,
meaning myself and brought an account of the boys, or one with him; and
it was most curious to see this great rough captain take each little
girl up in his arms and kiss her quite gently, always expressing a hope
to each that they were not getting too fond of the land, but would soon
return to their ocean home, as he was quite dull without them. Whatever
misgivings he might have had on starting, they had all given way to an
interest and affection for us all, that made it quite a pleasure to us
to communicate with him.

We took advantage of our first landing to write letters home, which,
having been preserved with sorrowful care, have now become agreeable
memorials of our adventures, and may be interesting, as their own
letters will best explain the individual character of each of those who
were now on their way towards adventures strange as unexpected. The
letters of the elder portion of our party contained but a description of
Gibraltar, which is well known to most people. Sybil's letter was as
follows:--


                                        "_Gibraltar, May 16, 18--_

"MY DEAREST MAMMA AND SISTERS,

"Here we are safe on dry land again, and who would have believed a
fortnight ago that we should have been so glad to get out of our dear La
Luna. But we don't make half such good sailors as we expected; and how
Em would have laughed could she have seen all the queer looks and sad
faces which possessed the merry party she had so lately seen. But here
we are really on dry land, and at Gibraltar, at the summit of all our
present hopes, and charmed enough to make us forget all the horrors of
the sea, and even think we could undergo them twenty times for such a
sight. We came into the harbour last night, and landed as soon as we
could collect our wits, and mother collect us; Madame has been at
Gibraltar before, and so ought to have had the use of hers, but knowing
her propensity to lose her way, we made Hargrave look after her, while
we three elder girls each took a little child. Both the mothers looked
after our things. The boys and Jenny were left behind. So we landed just
before gun fire, passing through the long rows of houses, which looked
so strange to our wondering eyes, piled one above the other, and as we
were passed and stared at by numbers of odd queer-looking people, we
quite fancied ourselves in a dream, or realizing the Arabian Nights. At
last we halted at our hotel. Our sailors deposited our boxes, and seemed
to wish us good night with sorrow. We had a famous tea, if I may so call
such an odd mixture of eatables, and went to bed, hardly believing we
could be in Gibraltar. This morning we were awoke by some little voices
round our beds--'Oh, auntie, dear auntie, do get up; this is such a
lovely place, and so odd. There are such rocks, and oh, auntie, such
queer people. I saw a man in a turban, and there is a black man in the
house, and----' 'Hush, little nieces, how are aunties to get up, if you
chatter so? rather help us to dress, that we may see the wonderful
things too.' We found our two mothers in the pretty drawing room. Three
large windows looked out upon the busy town and blue sea below. The
little mother was out in the balcony, in a perfect ecstasy of delight.
A call to breakfast was obeyed, though we could hardly eat, the chicks
jumping up every minute to look at something new and strange going on
below, and the aunties quite wishing that they might commit such a
breach of decorum. We were startled out of all propriety at last by a
well-known voice sounding under the windows, and a remonstrance which
drew us all there. Looking down, we beheld Felix seated on the top of a
most extraordinary vehicle, the driver of which he had superseded, and
was trying to persuade the lumbering old horse to get on. Smart was
behind vainly endeavouring to persuade his young master to come down. A
glance at the drawing-room windows effected what Smart's entreaties had
failed to do, and the young pickle was soon at high breakfast, and had
demolished a pretty considerable quantity ere his steady elder brother
appeared.

"We have just returned from our first expedition so charmed, even our
excited imaginations came not up to the beautiful reality. The town is a
very curious one. A long street composes the principal part. Almost all
the houses are painted black, with flat roofs. The shops open to the
street. But the rock itself! My dearest sisters, you cannot imagine
anything so exquisite as the tiers upon tiers, the masses of granite or
marble rising one above another until one's eyes ached in counting them.
I think if our party are always as wild as the fresh air, the beautiful
scenery, and the new sensations caused to day, our mother will repent
her responsibility. Even the quiet Zoë was roused, and her exclamations
were as rapturous as Winny's. Felix's feats of climbing were frightful;
we were never quite sure where to look for him. If Smart had not kept
his eye on him, and threatened him with sundry punishments, I don't know
in what mischief he would not have been. He is much more afraid of Smart
than he is of his mother. Lilly's head was full of some classic stories
which she had picked up somewhere, the scene of which she was quite sure
was in Gibraltar, and each auntie in turn came in for a bit of the
story, which might have created a sensation at any other time or in any
other scene but this. So you may imagine us now, all so happy, so weary,
so enchanted, so sleepy, but wide-awake enough to be able to send the
dear party at home a bit of our pleasure, and the wish that they were
all with us to delight also in such scenes. I don't think the mother
will ever get us all away. We have quite forgotten our pretty La Luna;
indeed she is at present as little thought of as her great prototype in
broad daylight. So I will now say good-bye, hoping you will set down all
deficiencies and incoherences in this long dispatch to the new and
delightful feelings such a place and such a new pleasure have produced
in our wondering heads. But in Gibraltar as at home, you must believe me
ever, dearest mamma, your dutiful and affectionate daughter, and dearest
sisters, your loving and affectionate sister,

                                                        "SYBIL."


My eldest son's letter to his grandpapa was as follows:


"DEAR GRANDPAPA,

"I like the sea quite as well as I expected; but I would rather go out
shooting at home. I hope mamma, however, will allow us to go to the Cape
or Canada. Smart says he should like to shoot a bear, and I wish to kill
an elephant. In the Bay of Biscay we had a rolling sea. The captain told
us the waves were 30 feet high; the wind was very great, and blew from
the South-West; but the captain did not seem afraid, he laughed and
liked it, so I thought it better not to be afraid either. But Smart was
very ill, and said, whenever we spoke to him, 'Oh! I wish I was at home
with my old woman.' Felix told him he was a coward and afraid; but he
said, 'I ain't afeard, but I be going to die, I be sure.' The dogs are
very happy and so is the cow; we feed her every day, and she knows us
quite well; she has not been sea-sick, or the dogs, or Felix and I, or
the captain and sailors, but I think everybody else has. Pray give my
love to grandmamma and my aunts. I am tired of this long letter, and I
think you will be also. I remain, your dutiful and affectionate
grandson,

                                                        "OSCAR."


Gatty's letter was to her sister:--


"MY DEAREST LIFFY,

"This is such glorious fun; but I am so hot. I declare if I stay here
much longer I shall flow away, and nothing be left of me but a rivulet.
I eat oranges all day long. We have a basket full put by our bedsides at
night, and I never leave one by breakfast time if I can help it. It is a
horrid nuisance being so sick at sea. I really thought in the Bay of
Biscay that I should make a fool of myself and wish I was at home again.
I don't like this place much, one is so stewed; there is not a shadow,
all seems baked hard as pie-crust twice done. I like being on the sea
better now I have got over being ill; there is a breeze to cool one,
besides it is so jolly having nothing to do but watch the waves and the
wind and learn to mind the helm. I have made great friends with all the
sailors, and they are very nice fellows, all but one crabbed old
Scotchman, who says, when he sees us on deck, 'ladies should always stay
down stairs.' I crawled up stairs in the Bay of Biscay, because they
said it was such a glorious sea, and, at first, I thought we were in a
vast quarry of bright blue marble, all the broken edges being crested
with brilliant white spar. Suddenly we seemed to go over all, all my
quarry disappeared, and I was as near as possible going headlong down
the companion ladder, and if I had how they would have laughed. The
captain said the ship was on an angle of twenty degrees, what that means
I cannot precisely say, but leave you to find out. I can only tell you I
thought we were topsy-turvy very often, and I hope we shall not
experience any more angles of that kind again. Sybil was awfully
frightened, and as white as a sheet. Serena was too ill to care whether
the ship was in angles or out. Felix is such a jolly boy, and likes the
winds roaring and the waves foaming, and he struts and blusters about as
if he was six feet two, and stout in proportion, instead of being a
shrimp of the smallest dimensions. He is getting a colour though, and
his mother looks at him quite happy. Winny is such an innocent little
donkey, so quaint and matter-of-factish.

"I suppose you don't care to hear about Gibraltar, you will get a much
better account in some Gazetteer than I can give you; I hate
descriptions. However, I'll look in our Gazetteer, and tell you if it is
true. All right, very good account. So now I will finish. I hope we
shall go across the Atlantic. The little mother is as cross as a bear;
but, as she cannot be so always, we are looking out for a change of
weather. You know I never can make civil speeches, so please say
everything proper for me, including my best of loves to papa and mamma.
Ever, old girl, believe me your most affectionate sister,

                                                        "GATTY."


CHAPTER IV.


I think the three letters I have given you will sufficiently explain the
feelings of our party. We now retraced our steps, though I should have
much liked to stop at Lisbon to see the celebrated Cintra.

We, to fulfil the promises made to our gentlemen, were now obliged to
make the best of our way to Madeira. This we accomplished within two
days of the time we had promised to meet them. But alas! instead of
having to welcome them, we received letters, stating that their joining
our party must be again postponed, from circumstances needless to
mention, and that we must either cruise about for another month or fix
some spot where they could meet us at the expiration of that time.
Having now become a nautical character, I may be excused saying "that I
was quite taken aback." What to do, where to go, or how to manage, I
knew not. But to proceed. After a variety of consultations, a vast
quantity of advice from all sides, we, backed by our captain's wishes,
and rendered rampant by the stretch we had given our hitherto
home-clipped wings, decided that we would cross the Atlantic. So great a
change had taken place in the captain's mind regarding ourselves that I
am not quite sure he mourned at all for the defalcation of our male
escort. He had us all to himself now; and, in recommending us the trip
across the Atlantic, he reminded me that my brother was stationed at Rio
Janeiro, being captain in H.M.S. C----, and that we might cruise up
towards North America, and pick up the gentlemen, who, coming from
England in the fast-sailing packet boats, would not be more than a
fortnight or three weeks at most on the voyage. Of course all the
children were wild to go. Remaining in the Mediterranean was voted dull
and stupid. How charming to go to America, to see things much more
uncommon, much more curious. Everybody could and did see the
Mediterranean; it was quite a common yacht excursion. Besides, as I
overheard Gatty say to her companions, "Just think, Girls, what a bore
it would have been, if, in a month or two's time, our mother should have
got tired of the sea, or the little mother continued, every time we have
a gale, to get sea sick, they would have ordered us homewards, without
consulting our wishes, and at the end of three months we should have
been in stupid England again."

_Sybil._--"Stupid England!"

_Gatty._--"Stupid England. I did not say stupid England, did I?"

_Sybil_ (much shocked).--"Yes, Gertrude, you did."

_Gatty._--"Then, Sybil, I am very sorry. England is anything but stupid.
It's a glorious place. It's a delectable place. It's a place that if any
one dared to say a word against it, I really think I should feel very
much inclined to----"

_Sybil._--"Well! What?"

_Gatty_ (softly).--"Why, I should like to knock them down; only don't
mention my ideas. Madame will bother me, and say it is unladylike; and
perhaps she will give me Theresa Tidy's maxims to do into French as a
punishment."

_Serena._--"Then we won't tell on any account; such a fate would be so
horrible. But I agree with you that it would be dreadfully stupid to go
home in three months. Now, if once we get to America, we shall have so
much to see and do that the winter would come on, and mother would never
trust all us precious people across the Atlantic in bad weather, so we
shall have to winter in New York perhaps."

_Gatty._--"How jolly! won't I 'guess' and 'reckon' every minute; and
won't I fire up if I hear anyone abuse our monarchical and loyal
constitution."

_Sybil._--"What grand words, Gatty. Where did you pick them up?"

_Serena._--"Oh, Gatty is so loyal, that I think she will be quite ready
to do that which we promised not to mention a little while ago, if----"

_Gatty._--"Hush, hush, Serena, you will get me into a scrape. Don't you
know everything is heard in this horrid--no, no, not horrid--sweet,
charming, dear, darling La Luna. You know what I mean, so hold your
tongue."

Therefore, across the Atlantic, accordingly, we pursued our merry
course, previously writing letters to detail our plans, to describe our
pleasures of all kinds, and to appoint a place of meeting.

What can express the delicious pleasure of the sea in a tropical
climate. The soft trade wind blowing us gently but swiftly through the
water, fanning every limb, and filling every vein with the very meat,
drink, and clothing of air; everything around, above, below bathed in
brightest purest sunshine; the still life, consequent upon the heat,
which pervaded the vessel, each person enjoying the unwonted luxury of
enforced idleness in their own way; the very barque herself seeming to
sleep on her silent course through the parting water; and as I raised
myself from the couch where I had lain down to read, I could not help
being struck with the pretty picture the vessel presented. My cousin was
reclining not far from me; her book had fallen from her listless hand,
her bright searching eyes, so restless in their intelligent activity
when open, were closed, her flushed face shewed she slept. Madame was
quietly pacing up and down, shaded from the sun by a great parasol; to
her the heat was soothing and agreeable, for she had lived much in
India, and it agreed with her better than cold winds and chilling
frosts. The three girls were not far off; the two elder ones making
pretence to read, but looking more inclined to snooze, while the
restless Gatty utterly prevented their pursuing either occupation. From
them came the only sounds in the vessel, and they consisted of peevish
expostulation, requests to be left alone, now and then a more energetic
appeal, a threat to complain to the higher powers, promises to be quiet
and still, and this scene at last resolved itself into a promise from
Sybil to tell a story, if the restless individual would only be quiet.
Immediately a reinforcement offered itself to the party in the shape of
Zoë and Winny. A pretty little group of four eager listeners and one
inspired narrator soon disposed themselves in the unstudied grace of
childhood, and the soft voice was heard in regular cadence, now lively,
now solemn, now pathetic, and again elevated according to the interest
and pathos of her story. Oscar, in his sailor's dress, with his fair
bright curls, his animated blue eyes, added to their picture. But in the
distance lay the prettiest group; tired and heated with the noisy play
of childhood, the mischievous and excited Felix lay fast asleep with his
arms round the neck of one of the dogs, as if he was determined the dog
should not play if he could not; but the watchful eye of Bernard shewed
that he was merely still for his little master's sake, and that he even
looked with a distrustful eye at the measured pacing of Madame, fearing
that her slight movement would disturb the profound repose into which
his charge had fallen. With her long curls sweeping half over the other
dog, and half over herself, lay the tired little Lilly, so mixed with
the other two that Cwmro did not seem to think it necessary to keep
guard while his companion watched so faithfully, and nothing could
exceed the depth of repose and stillness into which they seemed plunged;
and in finishing this picture I will end my chapter, for our days
glided quietly and deliciously, a time often looked back upon by us as
the sweetest and calmest we ever passed, and was only too short in its
duration.


CHAPTER V.


There fell upon us a dead calm. The heat was insufferable; the sky was
too blue to be looked at; the sea too dazzling to be gazed on; the sun
too scorching to be endured. We turned night into day, without mending
matters much. Gatty ran about, hot and panting, searching for a cool
hole, while she declared that the ship was a great pie, which the sun
had undertaken to bake, and that we were all the unfortunate pigeons
destined to be stewed therein. "Then," said the matter-of-fact little
Winny, "we must put all our feet together, and stick them up in the
middle." One day, when we happened to be in that indescribable state--a
sort of half consciousness of what was passing around--scarcely knowing
whether we were dreaming or waking, we heard a knock at the door, and
the hot but smiling face of our captain shewed itself. He was
immediately assailed with innumerable questions. Was the heat going? Was
the wind rising? When were we to go on? Why did he not whistle for a
breeze? Where could we get out of the way of the sun? Was it possible to
get into a shade? Could he give us anything to cool us? What would
happen if we all went on being baked in this manner? In fact, the
purport of his visit to the saloon at such an unusual hour was all but
lost sight of in the midst of these queries when I asked him if anything
was the matter. "I only wish to look at your barometer; something has
happened to mine," was his reply. So amidst an uproar of young voices,
with pullings, tuggings, and caresses, for he was a prodigious
favourite, he accomplished his object. I was surprised to see such an
expression of concern cross his countenance as he gazed at it, and
questioning him thereon, he answered, "Why, Madam, I find both the
barometers tell the same tale; therefore, what I imagined was owing to a
fault in mine, I must now impute to some extraordinary change in the
weather."

_Gatty._--"I hope then it will be hard frost."

_Felix._--"Or a storm, Gatty. I want the wind to blow, and the waves to
be mountains high."

_Lilly_ (yawning).--"I wish something would blow, and I wish I had two
little slave girls to fan me as they do in India."

_Zoë._--"I don't think I should; they would be so hot themselves, poor
things, I should be quite sorry all the time."

_Oscar._--"I vote for a hard frost, like Gatty, then we should have such
splendid skating on the sea."

_Serena._--"But, supposing (which I believe is no supposition, but a
fact) that the sea freezes in waves, we could not then skate."

_Gatty._--"Oh, don't talk any more of ice and frost, it makes one hotter
still to think of the contrast."

I proceeded to enquire of the captain what change he expected.

_Capt._--"Madam, it must be a storm of some kind; I have been becalmed
very often, but I never endured such profound stillness and heat as
there have been now for some days past. Dear little souls, I quite feel
for the young people, Madam."

_Mother._--"But, captain, is it likely to be a bad storm, or will there
be any danger?"

_Capt._--"You are all such good sailors that I am not at all afraid of
telling you the truth. Indeed," looking smilingly on the surrounding
faces, "I am thinking some of you will be glad to hear we are likely to
have a hurricane!"

The babble on this announcement was tremendous. Gatty and Felix shook
hands on the spot, and congratulated each other on the probable
fulfilment of their secret wishes. Madame turned deadly pale, and sunk
into a seat. My cousin tossed up her head, and said "anything is better
than this confounded heat." I trembled; the two little girls clasped
each other's hands half in fear, half in excitement; Sybil and Serena
both looked pleased; and Oscar besought me to allow him to be on deck
the whole time, that he might see the hurricane.

_Capt._ (seeing my alarm).--"You may be sure, Madam, I would not joke if
I thought there was any danger. I have been in Chinese typhoons,
hurricanes in the Tropics, and storms in the Atlantic, where one would
imagine heaven and earth were coming together, and under the blessing of
God" (here our captain bowed his head) "I apprehend nothing, Madam, but
what care and skill can overcome."

_Mother._--"But your face expressed great concern when you looked at the
barometer; and, besides, you mentioned the heat and calm as greater than
you ever before experienced."

_Capt._ (half hesitating).--"That is true, Madam, but I am such an ass,
I cannot hide the impulse of the moment."

_Mother._--"But, tell me, is this the impulse of the moment? Do you not
fear a more than ordinary severe hurricane? Remember, you have praised
us so much for being such good sailors, and so obedient to orders, that
you must put us to the proof; and the more you take us into your
confidence, the more well-behaved you will find us."

A number of voices, "Yes do, dear captain, tell us everything. Are we
going to have a grand storm? Will there be ice and snow? Shall we have
thunder and lightning? Will the waves be one hundred feet high? Do you
think the masts will be blown away? Tell us that it will be a
magnificent storm, whatever you do," said Gatty, winding up the noise.

_Capt._ (very much perplexed and anxiously).--"Dear little souls. Ma'am,
it does my heart good to hear them. They ought all to have been born
sailors, and bred to the sea into the bargain. Yes, my darlings, you
shall have a grand storm, no doubt you shall have all your wish,
whatever I can do for you, my little angels," and the good captain
looked quite benignly at them all, giving great energetic kisses back
for all the light rosy ones imprinted on his great Scotch face.

My cousin laughed as she turned to me and said, "Good as the captain is,
I hope he is not really going to spoil those children and conjure up a
prodigious storm for their amusement. Now brats, get out of the way, and
let us have a little common sense. You think we shall have a storm,
captain?"

_Capt._--"I fear so, Madam; that is, I don't fear," apologetically
turning to the young ones, "but I have no doubt we shall have a storm."

_Schillie._--"Then you would advise my betaking myself to bed, I
suppose, immediately."

_Capt._--"No, Ma'am, no, for I cannot judge when we shall have it, not
these twenty-four hours yet."

_Schillie._--"But, pray, have you any advice to give us against the
storm does come. When a horse kicks, I am well aware that the rider has
solely to think of sticking on; but, I confess, storms and their
consequences are quite out of my way."

_Capt._--"Indeed, Madam, I should be greatly obliged if you would
undertake to keep everybody quiet below, the children especially: if
they come running up after me, dear little souls. I shall be thinking
too much of them to mind my ship."

_Schillie._--"Then I will take particular good care they are kept out of
your way. I have no mind to lose my life for a parcel of spoilt animals.
But, otherwise, you think there is no danger?"

