Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


                                 HINTS

                                  ON

                       EXTEMPORANEOUS PREACHING.


                           BY HENRY WARE, JR.
                MINISTER OF THE SECOND CHURCH IN BOSTON.


      Maximus vero studiorum fructus est, et velut præmium quoddam
        amplissimum longi laboris, ex tempore dicendi facultas.

                                                 _Quinct._ x. 7.


                                BOSTON:
                 PUBLISHED BY CUMMINGS, HILLIARD & CO.
                                 1824.


                 University Press--Hilliard & Metcalf.


                                   TO
                              THE STUDENTS
                                 IN THE
              THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY,
                         THIS LITTLE TREATISE,
                                WITH THE
                 SINCEREST PRAYERS THAT THEY MAY BECOME
                PROFOUND DIVINES AND POWERFUL PREACHERS,
                      IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED
                                   BY
                               THE AUTHOR.


CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.
  Advantages of Extemporaneous Preaching

  CHAPTER II.
  Disadvantages--Objections considered

  CHAPTER III.
  Rules


PREFACE.


It is the object of this little work, to draw the attention of those who
are preparing for the christian ministry, or who have just entered it,
to a mode of preaching which the writer thinks has been too much
discountenanced and despised; but which, under proper restrictions, he
is persuaded may add greatly to the opportunities of ministerial
usefulness. The subject has hardly received the attention it deserves
from writers on the pastoral office, who have usually devoted to it but
a few sentences, which offer little encouragement and afford no aid.
Burnet, in his Treatise on the Pastoral Care, and Fenelon in his
Dialogues on Eloquence, have treated it more at large, but still very
cursorily. To their arguments and their authority, which are of great
weight, I refer the more distinctly here, because I have not quoted them
so much at large as I intended when I wrote the beginning of the second
chapter. Besides these, the remarks of Quinctilian, x. 7. on the subject
of speaking extempore, which are full of his usual good sense, may be
very profitably consulted.

It has been my object to state fully and fairly the benefits which
attend this mode of address in the pulpit, and at the same time to guard
against the dangers and abuses to which it is confessedly liable. How
far I may have succeeded, it is not for me to determine. It would be
something to persuade but one to add this to his other talents for doing
good in the church. Even the attempt to do it, though unsuccessful,
would not be without its reward; since it could not be fairly made
without a most salutary moral and intellectual discipline.

It is not to be expected--nor do I mean by any thing I have said to
intimate--that every man is capable of becoming an accomplished preacher
in this mode, or that every one may succeed as well in this as in the
ordinary mode. There is a variety in the talents of men, and to some
this may be peculiarly unsuited. Yet this is no good reason why _any_
should decline the attempt, since it is only by making the attempt that
they can determine whether or not success is within their power.

