"He means mamsie won't get here till afternoon," said Polly, catching
her up and kissing her; "then I guess you'll be awake, Phronsie, pet."

So Phronsie allowed herself to be persuaded, at the proper time, to be
carried off and inducted into her little nightgown. And when Polly went
up to bed, she found the little pin-cushion, with its hieroglyphics,
that she had insisted on taking to bed with her, still tightly grasped
in the little fat hand.

"She'll roll over and muss it," thought Polly; "and then she'll feel bad
in the morning. I guess I'd better lay it on the bureau."

So she drew it carefully away, without awaking the little sleeper, and
placed it where she knew Phronsie's eyes would rest on it the first
thing in the morning.

It was going on towards the middle of the night when Phronsie, whose
exciting dreams of mamsie and the boys wouldn't let her rest quietly,
woke up; and in the very first flash she thought of her cushion.

"Why, where--" she said, in the softest little tones, only half awake,
"why, Polly, where is it?" and she began to feel all around her pillow
to see if it had fallen down there.

But Polly's brown head with its crowd of anticipations and busy
plans was away off in dreamland, and she breathed on and on perfectly
motionless.

"I guess I better," said Phronsie to herself, now thoroughly awake, and
sitting up in bed, "not wake her up. Poor Polly's tired; I can find it
myself, I know I can."

So she slipped out of bed, and prowling around on the floor, felt all
about for the little cushion.

"'Tisn't here, oh, no, it isn't," she sighed at last, and getting up,
she stood still a moment, lost in thought. "Maybe Jane's put it out
in the hall," she said, as a bright thought struck her. "I can get it
there," and out she pattered over the soft carpet to the table at the
end of the long hall, where Jane often placed the children's playthings
over night. As she was coming back after her fruitless search, she
stopped to peep over the balustrade down the fascinating flight of
stairs, now so long and dark. Just then a little faint ray of light shot
up from below, and met her eyes.

"Why!" she said in gentle surprise, "they're all down-stairs! I guess
they're making something for mamsie--I'm going to see."

So, carefully picking her way over the stairs with her little bare feet,
and holding on to the balustrade at every step, she went slowly down,
guided by the light, which, as she neared the bottom of the flight, she
saw came from the library door.

"Oh, isn't it funny!" and she gave a little happy laugh. "They won't
know I'm comin'!" and now the soft little feet went pattering over the
thick carpet, until she stood just within the door. There she stopped
perfectly still.

Two dark figures, big and powerful, were bending over something that
Phronsie couldn't see, between the two big windows. A lantern on the
floor flung its rays over them as they were busily occupied; and the
firelight from the dying coals made the whole stand out distinctly to
the gaze of the motionless little figure.

"Why! what are you doing with my grandpa's things?"

The soft, clear notes fell like a thunderbolt upon the men. With a start
they brought themselves up, and stared--only to see a little white-robed
figure, with its astonished eyes uplifted with childlike, earnest gaze,
as she waited for her answer.

For an instant they were powerless to move; and stood as if frozen to
the spot, till Phronsie, moving one step forward, piped forth:

"Naughty men, to touch my dear grandpa's things!"

With a smothered cry one of them started forward with arm uplifted; but
the other sprang like a cat and intercepted the blow.

"Stop!" was all he said. A noise above the stairs--a rushing sound
through the hall! Something will save Phronsie, for the household is
aroused! The two men sprang through the window, having no time to catch
the lantern or their tools, as Polly, followed by one and another,
rushed in and surrounded the child.

"What!" gasped Polly, and got no further.

"STOP, THIEF!" roared Mr. King, hurrying over the stairs. The children,
frightened at the strange noises, began to cry and scream, as they
came running through the halls to the spot. Jasper rushed for the
men-servants.

And there stood Phronsie, surrounded by the pale group. "Twas two
naughty men," she said, lifting her little face with the grieved,
astonished look still in the big brown eyes, "and they were touching my
grandpa's things, Polly!"

"I should think they were," said Jasper, running over amongst the few
scattered tools and the lantern, to the windows, where, on the floor,
was a large table cover hastily caught up by the corners, into which a
vast variety of silver, jewelry, and quantities of costly articles were
gathered ready for flight. "They've broken open your safe, father!" he
cried in excitement, "see!"

"And they put up their hand--one man did," went on Phronsie. "And the
other said 'Stop!'--oh, Polly, you hurt me!" she cried, as Polly, unable
to bear the strain any longer, held her so tightly she could hardly
breathe.

"Go on," said Jasper, "how did they look?"

"All black," said the child, pushing back her wavy hair and looking at
him, "very all black, Jasper."

"And their faces, Phronsie?" said Mr. King, getting down on his old
knees on the floor beside her. "Bless me! somebody else ask her, I can't
talk!"

"How did their faces look, Phronsie, dear?" asked Jasper, taking one of
the cold hands in his. "Can't you think?"

"Oh!" said Phronsie--and then she gave a funny little laugh, "two big
holes, Jasper, that's all they had!"

"She means they were masked," whispered Jasper.

"What did you get up for?" Mrs. Whitney asked. "Dear child, what made
you get out of bed?"

"Why, my cushion-pin," said Phronsie looking worried at once. "I
couldn't find it, and--"

But just at this, without a bit of warning, Polly tumbled over in a dead
faint.

And then it was all confusion again.

And so, on the following afternoon, it turned out that the Peppers,
about whose coming there had been so many plans and expectations, just
walked in as if they had always lived there. The greater excitement
completely swallowed up the less!


WHICH TREATS OF A GOOD MANY MATTERS


"Phooh!" said Joel a few mornings after the emptying of the little brown
house into the big one, when he and Van were rehearsing for the fiftieth
time all the points of the eventful night, "phooh! if I'd been here they
wouldn't have got away, I guess!"

"What would you have done?" asked Van, bristling up at this reflection
on their courage, and squaring up to him. "What would you have done,
Joel Pepper?"

"I'd a-pitched right into 'em--like--everything!" said Joel valiantly;
"and a-caught 'em! Yes, every single one of the Bunglers!"

"The what?" said Van, bursting into a loud laugh.

"The Bunglers," said Joel with a red face. "That's what you said they
were, anyway," he added positively.

"I said Burglars," said Van, doubling up with amusement, while Joel
stood, a little sturdy figure, regarding him with anything but a sweet
countenance.

"Well anyway, I'd a-caught 'em, so there!" he said, as Van at last
showed signs of coming out of his fit of laughter, and got up and wiped
his eyes.

"How'd you have caught 'em?" asked Van, scornfully surveying the square
little country figure before him. "You can't hit any.

"Can't?" said Joel, the black eyes flashing volumes, and coming up in
front of Van. "You better believe I can, Van Whitney!"

"Come out in the back yard and try then," said Van hospitably, perfectly
delighted at the prospect, and flying alone towards the door. "Come
right out and try."

"All right!" said Joel, following sturdily, equally delighted to show
his skill.

"There," said Van, taking off his jacket, and flinging it on the grass,
while Joel immediately followed suit with his little homespun one.
"Now we can begin perfectly splendid! I won't hit hard," he added
patronizingly, as both boys stood ready.

"Hit as hard as you've a-mind to," said Joel, "I'm a-going to."

"Oh, you may," said Van politely, "because you're company. All
right--now!"

So at it they went. Before very many minutes were over, Van relinquished
all ideas of treating his company with extra consideration, and was
only thinking how he could possibly hold his own with the valiant little
country lad. Oh, if he could only be called to his lessons--anything
that would summon him into the house! Just then a window above their
heads was suddenly thrown up, and his mamma's voice in natural surprise
and distress called quickly: "Children what are you doing? Oh, Van, how
could you!"

Both contestants turned around suddenly. Joel looked up steadily. "We're
a-hitting, ma'am; he said I couldn't, and so we came out and--"

"Oh, Vanny," said Mrs. Whitney reproachfully, "to treat a little guest
in this way!"

"I wanted to," said Joel cheerfully; "twas great fun. Let's begin again,
Van!"

"We mustn't," said Van, readily giving up the charming prospect, and
beginning to edge quickly towards the house. "Mamma wouldn't like it you
know. He hits splendidly, mamma," he added generously, looking up. "He
does really."

"And so does Van," cried Joel, his face glowing at the praise. "We'll
come out every day," he added slipping into his jacket, and turning
enthusiastically back to Van.

"And perhaps he could have pitched into the Burglars," finished Van,
ignoring the invitation, and tumbling into his jacket with alarming
speed.

"I know I could!" cried Joel, scampering after him into the house. "If
I'd only a-been here!"

"Where's Ben?" said Van, bounding into the hall, and flinging himself
down on one of the chairs. "Oh dear, I'm so hot! Say, Joe, where do you
s'pose Ben is?"

"I don't know," replied Joel, who didn't even puff.

"I saw him a little while ago with master Percy," said Jane, who was
going through the hall.

"There now! and they've gone off somewhere," cried Van in extreme
irritation, and starting up quickly. "I know they have. Which way did
they go, Jane? And how long ago?"

"Oh, I don't know," replied Jane carelessly, "half an hour maybe; and
they didn't go nowhere as I see, at least they were talking at the door,
and I was going up-stairs."

"Right here?" cried Van, and stamping with his foot to point out the
exact place; "at this door, Jane?"

"Yes, yes," said Jane; "at that very door," and then she went into the
dining-room to her work.

"Oh dear me!" cried Van, and flying out on the veranda, he began to peer
wildly up and down the drive. "And they've gone to some splendid
place, I know, and wouldn't tell us. That's just like Percy!" he added
vindictively, "he's always stealing away! don't you see 'em, Joel? oh,
do come out and look!"

"'Tisn't any use," said Joel coolly, sitting down on the chair Van had
just vacated, and swinging his feet comfortably; "they're miles away if
they've been gone half an hour. I'm goin' up-stairs," and he sprang up,
and energetically pranced to the stairs.

"They aren't up-stairs!" screamed Van, in scorn, bounding into the hall.
"Don't go; I know that they've gone down to the museum!"

"The what?" exclaimed Joel, nearly at the top, peering over the railing.
"What's that you said--what is it?"

"A museum," shouted Van, "and it's a perfectly elegant place, Joel
Pepper, and Percy knows I like to go; and now he's taken Ben off;
and he'll show him all the things! and they'll all be old when I take
him--and--and--oh! I hope the snakes will bite him!" he added, trying to
think of something bad enough.

"Do they have snakes there?" asked Joel, staring.

