
[Footnote 1: Charles Lillie, the perfumer, from whose shop at the corner
of Beaufort Buildings the original Spectators were distributed, left
behind him a book of receipts and observations, The British Perfumer,
Snuff Manufacturer, and Colourmans Guide, of which the MS. was sold
with his business, but which remained unpublished until 1822. He opens
his Part III. on Snuffs with an account of the Origin of Snuff-taking
in England, the practice being one that had become fashionable in his
day, and only about eight years before the appearance of the Spectator.
It dates from Sir George Rooke's expedition against Cadiz in 1702.
Before that time snuff-taking in England was confined to a few luxurious
foreigners and English who had travelled abroad. They took their snuff
with pipes of the size of quills out of small spring boxes. The pipes
let out a very small quantity upon the back of the hand, and this was
snuffed up the nostrils with the intention of producing a sneeze which,
says Lillie, I need not say forms now no part of the design or rather
fashion of snuff-taking; least of all in the ladies who took part in
this method of snuffing defiance at the public enemy. When the fleet,
after the failure of its enterprize against Cadiz, proceeded to cut off
the French ships in Vigobay, on the way it plundered Port St. Mary and
adjacent places, where, among other merchandize, seizure was made of
several thousand barrels and casks, each containing four tin canisters
of snuffs of the best growth and finest Spanish manufacture. At Vigo,
among the merchandize taken from the shipping there destroyed, were
prodigious quantities of gross snuff, from the Havannah, in bales,
bags, and scrows (untanned buffalo hides, used with the hairy-side
inwards, for making packages), which were designed for manufacture in
different parts of Spain. Altogether fifty tons of snuff were brought
home as part of the prize of the officers and sailors of the fleet. Of
the coarse snuff, called Vigo snuff, the sailors, among whom it was
shared, sold waggon-loads at Portsmouth, Plymouth, and Chatham, for not
more than three-pence or four-pence a pound. The greater part of it was
bought up by Spanish Jews, to their own very considerable profit. The
fine snuffs taken at Port St. Mary, and divided among the officers, were
sold by some of them at once for a small price, while others held their
stocks and, as the snuff so taken became popular and gave a patriotic
impulse to the introduction of a fashion which had hitherto been almost
confined to foreigners, they got very high prices for it. This accounts
for the fact that the ladies too had added the use of the perfumed
snuff-box to their other fashionable accomplishments.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 345.              Saturday, April 5, 1712.                Addison.


  Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altæ
  Deerat adhuc, et quod dominari in coetera posset,
  Natus homo est.

  Ov. Met.


The Accounts which Raphael gives of the Battel of Angels, and the
Creation of the World, have in them those Qualifications which the
Criticks judge requisite to an Episode. They are nearly related to the
principal Action, and have a just Connexion with the Fable.

The eighth Book opens with a beautiful Description of the Impression
which this Discourse of the Archangel made on our first Parent[s]. Adam
afterwards, by a very natural Curiosity, enquires concerning the Motions
of those Celestial Bodies which make the most glorious Appearance among
the six days Works. The Poet here, with a great deal of Art, represents
Eve as withdrawing from this part of their Conversation, to Amusements
more suitable to her Sex. He well knew, that the Episode in this Book,
which is filled with Adams Account of his Passion and Esteem for Eve,
would have been improper for her hearing, and has therefore devised very
just and beautiful Reasons for her Retiring.

  So spake our Sire, and by his Countenance seem'd
  Entring on studious Thoughts abstruse: which Eve
  Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight,
  With lowliness majestick, from her Seat,
  And Grace, that won who saw to wish her Stay,
  Rose; and went forth among her Fruits and Flowers
  To visit how they prosper'd, Bud and Bloom,
  Her Nursery: they at her coming sprung,
  And touch'd by her fair Tendance gladlier grew.
  Yet went she not, as not with such Discourse
  Delighted, or not capable her Ear
  Of what was high: Such Pleasure she reserved,
  Adam relating, she sole Auditress;
  Her Husband the Relater she preferr'd
  Before the Angel, and of him to ask
  Chose rather: he, she knew, would intermix
  Grateful Digressions, and solve high Dispute
  With conjugal Caresses; from his Lip
  Not Words alone pleas'd her. O when meet now
  Such Pairs, in Love and mutual Honour join'd!

The Angels returning a doubtful Answer to Adams Enquiries, was not
only proper for the Moral Reason which the Poet assigns, but because it
would have been highly absurd to have given the Sanction of an Archangel
to any particular System of Philosophy. The chief Points in the
Ptolemaick and Copernican Hypothesis are described with great
Conciseness and Perspicuity, and at the same time dressed in very
pleasing and poetical Images.

Adam, to detain the Angel, enters afterwards upon his own History, and
relates to him the Circumstances in which he found himself upon his
Creation; as also his Conversation with his Maker, and his first meeting
with Eve. There is no part of the Poem more apt to raise the Attention
of the Reader, than this Discourse of our great Ancestor; as nothing can
be more surprizing and delightful to us, than to hear the Sentiments
that arose in the first Man while he was yet new and fresh from the
Hands of his Creator. The Poet has interwoven every thing which is
delivered upon this Subject in Holy Writ with so many beautiful
Imaginations of his own, that nothing can be conceived more just and
natural than this whole Episode. As our Author knew this Subject could
not but be agreeable to his Reader, he would not throw it into the
Relation of the six days Works, but reserved it for a distinct Episode,
that he might have an opportunity of expatiating upon it more at large.
Before I enter on this part of the Poem, I cannot but take notice of two
shining Passages in the Dialogue between Adam and the Angel. The first
is that wherein our Ancestor gives an Account of the pleasure he took in
conversing with him, which contains a very noble Moral.

  For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heavn,
  And sweeter thy Discourse is to my Ear
  Than Fruits of Palm-tree (pleasantest to Thirst
  And Hunger both from Labour) at the hour
  Of sweet Repast: they satiate, and soon fill,
  Tho pleasant; but thy Words with Grace divine
  Imbu'd, bring to their Sweetness no Satiety.

The other I shall mention, is that in which the Angel gives a Reason why
he should be glad to hear the Story Adam was about to relate.

  For I that day was absent, as befel,
  Bound on a Voyage uncouth and obscure;
  Far on Excursion towards the Gates of Hell,
  Squar'd in full Legion [such Command we had]
  To see that none thence issued forth a Spy,
  Or Enemy; while God was in his Work,
  Lest he, incens'd at such Eruption bold,
  Destruction with Creation might have mix'd.

There is no question but our Poet drew the Image in what follows from
that in Virgil's sixth Book, where Æneas and the Sibyl stand before the
Adamantine Gates, which are there described as shut upon the Place of
Torments, and listen to the Groans, the Clank of Chains, and the Noise
of Iron Whips, that were heard in those Regions of Pain and Sorrow.

 --Fast we found, fast shut
  The dismal Gates, and barricado'd strong;
  But long ere our Approaching heard within
  Noise, other than the Sound of Dance or Song,
  Torment, and loud Lament, and furious Rage.

Adam then proceeds to give an account of his Condition and Sentiments
immediately after his Creation. How agreeably does he represent the
Posture in which he found himself, the beautiful Landskip that
surrounded him, and the Gladness of Heart which grew up in him on that
occasion?

 --As new waked from soundest Sleep,
  Soft on the flowry Herb I found me laid
  In balmy Sweat, which with his Beams the Sun
  Soon dried, and on the reaking Moisture fed.
  Streight towards Heavn my wondring Eyes I turn'd,
  And gazed awhile the ample Sky, till rais'd
  By quick instinctive Motion, up I sprung,
  As thitherward endeavouring, and upright
  Stood on my Feet: About me round I saw
  Hill, Dale, and shady Woods, and sunny Plains,
  And liquid lapse of murmuring Streams; by these
  Creatures that liv'd, and mov'd, and walked, or flew,
  Birds on the Branches warbling; all things smil'd:
  With Fragrance, and with Joy my Heart o'erflow'd.

Adam is afterwards describ'd as surprized at his own Existence, and
taking a Survey of himself, and of all the Works of Nature. He likewise
is represented as discovering by the Light of Reason, that he and every
thing about him must have been the Effect of some Being infinitely good
and powerful, and that this Being had a right to his Worship and
Adoration. His first Address to the Sun, and to those Parts of the
Creation which made the most distinguished Figure, is very natural and
amusing to the Imagination.

 --Thou Sun, said I, fair Light,
  And thou enlighten'd Earth, so fresh and gay,
  Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods and Plains,
  And ye that live and move, fair Creatures tell,
  Tell if you saw, how came I thus, how here?

His next Sentiment, when upon his first going to sleep he fancies
himself losing his Existence, and falling away into nothing, can never
be sufficiently admired. His Dream, in which he still preserves the
Consciousness of his Existence, together with his removal into the
Garden which was prepared for his Reception, are also Circumstances
finely imagined, and grounded upon what is delivered in Sacred Story.

These and the like wonderful Incidents in this Part of the Work, have in
them all the Beauties of Novelty, at the same time that they have all
the Graces of Nature. They are such as none but a great Genius could
have thought of, tho, upon the perusal of them, they seem to rise of
themselves from the Subject of which he treats. In a word, tho they are
natural, they are not obvious, which is the true Character of all fine
Writing.

The Impression which the Interdiction of the Tree of Life left in the
Mind of our first Parent, is describ'd with great Strength and Judgment;
as the Image of the several Beasts and Birds passing in review before
him is very beautiful and lively.

 --Each Bird and Beast behold
  Approaching two and two, these cowring low
  With Blandishment; each Bird stoop'd on his Wing:
  I nam'd them as they pass'd--

Adam, in the next place, describes a Conference which he held with his
Maker upon the Subject of Solitude. The Poet here represents the supreme
Being, as making an Essay of his own Work, and putting to the tryal that
reasoning Faculty, with which he had endued his Creature. Adam urges, in
this Divine Colloquy, the Impossibility of his being happy, tho he was
the Inhabitant of Paradise, and Lord of the whole Creation, without the
Conversation and Society of some rational Creature, who should partake
those Blessings with him. This Dialogue, which is supported chiefly by
the Beauty of the Thoughts, without other poetical Ornaments, is as fine
a Part as any in the whole Poem: The more the Reader examines the
Justness and Delicacy of its Sentiments, the more he will find himself
pleased with it. The Poet has wonderfully preserved the Character of
Majesty and Condescension in the Creator, and at the same time that of
Humility and Adoration in the Creature, as particularly in the following
Lines:

  Thus I presumptuous; and the Vision bright,
  As with a Smile more bright-tied, thus reply'd, &c.

 --I, with leave of Speech implor'd
  And humble Deprecation, thus reply d:
  Let not my Words offend thee, Heavnly Power,
  My Maker, be propitious while I speak, &c.

Adam then proceeds to give an account of his second Sleep, and of the
Dream in which he beheld the Formation of Eve. The new Passion that was
awaken'd in him at the sight of her, is touch'd very finely.

  Under his forming Hands a Creature grew,
  Manlike, but different Sex: so lovely fair,
  That what seem'd fair in all the World, seemed now
  Mean, or in her summ'd up, in her contained,
  And in her Looks; which from that time infused
  Sweetness info my Heart, unfelt before:
  And into all things from her Air inspired
  The Spirit of Love and amorous Delight.

Adams Distress upon losing sight of this beautiful Phantom, with his
Exclamations of Joy and Gratitude at the discovery of a real Creature,
who resembled the Apparition which had been presented to him in his
Dream; the Approaches he makes to her, and his Manner of Courtship; are
all laid together in a most exquisite Propriety of Sentiments.

Tho this Part of the Poem is work'd up with great Warmth and Spirit,
the Love which is described in it is every way suitable to a State of
Innocence. If the Reader compares the Description which Adam here gives
of his leading Eve to the Nuptial Bower, with that which Mr. Dryden has
made on the same occasion in a Scene of his Fall of Man, he will be
sensible of the great care which Milton took to avoid all Thoughts on so
delicate a Subject, that might be offensive to Religion or Good-Manners.
The Sentiments are chaste, but not cold; and convey to the Mind Ideas of
the most transporting Passion, and of the greatest Purity. What a noble
Mixture of Rapture and Innocence has the Author join'd together, in the
Reflection which Adam makes on the Pleasures of Love, compared to those
of Sense.

  Thus have I told thee all my State, and brought
  My Story to the sum of earthly Bliss,
  Which I enjoy; and must confess to find
  In all things else Delight indeed, but such
  As us'd or not, works in the Mind no Change
  Nor vehement Desire; these Delicacies
  I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, and Flowers,
  Walks, and the Melody of Birds: but here
  Far otherwise, transported I behold,
  Transported touch; here Passion first I felt,
  Commotion strange! in all Enjoyments else
  Superiour and unmov'd, here only weak
  Against the Charms of Beauty's powerful Glance.
  Or Nature fail'd in me, and left some Part
  Not Proof enough such Object to sustain;
  Or from my Side subducting, took perhaps
  More than enough; at least on her bestowed
  Too much of Ornament in outward shew
  Elaborate, of inward less exact.

 --When I approach
  Her Loveliness, so absolute she seems
  And in herself compleat, so well to know
  Her own, that what she wills to do or say
  Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best:
  All higher Knowledge in her Presence falls
  Degraded: Wisdom in discourse with her
  Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shews;
  Authority and Reason on her wait,
  As one intended first, not after made
  Occasionally: and to consummate all,
  Greatness of Mind, and Nobleness their Seat
  Build in her loveliest, and create an Awe
  About her, as a Guard angelick plac'd.

These Sentiments of Love, in our first Parent, gave the Angel such an
Insight into Humane Nature, that he seems apprehensive of the Evils
which might befall the Species in general, as well as Adam in
particular, from the Excess of this Passion. He therefore fortifies him
against it by timely Admonitions; which very artfully prepare the Mind
of the Reader for the Occurrences of the next Book, where the Weakness
of which Adam here gives such distant Discoveries, brings about that
fatal Event which is the Subject of the Poem. His Discourse, which
follows the gentle Rebuke he received from the Angel, shews that his
Love, however violent it might appear, was still founded in Reason, and
consequently not improper for Paradise.

  Neither her outside Form so fair, nor aught
  In Procreation common to all kinds,
  (Tho higher of the genial Bed by far,
  And with mysterious Reverence I deem)
  So much delights me, as those graceful Acts,
  Those thousand Decencies that daily flow
  From all her Words and Actions, mixt with Love
  And sweet Compliance, which declare unfeign'd
  Union of Mind, or in us both one Soul;
  Harmony to behold in--wedded Pair!

Adams Speech, at parting with the Angel, has in it a Deference and
Gratitude agreeable to an inferior Nature, and at the same time a
certain Dignity and Greatness suitable to the Father of Mankind in his
State of Innocence.

L.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 346.                  Monday, April 7, 1712.                 Steele.


  Consuetudinem benignitatis largitioni Munerum longe antepono. Hæc est
  Gravium hominum atque Magnorum; Illa quasi assentatorum populi,
  multitudinis levitatem voluptate quasi titillantium.

  Tull.


When we consider the Offices of humane Life, there is, methinks,
something in what we ordinarily call Generosity, which when carefully
examined, seems to flow rather from a loose and unguarded Temper, than
an honest and liberal Mind. For this reason it is absolutely necessary
that all Liberality should have for its Basis and Support Frugality. By
this means the beneficent Spirit works in a Man from the Convictions of
Reason, not from the Impulses of Passion. The generous Man, in the
ordinary acceptation, without respect to the Demands of his own Family,
will soon find, upon the Foot of his Account, that he has sacrificed to
Fools, Knaves, Flatterers, or the deservedly Unhappy, all the
Opportunities of affording any future Assistance where it ought to be.
Let him therefore reflect, that if to bestow be in it self laudable,
should not a Man take care to secure Ability to do things praiseworthy
as long as he lives? Or could there be a more cruel Piece of Raillery
upon a Man who should have reduc'd his Fortune below the Capacity of
acting according to his natural Temper, than to say of him, That
Gentleman was generous? My beloved Author therefore has, in the Sentence
on the Top of my Paper, turned his Eye with a certain Satiety from
beholding the Addresses to the People by Largesses and publick
Entertainments, which he asserts to be in general vicious, and are
always to be regulated according to the Circumstances of Time and a
Man's own Fortune. A constant Benignity in Commerce with the rest of the
World, which ought to run through all a Man's Actions, has Effects more
useful to those whom you oblige, and less ostentatious in your self. He
turns his Recommendation of this Virtue in commercial Life: and
according to him a Citizen who is frank in his Kindnesses, and abhors
Severity in his Demands; he who in buying, selling, lending, doing acts
of good Neighbourhood, is just and easy; he who appears naturally averse
to Disputes, and above the Sense of little Sufferings; bears a nobler
Character, and does much more good to Mankind, than any other Man's
Fortune without Commerce can possibly support. For the Citizen above all
other Men has Opportunities of arriving at that highest Fruit of Wealth,
to be liberal without the least Expence of a Man's own Fortune. It is
not to be denied but such a Practice is liable to hazard; but this
therefore adds to the Obligation, that, among Traders, he who obliges is
as much concerned to keep the Favour a Secret, as he who receives it.
The unhappy Distinctions among us in England are so great, that to
celebrate the Intercourse of commercial Friendship, (with which I am
daily made acquainted) would be to raise the virtuous Man so many
Enemies of the contrary Party. I am obliged to conceal all I know of Tom
the Bounteous, who lends at the ordinary Interest, to give Men of less
Fortune Opportunities of making greater Advantages. He conceals, under a
rough Air and distant Behaviour, a bleeding Compassion and womanish
Tenderness. This is governed by the most exact Circumspection, that
there is no Industry wanting in the Person whom he is to serve, and that
he is guilty of no improper Expences. This I know of Tom, but who dare
say it of so known a Tory? The same Care I was forced to use some time
ago in the Report of anothers Virtue, and said fifty instead of a
hundred, because the Man I pointed at was a Whig. Actions of this kind
are popular without being invidious: for every Man of ordinary
Circumstances looks upon a Man who has this known Benignity in his
Nature, as a Person ready to be his Friend upon such Terms as he ought
to expect it; and the Wealthy, who may envy such a Character, can do no
Injury to its Interests but by the Imitation of it, in which the good
Citizens will rejoice to be rivalled. I know not how to form to myself a
greater Idea of Humane Life, than in what is the Practice of some
wealthy Men whom I could name, that make no step to the Improvement of
their own Fortunes, wherein they do not also advance those of other Men,
who would languish in Poverty without that Munificence. In a Nation
where there are so many publick Funds to be supported, I know not
whether he can be called a good Subject, who does not imbark some part
of his Fortune with the State, to whose Vigilance he owes the Security
of the whole. This certainly is an immediate way of laying an Obligation
upon many, and extending his Benignity the furthest a Man can possibly,
who is not engaged in Commerce. But he who trades, besides giving the
State some part of this sort of Credit he gives his Banker, may in all
the Occurrences of his Life have his Eye upon removing Want from the
Door of the Industrious, and defending the unhappy upright Man from
Bankruptcy. Without this Benignity, Pride or Vengeance will precipitate
a Man to chuse the Receipt of half his Demands from one whom he has
undone, rather than the whole from one to whom he has shewn Mercy. This
Benignity is essential to the Character of a fair Trader, and any Man
who designs to enjoy his Wealth with Honour and Self-Satisfaction: Nay,
it would not be hard to maintain, that the Practice of supporting good
and industrious Men, would carry a Man further even to his Profit, than
indulging the Propensity of serving and obliging the Fortunate. My
Author argues on this Subject, in order to incline Mens Minds to those
who want them most, after this manner; We must always consider the
Nature of things, and govern our selves accordingly. The wealthy Man,
when he has repaid you, is upon a Ballance with you; but the Person whom
you favour'd with a Loan, if he be a good Man, will think himself in
your Debt after he has paid you. The Wealthy and the Conspicuous are not
obliged by the Benefit you do them, they think they conferred a Benefit
when they receive one. Your good Offices are always suspected, and it is
with them the same thing to expect their Favour as to receive it. But
the Man below you, who knows in the Good you have done him, you
respected himself more than his Circumstances, does not act like an
obliged Man only to him from whom he has received a Benefit, but also to
all who are capable of doing him one. And whatever little Offices he can
do for you, he is so far from magnifying it, that he will labour to
extenuate it in all his Actions and Expressions. Moreover, the Regard to
what you do to a great Man, at best is taken notice of no further than
by himself or his Family; but what you do to a Man of an humble Fortune,
(provided always that he is a good and a modest Man) raises the
Affections towards you of all Men of that Character (of which there are
many) in the whole City.

There is nothing gains a Reputation to a Preacher so much as his own
Practice; I am therefore casting about what Act of Benignity is in the
Power of a SPECTATOR. Alas, that lies but in a very narrow compass, and
I think the most immediate under my Patronage, are either Players, or
such whose Circumstances bear an Affinity with theirs: All therefore I
am able to do at this time of this Kind, is to tell the Town that on
Friday the 11th of this Instant April, there will be perform'd in
York-Buildings a Consort of Vocal and Instrumental Musick, for the
Benefit of Mr. Edward Keen, the Father of twenty Children; and that this
Day the haughty George Powell hopes all the good-natur'd part of the
Town will favour him, whom they Applauded in Alexander, Timon, Lear, and
Orestes, with their Company this Night, when he hazards all his heroick
Glory for their Approbation in the humbler Condition of honest Jack
Falstaffe.

T.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 347.             Tuesday, April 8, 1711.                   Budgell.


  Quis furor ô Cives! quæ tanta licentia ferri!

  Lucan.


I do not question but my Country Readers have been very much surprized
at the several Accounts they have met with in our publick Papers of that
Species of Men among us, lately known by the Name of Mohocks. I find the
Opinions of the Learned, as to their Origin and Designs, are altogether
various, insomuch that very many begin to doubt whether indeed there
were ever any such Society of Men. The Terror which spread it self over
the whole Nation some Years since, on account of the Irish, is still
fresh in most Peoples Memories, tho it afterwards appeared there was
not the least Ground for that general Consternation.

The late Panick Fear was, in the Opinion of many deep and penetrating
Persons, of the same nature. These will have it, that the Mohocks are
like those Spectres and Apparitions which frighten several Towns and
Villages in her Majesty's Dominions, tho they were never seen by any of
the Inhabitants. Others are apt to think that these Mohocks are a kind
of Bull-Beggars, first invented by prudent married Men, and Masters of
Families, in order to deter their Wives and Daughters from taking the
Air at unseasonable Hours; and that when they tell them the Mohocks will
catch them, it is a Caution of the same nature with that of our
Fore-fathers, when they bid their Children have a care of Raw-head and
Bloody-bones.

For my own part, I am afraid there was too much Reason for that great
Alarm the whole City has been in upon this Occasion; tho at the same
time I must own that I am in some doubt whether the following Pieces are
Genuine and Authentick; and the more so, because I am not fully
satisfied that the Name by which the Emperor subscribes himself, is
altogether conformable to the Indian Orthography.

I shall only further inform my Readers, that it was some time since I
receiv'd the following Letter and Manifesto, tho for particular Reasons
I did not think fit to publish them till now.


  To the SPECTATOR.

  SIR,

  "Finding that our earnest Endeavours for the Good of Mankind have been
  basely and maliciously represented to the World, we send you enclosed
  our Imperial Manifesto, which it is our Will and Pleasure that you
  forthwith communicate to the Publick, by inserting it in your next
  daily Paper. We do not doubt of your ready Compliance in this
  Particular, and therefore bid you heartily Farewell."

  Sign'd,
  Taw Waw Eben Zan Kaladar,
  Emperor of the Mohocks.

    The Manifesto of Taw Waw Eben Zan Kaladar, Emperor of the Mohocks.

    "Whereas we have received Information from sundry Quarters of this
    great and populous City, of several Outrages committed on the Legs,
    Arms, Noses, and other Parts of the good People of England, by such
    as have styled themselves our Subjects; in order to vindicate our
    Imperial Dignity from those false Aspersions which have been cast on
    it, as if we our selves might have encouraged or abetted any such
    Practices; we have, by these Presents, thought fit to signify our
    utmost Abhorrence and Detestation of all such tumultuous and
    irregular Proceedings: and do hereby further give notice, that if
    any Person or Persons has or have suffered any Wound, Hurt, Damage
    or Detriment in his or their Limb or Limbs, otherwise than shall be
    hereafter specified, the said Person or Persons, upon applying
    themselves to such as we shall appoint for the Inspection and
    Redress of the Grievances aforesaid, shall be forthwith committed to
    the Care of our principal Surgeon, and be cured at our own Expence,
    in some one or other of those Hospitals which we are now erecting
    for that purpose.

    "And to the end that no one may, either through Ignorance or
    Inadvertency, incur those Penalties which we have thought fit to
    inflict on Persons of loose and dissolute Lives, we do hereby
    notifie to the Publick, that if any Man be knocked down or assaulted
    while he is employed in his lawful Business, at proper Hours, that
    it is not done by our Order; and we do hereby permit and allow any
    such person so knocked down or assaulted, to rise again, and defend
    himself in the best manner that he is able.

    "We do also command all and every our good Subjects, that they do
    not presume, upon any Pretext whatsoever, to issue and sally forth
    from their respective Quarters till between the Hours of Eleven and
    Twelve. That they never Tip the Lion upon Man, Woman or Child, till
    the Clock at St. Dunstan's shall have struck One.

    "That the Sweat be never given but between the Hours of One and Two;
    always provided, that our Hunters may begin to Hunt a little after
    the Close of the Evening, any thing to the contrary herein
    notwithstanding. Provided also, that if ever they are reduced to the
    Necessity of Pinking, it shall always be in the most fleshy Parts,
    and such as are least exposed to view.

    "It is also our Imperial Will and Pleasure, that our good Subjects
    the Sweaters do establish their Hummums[1] in such close Places,
    Alleys, Nooks, and Corners, that the Patient or Patients may not be
    in danger of catching Cold.

    "That the Tumblers, to whose Care we chiefly commit the Female Sex,
    confine themselves to Drury-Lane and the Purlieus of the Temple; and
    that every other Party and Division of our Subjects do each of them
    keep within the respective Quarters we have allotted to them.
    Provided nevertheless, that nothing herein contained shall in any
    wise be construed to extend to the Hunters, who have our full
    Licence and Permission to enter into any Part of the Town where-ever
    their Game shall lead them.

    "And whereas we have nothing more at our Imperial Heart than the
    Reformation of the Cities of London and Westminster, which to our
    unspeakable Satisfaction we have in some measure already effected,
    we do hereby earnestly pray and exhort all Husbands, Fathers,
    Housekeepers and Masters of Families, in either of the aforesaid
    Cities, not only to repair themselves to their respective
    Habitations at early and seasonable Hours; but also to keep their
    Wives and Daughters, Sons, Servants, and Apprentices, from appearing
    in the Streets at those Times and Seasons which may expose them to a
    military Discipline, as it is practised by our good Subjects the
    Mohocks: and we do further promise, on our Imperial Word, that as
    soon as the Reformation aforesaid shall be brought about, we will
    forthwith cause all Hostilities to cease.

    "Given from our Court at the Devil-Tavern,
    March 15, 1712."


X.


[Footnote 1: Turkish Sweating Baths. The Hummums "in Covent Garden was
one of the first of these baths (bagnios) set up in England."]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 348.                Wednesday, April 9, 1712.                 Steele.


  Invidiam placare paras virtute relicta?

  Hor.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I have not seen you lately at any of the Places where I visit, so
  that I am afraid you are wholly unacquainted with what passes among my
  part of the World, who are, tho I say it, without Controversy, the
  most accomplished and best bred of the Town. Give me leave to tell
  you, that I am extremely discomposed when I hear Scandal, and am an
  utter Enemy to all manner of Detraction, and think it the greatest
  Meanness that People of Distinction can be guilty of: However, it is
  hardly possible to come into Company, where you do not find them
  pulling one another to pieces, and that from no other Provocation but
  that of hearing any one commended. Merit, both as to Wit and Beauty,
  is become no other than the Possession of a few trifling Peoples
  Favour, which you cannot possibly arrive at, if you have really any
  thing in you that is deserving. What they would bring to pass, is, to
  make all Good and Evil consist in Report, and with Whispers, Calumnies
  and Impertinencies, to have the Conduct of those Reports. By this
  means Innocents are blasted upon their first Appearance in Town; and
  there is nothing more required to make a young Woman the object of
  Envy and Hatred, than to deserve Love and Admiration. This abominable
  Endeavour to suppress or lessen every thing that is praise-worthy, is
  as frequent among the Men as the Women. If I can remember what passed
  at a Visit last Night, it will serve as an Instance that the Sexes are
  equally inclined to Defamation, with equal Malice, with equal
  Impotence. Jack Triplett came into my Lady Airy's about Eight of [the]
  Clock. You know the manner we sit at a Visit, and I need not describe
  the Circle; but Mr. Triplett came in, introduced by two Tapers
  supported by a spruce Servant, whose Hair is under a Cap till my
  Lady's Candles are all lighted up, and the Hour of Ceremony begins: I
  say, Jack Triplett came in, and singing (for he is really good
  Company) Every Feature, Charming Creature,--he went on, It is a most
  unreasonable thing that People cannot go peaceably to see their
  Friends, but these Murderers are let loose. Such a Shape! such an Air!
  what a Glance was that as her Chariot pass'd by mine--My Lady herself
  interrupted him; Pray who is this fine Thing--I warrant, says another,
  tis the Creature I was telling your Ladyship of just now. You were
  telling of? says Jack; I wish I had been so happy as to have come in
  and heard you, for I have not Words to say what she is: But if an
  agreeable Height, a modest Air, a Virgin Shame, and Impatience of
  being beheld, amidst a Blaze of ten thousand Charms--The whole Room
  flew out--Oh Mr. Triplett!--When Mrs. Lofty, a known Prude, said she
  believed she knew whom the Gentleman meant; but she was indeed, as he
  civilly represented her, impatient of being beheld--Then turning to
  the Lady next to her--The most unbred Creature you ever saw. Another
  pursued the Discourse: As unbred, Madam, as you may think her, she is
  extremely bely'd if she is the Novice she appears; she was last Week
  at a Ball till two in the Morning; Mr. Triplett knows whether he was
  the happy Man that took Care of her home; but--This was followed by
  some particular Exception that each Woman in the Room made to some
  peculiar Grace or Advantage so that Mr. Triplett was beaten from one
  Limb and Feature to another, till he was forced to resign the whole
  Woman. In the end I took notice Triplett recorded all this Malice in
  his Heart; and saw in his Countenance, and a certain waggish Shrug,
  that he design'd to repeat the Conversation: I therefore let the
  Discourse die, and soon after took an Occasion to commend a certain
  Gentleman of my Acquaintance for a Person of singular Modesty,
  Courage, Integrity, and withal as a Man of an entertaining
  Conversation, to which Advantages he had a Shape and Manner peculiarly
  graceful. Mr. Triplett, who is a Woman's Man, seem'd to hear me with
  Patience enough commend the Qualities of his Mind: He never heard
  indeed but that he was a very honest Man, and no Fool; but for a fine
  Gentleman, he must ask Pardon. Upon no other Foundation than this, Mr.
  Triplett took occasion to give the Gentleman's Pedigree, by what
  Methods some part of the Estate was acquired, how much it was beholden
  to a Marriage for the present Circumstances of it: After all, he could
  see nothing but a common Man in his Person, his Breeding or
  Understanding.

  Thus, Mr. SPECTATOR, this impertinent Humour of diminishing every one
  who is produced in Conversation to their Advantage, runs thro the
  World; and I am, I confess, so fearful of the Force of ill Tongues,
  that I have begged of all those who are my Well-wishers never to
  commend me, for it will but bring my Frailties into Examination, and I
  had rather be unobserved, than conspicuous for disputed Perfections. I
  am confident a thousand young People, who would have been Ornaments to
  Society, have, from Fear of Scandal, never dared to exert themselves
  in the polite Arts of Life. Their Lives have passed away in an odious
  Rusticity, in spite of great Advantages of Person, Genius and Fortune.
  There is a vicious Terror of being blamed in some well-inclin'd
  People, and a wicked Pleasure in suppressing them in others; both
  which I recommend to your Spectatorial Wisdom to animadvert upon; and
  if you can be successful in it, I need not say how much you will
  deserve of the Town; but new Toasts will owe to you their Beauty, and
  new Wits their Fame. I am,
  SIR,
  Your most Obedient
  Humble Servant,
  Mary."


T.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 349.                Thursday, April 10, 1712.              Addison.


  Quos ille timorum
  Maximus haud urget lethi metus: inde ruendi
  In ferrum mens prona viris, animæque capaces
  Mortis.

  Lucan.


I am very much pleased with a Consolatory Letter of Phalaris, to one who
had lost a Son that was a young Man of great Merit. The Thought with
which he comforts the afflicted Father, is, to the best of my Memory, as
follows; That he should consider Death had set a kind of Seal upon his
Sons Character, and placed him out of the Reach of Vice and Infamy:
That while he liv'd he was still within the Possibility of falling away
from Virtue, and losing the Fame of which he was possessed. Death only
closes a Man's Reputation, and determines it as good or bad.

This, among other Motives, may be one Reason why we are naturally averse
to the launching out into a Man's Praise till his Head is laid in the
Dust. Whilst he is capable of changing, we may be forced to retract our
Opinions. He may forfeit the Esteem we have conceived of him, and some
time or other appear to us under a different Light from what he does at
present. In short, as the Life of any Man cannot be call'd happy or
unhappy, so neither can it be pronounced vicious or virtuous, before the
Conclusion of it.

It was upon this consideration that Epaminondas, being asked whether
Chabrias, Iphicrates, or he himself, deserved most to be esteemed? You
must first see us die, said he, before that Question can be answered.
[1]

As there is not a more melancholy Consideration to a good Man than his
being obnoxious to such a Change, so there is nothing more glorious than
to keep up an Uniformity in his Actions, and preserve the Beauty of his
Character to the last.

The End of a Man's Life is often compared to the winding up of a
well-written Play, where the principal Persons still act in Character,
whatever the Fate is which they undergo. There is scarce a great Person
in the Grecian or Roman History, whose Death has not been remarked upon
by some Writer or other, and censured or applauded according to the
Genius or Principles of the Person who has descanted on it. Monsieur de
St. Evremont is very particular in setting forth the Constancy and
Courage of Petronius Arbiter during his last Moments, and thinks he
discovers in them a greater Firmness of Mind and Resolution than in the
Death of Seneca, Cato, or Socrates. There is no question but this polite
Authors Affectation of appearing singular in his Remarks, and making
Discoveries which had escaped the Observation of others, threw him into
this course of Reflection. It was Petronius's Merit, that he died in the
same Gaiety of Temper in which he lived; but as his Life was altogether
loose and dissolute, the Indifference which he showed at the Close of it
is to be looked upon as a piece of natural Carelessness and Levity,
rather than Fortitude. The Resolution of Socrates proceeded from very
different Motives, the Consciousness of a well-spent Life, and the
prospect of a happy Eternity. If the ingenious Author above mentioned
was so pleased with Gaiety of Humour in a dying Man, he might have found
a much nobler Instance of it in our Countryman Sir Thomas More.

This great and learned Man was famous for enlivening his ordinary
Discourses with Wit and Pleasantry; and, as Erasmus tells him in an
Epistle Dedicatory, acted in all parts of Life like a second Democritus.

He died upon a Point of Religion, and is respected as a Martyr by that
Side for which he suffer'd. The innocent Mirth which had been so
conspicuous in his Life, did not forsake him to the last: He maintain'd
the same Chearfulness of Heart upon the Scaffold, which he used to shew
at his Table; and upon laying his Head on the Block, gave Instances of
that Good-Humour with which he had always entertained his Friends in the
most ordinary Occurrences. His Death was of a piece with his Life. There
was nothing in it new, forced, or affected. He did not look upon the
severing of his Head from his Body as a Circumstance that ought to
produce any Change in the Disposition of his Mind; and as he died under
a fixed and settled Hope of Immortality, he thought any unusual degree
of Sorrow and Concern improper on such an Occasion, as had nothing in it
which could deject or terrify him.

There is no great danger of Imitation from this Example. Mens natural
Fears will be a sufficient Guard against it. I shall only observe, that
what was Philosophy in this extraordinary Man, would be Frenzy in one
who does not resemble him as well in the Chearfulness of his Temper, as
in the Sanctity of his Life and Manners.

I shall conclude this Paper with the Instance of a Person who seems to
me to have shewn more Intrepidity and Greatness of Soul in his dying
Moments, than what we meet with among any of the most celebrated Greeks
and Romans. I met with this Instance in the History of the Revolutions
in Portugal, written by the Abbot de Vertot. [2]

When Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, had invaded the Territories of
Muly Moluc, Emperor of Morocco, in order to dethrone him, and set his
Crown upon the Head of his Nephew, Moluc was wearing away with a
Distemper which he himself knew was incurable. However, he prepared for
the Reception of so formidable an Enemy. He was indeed so far spent with
his Sickness, that he did not expect to live out the whole Day, when the
last decisive Battel was given; but knowing the fatal Consequences that
would happen to his Children and People, in case he should die before he
put an end to that War, he commanded his principal Officers that if he
died during the Engagement, they should conceal his Death from the Army,
and that they should ride up to the Litter in which his Corpse was
carried, under Pretence of receiving Orders from him as usual. Before
the Battel begun, he was carried through all the Ranks of his Army in an
open Litter, as they stood drawn up in Array, encouraging them to fight
valiantly in defence of their Religion and Country. Finding afterwards
the Battel to go against him, tho he was very near his last Agonies, he
threw himself out of his Litter, rallied his Army, and led them on to
the Charge; which afterwards ended in a compleat Victory on the side of
the Moors. He had no sooner brought his Men to the Engagement, but
finding himself utterly spent, he was again replaced in his Litter,
where laying his Finger on his Mouth, to enjoin Secrecy to his Officers,
who stood about him, he died a few Moments after in that Posture.

L.


[Footnote 1: Plutarch's Life of Epaminondas.]


[Footnote 2: The Abbé Vertot--Renatus Aubert de Vertot d'Auboeuf--was
born in 1655, and living in the Spectators time. He died in 1735, aged
80. He had exchanged out of the severe order of the Capuchins into that
of the Præmonstratenses when, at the age of 34, he produced, in 1689,
his first work, the History of the Revolutions of Portugal, here quoted.
Continuing to write history, in 1701 he was made a member, and in 1705 a
paid member, of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres.]


        *       *       *       *       *


No. 350.              Friday, April 11, 1712.                   Steele.


  Ea animi elatio quæ cernitur in periculis, si Justitia vacat
  pugnatque pro suis commodis, in vitio est.

  Tull.


CAPTAIN SENTREY was last Night at the Club, and produced a Letter from
Ipswich, which his Correspondent desired him to communicate to his
Friend the SPECTATOR. It contained an Account of an Engagement between a
French Privateer, commanded by one Dominick Pottiere, and a little
Vessel of that Place laden with Corn, the Master whereof, as I remember,
was one Goodwin. The Englishman  defended himself with incredible
Bravery, and beat off the French, after having been boarded three or
four times. The Enemy still came on with greater Fury, and hoped by his
Number of Men to carry the Prize, till at last the Englishman finding
himself sink apace, and ready to perish, struck: But the Effect which
this singular Gallantry had upon the Captain of the Privateer, was no
other than an unmanly Desire of Vengeance for the Loss he had sustained
in his several Attacks. He told the Ipswich Man in a speaking-Trumpet,
that he would not take him aboard, and that he stayed to see him sink.
The Englishman at the same time observed a Disorder in the Vessel, which
he rightly judged to proceed from the Disdain which the Ships Crew had
of their Captains Inhumanity: With this Hope he went into his Boat, and
approached the Enemy. He was taken in by the Sailors in spite of their
Commander; but though they received him against his Command, they
treated him when he was in the Ship in the manner he directed. Pottiere
caused his Men to hold Goodwin, while he beat him with a Stick till he
fainted with Loss of Blood, and Rage of Heart: after which he ordered
him into Irons without allowing him any Food, but such as one or two of
the Men stole to him under peril of the like Usage: After having kept
him several Days overwhelmed with the Misery of Stench, Hunger, and
Soreness, he brought him into Calais. The Governour of the Place was
soon acquainted with all that had passed, dismissed Pottiere from his
Charge with Ignominy, and gave Goodwin all the Relief which a Man of
Honour would bestow upon an Enemy barbarously treated, to recover the
Imputation of Cruelty upon his Prince and Country.

When Mr. SENTREY had read his Letter, full of many other circumstances
which aggravate the Barbarity, he fell into a sort of Criticism upon
Magnanimity and Courage, and argued that they were inseparable; and that
Courage, without regard to Justice and Humanity, was no other than the
Fierceness of a wild Beast. A good and truly bold Spirit, continued he,
is ever actuated by Reason and a Sense of Honour and Duty: The
Affectation of such a Spirit exerts it self in an Impudent Aspect, an
over-bearing Confidence, and a certain Negligence of giving Offence.
This is visible in all the cocking Youths you see about this Town, who
are noisy in Assemblies, unawed by the Presence of wise and virtuous
Men; in a word, insensible of all the Honours and Decencies of human
Life. A shameless Fellow takes advantage of Merit clothed with Modesty
and Magnanimity, and in the Eyes of little People appears sprightly and
agreeable; while the Man of Resolution and true Gallantry is overlooked
and disregarded, if not despised. There is a Propriety in all things;
and I believe what you Scholars call just and sublime, in opposition to
turgid and bombast Expression, may give you an Idea of what I mean, when
I say Modesty is the certain Indication of a great Spirit, and Impudence
the Affectation of it. He that writes with Judgment, and never rises
into improper Warmths, manifests the true Force of Genius; in like
manner, he who is quiet and equal in all his Behaviour, is supported in
that Deportment by what we may call true Courage. Alas, it is not so
easy a thing to be a brave Man as the unthinking part of Mankind
imagine: To dare, is not all that there is in it. The Privateer we were
just now talking of, had boldness enough to attack his Enemy, but not
Greatness of Mind enough to admire the same Quality exerted by that
Enemy in defending himself. Thus his base and little Mind was wholly
taken up in the sordid regard to the Prize, of which he failed, and the
damage done to his own Vessel; and therefore he used an honest Man, who
defended his own from him, in the Manner as he would a Thief that should
rob him.

He was equally disappointed, and had not Spirit enough to consider that
one Case would be Laudable and the other Criminal. Malice, Rancour,
Hatred, Vengeance, are what tear the Breasts of mean Men in Fight; but
Fame, Glory, Conquests, Desires of Opportunities to pardon and oblige
their Opposers, are what glow in the Minds of the Gallant. The Captain
ended his Discourse with a Specimen of his Book-Learning; and gave us to
understand that he had read a French Author on the Subject of Justness
in point of Gallantry. I love, said Mr. SENTREY, a Critick who mixes the
Rules of Life with Annotations upon Writers. My Author, added he, in his
Discourse upon Epick Poem, takes occasion to speak of the same Quality
of Courage drawn in the two different Characters of Turnus and Æneas: He
makes Courage the chief and greatest Ornament of Turnus; but in Æneas
there are many others which out-shine it, amongst the rest that of
Piety. Turnus is therefore all along painted by the Poet full of
Ostentation, his Language haughty and vain glorious, as placing his
Honour in the Manifestation of his Valour; Æneas speaks little, is slow
to Action; and shows only a sort of defensive Courage. If Equipage and
Address make Turnus appear more couragious than Æneas, Conduct and
Success prove Æneas more valiant than Turnus.

T.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 351.              Saturday, April 12, 1712.                 Addison.


  In te omnis domus inclinata recumbit.

  Virg.


If we look into the three great Heroick Poems which have appeared in the
World, we may observe that they are built upon very slight Foundations.
Homer lived near 300 Years after the Trojan War; and, as the writing of
History was not then in use among the Greeks, we may very well suppose,
that the Tradition of Achilles and Ulysses had brought down but very few
particulars to his Knowledge; though there is no question but he has
wrought into his two Poems such of their remarkable Adventures, as were
still talked of among his Contemporaries.

The Story of Æneas, on which Virgil founded his Poem, was likewise very
bare of Circumstances, and by that means afforded him an Opportunity of
embellishing it with Fiction, and giving a full range to his own
Invention. We find, however, that he has interwoven, in the course of
his Fable, the principal Particulars, which were generally believed
among the Romans, of Æneas his Voyage and Settlement in Italy. The
Reader may find an Abridgment of the whole Story as collected out of the
ancient Historians, and as it was received among the Romans, in
Dionysius Halicarnasseus [1].

Since none of the Criticks have consider'd Virgil's Fable, with relation
to this History of Æneas, it may not, perhaps, be amiss to examine it
in this Light, so far as regards my present Purpose. Whoever looks into
the Abridgment above mentioned, will find that the Character of Æneas is
filled with Piety to the Gods, and a superstitious Observation of
Prodigies, Oracles, and Predictions. Virgil has not only preserved this
Character in the Person of Æneas, but has given a place in his Poem to
those particular Prophecies which he found recorded of him in History
and Tradition. The Poet took the matters of Fact as they came down to
him, and circumstanced them after his own manner, to make them appear
the more natural, agreeable, or surprizing. I believe very many Readers
have been shocked at that ludicrous Prophecy, which one of the Harpyes
pronounces to the Trojans in the third Book, namely, that before they
had built their intended City, they should be reduced by Hunger to eat
their very Tables. But, when they hear that this was one of the
Circumstances that had been transmitted to the Romans in the History of
Æneas, they will think the Poet did very well in taking notice of it.
The Historian above mentioned acquaints us, a Prophetess had foretold
Æneas, that he should take his Voyage Westward, till his Companions
should eat their Tables; and that accordingly, upon his landing in
Italy, as they were eating their Flesh upon Cakes of Bread, for want of
other Conveniences, they afterwards fed on the Cakes themselves; upon
which one of the Company said merrily, We are eating our Tables. They
immediately took the Hint, says the Historian, and concluded the
Prophecy to be fulfilled. As Virgil did not think it proper to omit so
material a particular in the History of Æneas, it may be worth while to
consider with how much Judgment he has qualified it, and taken off every
thing that might have appeared improper for a Passage in an Heroick
Poem. The Prophetess who foretells it, is an Hungry Harpy, as the Person
who discovers it is young Ascanius. [2]

  Heus etiam mensas consumimus, inquit Inlus!

Such an observation, which is beautiful in the Mouth of a Boy, would
have been ridiculous from any other of the Company. I am apt to think
that the changing of the Trojan Fleet into Water-Nymphs which is the
most violent Machine in the whole Æneid, and has given offence to
several Criticks, may be accounted for the same way. Virgil himself,
before he begins that Relation, premises, that what he was going to tell
appeared incredible, but that it was justified by Tradition. What
further confirms me that this Change of the Fleet was a celebrated
Circumstance in the History of Æneas, is, that Ovid has given place to
the same Metamorphosis in his Account of the heathen Mythology.

None of the Criticks I have met with having considered the Fable of the
Æneid in this Light, and taken notice how the Tradition, on which it was
founded, authorizes those Parts in it which appear the most
exceptionable; I hope the length of this Reflection will not make it
unacceptable to the curious Part of my Readers.

The History, which was the Basis of Milton's Poem, is still shorter than
either that of the Iliad or Æneid. The Poet has likewise taken care to
insert every Circumstance of it in the Body of his Fable. The ninth
Book, which we are here to consider, is raised upon that brief Account
in Scripture, wherein we are told that the Serpent was more subtle than
any Beast of the Field, that he tempted the Woman to eat of the
forbidden Fruit, that she was overcome by this Temptation, and that Adam
followed her Example. From these few Particulars, Milton has formed one
of the most Entertaining Fables that Invention ever produced. He has
disposed of these several Circumstances among so many beautiful and
natural Fictions of his own, that his whole Story looks only like a
Comment upon sacred Writ, or rather seems to be a full and compleat
Relation of what the other is only an Epitome. I have insisted the
longer on this Consideration, as I look upon the Disposition and
Contrivance of the Fable to be the principal Beauty of the ninth Book,
which has more Story in it, and is fuller of Incidents, than any other
in the whole Poem. Satan's traversing the Globe, and still keeping
within the Shadow of the Night, as fearing to be discovered by the Angel
of the Sun, who had before detected him, is one of those beautiful
Imaginations with which he introduces this his second Series of
Adventures. Having examined the Nature of every Creature, and found out
one which was the most proper for his Purpose, he again returns to
Paradise; and, to avoid Discovery, sinks by Night with a River that ran
under the Garden, and rises up again through a Fountain that [issued
[3]] from it by the Tree of Life. The Poet, who, as we have before taken
notice, speaks as little as possible in his own Person, and, after the
Example of Homer, fills every Part of his Work with Manners and
Characters, introduces a Soliloquy of this infernal Agent, who was thus
restless in the Destruction of Man. He is then describ'd as gliding
through the Garden, under the resemblance of a Mist, in order to find
out that Creature in which he design'd to tempt our first Parents. This
Description has something in it very Poetical and Surprizing.

  So saying, through each Thicket Dank or Dry,
  Like a black Mist, low creeping, he held on
  His Midnight Search, where soonest he might find
  The Serpent: him fast sleeping soon he found
  In Labyrinth of many a Round self-roll'd,
  His Head the midst, well stor'd with subtle Wiles.

The Author afterwards gives us a Description of the Morning, which is
wonderfully suitable to a Divine Poem, and peculiar to that first Season
of Nature: He represents the Earth, before it was curst, as a great
Altar, breathing out its Incense from all Parts, and sending up a
pleasant Savour to the Nostrils of its Creator; to which he adds a noble
Idea of Adam and Eve, as offering their Morning Worship, and filling up
the Universal Consort of Praise and Adoration.

  Now when as sacred Light began to dawn
  In Eden on the humid Flowers, that breathed
  Their Morning Incense, when all things that breathe
  From th' Earth's great Altar send up silent Praise
  To the Creator, and his Nostrils fill
  With grateful Smell; forth came the human Pair,
  And join'd their vocal Worship to the Choir
  Of Creatures wanting Voice--

The Dispute which follows between our two first Parents, is represented
with great Art: It [proceeds [4]] from a Difference of Judgment, not of
Passion, and is managed with Reason, not with Heat: It is such a Dispute
as we may suppose might have happened in Paradise, had Man continued
Happy and Innocent. There is a great Delicacy in the Moralities which
are interspersed in Adams Discourse, and which the most ordinary Reader
cannot but take notice of. That Force of Love which the Father of
Mankind so finely describes in the eighth Book, and which is inserted in
my last Saturdays Paper, shews it self here in many fine Instances: As
in those fond Regards he cast towards Eve at her parting from him.

  Her long with ardent Look his Eye pursued
  Delighted, but desiring more her stay:
  Oft he to her his Charge of quick return
  Repeated; she to him as oft engaged
  To be return'd by noon amid the Bower.

In his Impatience and Amusement during her Absence

 --Adam the while,
  Waiting desirous her return, had wove
  Of choicest Flowers a Garland, to adorn
  Her Tresses, and her rural Labours crown:
  As Reapers oft are wont their Harvest Queen.
  Great Joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
  Solace in her return, so long delay'd.

But particularly in that passionate Speech, where seeing her
irrecoverably lost, he resolves to perish with her rather than to live
without her.

 --Some cursed Fraud
  Or Enemy hath beguil'd thee, yet unknown,
  And me with thee hath ruin'd; for with thee
  Certain my Resolution is to die!
  How can I live without thee; how forego
  Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly join'd,
  To live again in these wild Woods forlorn?
  Should God create another Eve, and I
  Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee
  Would never from my Heart! no, no! I feel
  The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh,
  Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State
  Mine never shall be parted, Bliss or Woe!

The Beginning of this Speech, and the Preparation to it, are animated
with the same Spirit as the Conclusion, which I have here quoted.

The several Wiles which are put in practice by the Tempter, when he
found Eve separated from her Husband, the many pleasing Images of Nature
which are intermix'd in this part of the Story, with its gradual and
regular Progress to the fatal Catastrophe, are so very remarkable that
it would be superfluous to point out their respective Beauties.

I have avoided mentioning any particular Similitudes in my Remarks on
this great Work, because I have given a general Account of them in my
Paper on the first Book. There is one, however, in this part of the
Poem, which I shall here quote as it is not only very beautiful, but the
closest of any in the whole Poem. I mean that where the Serpent is
describ as rolling forward in all his Pride, animated by the evil
Spirit, and conducting Eve to her Destruction, while Adam was at too
great a distance from her to give her his Assistance. These several
Particulars are all of them wrought into the following Similitude.

 --Hope elevates, and Joy
  Brightens his Crest; as when a wandering Fire,
  Compact of unctuous Vapour, which the Night
  Condenses, and the Cold invirons round,
  Kindled through Agitation to a Flame,
  (Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends)
  Hovering and blazing with delusive Light,
  Misleads th' amaz'd Night-wanderer from his Way
  To Bogs and Mires, and oft through Pond or Pool,
  There swallowed up and lost, from succour far.

That secret Intoxication of Pleasure, with all those transient flushings
of Guilt and Joy, which the Poet represents in our first Parents upon
their eating the forbidden Fruit, to [those [5]] flaggings of Spirits,
damps of Sorrow, and mutual Accusations which succeed it, are conceiv'd
with a wonderful Imagination, and described in very natural Sentiments.

When Dido in the fourth Æneid yielded to that fatal Temptation which
ruined her, Virgil tells us the Earth trembled, the Heavens were filled
with Flashes of Lightning, and the Nymphs howled upon the Mountain-Tops.
Milton, in the same poetical Spirit, has described all Nature as
disturbed upon Eves eating the forbidden Fruit.

  So saying, her rash Hand in evil hour
  Forth reaching to the Fruit, she pluckt, she eat:
  Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her Seat
  Sighing, through all her Works gave signs of Woe
  That all was lost--

Upon Adams falling into the same Guilt, the whole Creation appears a
second time in Convulsions.

 --He scrupled not to eat
  Against his better knowledge; not deceiv's,
  But fondly overcome with female Charm.
  Earth trembled from her Entrails, as again
  In Pangs, and Nature gave a second Groan,
  Sky lowred, and muttering Thunder, some sad Drops
  Wept at compleating of the mortal Sin--

As all Nature suffer'd by the Guilt of our first Parents, these Symptoms
of Trouble and Consternation are wonderfully imagined, not only as
Prodigies, but as Marks of her Sympathizing in the Fall of Man.

Adams Converse with Eve, after having eaten the forbidden Fruit, is an
exact Copy of that between Jupiter and Juno in the fourteenth Iliad.
Juno there approaches Jupiter with the Girdle which she had received
from Venus; upon which he tells her, that she appeared more charming and
desirable than she [6] done before, even when their Loves were at the
highest. The Poet afterwards describes them as reposing on a Summet of
Mount Ida, which produced under them a Bed of Flowers, the Lotos, the
Crocus, and the Hyacinth; and concludes his Description with their
falling asleep.

Let the Reader compare this with the following Passage in Milton, which
begins with Adams Speech to Eve.

  For never did thy Beauty, since the Day
  I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorn'd
  With all Perfections, so enflame my Sense
  With ardor to enjoy thee, fairer now
  Than ever, Bounty of this virtuous Tree.
  So said he, and forbore not Glance or Toy
  Of amorous Intent, well understood
  Of Eve, whose Eye darted contagious Fire.
  Her hand he seiz'd, and to a shady Bank
  Thick over-head with verdant Roof embower'd,
  He led her nothing loth: Flowrs were the Couch,
  Pansies, and Violets, and Asphodel,
  And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest Lap.
  There they their fill of Love, and Loves disport,
  Took largely, of their mutual Guilt the Seal,
  The Solace of their Sin, till dewy Sleep
  Oppress'd them--

As no Poet seems ever to have studied Homer more, or to have more
resembled him in the Greatness of Genius than Milton, I think I should
have given but a very imperfect Account of his Beauties, if I had not
observed the most remarkable Passages which look like Parallels in these
two great Authors. I might, in the course of these criticisms, have
taken notice of many particular Lines and Expressions which are
translated from the Greek Poet; but as I thought this would have
appeared too minute and over-curious, I have purposely omitted them. The
greater Incidents, however, are not only set off by being shewn in the
same Light with several of the same nature in Homer, but by that means
may be also guarded against the Cavils of the Tasteless or Ignorant.


[Footnote 1: In the first book of his Roman Antiquities.]


[Footnote 2: Dionysius says that the prophecy was either, as some write,
given at Dodous, or, as others say, by a Sybil, and the exclamation was
by one of the sons of Æneas, as it is related; or he was some other of
his comrades.]


[Footnote 3: [run]]


[Footnote 4: [arises]]


[Footnote 5: [that]]


[Footnote 6: [ever had]]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 352.                Monday, April 14, 1712.                 Steele.


  Si ad honestatem nati sumus, ea aut sola expetenda est, aut certe
  omni pondere gravior est habenda quam reliqua omnia.

  Tull.


Will. Honeycomb was complaining to me yesterday, that the Conversation
of the Town is so altered of late Years, that a fine Gentleman is at a
loss for Matter to start Discourse, as well as unable to fall in with
the Talk he generally meets with. WILL. takes notice, that there is now
an Evil under the Sun which he supposes to be entirely new, because not
mentioned by any Satyrist or Moralist in any Age: Men, said he, grow
Knaves sooner than they ever did since the Creation of the World before.
If you read the Tragedies of the last Age, you find the artful Men and
Persons of Intrigue, are advanced very far in Years, and beyond the
Pleasures and Sallies of Youth; but now WILL. observes, that the Young
have taken in the Vices of the Aged, and you shall have a Man of Five
and Twenty crafty, false, and intriguing, not ashamed to over-reach,
cozen, and beguile. My Friend adds, that till about the latter end of
King Charles's Reign, there was not a Rascal of any Eminence under
Forty: In the Places of Resort for Conversation, you now hear nothing
but what relates to the improving Mens Fortunes, without regard to the
Methods toward it. This is so fashionable, that young Men form
themselves upon a certain Neglect of every thing that is candid, simple,
and worthy of true Esteem; and affect being yet worse than they are, by
acknowledging in their general turn of Mind and Discourse, that they
have not any remaining Value for true Honour and Honesty; preferring the
Capacity of being Artful to gain their Ends, to the Merit of despising
those Ends when they come in competition with their Honesty. All this is
due to the very silly Pride that generally prevails, of being valued for
the Ability of carrying their Point; in a word, from the Opinion that
shallow and inexperienced People entertain of the short-liv'd Force of
Cunning. But I shall, before I enter upon the various Faces which Folly
cover'd with Artifice puts on to impose upon the Unthinking, produce a
great Authority [1] for asserting, that nothing but Truth and Ingenuity
has any lasting good Effect, even upon a Man's Fortune and Interest.

Truth and Reality have all the Advantages of Appearance, and many more.
If the Shew of any thing be good for any thing, I am sure Sincerity is
better: For why does any Man dissemble, or seem to be that which he is
not, but because he thinks it good to have such a Quality as he pretends
to? for to counterfeit and dissemble, is to put on the Appearance of
some real Excellency. Now the best way in the World for a Man to seem to
be any thing, is really to be what he would seem to be. Besides that it
is many times as troublesome to make good the Pretence of a good
Quality, as to have it; and if a Man have it not, it is ten to one but
he is discover'd to want it, and then all his Pains and Labour to seem
to have it is lost. There is something unnatural in Painting, which a
skillful Eye will easily discern from native Beauty and Complexion.

It is hard to personate and act a Part long; for where Truth is not at
the bottom, Nature will always be endeavouring to return, and will peep
out and betray her self one time or other. Therefore if any Man think it
convenient to seem good, let him be so indeed, and then his Goodness
will appear to every body's Satisfaction; so that upon all accounts
Sincerity is true Wisdom. Particularly as to the Affairs of this World,
Integrity hath many Advantages over all the fine and artificial ways of
Dissimulation and Deceit; it is much the plainer and easier, much the
safer and more secure way of dealing in the World; it has less of
Trouble and Difficulty, of Entanglement and Perplexity, of Danger and
Hazard in it; it is the shortest and nearest way to our End, carrying us
thither in a straight line, and will hold out and last longest. The Arts
of Deceit and Cunning do continually grow weaker and less effectual and
serviceable to them that use them; whereas Integrity gains Strength by
use, and the more and longer any Man practiseth it, the greater Service
it does him, by confirming his Reputation and encouraging those with
whom he hath to do, to repose the greatest Trust and Confidence in him,
which is an unspeakable Advantage in the Business and Affairs of Life.

Truth is always consistent with it self, and needs nothing to help it
out; it is always near at hand, and sits upon our Lips, and is ready to
drop out before we are aware: whereas a Lye is troublesome, and sets a
Man's Invention upon the rack, and one Trick needs a great many more to
make it good. It is like building upon a false Foundation, which
continually stands in need of Props to shoar it up, and proves at last
more chargeable, than to have raised a substantial Building at first
upon a true and solid Foundation; for Sincerity is firm and substantial,
and there is nothing hollow and unsound in it, and because it is plain
and open, fears no Discovery; of which the Crafty Man is always in
danger, and when he thinks he walks in the dark, all his Pretences are
so transparent, that he that runs may read them; he is the last Man that
finds himself to be found out, and whilst he takes it for granted that
he makes Fools of others, he renders himself ridiculous.

Add to all this, that Sincerity is the most compendious Wisdom, and an
excellent Instrument for the speedy dispatch of Business; it creates
Confidence in those we have to deal with, saves the Labour of many
Enquiries, and brings things to an issue in few Words: It is like
travelling in a plain beaten Road, which commonly brings a Man sooner to
his Journeys End than By-ways, in which Men often lose themselves. In a
word, whatsoever Convenience may be thought to be in Falshood and
Dissimulation, it is soon over; but the Inconvenience of it is
perpetual, because it brings a Man under an everlasting Jealousie and
Suspicion, so that he is not believed when he speaks Truth, nor trusted
when perhaps he means honestly. When a Man hath once forfeited the
Reputation of his Integrity, he is set fast, and nothing will then serve
his turn, neither Truth nor Falshood.

And I have often thought, that God hath in his great Wisdom hid from
Men of false and dishonest Minds the wonderful Advantages of Truth and
Integrity to the Prosperity even of our worldly Affairs; these Men are
so blinded by their Covetousness and Ambition, that they cannot look
beyond a present Advantage, nor forbear to seize upon it, tho by Ways
never so indirect; they cannot see so far as to the remote Consequences
of a steady Integrity, and the vast Benefit and Advantages which it will
bring a Man at last. Were but this sort of Men wise and clear-sighted
enough to discern this, they would be honest out of very Knavery, not
out of any Love to Honesty and Virtue, but with a crafty Design to
promote and advance more effectually their own Interests; and therefore
the Justice of the Divine Providence hath hid this truest Point of
Wisdom from their Eyes, that bad Men might not be upon equal Terms with
the Just and Upright, and serve their own wicked Designs by honest and
lawful Means.

Indeed, if a Man were only to deal in the World for a Day, and should
never have occasion to converse more with Mankind, never more need their
good Opinion or good Word, it were then no great Matter (speaking as to
the Concernments of this World) if a Man spent his Reputation all at
once, and ventured it at one throw: But if he be to continue in the
World, and would have the Advantage of Conversation whilst he is in it,
let him make use of Truth and Sincerity in all his Words and Actions;
for nothing but this will last and hold out to the end; all other Arts
will fail, but Truth and Integrity will carry a Man through, and bear
him out to the last.

T.


[Footnote 1: Archbishop Tilotson's Sermons, Vol. II., Sermon I (folio
edition). Italics in first issue.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 353.                  Tuesday, April 15, 1712.              Budgell.


 --In tenui labor--

Virg.


The Gentleman who obliges the World in general, and me in particular,
with his Thoughts upon Education, has just sent me the following Letter.


  SIR,

  I take the Liberty to send you a fourth Letter upon the Education of
  Youth: In my last I gave you my Thoughts about some particular Tasks
  which I conceiv'd it might not be amiss to use with their usual
  Exercises, in order to give them an early Seasoning of Virtue; I shall
  in this propose some others, which I fancy might contribute to give
  them a right turn for the World, and enable them to make their way in
  it.

  The Design of Learning is, as I take it, either to render a Man an
  agreeable Companion to himself, and teach him to support Solitude with
  Pleasure, or if he is not born to an Estate, to supply that Defect,
  and furnish him with the means of acquiring one. A Person who applies
  himself to Learning with the first of these Views may be said to study
  for Ornament, as he who proposes to himself the second, properly
  studies for Use. The one does it to raise himself a Fortune, the other
  to set off that which he is already possessed of. But as far the
  greater part of Mankind are included in the latter Class, I shall only
  propose some Methods at present for the Service of such who expect to
  advance themselves in the World by their Learning: In order to which,
  I shall premise, that many more Estates have been acquir'd by little
  Accomplishments than by extraordinary ones; those Qualities which make
  the greatest Figure in the Eye of the World, not being always the most
  useful in themselves, or the most advantageous to their Owners.

  The Posts which require Men of shining and uncommon Parts to discharge
  them, are so very few, that many a great Genius goes out of the World
  without ever having had an opportunity to exert it self; whereas
  Persons of ordinary Endowments meet with Occasions fitted to their
  Parts and Capacities every day in the common Occurrences of Life.

  I am acquainted with two Persons who were formerly School-fellows,[1]
  and have been good Friends ever since. One of them was not only
  thought an impenetrable Block-head at School, but still maintain'd his
  Reputation at the University; the other was the Pride of his Master,
  and the most celebrated Person in the College of which he was a
  Member. The Man of Genius is at present buried in a Country Parsonage
  of eightscore Pounds a year; while the other, with the bare Abilities
  of a common Scrivener, has got an Estate of above an hundred thousand
  Pounds.

  I fancy from what I have said it will almost appear a doubtful Case
  to many a wealthy Citizen, whether or no he ought to wish his Son
  should be a great Genius; but this I am sure of, that nothing is more
  absurd than to give a Lad the Education of one, whom Nature has not
  favour'd with any particular Marks of Distinction.

  The fault therefore of our Grammar-Schools is, that every Boy is
  pushed on to Works of Genius; whereas it would be far more
  advantageous for the greatest part of them to be taught such little
  practical Arts and Sciences as do not require any great share of Parts
  to be Master of them, and yet may come often into play during the
  course of a Man's Life.

  Such are all the Parts of Practical Geometry. I have known a Man
  contract a Friendship with a Minister of State, upon cutting a Dial in
  his Window; and remember a Clergyman who got one of the best Benefices
  in the West of England, by setting a Country Gentleman's Affairs in
  some Method, and giving him an exact Survey of his Estate.

  While I am upon this Subject, I cannot forbear mentioning a
  Particular which is of use in every Station of Life, and which
  methinks every Master should teach his Scholars. I mean the writing of
  English Letters. To this End, instead of perplexing them with Latin
  Epistles, Themes and Verses, there might be a punctual Correspondence
  established between two Boys, who might act in any imaginary Parts of
  Business, or be allow'd sometimes to give a range to their own Fancies,
  and communicate to each other whatever Trifles they thought fit,
  provided neither of them ever fail'd at the appointed time to answer
  his Correspondents Letter.

  I believe I may venture to affirm, that the generality of Boys would
  find themselves more advantaged by this Custom, when they come to be
  Men, than by all the Greek and Latin their Masters can teach them in
  seven or eight Years.

  The want of it is very visible in many learned Persons, who, while
  they are admiring the Styles of Demosthenes or Cicero, want Phrases to
  express themselves on the most common Occasions. I have seen a Letter
  from one of these Latin Orators, which would have been deservedly
  laugh'd at by a common Attorney.

  Under this Head of Writing I cannot omit Accounts and Short-hand,
  which are learned with little pains, and very properly come into the
  number of such Arts as I have been here recommending.

  You must doubtless, Sir, observe that I have hitherto chiefly insisted
  upon these things for such Boys as do not appear to have any thing
  extraordinary in their natural Talents, and consequently are not
  qualified for the finer Parts of Learning; yet I believe I might carry
  this Matter still further, and venture to assert that a Lad of Genius
  has sometimes occasion for these little Acquirements, to be as it were
  the forerunners of his Parts, and to introduce [him [2]] into the
  World.

  History is full of Examples of Persons, who tho they have had the
  largest Abilities, have been obliged to insinuate themselves into the
  Favour of great Men by these trivial Accomplishments; as the compleat
  Gentleman, in some of our modern Comedies, makes his first Advances to
  his Mistress under the disguise of a Painter or a Dancing-Master.

  The Difference is, that in a Lad of Genius these are only so many
  Accomplishments, which in another are Essentials; the one diverts
  himself with them, the other works at them. In short, I look upon a
  great Genius, with these little Additions, in the same Light as I
  regard the Grand Signior, who is obliged, by an express Command in the
  Alcoran, to learn and practise some Handycraft Trade. Tho I need not
  have gone for my Instance farther than Germany, where several Emperors
  have voluntarily done the same thing. Leopold the last [3], worked in
  Wood; and I have heard there are several handycraft Works of his
  making to be seen at Vienna so neatly turned, that the best Joiner in
  Europe might safely own them, without any disgrace to his Profession.

  I would not be thought, by any thing I have said, to be against
  improving a Boys Genius to the utmost pitch it can be carried. What I
  would endeavour to shew in this Essay is, that there may be Methods
  taken, to make Learning advantageous even to the meanest Capacities.

  I am, SIR, Yours, &c.


X.


[Footnote 1: Perhaps Swift and his old schoolfellow, Mr. Stratford, the
Hamburgh merchant.

  Stratford is worth a plumb, and is now lending the Government
  £40,000; yet we were educated together at the same school and
  university.

Journal to Stella, Sept. 14, 1710.]


[Footnote 2:[them]]


[Footnote 3: Leopold the last was also Leopold the First. He died May 6,
1705, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Joseph, who died while the
Spectator was being issued, and had now been followed by his brother,
the Archduke Charles, whose claim to the crown of Spain England had been
supporting, when his accession to the German throne had not seemed
probable. His coronation as Charles VI. was, therefore, one cause of the
peace. Leopold, born in 1640, and educated by the Jesuits, became
Emperor in 1658, and reigned 49 years. He was an adept in metaphysics
and theology, as well as in wood-turning, but a feeble and oppressive
ruler, whose empire was twice saved for him; by Sobiesld from the Turks,
and from the French by Marlborough.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 354.              Wednesday, April 16, 1712.                Steele.


 --Cum magnis virtutibus affers
  Grande supercilium--

  Juv.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  You have in some of your Discourses describ'd most sorts of Women in
  their distinct and proper Classes, as the Ape, the Coquet, and many
  others; but I think you have never yet said anything of a Devotée. A
  Devotée is one of those who disparage Religion by their indiscreet and
  unseasonable introduction of the Mention of Virtue on all Occasion[s]:
  She professes she is what nobody ought to doubt she is; and betrays
  the Labour she is put to, to be what she ought to be with Chearfulness
  and Alacrity. She lives in the World, and denies her self none of the
  Diversions of it, with a constant Declaration how insipid all things
  in it are to her. She is never her self but at Church; there she
  displays her Virtue, and is so fervent in her Devotions, that I have
  frequently seen her Pray her self out of Breath. While other young
  Ladies in the House are dancing, or playing at Questions and Commands,
  she reads aloud in her Closet. She says all Love is ridiculous, except
  it be Celestial; but she speaks of the Passion of one Mortal to
  another with too much Bitterness, for one that had no Jealousy mixed
  with her Contempt of it. If at any time she sees a Man warm in his
  Addresses to his Mistress, she will lift up her Eyes to Heaven, and
  cry, What Nonsense is that Fool talking? Will the Bell never ring for
  Prayers? We have an eminent Lady of this Stamp in our Country, who
  pretends to Amusements very much above the rest of her Sex. She never
  carries a white Shock-dog with Bells under her Arm, nor a Squirrel or
  Dormouse in her Pocket, but always an abridg'd Piece of Morality to
  steal out when she is sure of being observ'd. When she went to the
  famous Ass-Race (which I must confess was but an odd Diversion to be
  encouraged by People of Rank and Figure) it was not, like other
  Ladies, to hear those poor Animals bray, nor to see Fellows run naked,
  or to hear Country Squires in bob Wigs and white Girdles make love at
  the side of a Coach, and cry, Madam, this is dainty Weather. Thus she
  described the Diversion; for she went only to pray heartily that no
  body might be hurt in the Crowd, and to see if the poor Fellows Face,
  which was distorted with grinning, might any way be brought to it self
  again. She never chats over her Tea, but covers her Face, and is
  supposed in an Ejaculation before she taste[s] a Sup. This
  ostentatious Behaviour is such an Offence to true Sanctity, that it
  disparages it, and makes Virtue not only unamiable, but also
  ridiculous. The Sacred Writings are full of Reflections which abhor
  this kind of Conduct; and a Devotée is so far from promoting Goodness,
  that she deters others by her Example. Folly and Vanity in one of
  these Ladies, is like Vice in a Clergyman; it does not only debase
  him, but makes the inconsiderate Part of the World think the worse of
  Religion.

  I am, SIR,

  Your Humble Servant,

  Hotspur.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  Xenophon, in his short Account of the Spartan Commonwealth, [1]
  speaking of the Behavior of their young Men in the Streets, says,
  There was so much Modesty in their Looks, that you might as soon have
  turned the eyes of a Marble Statue upon you as theirs; and that in all
  their Behaviour they were more modest than a Bride when put to bed
  upon her Wedding-Night: This Virtue, which is always join'd to
  Magnanimity, had such an influence upon their Courage, that in Battel
  an Enemy could not look them in the Face, and they durst not but Die
  for their Country.

  Whenever I walk into the Streets of London and Westminster, the
  Countenances of all the young Fellows that pass by me, make me wish my
  self in Sparta; I meet with such blustering Airs, big Looks, and bold
  Fronts, that to a superficial Observer would bespeak a Courage above
  those Grecians. I am arrived to that Perfection in Speculation, that I
  understand the Language of the Eyes, which would be a great misfortune
  to me, had I not corrected the Testiness of old Age by Philosophy.
  There is scarce a Man in a red Coat who does not tell me, with a full
  Stare, he's a bold Man: I see several swear inwardly at me, without
  any Offence of mine, but the Oddness of my Person: I meet Contempt in
  every Street, express'd in different Manners, by the scornful Look,
  the elevated Eye-brow, and the swelling Nostrils of the Proud and
  Prosperous. The Prentice speaks his Disrespect by an extended Finger,
  and the Porter by stealing out his Tongue. If a Country Gentleman
  appears a little curious in observing the Edifices, Signs, Clocks,
  Coaches, and Dials, it is not to be imagined how the Polite Rabble of
  this Town, who are acquainted with these Objects, ridicule his
  Rusticity. I have known a Fellow with a Burden on his Head steal a
  Hand down from his Load, and slily twirle the Cock of a Squires Hat
  behind him; while the Offended Person is swearing, or out of
  Countenance, all the Wagg-Wits in the High-way are grinning in
  applause of the ingenious Rogue that gave him the Tip, and the Folly
  of him who had not Eyes all round his Head to prevent receiving it.
  These things arise from a general Affectation of Smartness, Wit, and
  Courage. Wycherly somewhere [2] rallies the Pretensions this Way, by
  making a Fellow say, Red Breeches are a certain Sign of Valour; and
  Otway makes a Man, to boast his Agility, trip up a Beggar on Crutches
  [3]. From such Hints I beg a Speculation on this Subject; in the mean
  time I shall do all in the Power of a weak old Fellow in my own
  Defence: for as Diogenes, being in quest of an honest Man, sought for
  him when it was broad Day-light with a Lanthorn and Candle, so I
  intend for the future to walk the Streets with a dark Lanthorn, which
  has a convex Chrystal in it; and if any Man stares at me, I give fair
  Warning that Ill direct the Light full into his Eyes. Thus despairing
  to find Men Modest, I hope by this Means to evade their Impudence,
  I am, SIR,
  Your most humble Servant,
  Sophrosunius.


T.


[Footnote 1:  The Polity of Lacedæmon and the Polity of Athens were
two of Xenophons short treatises. In the Polity of Lacedæmon the
Spartan code of law and social discipline is, as Mr. Mure says in his
Critical History of the Language and Literature of Ancient Greece,

  indiscriminately held up to admiration as superior in all respects to
  all others. Some of its more offensive features, such as the Cryptia,
  child murder, and more glaring atrocities of the Helot system, are
  suppressed; while the legalized thieving, adultery, and other
  unnatural practices, are placed in the most favourable or least odious
  light.]


[Footnote 2: In the Plain Dealer, Act II. sc. I.

Novel (a pert railing coxcomb). These sea captains make nothing of
         dressing. But let me tell you, sir, a man by his dress, as much
         as by anything, shows his wit and judgment; nay, and his
         courage too.

Freeman. How, his courage, Mr. Novel?

Novel.   Why, for example, by red breeches, tucked-up hair, or peruke, a
         greasy broad belt, and now-a-days a short sword.]


[Footnote 3: In his Friendship in Fashion, Act III. sc. i

Malagene.  I tell you what I did tother Day: Faith't is as good a Jest
           as ever you heard.

Valentine. Pray, sir, do.

Mal.       Why, walking alone, a lame Fellow follow'd me and ask'd my
           Charity (which by the way was a pretty Proposition to me).
           Being in one of my witty, merry Fits, I ask'd him how long he
           had been in that Condition? The poor Fellow shook his Head,
           and told me he was born so. But how dye think I served him?

Val.       Nay, the Devil knows.

Mal.       I show'd my Parts, I think; for I tripp'd up both his Wooden
           Legs, and walk'd off gravely about my Business.

Truman.    And this you say is your way of Wit?

Mal.       Ay, altogether, this and Mimickry. I'm a very good Mimick; I
           can act Punchinello, Scaramoucho, Harlequin, Prince
           Prettyman, or anything. I can act the rumbling of a
           Wheel-barrow.

Val.       The rumbling of a Wheelbarrow!

Mal.       Ay, the rumbling of a Wheelbarrow, so I say. Nay, more than
           that, I can act a Sow and Pigs, Sausages a broiling, a
           Shoulder of Mutton a roasting: I can act a Fly in a
           Honey-pot.

Trum.      That indeed must be the effect of very curious Observation.

Mal.       No, hang it, I never make it my Business to observe anything,
           that is Mechanick.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 355.               Thursday, April 17, 1712.                Addison.


  Non ego mordaci distrinxi carmine [quenquam.

  Ovid. [1]]


I have been very often tempted to write Invectives upon those who have
detracted from my Works, or spoken in derogation of my Person; but I
look upon it as a particular Happiness, that I have always hindred my
Resentments from proceeding to this extremity. I once had gone thro
half a Satyr, but found so many Motions of Humanity rising in me towards
the Persons whom I had severely treated, that I threw it into the Fire
without ever finishing it. I have been angry enough to make several
little Epigrams and Lampoons; and after having admired them a Day or
two, have likewise committed them to the Flames. These I look upon as so
many Sacrifices to Humanity, and have receiv'd much greater Satisfaction
from the suppressing such Performances, than I could have done from any
Reputation they might have procur'd me, or from any Mortification they
might have given my Enemies, in case I had made them publick. If a Man
has any Talent in Writing, it shews a good Mind to forbear answering
Calumnies and Reproaches in the same Spirit of Bitterness with which
they are offered: But when a Man has been at some Pains in making
suitable Returns to an Enemy, and has the Instruments of Revenge in his
Hands, to let drop his Wrath, and stifle his Resentments, seems to have
something in it Great and Heroical. There is a particular Merit in such
a way of forgiving an Enemy; and the more violent and unprovoke'd the
Offence has been, the greater still is the Merit of him who thus
forgives it.

I never met with a Consideration that is more finely spun, and what has
better pleased me, than one in Epictetus [2], which places an Enemy in a
new Light, and gives us a View of him altogether different from that in
which we are used to regard him. The Sense of it is as follows: Does a
Man reproach thee for being Proud or Ill-natured, Envious or Conceited,
Ignorant or Detracting? Consider with thy self whether his Reproaches
are true; if they are not, consider that thou art not the Person whom he
reproaches, but that he reviles an Imaginary Being, and perhaps loves
what thou really art, tho he hates what thou appearest to be. If his
Reproaches are true, if thou art the envious ill-natur'd Man he takes
thee for, give thy self another Turn, become mild, affable and obliging,
and his Reproaches of thee naturally cease: His Reproaches may indeed
continue, but thou art no longer the Person whom he reproaches.

I often apply this Rule to my self; and when I hear of a Satyrical
Speech or Writing that is aimed at me, I examine my own Heart, whether I
deserve it or not. If I bring in a Verdict against my self, I endeavour
to rectify my Conduct for the future in those particulars which have
drawn the Censure upon me; but if the whole Invective be grounded upon a
Falsehood, I trouble my self no further about it, and look upon my Name
at the Head of it to signify no more than one of those fictitious Names
made use of by an Author to introduce an imaginary Character. Why should
a Man be sensible of the Sting of a Reproach, who is a Stranger to the
Guilt that is implied in it? or subject himself to the Penalty, when he
knows he has never committed the Crime? This is a Piece of Fortitude,
which every one owes to his own Innocence, and without which it is
impossible for a Man of any Merit or Figure to live at Peace with
himself in a Country that abounds with Wit and Liberty.

The famous Monsieur Balzac, in a Letter to the Chancellor of France, [3]
who had prevented the Publication of a Book against him, has the
following Words, which are a likely Picture of the Greatness of Mind so
visible in the Works of that Author. If it was a new thing, it may be I
should not be displeased with the Suppression of the first Libel that
should abuse me; but since there are enough of em to make a small
Library, I am secretly pleased to see the number increased, and take
delight in raising a heap of Stones that Envy has cast at me without
doing me any harm.

The Author here alludes to those Monuments of the Eastern Nations, which
were Mountains of Stones raised upon the dead Body by Travellers, that
used to cast every one his Stone upon it as they passed by. It is
certain that no Monument is so glorious as one which is thus raised by
the Hands of Envy. For my Part, I admire an Author for such a Temper of
Mind as enables him to bear an undeserved Reproach without Resentment,
more than for all the Wit of any the finest Satirical Reply.

Thus far I thought necessary to explain my self in relation to those who
have animadverted on this Paper, and to shew the Reasons why I have not
thought fit to return them any formal Answer. I must further add, that
the Work would have been of very little use to the Publick, had it been
filled with personal Reflections and Debates; for which Reason I have
never once turned out of my way to observe those little Cavils which
have been made against it by Envy or Ignorance. The common Fry of
Scriblers, who have no other way of being taken Notice of but by
attacking what has gain'd some Reputation in the World, would have
furnished me with Business enough, had they found me dispos'd to enter
the Lists with them.

I shall conclude with the Fable of Boccalini's Traveller, who was so
pester'd with the Noise of Grasshoppers in his Ears, that he alighted
from his Horse in great Wrath to kill them all. This, says the Author,
was troubling himself to no manner of purpose: Had he pursued his
Journey without taking notice of them, the troublesome Insects would
have died of themselves in a very few Weeks, and he would have suffered
nothing from them.

L.


[Footnote 1:

  [quenquam, Nulla venenata littera mista joco est.

Ovid.]


[Footnote 2: Enchiridion, Cap. 48 and 64.]


[Footnote 3: Letters and Remains. Trans. by Sir. R. Baker (1655-8).]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 356.             Friday, [1] April 18, 1712.                Steele.


  Aptissima quæque dabunt Dii,
  Charior est illis homo quam sibi.

  Juv.


It is owing to Pride, and a secret Affectation of a certain
Self-Existence, that the noblest Motive for Action that ever was
proposed to Man, is not acknowledged the Glory and Happiness of their
Being. The Heart is treacherous to it self, and we do not let our
Reflections go deep enough to receive Religion as the most honourable
Incentive to good and worthy Actions. It is our natural Weakness, to
flatter our selves into a Belief, that if we search into our inmost
thoughts, we find our selves wholly disinterested, and divested of any
Views arising from Self-Love and Vain-Glory. But however Spirits of
superficial Greatness may disdain at first sight to do any thing, but
from a noble Impulse in themselves, without any future Regards in this
or another Being; upon stricter Enquiry they will find, to act worthily
and expect to be rewarded only in another World, is as heroick a Pitch
of Virtue as human Nature can arrive at. If the Tenour of our Actions
have any other Motive than the Desire to be pleasing in the Eye of the
Deity, it will necessarily follow that we must be more than Men, if we
are not too much exalted in Prosperity and depressed in Adversity: But
the Christian World has a Leader, the Contemplation of whose Life and
Sufferings must administer Comfort in Affliction, while the Sense of his
Power and Omnipotence must give them Humiliation in Prosperity.

It is owing to the forbidding and unlovely Constraint with which Men of
low Conceptions act when they think they conform themselves to Religion,
as well as to the more odious Conduct of Hypocrites, that the Word
Christian does not carry with it at first View all that is Great,
Worthy, Friendly, Generous, and Heroick. The Man who suspends his Hopes
of the Reward of worthy Actions till after Death, who can bestow unseen,
who can overlook Hatred, do Good to his Slanderer, who can never be
angry at his Friend, never revengeful to his Enemy, is certainly formed
for the Benefit of Society: Yet these are so far from Heroick Virtues,
that they are but the ordinary Duties of a Christian.

When a Man with a steddy Faith looks back on the great Catastrophe of
this Day, with what bleeding Emotions of Heart must he contemplate the
Life and Sufferings of his Deliverer? When his Agonies occur to him, how
will he weep to reflect that he has often forgot them for the Glance of
a Wanton, for the Applause of a vain World, for an Heap of fleeting past
Pleasures, which are at present asking Sorrows?

How pleasing is the Contemplation of the lowly Steps our Almighty Leader
took in conducting us to his heavenly Mansions! In plain and apt
Parable, [2] Similitude, and Allegory, our great Master enforced the
Doctrine of our Salvation; but they of his Acquaintance, instead of
receiving what they could not oppose, were offended at the Presumption
of being wiser than they: [3] They could not raise their little Ideas
above the Consideration of him, in those Circumstances familiar to them,
or conceive that he who appear'd not more Terrible or Pompous, should
have any thing more Exalted than themselves; he in that Place therefore
would not longer ineffectually exert a Power which was incapable of
conquering the Prepossession of their narrow and mean Conceptions.

Multitudes follow'd him, and brought him the Dumb, the Blind, the Sick,
and Maim'd; whom when their Creator had Touch'd, with a second Life they
Saw, Spoke, Leap'd, and Ran. In Affection to him, and admiration of his
Actions, the Crowd could not leave him, but waited near him till they
were almost as faint and helpless as others they brought for Succour. He
had Compassion on them, and by a Miracle supplied their Necessities. [4]
Oh, the Ecstatic Entertainment, when they could behold their Food
immediately increase to the Distributer's Hand, and see their God in
Person Feeding and Refreshing his Creatures! Oh Envied Happiness! But
why do I say Envied? as if our [God [5]] did not still preside over our
temperate Meals, chearful Hours, and innocent Conversations.

But tho the sacred Story is every where full of Miracles not inferior
to this, and tho in the midst of those Acts of Divinity he never gave
the least Hint of a Design to become a Secular Prince, yet had not
hitherto the Apostles themselves any other than Hopes of worldly Power,
Preferment, Riches and Pomp; for Peter, upon an Accident of Ambition
among the Apostles, hearing his Master explain that his Kingdom was not
of this World, was so scandaliz'd [6] that he whom he had so long
follow'd should suffer the Ignominy, Shame, and Death which he foretold,
that he took him aside and said, Be it far from thee, Lord, this shall
not be unto thee: For which he suffered a severe Reprehension from his
Master, as having in his View the Glory of Man rather than that of God.

The great Change of things began to draw near, when the Lord of Nature
thought fit as a Saviour and Deliverer to make his publick Entry into
Jerusalem with more than the Power and Joy, but none of the Ostentation
and Pomp of a Triumph; he came Humble, Meek, and Lowly: with an unfelt
new Ecstasy, Multitudes strewed his Way with Garments and
Olive-Branches, Crying with loud Gladness and Acclamation, Hosannah to
the Son of David, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord! At
this great Kings Accession to his Throne, Men were not Ennobled, but
Sav'd; Crimes were not Remitted, but Sins Forgiven; he did not bestow
Medals, Honours, Favours, but Health, Joy, Sight, Speech. The first
Object the Blind ever saw, was the Author of Sight; while the Lame Ran
before, and the Dumb repeated the Hosannah. Thus attended, he Entered
into his own House, the sacred Temple, and by his Divine Authority
expell'd Traders and Worldlings that profaned it; and thus did he, for a
time, use a great and despotic Power, to let Unbelievers understand,
that twas not Want of, but Superiority to all Worldly Dominion, that
made him not exert it. But is this then the Saviour? is this the
Deliverer? Shall this Obscure Nazarene command Israel, and sit on the
Throne of David? [7] Their proud and disdainful Hearts, which were
petrified [8] with the Love and Pride of this World, were impregnable to
the Reception of so mean a Benefactor, and were now enough exasperated
with Benefits to conspire his Death. Our Lord was sensible of their
Design, and prepared his Disciples for it, by recounting to em now more
distinctly what should befal him; but Peter with an ungrounded
Resolution, and in a Flush of Temper, made a sanguine Protestation, that
tho all Men were offended in him, yet would not he be offended. It was
a great Article of our Saviours Business in the World, to bring us to a
Sense of our Inability, without Gods Assistance, to do any thing great
or good; he therefore told Peter, who thought so well of his Courage and
Fidelity, that they would both fail him, and even he should deny him
Thrice that very Night.

But what Heart can conceive, what Tongue utter the Sequel? Who is that
yonder buffeted, mock'd, and spurn'd? Whom do they drag like a Felon?
Whither do they carry my Lord, my King, my Saviour, and my God? And will
he die to Expiate those very Injuries? See where they have nailed the
Lord and Giver of Life! How his Wounds blacken, his Body writhes, and
Heart heaves with Pity and with Agony! Oh Almighty Sufferer, look down,
look down from thy triumphant Infamy: Lo he inclines his Head to his
sacred Bosom! Hark, he Groans! see, he Expires! The Earth trembles, the
Temple rends, the Rocks burst, the Dead Arise: Which are the Quick?
Which are the Dead? Sure Nature, all Nature is departing with her
Creator.

T.


[Footnote 1: Good Friday.]


[Footnote 2: From the words In plain and apt parable to the end, this
paper is a reprint of the close of the second chapter of Steele's
Christian Hero, with the variations cited in the next six notes. The C.
H. is quoted from the text appended to the first reprint of the Tatler,
in 1711.]


[Footnote 3:

 --wiser than they: Is not this the Carpenters Son, is not his Mother
  called Mary, his Brethren, James, Joseph, Simon and Judas? They could
  not--

Christian Hero.]


[Footnote 4:

  He had compassion on em, commanded em to be seated, and with Seven
  Loaves, and a few little Fishes, Fed four thousand Men, besides Women
  and Children: Oh, the Ecstatic--

Christian Hero.]


[Footnote 5: [Good God] in first Issue and in Christian Hero.]


[Footnote 6: In the Christian Hero this passage was:

  become a Secular Prince, or in a Forcible or Miraculous Manner to
  cast off the Roman Yoke they were under, and restore again those
  Disgraced Favourites of Heavn, to its former Indulgence, yet had not
  hitherto the Apostles themselves (so deep set is our Natural Pride)
  any other than hopes of worldly Power, Preferment, Riches and Pomp:
  For Peter, who it seems ever since he left his Net and his Skiff,
  Dreamt of nothing but being a great Man, was utterly undone to hear
  our Saviour explain to em that his Kingdom was not of this World; and
  was so scandalized--]


[Footnote 7:

  Throne of David? Such were the unpleasant Forms that ran in the
  Thoughts of the then Powerful in Jerusalem, upon the most Truly
  Glorious Entry that ever Prince made; for there was not one that
  followed him who was not in his Interest; their Proud--

Christian Hero.]


[Footnote 8:

  Putrified with the--

Christian Hero.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 357.                  Saturday, April 19, 1712.             Addison.


  [Quis talia fando
  Temperet à lachrymis?

  Virg.] [1]


The Tenth Book of Paradise Lost has a greater variety of Persons in it
than any other in the whole Poem. The Author upon the winding up of his
Action introduces all those who had any Concern in it, and shews with
great Beauty the Influence which it had upon each of them. It is like
the last Act of a well-written Tragedy, in which all who had a part in
it are generally drawn up before the Audience, and represented under
those Circumstances in which the Determination of the Action places
them.

I shall therefore consider this Book under four Heads, in relation to
the Celestial, the Infernal, the Human, and the Imaginary Persons, who
have their respective Parts allotted in it.

To begin with the Celestial Persons: The Guardian Angels of Paradise are
described as returning to Heaven upon the Fall of Man, in order to
approve their Vigilance; their Arrival, their Manner of Reception, with
the Sorrow which appear'd in themselves, and in those Spirits who are
said to Rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner, are very finely laid
together in the following Lines.

  Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
  Th' Angelick Guards ascended, mute and sad
  For Man; for of his State by this they knew:
  Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stoln
  Entrance unseen. Soon as th' unwelcome News
  From Earth arriv'd at Heaven-Gate, displeased
  All were who heard: dim Sadness did not spare
  That time Celestial Visages; yet mixt
  With Pity, violated not their Bliss.
  About the new-arriv'd, in multitudes
  Th' Ethereal People ran, to hear and know
  How all befel: They tow'rds the Throne supreme
  Accountable made haste to make appear
  With righteous Plea, their utmost vigilance,
  And easily approved; when the Most High
  Eternal Father, from his secret cloud,
  Amidst in thunder utter'd thus his voice.

The same Divine Person, who in the foregoing Parts of this Poem
interceded for our first Parents before their Fall, overthrew the Rebel
Angels, and created the World, is now represented as descending to
Paradise, and pronouncing Sentence upon the three Offenders. The Cool of
the Evening, being a Circumstance with which Holy Writ introduces this
great Scene, it is poetically described by our Author, who has also kept
religiously to the Form of Words, in which the three several Sentences
were passed upon Adam, Eve, and the Serpent. He has rather chosen to
neglect the Numerousness of his Verse, than to deviate from those
Speeches which are recorded on this great occasion. The Guilt and
Confusion of our first Parents standing naked before their Judge, is
touched with great Beauty. Upon the Arrival of Sin and Death into the
Works of the Creation, the Almighty is again introduced as speaking to
his Angels that surrounded him.

  See! with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance,
  To waste and havock yonder World, which I
  So fair and good created; &c.

The following Passage is formed upon that glorious Image in Holy Writ,
which compares the Voice of an innumerable Host of Angels, uttering
Hallelujahs, to the Voice of mighty Thunderings, or of many Waters.

  He ended, and the Heavenly Audience loud
  Sung Hallelujah, as the sound of Seas,
  Through Multitude that sung: Just are thy Ways,
  Righteous are thy Decrees in all thy Works,
  Who can extenuate thee?--

Tho the Author in the whole Course of his Poem, and particularly in the
Book we are now examining, has infinite Allusions to Places of
Scripture, I have only taken notice in my Remarks of such as are of a
Poetical Nature, and which are woven with great Beauty into the Body of
this Fable. Of this kind is that Passage in the present Book, where
describing Sin and Death as marching thro the Works of Nature he adds,

 --Behind her Death
  Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
  On his pale Horse--

Which alludes to that Passage in Scripture, so wonderfully poetical, and
terrifying to the Imagination. And I look'd, and behold a pale Horse,
and his Name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him: and
Power was given unto them over the fourth Part of the Earth, to kill
with Sword, and with Hunger, and with Sickness, and with the Beasts of
the Earth. [1] Under this first Head of Celestial Persons we must
likewise take notice of the Command which the Angels receiv'd, to
produce the several Changes in Nature, and sully the Beauty of the
Creation. Accordingly they are represented as infecting the Stars and
Planets with malignant Influences, weakning the Light of the Sun,
bringing down the Winter into the milder Regions of Nature, planting
Winds and Storms in several Quarters of the Sky, storing the Clouds with
Thunder, and in short, perverting the Whole Frame of the Universe to the
Condition of its criminal Inhabitants. As this is a noble Incident in
the Poem, the following Lines, in which we see the Angels heaving up the
Earth, and placing it in a different Posture to the Sun from what it had
before the Fall of Man, is conceived with that sublime Imagination which
was so peculiar to this great Author.

  Some say he bid his Angels turn ascanse
  The Poles of Earth twice ten Degrees and more
  From the Suns Axle; they with Labour push'd
  Oblique the Centrick Globe--

We are in the second place to consider the Infernal Agents under the
view which Milton has given us of them in this Book. It is observed by
those who would set forth the Greatness of Virgil's Plan, that he
conducts his Reader thro all the Parts of the Earth which were
discover'd in his time. Asia, Africk, and Europe are the several Scenes
of his Fable. The Plan of Milton's Poem is of an infinitely greater
Extent, and fills the Mind with many more astonishing Circumstances.
Satan, having surrounded the Earth seven times, departs at length from
Paradise. We then see him steering his Course among the Constellations,
and after having traversed the whole Creation, pursuing his Voyage thro
the Chaos, and entring into his own Infernal Dominions.

His first appearance in the Assembly of fallen Angels, is work'd up with
Circumstances which give a delightful Surprize to the Reader; but there
is no Incident in the whole Poem which does this more than the
Transformation of the whole Audience, that follows the Account their
Leader gives them of his Expedition. The gradual Change of Satan himself
is describ'd after Ovid's manner, and may vie with any of those
celebrated Transformations which are look'd upon as the most beautiful
Parts in that Poets Works. Milton never fails of improving his own
Hints, and bestowing the last finishing Touches to every Incident which
is admitted into his Poem. The unexpected Hiss which rises in this
Episode, the Dimensions and Bulk of Satan so much superior to those of
the Infernal Spirits who lay under the same Transformation, with the
annual Change which they are supposed to suffer, are Instances of this
kind. The Beauty of the Diction is very remarkable in this whole
Episode, as I have observed in the sixth Paper of these Remarks the
great Judgment with which it was contrived.

The Parts of Adam and Eve, or the human Persons, come next under our
Consideration. Milton's Art is no where more shewn than in his
conducting the Parts of these our first Parents. The Representation he
gives of them, without falsifying the Story, is wonderfully contriv'd to
influence the Reader with Pity and Compassion towards them. Tho Adam
involves the whole Species in Misery, his Crime proceeds from a Weakness
which every Man is inclined to pardon and commiserate, as it seems
rather the Frailty of Human Nature, than of the Person who offended.
Every one is apt to excuse a Fault which he himself might have fallen
into. It was the Excess of Love for Eve, that ruin'd Adam, and his
Posterity. I need not add, that the Author is justify'd in this
Particular by many of the Fathers, and the most orthodox Writers. Milton
has by this means filled a great part of his Poem with that kind of
Writing which the French Criticks call the Tender, and which is in a
particular manner engaging to all sorts of Readers.

Adam and Eve, in the Book we are now considering, are likewise drawn
with such Sentiments as do not only interest the Reader in their
Afflictions, but raise in him the most melting Passions of Humanity and
Commiseration. When Adam sees the several Changes in Nature produced
about him, he appears in a Disorder of Mind suitable to one who had
forfeited both his Innocence and his Happiness; he is filled with
Horrour, Remorse, Despair; in the Anguish of his Heart he expostulates
with his Creator for having given him an unasked Existence.

  Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
  To mould me Man? did I sollicite thee
  From Darkness to promote me? or here place
  In this delicious Garden? As my Will
  Concurr'd not to my Being, twere but right
  And equal to reduce me to my Dust,
  Desirous to resign, and render back
  All I received--

He immediately after recovers from his Presumption, owns his Doom to be
just, and begs that the Death which is threatned him may be inflicted on
him.

 --Why delays
  His Hand to execute, what his Decree
  Fix'd on this day? Why do I overlive?
  Why am I mock'd with Death, and lengthened out
  To deathless Pain? how gladly would I meet
  Mortality my Sentence, and be Earth
  Insensible! how glad would lay me down,
  As in my Mothers Lap? there should I rest
  And sleep secure; his dreadful Voice no more
  Would thunder in my Ears: no fear of worse
  To me and to my Offspring, would torment me
  With cruel Expectation--

This whole Speech is full of the like Emotion, and varied with all those
Sentiments which we may suppose natural to a Mind so broken and
disturb'd. I must not omit that generous Concern which our first Father
shews in it for his Posterity, and which is so proper to affect the
Reader.

 --Hide me from the Face
  Of God, whom to behold was then my heighth
  Of Happiness! yet well, if here would end
  The Misery, I deserved it, and would bear
  My own Deservings: but this will not serve;
  All that I eat, or drink, or shall beget
  Is propagated Curse. O Voice once heard
  Delightfully, Increase and Multiply;
  Now Death to hear!--

 --In me all
  Posterity stands curst! Fair Patrimony,
  That I must leave ye, Sons! O were I able
  To waste it all my self, and leave you none!
  So disinherited, how would you bless
  Me, now your Curse! Ah, why should all Mankind,
  For one Man's Fault, thus guiltless be condemn'd,
  If guiltless? But from me what can proceed
  But all corrupt--

Who can afterwards behold the Father of Mankind extended upon the Earth,
uttering his midnight Complaints, bewailing his Existence, and wishing
for Death, without sympathizing with him in his Distress?

  Thus Adam to himself lamented loud,
  Thro the still Night; not now, (as ere Man fell)
  Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black Air
  Accompanied, with Damps and dreadful Gloom;
  Which to his evil Conscience represented
  All things with double Terror. On the Ground
  Outstretched he lay; on the cold Ground! and oft
  Curs'd his Creation; Death as oft accusd
  Of tardy Execution--

The Part of Eve in this Book is no less passionate, and apt to sway the
Reader in her Favour. She is represented with great Tenderness as
approaching Adam, but is spurn d from him with a Spirit of Upbraiding
and Indignation, conformable to the Nature of Man, whose Passions had
now gained the Dominion over him. The following Passage, wherein she is
described as renewing her Addresses to him, with the whole Speech that
follows it, have something in them exquisitely moving and pathetick.

  He added not, and from her turned: But Eve
  Not so repulst, with Tears that ceas'd not flowing,
  And Tresses all disorderd, at his feet
  Fell humble; and embracing them, besought
  His Peace, and thus proceeding in her Plaint.
    Forsake me not thus, Adam! Witness Heav'n
  What Love sincere, and Reverence in my Heart
  I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
  Unhappily deceived! Thy Suppliant
  I beg, and clasp thy Knees; bereave me not
  (Whereon I live!) thy gentle Looks, thy Aid,
  Thy Counsel, in this uttermost Distress,
  My only Strength, and Stay! Forlorn of thee,
  Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
  While yet we live, (scarce one short Hour perhaps)
  Between us two let there be Peace, &c.

Adams Reconcilement to her is workd up in the same Spirit of
Tenderness. Eve afterwards proposes to her Husband, in the Blindness of
her Despair, that to prevent their Guilt from descending upon Posterity
they should resolve to live Childless; or, if that could not be done,
they should seek their own Deaths by violent Methods. As those
Sentiments naturally engage the Reader to regard the Mother of Mankind
with more than ordinary Commiseration, they likewise contain a very fine
Moral. The Resolution of dying to end our Miseries, does not shew such a
degree of Magnanimity as a Resolution to bear them, and submit to the
Dispensations of Providence. Our Author has therefore, with great
Delicacy, represented Eve as entertaining this Thought, and Adam as
disapproving it.

We are, in the last place, to consider the Imaginary Persons, or [Death
and Sin [3]] who act a large Part in this Book. Such beautiful extended
Allegories are certainly some of the finest Compositions of Genius: but,
as, I have before observed, are not agreeable to the Nature of an
Heroick Poem. This of Sin and Death is very exquisite in its Kind, if
not considered as a Part of such a Work. The Truths contained in it are
so clear and open, that I shall not lose time in explaining them; but
shall only observe, that a Reader who knows the Strength of the English
Tongue, will be amazed to think how the Poet could find such apt Words
and Phrases to describe the Action[s] of those two imaginary Persons,
and particularly in that Part where Death is exhibited as forming a
Bridge over the Chaos; a Work suitable to the Genius of Milton.

Since the Subject I am upon, gives me an Opportunity of speaking more at
large of such Shadowy and Imaginary Persons as may be introduced into
Heroick Poems, I shall beg leave to explain my self in a Matter which is
curious in its Kind, and which none of the Criticks have treated of. It
is certain Homer and Virgil are full of imaginary Persons, who are very
beautiful in Poetry when they are just shewn, without being engaged in
any Series of Action. Homer indeed represents Sleep as a Person, and
ascribes a short Part to him in his Iliad, [4] but we must consider that
tho we now regard such a Person as entirely shadowy and unsubstantial,
the Heathens made Statues of him, placed him in their Temples, and
looked upon him as a real Deity. When Homer makes use of other such
Allegorical Persons, it is only in short Expressions, which convey an
ordinary Thought to the Mind in the most pleasing manner, and may rather
be looked upon as Poetical Phrases than Allegorical Descriptions.
Instead of telling us, that Men naturally fly when they are terrified,
he introduces the Persons of Flight and Fear, who, he tells us, are
inseparable Companions. Instead of saying that the time was come when
Apollo ought to have received his Recompence, he tells us, that the
Hours brought him his Reward. Instead of describing the Effects which
Minervas Ægis produced in Battel, he tells us, that the Brims of it
were encompassed by Terror, Rout, Discord, Fury, Pursuit, Massacre, and
Death. In the same Figure of speaking, he represents Victory as
following Diomedes; Discord as the Mother of Funerals and Mourning;
Venus as dressed by the Graces; Bellona as wearing Terror and
Consternation like a Garment. I might give several other Instances out
of Homer, as well as a great many out of Virgil. Milton has likewise
very often made use of the same way of Speaking, as where he tells us,
that Victory sat on the right Hand of the Messiah when he marched forth
against the Rebel Angels; that at the rising of the Sun the Hours
unbarrd the Gates of Light; that Discord was the Daughter of Sin. Of
the same nature are those Expressions, where describing the singing of
the Nightingale, he adds, Silence was pleased; and upon the Messiahs
bidding Peace to the Chaos, Confusion heard his Voice. I might add
innumerable Instances of our Poets writing in this beautiful Figure. It
is plain that these I have mentioned, in which Persons of an imaginary
Nature are introduced, are such short Allegories as are not designed to
be taken in the literal Sense, but only to convey particular
Circumstances to the Reader after an unusual and entertaining Manner.
But when such Persons are introduced as principal Actors, and engaged in
a Series of Adventures, they take too much upon them, and are by no
means proper for an Heroick Poem, which ought to appear credible in its
principal Parts. I cannot forbear therefore thinking that Sin and Death
are as improper Agents in a Work of this nature, as Strength and
Necessity in one of the Tragedies of Eschylus, who represented those two
Persons nailing down Prometheus to a Rock, [5] for which he has been
justly censured by the greatest Criticks. I do not know any imaginary
Person made use of in a more sublime manner of thinking than that in one
of the Prophets, who describing God as descending from Heaven, and
visiting the Sins of Mankind, adds that dreadful Circumstance, Before
him went the Pestilence. [6] It is certain this imaginary Person might
have been described in all her purple Spots. The Fever might have
marched before her, Pain might have stood at her right Hand, Phrenzy on
her Left, and Death in her Rear. She might have been introduced as
gliding down from the Tail of a Comet, or darted upon the Earth in a
Flash of Lightning: She might have tainted the Atmosphere with her
Breath; the very glaring of her Eyes might have scattered Infection. But
I believe every Reader will think, that in such sublime Writings the
mentioning of her as it is done in Scripture, has something in it more
just, as well as great, than all that the most fanciful Poet could have
bestowed upon her in the Richness of his Imagination.

L.


[Footnote 1:

  Reddere personæ scit convenientia cuique.

Hor.]


[Footnote 2: Revelation vi. 8.]


[Footnote 3: [Sin and Death]]


[Footnote 4: In the fourteenth Book, where Heré visits the home of
Sleep, the brother of Death, and offers him the bribe of a gold chain if
he will shut the eyes of Zeus, Sleep does not think it can be done. Heré
then doubles her bribe, and offers Sleep a wife, the youngest of the
Graces. Sleep makes her swear by Styx that she will hold to her word,
and when she has done so flies off in her company, sits in the shape of
a night-hawk in a pine tree upon the peak of Ida, whence when Zeus was
subdued by love and sleep, Sleep went down to the ships to tell Poseidon
that now was his time to help the Greeks.]


[Footnote 5: In the Prometheus Bound of Æschylus, the binding of
Prometheus by pitiless Strength, who mocks at compassion in the god
Hephaistos, charged to serve him in this office, opens the sublimest of
the ancient dramas. Addison is wrong in saying that there is a
personification here of Strength and Necessity; Hephaistos does indeed
say that he obeys Necessity, but his personified companions are Strength
and Force, and of these Force appears only as the dumb attendant of
Strength. Addisons greatest critics had something to learn when they
were blind to the significance of the contrast between Visible Strength
at the opening of this poem, and the close with sublime prophecy of an
unseen Power of the Future that disturbs Zeus on his throne, and gathers
his thunders about the undaunted Prometheus.

  Now let the shrivelling flame at me be driven,
  Let him, with flaky snowstorms and the crash
  Of subterraneous thunders, into ruins
  And wild confusion hurl and mingle all:
  For nought of these will bend me that I speak
  Who is foredoomed to cast him from his throne.

  (Mrs. Websters translation.)]


[Footnote 6: Habakkuk iii. 5.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 358.              Monday, April 21, 1702.                   Steele.


  Desipere in loco.

  Hor.


Charles Lillie attended me the other day, and made me a Present of a
large Sheet of Paper, on which is delineated a Pavement of Mosaick Work,
lately discovered at Stunsfield near Woodstock. [1] A Person who has so
much the Gift of Speech as Mr. Lillie, and can carry on a Discourse
without Reply, had great Opportunity on that Occasion to expatiate upon
so fine a Piece of Antiquity. Among other things, I remember, he gave me
his Opinion, which he drew from the Ornaments of the Work, That this was
the Floor of a Room dedicated to Mirth and Concord. Viewing this Work,
made my Fancy run over the many gay Expressions I had read in ancient
Authors, which contained Invitations to lay aside Care and Anxiety, and
give a Loose to that pleasing Forgetfulness wherein Men put off their
Characters of Business, and enjoy their very Selves. These Hours were
usually passed in Rooms adorned for that purpose, and set out in such a
manner, as the Objects all around the Company gladdened their Hearts;
which, joined to the cheerful Looks of well-chosen and agreeable
Friends, gave new Vigour to the Airy, produced the latent Fire of the
Modest, and gave Grace to the slow Humour of the Reserved. A judicious
Mixture of such Company, crowned with Chaplets of Flowers, and the whole
Apartment glittering with gay Lights, cheared with a Profusion of Roses,
artificial Falls of Water, and Intervals of soft Notes to Songs of Love
and Wine, suspended the Cares of human Life, and made a Festival of
mutual Kindness. Such Parties of Pleasure as these, and the Reports of
the agreeable Passages in their Jollities, have in all Ages awakened the
dull Part of Mankind to pretend to Mirth and Good-Humour, without
Capacity for such Entertainments; for if I may be allowed to say so,
there are an hundred Men fit for any Employment, to one who is capable
of passing a Night in the Company of the first Taste, without shocking
any Member of the Society, over-rating his own Part of the Conversation,
but equally receiving and contributing to the Pleasure of the whole
Company. When one considers such Collections of Companions in past
Times, and such as one might name in the present Age, with how much
Spleen must a Man needs reflect upon the aukward Gayety of those who
affect the Frolick with an ill Grace? I have a Letter from a
Correspondent of mine, who desires me to admonish all loud, mischievous,
airy, dull Companions, that they are mistaken in what they call a
Frolick. Irregularity in its self is not what creates Pleasure and
Mirth; but to see a Man who knows what Rule and Decency are, descend
from them agreeably in our Company, is what denominates him a pleasant
Companion. Instead of that, you find many whose Mirth consists only in
doing Things which do not become them, with a secret Consciousness that
all the World know they know better: To this is always added something
mischievous to themselves or others. I have heard of some very merry
Fellows, among whom the Frolick was started, and passed by a great
Majority, that every Man should immediately draw a Tooth; after which
they have gone in a Body and smoaked a Cobler. The same Company, at
another Night, has each Man burned his Cravat; and one perhaps, whose
Estate would bear it, has thrown a long Wigg and laced Hat into the same
Fire. [2] Thus they have jested themselves stark naked, and ran into the
Streets, and frighted Women very successfully. There is no Inhabitant of
any standing in Covent-Garden, but can tell you a hundred good Humours,
where People have come off with little Blood-shed, and yet scowered all
the witty Hours of the Night. I know a Gentleman that has several Wounds
in the Head by Watch Poles, and has been thrice run through the Body to
carry on a good Jest: He is very old for a Man of so much Good-Humour;
but to this day he is seldom merry, but he has occasion to be valiant at
the same time. But by the Favour of these Gentlemen, I am humbly of
Opinion, that a Man may be a very witty Man, and never offend one
Statute of this Kingdom, not excepting even that of Stabbing.

The Writers of Plays have what they call Unity of Time and Place to give
a Justness to their Representation; and it would not be amiss if all who
pretend to be Companions, would confine their Action to the Place of
Meeting: For a Frolick carried farther may be better performed by other
Animals than Men. It is not to rid much Ground, or do much Mischief,
that should denominate a pleasant Fellow; but that is truly Frolick
which is the Play of the Mind, and consists of various and unforced
Sallies of Imagination. Festivity of Spirit is a very uncommon Talent,
and must proceed from an Assemblage of agreeable Qualities in the same
Person: There are some few whom I think peculiarly happy in it; but it
is a Talent one cannot name in a Man, especially when one considers that
it is never very graceful but where it is regarded by him who possesses
it in the second Place. The best Man that I know of for heightening the
Revel-Gayety of a Company, is Estcourt, [3]--whose Jovial Humour
diffuses itself from the highest Person at an Entertainment to the
meanest Waiter. Merry Tales, accompanied with apt Gestures and lively
Representations of Circumstances and Persons, beguile the gravest Mind
into a Consent to be as humourous as himself. Add to this, that when a
Man is in his good Grace, he has a Mimickry that does not debase the
Person he represents; but which, taking from the Gravity of the
Character, adds to the Agreeableness of it. This pleasant Fellow gives
one some Idea of the ancient Pantomime, who is said to have given the
Audience, in Dumb-show, an exact Idea of any Character or Passion, or an
intelligible Relation of any publick Occurrence, with no other
Expression than that of his Looks and Gestures. If all who have been
obliged to these Talents in Estcourt, will be at Love for Love to-morrow
Night, they will but pay him what they owe him, at so easy a Rate as
being present at a Play which no body would omit seeing, that had, or
had not ever seen it before.


[Footnote 1: In No. 353 and some following numbers of the Spectator
appeared an advertisement of this plate, which was engraved by Vertue.

  Whereas about nine weeks since there was accidentally discovered by
  an Husbandman, at Stunsfield, near Woodstock, in Oxfordshire, (a large
  Pavement of rich Mosaick Work of the Ancient Romans, which is adornd
  with several Figures alluding to Mirth and Concord, in particular that
  of Bacchus seated on a Panther.) This is to give Notice the Exact
  Delineation of the same is Engraven and Imprinted on a large Elephant
  sheet of Paper, which are to be sold at Mr. Charles Lillies,
  Perfumer, at the corner of Beauford Buildings, in the Strand, at 1s.
  N.B. There are to be had, at the same Place, at one Guinea each, on
  superfine Atlas Paper, some painted with the same variety of Colours
  that the said Pavement is beautified with; this piece of Antiquity is
  esteemed by the Learned to be the most considerable ever found in
  Britain.

The fine pavement discovered at Stonesfield in 1711 measures 35 feet by
60, and although by this time groundworks of more than a hundred Roman
villas have been laid open in this country, the Stonesfield mosaic is
still one of the most considerable of its kind.]


[Footnote 2: Said to have been one of the frolics of Sir Charles Sedley.]


[Footnote 3: See note on p. 204, ante [Footnote 1 of No. 264].
Congreves Love for Love was to be acted at Drury Lane on Tuesday night
At the desire of several Ladies of Quality. For the Benefit of Mr.
Estcourt.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 359.              Tuesday, April 22, 1712.                Budgell.


  Torva leæna lupum sequitur, lupus ipse capellam;
  Florentem cytisum sequitur lusciva capella.

  Virg.


As we were at the Club last Night, I observd that my Friend Sir ROGER,
contrary to his usual Custom, sat very silent, and instead of minding
what was said by the Company, was whistling to himself in a very
thoughtful Mood, and playing with a Cork. I joggd Sir ANDREW FREEPORT
who sat between us; and as we were both observing him, we saw the Knight
shake his Head, and heard him say to himself, A foolish Woman! I cant
believe it. Sir ANDREW gave him a gentle Pat upon the Shoulder, and
offered to lay him a Bottle of Wine that he was thinking of the Widow.
My old Friend started, and recovering out of his brown Study, told Sir
ANDREW that once in his Life he had been in the right. In short, after
some little Hesitation, Sir ROGER told us in the fulness of his Heart
that he had just received a Letter from his Steward, which acquainted
him that his old Rival and Antagonist in the County, Sir David Dundrum,
had been making a Visit to the Widow. However, says Sir ROGER, I can
never think that shell have a Man thats half a Year older than I am,
and a noted Republican into the Bargain.

WILL. HONEYCOMB, who looks upon Love as his particular Province,
interrupting our Friend with a janty Laugh; I thought, Knight, says he,
thou hadst lived long enough in the World, not to pin thy Happiness upon
one that is a Woman and a Widow. I think that without Vanity I may
pretend to know as much of the Female World as any Man in Great-Britain,
tho' the chief of my Knowledge consists in this, that they are not to be
known. WILL, immediately, with his usual Fluency, rambled into an
Account of his own Amours. I am now, says he, upon the Verge of Fifty,
(tho' by the way we all knew he was turned of Threescore.) You may
easily guess, continued WILL., that I have not lived so long in the
World without having had some thoughts of settling in it, as the Phrase
is. To tell you truly, I have several times tried my Fortune that way,
though I can't much boast of my Success.

I made my first Addresses to a young Lady in the Country; but when I
thought things were pretty well drawing to a Conclusion, her Father
happening to hear that I had formerly boarded with a Surgeon, the old
Put forbid me his House, and within a Fortnight after married his
Daughter to a Fox-hunter in the Neighbourhood.

I made my next Applications to a Widow, and attacked her so briskly,
that I thought myself within a Fortnight of her. As I waited upon her
one Morning, she told me that she intended to keep her Ready-Money and
Jointure in her own Hand, and desired me to call upon her Attorney in
Lyons-Inn, who would adjust with me what it was proper for me to add to
it. I was so rebuffed by this Overture, that I never enquired either for
her or her Attorney afterwards.

A few Months after I addressed my self to a young Lady, who was an only
Daughter, and of a good Family. I danced with her at several Balls,
squeez'd her by the Hand, said soft things to her, and, in short, made
no doubt of her Heart; and though my Fortune was not equal to hers, I
was in hopes that her fond Father would not deny her the Man she had
fixed her Affections upon. But as I went one day to the House in order
to break the matter to him, I found the whole Family in Confusion, and
heard to my unspeakable Surprize, that Miss Jenny was that very Morning
run away with the Butler.

I then courted a second Widow, and am at a Loss to this day how I came
to miss her, for she had often commended my Person and Behaviour. Her
Maid indeed told me one Day, that her Mistress had said she never saw a
Gentleman with such a Spindle Pair of Legs as Mr. HONEYCOMB.

After this I laid Siege to four Heiresses successively, and being a
handsome young Dog in those Days, quickly made a Breach in their Hearts;
but I don't know how it came to pass, tho I seldom failed of getting the
Daughter's Consent, I could never in my Life get the old People on my
side.

I could give you an Account of a thousand other unsuccessful Attempts,
particularly of one which I made some Years since upon an old Woman,
whom I had certainly borne away with flying Colours, if her Relations
had not come pouring in to her Assistance from all Parts of England;
nay, I believe I should have got her at last, had not she been carried
off by an hard Frost.

As WILL'S Transitions are extremely quick, he turnd from Sir ROGER, and
applying himself to me, told me there was a Passage in the Book I had
considered last Saturday, which deserved to be writ in Letters of Gold;
and taking out a Pocket-Milton read the following Lines, which are Part
of one of Adam's Speeches to Eve after the Fall.

  --O! why did our
  Creator wise! that peopled highest Heav'n
  With Spirits masculine, create at last
  This Novelty on Earth, this fair Defect
  Of Nature? and not fill the World at once
  With Men, as Angels, without Feminine?
  Or find some other way to generate
  Mankind? This Mischief had not then befall'n,
  And more that shall befall; innumerable
  Disturbances on Earth through Female Snares,
  And strait Conjunction with this Sex: for either
  He never shall find out fit Mate, but such
  As some misfortune brings him, or mistake;
  Or, whom he wishes most, shall seldom gain
  Through her perverseness; but shall see her gain'd
  By a far worse; or if she love, with-held
  By Parents; or his happiest Choice too late
  Shall meet already link'd, and Wedlock bound
  To a fell Adversary, his Hate or Shame;
  Which infinite Calamity shall cause
  To human Life, and Household Peace confound. [1]

Sir ROGER listened to this Passage with great Attention, and desiring
Mr. HONEYCOMB to fold down a Leaf at the Place, and lend him his Book,
the Knight put it up in his Pocket, and told us that he would read over
those Verses again before he went to Bed.

X.


[Footnote 1: Paradise Lost, Bk x., ll 898-908.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 360.               Wednesday, April 23, 1712.               Steele.


 --De paupertate tacentes
  Plus poscente ferent.

  Hor.


I have nothing to do with the Business of this Day, any further than
affixing the piece of Latin on the Head of my Paper; which I think a
Motto not unsuitable, since if Silence of our Poverty is a
Recommendation, still more commendable is his Modesty who conceals it by
a decent Dress.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  There is an Evil under the Sun which has not yet come within your
  Speculation; and is, the Censure, Disesteem, and Contempt which some
  young Fellows meet with from particular Persons, for the reasonable
  Methods they take to avoid them in general. This is by appearing in a
  better Dress, than may seem to a Relation regularly consistent with a
  small Fortune; and therefore may occasion a Judgment of a suitable
  Extravagance in other Particulars: But the Disadvantage with which the
  Man of narrow Circumstances acts and speaks, is so feelingly set forth
  in a little Book called the Christian Hero, [1] that the appearing to
  be otherwise is not only pardonable but necessary. Every one knows the
  hurry of Conclusions that are made in contempt of a Person that
  appears to be calamitous, which makes it very excusable to prepare
  ones self for the Company of those that are of a superior Quality and
  Fortune, by appearing to be in a better Condition than one is, so far
  as such Appearance shall not make us really of worse.

  It is a Justice due to the Character of one who suffers hard
  Reflections from any particular Person upon this Account, that such
  Persons would enquire into his manner of spending his Time; of which,
  tho no further Information can be had than that he remains so many
  Hours in his Chamber, yet if this is cleared, to imagine that a
  reasonable Creature wrung with a narrow Fortune does not make the best
  use of this Retirement, would be a Conclusion extremely uncharitable.
  From what has, or will be said, I hope no Consequence can be extorted,
  implying, that I would have any young Fellow spend more Time than the
  common Leisure which his Studies require, or more Money than his
  Fortune or Allowance may admit of, in the pursuit of an Acquaintance
  with his Betters: For as to his Time, the gross of that ought to be
  sacred to more substantial Acquisitions; for each irrevocable Moment
  of which he ought to believe he stands religiously Accountable. And as
  to his Dress, I shall engage myself no further than in the modest
  Defence of two plain Suits a Year: For being perfectly satisfied in
  Eutrapeluss Contrivance of making a Mohock of a Man, by presenting
  him with lacd and embroiderd Suits, I would by no means be thought
  to controvert that Conceit, by insinuating the Advantages of Foppery.
  It is an Assertion which admits of much Proof, that a Stranger of
  tolerable Sense dressd like a Gentleman, will be better received by
  those of Quality above him, than one of much better Parts, whose Dress
  is regulated by the rigid Notions of Frugality. A Man's Appearance
  falls within the Censure of every one that sees him; his Parts and
  Learning very few are Judges of; and even upon these few, they cant
  at first be well intruded; for Policy and good Breeding will counsel
  him to be reservd among Strangers, and to support himself only by the
  common Spirit of Conversation. Indeed among the Injudicious, the Words
  Delicacy, Idiom, fine Images, Structure of Periods, Genius, Fire, and
  the rest, made use of with a frugal and comely Gravity, will maintain
  the Figure of immense Reading, and Depth of Criticism.

  All Gentlemen of Fortune, at least the young and middle-aged, are apt
  to pride themselves a little too much upon their Dress, and
  consequently to value others in some measure upon the same
  Consideration. With what Confusion is a Man of Figure obliged to
  return the Civilities of the Hat to a Person whose Air and Attire
  hardly entitle him to it? For whom nevertheless the other has a
  particular Esteem, tho he is ashamed to have it challenged in so
  publick a Manner. It must be allowed, that any young Fellow that
  affects to dress and appear genteelly, might with artificial
  Management save ten Pound a Year; as instead of fine Holland he might
  mourn in Sackcloth, and in other Particulars be proportionably shabby:
  But of what great Service would this Sum be to avert any Misfortune,
  whilst it would leave him deserted by the little good Acquaintance he
  has, and prevent his gaining any other? As the Appearance of an easy
  Fortune is necessary towards making one, I dont know but it might be
  of advantage sometimes to throw into ones Discourse certain
  Exclamations about Bank-Stock, and to shew a marvellous Surprize upon
  its Fall, as well as the most affected Triumph upon its Rise. The
  Veneration and Respect which the Practice of all Ages has preserved to
  Appearances, without doubt suggested to our Tradesmen that wise and
  Politick Custom, to apply and recommend themselves to the publick by
  all those Decorations upon their Sign-posts and Houses, which the most
  eminent Hands in the Neighbourhood can furnish them with. What can be
  more attractive to a Man of Letters, than that immense Erudition of
  all Ages and Languages which a skilful Bookseller, in conjunction with
  a Painter, shall image upon his Column and the Extremities of his
  Shop? The same Spirit of maintaining a handsome Appearance reigns
  among the grave and solid Apprentices of the Law (here I could be
  particularly dull in [proving [2]] the Word Apprentice to be
  significant of a Barrister) and you may easily distinguish who has
  most lately made his Pretensions to Business, by the whitest and most
  ornamental Frame of his Window: If indeed the Chamber is a
  Ground-Room, and has Rails before it, the Finery is of Necessity more
  extended, and the Pomp of Business better maintaind. And what can be
  a greater Indication of the Dignity of Dress, than that burdensome
  Finery which is the regular Habit of our Judges, Nobles, and Bishops,
  with which upon certain Days we see them incumbered? And though it may
  be said this is awful, and necessary for the Dignity of the State, yet
  the wisest of them have been remarkable, before they arrived at their
  present Stations, for being very well dressed Persons. As to my own
  Part, I am near Thirty; and since I left School have not been idle,
  which is a modern Phrase for having studied hard. I brought off a
  clean System of Moral Philosophy, and a tolerable Jargon of
  Metaphysicks from the University; since that, I have been engaged in
  the clearing Part of the perplexd Style and Matter of the Law, which
  so hereditarily descends to all its Professors: To all which severe
  Studies I have thrown in, at proper Interims, the pretty Learning of
  the Classicks. Notwithstanding which, I am what Shakespear calls A
  Fellow of no Mark or Likelihood; [3] which makes me understand the
  more fully, that since the regular Methods of making Friends and a
  Fortune by the mere Force of a Profession is so very slow and
  uncertain, a Man should take all reasonable Opportunities, by
  enlarging a good Acquaintance, to court that Time and Chance which is
  said to happen to every Man.


T.


[Footnote 1: The passage is nearly at the beginning of Steeles third
chapter,

  It is in every bodys observation with what disadvantage a Poor Man
  enters upon the most ordinary affairs, &c.]


[Footnote 2: [clearing]]


[Footnote 3: Henry IV. Pt. I. Act iii. sc. 2.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 361.                 Thursday, April 24, 1712.              Addison.


  Tartaream intendit vocem, quâ protinus omnis
  Contremuit domus--

  Virg.


I have lately received the following Letter from a Country Gentleman.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  The Night before I left London I went to see a Play, called The
  Humorous Lieutenant. [1] Upon the Rising of the Curtain I was very
  much surprized with the great Consort of Cat-calls which was exhibited
  that Evening, and began to think with myself that I had made a
  Mistake, and gone to a Musick-Meeting, instead of the Play-house. It
  appeared indeed a little odd to me to see so many Persons of Quality
  of both Sexes assembled together at a kind of Catterwawling; for I
  cannot look upon that Performance to have been any thing better,
  whatever the Musicians themselves might think of it. As I had no
  Acquaintance in the House to ask Questions of, and was forced to go
  out of Town early the next Morning, I could not learn the Secret of
  this Matter. What I would therefore desire of you, is, to give some
  account of this strange Instrument, which I found the Company called a
  Cat-call; and particularly to let me know whether it be a piece of
  Musick lately come from Italy. For my own part, to be free with you, I
  would rather hear an English Fiddle; though I durst not shew my
  Dislike whilst I was in the Play-House, it being my Chance to sit the
  very next Man to one of the Performers. I am, SIR,

  Your most affectionate Friend
  and Servant,
  John Shallow, Esq.


In compliance with Esquire Shallows Request, I design this Paper as a
Dissertation upon the Cat-call. In order to make myself a Master of the
Subject, I purchased one the Beginning of last Week, though not without
great difficulty, being informd at two or three Toyshops that the
Players had lately bought them all up. I have since consulted many
learned Antiquaries in relation to its Original, and find them very much
divided among themselves upon that Particular. A Fellow of the Royal
Society, who is my good Friend, and a great Proficient in the
Mathematical Part of Musick, concludes from the Simplicity of its Make,
and the Uniformity of its Sound, that the Cat-call is older than any of
the Inventions of Jubal. He observes very well, that Musical Instruments
took their first Rise from the Notes of Birds, and other melodious
Animals; and what, says he, was more natural than for the first Ages of
Mankind to imitate the Voice of a Cat that lived under the same Roof
with them? He added, that the Cat had contributed more to Harmony than
any other Animal; as we are not only beholden to her for this
Wind-Instrument, but for our String Musick in general.

Another Virtuoso of my Acquaintance will not allow the Cat-call to be
older than Thespis, and is apt to think it appeared in the World soon
after the antient Comedy; for which reason it has still a place in our
Dramatick Entertainments: Nor must I here omit what a very curious
Gentleman, who is lately returned from his Travels, has more than once
assured me, namely that there was lately dug up at Rome the Statue of
Momus, who holds an Instrument in his Right-Hand very much resembling
our Modern Cat-call.

There are others who ascribe this Invention to Orpheus, and look upon
the Cat-call to be one of those Instruments which that famous Musician
made use of to draw the Beasts about him. It is certain, that the
Roasting of a Cat does not call together a greater Audience of that
Species than this Instrument, if dexterously played upon in proper Time
and Place.

But notwithstanding these various and learned Conjectures, I cannot
forbear thinking that the Cat-call is originally a Piece of English
Musick. Its Resemblance to the Voice of some of our British Songsters,
as well as the Use of it, which is peculiar to our Nation, confirms me
in this Opinion. It has at least received great Improvements among us,
whether we consider the Instrument it self, or those several Quavers and
Graces which are thrown into the playing of it. Every one might be
sensible of this, who heard that remarkable overgrown Cat-call which was
placed in the Center of the Pit, and presided over all the rest at [the
[2]] celebrated Performance lately exhibited in Drury-Lane.

Having said thus much concerning the Original of the Cat-call, we are in
the next place to consider the Use of it. The Cat-call exerts it self to
most advantage in the British Theatre: It very much Improves the Sound
of Nonsense, and often goes along with the Voice of the Actor who
pronounces it, as the Violin or Harpsichord accompanies the Italian
Recitativo.

It has often supplied the Place of the antient Chorus, in the Works of
Mr.----In short, a bad Poet has as great an Antipathy to a Cat-call, as
many People have to a real Cat.

Mr. Collier, in his ingenious Essay upon Musick [3] has the following
Passage:

  I believe tis possible to invent an Instrument that shall have a
  quite contrary Effect to those Martial ones now in use: An Instrument
  that shall sink the Spirits, and shake the Nerves, and curdle the
  Blood, and inspire Despair, and Cowardice and Consternation, at a
  surprizing rate. Tis probable the Roaring of Lions, the Warbling of
  Cats and Scritch-Owls, together with a Mixture of the Howling of Dogs,
  judiciously imitated and compounded, might go a great way in this
  Invention. Whether such Anti-Musick as this might not be of Service in
  a Camp, I shall leave to the Military Men to consider.

What this learned Gentleman supposes in Speculation, I have known
actually verified in Practice. The Cat-call has struck a Damp into
Generals, and frighted Heroes off the Stage. At the first sound of it I
have seen a Crowned Head tremble, and a Princess fall into Fits. The
Humorous Lieutenant himself could not stand it; nay, I am told that even
Almanzor looked like a Mouse, and trembled at the Voice of this
terrifying Instrument.

As it is of a Dramatick Nature, and peculiarly appropriated to the
Stage, I can by no means approve the Thought of that angry Lover, who,
after an unsuccessful Pursuit of some Years, took leave of his Mistress
in a Serenade of Cat-calls.

I must conclude this Paper with the Account I have lately received of an
ingenious Artist, who has long studied this Instrument, and is very well
versed in all the Rules of the Drama. He teaches to play on it by Book,
and to express by it the whole Art of Criticism. He has his Base and his
Treble Cat-call; the former for Tragedy, the latter for Comedy; only in
Tragy-Comedies they may both play together in Consort. He has a
particular Squeak to denote the Violation of each of the Unities, and
has different Sounds to shew whether he aims at the Poet or the Player.
In short he teaches the Smut-note, the Fustian-note, the Stupid-note,
and has composed a kind of Air that may serve as an Act-tune to an
incorrigible Play, and which takes in the whole Compass of the Cat-call.

[L. [4]]


[Footnote 1: By Beaumont and Fletcher.]


[Footnote 2: [that]]


[Footnote 3: Essays upon several Moral Subjects, by Jeremy Collier, Part
II. p. 30 (ed. 1732). Jeremy Collier published the first volume of these
Essays in 1697, after he was safe from the danger brought on himself by
attending Sir John Friend and Sir William Perkins when they were
executed for the assassination plot. The other two volumes appeared
successively in 1705 and 1709. It was in 1698 that Collier published his
famous Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English
Stage.]


[Footnote 4: [Not being yet determined with whose Name to fill up the
Gap in this Dissertation which is marked with----, I shall defer it
till this Paper appears with others in a Volume.  L.]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 362.             Friday, April 25, 1712.                   Steele.


  Laudibus arguitur Vini vinosus--

  Hor.


  Temple, Apr. 24.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  Several of my Friends were this Morning got together over a Dish of
  Tea in very good Health, though we had celebrated Yesterday with more
  Glasses than we could have dispensed with, had we not been beholden to
  Brooke and Hillier. In Gratitude therefore to those good Citizens, I
  am, in the Name of the Company, to accuse you of great Negligence in
  overlooking their Merit, who have imported true and generous Wine, and
  taken care that it should not be adulterated by the Retailers before
  it comes to the Tables of private Families, or the Clubs of honest
  Fellows. I cannot imagine how a SPECTATOR can be supposed to do his
  Duty, without frequent Resumption of such Subjects as concern our
  Health, the first thing to be regarded, if we have a mind to relish
  anything else. It would therefore very well become your Spectatorial
  Vigilance, to give it in Orders to your Officer for inspecting Signs,
  that in his March he would look into the Itinerants who deal in
  Provisions, and enquire where they buy their several Wares. Ever since
  the Decease of [Cully [1]]- Mully-Puff [2] of agreeable and noisy
  Memory, I cannot say I have observed any thing sold in Carts, or
  carried by Horse or Ass, or in fine, in any moving Market, which is
  not perished or putrified; witness the Wheel-barrows of rotten
  Raisins, Almonds, Figs, and Currants, which you see vended by a
  Merchant dressed in a second-hand Suit of a Foot Soldier. You should
  consider that a Child may be poisoned for the Worth of a Farthing; but
  except his poor Parents send to one certain Doctor in Town, [3] they
  can have no advice for him under a Guinea. When Poisons are thus
  cheap, and Medicines thus dear, how can you be negligent in inspecting
  what we eat and drink, or take no Notice of such as the
  above-mentioned Citizens, who have been so serviceable to us of late
  in that particular? It was a Custom among the old Romans, to do him
  particular Honours who had saved the Life of a Citizen, how much more
  does the World owe to those who prevent the Death of Multitudes? As
  these Men deserve well of your Office, so such as act to the Detriment
  of our Health, you ought to represent to themselves and their
  Fellow-Subjects in the Colours which they deserve to wear. I think it
  would be for the publick Good, that all who vend Wines should be under
  oaths in that behalf. The Chairman at a Quarter Sessions should inform
  the Country, that the Vintner who mixes Wine to his Customers, shall
  (upon proof that the Drinker thereof died within a Year and a Day
  after taking it) be deemed guilty of Wilful Murder: and the Jury shall
  be instructed to enquire and present such Delinquents accordingly. It
  is no Mitigation of the Crime, nor will it be conceived that it can be
  brought in Chance-Medley or Man-Slaughter, upon Proof that it shall
  appear Wine joined to Wine, or right Herefordshire poured into Port O
  Port; but his selling it for one thing, knowing it to be another, must
  justly bear the foresaid Guilt of wilful Murder: For that he, the said
  Vintner, did an unlawful Act willingly in the false Mixture; and is
  therefore with Equity liable to all the Pains to which a Man would be,
  if it were proved he designed only to run a Man through the Arm, whom
  he whipped through the Lungs. This is my third Year at the Temple, and
  this is or should be Law. An ill Intention well proved should meet
  with no Alleviation, because it [out-ran [4]] it self. There cannot be
  too great Severity used against the Injustice as well as Cruelty of
  those who play with Mens Lives, by preparing Liquors, whose Nature,
  for ought they know, may be noxious when mixed, tho innocent when
  apart: And Brooke and Hillier, [5] who have ensured our Safety at our
  Meals, and driven Jealousy from our Cups in Conversation, deserve the
  Custom and Thanks of the whole Town; and it is your Duty to remind
  them of the Obligation. I am, SIR,
  Your Humble Servant,
  Tom. Pottle.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I am a Person who was long immured in a College, read much, saw
  little; so that I knew no more of the World than what a Lecture or a
  View of the Map taught me. By this means I improved in my Study, but
  became unpleasant in Conversation. By conversing generally with the
  Dead, I grew almost unfit for the Society of the Living; so by a long
  Confinement I contracted an ungainly Aversion to Conversation, and
  ever discoursed with Pain to my self, and little Entertainment to
  others. At last I was in some measure made sensible of my failing, and
  the Mortification of never being spoke to, or speaking, unless the
  Discourse ran upon Books, put me upon forcing my self amongst Men. I
  immediately affected the politest Company, by the frequent use of
  which I hoped to wear off the Rust I had contracted; but by an uncouth
  Imitation of Men used to act in publick, I got no further than to
  discover I had a Mind to appear a finer thing than I really was.

  Such I was, and such was my Condition, when I became an ardent Lover,
  and passionate Admirer of the beauteous Belinda: Then it was that I
  really began to improve. This Passion changed all my Fears and
  Diffidences in my general Behaviour, to the sole Concern of pleasing
  her. I had not now to study the Action of a Gentleman, but Love
  possessing all my Thoughts, made me truly be the thing I had a Mind to
  appear. My Thoughts grew free and generous, and the Ambition to be
  agreeable to her I admired, produced in my Carriage a faint Similitude
  of that disengaged Manner of my Belinda. The way we are in at present
  is, that she sees my Passion, and sees I at present forbear speaking
  of it through prudential Regards. This Respect to her she returns with
  much Civility, and makes my Value for her as little a Misfortune to
  me, as is consistent with Discretion. She sings very charmingly, and
  is readier to do so at my Request, because she knows I love her: She
  will dance with me rather than another, for the same Reason. My
  Fortune must alter from what it is, before I can speak my Heart to
  her; and her Circumstances are not considerable enough to make up for
  the Narrowness of mine. But I write to you now, only to give you the
  Character of Belinda, as a Woman that has Address enough to
  demonstrate a Gratitude to her Lover, without giving him Hopes of
  Success in his Passion. Belinda has from a great Wit, governed by as
  great Prudence, and both adorned with Innocence, the Happiness of
  always being ready to discover her real Thoughts. She has many of us,
  who now are her Admirers; but her Treatment of us is so just and
  proportioned to our Merit towards her, and what we are in our selves,
  that I protest to you I have neither Jealousy nor Hatred toward my
  Rivals. Such is her Goodness, and the Acknowledgment of every Man who
  admires her, that he thinks he ought to believe she will take him who
  best deserves her. I will not say that this Peace among us is not
  owing to Self-love, which prompts each to think himself the best
  Deserver: I think there is something uncommon and worthy of Imitation
  in this Ladys Character. If you will please to Print my Letter, you
  will oblige the little Fraternity of happy Rivals, and in a more
  particular Manner,

  SIR,
  Your most humble Servant,
  Will. Cymon.


T.


[Footnote 1: [Mully]


[Footnote 2: See No. 251. He was a little man just able to bear on his
head his basket of pastry, and who was named from his cry. There is a
half-sheet print of him in the set of London Cries in Granger's
Biographical History of England.]


[Footnote 3: Who advertised that he attended patients at charges ranging
from a shilling to half-a-crown, according to their distance from his
house.]


[Footnote 4: [out-run]]


[Footnote 5: Estcourt, it may be remembered, connected the advertisement
of his Bumper tavern with the recommendation of himself as one ignorant
of the wine trade who relied on Brooke and Hellier, and so ensured his
Customers good wine. Among the advertisers in the Spectator Brooke and
Hellier often appeared. One of their advertisements is preceded by the
following, evidently a contrivance of their own, which shows that the
art of puffing was not then in its infancy:

  'This is to give Notice, That Brooke and Hellier have not all the New
  Port Wines this Year, nor above one half, the Vintners having bought
  130 Pipes of Mr. Thomas Barlow and others, which are all natural, and
  shall remain Genuine, on which all Gentlemen and others may depend.
  Note.--Altho' Brooke and Hellier have asserted in several Papers that
  they had 140 Pipes of New Oporto Wines coming from Bristol, it now
  appears, since their landing, that they have only 133 Pipes, I Hhd. of
  the said Wines, which shews plainly how little what they say is to be
  credited.'

Then follows their long advertisement, which ends with a note that Their
New Ports, just landed, being the only New Ports in Merchants Hands, and
above One Half of all that is in London, will begin to be sold at the
old prices the I2th inst. (April) at all their Taverns and Cellars.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 363.               Saturday, April 26, 1712.                Addison.


  '--Crudelis ubique
  Luctus, ubique pavor, et plurima Mortis
  Imago.'

  Virg.


Milton has shewn a wonderful Art in describing that variety of Passions
which arise in our first Parents upon the Breach of the Commandment that
had been given them. We see them gradually passing from the Triumph of
their Guilt thro Remorse, Shame, Despair, Contrition, Prayer, and Hope,
to a perfect and compleat Repentance. At the end of the tenth Book they
are represented as prostrating themselves upon the Ground, and watering
the Earth with their Tears: To which the Poet joins this beautiful
Circumstance, that they offerd up their penitential Prayers, on the very
Place where their Judge appeared to them when he pronounced their
Sentence.

 --They forthwith to the place
  Repairing where he judg'd them, prostrate fell
  Before him Reverent, and both confess'd
  Humbly their Faults, and Pardon begg'd, with Tears
  Watering the Ground--

[There is a Beauty of the same kind in a Tragedy of Sophocles, where
OEdipus, after having put out his own Eyes, instead of breaking his Neck
from the Palace-Battlements (which furnishes so elegant an Entertainment
for our English Audience) desires that he may be conducted to Mount
Cithoeron, in order to end his Life in that very Place where he was
exposed in his Infancy, and where he should then have died, had the Will
of his Parents been executed.]

As the Author never fails to give a poetical Turn to his Sentiments, he
describes in the Beginning of this Book the Acceptance which these their
Prayers met with, in a short Allegory, formd upon that beautiful Passage
in holy Writ: And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a
golden Censer; and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should
offer it with the Prayers of all Saints upon the Golden Altar, which was
before the Throne: And the Smoak of the Incense which came with the
Prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God.

 --To Heavn their Prayers
  Flew up, nor miss'd the Way, by envious Winds
  Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passd
  Dimensionless through heavnly Doors, then clad
  With Incense, where the Golden Altar fumed,
  By their great Intercessor, came in sight
  Before the Father's Throne--

We have the same Thought expressed a second time in the Intercession of
the Messiah, which is conceived in very Emphatick Sentiments and
Expressions.

Among the Poetical Parts of Scripture, which Milton has so finely
wrought into this Part of his Narration, I must not omit that wherein
Ezekiel speaking of the Angels who appeared to him in a Vision, adds,
that every one had four Faces, and that their whole Bodies, and their
Backs, and their Hands, and their Wings, were full of Eyes round about.

 --The Cohort bright
  Of watchful Cherubims, four Faces each
  Had like a double Janus, all their Shape
  Spangled with Eyes--

The Assembling of all the Angels of Heaven to hear the solemn Decree
passed upon Man, is represented in very lively Ideas. The Almighty is
here describd as remembring Mercy in the midst of Judgment, and
commanding Michael to deliver his Message in the mildest Terms, lest the
Spirit of Man, which was already broken with the Sense of his Guilt and
Misery, should fail before him.

 --Yet lest they faint
  At the sad Sentence rigorously urg'd,
  For I behold them softned, and with Tears
  Bewailing their Excess, all Terror hide,

The Conference of Adam and Eve is full of moving Sentiments. Upon their
going abroad after the melancholy Night which they had passed together,
they discover the Lion and the Eagle pursuing each of them their Prey
towards the Eastern Gates of Paradise. There is a double Beauty in this
Incident, not only as it presents great and just Omens, which are always
agreeable in Poetry, but as it expresses that Enmity which was now
produced in the Animal Creation. The Poet to shew the like Changes in
Nature, as well as to grace his Fable with a noble Prodigy, represents
the Sun in an Eclipse. This particular Incident has likewise a fine
Effect upon the Imagination of the Reader, in regard to what follows;
for at the same time that the Sun is under an Eclipse, a bright Cloud
descends in the Western Quarter of the Heavens, filled with an Host of
Angels, and more luminous than the Sun it self. The whole Theatre of
Nature is darkned, that this glorious Machine may appear in all its
Lustre and Magnificence.

 --Why in the East
  Darkness ere Days mid-course, and morning Light
  More orient in that Western Cloud that draws
  O'er the blue Firmament a radiant White,
  And slow descends, with something Heavnly fraught?
    He err'd not, for by this the heavenly Bands
  Down from a Sky of Jasper lighted now
  In Paradise, and on a Hill made halt;
  A glorious Apparition--

I need not observe how properly this Author, who always suits his Parts
to the Actors whom he introduces, has employed Michael in the Expulsion
of our first Parents from Paradise. The Archangel on this Occasion
neither appears in his proper Shape, nor in that familiar Manner with
which Raphael the sociable Spirit entertained the Father of Mankind
before the Fall. His Person, his Port, and Behaviour, are suitable to a
Spirit of the highest Rank, and exquisitely describd in the following
Passage.

 --Th' Archangel soon drew nigh,
  Not in his Shape Celestial; but as Man
  Clad to meet Man: over his lucid Arms
  A Military Vest of Purple flow'd,
  Livelier than Meliboean, or the Grain
  Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Heroes old,
  In time of Truce: Iris had dipt the Wooff:
  His starry Helm, unbuckled, shew'd him prime
  In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side,
  As in a glistring Zodiack, hung the Sword,
  Satan's dire dread, and in his Hand the Spear.
  Adam bow'd low, he Kingly from his State
  Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.

Eve's Complaint upon hearing that she was to be removed from the Garden
of Paradise, is wonderfully beautiful: The Sentiments are not only
proper to the Subject, but have something in them particularly soft and
womanish.

  Must I then leave thee, Paradise? Thus leave
  Thee, native Soil, these happy Walks and Shades,
  Fit haunt of Gods? Where I had hope to spend
  Quiet, though sad, the respite of that Day
  That must be mortal to us both. O Flowrs,
  That never will in other Climate grow,
  My early Visitation, and my last
  At Even, which I bred up with tender Hand
  From the first opening Bud, and gave you Names;
  Who now shall rear you to the Sun, or rank
  Your Tribes, and water from th' ambrosial Fount?
  Thee, lastly, nuptial Bower, by me adorn'd
  With what to Sight or Smell was sweet; from thee
  How shall I part, and whither wander down
  Into a lower World, to this obscure
  And wild? how shall we breathe in other Air
  Less pure, accustomd to immortal Fruits?

Adam's Speech abounds with Thoughts which are equally moving, but of a
more masculine and elevated Turn. Nothing can be conceived more Sublime
and Poetical than the following Passage in it.

  This most afflicts me, that departing hence
  As from his Face I shall be hid, deprived
  His blessed Countnance: here I could frequent,
  With Worship, place by place where he vouchsaf'd
  Presence Divine; and to my Sons relate,
  On this Mount he appear'd, under this Tree
  Stood visible, among these Pines his Voice
  I heard, here with him at this Fountain talk'd;
  So many grateful Altars I would rear
  Of grassy Turf, and pile up every Stone
  Of lustre from the Brook, in memory
  Or monument to Ages, and thereon
  Offer sweet-smelling Gums and Fruits and Flowers.
  In yonder nether World--where shall I seek
  His bright Appearances, or Footsteps trace?
  For though I fled him angry, yet recalled
  To Life prolonged and promised Race, I now
  Gladly behold though but his utmost Skirts
  Of Glory, and far off his Steps adore.

The Angel afterwards leads Adam to the highest Mount of Paradise, and
lays before him a whole Hemisphere, as a proper Stage for those Visions
which were to be represented on it. I have before observed how the Plan
of Milton's Poem is in many Particulars greater than that of the Iliad
or Æneid. Virgil's Hero, in the last of these Poems, is entertained with
a Sight of all those who are to descend from him; but though that
Episode is justly admired as one of the noblest Designs in the whole
Æneid, every one-must allow that this of Milton is of a much higher
Nature. Adam's Vision is not confined to any particular Tribe of
Mankind, but extends to the whole Species.

In this great Review which Adam takes of all his Sons and Daughters, the
first Objects he is presented with exhibit to him the Story of Cain and
Abel, which is drawn together with much Closeness and Propriety of
Expression. That Curiosity and natural Horror which arises in Adam at
the Sight of the first dying Man, is touched with great Beauty.

  But have I now seen Death? is this the way
  I must return to native Dust? O Sight
  Of Terror foul, and ugly to behold,
  Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!

The second Vision sets before him the Image of Death in a great Variety
of Appearances. The Angel, to give him a general Idea of those Effects
which his Guilt had brought upon his Posterity, places before him a
large Hospital or Lazar-House, filled with Persons lying under all kinds
of mortal Diseases. How finely has the Poet told us that the sick
Persons languished under lingering and incurable Distempers, by an apt
and judicious use of such Imaginary Beings as those I mentioned in my
last Saturday's Paper.

  Dire was the tossing, deep the Groans. Despair
  Tended the Sick, busy from Couch to Couch;
  And over them triumphant Death his Dart
  Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
  With Vows, as their chief Good and final Hope.

The Passion which likewise rises in Adam on this Occasion, is very
natural.

  Sight so deform, what Heart of Rock could long
  Dry-eyed behold? Adam could not, but wept,
  Tho' not of Woman born; Compassion quell'd
  His best of Man, and gave him up to Tears.

The Discourse between the Angel and Adam, which follows, abounds with
noble Morals.

As there is nothing more delightful in Poetry than a Contrast and
Opposition of Incidents, the Author, after this melancholy Prospect of
Death and Sickness, raises up a Scene of Mirth, Love, and Jollity. The
secret Pleasure that steals into Adams Heart as he is intent upon this
Vision, is imagined with great Delicacy. I must not omit the Description
of the loose female Troop, who seduced the Sons of God, as they are
called in Scripture.

  For that fair female Troop thou sawst, that seemed
  Of Goddesses, so Blithe, so Smooth, so Gay,
  Yet empty of all Good wherein consists
  Woman's domestick Honour and chief Praise;
  Bred only and compleated to the taste
  Of lustful Appetence, to sing, to dance,
  To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roll the Eye:
  To these that sober Race of Men, whose Lives
  Religious titled them the Sons of God,
  Shall yield up all their Virtue, all their Fame
  Ignobly, to the Trains and to the Smiles
  Of those fair Atheists--

The next Vision is of a quite contrary Nature, and filled with the
Horrors of War. Adam at the Sight of it melts into Tears, and breaks out
in that passionate Speech,

 --O what are these!
  Death's Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death
  Inhumanly to Men, and multiply
  Ten Thousandfold the Sin of him who slew
  His Brother: for of whom such Massacre
  Make they but of their Brethren, Men of Men?

Milton, to keep up an agreeable Variety in his Visions, after having
raised in the Mind of his Reader the several Ideas of Terror which are
conformable to the Description of War, passes on to those softer Images
of Triumphs and Festivals, in that Vision of Lewdness and Luxury which
ushers in the Flood.

As it is visible that the Poet had his Eye upon Ovid's Account of the
universal Deluge, the Reader may observe with how much Judgment he has
avoided every thing that is redundant or puerile in the Latin Poet. We
do not here see the Wolf swimming among the Sheep, nor any of those
wanton Imaginations, which Seneca found fault with, [1] as unbecoming
[the [2]] great Catastrophe of Nature. If our Poet has imitated that
Verse in which Ovid tells us that there was nothing but Sea, and that
this Sea had no Shore to it, he has not set the Thought in such a Light
as to incur the Censure which Criticks have passed upon it. The latter
part of that Verse in Ovid is idle and superfluous, but just and
beautiful in Milton.

  'Jamque mare et tellus nullum discrimen habebant,
  Nil nisi pontus erat, deerant quoque littora ponto.'

  (Ovid.)


  '--Sea cover'd Sea,
  Sea without Shore--'

  (Milton.)

In Milton the former Part of the Description does not forestall the
latter. How much more great and solemn on this Occasion is that which
follows in our English Poet,

 --And in their Palaces
  Where Luxury late reign'd, Sea-Monsters whelp'd
  And stabled--

than that in Ovid, where we are told that the Sea-Calfs lay in those
Places where the Goats were used to browze? The Reader may find several
other parallel Passages in the Latin and English Description of the
Deluge, wherein our Poet has visibly the Advantage. The Skys being
overcharged with Clouds, the descending of the Rains, the rising of the
Seas, and the Appearance of the Rainbow, are such Descriptions as every
one must take notice of. The Circumstance relating to Paradise is so
finely imagined, and suitable to the Opinions of many learned Authors,
that I cannot forbear giving it a Place in this Paper.

 --Then shall this Mount
  Of Paradise by might of Waves be mov'd
  Out of his Place, pushed by the horned Flood
  With all his Verdure spoil'd, and Trees adrift
  Down the great River to the opning Gulf,
  And there take root, an Island salt and bare,
  The haunt of Seals and Orcs and Sea-Mews clang.

The Transition which the Poet makes from the Vision of the Deluge, to
the Concern it occasioned in Adam, is exquisitely graceful, and copied
after Virgil, though the first Thought it introduces is rather in the
Spirit of Ovid.

  How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
  The End of all thy Offspring, End so sad,
  Depopulation! thee another Flood
  Of Tears and Sorrow, a Flood thee also drowned,
  And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently rear'd
  By th' Angel, on thy Feet thou stoodst at last,
  Tho' comfortless, as when a Father mourns
  His Children, all in view destroyed at once.

I have been the more particular in my Quotations out of the eleventh
Book of Paradise Lost, because it is not generally reckoned among the
most shining Books of this Poem; for which Reason the Reader might be
apt to overlook those many Passages in it which deserve our Admiration.
The eleventh and twelfth are indeed built upon that single Circumstance
of the Removal of our first Parents from Paradise; but tho' this is not
in itself so great a Subject as that in most of the foregoing Books, it
is extended and diversified with so many surprising Incidents and
pleasing Episodes, that these two last Books can by no means be looked
upon as unequal Parts of this Divine Poem. I must further add, that had
not Milton represented our first Parents as driven out of Paradise, his
Fall of Man would not have been compleat, and consequently his Action
would have been imperfect.

L.


[Footnote 1: Nat. Quaest. Bk. III. §27.]


[Footnote  2: [this]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 364.                   Monday, April 28, 1712.             Steele.


  '[--Navibus [1]] atque
  Quadrigis petimus bene vivere.'

  Hor.


  Mr. SPECTATOR, [2]

  A Lady of my Acquaintance, for whom I have too much Respect to be easy
  while she is doing an indiscreet Action, has given occasion to this
  Trouble: She is a Widow, to whom the Indulgence of a tender Husband
  has entrusted the Management of a very great Fortune, and a Son about
  sixteen, both which she is extremely fond of. The Boy has Parts of the
  middle Size, neither shining nor despicable, and has passed the common
  Exercises of his Years with tolerable Advantage; but is withal what
  you would call a forward Youth: By the Help of this last
  Qualification, which serves as a Varnish to all the rest, he is
  enabled to make the best Use of his Learning, and display it at full
  length upon all Occasions. Last Summer he distinguished himself two or
  three times very remarkably, by puzzling the Vicar before an Assembly
  of most of the Ladies in the Neighbourhood; and from such weighty
  Considerations as these, as it too often unfortunately falls out, the
  Mother is become invincibly persuaded that her Son is a great Scholar;
  and that to chain him down to the ordinary Methods of Education with
  others of his Age, would be to cramp his Faculties, and do an
  irreparable Injury to his wonderful Capacity.

  I happened to visit at the House last Week, and missing the young
  Gentleman at the Tea-Table, where he seldom fails to officiate, could
  not upon so extraordinary a Circumstance avoid inquiring after him. My
  Lady told me, he was gone out with her Woman, in order to make some
  Preparations for their Equipage; for that she intended very speedily
  to carry him to travel. The Oddness of the Expression shock'd me a
  little; however, I soon recovered my self enough to let her know, that
  all I was willing to understand by it was, that she designed this
  Summer to shew her Son his Estate in a distant County, in which he has
  never yet been: But she soon took care to rob me of that agreeable
  Mistake, and let me into the whole Affair. She enlarged upon young
  Master's prodigious Improvements, and his comprehensive Knowledge of
  all Book-Learning; concluding, that it was now high time he should be
  made acquainted with Men and Things; that she had resolved he should
  make the Tour of France and Italy, but could not bear to have him out
  of her Sight, and therefore intended to go along with him.

  I was going to rally her for so extravagant a Resolution, but found my
  self not in fit Humour to meddle with a Subject that demanded the most
  soft and delicate Touch imaginable. I was afraid of dropping something
  that might seem to bear hard either upon the Son's Abilities, or the
  Mother's Discretion; being sensible that in both these Cases, tho'
  supported with all the Powers of Reason, I should, instead of gaining
  her Ladyship over to my Opinion, only expose my self to her Disesteem:
  I therefore immediately determined to refer the whole Matter to the
  SPECTATOR.

  When I came to reflect at Night, as my Custom is, upon the Occurrences
  of the Day, I could not but believe that this Humour of carrying a Boy
  to travel in his Mother's Lap, and that upon pretence of learning Men
  and Things, is a Case of an extraordinary Nature, and carries on it a
  particular Stamp of Folly. I did not remember to have met with its
  Parallel within the Compass of my Observation, tho' I could call to
  mind some not extremely unlike it. From hence my Thoughts took
  Occasion to ramble into the general Notion of Travelling, as it is now
  made a Part of Education. Nothing is more frequent than to take a Lad
  from Grammar and Taw, and under the Tuition of some poor Scholar, who
  is willing to be banished for thirty Pounds a Year, and a little
  Victuals, send him crying and snivelling into foreign Countries. Thus
  he spends his time as Children do at Puppet-Shows, and with much the
  same Advantage, in staring and gaping at an amazing Variety of strange
  things: strange indeed to one who is not prepared to comprehend the
  Reasons and Meaning of them; whilst he should be laying the solid
  Foundations of Knowledge in his Mind, and furnishing it with just
  Rules to direct his future Progress in Life under some skilful Master
  of the Art of Instruction.

  Can there be a more astonishing Thought in Nature, than to consider
  how Men should fall into so palpable a Mistake? It is a large Field,
  and may very well exercise a sprightly Genius; but I don't remember
  you have yet taken a Turn in it. I wish, Sir, you would make People
  understand, that Travel is really the last Step to be taken in the
  Institution of Youth; and to set out with it, is to begin where they
  should end.

  Certainly the true End of visiting Foreign Parts, is to look into
  their Customs and Policies, and observe in what Particulars they excel
  or come short of our own; to unlearn some odd Peculiarities in our
  Manners, and wear off such awkward Stiffnesses and Affectations in our
  Behaviour, as may possibly have been contracted from constantly
  associating with one Nation of Men, by a more free, general, and mixed
  Conversation. But how can any of these Advantages be attained by one
  who is a mere Stranger to the Custom sand Policies of his native
  Country, and has not yet fixed in his Mind the first Principles of
  Manners and Behaviour? To endeavour it, is to build a gawdy Structure
  without any Foundation; or, if I may be allow'd the Expression, to
  work a rich Embroidery upon a Cobweb.

  Another End of travelling which deserves to be considerd, is the
  Improving our Taste of the best Authors of Antiquity, by seeing the
  Places where they lived, and of which they wrote; to compare the
  natural Face of the Country with the Descriptions they have given us,
  and observe how well the Picture agrees with the Original. This must
  certainly be a most charming Exercise to the Mind that is rightly
  turned for it; besides that it may in a good measure be made
  subservient to Morality, if the Person is capable of drawing just
  Conclusions concerning the Uncertainty of human things, from the
  ruinous Alterations Time and Barbarity have brought upon so many
  Palaces, Cities and whole Countries, which make the most illustrious
  Figures in History. And this Hint may be not a little improved by
  examining every Spot of Ground that we find celebrated as the Scene of
  some famous Action, or retaining any Footsteps of a Cato, Cicero or
  Brutus, or some such great virtuous Man. A nearer View of any such
  Particular, tho really little and trifling in it self, may serve the
  more powerfully to warm a generous Mind to an Emulation of their
  Virtues, and a greater Ardency of Ambition to imitate their bright
  Examples, if it comes duly temper'd and prepar'd for the Impression.
  But this I believe you'll hardly think those to be, who are so far
  from ent'ring into the Sense and Spirit of the Ancients, that they
  don't yet understand their Language with any [Exactness. [3]]

  But I have wander'd from my Purpose, which was only to desire you to
  save, if possible, a fond English Mother, and Mother's own Son, from
  being shewn a ridiculous Spectacle thro' the most polite Part of
  Europe, Pray tell them, that though to be Sea-sick, or jumbled in an
  outlandish Stage-Coach, may perhaps be healthful for the Constitution
  of the Body, yet it is apt to cause such a Dizziness in young empty
  Heads, as too often lasts their Life-time.
  I am, SIR,
  Your most Humble Servant,
  Philip Homebred.


  Birchan-Lane.

  SIR,

  I was marry'd on Sunday last, and went peaceably to bed; but, to my
  Surprize, was awakend the next Morning by the Thunder of a Set of
  Drums. These warlike Sounds (methinks) are very improper in a
  Marriage-Consort, and give great Offence; they seem to insinuate, that
  the Joys of this State are short, and that Jars and Discord soon
  ensue. I fear they have been ominous to many Matches, and sometimes
  proved a Prelude to a Battel in the Honey-Moon. A Nod from you may
  hush them; therefore pray, Sir, let them be silenced, that for the
  future none but soft Airs may usher in the Morning of a Bridal Night,
  which will be a Favour not only to those who come after, but to me,
  who can still subscribe my self,

  Your most humble
  and most obedient Servant,
  Robin Bridegroom.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I am one of that sort of Women whom the gayer Part of our Sex are apt
  to call a Prude. But to shew them that I have very little Regard to
  their Raillery, I shall be glad to see them all at The Amorous Widow,
  or the Wanton Wife, which is to be acted, for the Benefit of Mrs.
  Porter, on Monday the 28th Instant. I assure you I can laugh at an
  Amorous Widow, or Wanton Wife, with as little Temptation to imitate
  them, as I could at any other vicious Character. Mrs. Porter obliged
  me so very much in the exquisite Sense she seemed to have of the
  honourable Sentiments and noble Passions in the Character of Hermione,
  that I shall appear in her behalf at a Comedy, tho I have not great
  Relish for any Entertainments where the Mirth is not seasond with a
  certain Severity, which ought to recommend it to People who pretend to
  keep Reason and Authority over all their Actions.

  I am, SIR,
  Your frequent Reader,
  Altamira.


T.


[Footnote 1: [Strenua nos exercet inertia: Navibus.]]


[Footnote 2: Dr. Thomas Birch, in a letter dated June 15, 1764, says
that this letter was by Mr. Philip Yorke, afterwards Earl of Hardwicke,
who was author also of another piece in the Spectator, but his son could
not remember what that was.]


[Footnote 3:

[Exactness.

I cant quit this head without paying my Acknowledgments to one of the
most entertaining Pieces this Age has produc'd, for the Pleasure it gave
me. You will easily guess, that the Book I have in my head is Mr. A----s
Remarks upon Italy. That Ingenious gentleman has with so much Art and
Judgment applied his exact Knowledge of all the Parts of Classical
Learning to illustrate the several occurrences of his Travels, that his
Work alone is a pregnant Proof of what I have said. No Body that has a
Taste this way, can read him going from Rome to Naples, and making
Horace and Silius Italicus  his Chart, but he must feel some Uneasiness
in himself to Reflect that he was not in his Retinue. I am sure I wish'd
it Ten Times in every Page, and that not without a secret Vanity to
think in what State I should have Travelled the Appian Road with Horace
for a Guide, and in company with a Countryman of my own, who of all Men
living knows best how to follow his Steps.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 365.               Tuesday, April 29, 1712.                 Budgell.


  'Vere magis, quia vere calor redit ossibus--'

  Virg.


The author of the Menagiana acquaints us, that discoursing one Day with
several Ladies of Quality about the Effects of the Month of May, which
infuses a kindly Warmth into the Earth, and all its Inhabitants; the
Marchioness of S----, who was one of the Company, told him, That though
she would promise to be chaste in every Month besides, she could not
engage for her self in May. As the beginning therefore of this Month is
now very near, I design this Paper for a Caveat to the Fair Sex, and
publish it before April is quite out, that if any of them should be
caught tripping, they may not pretend they had not timely Notice.

I am induced to this, being persuaded the above-mentioned Observation is
as well calculated for our Climate as for that of France, and that some
of our British Ladies are of the same Constitution with the French
Marchioness.

I shall leave it among Physicians to determine what may be the Cause of
such an Anniversary Inclination; whether or no it is that the Spirits
after having been as it were frozen and congealed by Winter, are now
turned loose, and set a rambling; or that the gay Prospects of Fields
and Meadows, with the Courtship of the Birds in every Bush, naturally
unbend the Mind, and soften it to Pleasure; or that, as some have
imagined, a Woman is prompted by a kind of Instinct to throw herself on
a Bed of Flowers, and not to let those beautiful Couches which Nature
has provided lie useless. However it be, the Effects of this Month on
the lower part of the Sex, who act without Disguise, [are [1]] very
visible. It is at this time that we see the young Wenches in a Country
Parish dancing round a May-Pole, which one of our learned Antiquaries
supposes to be a Relique of a certain Pagan Worship that I do not think
fit to mention.

It is likewise on the first Day of this Month that we see the ruddy
Milk-Maid exerting her self in a most sprightly manner under a Pyramid
of Silver-Tankards, and, like the Virgin Tarpeia, oppress'd by the
costly Ornaments which her Benefactors lay upon her.

I need not mention the Ceremony of the Green Gown, which is also
peculiar to this gay Season.

The same periodical Love-Fit spreads through the whole Sex, as Mr.
Dryden well observes in his Description of this merry Month:

  For thee, sweet Month, the Groves green Livries wear,
  If not the first, the fairest of the Year;
  For thee the Graces lead the dancing Hours,
  And Nature's ready Pencil paints the Flow'rs.
  The sprightly May commands our Youth to keep
  The Vigils of her Night, and breaks their Sleep;
  Each gentle Breast with kindly Warmth she moves,
  Inspires new Flames, revives extinguish'd Loves. [2]

Accordingly among the Works of the great Masters in Painting, who have
drawn this genial Season of the Year, we often observe Cupids confused
with Zephirs flying up and down promiscuously in several Parts of the
Picture. I cannot but add from my own Experience, that about this Time
of the Year Love-Letters come up to me in great Numbers from all
Quarters of the Nation.

I receiv'd an Epistle in particular by the last Post from a Yorkshire
Gentleman, who makes heavy Complaints of one Zelinda, whom it seems he
has courted unsuccessfully these three Years past. He tells me that he
designs to try her this May, and if he does not carry his Point, he will
never think of her more.

Having thus fairly admonished the female Sex, and laid before them the
Dangers they are exposed to in this critical Month, I shall in the next
place lay down some Rules and Directions for their better avoiding those
Calentures which are so very frequent in this Season.

In the first place, I would advise them never to venture abroad in the
Fields, but in the Company of a Parent, a Guardian, or some other sober
discreet Person. I have before shewn how apt they are to trip in a
flowry Meadow, and shall further observe to them, that Proserpine was
out a Maying, when she met with that fatal Adventure to which Milton
alludes when he mentions

 --That fair Field
  Of Enna, where Proserpine gathering Flowers,
  Herself a fairer Flower, by gloomy Dis
  Was gathered--[3]

Since I am got into Quotations, I shall conclude this Head with Virgil's
Advice to young People, while they are gathering wild Strawberries and
Nosegays, that they should have a care of the Snake in the Grass.

In the second place, I cannot but approve those Prescriptions, which our
Astrological Physicians give in their Almanacks for this Month; such as
are a spare and simple Diet, with the moderate Use of Phlebotomy.

Under this Head of Abstinence I shall also advise my fair Readers to be
in a particular manner careful how they meddle with Romances, Chocolate,
Novels, and the like Inflamers, which I look upon as very dangerous to
be made use of during this great Carnival of Nature.

As I have often declared, that I have nothing more at heart than the
Honour of my dear Country-Women, I would beg them to consider, whenever
their Resolutions begin to fail them, that there are but one and thirty
Days of this soft Season, and that if they can but weather out this one
Month, the rest of the Year will be easy to them. As for that Part of
the Fair-Sex who stay in Town, I would advise them to be particularly
cautious how they give themselves up to their most innocent
Entertainments. If they cannot forbear the Play-house, I would recommend
Tragedy to them, rather than Comedy; and should think the Puppet-show
much safer for them than the Opera, all the while the Sun is in Gemini.

The Reader will observe, that this Paper is written for the use of those
Ladies who think it worth while to war against Nature in the Cause of
Honour. As for that abandon'd Crew, who do not think Virtue worth
contending for, but give up their Reputation at the first Summons, such
Warnings and Premonitions are thrown away upon them. A Prostitute is the
same easy Creature in all Months of the Year, and makes no difference
between May and December.

X.


[Footnote 1: [is] and in first Reprint.]


[Footnote 2: This quotation is made up of two passages in Dryden's
version of Chaucer's Knights Tale, Palamon and Arcite. The first four
lines are from Bk. ii. 11. 663-666, the other four lines are from Bk. i.
11. 176-179.]


[Footnote 3: Paradise Lost, Bk. iv. 11. 268-271.]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 366.                Wednesday, April 30, 1712.              Steele.


  'Pone me pigris ubi nulla campis
  Arbor æstiva recreatur aura,
  Dulce ridentem Lalagen amabo,
  Dulce loquentem.'

  Hor.


There are such wild Inconsistencies in the Thoughts of a Man in love,
that I have often reflected there can be no reason for allowing him more
Liberty than others possessed with Frenzy, but that his Distemper has no
Malevolence in it to any Mortal. That Devotion to his Mistress kindles
in his Mind a general Tenderness, which exerts it self towards every
Object as well as his Fair-one. When this Passion is represented by
Writers, it is common with them to endeavour at certain Quaintnesses and
Turns of Imagination, which are apparently the Work of a Mind at ease;
but the Men of true Taste can easily distinguish the Exertion of a Mind
which overflows with tender Sentiments, and the Labour of one which is
only describing Distress. In Performances of this kind, the most absurd
of all things is to be witty; every Sentiment must grow out of the
Occasion, and be suitable to the Circumstances of the Character. Where
this Rule is transgressed, the humble Servant, in all the fine things he
says, is but shewing his Mistress how well he can dress, instead of
saying how well he loves. Lace and Drapery is as much a Man, as Wit and
Turn is Passion.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  The following Verses are a Translation of a Lapland Love-Song, which I
  met with in Scheffer's History of that Country. [1] I was agreeably
  surprized to find a Spirit of Tenderness and Poetry in a Region which
  I never suspected for Delicacy. In hotter Climates, tho' altogether
  uncivilized, I had not wonder'd if I had found some sweet wild Notes
  among the Natives, where they live in Groves of Oranges, and hear the
  Melody of Birds about them: But a Lapland Lyric, breathing Sentiments
  of Love and Poetry, not unworthy old Greece or Rome; a regular Ode
  from a Climate pinched with Frost, and cursed with Darkness so great a
  Part of the Year; where 'tis amazing that the poor Natives should get
  Food, or be tempted to propagate their Species: this, I confess,
  seemed a greater Miracle to me, than the famous Stories of their
  Drums, their Winds and Inchantments.

  I am the bolder in commending this Northern Song, because I have
  faithfully kept to the Sentiments, without adding or diminishing; and
  pretend to no greater Praise from my Translation, than they who smooth
  and clean the Furs of that Country which have suffered by Carriage.
  The Numbers in the Original are as loose and unequal, as those in
  which the British Ladies sport their Pindaricks; and perhaps the
  fairest of them might not think it a disagreeable Present from a
  Lover: But I have ventured to bind it in stricter Measures, as being
  more proper for our Tongue, tho perhaps wilder Graces may better suit
  the Genius of the Laponian Language.

  It will be necessary to imagine, that the Author of this Song, not
  having the Liberty of visiting his Mistress at her Father's House, was
  in hopes of spying her at a Distance in the Fields.


    I.    Thou rising Sun, whose gladsome Ray
          Invites my Fair to Rural Play,
          Dispel the Mist, and clear the Skies,
          And bring my Orra to my Eyes.


    II.   Oh! were I sure my Dear to view,
          I'd climb that Pine-Trees topmost Bough,
          Aloft in Air that quivering plays,
          And round and round for ever gaze.


    III.  My Orra Moor, where art thou laid?
          What Wood conceals my sleeping Maid?
          Fast by the Roots enrag'd I'll tear
          The Trees that hide my promised Fair.


    IV.   Oh! I cou'd ride the Clouds and Skies,
          Or on the Raven's Pinions rise:
          Ye Storks, ye Swans, a moment stay,
          And waft a Lover on his Way.


    V.    My Bliss too long my Bride denies,
          Apace the wasting Summer flies:
          Nor yet the wintry Blasts I fear,
          Not Storms or Night shall keep me here.


    VI.   What may for Strength with Steel compare?
          Oh! Love has Fetters stronger far:
          By Bolts of Steel are Limbs confin'd,
          But cruel Love enchains the Mind.


    VII.  No longer then perplex thy Breast,
          When Thoughts torment, the first are best;
          'Tis mad to go, 'tis Death to stay,
          Away to Orra, haste away.


  April the 10th.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I am one of those despicable Creatures called a Chamber-Maid, and have
  lived with a Mistress for some time, whom I love as my Life, which has
  made my Duty and Pleasure inseparable. My greatest Delight has been in
  being imploy'd about her Person; and indeed she is very seldom out of
  Humour for a Woman of her Quality: But here lies my Complaint, Sir; To
  bear with me is all the Encouragement she is pleased to bestow upon
  me; for she gives her cast-off Cloaths from me to others: some she is
  pleased to bestow in the House to those that neither wants nor wears
  them, and some to Hangers-on, that frequents the House daily, who
  comes dressed out in them. This, Sir, is a very mortifying Sight to
  me, who am a little necessitous for Cloaths, and loves to appear what
  I am, and causes an Uneasiness, so that I can't serve with that
  Chearfulness as formerly; which my Mistress takes notice of, and calls
  Envy and Ill-Temper at seeing others preferred before me. My Mistress
  has a younger Sister lives in the House with her, that is some
  Thousands below her in Estate, who is continually heaping her Favours
  on her Maid; so that she can appear every Sunday, for the first
  Quarter, in a fresh Suit of Cloaths of her Mistress's giving, with all
  other things suitable: All this I see without envying, but not without
  wishing my Mistress would a little consider what a Discouragement it
  is to me to have my Perquisites divided between Fawners and Jobbers,
  which others enjoy intire to themselves. I have spoke to my Mistress,
  but to little Purpose; I have desired to be discharged (for indeed I
  fret my self to nothing) but that she answers with Silence. I beg,
  Sir, your Direction what to do, for I am fully resolved to follow your
  Counsel; who am
  Your Admirer and humble Servant,
  Constantia Comb-brush.

  I beg that you would put it in a better Dress, and let it come abroad;
  that my Mistress, who is an Admirer of your Speculations, may see it.


T.


[Footnote 1: John Scheffer, born in 1621, at Strasburg, was at the age
of 27 so well-known for his learning, that he was invited to Sweden,
where he received a liberal pension from Queen Christina as her
librarian, and was also a Professor of Law and Rhetoric in the
University of Upsala. He died in 1679. He was the author of 27 works,
among which is his Lapponia, a Latin description of Lapland, published
in 1673, of which an English version appeared at Oxford in folio, in
1674. The song is there given in the original Lapp, and in a rendering
of Scheffers Latin less conventionally polished than that published by
the Spectator, which is Ambrose Philipss translation of a translation.
In the Oxford translation there were six stanzas of this kind:

  With brightest beams let the Sun shine
  On Orra Moor.
  Could I be sure
  That from the top o' th' lofty Pine
  I Orra Moor might see,
  I to his highest Bough would climb,
  And with industrious Labour try
  Thence to descry
  My Mistress if that there she be.
  Could I but know amidst what Flowers
  Or in what Shade she stays,
  The gaudy Bowers,
  With all their verdant Pride,
  Their Blossoms and their Sprays,
  Which make my Mistress disappear;
  And her in envious Darkness hide,
  I from the Roots and Beds of Earth would tear.

In the same chapter another song is given of which there is a version in
No. 406 of the Spectator.]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 367.              Thursday, May 1, 1712.                  Addison.


  '--Perituræ parcite chartæ.'

  Juv.


I have often pleased my self with considering the two kinds of Benefits
which accrue to the Publick from these my Speculations, and which, were
I to speak after the manner of Logicians, I would distinguish into the
Material and the Formal. By the latter I understand those Advantages
which my Readers receive, as their Minds are either improv'd or
delighted by these my daily Labours; but having already several times
descanted on my Endeavours in this Light, I shall at present wholly
confine my self to the Consideration of the former. By the Word Material
I mean those Benefits which arise to the Publick from these my
Speculations, as they consume a considerable quantity of our Paper
Manufacture, employ our Artisans in Printing, and find Business for
great Numbers of Indigent Persons.

Our Paper-Manufacture takes into it several mean Materials which could
be put to no other use, and affords Work for several Hands in the
collecting of them, which are incapable of any other Employment. Those
poor Retailers, whom we see so busy in every Street, deliver in their
respective Gleanings to the Merchant. The Merchant carries them in Loads
to the Paper-Mill, where they pass thro' a fresh Set of Hands, and give
life to another Trade. Those who have Mills on their Estates, by this
means considerably raise their Rents, and the whole Nation is in a great
measure supply'd with a Manufacture, for which formerly she was obliged
to her Neighbours.

The Materials are no sooner wrought into Paper, but they are distributed
among the Presses, where they again set innumerable Artists at Work, and
furnish Business to another Mystery. From hence, accordingly as they are
stain'd with News or Politicks, they fly thro' the Town in Post-Men,
Post-Boys, Daily-Courants, Reviews, Medleys, and Examiners. Men, Women,
and Children contend who shall be the first Bearers of them, and get
their daily Sustenance by spreading them. In short, when I trace in my
Mind a Bundle of Rags to a Quire of Spectators, I find so many Hands
employ'd in every Step they take thro their whole Progress, that while I
am writing a Spectator, I fancy my self providing Bread for a Multitude.

If I do not take care to obviate some of my witty Readers, they will be
apt to tell me, that my Paper, after it is thus printed and published,
is still beneficial to the Publick on several Occasions. I must confess
I have lighted my Pipe with my own Works for this Twelve-month past: My
Landlady often sends up her little Daughter to desire some of my old
Spectators, and has frequently told me, that the Paper they are printed
on is the best in the World to wrap Spice in. They likewise make a good
Foundation for a Mutton pye, as I have more than once experienced, and
were very much sought for, last Christmas, by the whole Neighbourhood.

It is pleasant enough to consider the Changes that a Linnen Fragment
undergoes, by passing thro' the several Hands above mentioned. The
finest pieces of Holland, when worn to Tatters, assume a new Whiteness
more beautiful than their first, and often return in the shape of
Letters to their Native Country. A Lady's Shift may be metamorphosed
into Billet[s]-doux, and come into her Possession a second time. A Beau
may peruse his Cravat after it is worn out, with greater Pleasure and
Advantage than ever he did in a Glass. In a word, a Piece of Cloth,
after having officiated for some Years as a Towel or a Napkin, may by
this means be raised from a Dung-hill, and become the most valuable
Piece of Furniture in a Prince's Cabinet.

The politest Nations of Europe have endeavoured to vie with one another
for the Reputation of the finest Printing: Absolute Governments, as well
as Republicks, have encouraged an Art which seems to be the noblest and
most beneficial that was ever invented among the Sons of Men. The
present King of France, in his Pursuits after Glory, has particularly
distinguished himself by the promoting of this useful Art, insomuch that
several Books have been printed in the Louvre at his own Expence, upon
which he sets so great a value, that he considers them as the noblest
Presents he can make to foreign Princes and Ambassadors. If we look into
the Commonwealths of Holland and Venice, we shall find that in this
Particular they have made themselves the Envy of the greatest
Monarchies. Elziver and Aldus are more frequently mentioned than any
Pensioner of the one or Doge of the other.

The several Presses which are now in England, and the great
Encouragement which has been given to Learning for some Years last past,
has made our own Nation as glorious upon this Account, as for its late
Triumphs and Conquests. The new Edition which is given us of Cæsar's
Commentaries, has already been taken notice of in foreign Gazettes, and
is a Work that does honour to the English Press. [1] It is no wonder
that an Edition should be very correct, which has passed thro' the Hands
of one of the most accurate, learned and judicious Writers this Age has
produced. The Beauty of the Paper, of the Character, and of the several
Cuts with which this noble Work is illustrated, makes it the finest Book
that I have ever seen; and is a true Instance of the English Genius,
which, tho' it does not come the first into any Art, generally carries
it to greater Heights than any other Country in the World. I am
particularly glad that this Author comes from a British Printing-house
in so great a Magnificence, as he is the first who has given us any
tolerable Account of our Country.

My Illiterate Readers, if any such there are, will be surprized to hear
me talk of Learning as the Glory of a Nation, and of Printing as an Art
that gains a Reputation to a People among whom it flourishes. When Men's
Thoughts are taken up with Avarice and Ambition, they cannot look upon
any thing as great or valuable, which does not bring with it an
extraordinary Power or Interest to the Person who is concerned in it.
But as I shall never sink this Paper so far as to engage with Goths and
Vandals, I shall only regard such kind of Reasoners with that Pity which
is due to so Deplorable a Degree of Stupidity and Ignorance.

L.


[Footnote 1: Just published, 1712, by Dr. Samuel Clarke, then 37 years
old. He had been for 12 years chaplain to the Bishop of Norwich, and
Boyle Lecturer in 1704-5, when he took for his subject the Being and
Attributes of God and the Evidences of Natural and Revealed Religion. He
had also translated Newton's Optics, and was become chaplain to the
Queen, Rector of St. Jamess, Westminster, and D. D. of Cambridge. The
accusations of heterodoxy that followed him through his after life date
from this year, 1712, in which, besides the edition of Cæsar, he
published a book on the Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity.]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 368.                Friday, May 2, 1712.                  Steele.


  'Nos decebat
  Lugere ubi esset aliquis in lucem editus
  Humanæ vitæ varia reputantes mala;
  At qui labores morte finisset graves
  Omnes amices laude et lætitia exequi.'

  Eurip. apud Tull.


As the Spectator is in a Kind a Paper of News from the natural World, as
others are from the busy and politick Part of Mankind, I shall translate
the following Letter written to an eminent French Gentleman in this Town
from Paris, which gives us the Exit of an Heroine who is a Pattern of
Patience and Generosity.


  Paris, April 18, 1712.

  SIR,

  It is so many Years since you left your native Country, that I am to
  tell you the Characters of your nearest Relations as much as if you
  were an utter Stranger to them. The Occasion of this is to give you an
  account of the Death of Madam de Villacerfe, whose Departure out of
  this Life I know not whether a Man of your Philosophy will call
  unfortunate or not, since it was attended with some Circumstances as
  much to be desired as to be lamented. She was her whole Life happy in
  an uninterrupted Health, and was always honoured for an Evenness of
  Temper and Greatness of Mind. On the 10th instant that Lady was taken
  with an Indisposition which confined her to her Chamber, but was such
  as was too slight to make her take a sick Bed, and yet too grievous to
  admit of any Satisfaction in being out of it. It is notoriously known,
  that some Years ago Monsieur Festeau, one of the most considerable
  Surgeons in Paris, was desperately in love with this Lady: Her Quality
  placed her above any Application to her on the account of his Passion;
  but as a Woman always has some regard to the Person whom she believes
  to be her real Admirer, she now took it in her head (upon Advice of
  her Physicians to lose some of her Blood) to send for Monsieur Festeau
  on that occasion. I happened to be there at that time, and my near
  Relation gave me the Privilege to be present. As soon as her Arm was
  stripped bare, and he began to press it in order to raise the Vein,
  his Colour changed, and I observed him seized with a sudden Tremor,
  which made me take the liberty to speak of it to my Cousin with some
  Apprehension: She smiled, and said she knew Mr. Festeau had no
  Inclination to do her Injury. He seemed to recover himself, and
  smiling also proceeded in his Work. Immediately after the Operation he
  cried out, that he was the most unfortunate of all Men, for that he
  had open'd an Artery instead of a Vein. It is as impossible to express
  the Artist's Distraction as the Patient's Composure. I will not dwell
  on little Circumstances, but go on to inform you, that within three
  days time it was thought necessary to take off her Arm. She was so far
  from using Festeau as it would be natural to one of a lower Spirit to
  treat him, that she would not let him be absent from any Consultation
  about her present Condition, and on every occasion asked whether he
  was satisfy'd in the Measures [that] were taken about her. Before this
  last Operation she ordered her Will to be drawn, and after having been
  about a quarter of an hour alone, she bid the Surgeons, of whom poor
  Festeau was one, go on in their Work. I know not how to give you the
  Terms of Art, but there appeared such Symptoms after the Amputation of
  her Arm, that it was visible she could not live four and twenty hours.
  Her Behaviour was so magnanimous throughout this whole Affair, that I
  was particularly curious in taking Notice of what passed as her Fate
  approached nearer and nearer, and took Notes of what she said to all
  about her, particularly Word for Word what she spoke to Mr. Festeau,
  which was as follows.

    "Sir, you give me inexpressible Sorrow for the Anguish with which I
    see you overwhelmed. I am removed to all Intents and Purposes from
    the Interests of human Life, therefore I am to begin to think like
    one wholly unconcerned in it. I do not consider you as one by whose
    Error I have lost my Life; no, you are my Benefactor, as you have
    hasten'd my Entrance into a happy Immortality. This is my Sense of
    this Accident; but the World in which you live may have Thoughts of
    it to your Disadvantage, I have therefore taken Care to provide for
    you in my Will, and have placed you above what you have to fear from
    their Ill-Nature."

  While this excellent Woman spoke these Words, Festeau looked as if he
  received a Condemnation to die, instead of a Pension for his Life.
  Madam de Villacerfe lived till Eight of [the] Clock the next Night;
  and tho she must have laboured under the most exquisite Torments, she
  possessed her Mind with so wonderful a Patience, that one may rather
  say she ceased to breathe than she died at that hour. You who had not
  the happiness to be personally known to this Lady, have nothing but to
  rejoyce in the Honour you had of being related to so great Merit; but
  we who have lost her Conversation, cannot so easily resign our own
  Happiness by Reflection upon hers.
  I am, SIR,
  Your affectionate Kinsman,
  and most obedient humble Servant,
  Paul Regnaud.


There hardly can be a greater Instance of an Heroick Mind, than the
unprejudiced Manner in which this Lady weighed this Misfortune. The
regard of Life itself could not make her overlook the Contrition of the
unhappy Man, whose more than Ordinary Concern for her was all his Guilt.
It would certainly be of singular Use to human Society to have an exact
Account of this Lady's ordinary Conduct, which was Crowned by so
uncommon Magnanimity. Such Greatness was not to be acquired in her last
Article, nor is it to be doubted but it was a constant Practice of all
that is praise-worthy, which made her capable of beholding Death, not as
the Dissolution, but Consummation of her Life.

T.


*       *       *       *       *


No. 369.             Saturday, May 3, 1712.                  Addison.


  'Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures
  Quam quæ sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus--'

  Hor.


Milton, after having represented in Vision the History of Mankind to the
first great Period of Nature, dispatches the remaining part of it in
Narration. He has devised a very handsome Reason for the Angels
proceeding with Adam after this manner; though doubtless the true Reason
was the Difficulty which the Poet would have found to have shadowed out
so mixed and complicated a Story in visible Objects. I could wish,
however, that the Author had done it, whatever Pains it might have cost
him. To give my Opinion freely, I think that the exhibiting part of the
History of Mankind in Vision, and part in Narrative, is as if an
History-Painter should put in Colours one half of his Subject, and write
down the remaining part of it. If Milton's Poem flags any where, it is
in this Narration, where in some places the Author has been so attentive
to his Divinity, that he has neglected his Poetry. The Narration,
however, rises very happily on several Occasions, where the Subject is
capable of Poetical Ornaments, as particularly in the Confusion which he
describes among the Builders of Babel, and in his short Sketch of the
Plagues of Egypt. The Storm of Hail and Fire, with the Darkness that
overspread the Land for three Days, are described with great Strength.
The beautiful Passage which follows, is raised upon noble Hints in
Scripture:

 --Thus with ten Wounds
  The River-Dragon tamed at length submits
  To let his Sojourners depart, and oft
  Humbles his stubborn Heart; but still as Ice
  More harden'd after Thaw, till in his Rage
  Pursuing whom he late dismissed, the Sea
  Swallows him with his Host, but them lets pass
  As on dry Land between two Chrystal Walls,
  Aw'd by the Rod of Moses so to stand
  Divided--

The River-Dragon is an Allusion to the Crocodile, which inhabits the
Nile, from whence Egypt derives her Plenty. This Allusion is taken from
that Sublime Passage in Ezekiel, Thus saith the Lord God, behold I am
against thee, Pharaoh King of Egypt, the great Dragon that lieth in the
midst of his Rivers, which hath said, my River is mine own, and I have
made it for my self. Milton has given us another very noble and poetical
Image in the same Description, which is copied almost Word for Word out
of the History of Moses.

  All Night he will pursue, but his Approach
  Darkness defends between till morning Watch;
  Then through the fiery Pillar and the Cloud
  God looking forth, will trouble all his Host,
  And craze their Chariot Wheels: when by command
  Moses once more his potent Rod extends
  Over the Sea: the Sea his Rod obeys:
  On their embattell'd Ranks the Waves return
  And overwhelm their War--

As the principal Design of this Episode was to give Adam an Idea of the
Holy Person, who was to reinstate human Nature in that Happiness and
Perfection from which it had fallen, the Poet confines himself to the
Line of Abraham, from whence the Messiah was to Descend. The Angel is
described as seeing the Patriarch actually travelling towards the Land
of Promise, which gives a particular Liveliness to this part of the
Narration.

  I see him, but thou canst not, with what Faith
  He leaves his Gods, his Friends, his Native Soil,
  Ur of Chaldæa, passing now the Ford
  To Haran, after him a cumbrous Train
  Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous Servitude,
  Not wand'ring poor, but trusting all his Wealth
  With God, who call'd him, in a Land unknown.
  Canaan he now attains, I see his Tents
  Pitch'd about Sechem, and the neighbouring Plain
  Of Moreh, there by Promise he receives
  Gifts to his Progeny of all that Land,
  From Hamath Northward to the Desart South.
  (Things by their Names I call, though yet unnamed.)

As Virgil's Vision in the sixth Æneid probably gave Milton the Hint of
this whole Episode, the last Line is a Translation of that Verse, where
Anchises mentions the Names of Places, which they were to bear
hereafter.

  Hæc tum nomina erunt, nunc sunt sine nomine terræ.

The Poet has very finely represented the Joy and Gladness of Heart which
rises in Adam upon his discovery of the Messiah. As he sees his Day at a
distance through Types and Shadows, he rejoices in it: but when he finds
the Redemption of Man compleated, and Paradise again renewed, he breaks
forth in Rapture and Transport;

  O Goodness infinite, Goodness immense!
  That all this Good of Evil shall produce, &c.

I have hinted in my sixth Paper on Milton, that an Heroick Poem,
according to the Opinion of the best Criticks, ought to end happily, and
leave the Mind of the Reader, after having conducted it through many
Doubts and Fears, Sorrows and Disquietudes, in a State of Tranquility
and Satisfaction. Milton's Fable, which had so many other Qualifications
to recommend it, was deficient in this Particular. It is here therefore,
that the Poet has shewn a most exquisite Judgment, as well as the finest
Invention, by finding out a Method to supply this natural Defect in his
Subject. Accordingly he leaves the Adversary of Mankind, in the last
View which he gives us of him, under the lowest State of Mortification
and Disappointment. We see him chewing Ashes, grovelling in the Dust,
and loaden with supernumerary Pains and Torments. On the contrary, our
two first Parents are comforted by Dreams and Visions, cheared with
Promises of Salvation, and, in a manner, raised to a greater Happiness
than that which they had forfeited: In short, Satan is represented
miserable in the height of his Triumphs, and Adam triumphant in the
height of Misery.

Milton's Poem ends very nobly. The last Speeches of Adam and the
Arch-Angel are full of Moral and Instructive Sentiments. The Sleep that
fell upon Eve, and the Effects it had in quieting the Disorders of her
Mind, produces the same kind of Consolation in the Reader, who cannot
peruse the last beautiful Speech which is ascribed to the Mother of
Mankind, without a secret Pleasure and Satisfaction.

  Whence thou return'st, and whither went'st, I know;
  For God is also in Sleep, and Dreams advise,
  Which he hath sent propitious, some great Good
  Presaging, since with Sorrow and Heart's Distress
  Wearied I fell asleep: but now lead on;
  In me is no delay: with thee to go,
  Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,
  Is to go hence unwilling: thou to me
  Art all things under Heav'n, all Places thou,
  Who for my wilful Crime art banish'd hence.
  This farther Consolation yet secure
  I carry hence; though all by me is lost,
  Such Favour, I unworthy, am vouchsafed,
  By me the promised Seed shall all restore.

The following Lines, which conclude the Poem, rise in a most glorious
Blaze of Poetical Images and Expressions.

Heliodorus in his Æthiopicks acquaints us, that the Motion of the Gods
differs from that of Mortals, as the former do not stir their Feet, nor
proceed Step by Step, but slide o'er the Surface of the Earth by an
uniform Swimming of the whole Body. The Reader may observe with how
Poetical a Description Milton has attributed the same kind of Motion to
the Angels who were to take Possession of Paradise.

  So spake our Mother Eve, and Adam heard
  Well pleas'd, but answered not; for now too nigh
  Th' Archangel stood, and from the other Hill
  To their fix'd Station, all in bright Array
  The Cherubim descended; on the Ground
  Gliding meteorous, as evening Mist
  Ris'n from a River, o'er the Marish glides,
  And gathers ground fast at the Lab'rer's Heel
  Homeward returning. High in Front advanced,
  The brandishd Sword of God before them blaz'd
  Fierce as a Comet--

The Author helped his Invention in the following Passage, by reflecting
on the Behaviour of the Angel, who, in Holy Writ, has the Conduct of Lot
and his Family. The Circumstances drawn from that Relation are very
gracefully made use of on this Occasion.

  In either Hand the hast'ning Angel caught
  Our ling'ring Parents, and to th' Eastern Gate
  Led them direct; and down the Cliff as fast
  To the subjected Plain; then disappear'd.
  They looking back, &c.

The Scene [1] which our first Parents are surprized with, upon their
looking back on Paradise, wonderfully strikes the Reader's Imagination,
as nothing can be more natural than the Tears they shed on that
Occasion.

  They looking back, all th' Eastern side beheld
  Of Paradise, so late their happy Seat,
  Wav'd over by that flaming Brand, the Gate
  With dreadful Faces throng'd and fiery Arms:
  Some natural Tears they dropped, but wiped them soon;
  The World was all before them, where to chuse
  Their Place of Rest, and Providence their Guide.

If I might presume to offer at the smallest Alteration in this divine
Work, I should think the Poem would end better with the Passage here
quoted, than with the two Verses which follow:

  They hand in hand, with wandering Steps and slow,
  Through Eden took their solitary Way.

These two Verses, though they have their Beauty, fall very much below
the foregoing Passage, and renew in the Mind of the Reader that Anguish
which was pretty well laid by that Consideration,

  The world was all before them, where to chuse
  Their Place of Rest, and Providence their Guide.

The Number of Books in Paradise Lost is equal to those of the Æneid.
Our Author in his first Edition had divided his Poem into ten Books, but
afterwards broke the seventh and the eleventh each of them into two
different Books, by the help of some small Additions.  This second
Division was made with great Judgment, as any one may see who will be at
the pains of examining it. It was not done for the sake of such a
Chimerical Beauty as that of resembling Virgil in this particular, but
for the more just and regular Disposition of this great Work.

Those who have read Bossu, and many of the Criticks who have written
since his Time, will not pardon me if I do not find out the particular
Moral which is inculcated in Paradise Lost.  Though I can by no means
think, with the last mentioned French Author, that an Epick Writer first
of all pitches upon a certain Moral, as the Ground-Work and Foundation
of his Poem, and afterwards finds out a Story to it:  I am, however, of
opinion, that no just Heroick Poem ever was or can be made, from whence
one great Moral may not be deduced. That which reigns in Milton, is the
most universal and most useful that can be imagined; it is in short
this, That Obedience to the Will of God makes Men happy, and that
Disobedience makes them miserable.  This is visibly the Moral of the
principal Fable, which turns upon Adam and Eve, who continued in
Paradise, while they kept the command that was given them, and were
driven out of it as soon as they had transgressed.  This is likewise the
Moral of the principal Episode, which shews us how an innumerable
Multitude of Angels fell from their State of Bliss, and were cast into
Hell upon their Disobedience.  Besides this great Moral, which may be
looked upon as the Soul of the Fable, there are an Infinity of
Under-Morals which are to be drawn from the several parts of the Poem,
and which makes this Work more useful and Instructive than any other
Poem in any Language.

Those who have criticized on the Odyssey, the Iliad, and Æneid, have
taken a great deal of Pains to fix the Number of Months and Days
contained in the Action of each of those Poems. If any one thinks it
worth his while to examine this Particular in Milton, he will find that
from Adam's first Appearance in the fourth Book, to his Expulsion from
Paradise in the twelfth, the Author reckons ten Days. As for that part
of the Action which is described in the three first Books, as it does
not pass within the Regions of Nature, I have before observed that it is
not subject to any Calculations of Time.

I have now finished my Observations on a Work which does an Honour to
the English Nation. I have taken a general View of it under these four
Heads, the Fable, the Characters, the Sentiments, and the Language, and
made each of them the Subject of a particular Paper. I have in the next
Place spoken of the Censures which our Author may incur under each of
these Heads, which I have confined to two Papers, though I might have
enlarged the Number, if I had been disposed to dwell on so ungrateful a
Subject. I believe, however, that the severest Reader will not find any
little Fault in Heroick Poetry, which this Author has fallen into, that
does not come under one of those Heads among which I have distributed
his several Blemishes. After having thus treated at large of Paradise
Lost, I could not think it sufficient to have celebrated this Poem in
the whole, without descending to Particulars. I have therefore bestowed
a Paper upon each Book, and endeavoured not only to [prove [2]] that the
Poem is beautiful in general, but to point out its Particular Beauties,
and to determine wherein they consist. I have endeavoured to shew how
some Passages are beautiful by being Sublime, others by being Soft,
others by being Natural; which of them are recommended by the Passion,
which by the Moral, which by the Sentiment, and which by the Expression.
I have likewise endeavoured to shew how the Genius of the Poet shines by
a happy Invention, a distant Allusion, or a judicious Imitation; how he
has copied or improved Homer or Virgil, and raised his own Imaginations
by the Use which he has made of several Poetical Passages in Scripture.
I might have inserted also several Passages of Tasso, which our Author
[has [3]] imitated; but as I do not look upon Tasso to be a sufficient
Voucher, I would not perplex my Reader with such Quotations, as might do
more Honour to the Italian than the English Poet. In short, I have
endeavoured to particularize those innumerable kinds of Beauty, which it
would be tedious to recapitulate, but which are essential to Poetry, and
which may be met with in the Works of this great Author. Had I thought,
at my first engaging in this design, that it would have led me to so
great a length, I believe I should never have entered upon it; but the
kind Reception which it has met with among those whose Judgments I have
a value for, as well as the uncommon Demands which my Bookseller tells
me have been made for these particular Discourses, give me no reason to
repent of the Pains I have been at in composing them.

L.


[Footnote 1: Prospect]


[Footnote 2: shew]


[Footnote 3: has likewise]


*       *       *       *       *


No. 370.                    Monday, May 5, 1712.                 Steele.


  'Totus Mundus agit Histrionem.'


Many of my fair Readers, as well as very gay and well-received Persons
of the other Sex, are extremely perplexed at the Latin Sentences at the
Head of my Speculations; I do not know whether I ought not to indulge
them with Translations of each of them: However, I have to-day taken
down from the Top of the Stage in Drury-Lane a bit of Latin which often
stands in their View, and signifies that the whole World acts the
Player. It is certain that if we look all round us, and behold the
different Employments of Mankind, you hardly see one who is not, as the
Player is, in an assumed Character. The Lawyer, who is vehement and loud
in a Cause wherein he knows he has not the Truth of the Question on his
Side, is a Player as to the personated Part, but incomparably meaner
than he as to the Prostitution of himself for Hire; because the
Pleader's Falshood introduces Injustice, the Player feigns for no other
end but to divert or instruct you. The Divine, whose Passions transport
him to say any thing with any View but promoting the Interests of true
Piety and Religion, is a Player with a still greater Imputation of
Guilt, in proportion to his depreciating a Character more sacred.
Consider all the different Pursuits and Employments of Men, and you will
find half their Actions tend to nothing else but Disguise and Imposture;
and all that is done which proceeds not from a Man's very self, is the
Action of a Player. For this Reason it is that I make so frequent
mention of the Stage: It is, with me, a Matter of the highest
Consideration what Parts are well or ill performed, what Passions or
Sentiments are indulged or cultivated, and consequently what Manners and
Customs are transfused from the Stage to the World, which reciprocally
imitate each other. As the Writers of Epick Poems introduce shadowy
Persons, and represent Vices and Virtues under the Characters of Men and
Women; so I, who am a SPECTATOR in the World, may perhaps sometimes make
use of the Names of the Actors on the Stage, to represent or admonish
those who transact Affairs in the World. When I am commending Wilks for
representing the Tenderness of a Husband and a Father in Mackbeth, the
Contrition of a reformed Prodigal in Harry the Fourth, the winning
Emptiness of a young Man of Good-nature and Wealth in the Trip to the
Jubilee, [1]--the Officiousness of an artful Servant in the Fox: [2]
when thus I celebrate Wilks, I talk to all the World who are engaged in
any of those Circumstances. If I were to speak of Merit neglected,
mis-applied, or misunderstood, might not I say Estcourt has a great
Capacity? But it is not the Interest of others who bear a Figure on the
Stage that his Talents were understood; it is their Business to impose
upon him what cannot become him, or keep out of his hands any thing in
which he would Shine. Were one to raise a Suspicion of himself in a Man
who passes upon the World for a fine Thing, in order to alarm him, one
might say, if Lord Foppington [3] were not on the Stage, (Cibber acts
the false Pretensions to a genteel Behaviour so very justly), he would
have in the generality of Mankind more that would admire than deride
him. When we come to Characters directly Comical, it is not to be
imagin'd what Effect a well-regulated Stage would have upon Men's
Manners. The Craft of an Usurer, the Absurdity of a rich Fool, the
awkward Roughness of a Fellow of half Courage, the ungraceful Mirth of a
Creature of half Wit, might be for ever put out of Countenance by proper
Parts for Dogget. Johnson by acting Corbacchio [4] the other Night, must
have given all who saw him a thorough Detestation of aged Avarice. The
Petulancy of a peevish old Fellow, who loves and hates he knows not why,
is very excellently performed by the Ingenious Mr. William Penkethman in
the Fop's Fortune;[5] where, in the Character of Don Cholerick Snap
Shorto de Testy, he answers no Questions but to those whom he likes, and
wants no account of any thing from those he approves. Mr. Penkethman is
also Master of as many Faces in the Dumb-Scene as can be expected from a
Man in the Circumstances of being ready to perish out of Fear and
Hunger: He wonders throughout the whole Scene very masterly, without
neglecting his Victuals. If it be, as I have heard it sometimes
mentioned, a great Qualification for the World to follow Business and
Pleasure too, what is it in the Ingenious Mr. Penkethman to represent a
Sense of Pleasure and Pain at the same time; as you may see him do this
Evening? [6]

As it is certain that a Stage ought to be wholly suppressed, or
judiciously encouraged, while there is one in the Nation, Men turned for
regular Pleasure cannot employ their Thoughts more usefully, for the
Diversion of Mankind, than by convincing them that it is in themselves
to raise this Entertainment to the greatest Height. It would be a great
Improvement, as well as Embellishment to the Theatre, if Dancing were
more regarded, and taught to all the Actors. One who has the Advantage
of such an agreeable girlish Person as Mrs. Bicknell, joined with her
Capacity of Imitation, could in proper Gesture and Motion represent all
the decent Characters of Female Life. An amiable Modesty in one Aspect
of a Dancer, an assumed Confidence in another, a sudden Joy in another,
a falling off with an Impatience of being beheld, a Return towards the
Audience with an unsteady Resolution to approach them, and a well-acted
Sollicitude to please, would revive in the Company all the fine Touches
of Mind raised in observing all the Objects of Affection or Passion they
had before beheld. Such elegant Entertainments as these, would polish
the Town into Judgment in their Gratifications; and Delicacy in Pleasure
is the first step People of Condition take in Reformation from Vice.
Mrs. Bicknell has the only Capacity for this sort of Dancing of any on
the Stage; and I dare say all who see her Performance tomorrow Night,
when sure the Romp will do her best for her own Benefit, will be of my
Mind.

T.


[Footnote 1: Farquhar's Constant Couple, or A Trip to the Jubilee.]


[Footnote 2: Ben Jonson's Volpone.]


[Footnote 3: In Colley Cibber's Careless Husband.]


[Footnote 4: In Ben Jonson's Volpone.]


[Footnote 5: Cibber's Love makes a Man, or The Fop's Fortune.]


[Footnote 6:

  For the Benefit of Mr. Penkethman. At the Desire of Several Ladies of
  Quality. By Her Majesty's Company of Comedians. At the Theatre Royal
  in Drury Lane, this present Monday, being the 5th of May, will be
  presented a Comedy called Love makes a Man, or The Fop's Fortune. The
  Part of Don Lewis, alias Don Choleric Snap Shorto de Testy, by Mr.
  Penkethman; Carlos, Mr. Wilks; Clodio, alias Don Dismallo Thick-Scullo
  de Half Witto, Mr. Cibber; and all the other Parts to the best
  Advantage. With a new Epilogue, spoken by Mr. Penkethman, riding on an
  Ass. By her Majesty's Command no Persons are to be admitted behind the
  Scenes. And To-Morrow, being Tuesday, will be presented, A Comedy
  call'd The Constant Couple, or A Trip to the Jubilee. For the Benefit
  of Mrs. Bicknell.

To do as kind a service to Mrs. Bicknell as to Mr. Penkethman on the
occasion of their benefits is the purpose of the next paragraph of
Steele's Essay.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 371.                Tuesday, May 6, 1712.                 Addison.


  'Jamne igitur laudas quod se sapientibus unus
  Ridebat?'

  Juv.


I shall communicate to my Reader the following Letter for the
Entertainment of this Day.


  Sir,

  You know very well that our Nation is more famous for that sort of Men
  who are called Whims and Humourists, than any other Country in the
  World; for which reason it is observed that our English Comedy excells
  that of all other Nations in the Novelty and Variety of its
  Characters.

  Among those innumerable Setts of Whims which our Country produces,
  there are none whom I have regarded with more Curiosity than those who
  have invented any particular kind of Diversion for the Entertainment
  of themselves or their Friends. My Letter shall single out those who
  take delight in sorting a Company that has something of Burlesque and
  Ridicule in its Appearance. I shall make my self understood by the
  following Example. One of the Wits of the last Age, who was a Man of a
  good Estate [1], thought he never laid out his Money better than in a
  Jest. As he was one Year at the Bath, observing that in the great
  Confluence of fine People, there were several among them with long
  Chins, a part of the Visage by which he himself was very much
  distinguished, he invited to dinner half a Score of these remarkable
  Persons who had their Mouths in the Middle of their Faces. They had no
  sooner placed themselves about the Table, but they began to stare upon
  one another, not being able to imagine what had brought them together.
  Our English Proverb says,

    Tis merry in the Hall,
    When Beards wag all.

  It proved so in the Assembly I am now speaking of, who seeing so many
  Peaks of Faces agitated with Eating, Drinking, and Discourse, and
  observing all the Chins that were present meeting together very often
  over the Center of the Table, every one grew sensible of the Jest, and
  came into it with so much Good-Humour, that they lived in strict
  Friendship and Alliance from that Day forward.

  The same Gentleman some time after packed together a Set of Oglers, as
  he called them, consisting of such as had an unlucky Cast in their
  Eyes. His Diversion on this Occasion was to see the cross Bows,
  mistaken Signs, and wrong Connivances that passed amidst so many
  broken and refracted Rays of Sight.

  The third Feast which this merry Gentleman exhibited was to the
  Stammerers, whom he got together in a sufficient Body to fill his
  Table. He had ordered one of his Servants, who was placed behind a
  Skreen, to write down their Table-Talk, which was very easie to be
  done without the help of Short-hand. It appears by the Notes which
  were taken, that tho' their Conversation never fell, there were not
  above twenty Words spoken during the first Course; that upon serving
  up the second, one of the Company was a quarter of an Hour in telling
  them, that the Ducklins and [Asparagus [2]] were very good; and that
  another took up the same time in declaring himself of the same
  Opinion. This Jest did not, however, go off so well as the former; for
  one of the Guests being a brave Man, and fuller of Resentment than he
  knew how to express, went out of the Room, and sent the facetious
  Inviter a Challenge in Writing, which though it was afterwards dropp'd
  by the Interposition of Friends, put a Stop to these ludicrous
  Entertainments.

  Now, Sir, I dare say you will agree with me, that as there is no Moral
  in these Jests, they ought to be discouraged, and looked upon rather
  as pieces of Unluckiness than Wit. However, as it is natural for one
  Man to refine upon the Thought of another, and impossible for any
  single Person, how great soever his Parts may be, to invent an Art,
  and bring it to its utmost Perfection; I shall here give you an
  account of an honest Gentleman of my Acquaintance who upon hearing the
  Character of the Wit above mentioned, has himself assumed it, and
  endeavoured to convert it to the Benefit of Mankind. He invited half a
  dozen of his Friends one day to Dinner, who were each of them famous
  for inserting several redundant Phrases in their Discourse, as d'y
  hear me, d'ye see, that is, and so Sir. Each of the Guests making
  frequent use of his particular Elegance, appeared so ridiculous to his
  Neighbour, that he could not but reflect upon himself as appearing
  equally ridiculous to the rest of the Company: By this means, before
  they had sat long together, every one talking with the greatest
  Circumspection, and carefully avoiding his favourite Expletive, the
  Conversation was cleared of its Redundancies, and had a greater
  Quantity of Sense, tho' less of Sound in it.

  The same well-meaning Gentleman took occasion, at another time, to
  bring together such of his Friends as were addicted to a foolish
  habitual Custom of Swearing. In order to shew the Absurdity of the
  Practice, he had recourse to the Invention above mentioned, having
  placed an Amanuensis in a private part of the Room. After the second
  Bottle, when Men open their Minds without Reserve, my honest Friend
  began to take notice of the many sonorous but unnecessary Words that
  had passed in his House since their sitting down at Table, and how
  much good Conversation they had lost by giving way to such superfluous
  Phrases. What a Tax, says he, would they have raised for the Poor, had
  we put the Laws in Execution upon one another? Every one of them took
  this gentle Reproof in good part: Upon which he told them, that
  knowing their Conversation would have no Secrets in it, he had ordered
  it to be taken down in Writing, and for the humour sake would read it
  to them, if they pleased. There were ten Sheets of it, which might
  have been reduced to two, had there not been those abominable
  Interpolations I have before mentioned. Upon the reading of it in cold
  Blood, it looked rather like a Conference of Fiends than of Men. In
  short, every one trembled at himself upon hearing calmly what he had
  pronounced amidst the Heat and Inadvertency of Discourse.

  I shall only mention another Occasion wherein he made use of the same
  Invention to cure a different kind of Men, who are the Pests of all
  polite Conversation, and murder Time as much as either of the two
  former, though they do it more innocently; I mean that dull Generation
  of Story-tellers. My Friend got together about half a dozen of his
  Acquaintance, who were infected with this strange Malady. The first
  Day one of them sitting down, entered upon the Siege of Namur, which
  lasted till four a-clock, their time of parting. The second Day a
  North-Britain took possession of the Discourse, which it was
  impossible to get out of his Hands so long as the Company staid
  together. The third Day was engrossed after the same manner by a Story
  of the same length. They at last began to reflect upon this barbarous
  way of treating one another, and by this means awakened out of that
  Lethargy with which each of them had been seized for several Years.

  As you have somewhere declared, that extraordinary and uncommon
  Characters of Mankind are the Game which you delight in, and as I look
  upon you to be the greatest Sportsman, or, if you please, the Nimrod
  among this Species of Writers, I thought this Discovery would not be
  unacceptable to you.

  I am,

  SIR, &c.


I.


[Footnote 1: George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, Drydens Zimri, and the
author of the Rehearsal.]


[Footnote 2: [Sparrow-grass] and in first Reprint.]


       *       *       *       *       *


372.                    Wednesday, May 7, 1712.                  Steele.


  'Pudet hæc opprobria nobis
  [Et dici potuisse et non potuisse refelli.]'

  Ovid.


  May 6, 1712.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I am Sexton of the Parish of Covent-Garden, and complained to you some
  time ago, that as I was tolling in to Prayers at Eleven in the
  Morning, Crowds of People of Quality hastened to assemble at a
  Puppet-Show on the other Side of the Garden. I had at the same time a
  very great Disesteem for Mr. Powell and his little thoughtless
  Commonwealth, as if they had enticed the Gentry into those Wandrings:
  But let that be as it will, I now am convinced of the honest
  Intentions of the said Mr. Powell and Company; and send this to
  acquaint you, that he has given all the Profits which shall arise
  to-morrow Night by his Play to the use of the poor Charity-Children of
  this Parish. I have been informed, Sir, that in Holland all Persons
  who set up any Show, or act any Stage-Play, be the Actors either of
  Wood and Wire, or Flesh and Blood, are obliged to pay out of their
  Gain such a Proportion to the honest and industrious Poor in the
  Neighbourhood: By this means they make Diversion and Pleasure pay a
  Tax to Labour and Industry. I have been told also, that all the time
  of Lent, in Roman Catholick Countries, the Persons of Condition
  administred to the Necessities of the Poor, and attended the Beds of
  Lazars and diseased Persons. Our Protestant Ladies and Gentlemen are
  so much to seek for proper ways of passing Time, that they are obliged
  to Punchinello for knowing what to do with themselves. Since the Case
  is so, I desire only you would intreat our People of Quality, who are
  not to be interrupted in their Pleasure to think of the Practice of
  any moral Duty, that they would at least fine for their Sins, and give
  something to these poor Children; a little out of their Luxury and
  Superfluity, would attone, in some measure, for the wanton Use of the
  rest of their Fortunes. It would not, methinks, be amiss, if the
  Ladies who haunt the Cloysters and Passages of the Play-house, were
  upon every Offence obliged to pay to this excellent Institution of
  Schools of Charity: This Method would make Offenders themselves do
  Service to the Publick. But in the mean time I desire you would
  publish this voluntary Reparation which Mr. Powell does our Parish,
  for the Noise he has made in it by the constant rattling of Coaches,
  Drums, Trumpets, Triumphs, and Battels. The Destruction of Troy
  adorned with Highland Dances, are to make up the Entertainment of all
  who are so well disposed as not to forbear a light Entertainment, for
  no other Reason but that it is to do a good Action.
  I am, SIR,
  Your most humble Servant,
  Ralph Bellfry.

  I am credibly informed, that all the Insinuations which a certain
  Writer made against Mr. Powell at the Bath, are false and groundless.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  My Employment, which is that of a Broker, leading me often into
  Taverns about the Exchange, has given me occasion to observe a certain
  Enormity, which I shall here submit to your Animadversion. In three or
  four of these Taverns, I have, at different times, taken notice of a
  precise Set of People with grave Countenances, short Wiggs, black
  Cloaths, or dark Camlet trimmd with Black, and mourning Gloves and
  Hatbands, who meet on certain Days at each Tavern successively, and
  keep a sort of moving Club. Having often met with their Faces, and
  observed a certain slinking Way in their dropping in one after
  another, I had the Curiosity to enquire into their Characters, being
  the rather moved to it by their agreeing in the Singularity of their
  Dress; and I find upon due Examination they are a Knot of
  Parish-Clarks, who have taken a fancy to one another, and perhaps
  settle the Bills of Mortality over their Half-pints. I have so great a
  Value and Veneration for any who have but even an assenting Amen in
  the Service of Religion, that I am afraid lest these Persons should
  incur some Scandal by this Practice; and would therefore have them,
  without Raillery, advised to send the Florence and Pullets home to
  their own Houses, and not pretend to live as well as the Overseers of
  the Poor.
  I am, SIR,
  Your most humble Servant,
  Humphry Transfer.


  May 6.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I was last Wednesday Night at a Tavern in the City, among a Set of Men
  who call themselves the Lawyer's Club. You must know, Sir, this Club
  consists only of Attorneys; and at this Meeting every one proposes the
  Cause he has then in hand to the Board, upon which each Member gives
  his Judgment according to the Experience he has met with. If it
  happens that any one puts a Case of which they have had no Precedent,
  it is noted down by their Clerk Will. Goosequill, (who registers all
  their Proceedings) that one of them may go the next Day with it to a
  Counsel. This indeed is commendable, and ought to be the principal End
  of their Meeting; but had you been there to have heard them relate
  their Methods of managing a Cause, their Manner of drawing out their
  Bills, and, in short, their Arguments upon the several ways of abusing
  their Clients, with the Applause that is given to him who has done it
  most artfully, you would before now have given your Remarks on them.
  They are so conscious that their Discourses ought to be kept secret,
  that they are very cautious of admitting any Person who is not of
  their Profession. When any who are not of the Law are let in, the
  Person who introduces him, says, he is a very honest Gentleman, and he
  is taken in, as their Cant is, to pay Costs. I am admitted upon the
  Recommendation of one of their Principals, as a very honest
  good-natured Fellow that will never be in a Plot, and only desires to
  drink his Bottle and smoke his Pipe. You have formerly remarked upon
  several Sorts of Clubs; and as the Tendency of this is only to
  increase Fraud and Deceit, I hope you will please to take Notice of it.
  I am (with Respect)
  Your humble Servant,
  H. R.


T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 373.              Thursday, May 8, 1712.                   Budgell.


  '[Fallit enim Vitium specie virtutis et umbra.'

  Juv. [1]]


Mr. Locke, in his Treatise of Human Understanding, has spent two
Chapters upon the Abuse of Words. [2] The first and most palpable Abuse
of Words, he says, is, when they are used without clear and distinct
Ideas: The second, when we are so inconstant and unsteady in the
Application of them, that we sometimes use them to signify one Idea,
sometimes another. He adds, that the Result of our Contemplations and
Reasonings, while we have no precise Ideas fixed to our Words, must
needs be very confused and absurd. To avoid this Inconvenience, more
especially in moral Discourses, where the same Word should constantly be
used in the same Sense, he earnestly recommends the use of Definitions.
A Definition, says he, is the only way whereby the precise Meaning of
Moral Words can be known. He therefore accuses those of great
Negligence, who Discourse of Moral things with the least Obscurity in
the Terms they make use of, since upon the forementioned ground he does
not scruple to say, that he thinks Morality is capable of Demonstration
as well as the Mathematicks.

I know no two Words that have been more abused by the different and
wrong Interpretations which are put upon them, than those two, Modesty
and Assurance. To say such an one is a modest Man, sometimes indeed
passes for a good Character; but at present is very often used to
signify a sheepish awkard Fellow, who has neither Good-breeding,
Politeness, nor any Knowledge of the World.

Again, A Man of Assurance, tho at first it only denoted a Person of a
free and open Carriage, is now very usually applied to a profligate
Wretch, who can break through all the Rules of Decency and Morality
without a Blush.

I shall endeavour therefore in this Essay to restore these Words to
their true Meaning, to prevent the Idea of Modesty from being confounded
with that of Sheepishness, and to hinder Impudence from passing for
Assurance.

If I was put to define Modesty, I would call it The Reflection of an
Ingenuous Mind, either when a Man has committed an Action for which he
censures himself, or fancies that he is exposed to the Censure of
others.

For this Reason a Man truly Modest is as much so when he is alone as in
Company, and as subject to a Blush in his Closet, as when the Eyes of
Multitudes are upon him.

I do not remember to have met with any Instance of Modesty with which I
am so well pleased, as that celebrated one of the young Prince, whose
Father being a tributary King to the Romans, had several Complaints laid
against him before the Senate, as a Tyrant and Oppressor of his
Subjects. The Prince went to Rome to defend his Father; but coming into
the Senate, and hearing a Multitude of Crimes proved upon him, was so
oppressed when it came to his turn to speak, that he was unable to utter
a Word. The Story tells us, that the Fathers were more moved at this
Instance of Modesty and Ingenuity, than they could have been by the most
Pathetick Oration; and, in short, pardoned the guilty Father for this
early Promise of Virtue in the Son.

I take Assurance to be the Faculty of possessing a Man's self, or of
saying and doing indifferent things without any Uneasiness or Emotion in
the Mind. That which generally gives a Man Assurance is a moderate
Knowledge of the World, but above all a Mind fixed and determined in it
self to do nothing against the Rules of Honour and Decency. An open and
assured Behaviour is the natural Consequence of such a Resolution. A Man
thus armed, if his Words or Actions are at any time misinterpreted,
retires within himself, and from the Consciousness of his own Integrity,
assumes Force enough to despise the little Censures of Ignorance or
Malice.

Every one ought to cherish and encourage in himself the Modesty and
Assurance I have here mentioned.

A Man without Assurance is liable to be made uneasy by the Folly or
Ill-nature of every one he converses with. A Man without Modesty is lost
to all Sense of Honour and Virtue.

It is more than probable, that the Prince above-mentioned possessed both
these Qualifications in a very eminent degree. Without Assurance he
would never have undertaken to speak before the most august Assembly in
the World; without Modesty he would have pleaded the Cause he had taken
upon him, tho it had appeared ever so Scandalous.

From what has been said, it is plain, that Modesty and Assurance are
both amiable, and may very well meet in the same Person. When they are
thus mixed and blended together, they compose what we endeavour to
express when we say a modest Assurance; by which we understand the just
Mean between Bashfulness and Impudence.

I shall conclude with observing, that as the same Man may be both Modest
and Assured, so it is also possible for the same Person to be both
Impudent and Bashful.

We have frequent Instances of this odd kind of Mixture in People of
depraved Minds and mean Education; who tho' they are not able to meet a
Man's Eyes, or pronounce a Sentence without Confusion, can Voluntarily
commit the greatest Villanies, or most indecent Actions.

Such a Person seems to have made a Resolution to do Ill even in spite of
himself, and in defiance of all those Checks and Restraints his Temper
and Complection seem to have laid in his way.

Upon the whole, I would endeavour to establish this Maxim, That the
Practice of Virtue is the most proper Method to give a Man a becoming
Assurance in his Words and Actions. Guilt always seeks to shelter it
self in one of the Extreams, and is sometimes attended with both.

X.


[Footnote 1:

  [--Strabonem
  Appellat pætumm pater; et pullum, male parvus
  Si cui filius est; ut abortivus fuit olim
  Sisyphus: hunc varum, distortis cruribus; illum
  Balbutit scaurum, pravis fullum malè talis.

Hor.]]


[Footnote 2: Book III., Chapters 10, 11. Words are the subject of this
book; ch. 10 is on the Abuse of Words; ch. 11 of the Remedies of the
foregoing imperfections and abuses.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 374.             Friday, May 9, 1712.                      Steele.


  'Nil actum reputans si quid superesset agendum.'

  Luc.


There is a Fault, which, tho' common, wants a Name. It is the very
contrary to Procrastination: As we lose the present Hour by delaying
from Day to Day to execute what we ought to do immediately; so most of
us take Occasion to sit still and throw away the Time in our Possession,
by Retrospect on what is past, imagining we have already acquitted our
selves, and established our Characters in the sight of Mankind. But when
we thus put a Value upon our selves for what we have already done, any
further than to explain our selves in order to assist our future
Conduct, that will give us an over-weening opinion of our Merit to the
prejudice of our present Industry. The great Rule, methinks, should be
to manage the Instant in which we stand, with Fortitude, Equanimity, and
Moderation, according to Men's respective Circumstances. If our past
Actions reproach us, they cannot be attoned for by our own severe
Reflections so effectually as by a contrary Behaviour. If they are
praiseworthy, the Memory of them is of no use but to act suitably to
them. Thus a good present Behaviour is an implicit Repentance for any
Miscarriage in what is past; but present Slackness will not make up for
past Activity. Time has swallowed up all that we Contemporaries did
Yesterday, as irrevocably as it has the Actions of the Antediluvians:
But we are again awake, and what shall we do to-Day, to-Day which passes
while we are yet speaking? Shall we remember the Folly of last Night, or
resolve upon the Exercise of Virtue tomorrow? Last Night is certainly
gone, and To-morrow may never arrive: This Instant make use of. Can you
oblige any Man of Honour and Virtue? Do it immediately. Can you visit a
sick Friend? Will it revive him to see you enter, and suspend your own
Ease and Pleasure to comfort his Weakness, and hear the Impertinencies
of a Wretch in Pain? Don't stay to take Coach, but be gone. Your
Mistress will bring Sorrow, and your Bottle Madness: Go to
neither.--Such Virtues and Diversions as these are mentioned because
they occur to all Men. But every Man is sufficiently convinced, that to
suspend the use of the present Moment, and resolve better for the future
only, is an unpardonable Folly: What I attempted to consider, was the
Mischief of setting such a Value upon what is past, as to think we have
done enough. Let a Man have filled all the Offices of Life with the
highest Dignity till Yesterday, and begin to live only to himself
to-Day, he must expect he will in the Effects upon his Reputation be
considered as the Man who died Yesterday. The Man who distinguishes
himself from the rest, stands in a Press of People; those before him
intercept his Progress, and those behind him, if he does not urge on,
will tread him down. Cæsar, of whom it was said, that he thought nothing
done while there was anything left for him to do, went on in performing
the greatest Exploits, without assuming to himself a Privilege of taking
Rest upon the Foundation of the Merit of his former Actions. It was the
manner of that glorious Captain to write down what Scenes he passed
through, but it was rather to keep his Affairs in Method, and capable of
a clear Review in case they should be examined by others, than that he
built a Renown upon any thing which was past. I shall produce two
Fragments of his to demonstrate, that it was his Rule of Life to support
himself rather by what he should perform than what he had done already.
In the Tablet which he wore about him the same Year, in which he
obtained the Battel of Pharsalia, there were found these loose Notes for
his own Conduct: It is supposed, by the Circumstances they alluded to,
that they might be set down the Evening of the same Night.


  My Part is now but begun, and my Glory must be sustained by the Use I
  make of this Victory; otherwise my Loss will be greater than that of
  Pompey. Our personal Reputation will rise or fall as we bear our
  respective Fortunes. All my private Enemies among the Prisoners shall
  be spared. I will forget this, in order to obtain such another Day.
  Trebutius is ashamed to see me: I will go to his Tent, and be
  reconciled in private. Give all the Men of Honour, who take part with
  me, the Terms I offered before the Battel. Let them owe this to their
  Friends who have been long in my Interests. Power is weakened by the
  full Use of it, but extended by Moderation. Galbinius is proud, and
  will be servile in his present Fortune; let him wait. Send for
  Stertinius: He is modest, and his Virtue is worth gaining. I have
  cooled my Heart with Reflection; and am fit to rejoice with the Army
  to-morrow. He is a popular General who can expose himself like a
  private Man during a Battel; but he is more popular who can rejoice
  but like a private Man after a Victory.

What is particularly proper for the Example of all who pretend to
Industry in the Pursuit of Honour and Virtue, is, That this Hero was
more than ordinarily sollicitous about his Reputation, when a common
Mind would have thought it self in Security, and given it self a Loose
to Joy and Triumph. But though this is a very great Instance of his
Temper, I must confess I am more taken with his Reflections when he
retired to his Closet in some Disturbance upon the repeated ill Omens of
Calphurnia's Dream the Night before his Death. The literal Translation
of that Fragment shall conclude this Paper.

  Be it so [then. [1]] If I am to die to-Morrow, that is what I am to do
  to-Morrow: It will not be then, because I am willing it should be
  then; nor shall I escape it, because I am unwilling. It is in the Gods
  when, but in my self how I shall die. If Calphurnia's Dreams are Fumes
  of Indigestion, how shall I behold the Day after to-morrow? If they
  are from the Gods, their Admonition is not to prepare me to escape
  from their Decree, but to meet it. I have lived to a Fulness of Days
  and of Glory; what is there that Cæsar has not done with as much
  Honour as antient Heroes? Cæsar has not yet died; Cæsar is prepared to
  die.


T.


[Footnote 1: [than]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 375.                   Saturday, May 10, 1712.               Hughes.


  'Non possidentem multa vocaveris
  Rectè beatum: rectiùs occupat
    Nomen beati, qui Deorum
      Muneribus sapienter uti,
  Duramque callet Pauperiem pati,
  Pejusque Letho flagitium timet.'

  Hor.


I have more than once had occasion to mention a noble Saying of Seneca
the Philosopher, That a virtuous Person struggling with Misfortunes, and
rising above them, is an Object on which the Gods themselves may look
down with Delight. [1] I shall therefore set before my Reader a Scene of
this kind of Distress in private Life, for the Speculation of this Day.

An eminent Citizen, who had lived in good Fashion and Credit, was by a
Train of Accidents, and by an unavoidable Perplexity in his Affairs,
reduced to a low Condition. There is a Modesty usually attending
faultless Poverty, which made him rather chuse to reduce his Manner of
Living to his present Circumstances, than sollicit his Friends in order
to support the Shew of an Estate when the Substance was gone. His Wife,
who was a Woman of Sense and Virtue, behaved her self on this Occasion
with uncommon Decency, and never appear'd so amiable in his Eyes as now.
Instead of upbraiding him with the ample Fortune she had brought, or the
many great Offers she had refused for his sake, she redoubled all the
Instances of her Affection, while her Husband was continually pouring
out his Heart to her in Complaints that he had ruined the best Woman in
the World. He sometimes came home at a time when she did not expect him,
and surpriz'd her in Tears, which she endeavour'd to conceal, and always
put on an Air of Chearfulness to receive him. To lessen their Expence,
their eldest Daughter (whom I shall call Amanda) was sent into the
Country, to the House of an honest Farmer, who had married a Servant of
the Family. This young Woman was apprehensive of the Ruin which was
approaching, and had privately engaged a Friend in the Neighbourhood to
give her an account of what passed from time to time in her Father's
Affairs. Amanda was in the Bloom of her Youth and Beauty, when the Lord
of the Manor, who often called in at the Farmer's House as he followd
his Country Sports, fell passionately in love with her. He was a Man of
great Generosity, but from a loose Education had contracted a hearty
Aversion to Marriage. He therefore entertained a Design upon Amanda's
Virtue, which at present he thought fit to keep private. The innocent
Creature, who never suspected his Intentions, was pleased with his
Person; and having observed his growing Passion for her, hoped by so
advantageous a Match she might quickly be in a capacity of supporting
her impoverish'd Relations. One day as he called to see her, he found
her in Tears over a Letter she had just receiv'd from her Friend, which
gave an Account that her Father had lately been stripped of every thing
by an Execution. The Lover, who with some Difficulty found out the Cause
of her Grief, took this occasion to make her a Proposal. It is
impossible to express Amanda's Confusion when she found his Pretensions
were not honourable. She was now deserted of all her Hopes, and had no
Power to speak; but rushing from him in the utmost Disturbance, locked
her self up in her Chamber. He immediately dispatched a Messenger to her
Father with the following Letter.

   SIR,

   I have heard of your Misfortune, and have offer'd your Daughter, if
   she will live with me, to settle on her Four hundred Pounds a year,
   and to lay down the Sum for which you are now distressed. I will be
   so ingenuous as to tell you that I do not intend Marriage: But if you
   are wise, you will use your Authority with her not to be too nice,
   when she has an opportunity of saving you and your Family, and of
   making her self happy.
   I am, &c.

This Letter came to the Hands of Amanda's Mother; she opend and read it
with great Surprize and Concern. She did not think it proper to explain
her self to the Messenger, but desiring him to call again the next
Morning, she wrote to her Daughter as follows.

  Dearest Child,

  Your Father and I have just now receiv'd a Letter from a Gentleman who
  pretends Love to you, with a Proposal that insults our Misfortunes,
  and would throw us to a lower Degree of Misery than any thing which is
  come upon us. How could this barbarous Man think, that the tenderest
  of Parents would be tempted to supply their Wants by giving up the
  best of Children to Infamy and Ruin? It is a mean and cruel Artifice
  to make this Proposal at a time when he thinks our Necessities must
  compel us to any thing; but we will not eat the Bread of Shame; and
  therefore we charge thee not to think of us, but to avoid the Snare
  which is laid for thy Virtue. Beware of pitying us: It is not so bad
  as you have perhaps been told. All things will yet be well, and I
  shall write my Child better News.

  I have been interrupted. I know not how I was moved to say things
  would mend. As I was going on I was startled by a Noise of one that
  knocked at the Door, and hath brought us an unexpected Supply of a
  Debt which had long been owing. Oh! I will now tell thee all. It is
  some days I have lived almost without Support, having conveyd what
  little Money I could raise to your poor Father--Thou wilt weep to
  think where he is, yet be assured he will be soon at Liberty. That
  cruel Letter would have broke his Heart, but I have concealed it from
  him. I have no Companion at present besides little Fanny, who stands
  watching my Looks as I write, and is crying for her Sister. She says
  she is sure you are not well, having discover'd that my present
  Trouble is about you. But do not think I would thus repeat my Sorrows,
  to grieve thee: No, it is to intreat thee not to make them
  insupportable, by adding what would be worse than all. Let us bear
  chearfully an Affliction, which we have not brought on our selves, and
  remember there is a Power who can better deliver us out of it than by
  the Loss of thy Innocence. Heaven preserve my dear Child.

  Affectionate Mother----


The Messenger, notwithstanding he promised to deliver this Letter to
Amanda, carry'd it first to his Master, who he imagined would be glad to
have an Opportunity of giving it into her Hands himself. His Master was
impatient to know the Success of his Proposal, and therefore broke open
the Letter privately to see the Contents. He was not a little moved at
so true a Picture of Virtue in Distress: But at the same time was
infinitely surprized to find his Offers rejected. However, he resolved
not to suppress the Letter, but carefully sealed it up again, and
carried it to Amanda. All his Endeavours to see her were in vain, till
she was assured he brought a Letter from her Mother. He would not part
with it, but upon Condition that she should read it without leaving the
Room. While she was perusing it, he fixed his Eyes on her Face with the
deepest Attention: Her Concern gave a new Softness to her Beauty, and
when she burst into Tears, he could no longer refrain from bearing a
Part of her Sorrow, and telling her, that he too had read the Letter and
was resolvd to make Reparation for having been the Occasion of it. My
Reader will not be displeased to see this Second Epistle which he now
wrote to Amanda's Mother.


  MADAM,

  I am full of Shame, and will never forgive my self, if I have not your
  Pardon for what I lately wrote. It was far from my Intention to add
  Trouble to the Afflicted; nor could any thing, but my being a Stranger
  to you, have betray'd me into a Fault, for which, if I live, I shall
  endeavour to make you amends, as a Son. You cannot be unhappy while
  Amanda is your Daughter: nor shall be, if any thing can prevent it,
  which is in the power of, MADAM,

  Your most obedient
  Humble Servant----


This Letter he sent by his Steward, and soon after went up to Town
himself, to compleat the generous Act he had now resolved on. By his
Friendship and Assistance Amanda's Father was quickly in a condition of
retrieving his perplex'd Affairs. To conclude, he Marry'd Amanda, and
enjoyd the double Satisfaction of having restored a worthy Family to
their former Prosperity, and of making himself happy by an Alliance to
their Virtues.


[Footnote 1: See note on p. 148 [Footnote 1 of No. 39], vol. i.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 376.                 Monday, May 12, 1712.                Steele.


  '--Pavone ex Pythagoreo--'

  Persius.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I have observed that the Officer you some time ago appointed as
  Inspector of Signs, has not done his Duty so well as to give you an
  Account of very many strange Occurrences in the publick Streets, which
  are worthy of, but have escaped your Notice. Among all the Oddnesses
  which I have ever met with, that which I am now telling you of gave me
  most Delight. You must have observed that all the Criers in the Street
  attract the Attention of the Passengers, and of the Inhabitants in the
  several Parts, by something very particular in their Tone it self, in
  the dwelling upon a Note, or else making themselves wholly
  unintelligible by a Scream. The Person I am so delighted with has
  nothing to sell, but very gravely receives the Bounty of the People,
  for no other Merit but the Homage they pay to his Manner of signifying
  to them that he wants a Subsidy. You must, sure, have heard speak of
  an old Man, who walks about the City, and that part of the Suburbs
  which lies beyond the Tower, performing the Office of a Day-Watchman,
  followed by a Goose, which bears the Bob of his Ditty, and confirms
  what he says with a Quack, Quack. I gave little heed to the mention of
  this known Circumstance, till, being the other day in those Quarters,
  I passed by a decrepit old Fellow with a Pole in his Hand, who just
  then was bawling out, Half an Hour after one a-Clock, and immediately
  a dirty Goose behind him made her Response, Quack, Quack. I could not
  forbear attending this grave Procession for the length of half a
  Street, with no small amazement to find the whole Place so familiarly
  acquainted with a melancholy Mid-night Voice at Noon-day, giving them
  the Hour, and exhorting them of the Departure of Time, with a Bounce
  at their Doors. While I was full of this Novelty, I went into a
  Friend's House, and told him how I was diverted with their whimsical
  Monitor and his Equipage. My Friend gave me the History; and
  interrupted my Commendation of the Man, by telling me the Livelihood
  of these two Animals is purchased rather by the good Parts of the
  Goose, than of the Leader: For it seems the Peripatetick who walked
  before her was a Watchman in that Neighbourhood; and the Goose of her
  self by frequent hearing his Tone, out of her natural Vigilance, not
  only observed, but answer'd it very regularly from Time to Time. The
  Watchman was so affected with it, that he bought her, and has taken
  her in Partner, only altering their Hours of Duty from Night to Day.
  The Town has come into it, and they live very comfortably. This is the
  Matter of Fact: Now I desire you, who are a profound Philosopher, to
  consider this Alliance of Instinct and Reason; your Speculation may
  turn very naturally upon the Force the superior Part of Mankind may
  have upon the Spirits of such as, like this Watchman, may be very near
  the Standard of Geese. And you may add to this practical Observation,
  how in all Ages and Times the World has been carry'd away by odd
  unaccountable things, which one would think would pass upon no
  Creature which had Reason; and, under the Symbol of this Goose, you
  may enter into the Manner and Method of leading Creatures, with their
  Eyes open, thro' thick and thin, for they know not what, they know not
  why.

  All which is humbly submitted to your Spectatorial Wisdom by,
  SIR,
  Your most humble Servant,
  Michael Gander.


  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  I have for several Years had under my Care the Government and
  Education of young Ladies, which Trust I have endeavour'd to discharge
  with due regard to their several Capacities and Fortunes: I have left
  nothing undone to imprint in every one of them an humble courteous
  Mind, accompanied with a graceful becoming Mein, and have made them
  pretty much acquainted with the Houshold Part of Family-Affairs; but
  still I find there is something very much wanting in the Air of my
  Ladies, different from what I observe in those that are esteemed your
  fine bred Women. Now, Sir, I must own to you, I never suffered my
  Girls to learn to Dance; but since I have read your Discourse of
  Dancing, where you have described the Beauty and Spirit there is in
  regular Motion, I own my self your Convert, and resolve for the future
  to give my young Ladies that Accomplishment. But upon imparting my
  Design to their Parents, I have been made very uneasy, for some Time,
  because several of them have declared, that if I did not make use of
  the Master they recommended, they would take away their Children.
  There was Colonel Jumper's Lady, a Colonel of the Train-Bands, that
  has a great Interest in her Parish; she recommends Mr. Trott for the
  prettiest Master in Town, that no Man teaches a  Jigg like him, that
  she has seen him rise six or seven Capers together with the greatest
  Ease imaginable, and that his Scholars twist themselves more ways than
  the Scholars of any Master in Town: besides there is Madam Prim, an
  Alderman's Lady, recommends a Master of her own Name, but she declares
  he is not of their Family, yet a very extraordinary Man in his way;
  for besides a very soft Air he has in Dancing, he gives them a
  particular Behaviour at a Tea-Table, and in presenting their
  Snuff-Box, to twirl, flip, or flirt a Fan, and how to place Patches to
  the best advantage, either for Fat or Lean, Long or Oval Faces: for my
  Lady says there is more in these Things than the World Imagines. But I
  must confess the major Part of those I am concern'd with leave it to
  me. I desire therefore, according to the inclosed Direction, you would
  send your Correspondent who has writ to you on that Subject to my
  House. If proper Application this way can give Innocence new Charms,
  and make Virtue legible in the Countenance, I shall spare no Charge to
  make my Scholars in their very Features and Limbs bear witness how
  careful I have been in the other Parts of their Education.

  I am, SIR,
  Your most humble Servant,
  Rachael Watchful

T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 377.                Tuesday, May 13, 1712.                 Addison.


  'Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis
  Cautum est in horas--'

  Hor.


Love was the Mother of Poetry, and still produces, among the most
ignorant and barbarous, a thousand imaginary Distresses and Poetical
Complaints. It makes a Footman talk like Oroondates, and converts a
brutal Rustick into a gentle Swain. The most ordinary Plebeian or
Mechanick in Love, bleeds and pines away with a certain Elegance and
Tenderness of Sentiments which this Passion naturally inspires.

These inward Languishings of a Mind infected with this Softness, have
given birth to a Phrase which is made use of by all the melting Tribe,
from the highest to the lowest, I mean that of dying for Love.

Romances, which owe their very Being to this Passion, are full of these
metaphorical Deaths. Heroes and Heroines, Knights, Squires, and Damsels,
are all of them in a dying Condition. There is the same kind of
Mortality in our Modern Tragedies, where every one gasps, faints, bleeds
and dies. Many of the Poets, to describe the Execution which is done by
this Passion, represent the Fair Sex as Basilisks that destroy with
their Eyes; but I think Mr. Cowley has with greater Justness of Thought
compared a beautiful Woman to a Porcupine, that sends an Arrow from
every Part. [1]

I have often thought, that there is no way so effectual for the Cure of
this general Infirmity, as a Man's reflecting upon the Motives that
produce it. When the Passion proceeds from the Sense of any Virtue or
Perfection in the Person beloved, I would by no means discourage it; but
if a Man considers that all his heavy Complaints of Wounds and Deaths
rise from some little Affectations of Coquetry, which are improved into
Charms by his own fond Imagination, the very laying before himself the
Cause of his Distemper, may be sufficient to effect the Cure of it.

It is in this view that I have looked over the several Bundles of
Letters which I have received from Dying People, and composed out of
them the following Bill of Mortality, which I shall lay before my Reader
without any further Preface, as hoping that it may be useful to him in
discovering those several Places where there is most Danger, and those
fatal Arts which are made use of to destroy the Heedless and Unwary.

  Lysander,    slain at a Puppet-show on the third of September.

  Thirsis,     shot from a Casement in Pickadilly.

  T. S.,       wounded by Zehinda's Scarlet Stocking, as she was
               stepping out of a Coach.

  Will. Simple, smitten at the Opera by the Glance of an Eye that was
                aimed at one who stood by him.

  Tho. Vainlove, lost his Life at a Ball.

  Tim. Tattle, kill'd by the Tap of a Fan on his left Shoulder by
               Coquetilla, as he was talking carelessly with her in a
               Bow-window.

  Sir Simon Softly, murder'd at the Play-house in Drury-lane by a Frown.

  Philander,   mortally wounded by Cleora, as she was adjusting her
               Tucker.

  Ralph Gapely, Esq., hit by a random Shot at the Ring.

  F. R.,       caught his Death upon the Water, April the 31st.

  W. W.,       killed by an unknown Hand, that was playing with the
               Glove off upon the Side of the Front-Box in Drury-Lane.

  Sir Christopher Crazy, Bart.,
               hurt by the Brush of a Whalebone Petticoat.

  Sylvius,     shot through the Sticks of a Fan at St. James's Church.

  Damon,       struck thro' the Heart by a Diamond Necklace.

  Thomas Trusty,
  Francis Goosequill,
  William Meanwell,
  Edward Callow, Esqrs.,
               standing in a Row, fell all four at the same time, by an
               Ogle of the Widow Trapland.

  Tom. Rattle, chancing to tread upon a Lady's Tail as he came out of
               the Play-house, she turned full upon him, and laid him
               dead upon the Spot.

  Dick Tastewell, slain by a Blush from the Queen's Box in the third Act
               of the Trip to the Jubilee.

  Samuel Felt, Haberdasher,
               wounded in his Walk to Islington by Mrs. Susannah
               Crossstich, as she was clambering over a Stile.

  R. F.,
  T. W.,
  S. I.,
  M. P., &c.,  put to Death in the last Birth-Day Massacre.

  Roger Blinko, cut off in the Twenty-first Year of his Age by a
               White-wash.

  Musidorus,   slain by an Arrow that flew out of a Dimple in Belinda's
               Left Cheek.

  Ned Courtly  presenting Flavia with her Glove (which she had dropped
               on purpose) she receivd it, and took away his Life with a
               Curtsie.

  John Gosselin having received a slight Hurt from a Pair of blue Eyes,
               as he was making his Escape was dispatch'd by a Smile.

  Strephon,    killed by Clarinda as she looked down into the Pit.

  Charles Careless,
               shot flying by a Girl of Fifteen, who unexpectedly popped
               her Head upon him out of a Coach.

  Josiah Wither, aged threescore and three, sent to his long home by
               Elizabeth Jet-well, Spinster.

  Jack Freelove, murderd by Melissa in her Hair.

  William Wiseaker, Gent.,
               drown'd in a Flood of Tears by Moll Common.

  John Pleadwell, Esq., of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law,
  assassinated in his Chambers the sixth Instant by Kitty Sly, who
  pretended to come to him for his Advice.


I.


[Footnote 1:

  They are all weapon, and they dart
  Like Porcupines from every Part.

Anacreontics, iii.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 378.                Wednesday, May 14, 1712.                  Pope.


  'Aggredere, O magnos, aderit jam tempus, honores.'

  Virg.


I will make no Apology for entertaining the Reader with the following
Poem, which is written by a great Genius, a Friend of mine, in the
Country, who is not ashamd to employ his Wit in the Praise of his Maker.
[1]


MESSIAH.

A sacred Eclogue, compos'd of several Passages of Isaiah the Prophet.

Written in Imitation of Virgil's POLLIO.


                Ye Nymphs of Solyma! begin the Song:
                To heav'nly Themes sublimer Strains belong.
                The Mossy Fountains, and the Sylvan Shades,
                The Dreams of Pindus and th' Aonian Maids,
                Delight no more--O Thou my Voice inspire,
                Who touch'd Isaiah's [hallow'd [2]] Lips with Fire!
                Rapt into future Times, the Bard begun;
                A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin bear a Son!

[Isaiah,        From Jesse's Root behold a Branch arise,
Cap. II.        Whose sacred Flow'r with Fragrance fills the Skies.
v. 1.]          Th' Æthereal Spirit o'er its Leaves shall move,
                And on its Top descends the Mystick Dove.

[Cap. 45.       Ye Heav'ns! from high the dewy Nectar pour,
v. 8.]          And in soft Silence shed the kindly Show'r!

[Cap. 25.       The Sick and Weak, the healing Plant shall aid,
v. 4.]          From Storms a Shelter, and from Heat a Shade.
                All Crimes shall cease, and ancient Fraud shall fail;

[Cap. 9.        Returning Justice lift aloft her Scale;
v. 7.]          Peace o'er the World her Olive Wand extend,
                And white-rob'd Innocence from Heav'n descend.
                Swift fly the Years, and rise th' expected Morn!
                Oh spring to Light, Auspicious Babe, be born!
                See Nature hastes her earliest Wreaths to bring,
                With all the Incense of the breathing Spring:

[Cap. 35.       See lofty Lebanon his Head advance,
v. 2.]          See nodding Forests on the Mountains dance,
                See spicy Clouds from lowly Sharon rise,
                And Carmels flow'ry Top perfumes the Skies!

[Cap. 40.       Hark! a glad Voice the lonely Desart chears;
v. 3, 4.]       Prepare the Way! a God, a God appears:
                A God! a God! the vocal Hills reply,
                The Rocks proclaim th' approaching Deity.
                Lo Earth receives him from the bending Skies!
                Sink down ye Mountains, and ye Vallies rise!
                With Heads declin'd, ye Cedars, Homage pay!
                Be smooth ye Rocks, ye rapid Floods give way!
                The SAVIOUR comes! by ancient Bards foretold;

[Cap. 42.
v. 18.]         Hear him, ye Deaf, and all ye Blind behold!

[Cap. 35.       He from thick Films shall purge the visual Ray,
v. 5, 6.]       And on the sightless Eye-ball pour the Day.
                'Tis he th' obstructed Paths of Sound shall clear,
                And bid new Musick charm th' unfolding Ear,
                The Dumb shall sing, the Lame his Crutch forego,
                And leap exulting like the bounding Roe;
                [No Sigh, no Murmur the wide World shall hear,
                From ev'ry Face he wipes off ev'ry Tear.

[Cap. 25.       In Adamantine Chains shall Death be bound,
v. 8.]          And Hell's grim Tyrant feel th' eternal Wound. [3]]


[Cap. 30.       As the good Shepherd tends his fleecy Care,
v. xx.]         Seeks freshest Pastures and the purest Air,
                Explores the lost, the wand'ring Sheep directs,
                By day o'ersees them, and by night protects;
                The tender Lambs he raises in his Arms,
                Feeds from his Hand, and in his Bosom warms:
                Mankind shall thus his Guardian Care engage,
                The promis'd Father of the future Age. [4]
                No more shall Nation against Nation rise, [5]
                No ardent Warriors meet with hateful Eyes,
                Nor Fields with gleaming Steel be coverd o'er,
                The Brazen Trumpets kindle Rage no more;
                But useless Lances into Scythes shall bend,
                And the broad Falchion in a Plow-share end.
                Then Palaces shall rise; the joyful Son [6]
                Shall finish what his short-liv'd Sire begun;
                Their Vines a Shadow to their Race shall yield,
                And the same Hand that sow'd shall reap the Field.
                The Swain in barren Desarts with Surprize [7]
                Sees Lillies spring, and sudden Verdure rise;
                And Starts, amidst the thirsty Wilds, to hear,
                New Falls of Water murmuring in his Ear:
                On rifted Rocks, the Dragon's late Abodes,
                The green Reed trembles, and the Bulrush nods.
                Waste sandy Vallies, once perplexd with Thorn, [8]
                The spiry Fir and shapely Box adorn:
                To leafless Shrubs the flow'ring Palms succeed,
                And od'rous Myrtle to the noisome Weed.
                The Lambs with Wolves shall graze the verdant Mead [9]
                And Boys in flow'ry Bands the Tyger lead;
                The Steer and Lion at one Crib shall meet,
                And harmless Serpents Lick the Pilgrim's Feet.
                The smiling Infant in his Hand shall take
                The crested Basilisk and speckled Snake;
                Pleas'd, the green Lustre of the Scales survey,
                And with their forky Tongue and pointless Sting shall
                  play.
                Rise, crown'd with Light, imperial Salem rise! [10]
                Exalt thy tow'ry Head, and lift thy Eyes!
                See, a long Race thy spacious Courts adorn; [11]
                See future Sons and Daughters yet unborn
                In crowding Ranks on ev'ry side arise,
                Demanding Life, impatient for the Skies!
                See barb'rous Nations at thy Gates attend, [12]
                Walk in thy Light, and in thy Temple bend.
                See thy bright Altars throng'd with prostrate Kings,
                And heap'd with Products of Sabaean Springs! [13]
                For thee Idume's spicy Forests blow;
                And seeds of Gold in Ophir's Mountains glow.
                See Heav'n its sparkling Portals wide display,
                And break upon thee in a Flood of Day!
                No more the rising Sun shall gild the Morn, [14]
                Nor Evening Cynthia fill her silver Horn,
                But lost, dissolv'd in thy superior Rays;
                One Tide of Glory, one unclouded Blaze
                O'erflow thy Courts: The LIGHT HIMSELF shall shine
                Reveal'd; and God's eternal Day be thine!
                The Seas shall waste, the Skies in Smoke decay; [15]
                Rocks fall to Dust, and Mountains melt away;
                But fix'd His Word, His saving Pow'r remains:
                Thy Realm for ever lasts! thy own Messiah reigns.


T.


[Footnote 1: Thus far Steele.]


[Footnote 2: [hollow'd]]


[Footnote 3:

  [Before him Death, the grisly Tyrant, flies;
  He wipes the Tears for ever from our Eyes.]

This was an alteration which Steele had suggested, and in which young
Pope had acquiesced. Steele wrote:

  I have turned to every verse and chapter, and think you have preserved
  the sublime, heavenly spirit throughout the whole, especially at "Hark
  a glad voice," and "The lamb with wolves shall graze." There is but
  one line which I think is below the original:

    He wipes the tears for ever from our eyes.

  You have expressed it with a good and pious but not so exalted and
  poetical a spirit as the prophet: The Lord God shall wipe away tears
  from off all faces. If you agree with me in this, alter it by way of
  paraphrase or otherwise, that when it comes into a volume it may be
  amended.]


[Footnote 4: Cap. 9. v. 6.]


[Footnote 5: Cap. 2. v. 4.]


[Footnote 6: Cap. 65. v. 21, 22.]


[Footnote 7: Cap 35. v. 1, 7.]


[Footnote 8: Cap. 41. v. 19. and Cap. 55. v. 13.]


[Footnote 9: Cap. 11. v. 6, 7, 8.]


[Footnote 10: Cap. 60. v. 1.]


[Footnote 11: Cap. 60. v. 4.]


[Footnote 12: Cap. 60. v. 3.]


[Footnote 13: Cap. 60. v. 6.]


[Footnote 14: Cap. 60. v. 19, 20.]


[Footnote 15: Cap. 51. v. 6. and Cap. 64. v. 10.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 379.             Thursday, May 15, 1712.                  Budgell.


  'Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.'

  Pers.


I have often wondered at that ill-natur'd Position which has been
sometimes maintained in the Schools, and is comprizd in an old Latin
Verse, namely, that A Man's Knowledge is worth nothing, if he
communicates what he knows to any one besides. [1] There is certainly no
more sensible Pleasure to a good-natur'd Man, than if he can by any
means gratify or inform the Mind of another. I might add, that this
Virtue naturally carries its own reward along with it, since it is
almost impossible it should be exercised without the Improvement of the
Person who practices it. The reading of Books, and the daily Occurrences
of Life, are continually furnishing us with Matter for Thought and
Reflection. It is extremely natural for us to desire to see such our
Thoughts put into the Dress of Words, without which indeed we can scarce
have a clear and distinct Idea of them our selves: When they are thus
clothed in Expressions, nothing so truly shews us whether they are just
or false, as those Effects which they produce in the Minds of others.

I am apt to flatter my self, that in the Course of these my
Speculations, I have treated of several Subjects, and laid down many
such Rules for the Conduct of a Man's Life, which my Readers were either
wholly ignorant of before, or which at least those few who were
acquainted with them, looked upon as so many Secrets they have found out
for the Conduct of themselves, but were resolved never to have made
publick.

I am the more confirmed in this Opinion from my having received several
Letters, wherein I am censur'd for having prostituted Learning to the
Embraces of the Vulgar, and made her, as one of my Correspondents
phrases it, a common Strumpet: I am charged by another with laying open
the Arcana, or Secrets of Prudence, to the Eyes of every Reader.

The narrow Spirit which appears in the Letters of these my
Correspondents is the less surprizing, as it has shewn itself in all
Ages: There is still extant an Epistle written by Alexander the Great to
his Tutor Aristotle, upon that Philosopher's publishing some part of his
Writings; in which the Prince complains of his having made known to all
the World, those Secrets in Learning which he had before communicated to
him in private Lectures; concluding, That he had rather excel the rest
of Mankind in Knowledge than in Power. [2]

Luisa de Padilla, a Lady of great Learning, and Countess of Aranda, was
in like manner angry with the famous Gratian, [3] upon his publishing
his Treatise of the Discrete; wherein she fancied that he had laid open
those Maxims to common Readers, which ought only to have been reserved
for the Knowledge of the Great.

These Objections are thought by many of so much weight, that they often
defend the above-mentiond Authors, by affirming they have affected such
an Obscurity in their Style and Manner of Writing, that tho every one
may read their Works, there will be but very few who can comprehend
their Meaning.

Persius, the Latin Satirist, affected Obscurity for another Reason; with
which however Mr. Cowley is so offended, that writing to one of his
Friends, You, says he, tell me, that you do not know whether Persius be
a good Poet or no, because you cannot understand him; for which very
Reason I affirm that he is not so.

However, this Art of writing unintelligibly has been very much improved,
and follow'd by several of the Moderns, who observing the general
Inclination of Mankind to dive into a Secret, and the Reputation many
have acquired by concealing their Meaning under obscure Terms and
Phrases, resolve, that they may be still more abstruse, to write without
any Meaning at all. This Art, as it is at present practised by many
eminent Authors, consists in throwing so many Words at a venture into
different Periods, and leaving the curious Reader to find out the
Meaning of them.

The Egyptians, who made use of Hieroglyphicks to signify several things,
expressed a Man who confined his Knowledge and Discoveries altogether
within himself, by the Figure of a Dark-Lanthorn closed on all sides,
which, tho' it was illuminated within, afforded no manner of Light or
Advantage to such as stood by it. For my own part, as I shall from time
to time communicate to the Publick whatever Discoveries I happen to
make, I should much rather be compared to an ordinary Lamp, which
consumes and wastes it self for the benefit of every Passenger.

I shall conclude this Paper with the Story of Rosicrucius's Sepulchre. I
suppose I need not inform my Readers that this Man was the Founder of
the Rosicrusian Sect, and that his Disciples still pretend to new
Discoveries, which they are never to communicate to the rest of Mankind.
[4]

A certain Person having occasion to dig somewhat deep in the Ground
where this Philosopher lay inter'd, met with a small Door having a Wall
on each side of it. His Curiosity, and the Hopes of finding some hidden
Treasure, soon prompted him to force open the Door. He was immediately
surpriz'd by a sudden Blaze of Light, and discover'd a very fair Vault:
At the upper end of it was a Statue of a Man in Armour sitting by a
Table, and leaning on his Left Arm. He held a Truncheon in his right
Hand, and had a Lamp burning before him. The Man had no sooner set one
Foot within the Vault, than the Statue erecting it self from its leaning
Posture, stood bolt upright; and upon the Fellow's advancing another
Step, lifted up the Truncheon in his Right Hand. The Man still ventur'd
a third Step, when the Statue with a furious Blow broke the Lamp into a
thousand Pieces, and left his Guest in a sudden Darkness.

Upon the Report of this Adventure, the Country People soon came with
Lights to the Sepulchre, and discovered that the Statue, which was made
of Brass, was nothing more than a Piece of Clock-work; that the Floor of
the Vault was all loose, and underlaid with several Springs, which, upon
any Man's entering, naturally produced that which had happend.

Rosicrucius, says his Disciples, made use of this Method, to shew the
World that he had re-invented the ever-burning Lamps of the Ancients,
tho' he was resolvd no one should reap any Advantage from the Discovery.

X.


[Footnote 1: Nil proprium ducas quod mutarier potest.]


[Footnote 2: Aulus Gellius. Noct. Att., Bk xx., ch. 5.]


[Footnote 3: Baltazar Grecian's Discreto has been mentioned before in
the Spectator, being well-known in England through a French translation.
See note on p. 303, ante [Footnote 1 of No. 293]. Gracian, in Spain,
became especially popular as a foremost representative of his time in
transferring the humour for conceits--cultismo, as it was called--from
verse to prose. He began in 1630 with a prose tract, the Hero, laboured
in short ingenious sentences, which went through six editions. He wrote
also an Art of Poetry after the new style. His chief work was the
Criticon, an allegory of the Spring, Autumn, and Winter of life. The
Discreto was one of his minor works. All that he wrote was published,
not by himself, but by a friend, and in the name of his brother Lorenzo,
who was not an ecclesiastic.]


[Footnote 4: Rosicrucius had been made fashionable by the Abbé de
Villars who was assassinated in 1675. His Comte de Gabalis was a popular
little book in the Spectators time. I suppose I need not inform my
readers that there never was a Rosicrucius or a Rosicrucian sect. The
Rosicrucian pamphlets which appeared in Germany at the beginning of the
17th century, dating from the Discovery of the Brotherhood of the
Honourable Order of the Rosy Cross, a pamphlet published in 1610, by a
Lutheran clergyman, Valentine Andreä, were part of a hoax designed
perhaps originally as means of establishing a sort of charitable masonic
society of social reformers. Missing that aim, the Rosicrucian story
lived to be adorned by superstitious fancy, with ideas of mystery and
magic, which in the Comte de Gabalis were methodized into a consistent
romance. It was from this romance that Pope got what he called the
Rosicrucian machinery of his Rape of the Lock. The Abbé de Villars,
professing to give very full particulars, had told how the Rosicrucians
assigned sylphs to the air, gnomes to the earth, nymphs to the water,
salamanders to the fire.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 380.                  Friday, May 16, 1712.                  Steele


  'Rivalem patienter habe--'

  Ovid.


  Thursday, May 8, 1712.

  SIR,

  The Character you have in the World of being the Lady's Philosopher,
  and the pretty Advice I have seen you give to others in your Papers,
  make me address my self to you in this abrupt Manner, and to desire
  your Opinion what in this Age a Woman may call a Lover. I have lately
  had a Gentleman that I thought made Pretensions to me, insomuch that
  most of my Friends took Notice of it and thought we were really
  married; which I did not take much Pains to undeceive them, and
  especially a young Gentlewoman of my particular Acquaintance which was
  then in the Country. She coming to Town, and seeing our Intimacy so
  great, she gave her self the Liberty of taking me to task concerning
  it: I ingenuously told her we were not married, but I did not know
  what might the Event. She soon got acquainted with the Gentleman, and
  was pleased to take upon her to examine him about it. Now whether a
  new Face had made a greater Conquest than the old, I'll leave you to
  judge: But I am informd that he utterly deny'd all Pretensions to
  Courtship, but withal profess'd a sincere Friendship for me; but
  whether Marriages are propos'd by way of Friendship or not, is what I
  desire to know, and what I may really call a Lover. There are so many
  who talk in a Language fit only for that Character, and yet guard
  themselves against speaking in direct Terms to the Point, that it is
  impossible to distinguish between Courtship and Conversation. I hope
  you will do me Justice both upon my Lover and my Friend, if they
  provoke me further: In the mean time I carry it with so equal a
  Behaviour, that the Nymph and the Swain too are mighty at a loss; each
  believes I, who know them both well, think my self revenged in their
  Love to one another, which creates an irreconcileable Jealousy. If all
  comes right again, you shall hear further from,

  SIR,
  Your most obedient Servant,
  Mirtilla.


  April 28, 1712.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  Your Observations on Persons that have behaved themselves irreverently
  at Church, I doubt not have had a good Effect on some that have read
  them: But there is another Fault which has hitherto escaped your
  Notice, I mean of such Persons as are very zealous and punctual to
  perform an Ejaculation that is only preparatory to the Service of the
  Church, and yet neglect to join in the Service it self. There is an
  Instance of this in a Friend of WILL. HONEYCOMB'S, who sits opposite
  to me: He seldom comes in till the Prayers are about half over, and
  when he has enter'd his Seat (instead of joining with the
  Congregation) he devoutly holds his Hat before his Face for three or
  four Moments, then bows to all his Acquaintance, sits down, takes a
  Pinch of Snuff, (if it be Evening Service perhaps a Nap) and spends
  the remaining Time in surveying the Congregation. Now, Sir, what I
  would desire, is, that you will animadvert a little on this
  Gentleman's Practice. In my Opinion, this Gentleman's Devotion,
  Cap-in-Hand, is only a Compliance to the Custom of the Place, and goes
  no further than a little ecclesiastical Good-Breeding. If you will not
  pretend to tell us the Motives that bring such Triflers to solemn
  Assemblies, yet let me desire that you will give this Letter a Place
  in your Paper, and I shall remain,

  SIR,
  Your obliged humble Servant,
  J. S.


  May the 5th.

  Mr. SPECTATOR,

  The Conversation at a Club, of which I am a Member, last Night falling
  upon Vanity and the Desire of being admired, put me in mind of
  relating how agreeably I was entertained at my own Door last Thursday
  by a clean fresh-colour'd Girl, under the most elegant and the best
  furnished Milk-Pail I had ever observed. I was glad of such an
  Opportunity of seeing the Behaviour of a Coquet in low Life, and how
  she received the extraordinary Notice that was taken of her; which I
  found had affected every Muscle of her Face in the same manner as it
  does the Feature of a first-rate Toast at a Play, or in an Assembly.
  This Hint of mine made the Discourse turn upon the Sense of Pleasure;
  which ended in a general Resolution, that the Milk-Maid enjoys her
  Vanity as exquisitely as the Woman of Quality. I think it would not be
  an improper Subject for you to examine this Frailty, and trace it to
  all Conditions of Life; which is recommended to you as an Occasion of
  obliging many of your Readers, among the rest,

  Your most humble Servant,
  T. B.


  SIR,

  Coming last Week into a Coffee-house not far from the Exchange with my
  Basket under my Arm, a Jew of considerable Note, as I am informed,
  takes half a Dozen Oranges of me, and at the same time slides a Guinea
  into my Hand; I made him a Curtsy, and went my Way: He follow'd me,
  and finding I was going about my Business, he came up with me, and
  told me plainly, that he gave me the Guinea with no other Intent but
  to purchase my Person for an Hour. Did you so, Sir? says I: You gave
  it me then to make me be wicked, I'll keep it to make me honest.
  However, not to be in the least ungrateful, I promise you Ill lay it
  out in a couple of Rings, and wear them for your Sake. I am so just,
  Sir, besides, as to give every Body that asks how I came by my Rings
  this Account of my Benefactor; but to save me the Trouble of telling
  my Tale over and over again, I humbly beg the favour of you so to tell
  it once for all, and you will extremely oblige,

  Your humble Servant,
  Betty Lemon.

  May 12,  1712.


  St. Bride's, May 15, 1712.

  SIR,

  'Tis a great deal of Pleasure to me, and I dare say will be no less
  Satisfaction to you, that I have an Opportunity of informing you, that
  the Gentlemen and others of the Parish of St. Bride's, have raised a
  Charity-School of fifty Girls, as before of fifty Boys. You were so
  kind to recommend the Boys to the charitable World, and the other Sex
  hope you will do them the same Favour in Friday's Spectator for Sunday
  next, when they are to appear with their humble Airs at the Parish
  Church of St. Bride's. Sir, the Mention of this may possibly be
  serviceable to the Children; and sure no one will omit a good Action
  attended with no Expence.


  I am, SIR, Your very humble Servant,
  The Sexton.


T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 381.                  Saturday, May 17, 1712.               Addison.


  'Æquam memento rebus in arduis,
  Servare mentem, non secùs in bonis
  Ab insolenti temperatam
  Lætitiâ, moriture Deli.'

  Hor.


I have always preferred Chearfulness to Mirth. The latter, I consider as
an Act, the former as an Habit of the Mind. Mirth is short and
transient. Chearfulness fixed and permanent. Those are often raised into
the greatest Transports of Mirth, who are subject to the greatest
Depressions of Melancholy: On the contrary, Chearfulness, tho' it does
not give the Mind such an exquisite Gladness, prevents us from falling
into any Depths of Sorrow. Mirth is like a Flash of Lightning, that
breaks thro a Gloom of Clouds, and glitters for a Moment; Chearfulness
keeps up a kind of Day-light in the Mind, and fills it with a steady and
perpetual Serenity.

Men of austere Principles look upon Mirth as too wanton and dissolute
for a State of Probation, and as filled with a certain Triumph and
Insolence of Heart, that is inconsistent with a Life which is every
Moment obnoxious to the greatest Dangers. Writers of this Complexion
have observed, that the sacred Person who was the great Pattern of
Perfection was never seen to Laugh.

Chearfulness of Mind is not liable to any of these Exceptions; it is of
a serious and composed Nature, it does not throw the Mind into a
Condition improper for the present State of Humanity, and is very
conspicuous in the Characters of those who are looked upon as the
greatest Philosophers among the Heathens, as well as among those who
have been deservedly esteemed as Saints and Holy Men among Christians.

If we consider Chearfulness in three Lights, with regard to our selves,
to those we converse with, and to the great Author of our Being, it will
not a little recommend it self on each of these Accounts. The Man who is
possessed of this excellent Frame of Mind, is not only easy in his
Thoughts, but a perfect Master of all the Powers and Faculties of his
Soul: His Imagination is always clear, and his Judgment undisturbed: His
Temper is even and unruffled, whether in Action or in Solitude. He comes
with a Relish to all those Goods which Nature has provided for him,
tastes all the Pleasures of the Creation which are poured about him, and
does not feel the full Weight of those accidental Evils which may befal
him.

If we consider him in relation to the Persons whom he converses with, it
naturally produces Love and Good-will towards him. A chearful Mind is
not only disposed to be affable and obliging, but raises the same good
Humour in those who come within its Influence. A Man finds himself
pleased, he does not know why, with the Chearfulness of his Companion:
It is like a sudden Sun-shine that awakens a secret Delight in the Mind,
without her attending to it. The Heart rejoices of its own accord, and
naturally flows out into Friendship and Benevolence towards the Person
who has so kindly an Effect upon it.

When I consider this chearful State of Mind in its third Relation, I
cannot but look upon it as a constant habitual Gratitude to the great
Author of Nature. An inward Chearfulness is an implicit Praise and
Thanksgiving to Providence under all its Dispensations. It is a kind of
Acquiescence in the State wherein we are placed, and a secret
Approbation of the Divine Will in his Conduct towards Man.

There are but two things which, in my Opinion, can reasonably deprive us
of this Chearfulness of Heart. The first of these is the Sense of Guilt.
A Man who lives in a State of Vice and Impenitence, can have no Title to
that Evenness and Tranquillity of Mind which is the Health of the Soul,
and the natural Effect of Virtue and Innocence. Chearfulness in an ill
Man deserves a harder Name than Language can furnish us with, and is
many degrees beyond what we commonly call Folly or Madness.

Atheism, by which I mean a Disbelief of a Supreme Being, and
consequently of a future State, under whatsoever Titles it shelters it
self, may likewise very reasonably deprive a Man of this Chearfulness of
Temper. There is something so particularly gloomy and offensive to human
Nature in the Prospect of Non-Existence, that I cannot but wonder, with
many excellent Writers, how it is possible for a Man to out-live the
Expectation of it. For my own Part, I think the Being of a God is so
little to be doubted, that it is almost the only Truth we are sure of,
and such a Truth as we meet with in every Object, in every Occurrence,
and in every Thought. If we look into the Characters of this Tribe of
Infidels, we generally find they are made up of Pride, Spleen, and
Cavil: It is indeed no wonder, that Men, who are uneasy to themselves,
should be so to the rest of the World; and how is it possible for a Man
to be otherwise than uneasy in himself, who is in danger every Moment of
losing his entire Existence, and dropping into Nothing?

The vicious Man and Atheist have therefore no Pretence to Chearfulness,
and would act very unreasonably, should they endeavour after it. It is
impossible for any one to live in Good-Humour, and enjoy his present
Existence, who is apprehensive either of Torment or of Annihilation; of
being miserable, or of not being at all.

After having mention'd these two great Principles, which are destructive
of Chearfulness in their own Nature, as well as in right Reason, I
cannot think of any other that ought to banish this happy Temper from a
Virtuous Mind. Pain and Sickness, Shame and Reproach, Poverty and old
Age, nay Death it self, considering the Shortness of their Duration, and
the Advantage we may reap from them, do not deserve the Name of Evils. A
good Mind may bear up under them with Fortitude, with Indolence and with
Chearfulness of Heart. The tossing of a Tempest does not discompose him,
which he is sure will bring him to a Joyful Harbour.

A Man, who uses his best endeavours to live according to the Dictates of
Virtue and right Reason, has two perpetual Sources of Chearfulness; in
the Consideration of his own Nature, and of that Being on whom he has a
Dependance. If he looks into himself, he cannot but rejoice in that
Existence, which is so lately bestowed upon him, and which, after
Millions of Ages, will be still new, and still in its Beginning. How
many  Self-Congratulations naturally arise in the Mind, when it reflects
on this its Entrance into Eternity, when it takes a View of those
improveable Faculties, which in a few Years, and even at its first
setting out, have made so considerable a Progress, and which will be
still receiving an Increase of Perfection, and consequently an Increase
of Happiness? The Consciousness of such a Being spreads a perpetual
Diffusion of Joy through the Soul of a virtuous Man, and makes him look
upon himself every Moment as more happy than he knows how to conceive.

The second Source of Chearfulness to a good Mind, is its Consideration
of that Being on whom we have our Dependance, and in whom, though we
behold him as yet but in the first faint Discoveries of his Perfections,
we see every thing that we can imagine as great, glorious, or amiable.
We find our selves every where upheld by his Goodness, and surrounded
with an Immensity of Love and Mercy. In short, we depend upon a Being,
whose Power qualifies him to make us happy by an Infinity of Means,
whose Goodness and Truth engage him to make those happy who desire it of
him, and whose Unchangeableness will secure us in this Happiness to all
Eternity.

Such Considerations, which every one should perpetually cherish in his
Thoughts, will banish, from us all that secret Heaviness of Heart which
unthinking Men are subject to when they lie under no real Affliction,
all that Anguish which we may feel from any Evil that actually oppresses
us, to which I may likewise add those little Cracklings of Mirth and
Folly that are apter to betray Virtue than support it; and establish in
us such an even and chearful Temper, as makes us pleasing to our selves,
to those with whom we converse, and to him whom we were made to please.

I.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 382.                  Monday, May 19, 1712.                 Steele.


  'Habes confitentem reum.'

  Tull.


I ought not to have neglected a Request of one of my Correspondents so
long as I have; but I dare say I have given him time to add Practice to
Profession. He sent me some time ago a Bottle or two of excellent Wine
to drink the Health of a Gentleman, who had by the Penny-Post advertised
him of an egregious Error in his Conduct. My Correspondent received the
Obligation from an unknown Hand with the Candour which is natural to an
ingenuous Mind; and promises a contrary Behaviour in that Point for the
future: He will offend his Monitor with no more Errors of that kind, but
thanks him for his Benevolence. This frank Carriage makes me reflect
upon the amiable Atonement a Man makes in an ingenuous Acknowledgment of
a Fault: All such Miscarriages as flow from Inadvertency are more than
repaid by it; for Reason, though not concerned in the Injury, employs
all its Force in the Atonement. He that says, he did not design to
disoblige you in such an Action, does as much as if he should tell you,
that tho' the Circumstance which displeased was never in his Thoughts,
he has that Respect for you, that he is unsatisfied till it is wholly
out of yours. It must be confessed, that when an Acknowledgment of
Offence is made out of Poorness of Spirit, and not Conviction of Heart,
the Circumstance is quite different: But in the Case of my
Correspondent, where both the Notice is taken and the Return made in
private, the Affair begins and ends with the highest Grace on each Side.
To make the Acknowledgment of a Fault in the highest manner graceful, it
is lucky when the Circumstances of the Offender place him above any ill
Consequences from the Resentment of the Person offended. A Dauphin of
France, upon a Review of the Army, and a Command of the King to alter
the Posture of it by a March of one of the Wings, gave an improper Order
to an Officer at the Head of a Brigade, who told his Highness, he
presumed he had not received the last Orders, which were to move a
contrary Way. The Prince, instead of taking the Admonition which was
delivered in a manner that accounted for his Error with Safety to his
Understanding, shaked a Cane at the Officer; and with the return of
opprobrious Language, persisted in his own Orders. The whole Matter came
necessarily before the King, who commanded his Son, on foot, to lay his
right Hand on the Gentleman's Stirrup as he sat on Horseback in sight of
the whole Army, and ask his Pardon. When the Prince touched his Stirrup,
and was going to speak, the Officer with an incredible Agility, threw
himself on the Earth, and kissed his Feet.

The Body is very little concerned in the Pleasures or Sufferings of
Souls truly great; and the Reparation, when an Honour was designed this
Soldier, appeared as much too great to be borne by his Gratitude, as the
Injury was intolerable to his Resentment.

When we turn our Thoughts from these extraordinary Occurrences in common
Life, we see an ingenuous kind of Behaviour not only make up for Faults
committed, but in a manner expiate them in the very Commission. Thus
many things wherein a Man has pressed too far, he implicitly excuses, by
owning, This is a Trespass; youll pardon my Confidence; I am sensible I
have no Pretension to this Favour, and the like. But commend me to those
gay Fellows about Town who are directly impudent, and make up for it no
otherwise than by calling themselves such, and exulting in it. But this
sort of Carriage, which prompts a Man against Rules to urge what he has
a Mind to, is pardonable only when you sue for another. When you are
confident in preference of your self to others of equal Merit, every Man
that loves Virtue and Modesty ought, in Defence of those Qualities, to
oppose you: But, without considering the Morality of the thing, let us
at this time behold only the natural Consequence of Candour when we
speak of ourselves.

The SPECTATOR writes often in an Elegant, often in an Argumentative, and
often in a Sublime Style, with equal Success; but how would it hurt the
reputed Author of that Paper to own, that of the most beautiful Pieces
under his Title, he is barely the Publisher? There is nothing but what a
Man really performs, can be an Honour to him; what he takes more than he
ought in the Eye of the World, he loses in the Conviction of his own
Heart; and a Man must lose his Consciousness, that is, his very Self,
before he can rejoice in any Falshood without inward Mortification.

Who has not seen a very Criminal at the Bar, when his Counsel and
Friends have done all that they could for him in vain, prevail upon the
whole Assembly to pity him, and his Judge to recommend his Case to the
Mercy of the Throne, without offering any thing new in his Defence, but
that he, whom before we wished convicted, became so out of his own
Mouth, and took upon himself all the Shame and Sorrow we were just
before preparing for him? The great Opposition to this kind of Candour,
arises from the unjust Idea People ordinarily have of what we call an
high Spirit. It is far from Greatness of Spirit to persist in the Wrong
in any thing, nor is it a Diminution of Greatness of Spirit to have been
in the Wrong: Perfection is not the Attribute of Man, therefore he is
not degraded by the Acknowledgment of an Imperfection: But it is the
Work of little Minds to imitate the Fortitude of great Spirits on worthy
Occasions, by Obstinacy in the Wrong. This Obstinacy prevails so far
upon them, that they make it extend to the Defence of Faults in their
very Servants. It would swell this Paper to too great a length, should I
insert all the Quarrels and Debates which are now on foot in this Town;
where one Party, and in some Cases both, is sensible of being on the
faulty Side, and have not Spirit enough to Acknowledge it. Among the
Ladies the Case is very common, for there are very few of them who know
that it is to maintain a true and high Spirit, to throw away from it all
which it self disapproves, and to scorn so pitiful a Shame, as that
which disables the Heart from acquiring a Liberality of Affections and
Sentiments. The candid Mind, by acknowledging and discarding its Faults,
has Reason and Truth for the Foundation of all its Passions and Desires,
and consequently is happy and simple; the disingenuous Spirit, by
Indulgence of one unacknowledged Error, is intangled with an After-Life
of Guilt, Sorrow, and Perplexity.

T.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 383.                  Tuesday, May 20, 1712.                Addison.


  'Criminibus debent Hortos--'

  Hor.


As I was sitting in my Chamber, and thinking on a Subject for my next
Spectator, I heard two or three irregular Bounces at my Landlady's Door,
and upon the opening of it, a loud chearful Voice enquiring whether the
Philosopher was at Home. The Child who went to the Door answered very
Innocently, that he did not Lodge there. I immediately recollected that
it was my good Friend Sir ROGER'S Voice; and that I had promised to go
with him on the Water to Spring-Garden, in case it proved a good
Evening. The Knight put me in mind of my Promise from the Bottom of the
Stair-Case, but told me that if I was Speculating he would stay below
till I had done. Upon my coming down, I found all the Children of the
Family got about my old Friend, and my Landlady herself, who is a
notable prating Gossip, engaged in a Conference with him; being mightily
pleased with his stroaking her little Boy upon the Head, and bidding him
be a good Child and mind his Book.

We were no sooner come to the Temple Stairs, but we were surrounded with
a Crowd of Watermen, offering us their respective Services. Sir ROGER,
after having looked about him very attentively, spied one with a
Wooden-Leg, and immediately gave him Orders to get his Boat ready. As we
were walking towards it, You must know, says Sir ROGER, I never make use
of any body to row me, that has not either lost a Leg or an Arm. I would
rather bate him a few Strokes of his Oar, than not employ an honest Man
that has been wounded in the Queen's Service. If I was a Lord or a
Bishop, and kept a Barge, I would not put a Fellow in my Livery that had
not a Wooden-Leg.

My old Friend, after having seated himself, and trimmed the Boat with
his Coachman, who, being a very sober Man, always serves for Ballast on
these Occasions, we made the best of our way for Fox-Hall. Sir ROGER
obliged the Waterman to give us the History of his Right Leg, and
hearing that he had left it [at La Hogue [1]] with many Particulars
which passed in that glorious Action, the Knight in the Triumph of his
Heart made several Reflections on the Greatness of the British Nation;
as, that one Englishman could beat three Frenchmen; that we could never
be in danger of Popery so long as we took care of our Fleet; that the
Thames was the noblest River in Europe; that London Bridge was a greater
piece of Work, than any of the seven Wonders of the World; with many
other honest Prejudices which naturally cleave to the Heart of a true
Englishman.

After some short Pause, the old Knight turning about his Head twice or
thrice, to take a Survey of this great Metropolis, bid me observe how
thick the City was set with Churches, and that there was scarce a single
Steeple on this side Temple-Bar. A most Heathenish Sight! says Sir
ROGER: There is no Religion at this End of the Town. The fifty new
Churches will very much mend the Prospect; but Church-work is slow,
Church-work is slow!

I do not remember I have any where mentioned, in Sir ROGER'S Character,
his Custom of saluting every Body that passes by him with a Good-morrow
or a Good-night. This the old Man does out of the overflowings of his
Humanity, though at the same time it renders him so popular among all
his Country Neighbours, that it is thought to have gone a good way in
making him once or twice Knight of the Shire. He cannot forbear this
Exercise of Benevolence even in Town, when he meets with any one in his
Morning or Evening Walk. It broke from him to several Boats that passed
by us upon the Water; but to the Knight's great Surprize, as he gave the
Good-night to two or three young Fellows a little before our Landing,
one of them, instead of returning the Civility, asked us what queer old
Put we had in the Boat, and whether he was not ashamed to go a Wenching
at his Years? with a great deal of the like Thames-Ribaldry. Sir ROGER
seemd a little shocked at first, but at length assuming a Face of
Magistracy, told us, That if he were a Middlesex Justice, he would make
such Vagrants know that Her Majesty's Subjects were no more to be abused
by Water than by Land.

We were now arrived at Spring-Garden, which is exquisitely pleasant at
this time of Year. When I considered the Fragrancy of the Walks and
Bowers, with the Choirs of Birds that sung upon the Trees, and the loose
Tribe of People that walked under their Shades, I could not but look
upon the Place as a kind of Mahometan Paradise. Sir ROGER told me it put
him in mind of a little Coppice by his House in the Country, which his
Chaplain used to call an Aviary of Nightingales. You must understand,
says the Knight, there is nothing in the World that pleases a Man in
Love so much as your Nightingale. Ah, Mr. SPECTATOR! the many Moon-light
Nights that I have walked by my self, and thought on the Widow by the
Musek of the Nightingales! He here fetched a deep Sigh, and was falling
into a Fit of musing, when a Masque, who came behind him, gave him a
gentle Tap upon the Shoulder, and asked him if he would drink a Bottle
of Mead with her? But the Knight, being startled at so unexpected a
Familiarity, and displeased to be interrupted in his Thoughts of the
Widow, told her, She was a wanton Baggage, and bid her go about her
Business.

We concluded our Walk with a Glass of Burton-Ale, and a Slice of
Hung-Beef. When we had done eating our selves, the Knight called a
Waiter to him, and bid him carry the remainder to the Waterman that had
but one Leg. I perceived the Fellow stared upon him at the oddness of
the Message, and was going to be saucy; upon which I ratified the
Knight's Commands with a Peremptory Look.

As we were going out of the Garden, my old Friend, thinking himself
obliged, as a Member of the Quorum, to animadvert upon the Morals of the
Place, told the Mistress of the House, who sat at the Bar, That he
should be a better Customer to her Garden, if there were more
Nightingales, and fewer Strumpets.


[Footnote 1: [in Bantry Bay] In Bantry Bay, on May-day, 1689, a French
Fleet, bringing succour to the adherents of James II., attacked the
English, under Admiral Herbert, and obliged them to retire. The change
of name in the text was for one with a more flattering association. In
the Battle of La Hogue, May 19, 1692, the English burnt 13 of the
enemy's ships, destroyed 8, dispersed the rest, and prevented a
threatened descent of the French upon England.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 384.                Wednesday, May 21, 1712.                 Steele.


  Hague, May 24. N. S.

  The same Republican Hands, who have so often since the Chevalier de
  St. George's Recovery killed him in our publick Prints, have now
  reduced the young Dauphin of France to that desperate Condition of
  Weakness, and Death it self, that it is hard to conjecture what Method
  they will take to bring him to Life again. Mean time we are assured by
  a very good Hand from Paris, That on the 2Oth Instant, this young
  Prince was as well as ever he was known to be since the Day of his
  Birth. As for the other, they are now sending his Ghost, we suppose,
  (for they never had the Modesty to contradict their Assertions of his
  Death) to Commerci in Lorrain, attended only by four Gentlemen, and a
  few Domesticks of little Consideration. The Baron de Bothmar having
  delivered in his Credentials to qualify him as an Ambassador to this
  State, (an Office to which his greatest Enemies will acknowledge him
  to be equal) is gone to Utrecht, whence he will proceed to Hanover,
  but not stay long at that Court, for fear the Peace should be made
  during his lamented Absence.

  Post-Boy, May 20.


I should be thought not able to read, should I overlook some
excellent Pieces lately come out. My Lord Bishop of St.
Asaph has just now published some Sermons, the Preface to which
seems to me to determine a great Point. [1]--He has, like a good
Man and a good Christian, in opposition to all the Flattery and
base Submission of false Friends to Princes, asserted, That
Christianity left us where it found us as to our Civil Rights.
The present Entertainment shall consist only of a Sentence out of
the Post-Boy, and the said Preface of the Lord of St. Asaph. I
should think it a little odd if the Author of the Post-Boy should
with Impunity call Men Republicans for a Gladness on Report of
the Death of the Pretender; and treat Baron Bothmar, the
Minister of Hanover, in such a manner as you see in my Motto.
I must own, I think every Man in England concerned to support
the Succession of that Family.

  The publishing a few Sermons, whilst I live, the latest of which was
  preached about eight Years since, and the first above seventeen, will
  make it very natural for People to enquire into the Occasion of doing
  so; And to such I do very willingly assign these following Reasons.

  First, From the Observations I have been able to make, for these many
  Years last past, upon our publick Affairs, and from the natural
  Tendency of several Principles and Practices, that have of late been
  studiously revived, and from what has followed thereupon, I could not
  help both fearing and presaging, that these Nations would some time or
  other, if ever we should have an enterprising Prince upon the Throne,
  of more Ambition than Virtue, Justice, and true Honour, fall into the
  way of all other Nations, and lose their Liberty.

  Nor could I help foreseeing to whose Charge a great deal of this
  dreadful Mischief, whenever it should happen, would be laid, whether
  justly or unjustly, was not my Business to determine; but I resolved
  for my own particular part, to deliver my self, as well as I could,
  from the Reproaches and the Curses of Posterity, by publickly
  declaring to all the World, That although in the constant Course of my
  Ministry, I have never failed, on proper Occasions, to recommend,
  urge, and insist upon the loving, honouring, and the reverencing the
  Prince's Person, and holding it, according to the Laws, inviolable and
  sacred; and paying all Obedience and Submission to the Laws, though
  never so hard and inconvenient to private People: Yet did I never
  think my self at liberty, or authorized to tell the People, that
  either Christ, St. Peter, or St. Paul, or any other Holy Writer, had
  by any Doctrine delivered by them, subverted the Laws and
  Constitutions of the Country in which they lived, or put them in a
  worse Condition, with respect to their Civil Liberties, than they
  would have been had they not been Christians. I ever thought it a most
  impious Blasphemy against that holy Religion, to father any thing upon
  it that might encourage Tyranny, Oppression, or Injustice in a Prince,
  or that easily tended to make a free and happy People Slaves and
  Miserable. No: People may make themselves as wretched as they will,
  but let not God be called into that wicked Party. When Force and
  Violence, and hard Necessity have brought the Yoak of Servitude upon a
  People's Neck, Religion will supply them with a patient and submissive
  Spirit under it till they can innocently shake it off; but certainly
  Religion never puts it on. This always was, and this at present is, my
  Judgment of these Matters: And I would be transmitted to Posterity
  (for the little Share of Time such Names as mine can live) under the
  Character of one who lov'd his Country, and would be thought a good
  Englishman, as well as a good Clergyman.

  This Character I thought would be transmitted by the following
  Sermons, which were made for, and preached in a private Audience, when
  I could think of nothing else but doing my Duty on the Occasions that
  were then offered by God's Providence, without any manner of design of
  making them publick: And for that reason I give them now as they were
  then delivered; by which I hope to satisfie those People who have
  objected a Change of Principles to me, as if I were not now the same
  Man I formerly was. I never had but one Opinion of these Matters; and
  that I think is so reasonable and well-grounded, that I believe I
  never can have any other. Another Reason of my publishing these
  Sermons at this time, is, that I have a mind to do my self some
  Honour, by doing what Honour I could to the Memory of two most
  excellent Princes, and who have very highly deserved at the hands of
  all the People of these Dominions, who have any true Value for the
  Protestant Religion, and the Constitution of the English Government,
  of which they were the great Deliverers and Defenders. I have lived to
  see their illustrious Names very rudely handled, and the great
  Benefits they did this Nation treated slightly and contemptuously. I
  have lived to see our Deliverance from Arbitrary Power and Popery,
  traduced and vilified by some who formerly thought it was their
  greatest Merit, and made it part of their Boast and Glory, to have had
  a little hand and share in bringing it about; and others who, without
  it, must have liv'd in Exile, Poverty, and Misery, meanly disclaiming
  it, and using ill the glorious Instruments thereof. Who could expect
  such a Requital of such Merit? I have, I own it, an Ambition of
  exempting my self from the Number of unthankful People: And as I loved
  and honoured those great Princes living, and lamented over them when
  dead, so I would gladly raise them up a Monument of Praise as lasting
  as any thing of mine can be; and I chuse to do it at this time, when
  it is so unfashionable a thing to speak honourably of them.

  The Sermon that was preached upon the Duke of Gloucester's Death was
  printed quickly after, and is now, because the Subject was so
  suitable, join'd to the others. The Loss of that most promising and
  hopeful Prince was, at that time, I saw, unspeakably great; and many
  Accidents since have convinced us, that it could not have been
  over-valued. That precious Life, had it pleased God to have prolonged
  it the usual Space, had saved us many Fears and Jealousies, and dark
  Distrusts, and prevented many Alarms, that have long kept us, and will
  keep us still, waking and uneasy. Nothing remained to comfort and
  support us under this heavy Stroke, but the Necessity it brought the
  King and Nation under, of settling the Succession in the House of
  HANNOVER, and giving it an Hereditary Right, by Act of Parliament, as
  long as it continues Protestant. So much good did God, in his merciful
  Providence, produce from a Misfortune, which we could never otherwise
  have sufficiently deplored.

  The fourth Sermon was preached upon the Queen's Accession to the
  Throne, and the first Year in which that Day was solemnly observed,
  (for, by some Accident or other, it had been overlook'd the Year
  before;) and every one will see, without the date of it, that it was
  preached very early in this Reign, since I was able only to promise
  and presage its future Glories and Successes, from the good
  Appearances of things, and the happy Turn our Affairs began to take;
  and could not then count up the Victories and Triumphs that, for seven
  Years after, made it, in the Prophet's Language, a Name and a Praise
  among all the People of the Earth. Never did seven such Years together
  pass over the head of any English Monarch, nor cover it with so much
  Honour: The Crown and Sceptre seemed to be the Queen's least
  Ornaments; those, other Princes wore in common with her, and her great
  personal Virtues were the same before and since; but such was the Fame
  of her Administration of Affairs at home, such was the Reputation of
  her Wisdom and Felicity in chusing Ministers, and such was then
  esteemed their Faithfulness and Zeal, their Diligence and great
  Abilities in executing her Commands; to such a height of military
  Glory did her great General and her Armies carry the British Name
  abroad; such was the Harmony and Concord betwixt her and her Allies,
  and such was the Blessing of God upon all her Counsels and
  Undertakings, that I am as sure as History can make me, no Prince of
  ours was ever yet so prosperous and successful, so beloved, esteemed,
  and honoured by their Subjects and their Friends, nor near so
  formidable to their Enemies. We were, as all the World imagined then,
  just ent'ring on the ways that promised to lead to such a Peace, as
  would have answered all the Prayers of our religious Queen, the Care
  and Vigilance of a most able Ministry, the Payments of a willing and
  obedient People, as well as all the glorious Toils and Hazards of the
  Soldiery; when God, for our Sins, permitted the Spirit of Discord to
  go forth, and, by troubling sore the Camp, the City, and the Country,
  (and oh that it had altogether spared the Places sacred to his
  Worship!) to spoil, for a time, this beautiful and pleasing Prospect,
  and give us, in its stead, I know not what--Our Enemies will tell
  the rest with Pleasure. It will become me better to pray to God to
  restore us to the Power of obtaining such a Peace, as will be to his
  Glory, the Safety, Honour, and the Welfare of the Queen and her
  Dominions, and the general Satisfaction of all her High and Mighty
  Allies.

  May 2, 1712.

  T.


[Footnote 1: Dr. William Fleetwood, Bishop of St. Asaph, had published
Four Sermons.

1. On the death of Queen Mary, 1694.
2. On the death of the Duke of Gloucester, 1700.
3. On the death of King William, 1701.
4. On the Queen's Accession to the Throne, in 1702, with a Preface.
8vo. London, 1712.

The Preface which, says Dr. Johnson, overflowed with Whiggish
principles, was ordered to be burnt by the House of Commons. This moved
Steele to diffuse it by inserting it in the Spectator, which, as its
author said in a letter to Burnet, conveyed about fourteen thousand
copies of the condemned preface into people's hands that would otherwise
have never seen or heard of it. Moreover, to ensure its delivery into
the Queen's hands the publication of this number is said to have been
deferred till twelve oclock, her Majesty's breakfast hour, that no time
might be allowed for a decision that it should not be laid, as usual,
upon her breakfast table.

Fleetwood was born in 1656; had been chaplain to King William, and in
1706 had been appointed to the Bishopric of St. Asaph without any
solicitation. He was translated to Ely in 1714, and died in 1723.]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 385.                Thursday, May 22, 1712.                Budgell.


  'Theseâ pectora juncta fide.'

  Ovid.


I intend the Paper for this Day as a loose Essay upon Friendship, in
which I shall throw my Observations together without any set Form, that
I may avoid repeating what has been often said on this Subject.

Friendship is a strong and habitual Inclination in two Persons to
promote the Good and Happiness of one another. Tho' the Pleasures and
Advantages of Friendship have been largely celebrated by the best moral
Writers, and are considered by all as great Ingredients of human
Happiness, we very rarely meet with the Practice of this Virtue in the
World.

Every Man is ready to give in a long Catalogue of those Virtues and good
Qualities he expects to find in the Person of a Friend, but very few of
us are careful to cultivate them in our selves.

Love and Esteem are the first Principles of Friendship, which always is
imperfect where either of these two is wanting.

As, on the one hand, we are soon ashamed of loving a Man whom we cannot
esteem: so, on the other, tho we are truly sensible of a Man's
Abilities, we can never raise ourselves to the Warmths of Friendship,
without an affectionate Good-will towards his Person.

Friendship immediately banishes Envy under all its Disguises. A Man who
can once doubt whether he should rejoice in his Friends being happier
than himself, may depend upon it that he is an utter Stranger to this
Virtue.

There is something in Friendship so very great and noble, that in those
fictitious Stories which are invented to the Honour of any particular
Person, the Authors have thought it as necessary to make their Hero a
Friend as a Lover. Achilles has his Patroclus, and Æneas his Achates. In
the first of these Instances we may observe, for the Reputation of the
Subject I am treating of, that Greece was almost ruin'd by the Hero's
Love, but was preserved by his Friendship.

The Character of Achates suggests to us an Observation we may often make
on the Intimacies of great Men, who frequently chuse their Companions
rather for the Qualities of the Heart than those of the Head, and prefer
Fidelity in an easy inoffensive complying Temper to those Endowments
which make a much greater Figure among Mankind. I do not remember that
Achates, who is represented as the first Favourite, either gives his
Advice, or strikes a Blow, thro' the whole Æneid.

A Friendship which makes the least noise, is very often most useful: for
which reason I should prefer a prudent Friend to a zealous one.

Atticus, one of the best Men of ancient Rome, was a very remarkable
Instance of what I am here speaking. This extraordinary Person, amidst
the Civil Wars of his Country, when he saw the Designs of all Parties
equally tended to the Subversion of Liberty, by constantly preserving
the Esteem and Affection of both the Competitors, found means to serve
his Friends on either side: and while he sent Money to young Marius,
whose Father was declared an Enemy of the Commonwealth, he was himself
one of Sylla's chief Favourites, and always near that General.

During the War between Cæsar and Pompey, he still maintained the same
Conduct. After the Death of Cæsar he sent Money to Brutus in his
Troubles, and did a thousand good Offices to Antony's Wife and Friends
when that Party seemed ruined. Lastly, even in that bloody War between
Antony and Augustus, Atticus still kept his place in both their
Friendships; insomuch that the first, says Cornelius Nepos, whenever he
was absent from Rome in any part of the Empire, writ punctually to him
what he was doing, what he read, and whither he intended to go; and the
latter gave him constantly an exact Account of all his Affairs.

A Likeness of Inclinations in every Particular is so far from being
requisite to form a Benevolence in two Minds towards each other, as it
is generally imagined, that I believe we shall find some of the firmest
Friendships to have been contracted between Persons of different
Humours; the Mind being often pleased with those Perfections which are
new to it, and which it does not find among its own Accomplishments.
Besides that a Man in some measure supplies his own Defects, and fancies
himself at second hand possessed of those good Qualities and Endowments,
which are in the possession of him who in the Eye of the World is looked
on as his other self.

The most difficult Province in Friendship is the letting a Man see his
Faults and Errors, which should, if possible, be so contrived, that he
may perceive our Advice is given him not so much to please ourselves as
for his own Advantage. The Reproaches therefore of a Friend should
always be strictly just, and not too frequent.

The violent Desire of pleasing in the Person reproved, may otherwise
change into a Despair of doing it, while he finds himself censur'd for
Faults he is not Conscious of. A Mind that is softened and humanized by
Friendship, cannot bear frequent Reproaches; either it must quite sink
under the Oppression, or abate considerably of the Value and Esteem it
had for him who bestows them.

The proper Business of Friendship is to inspire Life and Courage; and a
Soul thus supported, outdoes itself: whereas if it be unexpectedly
deprived of these Succours, it droops and languishes.

We are in some measure more inexcusable if we violate our Duties to a
Friend, than to a Relation: since the former arise from a voluntary
Choice, the latter from a Necessity to which we could not give our own
Consent.

As it has been said on one side, that a Man ought not to break with a
faulty Friend, that he may not expose the Weakness of his Choice; it
will doubtless hold much stronger with respect to a worthy one, that he
may never be upbraided for having lost so valuable a Treasure which was
once in his Possession.

X.


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 386.                 Friday, May 23, 1712.                  Steele.


  'Cum Tristibus severe, cum Remissis jucunde, cum Senibus graviter, cum
  Juventute comiter vivere.'

  Tull.


The piece of Latin on the Head of this Paper is part of a Character
extremely vicious, but I have set down no more than may fall in with the
Rules of Justice and Honour. Cicero spoke it of Catiline, who, he said,
lived with the Sad severely, with the Chearful agreeably, with the Old
gravely, with the Young pleasantly; he added, with the Wicked boldly,
with the Wanton lasciviously. The two last Instances of his Complaisance
I forbear to consider, having it in my thoughts at present only to speak
of obsequious Behaviour as it sits upon a Companion in Pleasure, not a
Man of Design and Intrigue. To vary with every Humour in this Manner,
cannot be agreeable, except it comes from a Man's own Temper and natural
Complection; to do it out of an Ambition to excel that Way, is the most
fruitless and unbecoming Prostitution imaginable. To put on an artful
Part to obtain no other End but an unjust Praise from the Undiscerning,
is of all Endeavours the most despicable. A Man must be sincerely
pleased to become Pleasure, or not to interrupt that of others: For this
Reason it is a most calamitous Circumstance, that many People who want
to be alone or should be so, will come into Conversation. It is certain,
that all Men who are the least given to Reflection, are seized with an
Inclination that Way; when, perhaps, they had rather be inclined to
Company: but indeed they had better go home, and be tired with
themselves, than force themselves upon others to recover their good
Humour. In all this the Cases of communicating to a Friend a sad Thought
or Difficulty, in order to relieve [a [1]] heavy Heart, stands excepted;
but what is here meant, is, that a Man should always go with Inclination
to the Turn of the Company he is going into, or not pretend to be of the
Party. It is certainly a very happy Temper to be able to live with all
kinds of Dispositions, because it argues a Mind that lies open to
receive what is pleasing to others, and not obstinately bent on any
Particularity of its own.

This is that which makes me pleased with the Character of my good
Acquaintance Acasto. You meet him at the Tables and Conversations of the
Wise, the Impertinent, the Grave, the Frolick, and the Witty; and yet
his own Character has nothing in it that can make him particularly
agreeable to any one Sect of Men; but Acasto has natural good Sense,
good Nature and Discretion, so that every Man enjoys himself in his
company; and tho' Acasto contributes nothing to the Entertainment, he
never was at a Place where he was not welcome a second time. Without
these subordinate good Qualities of Acasto, a Man of Wit and Learning
would be painful to the Generality of Mankind, instead of being
pleasing. Witty Men are apt to imagine they are agreeable as such, and
by that means grow the worst Companions imaginable; they deride the
Absent or rally the Present in a wrong manner, not knowing that if you
pinch or tickle a Man till he is uneasy in his Seat, or ungracefully
distinguished from the rest of the Company, you equally hurt him.

I was going to say, the true Art of being agreeable in Company, (but
there can be no such thing as Art in it) is to appear well pleased with
those you are engaged with, and rather to seem well entertained, than to
bring Entertainment to others. A Man thus disposed is not indeed what we
ordinarily call a good Companion, but essentially is such, and in all
the Parts of his Conversation has something friendly in his Behaviour,
which conciliates Men's Minds more than the highest Sallies of Wit or
Starts of Humour can possibly do. The Feebleness of Age in a Man of this
Turn, has something which should be treated with respect even in a Man
no otherwise venerable. The Forwardness of Youth, when it proceeds from
Alacrity and not Insolence, has also its Allowances. The Companion who
is formed for such by Nature, gives to every Character of Life its due
Regards, and is ready to account for their Imperfections, and receive
their Accomplishments as if they were his own. It must appear that you
receive Law from, and not give it to your Company, to make you
agreeable.

I remember Tully, speaking, I think, of Anthony, says, That in eo
facetiæ erant, quæ nulla arte tradi possunt: He had a witty Mirth, which
could be acquired by no Art. This Quality must be of the Kind of which I
am now speaking; for all sorts of Behaviour which depend upon
Observation and Knowledge of Life, is to be acquired: but that which no
one can describe, and is apparently the Act of Nature, must be every
where prevalent, because every thing it meets is a fit Occasion to exert
it; for he who follows Nature, can never be improper or unseasonable.

How unaccountable then must their Behaviour be, who, without any manner
of Consideration of what the Company they have just now entered are
upon, give themselves the Air of a Messenger, and make as distinct
Relations of the Occurrences they last met with, as if they had been
dispatched from those they talk to, to be punctually exact in a Report
of those Circumstances: It is unpardonable to those who are met to enjoy
one another, that a fresh Man shall pop in, and give us only the last
part of his own Life, and put a stop to ours during the History. If such
a Man comes from Change, whether you will or not, you must hear how the
Stocks go; and tho' you are ever so intently employed on a graver
Subject, a young Fellow of the other end of the Town will take his
place, and tell you, Mrs. Such-a-one is charmingly handsome, because he
just now saw her. But I think I need not dwell on this Subject, since I
have acknowledged there can be no Rules made for excelling this Way; and
Precepts of this kind fare like Rules for writing Poetry, which, 'tis
said, may have prevented ill Poets, but never made good ones.

T.


[Footnote 1: [an]]


       *       *       *       *       *


No. 387. [1]             Saturday, May 24, 1712.               Addison.


  'Quid purè tranquillet--'

  Hor.


In my last Saturday's Paper I spoke of Chearfulness as it is a Moral
Habit of the Mind, and accordingly mentioned such moral Motives as are
apt to cherish and keep alive this happy Temper in the Soul of Man: I
shall now consider Chearfulness in its natural State, and reflect on
those Motives to it, which are indifferent either as to Virtue or Vice.

