been arrayed in a light-blue, or light-green, or in a transparent
white bonnet, with blue or pink flowers on the inside--how different,
and how much more agreeable, would have been the impression on the
spectator! How frequently, again, do we see the dimensions of a tall
and _embonpoint_ figure magnified to almost Brobdignagian proportions
by a white dress, or a small woman reduced to Lilliputian size by a
black dress! Now, as the optical effect of white is to enlarge
objects, and that of black to diminish them, if the large woman had
been dressed in black, and the small woman in white, the apparent size
of each would have approached the ordinary stature, and the former
would not have appeared a giantess, or the latter a dwarf.--_Mrs
Merrifield in Art-Journal._


SITTING ON THE SHORE.


      The tide has ebbed away;
    No more wild surgings 'gainst the adamant rocks,
    No swayings of the sea-weed false that mocks
      The hues of gardens gay:
      No laugh of little wavelets at their play;
    No lucid pools reflecting heaven's broad brow--
    Both storm and calm alike are ended now.

      The bare gray rocks sit lone;
    The shifting sand lies spread so smooth and dry
    That not a wave might ever have swept by
      To vex it with loud moan;
      Only some weedy fragments blackening thrown
    To rot beneath the sky, tell what has been,
    But Desolation's self is grown serene.

      Afar the mountains rise,
    And the broad estuary widens out,
    All sunshine; wheeling round and round about
      Seaward, a white bird flies;
      A bird? Nay, seems it rather in these eyes
    An angel; o'er Eternity's dim sea,
    Beckoning--'Come thou where all we glad souls be.'

      O life! O silent shore
    Where we sit patient! O great Sea beyond,
    To which we look with solemn hope and fond,
      But sorrowful no more!--
      Would we were disembodied souls, to soar,
    And like white sea-birds wing the Infinite Deep!--
    Till then, Thou, Just One, wilt our spirits keep.


THE PALO DE VACA, OR COW-TREE OF BRAZIL.


This is one of the most remarkable trees in the forests of Brazil.
During several months in the year when no rain falls, and its branches
are dead and dried up, if the trunk be tapped, a sweet and nutritious
milk exudes. The flow is most abundant at sunrise. Then, the natives
receive the milk into large vessels, which soon grows yellow and
thickens on the surface. Some drink plentifully of it under the tree,
others take it home to their children. One might imagine he saw a
shepherd distributing the milk of his flock. It is used in tea and
coffee in place of common milk. The cow-tree is one of the largest in
the Brazilian forests, and is used in ship-building.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Just Published, Price 6d. Paper Cover,_

CHAMBERS'S POCKET MISCELLANY: forming a LITERARY COMPANION for the
RAILWAY, the FIRESIDE, or the BUSH.

VOLUME III.

To be continued in Monthly Volumes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed and Published by W. and R. CHAMBERS, High Street, Edinburgh.
Also sold by W.S. ORR, Amen Corner, London; D.N. CHAMBERS, 55 West
Nile Street, Glasgow; and J. M'GLASHAN, 50 Upper Sackville Street,
Dublin.--Advertisements for Monthly Parts are requested to be sent to
MAXWELL & CO., 31 Nicholas Lane, Lombard Street, London, to whom all
applications respecting their insertion must be made.