It wasn't that the House was disturbed about. The particular incident
arose a quarter of an hour before midnight, when CRANBORNE suddenly
got up and moved Adjournment of Debate. J.A. had bowled him and others
over in the earlier part of the Sitting; but there was a second night,
and the HOPE of HATFIELD determined he would collar that. Had the
Motion for Adjournment been accepted, he would, in accordance with
usage, have opened the ball when the House met again once more, fresh,
and in the mood to listen. But JOKIM objected to losing the quarter of
an hour.

"We can," he said, pleasantly, "bear another speech."

All right; CRANBORNE only a private Member, and modest withal; not the
person to argue with his pastors and masters. So resumed his seat. If
they wanted to use up the time, let some one else speak through the
quarter of an hour. Had things been so left, the listening Senate and
the waiting world would never have heard CRANBORNE in this Debate. As
the SPEAKER gently pointed out to him, having moved the Amendment he
had exhausted his privilege of speaking. He might sustain his thesis
at any length, or, being on his legs, might continue the Debate
without insisting on his Motion for the Adjournment. But he must speak
now, or for ever hold his tongue as far as the Debate was concerned.
This was awkward; but no help for it; so CRANBORNE plunged in and
talked up to midnight, when the Debate stood adjourned.

_Business done_.--Second Reading of Education Bill moved.

_Tuesday_.--Another night with Education Bill. Position rather
peculiar; everyone, or nearly everyone, in state of frantic adulation
of the measure; and yet everyone passing the cradle in which the
infant slumbers gives it a sly pinch. Here and there a Ministerialist
gets up and honestly denounces a Bill embodying principle which
Conservatives been led for generations to denounce. BARTLEY last night
made capital speech in this sense. To-night LAWRENCE bluntly declares
his regret that good Tories should be asked to support principles
which they, under their present Leaders, violently opposed at General
Election of 1885. ADDISON blandly and persuasively attempts to stem
this growing torrent of discontent. "The change of opinion on this
side of the House," he said, hitching on one side an imaginary wig,
clutching at an imperceptible gown, and turning over the pages of an
impalpable brief, "is owing to the fact that circumstances and times
have altered. It is the duty of statesmen,"--and here ADDISON,
like another Fat Boy known to history, wisibly swelled,--"to adapt
themselves to the necessities of the case."

JENNINGS, speaking from the Bench immediately behind ADDISON, had
no patience with this kind of argument. "Six years I've sat in this
House, Mr. SPEAKER," he said, "and during that time have seen measures
which we Conservatives have been encouraged, almost instructed, to
denounce, cordially received by our Leaders and passed into law. For
my part, I cannot flourish on this diet of broken pledges. One might
eat of it now and then, but when continually invited to the same dish,
it becomes a little monotonous."

OLD MORALITY happily out of the way of hearing all this. Gone off,
and wisely left no address. People walking along Downing Street, find
written over the door at the Treasury, "Back in Ten Minutes." That's
all; neither date nor hour specified. Ten minutes roll on, and OLD
MORALITY comes not. But he sometimes communicates with his most
intimate friends. Have this morning a note from him.

"I send these few lines," he writes, "hoping they will find you well
as they leave me at present. Talking about lines, mine have fallen in
pleasanter places than yours, or JOKIM'S chance to be just now. Some
people are inclined to deny me the faculty of humour. But I think the
merry-go-rounder of leaving JOKIM in charge of the Free Education Bill
is pretty well for a beginner. Everything must have a commencement.
Now I've started I may in time become a regular JOSEPH MILLER. Excuse
my not mentioning my present address, and be sure that wherever I am,
I am animated solely by desire to do my duty to Queen and Country,
and to meet the convenience of Hon. Gentlemen in whatever part of the
House they may sit. If you want to write to me, address 'Mr. SMITH,
England.' I have reason to believe that so perfect is the machinery of
the Post Office under the direction of my Right Hon. friend, that the
missive thus directed will not fail to reach its destination."

_Business done_.--On Second Reading of Education Bill.

_Thursday_.--An old acquaintance looked in at Lobby to-night. When
he was here, we used to call him LONG LAWRENCE. Now he is one of Her
MAJESTY'S Judges, and we must behave to him as such.

"How're you getting on here, TOBY?" he said, just as friendly as if he
were still at the Bar.

"As your Ludship pleases," I replied, too old a Parliamentary Hand to
be inveigled into familiarity by his unassuming manner.

Fact is, as, on his further entreaty, I proceeded to explain to the
learned Judge, we are getting on very well indeed. Truce been called
in party conflict, and is strictly observed. Mr. G. is absent on sick
leave--not keeping out of the way of Education Bill, as some will have
it. OLD MORALITY back to-night; came down in a penny 'bus, in final
effort to elude discovery of his place of recent retreat. PARNELL also
absent; news comes to-night that his business is matrimonial; graphic
accounts current of his expedition "in a one-horse vehicle" from
Brighton to Steyning.

"If," says his Ludship, fresh from a Criminal Court, "he had been
committing, a burglary, and was getting off with the loot in the
one-horse O'Shay, he could not have taken fuller precautions to evade
pursuit."

[Illustration: Long Lawrence.]

At first some doubt as to truth of story. Been rumoured often before.
Then comes, in special edition of evening paper, the detail: "The
ceremony being concluded, Mr. and Mrs. PARNELL drove away in the
direction of Bramber, Mrs. PARNELL taking the whip and reins."

"Ah!" said DICK POWER, "that's KITTY, and no mistake. She always takes
the whip and reins. Bet you three to one the trick's done."

SQUIRE of MALWOOD faithful at his post, but he, too, observant of the
Truce. Everyone tired to death of dullest Session ever lived through,
and chiefly anxious to bring it to an end.

_Business done_.--In Committee of Supply.

_Friday_.--In Lords to-night, Irish Land Purchase Bill read Second
Time, after series of essays delivered by half dozen Peers. Point of
honour not to take less than one hour in delivery. DERBY brought
down his contribution nicely written out on quarter sheets. Whilst
ASHBOURNE declaiming, DERBY seized opportunity to read his speech
over to himself. This all very well if he had strictly carried out
intention, but, when he grew so interested in it as to mumble passages
in an audible voice, situation grew embarrassing. At last KIMBERLEY,
who sat near, gently nudged him. "One at a time, my dear DERBY," he
whispered. "We know you're accustomed to dual action. DARBY and JOAN,
you know; but won't do here."

DERBY blushed, and thrust manuscript in pocket till his turn came,
when he had the pleasure of reading it aloud.

_Business done_.--Irish Land Bill through Lords; Public Health Bill in
Commons.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS NOMER.

[Illustration: Tree in _Hamlet_.]

