It was a first principle not to concentrate in the island any
overwhelming number of troops, and a considerable portion was
distributed in the colonies.  Care was taken that the troops
generally should be officered by a class of men deeply interested in
the property and the liberties of England.  So extreme was the
jealousy that the relations between that once constitutional force,
the militia, and the sovereign were rigidly guarded, and it was
carefully placed under local influences.  All this is changed.  We
have a standing army of large amount, quartered and brigaded and
encamped permanently in England, and fed by a considerable and
constantly increasing reserve.

It will in due time be officered by a class of men eminently
scientific, but with no relations necessarily with society; while
the militia is withdrawn from all local influences, and placed under
the immediate command of the Secretary of War.  Thus, in the
nineteenth century, we have a large standing army established in
England, contrary to all the traditions of the land, and that by a
Liberal government, and with the warm acclamations of the Liberal
party.

Let us look what they have done with the Admiralty.  You remember,
in this country especially, the denunciations of the profligate
expenditure of the Conservative government, and you have since had
an opportunity of comparing it with the gentler burden of Liberal
estimates.  The navy was not merely an instance of profligate
expenditure, but of incompetent and inadequate management.  A great
revolution was promised in its administration.  A gentleman
[Mr. Childers], almost unknown to English politics, was strangely
preferred to one of the highest places in the councils of her
Majesty.  He set to at his task with ruthless activity.  The
Consulative Council, under which Nelson had gained all his
victories, was dissolved.  The secretaryship of the Admiralty, an
office which exercised a complete supervision over every division of
that great department,--an office which was to the Admiralty what
the Secretary of State is to the kingdom,--which, in the qualities
which it required and the duties which it fulfilled, was rightly a
stepping-stone to the cabinet, as in the instances of Lord Halifax,
Lord Herbert, and many others,--was reduced to absolute
insignificance.  Even the office of Control, which of all others
required a position of independence, and on which the safety of the
navy mainly depended, was deprived of all its important attributes.
For two years the opposition called the attention of Parliament to
these destructive changes, but Parliament and the nation were alike
insensible.  Full of other business, they could not give a thought
to what they looked upon merely as captious criticism.  It requires
a great disaster to command the attention of England; and when
the Captain was lost, and when they had the detail of the perilous
voyage of the Megara, then public indignation demanded a complete
change in this renovating administration of the navy.

And what has occurred?  It is only a few weeks since that in the
House of Commons I heard the naval statement made by a new First
Lord [Mr. Goschen], and it consisted only of the rescinding of all
the revolutionary changes of his predecessor, the mischief of every
one of which during the last two years has been pressed upon the
attention of Parliament and the country by that constitutional and
necessary body, the Opposition.  Gentlemen, it will not do for
me--considering the time I have already occupied, and there are
still some subjects of importance that must be touched--to dwell
upon any of the other similar topics, of which there is a rich
abundance.  I doubt not there is in this hall more than one farmer
who has been alarmed by the suggestion that his agricultural
machinery should be taxed.

I doubt not there is in this hall more than one publican who
remembers that last year an act of Parliament was introduced to
denounce him as a "sinner."  I doubt not there are in this hall a
widow and an orphan who remember the profligate proposition to
plunder their lonely heritage.  But, gentlemen, as time advanced it
was not difficult to perceive that extravagance was being
substituted for energy by the government.  The unnatural stimulus
was subsiding.  Their paroxysms ended in prostration.  Some took
refuge in melancholy, and their eminent chief alternated between a
menace and a sigh.  As I sat opposite the treasury bench the
ministers reminded me of one of those marine landscapes not very
unusual on the coast of South America.  You behold a range of
exhausted volcanoes.  Not a flame flickers on a single pallid crest.
But the situation is still dangerous.  There are occasional
earthquakes, and ever and anon the dark rumbling of the sea.

But, gentlemen, there is one other topic on which I must touch.  If
the management of our domestic affairs has been founded upon a
principle of violence, that certainly cannot be alleged against the
management of our external relations.  I know the difficulty of
addressing a body of Englishmen on these topics.  The very phrase
"Foreign Affairs" makes an Englishman convinced that I am about to
treat of subjects with which be has no concern.  Unhappily the
relations of England to the rest of the world, which are "Foreign
Affairs," are the matters which most influence his lot.  Upon them
depends the increase or reduction of taxation.  Upon them depends
the enjoyment or the embarrassment of his industry.  And yet, though
so momentous are the consequences of the mismanagement of our
foreign relations, no one thinks of them till the mischief occurs
and then it is found how the most vital consequences have been
occasioned by mere inadvertence.

I will illustrate this point by two anecdotes.  Since I have been in
public life there has been for this country a great calamity and
there is a great danger, and both might have been avoided.  The
calamity was the Crimean War.  You know what were the consequences
of the Crimean War: A great addition to your debt, an enormous
addition to your taxation, a cost more precious than your treasure
--the best blood of England.  Half a million of men, I believe,
perished in that great undertaking.  Nor are the evil consequences
of that war adequately described by what I have said.  All the
disorders and disturbances of Europe, those immense armaments that
are an incubus on national industry and the great obstacle to
progressive civilization, may be traced and justly attributed to the
Crimean War.  And yet the Crimean War need never have occurred.

When Lord Derby acceded to office, against his own wishes, in 1852,
the Liberal party most unconstitutionally forced him to dissolve
Parliament at a certain time by stopping the supplies, or at least
by limiting the period for which they were voted.  There was not a
single reason to justify that course, for Lord Derby had only
accepted office, having once declined it, on the renewed application
of his sovereign.  The country, at the dissolution, increased the
power of the Conservative party, but did not give to Lord Derby a
majority, and he had to retire from power.  There was not the
slightest chance of a Crimean War when he retired from office; but
the Emperor of Russia, believing that the successor of Lord Derby
was no enemy to Russian aggression in the East, commenced those
proceedings, with the result of which you are familiar.  I speak of
what I know, not of what I believe, but of what I have evidence in
my possession to prove--that the Crimean War never would have
happened if Lord Derby had remained in office.

The great danger is the present state of our relations with the
United States.  When I acceded to office I did so, so far as
regarded the United States of America, with some advantage.  During
the whole of the Civil War in America both my noble friend near me
and I had maintained a strict and fair neutrality.  This was fully
appreciated by the government of the United States, and they
expressed their wish that with our aid the settlement of all
differences between the two governments should be accomplished.
They sent here a plenipotentiary, an honorable gentleman, very
intelligent and possessing general confidence.  My noble friend near
me, with great ability, negotiated a treaty for the settlement of
all these claims.  He was the first minister who proposed to refer
them to arbitration, and the treaty was signed by the American
government.  It was signed, I think, on November 10th, on the eve of
the dissolution of Parliament.  The borough elections that first
occurred proved what would be the fate of the ministry, and the
moment they were known in America the American government announced
that Mr. Reverdy Johnson, the American minister, had mistaken his
instructions, and they could not present the treaty to the Senate
for its sanction--the sanction of which there had been previously no
doubt.  But the fact is that, as in the case of the Crimean War, it
was supposed that our successors would be favorable to Russian
aggression, so it was supposed that by the accession to office of
Mr. Gladstone and a gentleman you know well, Mr. Bright, the
American claims would be considered in a very different spirit.  How
they have been considered is a subject which, no doubt, occupies
deeply the minds of the people of Lancashire.  Now, gentlemen,
observe this--the question of the Black Sea involved in the
Crimean War, the question of the American claims involved in our
negotiations with Mr. Johnson, are the two questions that have again
turned up, and have been the two great questions that have been
under the management of his government.

How have they treated them?  Prince Gortschakoff, thinking he saw an
opportunity, announced his determination to break from the Treaty of
Paris, and terminate all the conditions hostile to Russia which had
been the result of the Crimean War.  What was the first movement on
the part of our government is at present a mystery.  This we know,
that they selected the most rising diplomatist of the day and sent
him to Prince Bismarck with a declaration that the policy of Russia,
if persisted in, was war with England.  Now, gentlemen, there was
not the slightest chance of Russia going to war with England, and no
necessity, as I shall always maintain, of England going to war with
Russia.  I believe I am not wrong in stating that the Russian
government was prepared to withdraw from the position they had
rashly taken; but suddenly her Majesty's government, to use a
technical phrase, threw over the plenipotentiary, and, instead of
threatening war, if the Treaty of Paris were violated, agreed to
arrangements by which the violation of that treaty should be
sanctioned by England, and, in the form of a congress, showed
themselves guaranteeing their own humiliation.  That Mr. Odo Russell
made no mistake is quite obvious, because he has since been selected
to be her Majesty's ambassador at the most important court of
Europe.  Gentlemen, what will be the consequence of this
extraordinary weakness on the part of the British government it is
difficult to foresee.  Already we hear that Sebastopol is to be
refortified, nor can any man doubt that the entire command of the
Black Sea will soon be in the possession of Russia.  The time may
not be distant when we may hear of the Russian power in the Persian
Gulf, and what effect that may have upon the dominions of England
and upon those possessions on the productions of which you every
year more and more depend, are questions upon which it will be well
for you on proper occasions to meditate.

I come now to that question which most deeply interests you at this
moment, and that is our relations with the United States.  I
approved the government referring this question to arbitration.  It
was only following the policy of Lord Stanley.  My noble friend
disapproved the negotiations being carried on at Washington.  I
confess that I would willingly have persuaded myself that this was
not a mistake, but reflection has convinced me that my noble friend
was right.  I remember the successful negotiation of the
Clayton-Bulwer treaty by Sir Henry Bulwer.  I flattered myself that
treaties at Washington might be successfully negotiated; but I agree
with my noble friend that his general view was far more sound than
my own.  But no one, when that commission was sent forth, for a
moment could anticipate the course of its conduct under the strict
injunctions of the government.  We believed that commission was sent
to ascertain what points should be submitted to arbitration, to be
decided by the principles of the law of nations.  We had not the
slightest idea that that commission was sent with power and
instructions to alter the law of nations itself.  When that result
was announced, we expressed our entire disapprobation; and yet
trusting to the representations of the government that matters were
concluded satisfactorily, we had to decide whether it were wise, if
the great result was obtained, to wrangle upon points however
important, such as those to which I have referred.

Gentlemen, it appears that, though all parts of England were ready
to make those sacrifices, the two negotiating States--the
government of the United Kingdom and the government of the United
States--placed a different interpretation upon the treaty when the
time had arrived to put its provisions into practice.  Gentlemen, in
my mind, and in the opinion of my noble friend near me, there was
but one course to take under the circumstances, painful as it might
be, and that was at once to appeal to the good feeling and good
sense of the United States, and, stating the difficulty, to invite
confidential conference whether it might not be removed.  But her
Majesty's government took a different course.  On December 15th her
Majesty's government were aware of a contrary interpretation being
placed on the Treaty of Washington by the American government.  The
prime minister received a copy of their counter case, and he
confessed he had never read it.  He had a considerable number of
copies sent to him to distribute among his colleagues, and you
remember, probably, the remarkable statement in which he informed
the house that he had distributed those copies to everybody except
those for whom they were intended.

Time went on, and the adverse interpretation of the American
government oozed out, and was noticed by the press.  Public alarm
and public indignation were excited; and it was only seven weeks
afterward, on the very eve of the meeting of Parliament,--some
twenty-four hours before the meeting of Parliament,--that her
Majesty's government felt they were absolutely obliged to make a
"friendly communication" to the United States that they had arrived
at an interpretation of the treaty the reverse of that of the
American government.  What was the position of the American
government?  Seven weeks had passed without their having received
the slightest intimation from her Majesty's ministers.  They had
circulated their case throughout the world.  They had translated it
into every European language.  It had been sent to every court and
cabinet, to every sovereign and prime minister.  It was impossible
for the American government to recede from their position, even if
they had believed it to be an erroneous one.  And then, to aggravate
the difficulty, the prime minister goes down to Parliament, declares
that there is only one interpretation to be placed on the treaty,
and defies and attacks everybody who believes it susceptible of
another.

Was there ever such a combination of negligence and blundering?  And
now, gentlemen, what is about to happen?  All we know is that her
Majesty's ministers are doing everything in their power to evade the
cognizance and criticism of Parliament.  They have received an
answer to their "friendly communication"; of which, I believe, it
has been ascertained that the American government adhere to their
interpretation; and yet they prolong the controversy.  What is about
to occur it is unnecessary for one to predict; but if it be this--
if after a fruitless ratiocination worthy of a schoolman, we
ultimately agree so far to the interpretation of the American
government as to submit the whole case to arbitration, with feeble
reservation of a protest, if it be decided against us, I venture to
say that we shall be entering on a course not more distinguished by
its feebleness than by its impending peril.  There is before us
every prospect of the same incompetence that distinguished our
negotiations respecting the independence of the Black Sea; and I
fear that there is every chance that this incompetence will be
sealed by our ultimately acknowledging these direct claims of the
United States, which, both as regards principle and practical
results, are fraught with the utmost danger to this country.
Gentlemen, don't suppose, because I counsel firmness and decision at
the right moment, that I am of that school of statesmen who are
favorable to a turbulent and aggressive diplomacy.  I have resisted
it during a great part of my life.  I am not unaware that the
relations of England to Europe have undergone a vast change during
the century that has just elapsed.  The relations of England to
Europe are not the same as they were in the days of Lord Chatham or
Frederick the Great.  The Queen of England has become the sovereign
of the most powerful of Oriental States.  On the other side of the
globe there are now establishments belonging to her, teeming with
wealth and population, which will, in due time, exercise their
influence over the distribution of power.  The old establishments of
this country, now the United States of America, throw their
lengthening shades over the Atlantic, which mix with European
waters.  These are vast and novel elements in the distribution of
power.  I acknowledge that the policy of England with respect to
Europe should be policy of reserve, but proud reserve; and in
answer to those statesmen--those mistaken statesmen who have
intimated the decay of the power of England and the decline of its
resources, I express here my confident conviction that there never
was a moment in our history when the power of England was so great
and her resources so vast and inexhaustible.

And yet, gentlemen, it is not merely our fleets and armies, our
powerful artillery, our accumulated capital, and our unlimited
credit on which I so much depend, as upon that unbroken spirit of
her people, which I believe was never prouder of the imperial
country to which they belong.  Gentlemen, it is to that spirit that I
above all things trust.  I look upon the people of Lancashire as
fairly representative of the people of England.  I think the manner
in which they have invited me here, locally a stranger, to receive
the expression of their cordial sympathy, and only because they
recognize some effort on my part to maintain the greatness of their
country, is evidence of the spirit of the land.  I must express to
you again my deep sense of the generous manner in which you have
welcomed me, and in which you have permitted me to express to you my
views upon public affairs.  Proud of your confidence, and encouraged
by your sympathy, I now deliver to you, as my last words, the cause
of the Tory party, of the English constitution, and of the British
empire.


THE VENERABLE BEDE (672-735)

The VENERABLE BEDE, "The father of English literature,"  was bora
about 672 in the county of Durham.  The Anglo-Saxons, whose earliest
historian he was, had been converted by St. Austin and others by the
then not unusual process of preaching to the king until he was
persuaded to renounce heathenism both for himself and his
subjects.  Bede, though born among a people not greatly addicted
either to religion or letters, became a remarkable preacher,
scholar, and thinker.  Professionally a preacher, his sermons are
interesting, chiefly because they are the earliest specimens of
oratory extant from any Anglo-Saxon public speaker.

Best known as the author of the 'Ecclesiastical History of England,'
Bede was a most prolific writer.  He left a very considerable
collection of sermons or homilies, many of which are still
extant.  He also wrote on science, on poetic art, on medicine,
philosophy, and rhetoric, not to mention his hymns and his 'Book of
Epigrams in Heroic and Elegaic Verse'--all very interesting and some
of them valuable, as any one may see who will take the trouble to
read them in his simple and easily understood Latin.  It is a pity,
however, that they are not adequately translated and published in a
shape which would make the father of English eloquence the first
English rhetorician, as he was the first English philosopher, poet,
and historian, more readily accessible to the general public.

Bede's sermons deal very largely in allegory, and though he may have
been literal in his celebrated suggestions of the horrors of hell--
which were certainly literally understood by his hearers--it is
pertinent to quote in connection with them his own assertion, that
"he who knows how to interpret allegorically will see that the inner
sense excels the simplicity of the letter as apples do leaves."

Bede's reputation spread not only through England but throughout
Western Europe and to Rome.  Attempts were made to thrust honors on
him, but he refused them for fear they would prevent him from
learning.  He taught in a monastery at Jarrow where at one time he
had six hundred monks and many strangers attending on his
discourses.

He died in 735, just as he had completed the first translation of
the Gospel of John ever made into any English dialect.  The present
Anglo-Saxon version, generally in use among English students, is
supposed to include that version if not actually to present its
exact language.  The King James version comes from Bede's in a direct
line of descent through Wycliff and Tyndale.


THE MEETING OF MERCY AND JUSTICE

There was a certain father of a family, a powerful king, who had
four daughters, of whom one was called Mercy, the second Truth, the
third Justice, the fourth Peace; of whom it is said, "Mercy and
Truth are met together; Justice and Peace have kissed each other."
He had also a certain most wise son, to whom no one could be
compared in wisdom.  He had, also, a certain servant, whom he had
exalted and enriched with great honor: for he had made him after his
own likeness and similitude, and that without any preceding merit on
the servant's part.  But the Lord, as is the custom with such wise
masters, wished prudently to explore, and to become acquainted with,
the character and the faith of his servant, whether he were
trustworthy towards himself or not; so he gave him an easy
commandment, and said, "If you do what I tell you, I will exalt you
to further honors; if not, you shall perish miserably."

The servant heard the commandment, and without any delay went and
broke it.  Why need I say more?  Why need I delay you by my words and
by my tears?  This proud servant, stiff-necked, full of contumely,
and puffed up with conceit, sought an excuse for his transgression,
and retorted the whole fault on his Lord.  For when he said, "the
woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she deceived me," he threw all
the fault on his Maker.  His Lord, more angry for such contumelious
conduct than for the transgression of his command, called four most
cruel executioners, and commanded one of them to cast him into
prison, another to afflict him with grievous torments; the third to
strangle him, and the fourth to behead him.  By and by, when occasion
offers, I will give you the right name of these tormentors.

These torturers, then, studying how they might carry out their own
cruelty, took the wretched man and began to afflict him with all
manner of punishments.  But one of the daughters of the King, by
name Mercy, when she had heard of this punishment of the servant,
ran hastily to the prison, and looking in and seeing the man given
over to the tormentors, could not help having compassion upon him,
for it is the property of Mercy to have pity.  She tore her garments
and struck her hands together, and let her hair fall loose about her
neck, and crying and shrieking, ran to her father, and kneeling
before his feet began to say with an earnest and sorrowful voice:
"My beloved father, am not I thy daughter Mercy?  and art not thou
called merciful?  If thou art merciful, have mercy upon thy servant;
and if thou wilt not have mercy upon him, thou canst not be called
merciful; and if thou art not merciful, thou canst not have me,
Mercy, for thy daughter."  While she was thus arguing with her
father, her sister Truth came up, and demanded why it was that Mercy
was weeping.  "Your sister Mercy," replied the father, "wishes me to
have pity upon that proud transgressor whose punishment I have
appointed."  Truth, when she heard this, was excessively angry, and
looking sternly at her father, "Am not I," said she, "thy daughter
Truth?  art not thou called true?  Is it not true that thou didst
fix a punishment for him, and threaten him with death by torments?
If thou art true, thou wilt follow that which is true; if thou art
not true, thou canst not have me, Truth, for thy daughter."  Here,
you see, Mercy and Truth are met together.  The third sister,
namely, Justice, hearing this strife, contention, quarreling, and
pleading, and summoned by the outcry, began to inquire the cause
from Truth.  And Truth, who could only speak that which was true,
said, "This sister of ours, Mercy, if she ought to be called a
sister who does not agree with us, desires that our father should
have pity on that proud transgressor."  Then Justice, with an angry
countenance, and meditating on a grief which she had not expected,
said to her father, "Am not I thy daughter Justice?  are thou not
called just?  If thou art just, thou wilt exercise justice on the
transgressor; if thou dost not exercise that justice, thou canst not
be just; if thou art not just, thou canst not have me, Justice, for
thy daughter."  So here were Truth and Justice on the one side, and
Mercy on the other.  _Ultima_ _coelicolum_ _terras_ _Astrea_
_reliquit_; this means, that Peace fled into a far distant country.
For where there is strife and contention, there is no peace; and by
how much greater the contention, by so much further peace is driven
away.

Peace, therefore, being lost, and his three daughters in warm
discussion, the King found it an extremely difficult matter to
determine what he should do, or to which side he should lean.
For, if he gave ear to Mercy, he would offend Truth and Justice if
he gave ear to Truth and Justice, he could not have Mercy for his
daughter; and yet it was necessary that he should be both merciful
and just, and peaceful and true.  There was great need then of good
advice.  The father, therefore, called his wise son, and consulted
him about the affair.  Said the son, "Give me my father, this present
business to manage, and I will both punish the transgressor for
thee, and will bring back to thee in peace thy four daughters."
"These are great promises," replied the father, "if the deed only
agrees with the word.  If thou canst do that which thou sayest, I
will act as thou shalt exhort me."

Having, therefore, received the royal mandate, the son took his
sister Mercy along with him, and leaping upon the mountains, passing
over the hills, came to the prison, and looking through the windows,
looking through the lattice, he beheld the imprisoned servant, shut
out from the present life, devoured of affliction, and from the sole
of his foot even to the crown there was no soundness in him.  He saw
him in the power of death, because through him death entered into
the world.  He saw him devoured, because, when a man is once dead he
is eaten of worms.  And because I now have the opportunity of
telling you, you shall hear the names of the four tormentors.  The
first, who put him in prison, is the Prison of the Present Life, of
which it is said, "Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in
Mesech"; the second, who tormented him, is the Misery of the World,
which besets us with all kinds of pain and wretchedness; the third,
who was putting him to death, conquered death, bound the strong man,
took his goods, and distributed the spoils; and ascending up on
high, led captivity captive and gave gifts for men, and brought back
the servant into his country, crowned with double honor, and endued
with a garment of immortality.  When Mercy beheld this, she had no
grounds for complaint, Truth found no cause of discontent, because
her father was found true.  The servant had paid all his penalties.
Justice in like manner complained not, because justice had been
executed on the transgressor; and thus he who had been lost was
found.  Peace, therefore, when she saw her sisters at concord, came
back and united them.  And now, behold, Mercy and Truth are met
together, Justice and Peace have kissed each other.  Thus,
therefore, by the Mediator of man and angels, man was purified and
reconciled, and the hundredth sheep was brought back to the fold of
God.  To which fold Jesus Christ brings us, to whom is honor and
power everlasting.  Amen.

A SERMON FOR ANY DAY

Beloved brethren, it is time to pass from evil to good, from
darkness to light, from this most unfaithful world to everlasting
joys, lest that day take us unawares in which our Lord Jesus Christ
shall come to make the round world a desert, and to give over to
everlasting punishment sinners who would not repent of the sins
which they did.  There is a great sin in lying, as saith Solomon,
"The lips which lie slay the soul.  The wrath of man worketh not the
righteousness of God," no more doth his covetousness.  Whence the
Apostle saith, "The love of money and pride are the root of all
evil."  Pride, by which that apostate angel fell, who, as it is read
in the prophecy, "despised the beginning of the ways of God.  How
art thou fallen from heaven!"  We must avoid pride, which had power
to deceive angels; how much more will it have power to deceive men!
And we ought to fear envy, by which the devil deceived the first
man, as it is written, "Christ was crucified through envy,
therefore he that envieth his neighbor crucifieth Christ,"

See that ye always expect the advent of the Judge with fear and
trembling, lest he should find us unprepared; because the Apostle
saith, "My days shall come as a thief in the night."  Woe to them
whom it shall find sleeping in sins, for "then," as we read in the
Gospel, "He shall gather all nations, and shall separate them one
from the other, as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the
goats.  Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye
blessed of my Father," where there is no grief nor sorrow; where
there is no other sound but love, and peace, and everlasting
gladness with all the elect of God; where no good thing can be
wanting.  Then shall the righteous answer and say, Lord, why hast
thou prepared such glory and such good things?  He shall answer, for
mercy, for faith, for piety, and truth and the like.  Lord, when
didst thou see these good things in us?  The Lord shall answer,
"Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these, my brethren, ye have done it unto me, and what ye
did in secret, I will reward openly."  Then shall the King say unto
them on his left hand, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, where shall be weepjng
and gnashing of teeth," and tears of eyes; where death is desired
and comes not; where the worm dieth not and the fire is not
quenched; where is no joy, but sorrow; where is no rest, except
pain; where nothing is heard but lamentations.  Then they also shall
answer and say, Lord, why hast thou prepared such punishments for
us?  For your iniquity and malignity, the Lord shall say.

Therefore, my brethren, I beseech you, that they who are in the
habits of good works would persevere in every good work; and that
they who are evil would amend themselves quickly, before sudden
death come upon them.  While, therefore, we have time, let us do good
to all men, and let us leave off doing ill, that we may attain to
eternal life.

THE TORMENTS OF HELL

The Sunday is a chosen day, in which the angels rejoice.  We must
ask who was the first to request that souls might (on Sunday) have
rest in hell; and the answer is that Paul the Apostle and Michael
the Archangel besought the Lord when they came back from hell; for
it was the Lord's will that Paul should see the punishments of that
place.  He beheld trees all on fire, and sinners tormented on those
trees; and some were hung by the feet, some by the hands, some by
the hair, some by the neck, some by the tongue, and some by the arm.
And again, he saw a furnace of fire burning with seven flames, and
many were punished in it; and there were seven plagues round about
this furnace; the first, snow; the second, ice; the third, fire, the
fourth, blood; the fifth, serpents; the sixth, lightning; the
seventh, stench; and in that furnace itself were the souls of the
sinners who repented not in this life.  There they are tormented,
and every one receiveth according to his works; some weep, some
howl, some groan; some burn and desire to have rest, but find it
not, because souls can never die.  Truly we ought to fear that place
in which is everlasting dolor, in which is groaning, in which is
sadness without joy, in which are abundance of tears on account of
the tortures of souls; in which a fiery wheel is turned a thousand
times a day by an evil angel, and at each turn a thousand souls are
burnt upon it.  After this he beheld a horrible river, in which were
many diabolic beasts, like fishes in the midst of the sea, which
devour the souls of sinners; and over that river there is a bridge,
across which righteous souls pass without dread, while the souls of
sinners suffer each one according to its merits.

There Paul beheld many souls of sinners plunged, some to the knees,
some to the loins, some to the mouth, some to the eyebrows; and
every day and eternally they are tormented.  And Paul wept, and asked
who they were that were therein plunged to the knees.  And the angel
said, These are detractors and evil speakers; and those up to the
loins are fornicators and adulterers, who returned not to
repentance; and those to the mouth are they who went to Church, but
they heard not the word of God; and those to the eyebrows are they
who rejoiced in the wickedness of their neighbor.  And after this, he
saw between heaven and earth the soul of a sinner, howling betwixt
seven devils, that had on that day departed from the body.  And the
angels cried out against it and said, Woe to thee, wretched soul!
What hast thou done upon earth?  Thou hast despised the commandments
of God, and hast done no good works; and therefore thou shalt be
cast into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.  And after this, in one moment, angels carried a soul from its
body to heaven; and Paul heard the voice of a thousand angels
rejoicing over it, and saying, O most happy and blessed soul!
rejoice to-day, because thou hast done the will of God.  And they set
it in the presence of God.  ...  And the angel said, Whoso keepeth
the Sunday shall have his part with the angels of God.  And Paul
demanded of the angel, how many kinds of punishment there were in
hell.  And the angel said, there are a hundred and forty-four
thousand, and if there were a hundred eloquent men, each having four
iron tongues, that spoke from the beginning of the world, they could
not reckon up the torments of hell.  But let us, beloved brethren,
hearing of these so great torments, be converted to our Lord that we
may be able to reign with the angels.


HENRY WARD BEECHER (1813-1887)

A very great orator must be a thoroughly representative man,
sensitive enough to be moved to the depths of his nature by the
master-passions of his time.  Henry Ward Beecher was a very great
orator,--one of the greatest the country has produced,--and in his
speeches and orations inspired by the feelings which evolved the
Civil War and were themselves exaggerated by it to tenfold strength,
we feel all the volcanic forces which buried the primitive political
conditions of the United States deep under the ashes and lava of
their eruption.  Words are feeble in the presence of the facts of
such a war.  But what more could words do to suggest its meaning than
they do in Mr. Beecher's oration on the raising of the flag at Fort
Sumter, April 14th, 1865:--

"The soil has drunk blood and is glutted.  Millions mourn for myriads
slain, or, envying the dead, pray for oblivion.  Towns and villages
have been razed.  Fruitful fields have been turned back to
wilderness.  It came to pass as the prophet had said: 'The sun was
turned to darkness and the moon to blood.' The course of the law was
ended.  The sword sat chief magistrate in half the nation; industry
was paralyzed; morals corrupted; the public weal invaded by rapine
and anarchy; whole States were ravaged by avenging armies.  The world
was amazed.  The earth reeled."

In such passages, Mr. Beecher has something of the force which
immortalized the "Voluspa."  The "bardic inspiration," which moved
the early Norse poets to sing the bloody results of the "Berserker
fury," peculiar to the Teutonic and Norse peoples, seems to control
him as he recounts the dreadful features of the war and reminds the
vanquished of the meaning of defeat.

In considering the oratory inspired by the passions which found
their climax in the destructiveness of civil war,--and especially in
considering such magnificent outbursts as Mr. Beecher's oration at
Fort Sumter, intelligence will seek to free itself alike from
sympathy and from prejudice that it may the better judge the effect
of the general mind of the people on the orator, and the extent to
which that general mind as he voiced it, was influenced by the
strength of his individuality.  If when we ourselves are moved by no
passion we judge with critical calmness the impassioned utterances
of the orators of any great epoch of disturbance, we can hardly fail
to be repelled by much that the critical faculties will reject as
exaggeration.  But taking into account the environment, the
traditions, the public opinion, the various general or individual
impulses which influenced the oratory of one side or the other, we
can the better determine its true relation to the history of the
human intellect and that forward movement of the world which is but
a manifestation of the education of intellect.

Mr. Beecher had the temperament, the habits, the physique of the
orator.  His ancestry, his intellectual training, his surroundings,
fitted him to be a prophet of the crusade against slavery.  Of those
names which for a time were bruited everywhere as a result of the
struggles of the three decades from 1850 to 1880, a majority are
already becoming obscure, and in another generation most of the rest
will be "names only" to all who are not students of history as a
specialty.  But the mind in Henry Ward Beecher was so representative;
he was so fully mastered by the forces which sent Sherman on his
march to the sea and Grant to his triumph at Appomattox, that he
will always be remembered as one of the greatest orators of the
Civil War period.  Perhaps when the events of the war are so far
removed in point of time as to make a critical judgment really
possible, he may even rank as the greatest.

RAISING THE FLAG OVER FORT SUMTER (Delivered April 14th, 1865, by
request of President Lincoln)

On this solemn and joyful day we again lift to the breeze our
fathers' flag, now again the banner of the United States, with the
fervent prayer that God will crown it with honor, protect it from
treason, and send it down to our children, with all the blessings of
civilization, liberty, and religion.  Terrible in battle, may it be
beneficent in peace.  Happily, no bird or beast of prey has been
inscribed upon it.  The stars that redeem the night from darkness,
and the beams of red light that beautify the morning, have been
united upon its folds.  As long as the sun endures, or the stars,
may it wave over a nation neither enslaved nor enslaving!  Once, and
but once, has treason dishonored it.  In that insane hour when the
guiltiest and bloodiest rebellion of all time hurled their fires
upon this fort, you, sir [turning to General Anderson], and a small,
heroic band, stood within these now crumbled walls, and did gallant
and just battle for the honor and defense of the nation's banner.
In that cope of fire, that glorious flag still peacefully waved to
the breeze above your head unconscious of harm as the stars and
skies above it.  Once it was shot down.  A gallant hand, in whose
care this day it has been, plucked it from the ground, and reared it
again--"cast down, but not destroyed."  After a vain resistance,
with trembling hand and sad heart, you withdrew it from its height,
closed its wings, and bore it far away, sternly to sleep amid the
tumults of rebellion, and the thunder of battle.  The first act of
war had begun.  The long night of four years had set in.  While the
giddy traitors whirled in a maze of exhilaration, dim horrors were
already advancing, that were ere long to fill the land with blood.
To-day you are returned again.  We devoutly join with you in
thanksgiving to Almighty God that he has spared your honored life,
and vouchsafed to you the glory of this day.  The heavens over you
are the same, the same shores are here, morning comes, and evening,
as they did.  All else, how changed!  What grim batteries crowd the
burdened shores!  What scenes have filled this air, and disturbed
these waters!  These shattered heaps of shapeless stone are all that
is left of Fort Sumter.  Desolation broods in yonder city--solemn
retribution hath avenged our dishonored banner!  You have come back
with honor, who departed hence four years ago, leaving the air
sultry with fanaticism.  The surging crowds that rolled up their
frenzied shouts as the flag came down, are dead, or scattered, or
silent, and their habitations are desolate.  Ruin sits in the cradle
of treason.  Rebellion has perished.  But there flies the same flag
that was insulted.  With starry eyes it looks over this bay for the
banner that supplanted it, and sees it not.  You that then, for the
day, were humbled, are here again, to triumph once and forever.  In
the storm of that assault this glorious ensign was often struck;
but, memorable fact, not one of its stars was torn out by shot or
shell.  It was a prophecy.  It said: "Not a State shall be struck
from this nation by treason!"  The fulfillment is at hand.  Lifted
to the air to-day, it proclaims that after four years of war, "Not a
State is blotted out."  Hail to the flag of our fathers, and our
flag!  Glory to the banner that has gone through four years black
with tempests of war, to pilot the nation back to peace without
dismemberment!  And glory be to God, who, above all hosts and
banners, hath ordained victory, and shall ordain peace.  Wherefore
have we come hither, pilgrims from distant places?  Are we come to
exult that Northern hands are stronger than Southern?  No; but to
rejoice that the hands of those who defend a just and beneficent
government are mightier than the hands that assaulted it.  Do we
exult over fallen cities?  We exult that a nation has not fallen.
We sorrow with the sorrowful.  We sympathize with the desolate.  We
look upon this shattered fort and yonder dilapidated city with sad
eyes, grieved that men should have committed such treason, and glad
that God hath set such a mark upon treason that all ages shall dread
and abhor it.  We exult, not for a passion gratified, but for a
sentiment victorious; not for temper, but for conscience; not, as we
devoutly believe, that our will is done, but that God's will hath
been done.  We should be unworthy of that liberty intrusted to our
care, if, on such a day as this, we sullied our hearts by feelings
of aimless vengeance; and equally unworthy if we did not devoutly
thank him who hath said: "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the
Lord," that he hath set a mark upon arrogant rebellion, ineffaceable
while time lasts.

Since this flag went down on that dark day, who shall tell the
mighty woes that have made this land a spectacle to angels and men?
The soil has drunk blood and is glutted.  Millions mourn for myriads
slain, or, envying the dead, pray for oblivion.  Towns and villages
have been razed.  Fruitful fields have been turned back to
wilderness.  It came to pass, as the prophet said: "The sun was
turned to darkness and the moon to blood," The course of law was
ended.  The sword sat chief magistrate in half the nation; industry
was paralyzed; morals corrupted; the public weal invaded by rapine
and anarchy; whole States ravaged by avenging armies.  The world was
amazed.  The earth reeled.  When the flag sunk here, it was as if
political night had come, and all beasts of prey had come forth to
devour.  That long night is ended.  And for this returning day we
have come from afar to rejoice and give thanks.  No more war.  No
more accursed secession.  No more slavery, that spawned them both.
Let no man misread the meaning of this unfolding flag!  It says:
"Government has returned hither."  It proclaims, in the name of
vindicated government, peace and protection to loyalty, humiliation
and pains to traitors.  This is the flag of sovereignty.  The
nation, not the States, is sovereign.  Restored to authority, this
flag commands, not supplicates.  There may be pardon, but no
concession.  There may be amnesty and oblivion, but no honeyed
compromises.  The nation to-day has peace for the peaceful, and war
for the turbulent.  The only condition to submission is to submit!
There is the Constitution, there are the laws, there is the
government.  They rise up like mountains of strength that shall not
be moved.  They are the conditions of peace.  One nation, under one
government, without slavery, has been ordained and shall stand.
There can be peace on no other basis.  On this basis reconstruction
is easy, and needs neither architect nor engineer.  Without this
basis no engineer nor architect shall ever reconstruct these
rebellious States.  We do not want your cities or your fields.  We
do not envy you your prolific soil, nor heavens full of perpetual
summer.  Let agriculture revel here, let manufactures make every
stream twice musical, build fleets in every port, inspire the arts
of peace with genius second only to that of Athens, and we shall be
glad in your gladness, and rich in your wealth.  All that we ask is
unswerving loyalty and universal liberty.  And that, in the name of
this high sovereignty of the United States of America, we demand and
that, with the blessing of Almighty God, we will have!  We raise our
fathers banner that it may bring back better blessings than those of
old; that it may cast out the devil of discord; that it may restore
lawful government, and a prosperity purer and more enduring than
that which it protected before; that it may win parted friends from
their alienation; that it may inspire hope, and inaugurate universal
liberty; that it may say to the sword, "Return to thy sheath"; and
to the plow and sickle, "Go forth"; that it may heal all jealousies,
unite all policies, inspire a new national life, compact our
strength, purify our principles, ennoble our national ambitions, and
make this people great and strong, not for agression and
quarrelsomeness, but for the peace of the world, giving to us the
glorious prerogative of leading all nations to juster laws, to more
humane policies, to sincerer friendship, to rational, instituted
civil liberty, and to universal Christian brotherhood.  Reverently,
piously, in hopeful patriotism, we spread this banner on the sky, as
of old the bow was painted on the cloud and, with solemn fervor,
beseech God to look upon it, and make it a memorial of an
everlasting covenant and decree that never again on this fair land
shall a deluge of blood prevail.  Why need any eye turn from this
spectacle?  Are there not associations which, overleaping the recent
past, carry us back to times when, over North and South, this flag
was honored alike by all?  In all our colonial days we were one, in
the long revolutionary struggle, and in the scores of prosperous
years succeeding, we were united.  When the passage of the Stamp Act
in 1765 aroused the colonies, it was Gadsden, of South Carolina,
that cried, with prescient enthusiasm, "We stand on the broad common
ground of those natural rights that we all feel and know as men.
There ought to be no New England man, no New Yorker, known on this
continent, but all of us," said he, "Americans."  That was the voice
of South Carolina.  That shall be the voice of South Carolina.
Faint is the echo; but it is coming.  We now hear it sighing sadly
through the pines; but it shall yet break in thunder upon the shore.
No North, no West, no South, but the United States of America.
There is scarcely a man born in the South who has lifted his hand
against this banner but had a father who would have died for it.  Is
memory dead?  Is there no historic pride?  Has a fatal fury struck
blindness or hate into eyes that used to look kindly towards each
other, that read the same Bible, that hung over the historic pages
of our national glory, that studied the same Constitution?  Let this
uplifting bring back all of the past that was good, but leave in
darkness all that was bad.  It was never before so wholly unspotted;
so clear of all wrong, so purely and simply the sign of justice and
liberty.  Did I say that we brought back the same banner that you
bore away, noble and heroic sir?  It is not the same.  It is more
and better than it was.  The land is free from slavery since that
banner fell.

When God would prepare Moses for emancipation, he overthrew his
first steps and drove him for forty years to brood in the
wilderness.  When our flag came down, four years it lay brooding in
darkness.  It cried to the Lord, "Wherefore am I deposed?"  Then
arose before it a vision of its sin.  It had strengthened the
strong, and forgotten the weak.  It proclaimed liberty, but trod
upon slaves.  In that seclusion it dedicated itself to liberty.
Behold, to-day, it fulfills its vows!  When it went down four
million people had no flag.  To-day it rises, and four million
people cry out, "Behold our flag!"  Hark!  they murmur.  It is the
Gospel that they recite in sacred words: "It is a Gospel to the
poor, it heals our broken hearts, it preaches deliverance to
captives, it gives sight to the blind, it sets at liberty them that
are bruised."  Rise up then, glorious Gospel banner, and roll out
these messages of God.  Tell the air that not a spot now sullies thy
whiteness.  Thy red is not the blush of shame, but the flush of joy.
Tell the dews that wash thee that thou art as pure as they.  Say to
the night that thy stars lead toward the morning; and to the
morning, that a brighter day arises with healing in its wings.  And
then, O glowing flag, bid the sun pour light on all thy folds with
double brightness while thou art bearing round and round the world
the solemn joy--a race set free!  a nation redeemed!  The mighty
hand of government, made strong in war by the favor of the God of
Battles, spreads wide to-day the banner of liberty that went down in
darkness, that arose in light; and there it streams, like the sun
above it, neither parceled out nor monopolized, but flooding the air
with light for all mankind.  Ye scattered and broken, ye wounded and
dying, bitten by the fiery serpents of oppression, everywhere, in
all the world, look upon this sign, lifted up, and live!  And ye
homeless and houseless slaves, look, and ye are free!  At length
you, too, have part and lot in this glorious ensign that broods with
impartial love over small and great, the poor and the strong, the
bond and the free.  In this solemn hour, let us pray for the quick
coming of reconciliation and happiness under this common flag.  But
we must build again, from the foundations, in all these now free
Southern States.  No cheap exhortations "to forgetfulness of the
past, to restore all things as they were," will do.  God does not
stretch out his hand, as he has for four dreadful years, that men
may easily forget the might of his terrible acts.  Restore things as
they were!  What, the alienations and jealousies, the discords and
contentions, and the causes of them?  No.  In that solemn sacrifice
on which a nation has offered for its sins so many precious victims,
loved and lamented, let our sins and mistakes be consumed utterly
and forever.  No, never again shall things be restored as before the
war.  It is written in God's decree of events fulfilled, "Old things
are passed away."  That new earth, in which dwelleth righteousness,
draws near.  Things as they were!  Who has an omnipotent hand to
restore a million dead, slain in battle or wasted by sickness, or
dying of grief, broken-hearted?  Who has omniscience to search for
the scattered ones?  Who shall restore the lost to broken families?
Who shall bring back the squandered treasure, the years of industry
wasted, and convince you that four years of guilty rebellion and
cruel war are no more than dirt upon the hand, which a moment's
washing removes and leaves the hand clean as before?  Such a war
reaches down to the very vitals of society.  Emerging from such a
prolonged rebellion, he is blind who tells you that the State, by a
mere amnesty and benevolence of government, can be put again, by a
mere decree, in its old place.  It would not be honest, it would not
be kind or fraternal, for me to pretend that Southern revolution
against the Union has not reacted, and wrought revolution in the
Southern States themselves, and inaugurated a new dispensation.
Society here is like a broken loom, and the piece which Rebellion
put in, and was weaving, has been cut, and every thread broken.  You
must put in new warp and new woof, and weaving anew, as the fabric
slowly unwinds we shall see in it no Gorgon figures, no hideous
grotesques of the old barbarism, but the figures of liberty, vines,
and golden grains, framing in the heads of justice, love, and
liberty.  The august convention of 1787 formed the Constitution with
this memorable preamble: "We, the people of the United States, in
order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure
domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the
general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves
and our posterity, do ordain this Constitution for the United States
of America."  Again, in the awful convention of war, the people of
the United States, for the very ends just recited, have debated,
settled, and ordained certain fundamental truths, which must
henceforth be accepted and obeyed.  Nor is any State nor any
individual wise who shall disregard them.  They are to civil affairs
what the natural laws are to health--indispensable conditions of
peace and happiness.  What are the ordinances given by the people,
speaking out of fire and darkness of war, with authority inspired by
that same God who gave the law from Sinai amid thunders and trumpet
voices?  1. That these United States shall be one and indivisible.
2. That States have not absolute sovereignty, and have no right to
dismember the Republic.  3. That universal liberty is indispensable
to republican government, and that slavery shall be utterly and
forever abolished.

Such are the results of war!  These are the best fruits of the war.
They are worth all they have cost.  They are foundations of peace.
They will secure benefits to all nations as well as to ours.  Our
highest wisdom and duty is to accept the facts as the decrees of
God.  We are exhorted to forget all that has happened.  Yes, the
wrath, the conflict, the cruelty, but not those overruling decrees
of God which this war has pronounced.  As solemnly as on Mount
Sinai, God says, "Remember!  remember!"  Hear it to-day.  Under this
sun, tinder that bright child of the sun, our banner, with the eyes
of this nation and of the world upon us, we repeat the syllables of
God's providence and recite the solemn decrees: No more Disunion!
No more Secession!  No more Slavery!  Why did this civil war begin?
We do not wonder that European statesmen failed to comprehend this
conflict, and that foreign philanthropists were shocked at a
murderous war that seemed to have no moral origin, but, like the
brutal fights of beasts of prey, to have sprung from ferocious
animalism.  This great nation, filling all profitable latitudes,
cradled between two oceans, with inexhaustible resources, with
riches increasing in an unparalleled ratio, by agriculture, by
manufactures, by commerce, with schools and churches, with books and
newspapers thick as leaves in our own forests, with institutions
sprung from the people, and peculiarly adapted to their genius; a
nation not sluggish, but active, used to excitement, practiced in
political wisdom, and accustomed to self-government, and all its
vast outlying parts held together by the Federal government, mild in
temper, gentle in administration, and beneficent in results, seemed
to have been formed for peace.  All at once, in this hemisphere of
happiness and hope, there came trooping clouds with fiery bolts,
full of death and desolation.  At a cannon shot upon this fort, all
the nation, as if it had been a trained army lying on its arms,
awaiting a signal, rose up and began a war which, for awfulness,
rises into the front rank of bad eminence.  The front of the battle,
going with the sun, was twelve hundred miles long; and the depth,
measured along a meridian, was a thousand miles.  In this vast area
more than two million men, first and last, for four years, have, in
skirmish, fight, and battle, met in more than a thousand conflicts;
while a coast and river line, not less than four thousand miles in
length, has swarmed with fleets freighted with artillery.  The very
industry of the country seemed to have been touched by some infernal
wand, and, with sudden wheel, changed its front from peace to war.
The anvils of the land beat like drums.  As out of the ooze emerge
monsters, so from our mines and foundries uprose new and strange
machines of war, ironclad.  And so, in a nation of peaceful habits,
without external provocation, there arose such a storm of war as
blackened the whole horizon and hemisphere.  What wonder that
foreign observers stood amazed at this fanatical fury, that seemed
without Divine guidance, but inspired wholly with infernal frenzy.
The explosion was sudden, but the train had long been laid.  We must
consider the condition of Southern society, if we would understand
the mystery of this iniquity.  Society in the South resolves itself
into three divisions, more sharply distinguished than in any other
part of the nation.  At the base is the laboring class, made up of
slaves.  Next is the middle class, made up of traders, small
farmers, and poor men.  The lower edge of this class touches the
slave, and the upper edge reaches up to the third and ruling class.
This class was a small minority in numbers, but in practical ability
they had centred in their hands the whole government of the South,
and had mainly governed the country.  Upon this polished, cultured,
exceedingly capable, and wholly unprincipled class, rests the whole
burden of this war.  Forced up by the bottom heat of slavery, the
ruling class in all the disloyal States arrogated to themselves a
superiority not compatible with republican equality, nor with just
morals.  They claimed a right of pre-eminence.  An evil prophet
arose who trained these wild and luxuriant shoots of ambition to the
shapely form of a political philosophy.  By its reagents they
precipitated drudgery to the bottom of society, and left at the top
what they thought to be a clarified fluid.  In their political
economy, labor was to be owned by capital; in their theory of
government, the few were to rule the many.  They boldly avowed, not
the fact alone, that, under all forms of government, the few rule
the many, but their right and duty to do so.  Set free from the
necessity of labor, they conceived a contempt for those who felt its
wholesome regimen.  Believing themselves foreordained to supremacy,
they regarded the popular vote, when it failed to register their
wishes, as an intrusion and a nuisance.  They were born in a garden,
and popular liberty, like freshets overswelling their banks, but
covered their dainty walks and flowers with slime and mud--of
democratic votes.  When, with shrewd observation, they saw the
growth of the popular element in the Northern States, they
instinctively took in the inevitable events.  It must be controlled
or cut off from a nation governed by gentlemen!  Controlled, less
and less, could it be in every decade; and they prepared secretly,
earnestly, and with wide conference and mutual connivance, to
separate the South from the North.  We are to distinguish between
the pretenses and means, and the real causes of this war.  To
inflame and unite the great middle class of the South, who had no
interest in separation and no business with war, they alleged
grievances that never existed, and employed arguments which they,
better than all other men, knew to be specious and false.

Slavery itself was cared for only as an instrument of power or of
excitement.  They had unalterably fixed their eye upon empire, and
all was good which would secure that, and bad which hindered it.
Thus, the ruling class of the South--an aristocracy as intense,
proud, and inflexible as ever existed--not limited either by
customs or institutions, not recognised and adjusted in the regular
order of society, playing a reciprocal part in its machinery, but
secret, disowning its own existence, baptized with ostentatious
names of democracy, obsequious to the people for the sake of
governing them; this nameless, lurking aristocracy, that ran in the
blood of society like a rash not yet come to the skin; this
political tapeworm, that produced nothing, but lay coiled in the
body, feeding on its nutriment, and holding the whole structure to
be but a servant set up to nourish it--this aristocracy of the
plantation, with firm and deliberate resolve, brought on the war,
that they might cut the land in two, and, clearing themselves from
an incorrigibly free society, set up a sterner, statelier empire,
where slaves worked that gentlemen might live at ease.  Nor can
there be any doubt that though, at first, they meant to erect the
form of republican government, this was but a device, a step
necessary to the securing of that power by which they should be able
to change the whole economy of society.  That they never dreamed of
such a war, we may well believe.  That they would have accepted it,
though twice as bloody, if only thus they could rule, none can doubt
that knows the temper of these worst men of modern society.  But
they miscalculated.  They understood the people of the South; but
they were totally incapable of understanding the character of the
great working classes of the loyal States.  That industry, which is
the foundation of independence, and so of equity, they stigmatized
as stupid drudgery, or as mean avarice.  That general intelligence
and independence of thought which schools for the common people and
newspapers breed, they reviled as the incitement of unsettled zeal,
running easily into fanaticism.  They more thoroughly misunderstood
the profound sentiment of loyality, the deep love of country, which
pervaded the common people.  If those who knew them best had never
suspected the depth and power of that love of country which threw it
into an agony of grief when the flag was here humbled, how should
they conceive of it who were wholly disjoined from them in sympathy?
The whole land rose up, you remember, when the flag came down, as if
inspired unconsciously by the breath of the Almighty, and the power
of omnipotence.  It was as when one pierces the banks of the
Mississippi for a rivulet, and the whole raging stream plunges
through with headlong course.  There they calculated, and
miscalculated!  And more than all, they miscalculated the bravery of
men who have been trained under law, who are civilized and hate
personal brawls, who are so protected by society as to have
dismissed all thought of self-defense, the whole force of whose life
is turned to peaceful pursuits.  These arrogant conspirators against
government, with Chinese vanity, believed that they could blow away
these self-respecting citizens as chaff from the battlefield.  Few
of them are left alive to ponder their mistake!  Here, then, are the
roots of this civil war.  It was not a quarrel of wild beasts, it
was an inflection of the strife of ages, between power and right,
between ambition and equity.  An armed band of pestilent
conspirators sought the nation's life.  Her children rose up and
fought at every door and room and hall, to thrust out the murderers
and save the house and household.  It was not legitimately a war
between the common people of the North and South.  The war was set
on by the ruling class, the aristocratic conspirators of the South.
They suborned the common people with lies, with sophistries, with
cruel deceits and slanders, to fight for secret objects which they
abhorred, and against interests as dear to them as their own lives,
I charge the whole guilt of this war upon the ambitious, educated,
plotting, political leaders of the South.  They have shed this ocean
of blood.  They have desolated the South.  They have poured poverty
through all her towns and cities.  They have bewildered the
imagination of the people with phantasms, and led them to believe
that they were fighting for their homes and liberty, whose homes
were unthreatened, and whose liberty was in no jeopardy.  These
arrogant instigators of civil war have renewed the plagues of Egypt,
not that the oppressed might go free, but that the free might be
oppressed.  A day will come when God will reveal judgment, and
arraign at his bar these mighty miscreants; and then, every orphan
that their bloody game has made, and every widow that sits
sorrowing, and every maimed and wounded sufferer, and every bereaved
heart in all the wide regions of this land, will rise up and come
before the Lord to lay upon these chief culprits of modern history
their awful witness.  And from a thousand battlefields shall rise up
armies of airy witnesses, who, with the memory of their awful
sufferings, shall confront the miscreants with shrieks of fierce
accusation; and every pale and starved prisoner shall raise his
skinny hand in judgment.  Blood shall call out for vengeance, and
tears shall plead for justice, and grief shall silently beckon, and
love, heart-smitten, shall wail for justice.  Good men and angels
will cry out: "How long, O Lord, how long, wilt thou not avenge?"
And, then, these guiltiest and most remorseless traitors, these high
and cultured men,--with might and wisdom, used for the destruction
of their country,--the most accursed and detested of all criminals,
that have drenched a continent in needless blood, and moved the
foundations of their times with hideous crimes and cruelty, caught
up in black clouds, full of voices of vengeance and lurid with
punishment, shall be whirled aloft and plunged downwards forever and
forever in an endless retribution; while God shall say, "Thus shall
it be to all who betray their country"; and all in heaven and upon
the earth will say "Amen!"

But for the people misled, for the multitudes drafted and driven
into this civil war, let not a trace of animosity remain.  The
moment their willing hand drops the musket, and they return to their
allegiance, then stretch out your own honest right hand to greet
them.  Recall to them the old days of kindness.  Our hearts wait for
their redemption.  All the resources of a renovated nation shall be
applied to rebuild their prosperity, and smooth down the furrows of
war.  Has this long and weary period of strife been an unmingled
evil?  Has nothing been gained?  Yes, much.  This nation has
attained to its manhood.  Among Indian customs is one which admits
young men to the rank of warriors only after severe trials of
hunger, fatigue, pain, endurance.  They reach their station, not
through years, but ordeals.  Our nation has suffered, but now is
strong.  The sentiment of loyalty and patriotism, next in importance
to religion, has been rooted and grounded.  We have something to be
proud of, and pride helps love.  Never so much as now did we love
our country.  But four such years of education in ideas, in the
knowledge of political truth, in the love of history, in the
geography of our own country, almost every inch of which we have
probed with the bayonet, have never passed before.  There is half a
hundred years' advance in four.  We believed in our institutions and
principles before; but now we know their power.  It is one thing to
look upon artillery, and be sure that it is loaded; it is another
thing to prove its power in battle!  We believe in the hidden power
stored in our institutions; we had never before seen this nation
thundering like Mount Sinai at all those that worshiped the calf at
the base of the mountain.  A people educated and moral are competent
to all the exigencies of national life.  A vote can govern better
than a crown.  We have proved it.  A people intelligent and
religious are strong in all economic elements.  They are fitted for
peace and competent to war.  They are not easily inflamed, and, when
justly incensed, not easily extinguished.  They are patient in
adversity, endure cheerfully needful burdens, tax themselves to meet
real wants more royally than any prince would dare to tax his
people.  They pour forth without stint relief for the sufferings of
war, and raise charity out of the realm of a dole into a munificent
duty of beneficence.  The habit of industry among free men prepares
them to meet the exhaustion of war with increase of productiveness
commensurate with the need that exists.  Their habits of skill
enable them at once to supply such armies as only freedom can
muster, with arms and munitions such as only free industry can
create.  Free society is terrible in war, and afterwards repairs the
mischief of war with celerity almost as great as that with which the
ocean heals the seams gashed in it by the keel of ploughing ships.
Free society is fruitful of military genius.  It comes when called;
when no longer needed, it falls back as waves do to the level of the
common sea, that no wave may be greater than the undivided water.
With proof of strength so great, yet in its infancy, we stand up
among the nations of the world, asking no privileges, asserting no
rights, but quietly assuming our place, and determined to be second
to none in the race of civilization and religion.  Of all nations we
are the most dangerous and the least to be feared.  We need not
expound the perils that wait upon enemies that assault us.  They are
sufficiently understood!  But we are not a dangerous people because
we are warlike.  All the arrogant attitudes of this nation, so
offensive to foreign governments, were inspired by slavery, and
under the administration of its minions.  Our tastes, our habits,
our interests, and our principles, incline us to the arts of peace.
This nation was founded by the common people for the common people.
We are seeking to embody in public economy more liberty, with higher
justice and virtue, than have been organized before.  By the
necessity of our doctrines, we are put in sympathy with the masses
of men in all nations.  It is not our business to subdue nations,
but to augment the powers of the common people.  The vulgar ambition
of mere domination, as it belongs to universal human nature, may
tempt us; but it is withstood by the whole force of our principles,
our habits, our precedents, and our legends.  We acknowledge the
obligation which our better political principles lay upon us, to set
an example more temperate, humane, and just, than monarchical
governments can.  We will not suffer wrong, and still less will we
inflict it upon other nations.  Nor are we concerned that so many,
ignorant of our conflict, for the present, misconceive the reasons
of our invincible military zeal.  "Why contend," say they, "for a
little territory that you do not need?"  Because it is ours!
Because it is the interest of every citizen to save it from becoming
a fortress and refuge of iniquity.  This nation is our house, and
our fathers' house; and accursed be the man who will not defend it
to the uttermost.  More territory than we need!  England, that is
not large enough to be our pocket, may think that it is more than we
need, because it is more than it needs; but we are better judges of
what we need than others are.

Shall a philanthropist say to a banker, who defends himself against
a robber, "Why do you need so much money?"  But we will not reason
with such questions.  When any foreign nation willingly will divide
its territory and give it cheerfully away, we will answer the
question why we are fighting for territory!  At present--for I pass
to the consideration of benefits that accrue to the South in
distinction from the rest of the nation--the South reaps only
suffering; but good seed lies buried under the furrows of war, that
peace will bring to harvest, 1. Deadly doctrines have been purged
away in blood.  The subtle poison of secession was a perpetual
threat of revolution.  The sword has ended that danger.  That which
reason had affirmed as a philosophy, that people have settled as a
fact.  Theory pronounces, "There can be no permanent government
where each integral particle has liberty to fly off."  Who would
venture upon a voyage in a ship each plank and timber of which might
withdraw at its pleasure?  But the people have reasoned by the logic
of the sword and of the ballot, and they have declared that States
are inseparable parts of the national government.  They are not
sovereign.  State rights remain; but sovereignty is a right higher
than all others; and that has been made into a common stock for the
benefit of all.  All further agitation is ended.  This element must
be cast out of political problems.  Henceforth that poison will not
rankle in the blood.  2. Another thing has been learned: the rights
and duties of minorities.  The people of the whole nation are of
more authority than the people of any section.  These United States
are supreme over Northern, Western, and Southern States.  It ought
not to have required the awful chastisement of this war to teach
that a minority must submit the control of the nation's government
to a majority.  The army and navy have been good political
schoolmasters.  The lesson is learned.  Not for many generations
will it require further illustration.  3. No other lesson will be
more fruitful of peace than the dispersion of those conceits of
vanity, which, on either side, have clouded the recognition of the
manly courage of all Americans.  If it be a sign of manhood to be
able to fight, then Americans are men.  The North certainly is in no
doubt whatever of the soldierly qualities of Southern men.  Southern
soldiers have learned that all latitudes breed courage on this
continent.  Courage is a passport to respect.  The people of all the
regions of this nation are likely hereafter to cherish a generous
admiration of each other's prowess.  The war has bred respect, and
respect will breed affection, and affection peace and unity.  4. No
other event of the war can fill an intelligent Southern man, of
candid nature, with more surprise than the revelation of the
capacity, moral and military, of the black race.  It is a revelation
indeed.  No people were ever less understood by those most familiar
with them.  They were said to be lazy, lying, impudent, and cowardly
wretches, driven by the whip alone to the tasks needful to their own
support and the functions of civilization.  They were said to be
dangerous, bloodthirsty, liable to insurrection; but four years of
tumultuous distress and war have rolled across the area inhabited by
them, and I have yet to hear of one authentic instance of the
misconduct of a colored man.  They have been patient and gentle and
docile, and full of faith and hope and piety; and, when summoned to
freedom, they have emerged with all the signs and tokens that
freedom will be to them what it was to us, the swaddling-band that
shall bring them to manhood.  And after the government, honoring
them as men summoned them to the field, when once they were
disciplined, and had learned the arts of war, they have proved
themselves to be not second to their white brethren in arms.  And
when the roll of men that have shed their blood is called in the
other land, many and many a dusky face will rise, dark no more when
the light of eternal glory shall shine upon it from the throne of
God!  5. The industry of the Southern States is regenerated, and now
rests upon a basis that never fails to bring prosperity.  Just now
industry is collapsed; but it is not dead; it sleepeth.  It is vital
yet.  It will spring like mown grass from the roots that need but
showers and heat and time to bring them forth.  Though in many
districts not a generation will see wanton wastes of self-invoked
war repaired, and many portions may lapse again to wilderness, yet,
in our lifetime, we shall see States, as a whole, raised to a
prosperity, vital, wholesome, and immovable, 6. The destruction of
class interests, working with a religion which tends toward true
democracy, in proportion as it is pure and free, will create a new
era of prosperity for the common laboring people of the South, Upon
them have come the labor, the toil, and the loss of this war.  They
have fought blindfolded.  They have fought for a class that sought
their degradation, while they were made to believe that it was for
their own homes and altars.  Their leaders meant a supremacy which
would not long have left them political liberty, save in name.  But
their leaders are swept away.  The sword has been hungry for the
ruling classes.  It has sought them out with remorseless zeal.  New
men are to rise up; new ideas are to bud and blossom; and there will
be men with different ambition and altered policy.  7, Meanwhile,
the South, no longer a land of plantations, but of farms; no longer
tilled by slaves, but by freedmen, will find no hindrance to the
spread of education.  Schools will multiply.  Books and papers will
spread.  Churches will bless every hamlet.  There is a good day
coming for the South.  Through darkness and tears and blood she has
sought it.  It has been an unconscious _via_ _dolorosa_.  But in the
end it will be worth all that it has cost.  Her institutions before
were deadly.  She nourished death in her bosom.  The greater her
secular prosperity, the more sure was her ruin.  Every year of delay
but made the change more terrible.  Now, by an earthquake, the evil
is shaken down.  And her own historians, in a better day, shall
write, that from the day the sword cut off the cancer, she began to
find her health.  What, then, shall hinder the rebuilding of the
Republic?  The evil spirit is cast out: why should not this nation
cease to wander among tombs, cutting itself?  Why should it not
come, clothed and in its right mind, to "sit at the feet of Jesus"?
Is it feared that the government will oppress the conquered States?
What possible motive has the government to narrow the base of that
pyramid on which its own permanence depends?  Is it feared that the
rights of the States will be withheld?  The South is not more
jealous of State rights than the North.  State rights from the
earliest colonial days have been the peculiar pride and jealousy of
New England.  In every stage of national formation, it was
peculiarly Northern, and not Southern, statesmen that guarded State
rights as we were forming the Constitution.  But once united, the
loyal States gave up forever that which had been delegated to the
national government.  And now, in the hour of victory, the loyal
States do not mean to trench upon Southern State rights.  They will
not do it, nor suffer it to be done.  There is not to be one rule
for high latitudes and another for low.  We take nothing from the
Southern States that has not already been taken from the Northern.
The South shall have just those rights that every eastern, every
middle, every western State has--no more, no less.  We are not
seeking our own aggrandizement by impoverishing the South.  Its
prosperity is an indispensable element of our own.

We have shown, by all that we have suffered in war, how great is our
estimate of the Southern States of this Union; and we will measure
that estimate, now, in peace, by still greater exertions for their
rebuilding.  Will reflecting men not perceive, then, the wisdom of
accepting established facts, and, with alacrity of enterprise, begin
to retrieve the past?  Slavery cannot come back.  It is the interest,
therefore, of every man to hasten its end.  Do you want more war?  Are
you not yet weary of contest?  Will you gather up the unexploded
fragments of this prodigious magazine of all mischief, and heap them
up for continued explosions?  Does not the South need peace?  And,
since free labor is inevitable, will you have it in its worst forms
or in its best?  Shall it be ignorant, impertinent, indolent, or
shall it be educated, self-respecting, moral, and self-supporting?
Will you have men as drudges, or will you have them as citizens?
Since they have vindicated the government, and cemented its
foundation stones with their blood, may they not offer the tribute
of their support to maintain its laws and its policy?  It is better
for religion; it is better for political integrity; it is better for
industry; it is better for money--if you will have that ground
motive--that you should educate the black man, and, by education,
make him a citizen.  They who refuse education to the black man would
turn the South into a vast poorhouse, and labor into a pendulum,
incessantly vibrating between poverty and indolence.  From this
pulpit of broken stone we speak forth our earnest greeting to all
our land.  We offer to the President of these United States our
solemn congratulations that God has sustained his life and health
under the unparalleled burdens and sufferings of four bloody years,
and permitted him to behold this auspicious consummation of that
national unity for which he has waited with so much patience and
fortitude, and for which he has labored with such disinterested
wisdom.  To the members of the government associated with him in the
administration of perilous affairs in critical times; to the
senators and representatives of the United States, who have eagerly
fashioned the instruments by which the popular will might express
and enforce itself, we tender our grateful thanks.  To the officers
and men of the army and navy, who have so faithfully, skillfully,
and gloriously upheld their country's authority, by suffering,
labor, and sublime courage, we offer a heart-tribute beyond the
compass of words.  Upon those true and faithful citizens, men and
women, who have borne up with unflinching hope in the darkest hour,
and covered the land with their labor of love and charity, we invoke
the divinest blessing of him whom they have so truly imitated.  But
chiefly to thee, God of our fathers, we render thanksgiving and
praise for that wondrous Providence that has brought forth from such
a harvest of war the seed of so much liberty and peace!  We invoke
peace upon the North.  Peace be to the West!  Peace be upon the South!
In the name of God we lift up our banner, and dedicate it to peace,
union, and liberty, now and for evermore!  Amen.


EFFECT OF THE DEATH OF LINCOLN (Delivered in Brooklyn, April
16th.  1865)

Again a great leader of the people has passed through toil, sorrow,
battle, and war, and come near to the promised land of peace, into
which he might not pass over.  Who shall recount our martyr's
sufferings for this people?  Since the November of 1860, his horizon
has been black with storms.  By day and by night, he trod a way of
danger and darkness.  On his shoulders rested a government dearer to
him than his own life.  At its integrity millions of men were striking
at home.  Upon this government foreign eyes lowered.  It stood like a
lone island in a sea full of storms, and every tide and wave seemed
eager to devour it.  Upon thousands of hearts great sorrows and
anxieties have rested, but not on one such, and in such measure, as
upon that simple, truthful, noble soul, our faithful and sainted
Lincoln.  Never rising to the enthusiasm of more impassioned natures
in hours of hope, and never sinking with the mercurial in hours of
defeat to the depths of despondency, he held on with unmovable
patience and fortitude, putting caution against hope, that it might
not be premature, and hope against caution, that it might not yield
to dread and danger.  He wrestled ceaselessly, through four black and
dreadful purgatorial years, wherein God was cleansing the sin of his
people as by fire.

At last, the watcher beheld the gray dawn for the country.  The
mountains began to give forth their forms from out the darkness, and
the East came rushing toward us with arms full of joy for all our
sorrows.  Then it was for him to be glad exceedingly that had
sorrowed immeasurably.  Peace could bring to no other heart such joy,
such rest, such honor, such trust, such gratitude.  But he looked
upon it as Moses looked upon the promised land.  Then the wail of a
nation proclaimed that he had gone from among us.  Not thine the
sorrow, but ours, sainted soul.  Thou hast, indeed, entered the
promised land, while we are yet on the march.  To us remains the
rocking of the deep, the storm upon the land, days of duty and
nights of watching; but thou art sphered high above all darkness and
fear, beyond all sorrow and weariness.  Rest, O weary heart!  Rejoice
exceedingly, thou that hast enough suffered!  Thou hast beheld him
who invisibly led thee in this great wilderness.  Thou standest
among the elect.  Around thee are the royal men that have ennobled
human life in every age.  Kingly art thou, with glory on thy brow as
a diadem.  And joy is upon thee for evermore.  Over all this land,
over all the little cloud of years that now from thine infinite
horizon moves back as a speck, thou art lifted up as high as the
star is above the clouds that bide us, but never reach it.  In the
goodly company of Mount Zion thou shalt find that rest which thou
hast sorrowing sought in vain; and thy name, an everlasting name in
heaven, shall flourish in fragrance and beauty as long as men shall
last upon the earth, or hearts remain, to revere truth, fidelity,
and goodness.

Never did two such orbs of experience meet in one hemisphere, as the
joy and the sorrow of the same week in this land.  The joy was as
sudden as if no man had expected it, and as entrancing as if it had
fallen a sphere from heaven.  It rose up over sobriety, and swept
business from its moorings, and ran down through the land in
irresistible course.  Men embraced each other in brotherhood that
were strangers in the flesh.  They sang, or prayed, or, deeper yet,
many could only think thanksgiving and weep gladness.  That peace was
sure; that government was firmer than ever; that the land was
cleansed of plague; that the ages were opening to our footsteps, and
we were to begin a march of blessings; that blood was staunched, and
scowling enmities were sinking like storms beneath the horizon; that
the dear fatherland, nothing lost, much gained, was to rise up in
unexampled honor among the nations of the earth--these thoughts,
and that undistinguishable throng of fancies, and hopes, and
desires, and yearnings, that filled the soul with tremblings like
the heated air of midsummer days--all these kindled up such a
surge of joy as no words may describe.

In one hour joy lay without a pulse, without a gleam or breath.  A
sorrow came that swept through the land as huge storms sweep through
the forest and field, rolling thunder along the sky, disheveling the
flowers, daunting every singer in thicket or forest, and pouring
blackness and darkness across the land and up the mountains.  Did
ever so many hearts, in so brief a time, touch two such boundless
feelings?  It was the uttermost of joy; it was the uttermost of
sorrow--noon and midnight, without a space between.

The blow brought not a sharp pang.  It was so terrible that at first
it stunned sensibility.  Citizens were like men awakened
at midnight by an earthquake and bewildered to find everything that
they were accustomed to trust wavering and falling.  The very earth
was no longer solid.  The first feeling was the least.  Men waited to
get straight to feel.  They wandered in the streets as if groping
after some impending dread, or undeveloped sorrow, or some one to
tell them what ailed them.  They met each other as if each would ask
the other, "Am I awake, or do I dream?"  There was a piteous
helplessness.  Strong men bowed down and wept.  Other and common
griefs belonged to some one in chief; this belonged to all.  It was
each and every man's.  Every virtuous household in the land felt as
if its firstborn were gone.  Men were bereaved and walked for days as
if a corpse lay unburied in their dwellings.  There was nothing else
to think of.  They could speak of nothing but that; and yet of that
they could speak only falteringly.  All business was laid
aside.  Pleasure forgot to smile.  The city for nearly a week ceased
to roar.  The great Leviathan lay down, and was still.  Even avarice
stood still, and greed was strangely moved to generous sympathy and
universal sorrow.  Rear to his name monuments, found charitable
institutions, and write his name above their lintels; but no
monument will ever equal the universal, spontaneous, and sublime
sorrow that in a moment swept down lines and parties, and covered up
animosities, and in an hour brought a divided people into unity of
grief and indivisible fellowship of anguish. ...

This nation has dissolved--but in tears only.  It stands
foursquare, more solid to-day than any pyramid in Egypt.  This people
are neither wasted, nor daunted, nor disordered.  Men hate slavery
and love liberty with stronger hate and love to-day than ever
before.  The government is not weakened, it is made stronger.  How
naturally and easily were the ranks closed!  Another steps forward,
in the hour that the one fell, to take his place and his mantle; and
I avow my belief that he will be found a man true to every instinct
of liberty; true to the whole trust that is reposed in him; vigilant
of the Constitution; careful of the laws; wise for liberty, in that
he himself, through his life, has known what it was to suffer from
the stings of slavery, and to prize liberty from bitter personal
experiences.

Where could the head of government in any monarchy be smitten down
by the hand of an assassin, and the funds not quiver or fall
one-half of one per cent?  After a long period of national
disturbance, after four years of drastic war, after tremendous
drafts on the resources of the country, in the height and top of our
burdens, the heart of this people is such that now, when the head of
government is stricken down, the public funds do not waver, but
stand as the granite ribs in our mountains.

Republican institutions have been vindicated in this experience as
they never were before; and the whole history of the last four
years, rounded up by this cruel stroke, seems, in the providence of
God, to have been clothed, now, with an illustration, with a
sympathy, with an aptness, and with a significance, such as we never
could have expected nor imagined.  God, I think, has said, by the
voice of this event, to all nations of the earth, "Republican
liberty, based upon true Christianity, is firm as the foundation of
the globe."

Even he who now sleeps has, by this event, been clothed with new
influence.  Dead, he speaks to men who now willingly hear what before
they refused to listen to.  Now his simple and weighty words will be
gathered like those of Washington, and your children and your
children's children shall be taught to ponder the simplicity and
deep wisdom of utterances which, in their time, passed, in party
heat, as idle words.  Men will receive a new impulse of patriotism
for his sake and will guard with zeal the whole country which he
loved so well.  I swear you, on the altar of his memory, to be more
faithful to the country for which he has perished.  They will, as
they follow his hearse, swear a new hatred to that slavery against
which he warred, and which, in vanquishing him, has made him a
martyr and a conqueror.  I swear you, by the memory of this martyr,
to hate slavery with an unappeasable hatred.  They will admire and
imitate the firmness of this man, his inflexible conscience for the
right, and yet his gentleness, as tender as a woman's, his
moderation of spirit, which not all the heat of party could inflame,
nor all the jars and disturbances of his country shake out of
place.  I swear you to an emulation of his justice, his moderation,
and his mercy.

You I can comfort; but how can I speak to that twilight million to
whom his name was as the name of an angel of God?  There will be
wailing in places which no minister shall be able to reach.  When,
in hovel and in cot, in wood and in wilderness, in the field
throughout the South, the dusky children, who looked upon him as
that Moses whom God sent before them to lead them out of the land of
bondage, learn that he has fallen, who shall comfort them?  O, thou
Shepherd of Israel, that didst comfort thy people of old, to thy
care we commit the helpless, the long-wronged, and grieved.

And now the martyr is moving in triumphal march, mightier than when
alive.  The nation rises up at every stage of his coming.  Cities and
States are his pallbearers, and the cannon beats the hours with
solemn progression.  Dead, dead, dead, he yet speaketh.  Is Washington
dead?  Is Hampden dead?  Is David dead?  Is any man that ever was fit
to live dead?  Disenthralled of flesh, and risen in the unobstructed
sphere where passion never comes, he begins his illimitable
work.  His life now is grafted upon the infinite, and will be
fruitful as no earthly life can be.  Pass on, thou that hast
overcome.  Your sorrows, O people, are his peace.  Your bells and
bands and muffled drums sound triumph in his ear.  Wail and weep
here; God made it echo joy and triumph there.  Pass on.

Four years ago, O Illinois, we took from your midst an untried man
and from among the people.  We return him to you a mighty
conqueror.  Not thine any more, but the nation's; not ours, but the
world's.  Give him place, O ye prairies.  In the midst of this great
continent his dust shall rest, a sacred treasure to myriads who
shall pilgrim to that shrine to kindle anew their zeal and
patriotism.  Ye winds that move over the mighty places of the West,
chant his requiem.  Ye people, behold a martyr whose blood, as so
many articulate words, pleads for fidelity, for law, for liberty.


LORD BELHAVEN (1656-1708)

Scotland ceased to exist as a nation by the act of union, May 1st,
1707. As occasions have been so rare in the world's history when a
nation has voluntarily abdicated its sovereignty and ceased to exist
by its own free act, it would be too much to say that Lord
Belhaven's speech against surrendering Scotch nationality was worthy
of so remarkable a scene as that presented in he Scotch Parliament
when, soon after its opening, November 1st, 1706, he rose to make the
protest which immortalized him.

Smollet belongs more properly to another generation, but the feeling
against the union was rather exaggerated than diminished between the
date of its adoption and that of his poem, 'The Tears of Scotland,'
into the concluding stanza of which he has condensed the passion
which prompted Belhaven's protest:--

  "While the warm blood bedews my veins
   And unimpaired remembrance reigns,
   Resentment of my country's fate
   Within my filial heart shall beat,
   And spite of her insulting foe,
   My sympathizing verse shall flow;--
   'Mourn, helpless Caledonia, mourn,
   Thy banished peace, thy laurels torn!'"

If there is nothing in Belhaven's oration which equals this in
intensity, there is power and pathos, as well as Ciceronian syntax,
in the period: "Hannibal, my lord, is at our gates; Hannibal is come
within our gates; Hannibal is come the length of this table; he is
at the foot of this throne; if we take not notice he'll seize upon
these regalia, he'll take them as our _spolia_ _opima_, and whip us
out of this house, never to return."

It is unfortunate for Belhaven's fame as an orator that his most
effective passages are based on classical allusions intelligible at
once to his audience then, but likely to appear pedantic in times
when Latin has ceased to be the "vulgar tongue" of the educated, as
it still was in the Scotland of Queen Anne's time.

The text of his speech here used is from 'The Parliamentary
Debates,' London 1741.


A PLEA FOR THE NATIONAL LIFE OF SCOTLAND (Delivered 1706 in the
Scotch Parliament)

My Lord Chancellor:--

When I consider the affair of a union betwixt the two nations, as it
is expressed in the several articles thereof, and now the subject of
our deliberation at this time I find my mind crowded with a variety
of melancholy thoughts, and I think it my duty to disburden myself
of some of them, by laying them before, and exposing them to, the
serious consideration of this honorable house.

I think I see a free and independent kingdom delivering up that
which all the world hath been fighting for since the days of Nimrod;
yea, that for which most of all the empires, kingdoms, states,
principalities, and dukedoms of Europe, are at this very time
engaged in the most bloody and cruel wars that ever were, to-wit, a
power to manage their own affairs by themselves, without the
assistance and counsel of any other.

I think I see a national church, founded upon a rock, secured by a
claim of right, hedged and fenced about by the strictest and most
pointed legal sanction that sovereignty could contrive, voluntarily
descending into a plain, upon an equal level with Jews, Papists,
Socinians, Arminians, Anabaptists, and other sectaries, etc.  I think
I see the noble and honorable peerage of Scotland, whose valiant
predecessors led armies against their enemies, upon their own proper
charges and expenses, now divested of their followers and
vassalages, and put upon such an equal foot with their vassals, that
I think I see a petty English exciseman receive more homage and
respect than what was paid formerly to their quondam Mackallamores.

I think I see the present peers of Scotland, whose noble ancestors
conquered provinces, over-run countries, reduced and subjected towns
and fortified places, exacted tribute through the greatest part of
England, now walking in the court of requests like so many English
attorneys, laying aside their walking swords when in company with
the English peers, lest their self-defense should be found murder.

I think I see the honorable estate of barons, the bold assertors of
the nation's rights and liberties in the worst of times, now
setting a watch upon their lips and a guard upon their tongues,
lest they be found guilty of _scandalum_ _magnatum_.

I think I see the royal state of boroughs walking their desolate
streets, hanging down their heads under disappointments, wormed out
of all the branches of their old trade, uncertain what hand to turn
to, necessitate to become 'prentices to their unkind neighbors; and
yet, after all, finding their trade so fortified by companies, and
secured by prescriptions, that they despair of any success therein.

I think I see our learned judges laying aside their practiques and
decisions, studying the common law of England, graveled with
_certioraries_, _nisi_ _prius's_, writs of error, _verdicts_ _indovar_,
_ejectione_ _firmae_, injunctions, demurs, etc., and frighted with
appeals and avocations, because of the new regulations and
rectifications they may meet with.

I think I see the valiant and gallant soldiery either sent to learn
the plantation-trade abroad; or at home petitioning for a small
subsistence, as the reward of their honorable exploits; while their
old corps are broken, the common soldiers left to beg, and the
youngest English corps kept standing.

I think I see the honest, industrious tradesman loaded with new
taxes and impositions, disappointed of the equivalents, drinking
water in place of ale, eating his saltless pottage, petitioning for
encouragement to his manufactories, and answered by counter-petitions.

In short, I think I see the laborious plowman, with his corn
spoiling upon his hands, for want of sale, cursing the day of his
birth, dreading the expense of his burial, and uncertain whether to
marry or do worse.

I think I see the incurable difficulties of the landed men, fettered
under the golden chain of equivalents, their pretty daughters
petitioning for want of husbands, and their sons for want of
employment.

I think I see our mariners delivering up their ships to their Dutch
partners, and what through presses and necessity, earning their
bread as underlings in the royal English navy.

But above all, my lord, I think I see our ancient mother Caledonia,
like Caesar, sitting in the midst of our senate, ruefully looking
round about her, covering herself with her royal garment, attending
the fatal blow, and breathing out her last with an _Et_ _tu_
_quoque_, _mi_ _fili_.

Are not these, my lord, very afflicting thoughts?  And yet they are
but the least part suggested to me by these dishonorable
articles.  Should not the consideration of these things vivify these
dry bones of ours?  Should not the memory of our noble predecessors'
valor and constancy rouse up our drooping spirits?  Are our noble
predecessors' souls got so far into the English cabbage stock and
cauliflowers that we should show the least inclination that way?  Are
our eyes so blinded?  Are our ears so deafened?  Are our hearts so
hardened?  Are our tongues so faltered?  Are our hands so fettered
that in this our day, I say, my lord, that in this our day, we
should not mind the things that concern the very being and
well-being of our ancient kingdom, before the day be hid from our
eyes?

No, my lord, God forbid!  man's extremity is God's opportunity; he is
a present help in time of need, and a deliverer, and that right
early.  Some unforeseen Providence will fall out, that may cast the
balance; some Joseph or other will say, "Why do ye strive together,
since ye are brethren?"  None can destroy Scotland, save Scotland
itself; hold your hands from the pen, you are secure.  Some Judah or
other will say, "Let not our hands be upon the lad, he is our
brother."  There will be a Jehovah-Jireh, and some ram will he caught
in the thicket, when the bloody knife is at our mother's throat.  Let
us up then, my lord, and let our noble patriots behave themselves
like men, and we know not bow soon a blessing may come.

My lord, I wish from my heart, that this my vision prove not as true
as my reasons for it are probable.  I design not at this time to
enter into the merits of any one particular article; I intend this
discourse as an introduction to what I may afterwards say upon the
whole debate as it falls in before this honorable house; and
therefore, in the farther prosecution of what I have to say, I shall
insist upon few particulars, very necessary to be understood, before
we enter into the detail of so important a matter.

I shall, therefore, in the first place, endeavor to encourage a free
and full deliberation, without animosities and heats.  In the next
place I shall endeavor to make an inquiry into the nature and source
of the unnatural and dangerous divisions that are now on foot within
this isle, with some motives showing that it is our interest to lay
them aside at this time.  Then I shall inquire into the reasons
which have induced the two nations to enter into a treaty of union
at this time, with some considerations and meditations with relation
to the behavior of the lord's commissioners of the two kingdoms in
the management of this great concern.  And lastly, I shall propose a
method, by which we shall most distinctly, and without confusion, go
through the several articles of this treaty, without unnecessary
repetitions or loss of time.  And all this with all deference, and
under the correction of this honorable house.

My lord chancellor, the greatest honor that was done unto a Roman
was to allow him the glory of a triumph; the greatest and most
dishonorable punishment was that of _parricide_.  He that was guilty of
_parricide_ was beaten with rods upon his naked body till the blood
gushed out of all the veins of his body; then he was sewed up in a
leathern sack, called a _culeus_ with a cock, a viper, and an ape,
and thrown headlong into the sea.

My lord, _patricide_ is a greater crime than _parricide_, all the world
over.

In a triumph, my lord, when the conqueror was riding in his
triumphal chariot, crowned with laurels, adorned with trophies, and
applauded with huzzas, there was a monitor appointed to stand behind
him, to warn him not to be high-minded, not puffed up with
overweening thoughts of himself; and to his chariot were tied a whip
and a bell, to mind him that for all his glory and grandeur he was
accountable to the people for his administration, and would be
punished as other men, if found guilty.

The greatest honor amongst us, my lord, is to represent the
sovereign's sacred person in Parliament; and in one particular it
appears to be greater than that of a triumph, because the whole
legislative power seems to be wholly intrusted with him.  If he give
the royal assent to an act of the estates, it becomes a law
obligatory upon the subject, though contrary or without any
instructions from the sovereign.  If he refuse the royal assent to a
vote in Parliament, it cannot be a law, though he has the
Sovereign's particular and positive instructions for it.

His Grace, the Duke of Queensbury, who now presents her Majesty in
this session of Parliament, hath had the honor of that great trust,
as often, if not more, than any Scotchman ever had.  He hath been
the favorite of two successive sovereigns; and I cannot but commend
his constancy and perseverance, that notwithstanding his former
difficulties and unsuccessful attempts, and maugre some other
specialties not yet determined, that his Grace has yet had the
resolution to undertake the most unpopular measures last.  If his
Grace succeed in this affair of a union, and that it prove for the
happiness and welfare of the nation, then he justly merits to have a
statue of gold erected for himself; but if it shall tend to the
entire destruction and abolition of our nation, and that we the
nation's trustees will go into it, then I must say that a whip and a
bell, a cock and a viper and an ape, are but too small punishments
for any such bold, unnatural undertaking and complaisance.

That I may pave a way, my lord, to a full, calm, and free reasoning
upon this affair, which is of the last consequence unto this nation,
I shall mind this honorable house, that we are the successors of our
noble predecessors, who founded our monarchy, framed our laws,
amended, altered, and corrected them from time to time, as the
affairs and circumstances of the nation did require, without the
assistance or advice of any foreign power or potentate, and who,
during the time of 2,000 years, have handed them down to us, a free
independent nation, with the hazard of their lives and fortunes.
Shall not we then argue for that which our progenitors have
purchased for us at so dear a rate, and with so much immortal honor
and glory?  God forbid.  Shall the hazard of a father unbind the
ligaments of a dumb son's tongue; and shall we hold our peace, when
our _patria_ is in danger?  I speak this, my lord, that I may
encourage every individual member of this house to speak his mind
freely.  There are many wise and prudent men amongst us, who think
it not worth their while to open their mouths; there are others, who
can speak very well, and to good purpose, who shelter themselves
under the shameful cloak of silence, from a fear of the frowns of
great men and parties.  I have observed, my lord, by my experience,
the greatest number of speakers in the most trivial affairs; and it
will always prove so, while we come not to the right understanding
of the oath _de_ _fideli_, whereby we are bound not only to give our
vote, but our faithful advice in Parliament, as we should answer to
God; and in our ancient laws, the representatives of the honorable
barons and the royal boroughs are termed spokesmen.  It lies upon
your lordships, therefore, particularly to take notice of such whose
modesty makes them bashful to speak.  Therefore, I shall leave it
upon you, and conclude this point with a very memorable saying of an
honest private gentleman to a great queen, upon occasion of a State
project, contrived by an able statesman, and the favorite to a great
king, against a peaceable, obedient people, because of the diversity
of their laws and constitutions: "If at this time thou hold thy
peace, salvation shall come to the people from another place, but
thou and thy house shall perish."  I leave the application to each
particular member of this house.

My lord, I come now to consider our divisions.  We are under the
happy reign (blessed be God) of the best of queens, who has no evil
design against the meanest of her subjects, who loves all her
people, and is equally beloved by them again; and yet that under the
happy influence of our most excellent Queen there should be such
divisions and factions more dangerous and threatening to her
dominions than if we were under an arbitrary government, is most
strange and unaccountable.  Under an arbitrary prince all are willing
to serve because all are under a necessity to obey, whether they
will or not.  He chooses therefore whom he will, without respect to
either parties or factions; and if he think fit to take the advices
of his councils or parliaments, every man speaks his mind freely,
and the prince receives the faithful advice of his people without
the mixture of self-designs.  If he prove a good prince, the
government is easy; if bad, either death or a revolution brings a
deliverance.  Whereas here, my lord, there appears no end of our
misery, if not prevented in time; factions are now become
independent, and have got footing in councils, in parliaments, in
treaties, armies, in incorporations, in families, among kindred,
yea, man and wife are not free from their political jars.

It remains therefore, my lord, that I inquire into the nature of
these things; and since the names give us not the right idea of the
thing, I am afraid I shall have difficulty to make myself well
understood.

The names generally used to denote the factions are Whig and Tory,
as obscure as that of Guelfs and Gibelins.  Yea, my lord, they have
different significations, as they are applied to factions in each
kingdom; a Whig in England is a heterogeneous creature, in Scotland
he is all of a piece; a Tory in England is all of a piece, and a
statesman in Scotland, he is quite otherways, an anti-courtier and
anti-statesman.

A Whig in England appears to be somewhat like Nebuchadnezzar's
image, of different metals, different classes, different principles,
and different designs; yet take the Whigs all together, they are
like a piece of fine mixed drugget of different threads, some finer,
some coarser, which, after all, make a comely appearance and an
agreeable suit.  Tory is like a piece of loyal-made English cloth,
the true staple of the nation, all of a thread; yet, if we look
narrowly into it, we shall perceive diversity of colors, which,
according to the various situations and positions, make various
appearances.  Sometimes Tory is like the moon in its full, as
appeared in the affair of the bill of occasional conformity; upon
other occasions it appears to be under a cloud, and as if it were
eclipsed by a greater body, as it did in the design of calling over
the illustrious Princess Sophia.  However, by this we may see their
designs are to outshoot Whig in his own bow.

Whig in Scotland is a true blue Presbyterian, who, without
considering time or power, will venture their all for the Kirk, but
something less for the State.  The greatest difficulty is how to
describe a Scots Tory.  Of old, when I knew them first, Tory was an
honest-hearted comradish fellow, who, provided he was maintained and
protected in his benefices, titles, and dignities by the State, was
the less anxious who had the government and management of the
Church.  But now what he is since _jure_ _divino_ came in fashion, and
that Christianity, and, by consequence, salvation comes to depend
upon episcopal ordination, I profess I know not what to make of him;
only this I must say for him, that he endeavors to do by opposition
that which his brother in England endeavors by a more prudent and
less scrupulous method.

Now, my lord, from these divisions there has got up a kind of
aristocracy something like the famous triumvirate at Rome; they are
a kind of undertakers and pragmatic statesmen, who, finding their
power and strength great, and answerable to their designs, will make
bargains with our gracious sovereign; they will serve her
faithfully, but upon their own terms; they must have their own
instruments, their own measures; this man must be turned out, and
that man put in, and then they will make her the most glorious queen
in Europe.

Where will this end, my lord?  Is not her Majesty in danger by such
a method?  Is not the monarchy in danger?  Is not the nation's peace
and tranquillity in danger?  Will a change of parties make the
nation more happy?  No, my lord, the seed is sown that is like to
afford us a perpetual increase; it is not an annual herb, it takes
deep root; it seeds and breeds; and, if not timely prevented by her
Majesty's royal endeavors, will split the whole island in two.

My lord, I think, considering our present circumstances at this
time, the Almighty God has reserved this great work for us.  We may
bruise this Hydra of division, and crush this Cockatrice's egg.  Our
neighbors in England are not yet fitted for any such thing; they are
not under the afflicting hand of Providence, as we are; their
circumstances are great and glorious; their treaties are prudently
managed, both at home and abroad; their generals brave and valorous;
their armies successful and victorious; their trophies and laurels
memorable and surprising; their enemies subdued and routed; their
strongholds besieged and taken, sieges relieved, marshals killed and
taken prisoners; provinces and kingdoms are the results of their
victories; their royal navy is the terror of Europe; their trade and
commerce extended through the universe, encircling the whole
habitable world and rendering their own capital city the emporium
for the whole inhabitants of the earth.  And, which is yet more than
all these things, the subjects freely bestow their treasure upon
their sovereign!  And, above all, these vast riches, the sinews of
war, and without which all the glorious success had proved abortive
--these treasures are managed with such faithfulness and nicety,
that they answer seasonably all their demands, though at never so
great a distance.  Upon these considerations, my lord, how hard and
difficult a thing will it prove to persuade our neighbors to a
self-denying bill.

'Tis quite otherwise with us, my lord; we are an obscure poor
people, though formerly of better account, removed to a remote
corner of the world, without name, and without alliances, our posts
mean and precarious, so that I profess I don't think any one post of
the kingdom worth the briguing after, save that of being
commissioner to a long session of a factious Scotch Parliament, with
an antedated commission, and that yet renders the rest of the
ministers more miserable.  What hinders us then, my lord, to lay
aside our divisions, to unite cordially and heartily together in our
present circumstances, when our all is at stake?  Hannibal, my lord,
is at our gates; Hannibal is come within our gates Hannibal is come
the length of this table; he is at the foot of this throne; he will
demolish this throne; if we take not notice, he'll seize upon these
regalia, he'll take them as our _spolia_ _opima_, and whip us out of
this house, never to return again.

For the love of God then, my lord, for the safety and welfare of our
ancient kingdom, whose sad circumstances, I hope, we shall yet
convert into prosperity and happiness, we want no means, if we
unite.  God blessed the peacemakers; we want neither men, nor
sufficiency of all manner of things necessary, to make a nation
happy; all depends upon management, _Concordia_ _res_ _parvae_
_crescunt_.  I fear not these articles, though they were ten times
worse than they are, if we once cordially forgive one another, and
that, according to our proverb, bygones be bygones, and fair play
for time to come.  For my part, in the sight of God, and in the
presence of this honorable house, I heartily forgive every man, and
beg that they may do the same to me; and I do most humbly propose
that his grace, my lord commissioner, may appoint an Agape, may
order a love feast for this honorable house, that we may lay aside
all self-designs, and after our fasts and humiliations may have a
day of rejoicing and thankfulness, may eat our meat with gladness,
and our bread with a merry heart; then shall we sit each man under
his own fig-tree, and the voice of the turtle shall be heard in our
land, a bird famous for constancy and fidelity.

My lord, I shall make a pause here, and stop going on further in my
discourse, till I see further, if his grace, my lord commissioner,
receive any humble proposals for removing misunderstandings among
us, and putting an end to our fatal divisions; upon honor, I have no
other design, and I am content to beg the favor upon my bended
knees.  (No answer.) My lord chancellor, I am sorry that I must
pursue the thread of my sad and melancholy story.  What remains, I
am afraid may prove as afflicting as what I have said; I shall
therefore consider the motives which have engaged the two nations to
enter upon a treaty of union at this time.  In general, my lord, I
think both of them had in their view to better themselves by the
treaty; but before I enter upon the particular motives of each
nation, I must inform this honorable house that since I can
remember, the two nations have altered their sentiments upon that
affair, even almost to downright contradiction--they have changed
headbands, as we say; for the English, till of late, never thought
it worth their pains of treating with us; the good bargain they made
at the beginning they resolve to keep, and that which we call an
incorporating union was not so much as in their thoughts.  The first
notice they seemed to take of us was in our affair of Caledonia,
when they had most effectually broken off that design in a manner
very well known to the world, and unnecessary to be repeated here;
they kept themselves quiet during the time of our complaints upon
that head.  In which time our sovereign, to satisfy the nation, and
allay their heats, did condescend to give us some good laws, and
amongst others that of personal liberties; but they having declared
their succession, and extended their entail, without ever taking
notice of us, our gracious sovereign Queen Anne was graciously
pleased to give the royal assent to our act of security, to that of
peace and war after the decease of her Majesty, and the heirs of her
body, and to give us a hedge to all our sacred and civil interests,
by declaring it high treason to endeavor the alteration of them, as
they were then established.  Thereupon did follow the threatening
and minatory laws against us by the Parliament of England, and the
unjust and unequal character of what her Majesty had so graciously
condescended to in our favors.  Now, my lord, whether the desire
they had to have us engaged in the same succession with them, or
whether they found us like a free and independent people, breathing
after more liberty than what formerly was looked after, or whether
they were afraid of our act of security, in case of her Majesty's
decease; which of all these motives has induced them to a treaty I
leave it to themselves.  This I must say only, they have made a good
bargain this time also.

For the particular motives that induced us, I think they are obvious
to be known, we found by sad experience, that every man hath
advanced in power and riches, as they have done in trade, and at the
same time considering that nowhere through the world slaves are
found to be rich, though they should be adorned with chains of gold,
we thereupon changed our notion of an incorporating union to that of
a federal one; and being resolved to take this opportunity to make
demands upon them, before we enter into the succession, we were
content to empower her Majesty to authorize and appoint
commissioners to treat with the commissioners of England, with as
ample powers as the lords commissioners from England had from their
constituents, that we might not appear to have less confidence in
her Majesty, nor more narrow-heartedness in our act, than our
neighbors of England.  And thereupon last Parliament, after her
Majesty's gracious letter was read, desiring us to declare the
succession in the first place, and afterwards to appoint
commissioners to treat, we found it necessary to renew our former
resolve, which I shall read to this honorable house.  The resolve
presented by the Duke of Hamilton last session of Parliament:--

"That this Parliament will not proceed to the nomination of a
successor till we have had a previous treaty with England, in
relation to our commerce, and other concerns with that nation.  And
further, it is resolved that this Parliament will proceed to make
such limitations and conditions of government, for the rectification
of our constitution, as may secure the liberty, religion, and
independency of this kingdom, before they proceed to the said
nomination."

Now, my lord, the last session of Parliament having, before they
would enter into any treaty with England, by a vote of the house,
passed both an act for limitations and an act for rectification of
our constitution, what mortal man has reason to doubt the design of
this treaty was only federal?

My lord chancellor, it remains now, that we consider the behavior of
the lords commissioners at the opening of this treaty.  And before I
enter upon that, allow me to make this meditation, that if our
posterity, after we are all dead and gone, shall find themselves
under an ill-made bargain, and shall have recourse unto our records,
and see who have been the managers of that treaty, by which they
have suffered so much; when they read the names, they will certainly
conclude, and say, Ah!  our nation has been reduced to the last
extremity, at the time of this treaty; all our great chieftains, all
our great peers and considerable men, who used formerly to defend
the rights and liberties of the nation, have been all killed and
dead in the bed of honor, before ever the nation was necessitated to
condescend to such mean and contemptible terms.  Where are the names
of the chief men, of the noble families of Stuarts, Hamiltons,
Grahams, Campbels, Gordons, Johnstons, Humes, Murrays, Kers?  Where
are the two great officers of the crown, the constables and marshals
of Scotland?  They have certainly all been extinguished, and now we
are slaves forever.

Whereas the English records will make their posterity reverence the
memory of the honorable names who have brought under their fierce,
warlike, and troublesome neighbors, who had struggled so long for
independence, shed the best blood of their nation and reduced a
considerable part of their country to become waste and desolate.

I am informed, my lord, that our commissioners did indeed frankly
tell the lords commissioners for England that the inclinations of
the people of Scotland were much altered of late, in relation to an
incorporating union; and that, therefore, since the entail was to
end with her Majesty's life (whom God long preserve), it was proper
to begin the treaty upon the foot of the treaty of 1604, year of
God, the time when we came first under one sovereign; but this the
English commissioners would not agree to, and our commissioners,
that they might not seem obstinate, were willing to treat and
conclude in the terms laid before this honorable house and subjected
to their determination.  If the lords commissioners for England had
been as civil and complaisant, they should certainly have finished a
federal treaty likewise, that both nations might have the choice
which of them to have gone into as they thought fit; but they would
hear of nothing but an entire and complete union, a name which
comprehends a union, either by incorporation, surrender, or
conquest, whereas our commissioners thought of nothing but a fair,
equal, incorporating union.  Whether this be so or not I leave it to
every man's judgment; but as for myself I must beg liberty to think
it no such thing; for I take an incorporating union to be, where
there is a change both in the material and formal points of
government, as if two pieces of metal were melted down into one
mass, it can neither be said to retain its former form or substance
as it did before the mixture.  But now, when I consider this treaty,
as it hath been explained and spoke to before us this three weeks by
past, I see the English constitution remaining firm, the same two
houses of Parliament, the same taxes, the same customs, the same
excises, the same trading companies, the same municipal laws and
courts of judicature; and all ours either subject to regulations or
annihilations, only we have the honor to pay their old debts and to
have some few persons present for witnesses to the validity of the
deed when they are pleased to contract more.

Good God!  What, is this an entire surrender!

My lord, I find my heart so full of grief and indignation that I
must beg pardon not to finish the last part of my discourse, that I
may drop a tear as the prelude to so sad a story.


JOHN BELL (1797-1869)

John Bell, of Tennessee, who was a candidate with Edward Everett on
the "Constitutional Union" ticket of 1860, when Virginia, Kentucky,
and Tennessee gave him their thirty-nine electoral votes in favor of
a hopeless peace, will always seem one of the most respectable
figures in the politics of a time when calmness and conservatism,
such as characterized him and his coadjutor., Mr. Everett, of
Massachusetts, had ceased to be desired by men who wished immediate
success in public life.  He was one of the founders of the Whig
party, and by demonstrating himself to be one of the very few men
who could win against Andrew Jackson's opposition in Tennessee, he
acquired, under Jackson and Van Buren, a great influence with the
Whigs of the country at large.  He was a member of Congress from
Tennessee for fourteen years dating from 1827, when he won by a
single vote against Felix Grundy, one of the strongest men in
Tennessee and a special favorite with General Jackson.  Disagreeing
with Jackson on the removal of the deposits, Bell was elected
Speaker of the House over Jackson's protege, James K. Polk, in 1834,
and in 1841 he entered the Whig cabinet as Secretary of War under
Harrison who had defeated another of Jackson's proteges, Van
Buren.  In 1847 and again in 1853, he was elected United States
Senator from Tennessee and he did his best to prevent secession.  He
had opposed Calhoun's theories of the right of a State to nullify a
Federal act if unconstitutional, and in March 1858, in the debate
over the Lecompton constitution, he opposed Toombs in a speech which
probably made him the candidate of the Constitutional Unionists two
years later.  Another notable speech, of even more far-reaching
importance, he had delivered in 1853 in favor of opening up the West
by building the Pacific Railroad, a position in which he was
supported by Jefferson Davis.

Mr. Bell was for the Union in 1861, denying the right of secession,
but he opposed the coercion of the Southern States, and when the
fighting actually began he sided with Tennessee, and took little or
no part in public affairs thereafter.  He died in 1869.


AGAINST EXTREMISTS NORTH AND SOUTH (From a Speech in the Senate,
March 18th, 1858. on the Lecompton Constitution)

The honorable Senator from Georgia, Mr. Toombs, announced some great
truths to-day.  He said that mankind made a long step, a great
stride, when they declared that minorities should not rule; and that
a still higher and nobler advance had been made when it was decided
that majorities could only rule through regular and legal forms.  He
asserted this general doctrine with reference to the construction he
proposed to give to the Lecompton constitution; and to say that the
people of Kansas, unless they spoke through regular forms, cannot
speak at all.  He will allow me to say, however, that the forms
through which a majority speaks must be provided and established by
competent authority, and his doctrine can have no application to the
Lecompton constitution, unless he can first show that the
legislature of Kansas was vested with legal authority to provide for
the formation of a State constitution; for, until that can be shown,
there could be no regular and legal forms through which the majority
could speak.  But how does that Senator reconcile his doctrine with
that avowed by the President, as to the futility of attempting, by
constitutional provisions, to fetter the power of the people in
changing their constitution at pleasure?  In no States of the Union
so much as in some of the slaveholding States would such a doctrine
as that be so apt to be abused by incendiary demagogues,
disappointed and desperate politicians, in stirring up the people to
assemble voluntarily in convention--disregarding all the
restrictions in their constitution--and strike at the property of
the slaveholder.

The honorable Senator from Kentucky inquired what, under this new
doctrine, would prevent the majority of the people of the States of
the Union from changing the present Federal Constitution, and
abrogating all existing guarantees for the protection of the small
States, and any peculiar or particular interest confined to a
minority of the States of the Union.  The analogy, I admit, is not
complete between the Federal Constitution and a constitution of a
State; but the promulgation of the general principle, that a
majority of the people are fettered by no constitutional
restrictions in the exercise of their right to change their form of
government, is dangerous.  That is quite enough for the purposes of
demagogues and incendiary agitators.  When I read the special
message of the President, I said to some friends that the message,
taking it altogether, was replete with more dangerous heresies than
any paper I had ever seen emanating, not from a President of the
United States, but from any political club in the country, and
calculated to do more injury.  I consider it in effect, and in its
tendencies, as organizing anarchy.

We are told that if we shall admit Kansas with the Lecompton
constitution, this whole difficulty will soon be settled by the
people of Kansas.  How?  By disregarding the mode and forms
prescribed by the constitution for amending it?  No.  I am not sure
that the President, after all the lofty generalities announced in
his message, in regard to the inalienable rights of the people,
intended to sanction the idea that all the provisions of the
Lecompton constitution in respect to the mode and form of amending
it should be set aside.  He says the legislature now elected may, at
its first meeting, call a convention to amend the constitution; and
in another passage of his message he says that this inalienable
power of the majority must be exercised in a lawful manner.  This is
perplexing.  Can there be any lawful enactment of the legislature in
relation to the call of a convention, unless it be in conformity
with the provisions of the constitution?  They require that
two-thirds of the members of the legislature shall concur in passing
an act to take the sense of the people upon the call of a
convention, and that the vote shall be taken at the next regular
election, which cannot be held until two years afterwards.  How can
this difficulty be got over?  The truth is, that unless all
constitutional impediments in respect to forms be set aside, and the
people take it in hand to amend the constitution on revolutionary
principles, there can be no end of agitation on this subject in less
than three years.  I long since ventured the prediction that there
would be no settlement of the difficulties in Kansas until the next
presidential election.  To continue the agitation is too important
to the interests of both the great parties of the country to
dispense with it, as long as any pretext can be found for prolonging
it.  In the closing debate on the Kansas-Nebraska Bill, I told its
supporters that they could do nothing more certain to disturb the
composure of the two Senators who sat on the opposite side of the
chamber, the one from Massachusetts [Mr. Sumner] and the other from
Ohio [Mr. Chase], than to reject that bill.  Its passage was the
only thing in the range of possible events by which their political
fortunes could be resuscitated, so completely had the Free-Soil
movement at the North been paralyzed by the compromise measures of
1850. I say now to the advocates of this measure, if they want to
strengthen the Republican party, and give the reins of government
into their hands, pass this bill.  If they desire to weaken the
power of that party, and arrest the progress of slavery agitation,
reject it.  And if it is their policy to put an end to the agitation
connected with Kansas affairs at the earliest day practicable, as
they say it is, then let them remit this constitution back to the
people of Kansas, for their ratification or rejection.  In that way
the whole difficulty will be settled before the adjournment of the
present session of Congress, without the violation of any sound
principle, or the sacrifice of the rights of either section of the
Union.

But the President informs us that threatening and ominous clouds
impend over the country; and he fears that if Kansas is not admitted
under the Lecompton constitution, slavery agitation will be revived
in a more dangerous form than it has ever yet assumed.  There may be
grounds for that opinion, for aught I know; but it seems to me that
if any of the States of the South have taken any position on this
question which endangers the peace of the country, they could not
have been informed of the true condition of affairs in Kansas, and
of the strong objections which may be urged on principle against the
acceptance by Congress of the Lecompton constitution.  And I have
such confidence in the intelligence of the people of the whole
South, that when the history and character of this instrument shall
be known, even those who would be glad to find some plausible
pretext for dissolving the Union will see that its rejection by
Congress would not furnish them with such a one as they could make
available for their purposes.

When the Kansas-Nebraska Bill was under discussion, in 1854, in
looking to all the consequences which might follow the adoption of
that measure, I could not overlook the fact that a sentiment of
hostility to the Union was widely diffused in certain States of the
South; and that that sentiment was only prevented from assuming an
organized form of resistance to the authority of the Federal
government, at least in one of the States, in 1851, by the earnest
remonstrance of a sister State, that was supposed to sympathize with
her in the project of establishing a southern republic.  Nor could I
fail to remember that the project--I speak of the convention held in
South Carolina, in pursuance of an act of the legislature--was
then postponed, not dropped.  The argument was successfully urged
that an enterprise of such magnitude ought not to be entered upon
without the co-operation of a greater number of States than they
could then certainly count upon.  It was urged that all the
cotton-planting States would, before a great while, be prepared to
unite in the movement, and that they, by the force of circumstances,
would bring in all the slaveholding States.  The ground was openly
taken, that separation was an inevitable necessity.  It was only a
question of time.  It was said that no new aggression was necessary
on the part of the North to justify such a step.  It was said that
the operation of this government from its foundation had been
adverse to southern interests; and that the admission of California
as a free State, and the attempt to exclude the citizens of the
South, with their property, from all the territory acquired from
Mexico, was a sufficient justification for disunion.  It was not a
mere menace to deter the North from further aggressions.  These
circumstances made a deep impression on my mind at the time, and
from a period long anterior to that I had known that it was a maxim
with the most skillful tacticians among those who desire separation,
that the slaveholding States must be united--consolidated into one
party.  That object once effected, disunion, it was supposed, would
follow without difficulty.

I had my fears that the Kansas-Nebraska Bill was expected to
consolidate the South, and to pave the way for the accomplishment of
ulterior plans by some of the most active supporters of that measure
from the South; and these fears I indicated in the closing debate on
that subject.  Some of the supporters of that measure, I fear, are
reluctant now to abandon the chances of finding some pretext for
agitating the subject of separation in the South in the existing
complications of the Kansas embroilment.

To what extent the idea of disunion is entertained in some of the
Southern States, and what importance is attached to the policy of
uniting the whole South in one party as a preliminary step, may be
inferred from a speech delivered before the Southern convention lately
held in Knoxville, Tenn., by Mr. De Bow, the president of the
convention, and the editor of a popular Southern review.  I will only
refer now to the fate to which the author resigns those who dare to
break the ranks of that solid phalanx in which he thinks the South
should be combined--that is, to be "held up to public scorn and
public punishment as traitors and Tories, more steeped in guilt than
those of the Revolution itself."

The honorable Senator from New York further announced to us in
exultant tones, that "at last there was a North side of this
Chamber, a North side of the Chamber of the House of Representatives,
and a North side of the Union, as well as a South side of all
these"; and he admonished us that the time was at hand when freedom
would assert its influence in the regulation of the domestic and
foreign policy of the country.

When was there a time in the history of the government that there
was no North side of this Chamber and of the other?  When was there a
time that there was not a proud array of Northern men in both
Chambers, distinguished by their genius and ability, devoted to the
interests of the North, and successful in maintaining them?

Though it may be true that Southern men have filled the executive
chair for much the larger portion of the time that has elapsed since
the organization of the government, yet when, in what instance was
it, that a Southerner has been elevated to that high station without
the support of a majority of the freemen of the North?

Do you of the North complain that the policy of the government, under
the long-continued influence of Southern Presidents, has been
injurious or fatal to your interests?  Has it paralyzed your industry?
Has it crippled your resources?  Has it impaired your energies?  Has
it checked your progress in any one department of human effort?  Let
your powerful mercantile marine, your ships whitening every sea--the
fruit of wise commercial regulations and navigation laws; let your
flourishing agriculture, your astonishing progress in manufacturing
skill, your great canals, your thousands of miles of railroads, your
vast trade, internal and external, your proud cities, and your
accumulated millions of moneyed capital, ready to be invested in
profitable enterprises in any part of the world, answer that question.
Do you complain of a narrow and jealous policy under Southern rule, in
extending and opening new fields of enterprise to your hardy sons in
the great West, along the line of the great chain of American lakes,
even to the head waters of the Father of Rivers, and over the rich and
fertile plains stretching southward from the lake shores?  Let the
teeming populations--let the hundreds of millions of annual products
that have succeeded to the but recent dreary and unproductive haunts
of the red man--answer that question.  That very preponderance of
free States which the Senator from New York contemplates with such
satisfaction, and which has moved him exultingly to exclaim that
there is at last a North side of this Chamber, has been hastened by
the liberal policy of Southern Presidents and Southern statesmen; and
has it become the ambition of that Senator to unite and combine all
this great, rich, and powerful North in the policy of crippling the
resources and repressing the power of the South?  Is this to be the
one idea which is to mold the policy of the government, when that
gentleman and his friends shall control it?  If it be, then I appeal
to the better feelings and the better judgment of his followers to
arrest him in his mad career.  Sir, let us have some brief interval of
repose at least from this eternal agitation of the slavery question.
Let power go into whatever hands it may, let us save the Union!

I have all the confidence other gentlemen can have in the extent to
which this Union is intrenched in the hearts of the great mass of
the people of the North and South; but when I reflect upon and
consider the desperate and dangerous extremes to which ambitious
party leaders are often prepared to go, without meaning to do the
country any mischief, in the struggle for the imperial power, the
crown of the American presidency, I sometimes tremble for its fate.

Two great parties are now dividing the Union on this question.  It is
evident to every man of sense, who examines it, that practically, in
respect to slavery, the result will be the same both to North and
South; Kansas will be a free State, no matter what may be the
decision on this question.  But how that decision may affect the
fortunes of those parties, is not certain; and there is the chief
difficulty.  But the greatest question of all is, How will that
decision affect the country as a whole?

Two adverse yet concurrent and mighty forces are driving the vessel
of State towards the rocks upon which she must split, unless she
receives timely aid--a paradox, yet expressive of a momentous and
perhaps a fatal truth.

There is no hope of rescue unless the sober-minded men, both of the
North and South, shall, by some sufficient influence, be brought to
adopt the wise maxims and sage counsels of the great founders of our
government.


TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILROADS (Delivered in the United States Senate,
February 17th, 1858. in Support of the Pacific Railroad Bill)

An objection made to this bill is, the gigantic scale of the
projected enterprise.  A grand idea it is.  A continent of three
thousand miles in extent from east to west, reaching from the
Atlantic to the Pacific, is to be connected by a railway!  Honorable
Senators will remember, that over one thousand miles--one-third of
this whole expanse of the continent--the work is already
accomplished, and that chiefly by private enterprise.  I may, as a
safe estimate, say, that a thousand miles of this railroad leading
from the Atlantic to the West, upon the line of the lakes, and
nearly as much upon a line further south, are either completed, or
nearly so.  We have two thousand miles yet to compass, in the
execution of a work which it is said has no parallel in the history
of the world.  No, sir; it has no parallel in the history of the
world, ancient or modern, either as to its extent and magnitude, or
to its consequences, beneficent and benignant in all its bearings on
the interests of all mankind.  It is in these aspects, and in the
contemplation of these consequences, that it has no parallel in the
history of the world--changing the course of the commerce of the
world--bringing the West almost in contact, by reversing the
ancient line of communication, with the gorgeous East, and all its
riches, the stories of which, in our earlier days we regarded as
fabulous; but now, sir, what was held to be merely fictions of the
brain in former times, in regard to the riches of Eastern Asia, is
almost realized on our own western shores.  Sir, these are some of
the inducements to the construction of this great road, besides its
importance to the military defenses of the country, and its mail
communications.  Sir, it is a magnificent and splendid project in
every aspect in which you can view it.  One-third of this great
railway connection is accomplished; two-thirds remain to be.  Shall
we hesitate to go forward with the work?

Now, with regard to the means provided for the construction of the
road.  It is said, here is an enormous expenditure of the public money
proposed.  We propose to give twenty millions of dollars in the bonds
of the government, bearing five per cent.  interest, and fifteen
millions of acres of land, supposed to be worth as much more, on the
part of the government.  This is said to be enormous, and we are
reminded that we ought to look at what the people will say, and how
they will feel when they come to the knowledge that twenty millions in
money and twenty millions in land have been given for the construction
of a railway!  Some doubtless there are in this chamber who are ready
to contend that we had better give these fifteen millions of acres of
land to become homesteads for the landless and homeless.  What is this
twenty millions in money, and how is it to be paid?  It is supposed
that the road cannot be constructed in less than five years.  In that
event, bonds of the government to the amount of four millions of
dollars will issue annually.  Probably the road will not be built in
less than ten years, and that will require an issue of bonds amounting
to two millions a year; and possibly the road may not be finished in
less than twenty years, which would limit the annual issue of bonds to
one million.  The interest upon these bonds, at five per cent, will
of course have to be paid out of the treasury, a treasury in which
there is now a surplus of twelve or fourteen millions of dollars.
When the road is completed and the whole amount of twenty millions in
lands is paid, making the whole sum advanced by the government forty
millions, the annual interest upon them will only be two millions.
And what is that?  Why, sir, the donations and benevolences, the
allowances of claims upon flimsy and untenable grounds, and other
extravagant and unnecessary expenditures that are granted by Congress
and the executive departments, while you have an overflowing treasury,
will amount to the half of that sum annually.  The enormous sum of two
millions is proposed to be paid out of the treasury annually, when
this great road shall be completed!  It is a tremendous undertaking,
truly!  What a scheme!  What extravagance!  I understand the cost of
the New York and Erie road alone, constructed principally by private
enterprise, has been not less than thirty millions--between thirty
and thirty-three millions of dollars.  That work was constructed by a
single State giving aid occasionally to a company, which supplied the
balance of the cost.  I understand that the road from Baltimore to
Wheeling, when it shall have been finished, and its furniture placed
upon it, will have cost at least thirty millions.  What madness, what
extravagance, then, is it for the government of the United States to
undertake to expend forty millions for a road from the Mississippi
to the Pacific.

Mr. President, one honorable Senator says the amount is not
sufficient to induce a capitalist to invest his money in the
enterprise.  Others, again, say it is far too much; more than we can
afford to give for the construction of the work.  Let us see which is
right.  The government is to give twenty millions in all out of the
treasury for the road; or we issue bonds and pay five per cent,
interest annually upon them, and twenty millions in lands, which, if
regarded as money, amounts to a cost to the government of two
millions per annum.

What are the objects to be accomplished?  A daily mail from the
valley of the Mississippi to the Pacific; the free transportation of
all troops and munitions of war required for the protection and
defense of our possessions on the Pacific; which we could not hold
three months in a war either with England or France, without such a
road.  By building this road we accomplish this further object: This
road will be the most effective and powerful check that can be
interposed by the government upon Indian depredations and
aggressions upon our frontiers or upon each other; the northern
tribes upon the southern, and the southern upon the northern.  You
cut them in two.  You will be constantly in their midst, and cut off
their intercommunication and hostile depredations.  You will have a
line of quasi fortifications, a line of posts and stations, with
settlements on each side of the road.  Every few miles you will thus
have settlements strong enough to defend themselves against inroads
of the Indians, and so constituting a wall of separation between the
Indian tribes, composed of a white population, with arms in their
hands.  This object alone would, perhaps, be worth as much as the
road will cost; and when I speak of what the road will be worth in
this respect, I mean to say, that besides the prevention of savage
warfare, the effusion of blood, it will save millions of dollars to
the treasury annually, in the greater economy attained in moving
troops and military supplies and preventing hostilities.

. . .

I have been thus particular in noting these things because I want to
show where or on which side the balance will be found in the
adjustment of the responsibility account between the friends and the
opponents of this measure--which will have the heaviest account to
settle with the country.

For myself, I am not wedded to this particular scheme.  Rather than
have no road, I would prefer to adopt other projects.  I am now
advocating one which I supposed would meet the views of a greater
number of Senators than any other.  I think great honor is due to
Mr. Whitney for having originated the scheme, and having obtained
the sanction of the legislatures of seventeen or eighteen States of
the Union.  Rather than have the project altogether fail, I would be
willing to adopt this plan.  It may not offer the same advantages for
a speedy consummation of the work; but still, we would have a road
in prospect, and that would be a great deal.  But if gentlemen are to
rise here in their places year after year--and this is the fifth
year from the time we ought to have undertaken this work--and tell
us it is just time to commence a survey, we will never have a
road.  The honorable Senator from South Carolina [Mr. Butler] says
there ought to be some limitation in this idea of progress, when
regarded as a spur to great activity and energy, as to what we shall
do in our day.  He says we have acquired California; we have opened
up those rich regions on our western borders, which promises such
magnificent results; and he asks, is not that enough for the present
generation?  Leave it to the nest generation to construct a work of
such magnitude as this--requiring forty millions of dollars from
the government.  Mr. President, I have said that if the condition was
a road or no road, I would regard one hundred and fifty millions of
dollars as well laid out by the government for the work; though I
have no idea that it will take such an amount.  Eighty or one hundred
millions of dollars will build the road.

But with regard to what is due from this generation to itself, or
what may be left to the next generation, I say it is for the present
generation that we want the road.  As to our having acquired
California, and opened this new world of commerce and enterprise,
and as to what we shall leave to the next generation, I say that,
after we of this generation shall have constructed this road, we
will, perhaps, not even leave to the next generation the
construction of a second one.  The present generation, in my
opinion, will not pass away until it shall have seen two great lines
of railroads in prosperous operation between the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans, and within our own territory, and still leave quite
enough to the next generation--the third and fourth great lines of
communication between the two extremes of the continent.  One, at
least, is due to ourselves, and to the present generation; and I
hope there are many within the sound of my voice who will live to
see it accomplished.  We want that new Dorado, the new Ophir of
America, to be thrown open and placed within the reach of the whole
people.  We want the great cost, the delays, as well as the
privations and risks of a passage to California, by the malarious
Isthmus of Panama, or any other of the routes now in use, to be
mitigated, or done away with.  There will be some greater equality
in the enjoyment and advantages of these new acquisitions upon the
Pacific coast when this road shall be constructed.  The
inexhaustible gold mines, or placers of California, will no longer
be accessible only to the more robust, resolute, or desperate part
of our population, and who may be already well enough off to pay
their passage by sea, or provide an outfit for an overland travel of
two and three thousand miles.  Enterprising young men all over the
country, who can command the pittance of forty or fifty dollars to
pay their railroad fare; heads of families who have the misfortune
to be poor, but spirit and energy enough to seek comfort and
independence by labor, will no longer be restrained by the necessity
of separating themselves from their families, but have it in their
power, with such small means as they may readily command, in eight
or ten days, to find themselves with their whole households
transported and set down in the midst of the gold regions of the
West, at full liberty to possess and enjoy whatever of the rich
harvest spread out before them their industry and energy shall
entitle them to.  It will be theirs by as good a title as any can
boast who have had the means to precede them.  We hear much said of
late of the justice and policy of providing a homestead, a quarter
section of the public land, to every poor and landless family in the
country.  Make this road, and you enable every poor man in the
country to buy a much better homestead, and retain all the pride and
spirit of independence.  Gentlemen here may say that the region of
California, so inviting, and abundant in gold now, will soon be
exhausted, and all these bright prospects for the enterprising poor
pass away.  No, sir; centuries will pass--ages and ages must roll
away before those gold-bearing mountains shall all have been
excavated--those auriferous sands and alluvial deposits shall give
out all their wealth; and even after all these shall have failed,
the beds of the rivers will yield a generous return to the toil of
the laborer.  ...

Mr. President, I alluded to the importance of having a communication
by railway between the Mississippi River and the Pacific Ocean, in
the event of war with any great maritime Power.  I confess that the
debates upon the subject of our foreign relations within the last
few weeks, if all that was said had commanded my full assent, would
have dissipated very much the force of any argument which I thought
might be fairly urged in favor of this road as a necessary work for
the protection and security of our possessions on the Pacific coast.
We now hear it stated, and reiterated by grave and respectable and
intelligent Senators, that there is no reason that any one should
apprehend a war with either Great Britain or France.  Not now, nor
at any time in the future; at all events, unless there shall be a
total change in the condition, social, political, and economical, of
those Powers, and especially as regards Great Britain.  All who have
spoken agree that there is no prospect of war.  None at all.  I
agree that I can see nothing in the signs of the times which is
indicative of immediate and certain war.  Several gentlemen have
thrown out the idea that we hold the bond of Great Britain to keep
the peace, with ample guarantees and sureties, not only for the
present time, but for an indefinite time; and as long as Great
Britain stands as an independent monarchy.  These sureties and
guarantees are said to consist in the discontented and destitute
class of her population, of her operatives and laborers, and the
indispensable necessity of the cotton crop of the United States in
furnishing them with employment and subsistence, without which it is
said she would be torn with internal strife.

I could tell gentlemen who argue in that way, that we have another
guarantee that Great Britain will not break with the United States
for any trivial cause, which they have not thought proper to raise.
We may threaten and denounce and bluster as much as we please about
British violations of the Clayton and Bulwer treaty, and the
Mosquito protectorate, about the assumption of territorial dominion
over the Balize or British Honduras, and the new colony of the Bay
Islands; and Great Britain will negotiate, explain, treat, and
transgress, and negotiate again, and resort to any device, before
she will go to war with us, as long as she can hope to prolong the
advantages to herself of the free-trade policy now established with
the United States.  It is not only the cotton crop of America which
she covets, but it is the rich market for the products of her
manufacturing industry, which she finds in the United States; and
this has contributed as much as any other cause to improve the
condition of her operatives, and impart increased prosperity to her
trade and revenue.  As long as we think proper to hold to our
present commercial regulations, I repeat that it will require very
great provocation on our part to force Great Britain into a war with
the United States.  . . .

As for this road, we are told at every turn that it is ridiculous to
talk of war in connection with it, for we will have no wars except
those with the Indians.  Both England and France dare not go to war
with us.  I say this course of argument is not only unwise and
delusive, but if such sentiments take hold on the country, they will
be mischievous; they will almost to a certainty lead to a daring and
reckless policy on our part; and as each government labors under a
similar delusion as to what the other will not dare to do, what is
more probable than that both may get into such a position--the
result of a mutual mistake--that war must ensue?  It is worth while
to reflect upon the difference between the policy of Great Britain
and this country in her diplomatic correspondence and debates in
Parliament.  When we make a threat, Great Britain does not threaten
in turn.  We hear of no gasconade on her part.  If we declare that we
have a just right to latitude 54 degrees 40', and will maintain our right
at all hazard, she does not bluster, and threaten, and declare what
she will do, if we dare to cany out our threat.  When we talk about
the Mosquito king, of Balize, and of the Bay Islands, and declare
our determination to drive her from her policy and purposes in
regard to them, we do not hear of an angry form of expression from
her.  We employed very strong language last year in regard to the
rights of American fishermen; but the reply of Great Britain
scarcely assumed the tone of remonstrance against the intemperate
tone of our debates.  Her policy upon all such occasions is one of
wisdom.  Her strong and stern purpose is seldom to be seen in her
diplomatic intercourse, or in the debates of her leading statesmen;
but if you were about her dock-yards, or in her foundries, or her
timber-yards, and her great engine manufactories, and her armories,
you would find some bustle and stir.  There, all is life and motion.

I have always thought that the proper policy of this country is to
make no threats--to make no parade of what we intend to do.  Let
us put the country in a condition to defend its honor and interests;
to maintain them successfully whenever they may be assailed; no
matter by what Power, whether by Great Britain, or France, or both
combined.  Make this road; complete the defenses of the country, of
your harbors, and navy yards; strengthen your navy--put it upon an
efficient footing; appropriate ample means for making experiments to
ascertain the best model of ships-of-war, to be driven by steam or
any other motive power; the best models of the engines to be
employed in them; to inquire whether a large complement of guns, or
a few guns of great calibre, is the better plan.  We may well, upon
such questions, take a lesson from England.  At a recent period she
has been making experiments of this nature, in order to give
increased efficiency to her naval establishment.  How did she set
about it?  Her Admiralty Board gave orders for eleven of the most
perfect engines that could be built by eleven of the most skillful
and eminent engine-builders in the United Kingdom, without limit as
to the cost, or any other limitation, except as to class or size.
At the same time orders were issued for the building of thirteen
frigates of a medium class by thirteen of the most skillful
shipbuilders in the kingdom, in order to ascertain the best models,
the best running lines, and the best of every other quality
desirable in a war vessel.  This is the mode in which Great Britain
prepares for any contingencies which may arise.  She cannot tell
when they may occur, yet she knows that she has no immunity from
those chances which, at some time or other, are seen to happen to
all nations.  In my opinion, the construction of this road from the
Mississippi to the Pacific is essential to the protection and safety
of this country, in the event of a war with any great maritime
Power.  It may take ten years to complete it; but every hundred
miles of it, which may be finished before the occurrence of war,
will be just so much gained--so much added to our ability to
maintain our honor in that war.  In every view of this question I
can take, I am persuaded that we ought at least prepare to commence
the work, and do it immediately.


JUDAH PHILIP BENJAMIN (1811-1884)

Judah P. Benjamin, the "Beaconsfield of the Confederacy," was born
at St. Croix in the West Indies, where his parents, a family of
English-Jews, on their way to settle in New Orleans, were delayed by
the American measures against intercourse with England.  In 1816 his
parents brought him to Wilmington, North Carolina, where, and at
Yale College, he was educated.  Not until after he was ready to
begin life at the bar, did he reach New Orleans, the destination for
which his parents had set out before he was born.  In New Orleans,
after a severe struggle, he rose to eminence as a lawyer, and his
firm, of which Mr. Slidell was a partner, was the leading law firm
of the State.  He was elected to the United States Senate as a Whig
in 1852 and re-elected as a Democrat in 1859. With Mr. Slidell, who
was serving with him in the Senate, he withdrew in 1861 and became
Attorney-General in the Confederate cabinet.  He was afterwards made
Secretary of War, but as the Confederate congress censured him in
that position he resigned it and Mr. Davis immediately appointed him
Secretary of State.  After the close of the war, when pursuit after
members of the Confederate cabinet was active, he left the coast of
Florida in an open boat and landed at the Bahamas, taking passage
thence to London where he rose to great eminence as a lawyer.  He
was made Queen's Counsel, and on his retirement from practice,
because of ill health, in 1883, a farewell banquet was given him by
the bar in the hall of the Inner Temple, probably the most notable
compliment paid in England to any orator since the banquet to
Berryer.  He died in 1884.

Benjamin was called the "brains of the Confederacy" and in acuteness
of intellect he probably surpassed most men of his time.  He
resembled Disraeli in this as well as in being a thorough-going
believer in an aristocratic method of government rather than in one
based on universal suffrage and the will of the masses determined by
majority vote.

FAREWELL TO THE UNION (On Leaving the United States Senate in 1861)

Mr. President, if we were engaged in the performance of our
accustomed legislative duties, I might well rest content with the
simple statement of my concurrences in the remarks just made by my
colleague [Mr. Slidell].  Deeply impressed, however, with the
solemnity of the occasion, I cannot remain insensible to the duty of
recording, among the authentic reports of your proceedings, the
expression of my conviction that the State of Louisiana has judged
and acted well and wisely in this crisis of her destiny.

Sir, it has been urged, on more than one occasion, in the
discussions here and elsewhere, that Louisiana stands on an
exceptional footing.  It has been said that whatever may be the
rights of the States that were original parties to the Constitution,
--even granting their right to resume, for sufficient cause, those
restricted powers which they delegated to the general government in
trust for their own use and benefit,--still Louisiana can have no
such right, because she was acquired by purchase.  Gentlemen have
not hesitated to speak of the sovereign States formed out of the
territory ceded by France as property bought with the money of the
United States, belonging to them as purchasers; and, although they
have not carried their doctrine to its legitimate results, I must
conclude that they also mean to assert, on the same principle, the
right of selling for a price that which for a price was bought.

I shall not pause to comment on this repulsive dogma of a party
which asserts the right of property in free-born white men, in order
to reach its cherished object of destroying the right of property in
slave-born black men--still less shall I detain the Senate in
pointing out how shadowy the distinction between the condition of
the servile African and that to which the white freeman of my State
would be reduced, if it, indeed, be true that they are bound to this
government by ties that cannot be legitimately dissevered without
the consent of that very majority which wields its powers for their
oppression.  I simply deny the fact on which the argument is
founded.  I deny that the province of Louisiana, or the people of
Louisiana, were ever conveyed to the United States for a price as
property that could be bought or sold at will.  Without entering
into the details of the negotiation, the archives of our State
Department show the fact to be, that although the domain, the public
lands, and other property of France in the ceded province, were
conveyed by absolute title to the United States, the sovereignty was
not conveyed otherwise than in trust.

A hundredfold, sir, has the Government of the United States been
reimbursed by the sales of public property, of public lands, for the
price of the acquisition; but not with the fidelity of the honest
trustee has it discharged the obligations as regards the
sovereignty.

I have said that the government assumed to act as trustee or
guardian of the people of the ceded province, and covenanted to
transfer to them the sovereignty thus held in trust for their use
and benefit, as soon as they were capable of exercising it.  What is
the express language of the treaty?

"The inhabitants of the ceded territory shall be incorporated in the
Union of the United States, and admitted as soon as possible,
according to the principles of the Federal Constitution, to the
enjoyments of all rights, advantages, and immunities of citizens of
the United States; and in the meantime they shall be maintained and
protected in the enjoyment of their liberty, property, and the
religion which they profess."

And, sir, as if to mark the true nature of the cession in a manner
too significant to admit of misconstruction, the treaty stipulates
no price; and the sole consideration for the conveyance, as stated
on its face, is the desire to afford a strong proof of the
friendship of France for the United States.  By the terms of a
separate convention stipulating the payment of a sum of money, the
precaution is again observed of stating that the payment is to be
made, not as a consideration or a price or a condition precedent of
the cession, but it is carefully distinguished as being a
consequence of the cession.  It was by words thus studiously chosen,
sir, that James Monroe and Thomas Jefferson marked their
understanding of a contract now misconstrued as being a bargain and
sale of sovereignty over freemen.  With what indignant scorn would
those stanch advocates of the inherent right of self-government have
repudiated the slavish doctrine now deduced from their action!

How were the obligations of this treaty fulfilled?  That Louisiana
at that date contained slaves held as property by her people through
the whole length of the Mississippi Valley, that those people had an
unrestricted right of settlement with their slaves under legal
protection throughout the entire ceded province, no man has ever yet
had the hardihood to deny.  Here is a treaty promise to protect
their property--their slave property--in that Territory, before
it should become a State.  That this promise was openly violated, in
the adjustment forced upon the South at the time of the admission of
Missouri, is a matter of recorded history.  The perspicuous and
unanswerable exposition of Mr. Justice Catron, in the opinion
delivered by him in the Dred Scott case, will remain through all
time as an ample vindication of this assertion.

If then, sir, the people of Louisiana had a right, which Congress
could not deny, of the admission into the Union with all the rights
of all the citizens of the United States, it is in vain that the
partisans of the right of the majority to govern the minority with
despotic control, attempt to establish a distinction, to her
prejudice, between her rights and those of any other State.  The only
distinction which really exists is this, that she can point to a
breach of treaty stipulations expressly guaranteeing her rights, as
a wrong superadded to those which have impelled a number of her
sister States to the assertion of their independence.

The rights of Louisiana as a sovereign State are those of Virginia;
no more, no less.  Let those who deny her right to resume delegated
powers successfully refute the claim of Virginia to the same right,
in spite of her express reservation made and notified to her sister
States when she consented to enter the Union!  And, sir, permit me to
say that, of all the causes which justify the action of the Southern
States, I know none of greater gravity and more alarming magnitude
than that now developed of the right of secession.  A pretension so
monstrous as that which perverts a restricted agency constituted by
sovereign States for common purposes, into the unlimited despotism
of the majority, and denies all legitimate escape from such
despotism, when powers not delegated are usurped, converts the whole
constitutional fabric into the secure abode of lawless tyranny, and
degrades sovereign States into provincial dependencies.

It is said that the right of secession, if conceded, makes of our
government a mere rope of sand; that to assert its existence
imputes to the framers of the Constitution the folly of planting
the seeds of death in that which was designed for perpetual
existence.  If this imputation were true, sir, it would merely prove
that their offspring was not exempt from that mortality which is the
common lot of all that is not created by higher than human
power.  But it is not so, sir.  Let facts answer theory.  For
two-thirds of a century this right has been known by many of the
States to be, at all times, within their power.  Yet, up to the
present period, when its exercise has become indispensable to a
people menaced with absolute extermination, there have been but two
instances in which it has been even threatened seriously; the first,
when Massachusetts led the New England States in an attempt to
escape from the dangers of our last war with Great Britain; the
second, when the same State proposed to secede on account of the
admission of Texas as a new State into the Union.

Sir, in the language of our declaration of secession from Great
Britain, it is stated as an established truth, that "all experience
has shown that mankind are more disposed to suffer while evils are
sufferable than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which
they have been accustomed"; and nothing can be more obvious to the
calm and candid observer of passing events than that the disruption
of the Confederacy has been due, in a great measure, not to the
existence, but to the denial of this right.  Few candid men would
refuse to admit that the Republicans of the North would have been
checked in their mad career had they been convinced of the existence
of this right, and the intention to assert it.  The very knowledge of
its existence by preventing occurrences which alone could prompt its
exercise would have rendered it a most efficient instrument in the
preservation of the Union, But, sir, if the fact were otherwise--
if all the teachings of experience were reversed--better, far
better, a rope of sand, aye, the flimsiest gossamer that ever
glistened in the morning dew, than chains of iron and shackles of
steel; better the wildest anarchy, with the hope, the chance, of one
hour's inspiration of the glorious breath of freedom, than ages of
the hopeless bondage and oppression to which our enemies would
reduce us.

We are told that the laws must be enforced; that the revenues must
be collected; that the South is in rebellion without cause, and that
her citizens are traitors.

Rebellion!  the very word is a confession; an avowal of tyranny,
outrage, and oppression.  It is taken from the despot's code, and
has no terror for others than slavish souls.  When, sir, did
millions of people, as a single man, rise in organized, deliberate,
unimpassioned rebellion against justice, truth, and honor?  Well did
a great Englishman exclaim on a similar occasion:--

"You might as well tell me that they rebelled against the light of
heaven, that they rejected the fruits of the earth.  Men do not war
against their benefactors; they are not mad enough to repel the
instincts of self-preservation.  I pronounce fearlessly that no
intelligent people ever rose, or ever will rise, against a sincere,
rational, and benevolent authority.  No people were ever born
blind.  Infatuation is not a law of human nature.  When there is a
revolt by a free people, with the common consent of all classes of
society, there must be a criminal against whom that revolt is
aimed."

Traitors!  Treason!  Ay, sir, the people of the South imitate and
glory in just such treason as glowed in the soul of Hampden; just
such treason as leaped in living flame from the impassioned lips of
Henry; just such treason as encircles with a sacred halo the undying
name of Washington.

You will enforce the laws.  You want to know if we have a government;
if you have any authority to collect revenue; to wring tribute from
an unwilling people?  Sir, humanity desponds, and all the inspiring
hopes of her progressive improvement vanish into empty air at the
reflections which crowd on the mind at hearing repeated, with
aggravated enormity, the sentiments against which a Chatham launched
his indignant thunders nearly a century ago.  The very words of Lord
North and his royal master are repeated here in debate, not as
quotations, but as the spontaneous outpourings of a spirit the
counterpart of theirs.

In Lord North's speech on the destruction of the tea in Boston
harbor, he said:--

"We are no longer to dispute between legislation and taxation; we
are now only to consider whether or not we have any authority
there.  It is very clear we have none, if we suffer the property of
our subjects to be destroyed.  We must punish, control, or yield to
them."

And thereupon he proposed to close the port of Boston, just as the
representatives of Massachusetts now propose to close the port of
Charleston, in order to determine whether or not you have any
authority there.  It is thus that, in 1861, Boston is to pay her
debt of gratitude to Charleston, which, in the days of her struggle,
proclaimed the generous sentiment that "the cause of Boston was the
cause of Charleston."  Who, after this, will say that republicans
are ungrateful?  Well, sir, the statesmen of Great Britain answered
to Lord North's appeal, "yield."  The courtiers and the politicians
said, "punish," "control."  The result is known.  History gives you
the lesson.  Profit by its teachings!

So, sir, in the address sent under the royal sign-manual to
Parliament, it was invoked to take measures "for better securing the
execution of the laws," and it acquiesced in the suggestion.  Just as
now, a senile executive, under the sinister influence of insane
counsels, is proposing, with your assent, "to secure the better
execution of the laws," by blockading ports and turning upon the
people of the States the artillery which they provided at their own
expense for their own defense, and intrusted to you and to him for
that and for no other purpose--nay, even in States that are now
exercising the undoubted and most precious rights of a free people;
where there is no secession; where the citizens are assembling to
hold peaceful elections for considering what course of action is
demanded in this dread crisis by a due regard for their own safety
and their own liberty; aye, even in Virginia herself, the people are
to cast their suffrages beneath the undisguised menaces of a
frowning fortress.  Cannon are brought to bear on their homes, and
parricidal hands are preparing weapons for rending the bosom of the
mother of Washington.

Sir, when Great Britain proposed to exact tribute from your fathers
against their will, Lord Chatham said:--

"Whatever is a man's own is absolutely his own; no man has a right
to take it from him without his consent.  Whoever attempts to do it
attempts an injury.  Whoever does it commits a robbery.  You have no
right to tax America.  I rejoice that America has resisted.

"Let the sovereign authority of this country over the colonies be
asserted in as strong terms as can be devised, and be made to extend
to every point of legislation whatever, so that we may bind their
trade, confine their manufactures, and exercise every power, except
that of taking money out of their own pockets without their
consent."

It was reserved for the latter half of the nineteenth century, and
for the Congress of a Republic of free men, to witness the willing
abnegation of all power, save that of exacting tribute.  What
Imperial Britain, with the haughtiest pretensions of unlimited power
over dependent colonies, could not even attempt without the vehement
protest of her greatest statesmen, is to be enforced in aggravated
form, if you can enforce it, against independent States.

Good God, sir!  since when has the necessity arisen of recalling to
American legislators the lessons of freedom taught in lisping
childhood by loving mothers; that pervade the atmosphere we have
breathed from infancy; that so form part of our very being, that in
their absence we would lose the consciousness of our own identity?
Heaven be praised that not all have forgotten them; that when we
shall have left these familiar halls, and when force bills,
blockades, armies, navies, and all the accustomed coercive
appliances of despots shall be proposed and advocated, voices shall
be heard from this side of the chamber that will make its very roof
resound with the indignant clamor of outraged freedom.  Methinks I
still hear ringing in my ears the appeal of the eloquent
Representative [Hon. George H. Pendleton, of Ohio], whose Northern
home looks down on Kentucky's fertile borders: "Armies, money, blood
cannot maintain this Union; justice, reason, peace may."

And now to you, Mr. President, and to my brother Senators, on all
sides of this chamber, I bid a respectful farewell; with many of
those from whom I have been radically separated in political
sentiment, my personal relations have been kindly, and have inspired
me with a respect and esteem that I shall not willingly forget; with
those around me from the Southern States I part as men part from
brothers on the eve of a temporary absence, with a cordial pressure
of the hand and a smiling assurance of the speedy renewal of sweet
intercourse around the family hearth.  But to you, noble and
generous friends, who, born beneath other skies, possess hearts that
beat in sympathy with ours; to you, who, solicited and assailed by
motives the most powerful that could appeal to selfish natures, have
nobly spurned them all; to you, who, in our behalf, have bared your
breasts to the fierce beatings of the storm, and made willing
sacrifice of life's most glittering prizes in your devotion to
constitutional liberty; to you, who have made our cause your cause,
and from many of whom I feel I part forever, what shall I, can I
say?  Naught, I know and feel, is needed for myself; but this I will
say for the people in whose name I speak to-day: whether prosperous
or adverse fortunes await you, one priceless treasure is yours--
the assurance that an entire people honor your names, and hold them
in grateful and affectionate memory.  But with still sweeter and
more touching return shall your unselfish devotion be rewarded.
When, in after days, the story of the present shall be written, when
history shall have passed her stern sentence on the erring men who
have driven their unoffending brethren from the shelter of their
common home, your names will derive fresh lustre from the contrast;
and when your children shall hear repeated the familiar tale, it
will be with glowing cheek and kindling eye; their very souls will
stand a-tiptoe as their sires are named, and they will glory in
their lineage from men of spirit as generous and of patriotism as
high-hearted as ever illustrated or adorned the American Senate.

SLAVERY AS ESTABLISHED BY LAW (Delivered in the United States
Senate, March 11th, 1858)

Examine your Constitution; are slaves the only species of property
there recognized as requiring peculiar protection?  Sir, the
inventive genius of our brethren of the North is a source of vast
wealth to them and vast benefit to the nation.  I saw a short time
ago in one of the New York journals, that the estimated value of a
few of the patents now before us in this capitol for renewal was
$40,000,000.  I cannot believe that the entire capital invested in
inventions of this character in the United States can fall short of
one hundred and fifty or two hundred million dollars.  On what
protection does this vast property rest?  Just upon that same
constitutional protection which gives a remedy to the slave-owner
when his property is also found outside of the limits of the State
in which he lives.

Without this protection what would be the condition of the Northern
inventor?  Why, sir, the Vermont inventor protected by his own law
would come to Massachusetts, and there say to the pirate who had
stolen his property, "Render me up my property, or pay me value for
its use."  The Senator from Vermont would receive for answer, if he
were the counsel of this Vermont inventor: "Sir, if you want
protection for your property go to your own State; property is
governed by the laws of the State within whose jurisdiction it is
found; you have no property in your invention outside of the limits
of your State; you cannot go an inch beyond it."  Would not this be
so?  Does not every man see at once that the right of the inventor
to his discovery, that the right of the poet to his inspiration,
depends upon those principles of eternal justice which God has
implanted in the heart of man; and that wherever he cannot exercise
them, it is because man, faithless to the trust that he has received
from God, denies them the protection to which they are entitled?

Sir, follow out the illustration which the Senator from Vermont
himself has given; take his very case of the Delaware owner of a
horse riding him across the line into Pennsylvania.  The Senator
says, "Now you see that slaves are not property, like other
property; if slaves were property like other property, why have you
this special clause in your Constitution to protect a slave?  You
have no clause to protect a horse, because horses are recognized as
property everywhere."  Mr. President, the same fallacy lurks at the
bottom of this argument, as of all the rest.  Let Pennsylvania
exercise her undoubted jurisdiction over persons and things within
her own boundary, let her do as she has a perfect right to
do--declare that hereafter, within the State of Pennsylvania, there
shall be no property in horses, and that no man shall maintain a
suit in her courts for the recovery of property in a horse, and
where will your horse owner be then?  Just where the English poet is
now; just where the slaveholder and the inventor would be if the
Constitution, foreseeing a difference of opinion in relation to
rights in these subject-matters, had not provided the remedy in
relation to such property as might easily be plundered.  Slaves, if
you please, are not property like other property in this, that you
can easily rob us of them; but as to the right in them, that man has
to overthrow the whole history of the world, he has to overthrow
every treatise on jurisprudence, he has to ignore the common
sentiment of mankind, he has to repudiate the authority of all that
is considered sacred with man, ere he can reach the conclusion that
the person who owns a slave, in a country where slavery has been
established for ages, has no other property in that slave than the
mere title which is given by the statute law of the land where it is
found.