 (23) I am indebted to Professor Jebb for the following suggestions
    with regard to this passage: "The words {oude touto eosin, all
    apothousin e}, etc., contain some corruption. The sense ought
    clearly to be roughly parallel with that of the phrase used a
    little before, {ouden allo pragmateuontai e}, etc. Perhaps
    {apothousin} is a corruption of {apothen ousin}, and this
    corruption occasioned the insertion of {e}. Probably Xenophon
    wrote {oude touto eosin, all apothen ousin antipalous}, etc.:
    'while the enemy is still some way off, they turn their companies
    so as to face him.' The words {apothen ousin} indirectly suggest
    the celerity of the Spartan movement."


XII

I will now speak of the mode of encampment sanctioned by the regulation
of Lycurgus. To avoid the waste incidental to the angles of a square,
(1) the encampment, according to him, should be circular, except where
there was the security of a hill, (2) or fortification, or where they
had a river in their rear. He had sentinels posted during the day along
the place of arms and facing inwards; (3) since they are appointed not
so much for the sake of the enemy as to keep an eye on friends. The
enemy is sufficiently watched by mounted troopers perched on various
points commanding the widest prospect.

 (1) Or, "Regarding the angles of a square as a useless inconvenience,
    he arranged that an encampment should be circular," etc. See
    Polyb. vi. 31, 42.

 (2) Cf. "Hell." VI. iv. 14; Polyaen. II. iii. 11, ap. Schneider.

 (3) Lit. "these," {tas men}. Or, "He had lines of sentinels posted
    throughout the day; one line facing inwards towards the place of
    arms (and these were appointed, etc.); while observation of the
    enemy was secured by mounted troopers," etc.

To guard against hostile approach by night, sentinel duty according to
the ordinance was performed by the Sciritae (4) outside the main
body. At the present time the rule is so far modified that the duty is
entrusted to foreigners, (5) if there be a foreign contingent present,
with a leaven of Spartans themselves to keep them company. (6)

 (4) See Muller's "Dorians," ii. 253; "Hell." VI. v. 24; "Cyrop." IV.
    ii. 1; Thuc. v. 67, 71; Grote, "H. G." vii. 110.

 (5) See "Hipparch." ix. 4.

 (6) Reading {auton de}. The passage is probably corrupt. See L.
    Dindorf ad loc.

The custom of always taking their spears (7) with them when they go
their rounds must certainly be attributed to the same cause which
makes them exclude their slaves from the place of arms. Nor need we be
surprised if, when retiring for necessary purposes, they only withdraw
just far enough from one another, or from the place of arms itself, not
to create annoyance. The need of precaution is the whole explanation.

 (7) See Critias, ap. Schneider ad loc.

The frequency with which they change their encampments is another point.
It is done quite as much for the sake of benefiting their friends as of
annoying their enemies.

Further, the law enjoins upon all Lacedaemonians, during the whole
period of an expedition, the constant practice of gymnastic (8)
exercises, whereby their pride (9) in themselves is increased, and they
appear freer and of a more liberal aspect than the rest of the world.
(10) The walk and the running ground must not exceed in length (11) the
space covered by a regimental division, (12) so that no one may find
himself far from his own stand of arms. After the gymnastic exercises
the senior polemarch gives the order (by herald) to be seated. This
serves all the purposes of an inspection. After this the order is given
"to get breakfast," and for "the outposts (13) to be relieved." After
this, again, come pastimes and relaxations before the evening exercises,
after which the herald's cry is heard "to take the evening meal." When
they have sung a hymn to the gods to whom the offerings of happy omen
had been performed, the final order, "Retire to rest at the place of
arms," (14) is given.

 (8) Cf. Herod. vii. 208; Plut. "Lycurg." 22 (Clough, i. 113 foll.)

 (9) Reading {megalophronesterous} (L. Dindorf's emendation) for the
    vulg. {megaloprepesterous}. Xen "Opusc. polit." Ox. MDCCCLVI.

 (10) Or, "the proud self-consciousness of their own splendour is
    increased, and by comparison with others they bear more notably
    the impress of freemen."

 (11) The word {masso} is "poetical" (old Attic?). See "Cyrop." II. iv.
    27, and L. Dindorf ad loc.

 (12) A single mora, or an army corps.

 (13) Or, "vedettes," {proskopon}. See "Cyrop." V. ii. 6.

 (14)? Or, "on your arms." See Sturz, "Lex. Xen." s.v.

If the story is a little long the reader must not be surprised, since it
would be difficult to find any point in military matters omitted by the
Lacedaemonians which seems to demand attention.


XIII

I will now give a detailed account of the power and privilege assigned
by Lycurgus to the king during a campaign. To begin with, so long as he
is on active service, the state maintains the king and those with him.
(1) The polemarchs mess with him and share his quarters, so that by dint
of constant intercourse they may be all the better able to consult in
common in case of need. Besides the polemarch three other members of the
peers (2) share the royal quarters, mess, etc. The duty of these is to
attend to all matters of commisariat, (3) in order that the king and the
rest may have unbroken leisure to attend to affairs of actual warfare.

 (1) I.e. "the Thirty." See "Ages." i. 7; "Hell." III. iv. 2; Plut.
    "Ages." 6 (Clough, iv. 6); Aristot. "Pol." ii. 9, 29.

 (2) For these {oi omoioi}, see "Cyrop." I. v. 5; "Hell." III. iii. 5.

 (3) Lit. "supplies and necessaries."

But I will resume at a somewhat higher point and describe the manner in
which the king sets out on an expedition. As a preliminary step, before
leaving home he offers sacrifice (in company with (4) his staff) to Zeus
Agetor (the Leader), and if the victims prove favourable then and there
the priest, (5) who bears the sacred fire, takes thereof from off the
altar and leads the way to the boundaries of the land. Here for the
second time the king does sacrifice (6) to Zeus and Athena; and as soon
as the offerings are accepted by those two divinities he steps across
the boundaries of the land. And all the while the fire from those
sacrifices leads the way, and is never suffered to go out. Behind follow
beasts for sacrifice of every sort.

 (4) Lit. reading {kai oi sun auto}, after L. Dindorf, "he and those
    with him."

 (5) Lit. "the Purphuros." See Nic. Damasc. ap. Stob. "Fl." 44, 41;
    Hesych. ap. Schneider, n. ad loc.

 (6) These are the {diabateria}, so often mentioned in the "Hellenica."

Invariably when he offers sacrifice the king begins the work in the
gloaming ere the day has broken, being minded to anticipate the goodwill
of the god. And round about the place of sacrifice are present the
polemarchs and captains, the lieutenants and sub-lieutenants, with the
commandants of the baggage train, and any general of the states (7) who
may care to assist. There, too, are to be seen two of the ephors, who
neither meddle nor make, save only at the summons of the king, yet have
they their eyes fixed on the proceedings of each one there and keep
all in order, (8) as may well be guessed. When the sacrifices are
accomplished the king summons all and issues his orders (9) as to
what has to be done. And all with such method that, to witness the
proceedings, you might fairly suppose the rest of the world to be
but bungling experimenters, (10) and the Lacedaemonians alone true
handicraftsmen in the art of soldiering.

 (7) I.e. "allied"? or "perioecid"?

 (8) {sophronizousin}, "keep every one in his sober senses."

 (9) See Thuc. v. 66.

 (10) {autoskhediastai, tekhnitai}. See Jebb, "Theophr." x. 3.

Anon the king puts himself at the head of the troops, and if no enemy
appears he heads the line of march, no one preceding him except the
Sciritae, and the mounted troopers exploring in front. (11) If, however,
there is any reason to anticipate a battle, the king takes the leading
column of the first army corps (12) and wheels to the right until he has
got into position with two army corps and two generals of division on
either flank. The disposition of the supports is assigned to the eldest
of the royal council (13) (or staff corps) acting as brigadier--the
staff consisting of all peers who share the royal mess and quarters,
with the soothsayers, surgeons, (14) and pipers, whose place is in the
front of the troops, (15) with, finally, any volunteers who happen to be
present. So that there is no check or hesitation in anything to be done;
every contingency is provided for.

 (11) Or, "who are on scouting duty. If, however, they expect a
    battle," etc.

 (12) Technically, "mora."

 (13) {ton peri damosian}. See "Hell." IV. v. 8; vii. 4.

 (14) See "Anab." III. iv. 30; "Cyrop." I. vi. 15; L. Dindorf, n. ad
    loc.

 (15) Schneider refers to Polyaenus, i. 10.

The following details also seem to me of high utility among the
inventions of Lycurgus with a view to the final arbitrament of battle.
Whensoever, the enemy being now close enough to watch the proceedings,
(16) the goat is sacrificed; then, says the law, let all the pipers,
in their places, play upon the pipes, and let every Lacedaemonian don
a wreath. Then, too, so runs the order, let the shields be brightly
polished. The privilege is accorded to the young man to enter battle
with his long locks combed. (17) To be of cheery countenance--that,
too, is of good repute. Onwards they pass the word of command to the
subaltern (18) in command of his section, since it is impossible to hear
along the whole of each section from the particular subaltern posted on
the outside. It devolves, finally, on the polemarch to see that all goes
well.

 (16) See Plut. "Lycurg." 22 (Clough, i. 114); and for the goat
    sacrificed to Artemis Agrotera, see "Hell." IV. ii. 20; Pause. IX.
    xiii. 4; Plut. "Marcell." 22 (Clough, ii. 264).

 (17) See Plut. "Lycurg." 22 (Clough, i. 114). The passage is corrupt,
    and possibly out of its place. I cite the words as they run in the
    MSS. with various proposed emendations. See Schneider, n. ad loc.
    {exesti de to neo kai kekrimeno eis makhen sunienai kai phaidron
    einai kai eudokimon. kai parakeleuontai de k.t.l.} Zeune,
    {kekrimeno komen}, after Plut. "Lycurg." 22. Weiske, {kai komen
    diakekrimeno}. Cobet, {exesti de to neo liparo kai tas komas
    diakekrimeno eis makhen ienai}.

 (18) Lit. "to the enomotarch."

When the right moment for encamping has come, the king is responsible
for that, and has to point out the proper place. The despatch of
emissaries, however, whether to friends or to foes, is (not) (19) the
king's affair. Petitioners in general wishing to transact anything
treat, in the first instance, with the king. If the case concerns some
point of justice, the king despatches the petitioner to the Hellanodikai
(who form the court-martial); if of money, to the paymasters. (20) If
the petitioner brings booty, he is sent off to the Laphuropolai (or
sellers of spoil). This being the mode of procedure, no other duty is
left to the king, whilst he is on active service, except to play the
part of priest in matters concerning the gods and of commander-in-chief
in his relationship to men. (21)

 (19) The MSS. give {au}, "is again," but the word {mentoi}, "however,"
    and certain passages in "Hell." II. ii. 12, 13; II. iv. 38 suggest
    the negative {ou} in place of {au}. If {au} be right, then we
    should read {ephoren} in place of {basileos}, "belongs to the
    ephors."

 (20) Technically the {tamiai}.

 (21) See Aristot. "Pol." iii. 14.


XIV (1)

Now, if the question be put to me, Do you maintain that the laws of
Lycurgus remain still to this day unchanged? that indeed is an assertion
which I should no longer venture to maintain; knowing, as I do, that in
former times the Lacedaemonians preferred to live at home on moderate
means, content to associate exclusively with themselves rather than
to play the part of governor-general (2) in foreign states and to be
corrupted by flattery; knowing further, as I do, that formerly they
dreaded to be detected in the possession of gold, whereas nowadays there
are not a few who make it their glory and their boast to be possessed of
it. I am very well aware that in former days alien acts (3) were put
in force for this very object. To live abroad was not allowed. And why?
Simply in order that the citizens of Sparta might not take the infection
of dishonesty and light-living from foreigners; whereas now I am very
well aware that those who are reputed to be leading citizens have
but one ambition, and that is to live to the end of their days as
governors-general on a foreign soil. (4) The days were when their sole
anxiety was to fit themselves to lead the rest of Hellas. But nowadays
they concern themselves much more to wield command than to be fit
themselves to rule. And so it has come to pass that whereas in old days
the states of Hellas flocked to Lacedaemon seeking her leadership (5)
against the supposed wrongdoer, now numbers are inviting one another to
prevent the Lacedaemonians again recovering their empire. (6) Yet, if
they have incurred all these reproaches, we need not wonder, seeing that
they are so plainly disobedient to the god himself and to the laws of
their own lawgiver Lycurgus.

 (1) For the relation of this chapter to the rest of the treatise, see
    Grote, ix. 325; Ern. Naumann, "de Xen. libro qui" {LAK. POLITEIA}
    inscribitur, p. 18 foll.; Newmann, "Pol. Aristot." ii. 326.

 (2) Harmosts.

 (3) "Xenelasies," {xenelasiai} technically called. See Plut. "Lycurg."
    27; "Agis," 10; Thuc. ii. 39, where Pericles contrasts the liberal
    spirit of the democracy with Spartan exclusiveness; "Our city is
    thrown open to the world, and we never expel a foreigner or
    prevent him from seeing or learning anything of which the secret,
    if revealed to an enemy, might profit him."--Jowett, i. 118.

 (4) Lit. "harmosts"; and for the taste of living abroad, see what is
    said of Dercylidas, "Hell." IV. iii. 2. The harmosts were not
    removed till just before Leuctra (371 B.C.), "Hell." VI. iv. 1,
    and after, see Paus. VIII. lii. 4; IX. lxiv.

 (5) See Plut. "Lycurg." 30 (Clough, i. 124).

 (6) This passage would seem to fix the date of the chapter xiv. as
    about the time of the Athenian confederacy of 378 B.C.; "Hell." V.
    iv. 34; "Rev." v. 6. See also Isocr. "Panegyr." 380 B.C.; Grote,
    "H. G." ix. 325. See the text of a treaty between Athens, Chios,
    Mytilene, and Byzantium; Kohler, "Herm." v. 10; Rangabe, "Antiq.
    Hellen." ii. 40, 373; Naumann, op. cit. 26.


XV

I wish to explain with sufficient detail the nature of the covenant
between king and state as instituted by Lycurgus; for this, I take it,
is the sole type of rule (1) which still preserves the original form
in which it was first established; whereas other constitutions will
be found either to have been already modified or else to be still
undergoing modifications at this moment.

 (1) Or, "magistracy"; the word {arkhe} at once signifies rule and
    governmental office.

