PRINCE PAUL (_hurriedly_). I promise your Majesty to crush every
Nihilist in Russia in six months if you sign this proclamation; every
Nihilist in Russia.

CZAR. Say that again! To crush every Nihilist in Russia; to crush this
woman, their leader, who makes war upon me in my own city. Prince Paul
Maraloffski, I create you Marechale of the whole Russian Empire to help
you to carry out martial law.

CZAR. Give me the proclamation. I will sign it at once.

PRINCE PAUL (_points on paper_). Here, Sire.

CZARE. (_starts up and puts his hands on the paper_). Stay! I tell you,
stay! The priests have taken heaven from the people, and you would take
the earth away too.

PRINCE PAUL. We have no time, Prince, now. This boy will ruin
everything. The pen, Sire.

CZARE. What! is it so small a thing to strangle a nation, to murder a
kingdom, to wreck an empire? Who are we who dare lay this ban of terror
on a people? Have we less vices than they have, that we bring them to
the bar of judgment before us?

PRINCE PAUL. What a Communist the Prince is! He would have an equal
distribution of sin as well as of property.

CZARE. Warmed by the same sun, nurtured by the same air, fashioned of
flesh and blood like to our own, wherein are they different to us, save
that they starve while we surfeit, that they toil while we idle, that
they sicken while we poison, that they die while we strangle?

CZAR. How dare--?

CZARE. I dare all for the people; but you would rob them of common
rights of common men.

CZAR. The people have no rights.

CZARE. Then they have great wrongs. Father, they have won your battles
for you; from the pine forests of the Baltic to the palms of India they
have ridden on victory's mighty wings in search of your glory! Boy as I
am in years, I have seen wave after wave of living men sweep up the
heights of battle to their death; ay, and snatch perilous conquest from
the scales of war when the bloody crescent seemed to shake above our
eagles.

CZAR (_somewhat moved_). Those men are dead. What have I to do with
them?

CZARE. Nothing! The dead are safe; you[18] cannot harm them now. They
sleep their last long sleep. Some in Turkish waters, others by the
windswept heights of Norway and the Dane! But these, the living, our
brothers, what have you done for them? They asked you for bread, you
gave them a stone. They sought for freedom, you scourged them with
scorpions. You have sown the seeds of this revolution yourself!--

PRINCE PAUL. And are we not cutting down the harvest?

CZARE. Oh, my brothers! better far that ye had died in the iron hail and
screaming shell of battle than to come back to such a doom as[19] this!
The beasts of the forests have their lairs, and the wild beasts their
caverns, but the people of Russia, conquerors of the world, have not
where to lay their heads.

PRINCE PAUL. They have the headsman's block.

CZARE. The headsman's block! Ay! you have killed their souls at your
pleasure, you would kill their bodies now.

CZAR. Insolent boy! Have you forgotten who is Emperor of Russia?

CZARE. No! The people reign now, by the grace of God.[20] You should
have been their shepherd; you have fled away like the hireling, and let
the wolves in upon them.

CZAR. Take him away! Take him away, Prince Paul!

CZARE. God hath given this people tongues to speak with; you would cut
them out that they may be dumb in their agony, silent in their torture!
But God hath given them hands to smite with, and they shall smite! Ay!
from the sick and labouring womb of this unhappy land some revolution,
like a bloody child, shall[21] rise up and slay you.

CZAR (_leaping up_). Devil! Assassin! Why do you beard me thus to my
face?

CZARE. Because I[22] am a Nihilist! (_The ministers start to their feet;
there is dead silence for a few minutes._)

CZAR. A Nihilist! a Nihilist! Scorpion whom I have nurtured, traitor
whom I have fondled, is this your bloody secret? Prince Paul
Maraloffski, Marechale of the Russian Empire, arrest the Czarevitch!

MINISTERS. Arrest the Czarevitch!

CZAR. A Nihilist! If you have sown with them, you shall reap with them!
If you have talked with them, you shall rot with them! If you have lived
with them, with them you shall die!

PRINCE PETRO. Die!

CZAR. A plague on all sons, I say! There should be no more marriages in
Russia when one can breed such vipers as you are! Arrest the Czarevitch,
I say!

PRINCE PAUL. Czarevitch! by order of the Emperor, I demand your sword.
(_CZAREVITCH gives up sword; PRINCE PAUL places it on the table._)
Foolish boy! you are not made for a conspirator; you have not learned to
hold your tongue. Heroics are out of place in a palace.

CZAR (_sinks into his chair with his eyes fixed on the CZAREVITCH_). O
God!

CZARE. If I am to die for the people, I am ready; one Nihilist more or
less in Russia, what does that matter?

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). A good deal I should say to the one Nihilist.

[23]CZARE. The mighty brotherhood to which I belong has a thousand such
as I am, ten thousand better still! (_The CZAR starts in his seat._) The
star of freedom is risen already, and far off I hear the mighty wave
democracy break on these cursed shores.[23]

PRINCE PAUL (_to PRINCE PETROVITCH_). In that case you and I had better
learn how to swim.

CZARE. Father, Emperor, Imperial Master, I plead not for my own life,
but for the lives of my brothers, the people.

PRINCE PAUL (_bitterly_). Your brothers, the people, Prince, are not
content with their own lives, they always want to take their neighbour's
too.

CZAR (_standing up_). I am sick of being afraid. I have done with terror
now. From this day I proclaim war against the people--war to their
annihilation. As they have dealt with me, so shall I deal with them. I
shall grind them to powder, and strew their dust upon the air. There
shall be a spy in every man's house, a traitor on every hearth, a
hangman in every village, a gibbet in every square. Plague, leprosy, or
fever shall be less deadly than my wrath; I will make every frontier a
grave-yard, every province a lazar-house, and cure the sick by the
sword. I shall have peace in Russia, though it be the peace of the dead.
Who said I was a coward? Who said I was afraid? See, thus shall I crush
this people beneath my feet! (_Takes up sword of CZAREVITCH off table
and tramples on it._)

CZARE. Father, beware, the sword you tread on may turn and wound you.
The people suffer long, but vengeance comes at last, vengeance with red
hands and bloody purpose.

PRINCE PAUL. Bah! the people are bad shots; they always miss one.

CZARE. There are times when the people are instruments of God.

CZAR. Ay! and when kings are God's scourges for the people. Oh, my own
son, in my own house! My own flesh and blood against me! Take him away!
Take him away! Bring in my guards. (_Enter the Imperial Guard. CZAR
points to CZAREVITCH, who stands alone at the side of the stage._) To
the blackest prison in Moscow! Let me never see his face again.
(_CZAREVITCH is being led out._) No, no, leave him! I don't trust
guards. They are all Nihilists! They would let him escape and he would
kill me, kill me! No, I'll bring him to prison myself, you and I (_to
PRINCE PAUL_). I trust you, you have no mercy. I shall have no mercy.
Oh, my own son against me! How hot it is! The air stifles me! I feel as
if I were going to faint, as if something were at my throat. Open the
windows, I say! Out of my sight! Out of my sight! I can't bear his eyes.
Wait, wait for me. (_Throws window open and goes out on balcony._)

PRINCE PAUL (_looking at his watch_). The dinner is sure to be spoiled.
How annoying politics are and eldest sons!

VOICE (_outside, in the street_). God save the people! (_CZAR is shot,
and staggers back into the room._)

CZARE. (_breaking from the guards, and rushing over_). Father!

CZAR. Murderer! Murderer! You did it! Murderer! (_Dies._)


TABLEAU.


END OF ACT II.


ACT III.

_Same scene and business as Act I. Man in yellow dress, with drawn
sword, at the door._


_Password outside._ Væ tyrannis.

_Answer._ Væ victis (_repeated three times_).

(_Enter CONSPIRATORS, who form a semicircle, masked and cloaked._)

PRESIDENT. What hour is it?

FIRST CONSP. The hour to strike.

PRES. What day?

SECOND CONSP. The day of Marat.[1]

PRES. In what month?

SECOND CONSP. The month of liberty.

PRES. What is our duty?

FOURTH CONSP. To obey.

PRES. Our creed?

FIFTH CONSP. Parbleu, Mons. le President, I never knew you had one.

CONSPS. A spy! A spy! Unmask! Unmask! A spy!

PRES. [2]Let the doors be shut. There are others but Nihilists
present.[2]

CONSPS. Unmask! Unmask! [3]Kill him! kill him![3] (_Masked CONSPIRATOR
unmasks._) Prince Paul!

VERA. Devil! Who lured you into the lion's den?

CONSPS. Kill him! kill him![4]

PRINCE PAUL. En vérité, Messieurs, you are not over-hospitable in your
welcome.

VERA. Welcome! What welcome should we give you but the dagger or the
noose?

PRINCE PAUL. I had no idea, really, that the Nihilists were so
exclusive. Let me assure you that if I had not always had an _entree_
to the very best society, and the very worst conspiracies, I could never
have been Prime Minister in Russia.

VERA. The tiger cannot change its nature, nor the snake lose its venom;
but are you turned a lover of the people?

PRINCE PAUL. Mon Dieu, non, Mademoiselle! I would much sooner talk
scandal in a drawing-room than treason in a cellar. Besides, I hate the
common mob, who smell of garlic, smoke bad tobacco, get up early, and
dine off one dish.

PRES. What have you to gain, then, by a revolution?

PRINCE PAUL. Mon ami, I have nothing left to lose. That scatter-brained
boy, this new Czar, has banished me.

VERA. To Siberia?

PRINCE PAUL. No, to Paris. He has confiscated my estates, robbed me of
my office and my cook. I have nothing left but my decorations. I am here
for revenge.[5]

PRES. Then you have a right to be one of us. [5]We also meet daily for
revenge.[5]

PRINCE PAUL. You want money, of course. No one ever joins a conspiracy
who has any. Here. (_Throws money on table._) You have so many spies
that I should think you want information. Well, you will find me the
best informed man in Russia on the abuses of our Government. I made them
nearly all myself.

VERA. President, I don't trust this man. He has done us too much harm in
Russia to let him go in safety.

PRINCE PAUL. Believe me, Mademoiselle, you are wrong; I will be a most
valuable addition to your circle; as for you, gentlemen, if I had not
thought that you would be useful to me I shouldn't have risked my neck
among you, or dined an hour earlier than usual so as to be in time.

PRES. Ay, if he had wanted to spy on us, Vera, he wouldn't have come
himself.

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). No; I should have sent my best friend.

PRES. Besides, Vera, he is just the man to give us the information we
want about some business we have in hand to-night.

VERA. Be it so if you wish it.

PRES. Brothers, is it your will that Prince Paul Maraloffski be
admitted, and take the oath of the Nihilist?

CONSPS. It is! it is!

PRES. (_holding out dagger and a paper_). Prince Paul, the dagger or the
oath?

PRINCE PAUL (_smiles sardonically_). I would sooner annihilate than be
annihilated. (_Takes paper._)

PRES. Remember: [6]Betray us, and as long as the earth holds poison or
steel, as long as men can strike or woman betray, you shall not escape
vengeance.[6] The Nihilists never forget their friends, or forgive their
enemies.

PRINCE PAUL. Really? I did not think you were so civilized.

VERA (_pacing up and down_). Why is he not here? He will not keep the
crown. I know him well.

PRES. Sign. (_PRINCE PAUL signs_.) You said you thought we had no creed.
You were wrong. Read it!

VERA. This is a dangerous thing, President. What can we do with this
man?

PRES. We can use him.

VERA. And afterwards?

PRES. (_shrugging his shoulders_). Strangle him.

PRINCE PAUL (_reading_). "The rights of humanity!" In the old times men
carried out their rights for themselves as they lived, but nowadays
every baby seems born with a social manifesto in its mouth much bigger
than itself.[7] "Nature is not a temple, but a workshop: we demand the
right to labour." Ah, I shall surrender my own rights in that respect.

VERA (_pacing up and down behind_). Oh, will he never come? will he
never come?

PRINCE PAUL. "The family as subversive of true socialistic and communal
unity is to be annihilated." Yes, President, I agree completely with
Article 5. A family is a terrible incumbrance, especially when one is
not married. (_Three knocks at the door._)

VERA. Alexis at last!

_Password._ Væ tyrannis!

_Answer._ Væ victis!

(_Enter MICHAEL STROGANOFF._)

PRES.[8] Michael, the regicide! Brothers, let us do honour to a man who
has killed a king.

[9]VERA (_aside_). Oh, he will come yet.[9]

PRES. Michael, you have saved Russia.

MICH. Ay, Russia was free for a moment [10]when the tyrant fell, but the
sun of liberty has set again like that false dawn which cheats our eyes
in autumn.

PRES. The dread night of tyranny is not yet past for Russia.

MICH. (_clutching his knife_).[10] One more blow, and the end is come
indeed.

VERA (_aside_). One more blow! What does he mean? Oh, impossible! but
why is he not with us? Alexis! Alexis! why are you not here?

PRES. But how did you escape, Michael? They said you had been seized.

MICH. I was dressed in the uniform of the Imperial Guard. The Colonel on
duty was a brother, and gave me the password. I drove through the troops
in safety with it, and, thanks to my good horse, reached the walls
before the gates were closed.

PRES. What a chance his coming out on the balcony was!

MICH. A chance? There is no such thing as chance. It was God's finger
led him there.

PRES. And where have you been these three days?

MICH. Hiding in the house of the priest Nicholas at the cross-roads.

PRES. Nicholas is an honest man.

MICH. Ay, honest enough for a priest. I am here now for vengeance on a
traitor!

VERA (_aside_). O God, will he never come? Alexis! why are you not here?
You cannot have turned traitor!

MICH. (_seeing PRINCE PAUL_). Prince Paul Maraloffski here! By St.
George, a lucky capture! This must have been Vera's doing. She is the
only one who could have lured that serpent into the trap.

PRES. Prince Paul has just taken the oath.

VERA. Alexis, the Czar, has banished him from Russia.

MICH. Bah! A blind to cheat us. We will keep Prince Paul here, [11]and
find some office for him in our reign of terror.[11] He is well
accustomed by this time to bloody work.

PRINCE PAUL (_approaching MICHAEL_). That was a long shot of yours, mon
camarade.

MICH. I have had a good deal of practice shooting, since I have been a
boy, off your Highness's wild boars.

PRINCE PAUL. Are my gamekeepers like moles, then, always asleep?

MICH. No, Prince. I am one of them; but, like you, I am fond of robbing
what I am put to watch.

PRES. This must be a new atmosphere for you, Prince Paul. We speak the
truth to one another here.

PRINCE PAUL. How misleading you must find it. You have an odd medley
here, President--a little rococo, I am afraid.

PRES. You recognise a good many friends, I dare say?

PRINCE PAUL. Yes, there is always more brass than brains in an
aristocracy.

PRES. But you are here yourself?

PRINCE PAUL. I? As I cannot be Prime Minister, I must be a Nihilist.
There is no alternative.

VERA. O God, will he never come? The hand is on the stroke of the hour.
Will he never come?

MICH. (_aside_). President, you know what we have to do? 'Tis but a
sorry hunter who leaves the wolf cub alive to avenge his father. How are
we to get at this boy? It must be to-night. To-morrow he will be
throwing some sop of reform to the people, and it will be too late for a
Republic.

PRINCE PAUL. You are quite right. Good kings are the enemies of
Democracy, and when he has begun by banishing me you may be sure he
intends to be a patriot.

MICH. I am sick of patriot kings; [12]what Russia needs is a
Republic.[12]

PRINCE PAUL. Messieurs, I have brought you two documents which I think
will interest you--the proclamation this young Czar intends publishing
to-morrow, and a plan of the Winter Palace, where he sleeps to-night.
(_Hands paper._)

VERA. [13]I dare not ask them what they are plotting about.[13] Oh, why
is Alexis not here?

PRES. Prince, this is most valuable information. Michael, you were
right. If it is not to-night it will be too late. Read that.

MICH. Ah! A loaf of bread flung to a starving nation. [14]A lie to cheat
the people.[14] (_Tears it up._) It must be to-night. I do not believe
in him. Would he have kept his crown had he loved the people? But how
are we to get at him?

PRINCE PAUL. The key of the private door in the street. (_Hands key._)

PRES. Prince, we are in your debt.

PRINCE PAUL (_smiling_). The normal condition of the Nihilists.

MICH. Ay, but we are paying our debts off with interest now. Two
Emperors in one week. That will make the balance straight. We would have
thrown in a Prime Minister if you had not come.

PRINCE PAUL. Ah, I am sorry you told me. It robs my visit of all its
picturesqueness and adventure. I thought I was perilling my head by
coming here, and you tell me I have saved it. One is sure to be
disappointed if one tries to get romance out of modern life.

MICH. It is not so romantic a thing to lose one's head, Prince Paul.

PRINCE PAUL. No, but it must often be very dull to keep it. Don't you
find that sometimes? (_Clock strikes six._)

VERA (_sinking into a seat_). Oh, it is past the hour! It is past the
hour!

MICH. (_to PRESIDENT_). Remember to-morrow will be too late.

PRES. Brothers, it is full time. Which of us is absent?

CONSPS. Alexis! Alexis!

PRES. Michael, read Rule 7.

MICH. "When any brother shall have disobeyed a summons to be present,
the President shall enquire if there is anything alleged against him."

PRES. Is there anything against our brother Alexis?

CONSPS. He wears a crown! He wears a crown!

PRES. Michael, read Article 7 of the Code of Revolution.

MICH. "Between the Nihilists and all men who wear crowns above their
fellows, there is war to the death."

PRES. Brothers, what say you? Is Alexis, the Czar, guilty or not?

OMNES. He is guilty!

PRES. What shall the penalty be?

OMNES. Death!

PRES. Let the lots be prepared; it shall be to-night.

PRINCE PAUL. Ah, this is really interesting! I was getting afraid
conspiracies were as dull as courts are.

PROF. MARFA. My forte is more in writing pamphlets than in taking shots.
Still a regicide has always a place in history.

MICH. If your pistol is as harmless as your pen, this young tyrant will
have a long life.

PRINCE PAUL. You ought to remember, too, Professor, that if you were
seized, as you probably would be, and hung, as you certainly would be,
there would be nobody left to read your own articles.

PRES. Brothers, are you ready?

VERA (_starting up_). Not yet! Not yet! I have a word to say.

MICH. (_aside_). [15]Plague take her! I knew it would come to this.[15]

VERA. This boy has been our brother. Night after night he has perilled
his own life to come here. [16]Night after night, when every street was
filled with spies, every house with traitors.[16] Delicately nurtured
like a king's son, he has dwelt among us.

PRES. Ay! under a false name. [17]He lied to us at the beginning. He
lies to us now at the end.[17]

VERA. I swear he is true. There is not a man here who does not owe him
his life a thousand times. When the bloodhounds were on us that night,
who saved us [18]from arrest, torture, flogging, death,[18] but he ye
seek to kill?--

MICH. To kill all tyrants is our mission!

VERA. He is no tyrant. I know him well! He loves the people.

PRES. We know him too; he is a traitor.

VERA. A traitor! Three days ago he could have betrayed every man of you
here, [19]and the gibbet would have been your doom.[19] He gave you all
your lives once. Give him a little time--a week, a month, a few days;
but not now!--O God,[20] not now!

CONSPS. (_brandishing daggers_). To-night! to-night! to-night!

VERA. Peace, you gorged adders; peace!

MICH. What, are we not here to annihilate? shall we not keep our oath?

VERA. Your oath! your oath! [21]Greedy that you are of gain, every man's
hand lusting for his neighbour's pelf, every heart set on pillage and
rapine;[21] who, of ye all, if the crown were set on his head, would
give an empire up for the mob to scramble for? The people are not yet
fit for a Republic in Russia.

PRES. Every nation is fit for a Republic.

MICH. The man is a tyrant.

VERA. A tyrant! Hath he not dismissed his evil counsellors. That
ill-omened raven of his father's life hath had his wings clipped and his
claws pared, and comes to us croaking for revenge. Oh, have mercy on
him![22] Give him a week to live!

PRES. Vera pleading for a king!

VERA (_proudly_). I plead not for a king, but for a brother.

MICH. For a traitor to his oath, for a coward who should have flung the
purple back to the fools that gave it to him. No, Vera, no. The brood of
men is not dead yet, nor the dull earth grown sick of child-bearing. No
crowned man in Russia shall pollute God's air by living.

PRES. You bade us try you once; we have tried you, and you are found
wanting.

MICH. Vera, I am not blind; I know your secret. You love this boy, this
young prince with his pretty face, his curled hair, his soft white
hands. Fool that you are, dupe of a lying tongue, do you know what he
would have done to you, this boy you think loved you? He would have made
you his mistress, used your body at his pleasure, thrown you away when
he was wearied of you; you, the priestess of liberty, the flame of
Revolution, the torch of democracy.

VERA. What he would have done to me matters little. To the people, at
least, he will be true. He loves the people--at least, he loves liberty.

PRES. So he would play the citizen-king, would he, while we starve?
[23]Would flatter us with sweet speeches, would cheat us with promises
like his father, would lie to us as his whole race have lied.[23]

MICH. And you whose very name made every despot tremble for his life,
you, Vera Sabouroff, you would betray liberty for a lover and the people
for a paramour!

CONSPS. [24]Traitress! Draw the lots; draw the lots![24]

VERA. In thy throat thou liest, Michael! I love him not. He loves me
not.

MICH. You love him not? Shall he not die then?

VERA (_with an effort, clenching her hands_). Ay, it is right that he
should die. He hath broken his oath. [25]There should be no crowned man
in Europe. Have I not sworn it? To be strong our new Republic should be
drunk with the blood of kings. He hath broken his oath. As the father
died so let the son die too.[25] Yet not to-night, not to-night. Russia,
that hath borne her centuries of wrong, can wait a week for liberty.
Give him a week.

PRES. We will have none of you! Begone from us to this boy you love.

MICH. Though I find him in your arms I shall kill him.

CONSPS. To-night! To-night! To-night!

MICH. (_holding up his hand_). A moment! I have something to say.
(_Approaches VERA; speaks very slowly._) Vera Sabouroff, have you
forgotten your brother? (_Pauses to see effect; VERA starts._) Have you
forgotten that young face, pale with famine; those young limbs twisted
with torture; the iron chains they made him walk in? What week of
liberty did they give him? What pity did they show him for a day? (_VERA
falls in a chair._) Oh! you could talk glibly enough then of vengeance,
glibly enough of liberty. When you said you would come to Moscow, your
old father caught you by the knees and begged you not to leave him
childless and alone.[26] I seem to hear his cries still ringing in my
ears, but you were as deaf to him as the rocks on the roadside; as chill
and cold as the snow on the hill. You left your father that night, and
three weeks after he died of a broken heart. You wrote to me to follow
you here. I did so; first because I loved you; but you soon cured me of
that; whatever gentle feeling, whatever pity, whatever humanity, was in
my heart you withered up and destroyed, as the canker worm eats the
corn, and the plague kills the child. You bade me cast out love from my
breast as a vile thing, you turned my hand to iron, and my heart to
stone; you told me to live for freedom and for revenge. I have done so;
but you, what have you done?

VERA. Let the lots be drawn! (_CONSPIRATORS applaud._)

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). Ah, the Grand Duke will come to the throne sooner
than he expected. He is sure to make a good king under my guidance. He
is so cruel to animals, and never keeps his word.

MICH. Now you are yourself at last, Vera.

VERA (_standing motionless in the middle_). The lots, I say, the lots!
I am no woman now. My blood seems turned to gall; my heart is as cold as
steel is; my hand shall be more deadly. From the desert and the tomb the
voice of my prisoned brother cries aloud, and bids me strike one blow
for liberty. The lots, I say, the lots!

PRES. Are you ready. Michael, you have the right to draw first; you are
a Regicide.

VERA. O God, into my hands! Into my hands! (_They draw the lots from a
bowl surmounted by a skull._)

PRES. Open your lots.

VERA (_opening her lot_). The lot is mine! see the bloody sign upon it!
Dmitri, my brother, you shall have your revenge now.

PRES. Vera Sabouroff, you are chosen to be a regicide. God has been good
to you. The dagger or the poison? (_Offers her dagger and vial._)

VERA. I can trust my hand better with the dagger; it never fails. (_Take
dagger._) I shall stab him to the heart, as he has stabbed me. Traitor,
to leave us for a ribbon, a gaud, a bauble, to lie to me every day he
came here, to forget us in an hour. [27]Michael was right, he loved me
not, nor the people either.[27] Methinks that if I was a mother and bore
a man-child I would poison my breast to him, lest he might grow to a
traitor or to a king. (_PRINCE PAUL whispers to the PRESIDENT._)

PRES. Ay, Prince Paul, that is the best way. Vera, the Czar[28] sleeps
to-night in his own room in the north wing of the palace. Here is the
key of the private door in the street. The passwords of the guards will
be given to you. His own servants will be drugged. You will find him
alone.

VERA. It is well. I shall not fail.

PRES. We will wait outside in the Place St. Isaac, under the window. As
the clock strikes twelve from the tower of St. Nicholas you will give us
the sign that the dog is dead.

VERA. And what shall the sign be?

PRES. You are to throw us out the bloody dagger.

MICH. Dripping with the traitor's life.

PRES. Else we shall know that you have been seized, and we will burst
our way in, drag you from his guards.

MICH. And kill him in the midst of them.

PRES. Michael, you will head us?

MICH. Ay, I shall head you. See that your hand fails not, Vera
Sabouroff.

[29]VERA. Fool, is it so hard a thing to kill one's enemy.[29]

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). This is the ninth conspiracy I have been in in
Russia. They always end in a "voyage en Siberie" for my friends and a
new decoration for myself.

MICH. It is your last conspiracy, Prince.

PRES. At twelve o'clock, the bloody dagger.

VERA. Ay, red with the blood of that false heart. I shall not forget it.
(_Standing in the middle of the stage._) [30]To strangle whatever nature
is in me, neither to love nor to be loved, neither to pity nor to be
pitied. Ay! it is an oath, an oath. Methinks the spirit of Charlotte
Corday has entered my soul now. I shall carve my name on the world, and
be ranked among the great heroines. Ay! the spirit of Charlotte Corday
beats in each petty vein, and nerves my woman's hand to strike, as I
have nerved my woman's heart to hate. Though he laughs in his dreams, I
shall not falter. Though he sleep peacefully I shall not miss my
blow.[30] Be glad, my brother, in your stifled cell; be glad and laugh
to-night. To-night this new-fledged Czar shall post with bloody feet to
Hell, and greet his father there! [31]This Czar! O traitor, liar, false
to his oath, false to me! To play the patriot amongst us, and now to
wear a crown; to sell us, like Judas, for thirty silver pieces, to
betray us with a kiss![31] (_With more passion._) O Liberty, O mighty
mother of eternal time, thy robe is purple with the blood of those who
have died for thee! Thy throne is the Calvary of the people, thy crown
the crown of thorns. O crucified mother, the despot has driven a nail
through thy right hand, and the tyrant through thy left! Thy feet are
pierced with their iron. When thou wert athirst thou calledst on the
priests for water, and they gave thee bitter drink. They thrust a sword
into thy side. They mocked thee in thine agony of age on age. [32]Here,
on thy altar, O Liberty, do I dedicate myself to thy service; do with me
as thou wilt![32] (_Brandishing dagger._) The end has come now, and by
thy sacred wounds, O crucified mother, O Liberty, I swear that Russia
shall be saved!


CURTAIN.


END OF ACT III.


ACT IV.

SCENE.--_Antechamber of the CZAR'S private room. Large window at the
back, with drawn curtains over it._

_Present._--PRINCE PETROVITCH, BARON RAFF, MARQUIS DE POIVRARD, COUNT
ROUVALOFF.


PRINCE PETRO. He is beginning well, this young Czar.

BARON RAFF (_shrugs his shoulders_). All young Czars do begin well.

COUNT R. And end badly.

[1]MARQ. DE POIV. Well, I have no right to complain. He has done me one
good service, at any rate.

PRINCE PETRO. Cancelled your appointment to Archangel, I suppose?

MARQ. DE POIV. Yes; my head wouldn't have been safe there for an
hour.[1]

(_Enter GENERAL KOTEMKIN._)

BARON RAFF. Ah! General, any more news of our romantic Emperor?

GEN. KOTEMK. You are quite right to call him romantic, Baron; a week ago
I found him amusing himself in a garret with a company of strolling
players; to-day his whim is all the convicts in Siberia are to be
recalled, and political prisoners, as he calls them, amnestied.

PRINCE PETRO. Political prisoners! Why, half of them are no better than
common murderers!

COUNT R. And the other half much worse?

BARON RAFF. Oh, you wrong them, surely, Count. Wholesale trade has
always been more respectable than retail.

COUNT R. But he is really too romantic. He objected yesterday to my
having the monopoly of the salt tax. He said the people had a right to
have cheap salt.

MARQ. DE POIV. Oh, that's nothing; but he actually disapproved of a
State banquet every night because there is a famine in the Southern
provinces. (_The young CZAR enters unobserved, and overhears the rest._)

PRINCE PETRO. Quelle bétise! The more starvation there is among the
people, the better. It teaches them self-denial, an excellent virtue,
Baron, an excellent virtue.

BARON RAFF. I have often heard so; I have often heard so.

GEN. KOTEMK. He talked of a Parliament, too, in Russia, and said the
people should have deputies to represent them.

