Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

       *       *       *       *       *


{533}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 214.]
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 3. 1853.
[Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition 5d.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                    Page

    Peter Brett                                                533
    Richard's "Guide through France," by Weld Taylor           534
    Women and Tortoises                                        534
    Weather Rules, by W. Winthrop                              535
    Occasional Forms of Prayer, by Rev. Thomas Lathbury        535

    MINOR NOTES:--Chair Moving--Epitaph on Politian
      in the Church of the Annunciation at Florence--
      Epitaph in Torrington Churchyard, Devon--The
      early Delights of Philadelphia--Misapplication of
      Terms--"Plantin" Bibles in 1600--Ancient Gold
      Collar found in Staffordshire                            537

  QUERIES:--

    Pictures in Hampton Court Palace                           538

    MINOR QUERIES:--Helmets--The Nursrow--City
      Bellmen--Pope's Elegy on An Unfortunate Lady--
      "Too wise to err, too good to be unkind"--Passage
      in the "Christian Year"--David's Mother--Emblems
      --"Kaminagadeyathooroosoomokanoogonagira"
      --"Quid facies," &c.--Will of Peter the Great--
      H. Neele, Editor of Shakspeare--MS. by Rubens on
      Painting--Peter Allan--Haschisch or Indian Hemp
      --Crieff Compensation--Admission to Lincoln's Inn,
      the Temple, and Gray's Inn--Orders for the Household
      of Lord Montagu                                          538

    MINOR QUERIES WITH ANSWERS:--Cateaton Street--
      Portrait of Lee, Inventor of the Stocking-Frame--
      Cocker's Arithmetic--Lyke Porch or Litch Porch--
      Henry Burton--British Mathematicians--"Les
      Lettres Juives"                                          540

  REPLIES:--

    Attainment of Majority                                     541
    Lord Halifax and Mrs. Catherine Barton                     543
    Milton's Widow, by T. Hughes                               544
    Anticipatory Use of the Cross, by J. W. Thomas and
      Eden Warwick                                             545
    Decorative Pavement Tiles from Caen, by Albert Way
      and Gilbert J. French                                    547
    Mottos of the Emperors of Germany                          548

    PHOTOGRAPHIC CORRESPONDENCE:--Simplicity of Calotype
      Process--Albumized Paper--New Developing
      Mixture--Queries on the Albumenized Process              548

    REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES:--Poems in connexion
      with Waterloo--Richard Oswald--Grammont's
      Marriage--Life--Muscipula--Berefellarii--Harmony
      of the Four Gospels--Picts' Houses and Argils
      --Boswell's "Johnson"--Pronunciation of "Humble"
      --Continuation of Robertson--Nostradamus--
      Quantity of Words--"Man proposes, but God disposes"
      --Polarised Light                                        549

  MISCELLANEOUS:--

    Notes on Books, &c.                                        552
    Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               553
    Notices to Correspondents                                  553
    Advertisements                                             554

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes.

PETER BRETT.

Your correspondent T. K. seems to think that Scotchmen, and Scotch
subjects, have an undue prominence in "N. & Q.:" let me therefore introduce
to your readers a neglected _Irishman_, in the person of Peter Brett, the
"parish clerk and schoolmaster of Castle-Knock." This worthy seems to have
been a great author, and the literary oracle of the district over which he
presided, and exercised the above-named important functions. His _magnum
opus_ appears to have been his _Miscellany_; a farrago of prose and verse,
which, to distinguish it from the herd of books bearing that title, is
yclept, _par excellence_, Brett's _Miscellany_. When Mr. Brett commenced to
enlighten the world, and when his candle was snuffed out, I know not. My
volume of the above work purports to be the fifth:

    "Containing above a hundred useful and entertaining Particulars,
    Divine, Moral, and Historical; chiefly designed for the Improvement of
    Youth, and those who have not the Opportunity of reading large Volumes.
    Interspersed with several Entertaining Things never before printed.
    Dublin, 1762."

The parish clerk's _bill of fares_ is of the most seductive kind. Under all
the above heads he has something spicy to say, either in prose or verse;
but the marrow of the book lies in the Preface. To say that a man, holding
the important offices of parish clerk and schoolmaster, could be charged
with conceit, would be somewhat rash; if, therefore, in remarking upon the
rare instance of a parish clerk becoming an author, he lets out that
"whatever cavillers may say about his performance, they must admit his
extensive reading, and the great labour and application the concoction of
these books has cost him," he is but indulging in a feeling natural to a
man of genius, and a pardonable ebullition of the _amour propre_. Mr. Brett
seems to have been twitted with the charge of taking up authorship as a
commercial spec; he sullenly admits that his book-making leaves him
something, but nothing like a recompense, and draws an invidious comparison
between one Counsellor Harris and himself; the {534} former having received
200l. per annum for collecting materials for the _Life of King William
III._, while he, the schoolmaster of Castle-Knock, scarcely gets salt to
his porridge for his _Collections and Observations for perpetuating the
Honour and Glory of the King of Kings_.

Peter farther boasts that these his volumes

    "Contain the juice and marrow of many excellent and learned authors,
    but compacted after such an ingenious manner, that the learned would
    find it a great difficulty to show in what authors they are to be
    found!"

A plan for which, I think, the learned would award him the _birch_. Mrs.
Brett is no less a genius than her husband; and she takes advantage of the
publication of the _Miscellany_, to stick the following little bill upon
the back of the title:

    "Ann Brett, wife of the said Peter, at the sign of the _Shroud_ in
    Christ Church Lane, opposite to the Church, makes and sells all Sorts
    of Shrouds, draws all Sorts of Patterns, does all manner of Pinking,
    and teaches Young Misses Reading and Writing, Arithmetic, and Plain
    Work. The Dublin Society," she adds, "was pleased to honour her with a
    handsome Present for her Curious Performance with the Pen."

J. O.

       *       *       *       *       *

RICHARD'S "GUIDE THROUGH FRANCE."

(Translated from the French on the 12th edition. Paris: Audin, 25. Quai des
Augustins.)

As we are not supposed to be sensible of our own failings, I should much
wish to know whether any English-French exists equal to some French-English
I know of, and inclose a specimen. MR. P. CHASLES has played the critic so
well with the English tongue, that perhaps he can find us a few specimens.
Without doubt, it will be a wholesome correction to the Malaprop spirit if
she is shown up a little; and I regret extremely that MR. P. CHASLES was
not invited to correct the proofs of the _Itinéraire de France_. Here we
are posting with M. Richard:

    "The courier à franc-étrier cannot use bridle of their own, they must
    not outrun the postilion who leads them, and the post master if they
    might arrive at, without their postillion, must not give them horse
    before this last is come. The supply-horses, according to the number of
    persons, shall be put to carriages as much as the disposition of the
    vehicles will admit. For example, three horses shall be put to
    cabriolets, and till six to the berline, but as it should not be
    possible, to put a horse en arbalête (cross-bow) without notable
    accidents, either to caleches with two horses or to the limonieres;
    they shall be obliged to pay the charge for supply horse."

Here we are in a steamer, p. 52.:

    "The sea is smooth, the sky pure, the air calm, everything promises a
    happy navigation, our boat is in a very favourable position in the
    middle of the Seine, on the right hand the hills of Honfleur, on the
    left the coast of Ingouville, let us pause a little more on these
    shores we are going to leave: behold on the east the fortifications of
    Havre, small seats! clusters of trees! this is the village of l'Eure
    threatened by the sea of an entire destruction. We must not pass over
    this green hill so delightful to view, standing on the opposite shore
    seamen would not forgive my silence, among these high trees stands a
    chapel dedicated to Notre-Dame-de-Grace. Ingouville is of 4,800
    inhabitants, among which a great many Englishmen live there as in their
    own country, having their particular churchyard, physicians, and many
    occasions of hearing from England, which they can perceive from their
    pavilions. The traveller can go to Elbeuf by land or water. The lover
    of the scenes of nature will enjoy very romantical prospects, a new
    kind of view will strike his sight, a long train of rocks called
    D'Orival, the most part steep, covered with evergreen trees, which seem
    shoot out, with difficulty, of their craggings."

He tells us Soissons (p. 102.) "has a college, a pretty theatre, and a
bishoprick-sec, from the Cradle of Christianity into the Gauls." At
Coulommières (Seine et Marne), "the sciences are not cultivated, but the
inhabitants know pretty well how to play at nine pins." At Fontaines les
Cornues, "the inhabitants of Paris with a small expense can procure to
himself a scenery scarecely to be found in the other quarter of the globe!"
At Chatillion-sur-Seine, "the streets are neat and well aired." At Arles,
p. 361., a head of a goddess carved in marble:

    "The way in which the neck and left shoulder are ended, points out that
    the head is _related_ to a figure in drapery cut in another block."

    "The merchant of Bordeaux is distinguished by his noble easy and
    pompous manner, he makes himself easily forgiven a sort of boasting,
    which is the foible of the country."

How the ladies bathe at Mont d'Or, p. 218.:

    "At five in the morning bathing begins. Two hardy Highlanders go and
    fetch in a kind of deal boxes the fashionable lady, who when in town
    never quits her bed-down before noon, the annuitant, the rich man, are
    all brought in the same manner in these boxes. It is one of the most
    pleasant bathing establishments; it offers a peristyle, a small
    resting-room, a warming-place for linen, with partitions to prevent its
    mixture."

The work consists of 446 mortal pages though I am bound to say a portion
here and there is respectably written.

WELD TAYLOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMEN AND TORTOISES.

