  Mayence occupied by the Offices and Wine-cellars of Lauteren
  Sohn-- The Sparkling Wine Establishment of the Firm and their
  Fine Collection of Hocks and Moselles-- The Hochheim Sparkling
  Wine Association-- Foundation of the Establishment-- Its
  Superior Sparkling Hocks and Moselles-- The Sparkling Wine
  Establishments of Stock and Sons at Creuznach in the Nahe
  Valley, of Kessler and Co. at Esslingen, on the Neckar, and of
  M. Oppmann at Würzburg-- The Historic Cellars of the King of
  Bavaria beneath the Residenz-- The Establishment of F. A.
  Siligmüller                                                        183

XVIII.--THE SPARKLING WINES OF AUSTRO-HUNGARY, SWITZERLAND, ITALY,
  SPAIN, RUSSIA, &C.

Sparkling Voslauer-- The Sparkling Wine Manufactories of Graz--
  Establishment of Kleinoscheg Brothers-- Vintaging and Treatment
  of Styrian Champagnes-- Sparkling Red, Rose, and White Wines of
  Hungary-- The Establishment of Hubert and Habermann at
  Pressburg-- Sparkling Wines of Croatia, Galicia, Bohemia,
  Moravia, Dalmatia, the Tyrol, Transylvania, and the Banat--
  Neuchâtel Champagne-- Sparkling Wine Factories at Vevay and
  Sion-- The Vevay Vineyards-- Establishment of De Riedmatten and
  De Quay-- Sparkling Muscatel, Malmsey, Brachetto, Castagnolo,
  and Lacryma Christi of Italy-- Sparkling Wines of Spain, Greece,
  Algeria, and Russia-- The Krimski and Donski Champagnes-- The
  Latter Chiefly Consumed at the Great Russian Fairs                 196

XIX.--THE SPARKLING WINES OF THE UNITED STATES.

Earliest Efforts at Wine-Making in America-- Failures to
  Acclimatise European Vines-- Wines Made by the Swiss Settlers
  and the Mission Fathers-- The Yield of the Mission Vineyards--
  The Monster Vine of the Montecito Valley-- The Catawba Vine and
  its General Cultivation-- Mr. Longworth one of the Founders of
  American Viticulture-- Fresh Attempts to make Sparkling Wine at
  Cincinnati-- Existing Sparkling Wine Manufactures there--
  Longfellow's Song in Praise of Catawba-- The Kelley Island Wine
  Company-- Vintaging and Treatment of their Sparkling Wines--
  Decrease of Consumption-- The Vineyards of Hammondsport--
  Varieties of Grapes used for Sparkling Wines-- The Vintage--
  After Treatment of the Wines-- The Pleasant Valley and Urbana
  Wine Companies and their Various Brands-- Californian Sparkling
  Wines-- The Buena Vista Vinicultural Society of San Francisco--
  Its Early Failures and Eventual Success in Manufacturing
  Sparkling Wines-- The Vintage in California-- Chinese
  Vintagers-- How the Wine is Made-- American Spurious Sparkling
  Wines                                                              203

XX.--CONCLUDING FACTS AND HINTS.

Dry and Sweet Champagnes-- Their Sparkling Properties-- Form of
  Champagne Glasses-- Style of Sparkling Wines Consumed in
  Different Countries-- The Colour and Alcoholic Strength of
  Champagne-- Champagne Approved of by the Faculty-- Its Use in
  Nervous Derangements-- The Icing of Champagne-- Scarcity of
  Grand Vintages in the Champagne-- The Quality of the Wine has
  little influence on the Price-- Prices realised by the Ay and
  Verzenay Crûs in Grand Years-- Suggestions for laying down
  Champagnes of Grand Vintages-- The Improvement they Develop
  after a few Years-- The Wine of 1874-- The proper kind of Cellar
  to lay down Champagne in-- Advantages of Burrow's Patent Slider
  Wine Bins-- Increase in the Consumption of Champagne-- Tabular
  Statement of Stocks, Exports, and Home Consumption from 1844-5
  to 1877-8-- When to Serve Champagne at a Dinner Party-- Charles
  Dickens's dictum that its proper place is at a Ball--
  Advantageous Effect of Champagne at an Ordinary British Dinner
  Party-- Sparkling Wine Cups                                        212

THE PRINCIPAL SPARKLING WINE BRANDS                                  225


  [Illustrated Text:]

  FACTS ABOUT CHAMPAGNE
  AND
  OTHER SPARKLING WINES.


I.--THE ORIGIN OF CHAMPAGNE.

The Early Vineyards of the Champagne-- Their Produce esteemed by
  Popes and Kings, Courtiers and Prelates-- Controversy regarding the
  rival Merits of the Wines of Burgundy and the Champagne-- Dom
  Perignon's happy Discovery of Sparkling Wine-- Its Patrons under
  Louis Quatorze and the Regency-- The Ancient Church and Abbey of
  Hautvillers-- Farre and Co.'s Champagne Cellars-- The Abbey of St.
  Peter now a Farm-- Existing Remains of the Monastic Buildings-- The
  Tombs and Decorations of the Ancient Church-- The Last Resting-Place
  of Dom Perignon--The Legend of the Holy Dove-- Good Champagne the
  Result of Labour, Skill, Minute Precaution, and Careful Observation.


Strong men, we know, lived before Agamemnon; and strong wine was made in
the fair province of Champagne long before the days of the sagacious Dom
Perignon, to whom we are indebted for the sparkling vintage known under
the now familiar name. The chalky slopes that border the Marne were
early recognised as offering special advantages for the culture of the
vine. The priests and monks, whose vows of sobriety certainly did not
lessen their appreciation of the good things of this life, and the
produce of whose vineyards usually enjoyed a higher reputation than that
of their lay neighbours, were clever enough to seize upon the most
eligible sites, and quick to spread abroad the fame of their wines. St.
Remi, baptiser of Clovis, the first Christian king in France, at the end
of the fifth century left by will, to various churches, the vineyards
which he owned at Reims and Laon, together with the "vilains" employed
in their cultivation. Some three and a half centuries later we find
worthy Bishop Pardulus of Laon imitating Paul's advice to Timothy, and
urging Archbishop Hincmar to drink of the wines of Epernay and Reims for
his stomach's sake. The crusade-preaching Pope, Urban II., who was born
among the vineyards of the Champagne, dearly loved the wine of Ay; and
his energetic appeals to the princes of Europe to take up arms for the
deliverance of the Holy Sepulchre may have owed some of their eloquence
to his favourite beverage.

The red wine of the Champagne sparkled on the boards of monarchs in the
Middle Ages when they sat at meat amidst their mailclad chivalry, and
quaffed mighty beakers to the confusion of the Paynim. Henry of Andely
has sung in his _fabliau_ of the "Bataille des Vins," how, when stout
Philip Augustus and his chaplain constituted themselves the earliest
known wine-jury, the _crûs_ of Espernai, Auviler, Chaalons, and Reims
were amongst those which found most favour in their eyes, though nearly
a couple of centuries elapsed before Eustace Deschamps recorded in verse
the rival merits of those of Cumières and Ay. King Wenceslaus of
Bohemia, a mighty toper, got so royally drunk day after day upon the
vintages of the Champagne, that he forgot all about the treaty with
Charles VI., that had formed the pretext of his visit to France, and
would probably have lingered, goblet in hand, in the old cathedral city
till the day of his death, but for the presentation of a little account
for wine consumed, which sobered him to repentance and led to his abrupt
departure. Dunois, Lahire, Xaintrailles, and their fellows, when they
rode with Joan of Arc to the coronation of Charles VII., drank the same
generous fluid, through helmets barred, to the speedy expulsion of the
detested English from the soil of France.

The vin d'Ay--_vinum Dei_ as Dominicus Baudoin punningly styled it--was,
according to old Paulmier, the ordinary drink of the kings and princes
of his day. It fostered bluff King Hal's fits of passion and the tenth
Leo's artistic extravagance; consoled Francis I. for the field of Pavia,
and solaced his great rival in his retirement at St. Just. All of them
had their commissioners at Ay to secure the best wine for their own
consumption. Henri Quatre, whose _vendangeoir_ is still shown in the
village, held the wine in such honour that he was wont to style himself
the Seigneur d'Ay, just as James of Scotland was known as the Gudeman of
Ballangeich. When his son, Louis XIII., was crowned, the wines of the
Champagne were the only growths allowed to grace the board at the royal
banquet. Freely too did they flow at the coronation feast of the Grand
Monarque, when the crowd of assembled courtiers, who quaffed them in his
honour, hailed them as the finest wines of the day.

But the wines which drew forth all these encomiums were far from
resembling the champagne of modern times. They were not, as has been
asserted, all as red as burgundy and as flat as port; for at the close
of the sixteenth, century some of them were of a _fauve_ or yellowish
hue, and of the intermediate tint between red and white which the French
call _clairet_, and which our old writers translate as the "complexion
of a cherry" or the "colour of a partridge's eye." But, as a rule, the
wines of the Champagne up to this period closely resembled those
produced in the adjacent province, where Charles the Bold had once held
sway; a resemblance, no doubt, having much to do with the great medical
controversy regarding their respective merits which arose in 1652. In
that year a young medical student, hard pressed for the subject of his
inaugural thesis, and in the firm faith that

  "None but a clever dialectician
  Can hope to become a good physician,
  And that logic plays an important part
  In the mystery of the healing art,"

propounded the theory that the wines of Burgundy were preferable to
those of the Champagne, and that the latter were irritating to the
nerves and conducive to gout. The faculty of medicine at Reims naturally
rose in arms at this insolent assertion. They seized their pens and
poured forth a deluge of French and Latin in defence of the wines of
their province, eulogising alike their purity, their brilliancy of
colour, their exquisite flavour and perfume, their great keeping powers,
and, in a word, their general superiority to the Burgundy growths. The
partisans of the latter were equally prompt in rallying in their
defence, and the faculty of medicine of Beaune, having put their learned
periwigs together, enunciated their views and handled their opponents
without mercy. The dispute spread to the entire medical profession, and
the champions went on pelting each other with pamphlets in prose and
tractates in verse, until in 1778--long after the bones of the original
disputants were dust and their lancets rust--the faculty of Paris, to
whom the matter was referred, gave a final and formal decision in favour
of the wines of the Champagne.

Meanwhile an entirely new kind of wine, which was to carry the name of
the province producing it to the uttermost corners of the earth, had
been introduced. On the picturesque slopes of the Marne, about fifteen
miles from Reims, and some four or five miles from Epernay, stands the
little hamlet of Hautvillers, which, in pre-revolutionary days, was a
mere dependency upon a spacious abbey dedicated to St. Peter. Here the
worthy monks of the order of St. Benedict had lived in peace and
prosperity for several hundred years, carefully cultivating the acres of
vineland extending around the abbey, and religiously exacting a tithe of
all the other wine pressed in their district. The revenue of the
community thus depending in no small degree upon the vintage, it was
natural that the post of "celerer" should be one of importance. It
happened that about the year 1688 this office was conferred upon a
worthy monk named Perignon. Poets and roasters, we know, are born, and
not made; and the monk in question seems to have been a heaven-born
cellarman, with a strong head and a discriminating palate. The wine
exacted from the neighbouring cultivators was of all qualities--good,
bad, and indifferent; and with the spirit of a true Benedictine, Dom
Perignon hit upon the idea of "marrying" the produce of one vineyard
with that of another. He had noted that one kind of soil imparted
fragrance and another generosity, and discovered that a white wine could
be made from the blackest grapes, which would keep good, instead of
turning yellow and degenerating like the wine obtained from white ones.
Moreover, the happy thought occurred to him that a piece of cork was a
much more suitable stopper for a bottle than the flax dipped in oil
which had heretofore served that purpose.

The white, or, as it was sometimes styled, the grey wine of the
Champagne grew famous, and the manufacture spread throughout the
province, but that of Hautvillers held the predominance. To Dom Perignon
the abbey's well-stocked cellar was a far cheerfuller place than the
cell. Nothing delighted him more than

  "To come down among this brotherhood
  Dwelling for ever underground,
  Silent, contemplative, round and sound,
  Each one old and brown with mould,
  But filled to the lips with the ardour of youth,
  With the latent power and love of truth,
  And with virtues fervent and manifold."

Ever busy among his vats and presses, barrels and bottles, Perignon
alighted upon a discovery destined to be most important in its results.
He found out the way of making an effervescent wine--a wine that burst
out of the bottle and overflowed the glass, that was twice as dainty to
the taste, and twice as exhilarating in its effects. It was at the close
of the seventeenth century that this discovery was made--when the glory
of the Roi Soleil was on the wane, and with it the splendour of the
Court of Versailles. Louis XIV., for whose especial benefit liqueurs had
been invented, recovered a gleam of his youthful energy as he sipped the
creamy foaming vintage that enlivened his dreary _têtes-à-têtes_ with
the widow of Scarron. It found its chief patrons however, amongst the
bands of gay young roysterers, the future _roues_ of the Regency, whom
the Duc d'Orléans and the Duc de Vendôme had gathered round them, at the
Palais Royal and at Anet. It was at one of the famous _soupers_ d'Anet
that the Marquis de Sillery--who had turned his sword into a
pruning-knife, and applied himself to the cultivation of his paternal
vineyards on the principles inculcated by the celerer of St.
Peter's--first introduced the sparkling wine bearing his name. The
flower-wreathed bottles, which, at a given signal, a dozen of blooming
young damsels scantily draped in the guise of Bacchanals placed upon the
table, were hailed with rapture, and thenceforth sparkling wine was an
indispensable adjunct at all the _petits soupers_ of the period. In the
highest circles the popping of champagne-corks seemed to ring the knell
of sadness, and the victories of Marlborough were in a measure
compensated for by this happy discovery.

Why the wine foamed and sparkled was a mystery even to the very makers
themselves; for as yet Baume's aerometer was unknown, and the connection
between sugar and carbonic acid undreamt of. The general belief was that
the degree of effervescence depended upon the time of year at which the
wine was bottled, and that the rising of the sap in the vine had
everything to do with it. Certain wiseacres held that it was influenced
by the age of the moon at the time of bottling; whilst others thought
the effervescence could be best secured by the addition of spirit, alum,
and various nastinesses. It was this belief in the use and efficacy of
drugs that led to a temporary reaction against the wine about 1715, in
which year Dom Perignon departed this life. In his latter days he had
grown blind, but his discriminating taste enabled him to discharge his
duties with unabated efficiency to the end. Many of the tall tapering
glasses invented by him have been emptied to the memory of the old
Benedictine, whose remains repose beneath a black marble slab in the
chancel of the archaic abbey church of Hautvillers.

  [Illustration:
  THE VINEYARDS AND ABBEY OF HAUTVILLERS. (p. 14)]

  [Illustration:
  THE ESTABLISHMENT OF MESSRS. CHARLES FARRE & CO., AT HAUTVILLERS.
  (p. 15)]

Time and the iconoclasts of the great Revolution have spared but little
of the royal abbey of St. Peter where Dom Perignon lighted upon his
happy discovery of the effervescent quality of champagne. The quaint old
church, scraps of which date back to the 12th century, the remnants of
the cloisters, and a couple of ancient gateways, marking the limits of
the abbey precincts, are all that remain to testify to the grandeur of
its past. It was the proud boast of the brotherhood that it had given
nine archbishops to the see of Reims, and two-and-twenty abbots to
various celebrated monasteries, but this pales beside the enduring fame
it has acquired from having been the cradle of the sparkling vintage of
the Champagne.

It was in the budding springtime when we made our pilgrimage to
Hautvillers across the swollen waters of the Marne at Epernay. Our way
lay for a time along a straight level poplar-bordered road, with verdant
meadows on either hand, then diverged sharply to the left and we
commenced ascending the vine-clad hills, on a narrow plateau of which
the church and abbey remains are picturesquely perched. Vines climb the
undulating slopes to the summit of the plateau, and wooded heights rise
up beyond, affording shelter from the bleak winds sweeping over from the
north. As we near the village of Hautvillers we notice on our left hand
a couple of isolated buildings overlooking a small ravine with their
bright tiled roofs flashing in the sunlight. These prove to be a branch
establishment of Messrs. Charles Farre and Co., a well-known champagne
firm having its head-quarters at Reims. The grassy space beyond, dotted
over with low stone shafts giving light and ventilation to the cellars
beneath, is alive with workmen unloading waggons densely packed with new
champagne bottles, while under a neighbouring shed is a crowd of women
actively engaged in washing the bottles as they are brought to them. The
large apartment aboveground, known as the _cellier_, contains wine in
cask already blended, and to bottle which preparations are now being
made. On descending into the cellars, which, excavated in the chalk and
of regular construction, comprise a series of long, lofty, and
well-ventilated galleries, we find them stocked with bottles of fine
wine reposing in huge compact piles ready for transport to the head
establishment, where they will undergo their final manipulation. The
cellars consist of two stories, the lowermost of which has an iron gate
communicating with the ravine already mentioned. On passing out here and
looking up behind we see the buildings perched some hundred feet above
us, hemmed in on every side with budding vines.

  [Illustration:
  THE PORTE DES PRESSOIRS, HAUTVILLERS.]

The church of Hautvillers and the remains of the neighbouring abbey are
situated at the farther extremity of the village, at the end of its one
long street, named, pertinently enough, the Rue de Bacchus. Passing
through an unpretentious gateway we find ourselves in a spacious
courtyard, bounded by buildings somewhat complex in character. On our
right rises the tower of the church with the remains of the old
cloisters, now walled-in and lighted by small square windows, and
propped up by heavy buttresses. To the left stands the residence of the
bailiff, and beyond it an 18th-century château on the site of the
abbot's house, the abbey precincts being bounded on this side by a
picturesque gateway tower leading to the vineyards, and known as the
"porte des pressoirs," from its contiguity to the existing wine-presses.
Huge barn-like buildings, stables, and cart-sheds inclose the court on
its remaining sides, and roaming about are numerous live stock,
indicating that what remains of the once-famous royal abbey of St. Peter
has degenerated into an ordinary farm. To-day the abbey buildings and
certain of its lands are the property of Messrs. Moët and Chandon, the
great champagne manufacturers of Epernay, who maintain them as a farm,
keeping some six-and-thirty cows there with the object of securing the
necessary manure for the numerous vineyards which they own hereabouts.

  [Illustration]

The dilapidated cloisters, littered with old casks, farm implements, and
the like, preserve ample traces of their former architectural character,
and the Louis Quatorze gateway on the northern side of the inclosure
still displays above its arch a grandiose carved shield, with
surrounding palm-branches and half-obliterated bearings. Vine-leaves and
bunches of grapes decorate some of the more ancient columns inside the
church, and grotesque mediæval monsters, such as monkish architects
habitually delighted in, entwine themselves around the capitals of
others. The stalls of the choir are elaborately carved with cherubs'
heads, medallions and figures of saints, cupids supporting shields, and
free and graceful arabesques of the epoch of the Renaissance. In the
chancel, close by the altar steps, are a couple of black marble slabs,
with Latin inscriptions of dubious orthography, the one to Johannes
Royer, who died in 1527, and the other setting forth the virtues and
merits of Dom Petrus Perignon, the discoverer of champagne. In the
central aisle a similar slab marks the resting-place of Dom Thedoricus
Ruynart--obit 1709--an ancestor of the Reims Ruinarts, and little square
stones interspersed among the tiles with which the side aisles of the
church are paved record the deaths of other members of the Benedictine
brotherhood during the 17th and 18th centuries. Several large pictures
grace the walls of the church, the most interesting one representing St.
Nivard, Bishop of Reims, and his friend, St. Berchier, designating to
some mediæval architect the site the contemplated abbey of St. Peter was
to occupy. There was a monkish legend that about the middle of the 7th
century this pair of saints set out in search of a suitable site for the
future monastery. The way was long, the day was warm, and St. Nivard and
St. Berchier as yet were simply mortal. Weary and faint, they sat them
down to rest at a spot identified by tradition with a vineyard at Dizy,
belonging to-day to the Messrs. Bollinger, but at that period forming
part of the forest of the Marne. St. Nivard fell asleep with his head on
his companion's lap, and the one in a dream, and the other with waking
eyes, saw a snow-white dove--the same, firm believers in miracles
suggested, which had brought down the holy oil for the anointment of
Clovis at his coronation at Reims--flutter through the wood, and finally
alight on the stump of a tree.

In those superstitious times such a significant omen was not to be
disregarded, the site thus miraculously indicated was at once decided
upon, the high altar of the abbey church being erected upon the precise
spot where the tree stood on which the snow-white dove had alighted.

The celerer of St. Peter's found worthy successors, and thenceforward
the manufacture and the popularity of champagne went on steadily
increasing, until to-day its production is carried on upon a scale and
with an amount of painstaking care that would astonish its originator.
For good champagne does not rain down from the clouds, or gush out from
the rocks, but is the result of incessant labour, patient skill, minute
precaution, and careful observation. In the first place, the soil
imparts to the natural wine a special quality which it has been found
impossible to imitate in any other quarter of the globe. To the wine of
Ay it lends a flavour of peaches, and to that of Avenay the savour of
strawberries; the vintage of Hautvillers, though fallen from its former
high estate, is yet marked by an unmistakably nutty taste; while that of
Pierry smacks of the locally-abounding flint, the well-known _pierre à
fusil_ flavour. So on the principle that a little leaven leavens the
whole lump, the produce of grapes grown in the more favoured vineyards
is added in certain proportions to secure certain special
characteristics, as well as to maintain a fixed standard of excellence.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]

II.--THE VINTAGE IN THE CHAMPAGNE. THE VINEYARDS OF THE RIVER.

Ay, the Vineyard of Golden Plants-- Summoning the Vintagers by Beat
  of Drum-- Excitement in the Surrounding Villages-- The Pickers at
  Work-- Sorting the Grapes-- Grapes Gathered at Sunrise the Best--
  Varieties of Vines in the Ay Vineyards-- Few of the Growers in the
  Champagne Crush their own Grapes-- Squeezing the Grapes in the
  "Pressoir" and Drawing off the Must-- Cheerful Glasses Round-- The
  Vintage at Mareuil-- Bringing in the Grapes on Mules and Donkeys--
  The Vineyards of Avenay, Mutigny, and Cumières-- Damery and Adrienne
  Lecouvreur, Maréchal de Saxe, and the obese Anna Iwanowna-- The
  Vineyards of the Côte d'Epernay-- Boursault and its Château-- Pierry
  and its Vineyard Cellars-- The Clos St. Pierre-- Moussy and Vinay--
  A Hermit's Cave and a Miraculous Fountain-- Ablois St. Martin-- The
  Côte d'Avize-- The Grand Premier Crû of Cramant-- Avize and its
  Wines-- The Vineyards of Oger and Le Mesnil-- The Old Town of Vertus
  and its Vine-clad Slopes-- Their Red Wine formerly celebrated.


With the exception of certain famous vineyards of the Rhône, the
vinelands of the Champagne may, perhaps, be classed among the most
picturesque of the more notable vine districts of France. Between Paris
and Epernay even, the banks of the Marne present a series of scenes of
quiet beauty. The undulating ground is everywhere cultivated like a
garden. Handsome châteaux and charming country houses peep out from amid
luxuriant foliage. Picturesque antiquated villages line the river's bank
or climb the hill sides, and after leaving La Ferté-sous-Jouarre, the
cradle of the Condés, all the more favoured situations commence to be
covered with vines.

This is especially the case in the vicinity of Château-Thierry--the
birthplace of La Fontaine--where the view is shut in on all sides by
vine-clad slopes, which the spring frosts seldom spare. Hence merely one
good vintage out of four gladdens the hearts of the peasant proprietors,
who find eager purchasers for their produce among the lower-class
manufacturers of champagne. In the same way the _petit vin de Chierry_,
dexterously prepared and judiciously mingled with other growths, often
figures as "Fleur de Sillery" or "Ay Mousseux." In reality it is not
until we have passed the ornate modern Gothic château of Boursault,
erected in her declining years by the wealthy Veuve Clicquot, by far the
shrewdest manipulator of the sparkling products of Ay and Bouzy of her
day, and the many towers and turrets of which, rising above umbrageous
trees, crown the loftiest height within eyeshot of Epernay, that we find
ourselves within that charmed circle of vineyards whence champagne--the
wine, not merely of princes, as it has been somewhat obsequiously
termed, but essentially the _vin de société_--is derived.

The vinelands in the vicinity of Epernay, and consequently near the
Marne, are commonly known as the "Vineyards of the River," whilst those
covering the slopes in the neighbourhood of Reims are termed the
"Vineyards of the Mountain." The Vineyards of the River comprise three
distinct divisions--first, those lining the right bank of the Marne and
enjoying a southern and south-eastern aspect, among which are Ay,
Hautvillers, Cumières, Dizy, and Mareuil; secondly, the Côte d'Epernay
on the left bank of the river, of which Pierry, Moussy, and Vinay form
part; and thirdly, the Côte d'Avize (the region _par excellence_ of
white grapes), which stretches towards the south-east, and includes the
vinelands of Cramant, Avize, Oger, Le Mesnil, and Vertus. The entire
vineyard area is upwards of 40,000 acres.

The Champagne vineyards most widely celebrated abroad are those of Ay
and Sillery, although the last-named are really the smallest in the
Champagne district. Ay, distant only a few minutes by rail from Epernay,
is in the immediate centre of the vinelands of the river, having Mareuil
and Avenay on the east, and Dizy, Hautvillers, and Cumières on the west.
Sillery, on the other hand, lies at the foot of the so-called Mountain
of Reims, and within an hour's drive of the old cathedral city.

The pleasantest season of the year to visit the Champagne is certainly
during the vintage. When this is about to commence, the vintagers--some
of whom come from Sainte Menehould, forty miles distant, while others
hail from as far as Lorraine--are summoned at daybreak by beat of drum
in the market-places of the villages adjacent to the vineyards, and then
and there a price is made for the day's labour. This is generally either
a franc and a half, with food consisting of three meals, or two francs
and a half without food, children being paid a franc and a half. The
rate of wage satisfactorily arranged, the gangs start off to the
vineyards, headed by their overseers.

It was on one of those occasional sunshiny days in the early part of
October (1871) when I first visited Ay, the vineyard of golden plants,
the unique _premier crû_ of the Wines of the River. The road lay between
two rows of closely-planted poplar-trees reaching almost to the village
of Dizy, whose quaint grey church tower, with its gabled roof, is
dominated by the neighbouring vine-clad slopes, which extend from Avenay
to Venteuil, some few miles beyond Hautvillers, the cradle, so to speak,
of the _vin mousseux_ of the Champagne.

Everywhere was bustle and excitement; every one was big with the
business in hand. In these ordinarily quiet little villages the majority
of the inhabitants were afoot, the feeble feminine half with the
juveniles threading their way through the rows of vines half-way up the
mountain, basket on arm, while the sturdy masculine portion were mostly
passing to and fro between the press-houses and the wine-shops. Carts
piled up with baskets, or crowded with peasants from a distance on their
way to the vineyards, jostled the low railway trucks laden with bran-new
casks, and the somewhat rickety cabriolets of the agents of the big
champagne houses, reduced to clinch their final bargain for a hundred or
more _pièces_ of the peerless wine of Ay, beside the reeking wine-press.

There was a pleasant air of jollity over all, for in the wine-producing
districts every one participates in the interest excited by the vintage,
which influences the takings of all the artificers and all the
tradespeople, bringing grist to the mill of the baker and the bootmaker,
as well as to the café and the cabaret. The various contending interests
were singularly satisfied, the vintagers getting their two francs and a
half a day, and the men at the pressoirs their three francs and their
food. The plethoric _commissionaires-en-vins_ wiped their perspiring
foreheads with satisfaction at having at last secured the full number of
hogsheads they had been instructed to buy--at a high figure it was true,
still this was no disadvantage to them, as their commission mounted up
all the higher. And, as regarded the small vine proprietors, even the
thickest-skulled among them, who make all their calculations on their
fingers, could see at a glance that they were gainers, for, although the
crop was no more than half an average one, yet, thanks to the
ill-disguised anxiety of the agents to secure all the wine they
required, prices had gradually crept up until they doubled those of
ordinary years, and this with only half the work in the vineyard and at
the wine-press to be done.

On leaving Dizy the road runs immediately at the base of the vine-clad
slopes, broken up by an occasional conical peak detaching itself from
the mass, and tinted from base to summit with richly-variegated hues,
in which deep purple, yellow, green, grey, and crimson by turns
predominate. Dotting these slopes like a swarm of huge ants are a crowd
of men, women, and children, intent on stripping the vines of their
luscious-looking fruit. The men are mostly in blue blouses, and the
women in closely-fitting neat white caps, or wearing old-fashioned
unbleached straw-bonnets of the contemned coal-scuttle type. They detach
the grapes with scissors or hooked knives, technically termed
"serpettes," and in some vineyards proceed to remove all damaged,
decayed, or unripe fruit from the bunches before placing them in the
baskets hanging on their arms, the contents of which are from time to
time emptied into a larger basket resembling a deep clothes-basket in
shape, numbers of these being dispersed about the vineyard for the
purpose, and invariably in the shade. When filled they are carried by a
couple of men to the roadside, along which dwarf stones carved with
initials, and indicating the boundaries of the respective properties,
are encountered every eight or ten yards, into such narrow strips are
the vineyards divided. Large carts with railed open sides are
continually passing backwards and forwards to pick these baskets up, and
when one of them has secured its load it is driven slowly--in order that
the grapes may not be shaken--to the neighbouring pressoir, so extreme
is the care observed throughout every stage of the process of champagne
manufacture.

In many of the vineyards the grapes are inspected in bulk instead of in
detail before being sent to the wine-press. The hand-baskets, when
filled, are all brought to a particular spot, where their contents are
minutely examined by some half-dozen men and women, who pluck off all
the bruised, rotten, and unripe berries, and fling them aside into a
separate basket. In one vineyard we came upon a party of girls,
congregated round a wicker sieve perched on the top of a large tub by
the roadside, who were busy sorting the grapes, pruning away the
diseased stalks, and picking off all the doubtful berries, and letting
the latter fall through the interstices of the sieve, the sound fruit
being deposited in large baskets standing by their side, which, as soon
as filled, were conveyed to the pressoir.

  [Illustration:
  A VINTAGE SCENE IN THE CHAMPAGNE. (p. 24)]

The picking ordinarily commences with daylight, and the vintagers assert
that the grapes gathered at sunrise always produce the lightest and most
limpid wine. Moreover by plucking the grapes when the early morning sun
is upon them they are believed to yield a fourth more juice. Later on in
the day, too, spite of all precautions, it is impossible to prevent some
of the detached grapes from partially fermenting, which frequently
suffices to give a slight excess of colour to the must, a thing
especially to be avoided--no matter how rich and ripe the fruit may
be--in a high-class champagne. When the grapes have to be transported in
open baskets for some distance to the press-house, jolting along the
road either in carts or on the backs of mules, and exposed to the torrid
rays of a bright autumnal sun, the juice expressed from the fruit,
however gently the latter may be squeezed, is occasionally of a positive
purple tinge, and consequently useless for conversion into champagne.

On the right of the road leading from Dizy to Ay we pass a vineyard
called Le Léon, which tradition asserts to be the one whence Pope Leo
the Magnificent, the patron of Michael Angelo, Raffaelle, and Da Vinci,
drew his supply of Ay wine. The village of Ay lies right before us at
the foot of the vine-clad slopes, with the tapering spire of its ancient
church rising above the neighbouring hills and cutting sharply against
the bright blue sky. The vineyards, which spread themselves over a
calcareous declivity, have mostly a full southern aspect, and the
predominating vines are those known as golden plants, the fruit of which
is of a deep purple colour. After these comes the _plant vert doré_, and
then a moderate proportion of the _plant gris_, the latter a white
variety, as its name implies. A limited quantity of wine from white
grapes is likewise made in the neighbouring vineyards of Dizy.

We visited the pressoir of the principal producer of _vin brut_ at Ay,
who, although the owner of merely five hectares, or about twelve and a
half acres of vines, expected to make as many as 1,500 pièces of wine
that year, mainly of course from grapes purchased from other growers.
One peculiarity of the Champagne district is that, contrary to the
prevailing practice in the other wine-producing regions of France, where
the owner of even a single acre of vines will crush his grapes himself,
only a limited number of vine-proprietors press their own grapes. The
large champagne houses, possessing vineyards, always have their
pressoirs in the neighbourhood, and other large vine-proprietors will
press the grapes they grow, but the multitude of small cultivators
invariably sell the produce of their vineyards to one or other of the
former at a certain rate, either by weight or else per caque, a measure
estimated to hold sixty kilogrammes (equal to 132lbs.) of grapes. The
price which the fruit fetches varies of course according to the quality
of the vintage and the requirements of the manufacturers. In 1873, in
all the higher-class vineyards, as much as two francs and a quarter per
kilogramme (10d. per lb.) were paid, or between treble and quadruple the
average price. And yet the vintage was a most unsatisfactory one owing
to the deficiency of sun and abundance of wet throughout the summer. The
market, however, was in great need of wine, and the fruit while still
ungathered was bought up at most exorbitant prices by the _spéculateurs_
who supply the _vin brut_ to the champagne manufacturers.

Carts laden with grapes were continually arriving at the pressoir, and
after discharging their loads, and having them weighed, kept driving off
for fresh ones. Four powerful presses of recent invention, each worked
by a large fly-wheel requiring four sturdy men to turn it, were in
operation. The grapes were spread over the floor of the press in a
compact mass, and on being subjected to pressure--again and again
repeated, the first squeeze only giving a high-class wine--the must
filtered through a wicker basket into the reservoir beneath, whence,
after remaining a certain time to allow of its ridding itself of the
grosser lees, it is pumped through a gutta-percha tube into the casks.
The wooden stoppers of the bungholes, instead of being fixed tightly in
the apertures, are simply laid over them, and after the lapse of ten or
twelve days fermentation usually commences, and during its progress the
must, which is originally of a pale pink tint, fades to a light straw
colour. The wine usually remains undisturbed until Christmas, when it is
drawn off into fresh casks, and delivered to the purchaser.

On our way from Ay to Mareuil, along the lengthy Rue de Châlons, we
looked in at the little auberge at the corner of the Boulevard du Sud,
where we found a crowd of coopers and others connected in some way with
the vintage taking their cheerful glasses round. The walls of the room
were appropriately enough decorated with capering bacchanals squeezing
bunches of purple grapes and flourishing their thyrsi about in a very
tipsy fashion. All the talk--and there was an abundance of it--had
reference to the yield of this particular vintage and the high rate the
Ay wine had realised. Eight hundred francs the pièce of two hundred
litres, equal to forty-four gallons, appeared to be the price fixed by
the agents of the great champagne houses, and at this figure the bulk of
the vintage was disposed of before a single grape passed through the
wine-press.

At Mareuil, which is scarcely more than a mile from Ay, owing to the
steepness of the slopes and to the roads through the vineyards being
impracticable for carts, the grapes were being conveyed to the
press-houses in baskets slung across the backs of mules and donkeys,
who, on account of their known partiality for the ripe fruit, were most
of them muzzled while thus employed. The _vin brut_ here, inferior of
course to that of Ay, found a ready market at from five to six hundred
francs the pièce.

  [Illustration]

From Mareuil we proceeded to Avenay, a tumbledown little village in the
direction of Reims, and the vineyards of which were of greater repute in
the 13th century than they are to-day. Its best wine, extolled by Saint
Evremond, the epicurean Frenchman, who emigrated to the gay court of
Charles II. at Whitehall to escape a gloomy cell in the Bastille, is
vintaged up the slopes of Mont Hurlé. At Avenay we found the yield had
been little more than the third of an average one, and that the wine
from the first pressure of the grapes had been sold for five hundred
francs the pièce. Here we tasted some very fair still red wine, made
from the same grapes as champagne, remarkably deep in colour, full of
body, and with that slight sweet bitterish flavour characteristic of
certain of the better-class growths of the south of France. On leaving
Avenay we ascended the hills to Mutigny, and wound round thence to
Cumières, on the banks of the Marne, finding the vintage in full
operation all throughout the route. The vineyards of Cumières--classed
as a second crû--join those of Hautvillers on the one side and Damery on
the other--the latter a cosy little river-side village, where the "_bon
Roi Henri_" sought relaxation from the turmoils of war in the society of
the fair Anne du Puy--"_sa belle hôtesse_," as the gallant Béarnais was
wont to style her. Damery too claims to be the birthplace of Adrienne
Lecouvreur, the celebrated actress of the Regency, and mistress of the
Maréchal de Saxe who coaxed her out of her £30,000 of savings to enable
him to prosecute his suit with the obese Anna Iwanowna, niece of Peter
the Great, which, had he only been successful in, would have secured the
future hero of Fontenoy the coveted dukedom of Courland.

The vineyards of the Côte d'Epernay, south of the Marne, extend eastward
from beyond Boursault, on whose wooded height Madame Clicquot built her
fine château, in which her granddaughter, the Comtesse de Mortemart,
to-day resides. They then follow the course of the river, and after
winding round behind Epernay diverge towards the south-west. The vines
produce only black grapes, and many of the vineyards are of great
antiquity, one at Epernay, known as the Closet, having been bequeathed
under that name six and a half centuries ago to a neighbouring Abbey of
St. Martin. A short drive along the high road leading from Epernay to
Troyes brings us to the village of Pierry cosily nestling amongst groves
of poplars in the valley of the Cubry, with some half-score of châteaux
of the last century belonging to well-to-do wine-growers of the
neighbourhood, screened from the road by umbrageous gardens. Vines mount
the slopes that rise around, the higher summits being crowned with
forest, while here and there some pleasant village shelters itself under
the brow of a lofty hill. Near Pierry many cellars have been excavated
in the chalky soil, to the flints prevalent in which the village is said
to owe its name.

  [Illustration]

The entrances to these cellars are closed by iron gateways, and on the
skirts of the vineyards we come upon whole rows of them picturesquely
overgrown with ivy. Early in the last century the wine vintaged in the
Clos St. Pierre, belonging to an abbey of this name at Châlons, acquired
a high reputation through the care bestowed upon it by Brother Jean
Oudart, whose renown almost rivalled that of Dom Perignon himself, and
to-day the Pierry vineyards, producing exclusively black grapes, hold a
high rank among the second-class crûs of the Marne.

Crossing the Sourdon, a little stream which, bubbling up in the midst of
huge rocks in the forest of Epernay, rushes down the hills and mingles
its waters with that of the Cubry, we soon reach Moussy, where the
vineyards, spite of their long pedigree and southern aspect, also rank
as a second crû. Still skirting the vine-clad slopes we come to Vinay,
noted for an ancient grotto--the comfortless abode of some rheumatic
anchorite--and a pretended miraculous spring to which fever-stricken
pilgrims to-day credulously resort. The water may possibly merit its
renown, but the wine here produced is very inferior, due no doubt to the
class of vines, the meunier being the leading variety cultivated. At
Ablois St. Martin, picturesquely perched partway up a slope in the midst
of hills covered with vines and crowned with forest trees, the Côte
d'Epernay ends, and the produce becomes of a choicer character.

The Côte d'Avize lies to the south-east, so that we have to retrace our
steps to Pierry and follow the road which there branches off, leaving
the vineyards of Chavot, Monthelon, and Grauves, of no particular note,
on our right hand. We pass through Cuis, where the slopes, planted with
both black and white varieties of vines, are extremely abrupt, and
eventually reach Cramant, one of the grand _premiers crûs_ of the
Champagne. From the vineyards around this picturesque little village,
and extending along the somewhat precipitous Côte de Saran--a prominent
object on which is M. Moët's handsome château--there is vintaged a wine
from white grapes especially remarkable for lightness and delicacy and
the richness of its bouquet, and an admixture of which is essential to
every first-class champagne _cuvée_.

From Cramant the road runs direct to Avize, a large thriving village,
lying at the foot of vineyard slopes, where numerous champagne firms
have established themselves. Its prosperity dates from the commencement
of the last century, when the Count de Lhery cleared away the remains of
its ancient ramparts, filled up the moat, and planted the ground with
vines, the produce of which was found admirably suited for the sparkling
wines then coming into vogue. To-day the light delicate wine of Avize is
classed, like that of Cramant, as a _premier crû_. It is the same with
the wine of Oger, lying a little to the south, while the neighbouring
growths of Le Mesnil hold a slightly inferior rank. The latter village
and its grey Gothic church lie under the hill in the midst of vines that
almost climb the forest-crowned summit. The stony soil hereabouts is
said to be better adapted to the cultivation of white than of black
grapes, besides which the wines of Le Mesnil are remarkable for their
effervescent properties.

Vertus forms the southern limit of the Côte d'Avize, and the vineyard
slopes subsiding at their base into a broad expanse of fertile fields,
and crested as usual with dense forest, rise up behind the picturesque
old town which the English assailed and partly burnt five centuries ago,
spite of its fortifications, of which to-day a dilapidated gateway alone
remains. The church is ancient and curious, and a few quaint old houses
are here and there met with, notably one with a florid Gothic window
enriched with a moulding of grapes and vine-leaves. The vineyards of
Vertus were originally planted with vines from Burgundy, and in the 14th
century yielded a red wine held in high repute, while later on the
Vertus growths formed the favourite beverage of William III. of England.
To-day the growers find it more profitable to make white instead of red
wine from their crops of black grapes, the former commanding a good
price for conversion into _vin mousseux_, it being in the opinion of
some manufacturers especially valuable for binding a _cuvée_ together.
The wine of Vertus ranks among the second-class champagne crûs.


  [Illustration:
  CHATEAU OF SILLERY.]

III.--THE VINEYARDS OF THE MOUNTAIN.

The Wine of Sillery-- Origin of its Renown-- The Marechale d'Estrées
  a successful Marchande de Vin-- From Reims to Sillery-- Failure of
  the Jacquesson Vineyards-- Château of Sillery-- Wine Making at
  M. Fortel's-- Sillery sec-- The Vintage and Vendangeoirs at
  Verzenay-- The Verzy Vineyards-- Edward III. at the Abbey of St.
  Basle-- From Reims to Bouzy-- The Herring Procession at St. Remi--
  Rilly, Chigny, and Ludes-- The Knights Templars' "Pot" of Wine--
  Mailly and the View over the Plains of the Champagne-- Wine Making
  at Mailly-- The Village in the Wood-- Village and Château of
  Louvois-- Louis le Grand's War Minister-- Bouzy, its Vineyards and
  Church Steeple, and the Lottery of the Great Gold Ingot-- MM.
  Werlé's and Moët and Chandon's Vendangeoirs-- Pressing the Grapes--
  Still Red Bouzy-- Ambonnay-- A Peasant Proprietor-- The Vineyards of
  Ville-Dommange and Sacy, Hermonville, and St. Thierry-- The Still
  Red Wine of the latter.


The smallest of the Champagne vineyards are those of Sillery, and yet no
wine of the Marne enjoys a greater renown, due originally to the
intelligence and energy of the Maréchale d'Estrées, the clever daughter
of a Jew financier, who brought the wine of Sillery prominently into
notice during the latter half of the seventeenth century. She had
vineyards at Mailly, Verzy, and Verzenay, as well as at Sillery, and
concentrated their produce in the capacious cellars of her château,
afterwards sending it forth with her own guarantee, under the general
name of Sillery, which, like Aaron's serpent, thus swallowed up the
others. The Maréchale's social position enabled her to secure for her
wines the recognition they really merited, added to which she was a keen
woman of business. She also possessed much taste, and whenever she gave
one of her rare entertainments nothing could be more exquisite or more
magnificent. At the same time, she was so sordid that when her daughter,
who was covered with jewels, fell down at a ball, her first cry was, not
like Shylock's, "my daughter," but "my diamonds," as rushing forward she
strove to pick up, not the fallen dancer, but her scattered gems.

The drive from Reims to Sillery has nothing attractive about it. A long,
straight, level road bordered by trees intersects a broad tract of open
country, skirted on the right by the Petite Montagne of Reims, with
antiquated villages nestled among the dense woodland. After crossing the
Châlons line of railway--near where one of the new forts constructed for
the defence of Reims rises up behind the villages and vineyards of
Cernay and Nogent l'Abbesse--the country becomes more undulating.
Poplars border the broad Marne canal, and a low fringe of foliage marks
the course of the languid river Vesle, on the banks of which is Taissy,
famous in the old days for its wines, great favourites with Sully, and
which almost lured Henri Quatre from his allegiance to the vintages of
Ay and Arbois that he loved so well.

To the left rises Mont de la Pompelle, where the first Christians of
Reims suffered martyrdom, and where in 1658 the Spaniards under Montal,
when attempting to ravage the vineyards of the district, were repulsed
with terrible slaughter by the Remois militia, led on by Grandpré.
A quarter of a century ago the low ground on our right near Sillery was
planted with vines by M. Jacquesson, the owner of the Sillery estate,
and a large champagne manufacturer at Châlons, who was anxious to
resuscitate the ancient reputation of the domain. Under the advice of
Dr. Guyot, the well-known writer on viticulture, he planted the vines in
deep trenches, which led to the vineyards being punningly termed
Jacquesson's _celery_ beds. To shield the vines from hailstorms
prevalent in the district, and the more dangerous spring frosts,
so fatal to vines planted in low-lying situations, long rolls of
straw-matting were stored close at hand with which to roof them over
when needful. These precautions were scarcely needed, however; the vines
languished through moisture at the roots, and eventually were mostly
rooted up.

After again crossing the railway, we pass the trim, restored turrets of
the famous château of Sillery, with its gateways, moats, and
drawbridges, flanked by trees and floral parterres. It was here that the
Maréchale d'Estrées carried on her successful business as a _marchande
de vins_, and the pragmatic and pedantic Comtesse de Genlis, governess
of the Orleans princes, spent, as she tells us, the happiest days of her
life. The few thriving vineyards of Sillery cover a gentle eminence
which rises out of the plain, and present on the one side an eastern and
on the other a western aspect. To-day the Vicomte de Brimont and
M. Fortel of Reims, the latter of whom cultivates about forty acres of
vines, yielding ordinarily about 300 hogsheads, are the only
wine-growers at Sillery. Before pressing his grapes--of course for
sparkling wine--M. Fortel has them thrown into a trough, at the bottom
of which are a couple of grooved cylinders, each about eight inches in
diameter, and revolving in contrary directions, the effect of which,
when set in motion, is to disengage the grapes partially from their
stalks. Grapes and stalks are then placed under the press, which is on
the old cyder-press principle, and the must runs into a reservoir
beneath, whence it is pumped into large vats, each holding from 250 to
500 gallons. Here it remains from six to eight hours, and is then run
off into casks, the spigots of which are merely laid lightly over the
holes, and in the course of twelve days the wine begins to ferment. It
now rests until the end of the year, when it is drawn off into new casks
and delivered to the buyer, invariably one or other of the great
champagne houses, who willingly pay an exceptionally high price for it.
The second and third pressures of the grapes yield an inferior wine, and
from the husks and stalks _eau-de-vie_, worth about five shillings a
gallon, is distilled.

The wine known as Sillery sec is a full, dry, pleasant-flavoured, and
somewhat spirituous amber-coloured wine. Very little of it is made
now-a-days, and most that is comes from the adjacent vineyards of
Verzenay and Mailly, and is principally reserved by the growers for
their own consumption. One of these candidly admitted to me that the old
reputation of the wine had exploded, and that better white Bordeaux and
Burgundy wines were to be obtained for less money. In making dry
Sillery, which locally is esteemed as a valuable tonic, it is essential
that the grapes should be subjected to only slight pressure, while to
have it in perfection it is equally essential that the wine should be
kept for ten years in the wood according to some, and eight years in
bottle according to others, to which circumstance its high price is in
all probability to be attributed. In course of time it forms a deposit,
and has the disadvantage common to all the finer still wines of the
Champagne district of not travelling well.

Beyond Sillery the vineyards of Verzenay unfold themselves, spreading
over the extensive slopes and stretching to the summit of the steep
height to the right, where a windmill or two is perched. Everywhere the
vintagers are busy detaching the grapes with their little hook-shaped
_serpettes_, the women all wearing projecting, close-fitting bonnets, as
though needlessly careful of their anything but blonde complexions. Long
carts laden with baskets of grapes block the narrow roads, and donkeys,
duly muzzled, with baskets slung across their backs, toil up and down
the steeper slopes. Half way up the principal hill, backed by a dense
wood and furrowed with deep trenches, whence soil has been removed for
manuring the vineyards, is the village of Verzenay, overlooking a
veritable sea of vines. Rising up in front of the old grey cottages,
encompassed by orchards or gardens, are the white walls and long red
roofs of the vendangeoirs belonging to the great champagne houses--Moët
and Chandon, Clicquot, G. H. Mumm, Roederer, Deutz and Geldermann, and
others--all teeming with bustle and excitement, and with the vines
almost reaching to their very doors. Moët and Chandon have as many as
eight presses in full work, and own no less than 120 acres of vines on
the neighbouring slopes, besides the Clos de Romont--in the direction of
Sillery, and yielding a wine of the Sillery type--belonging to M. Moët
Romont. At Messrs. G. H. Mumm's the newly-delivered grapes are either
being weighed and emptied into one of the pressoirs, or else receiving
their first gentle squeeze. Verzenay ranks as a _premier crû_, and for
three years in succession--1872, 3, and 4--its wines fetched a higher
price than either those of Ay or Bouzy. In 1873 the _vin brut_ commanded
the exceptionally large sum of 1,030 francs the hogshead of 44 gallons.
All the inhabitants of Verzenay are vine proprietors, and several
million francs are annually received by them for the produce of their
vineyards from the manufacturers of champagne. The wine of Verzenay,
remarkable for its body and vinosity, has always been held in high
repute, which is more than can be said for the probity of the
inhabitants, for according to an old Champagne saying--"Whenever at
Verzenay 'Stop thief' is cried every one takes to his heels."

Just over the mountain of Reims is the village of Verzy, the vineyards
of which adjoin those of Verzenay, and are almost exclusively planted
with white grapes, the only instance of the kind to be met with in the
district. In the clos St. Basse, however--taking its name from the abbey
of St. Basle, of which the village was a dependency, and where Edward
III. of England had his head-quarters during the siege of Reims--black
grapes alone are grown, and its produce is almost on a par with the
wines of Verzenay. Southwards of Verzy are the third-class crûs of
Villers-Marmery and Trépail.

  [Illustration:
  THE VINEYARDS OF VERZENAY. (p. 36.)]

On leaving Reims on our excursion to the vineyards of Bouzy we pass the
quaint old church of St. Remi, one of the sights of the Champagne
capital, and notable among other things for its magnificent ancient
stained-glass windows, and the handsome modern tomb of the popular
Remois saint. It was here in the middle ages that that piece of priestly
mummery, the procession of the herrings, used to take place at dusk on
the Wednesday before Easter. Preceded by a cross the canons of the
church marched in double file up the aisles, each trailing a cord after
him, with a herring attached. Every one's object was to tread on the
herring in front of him, and prevent his own herring from being trodden
upon by the canon who followed behind--a difficult enough proceeding
which, if it did not edify, certainly afforded much amusement to the
lookers-on.

Soon after crossing the canal and the river Vesle we leave the grey
antiquated-looking village of Cormontreuil on our left, and traverse a
wide stretch of cultivated country streaked with patches of woodland.
Occasional windmills dot the distant heights, while villages nestle
among the trees up the mountain sides and in the quiet hollows. Soon a
few vineyards occupying the lower slopes, and thronged by bands of
vintagers, come in sight, and the country too gets more picturesque. We
pass successively on our right hand Rilly, producing a capital red wine,
then Chigny, and afterwards Ludes, all three more or less up the
mountain, with vines in all directions, relieved by a dark background of
forest trees. In the old days the Knights Templars of the Commanderie of
Reims had the right of _vinage_ at Ludes, and exacted their modest "pot"
(about half a gallon) per pièce on all the wine the village produced. On
our left hand is Mailly, the vineyards of which join those of Verzenay,
and yield a wine noted for _finesse_ and bouquet. From the wooded knolls
hereabouts a view is gained of the broad plains of the Champagne, dotted
with white villages and scattered homesteads among the poplars and the
limes, the winding Vesle glittering in the sunlight, and the dark towers
of Notre Dame de Reims, with all their rich Gothic fretwork, rising
majestically above the distant city.

At one vendangeoir we visited at Mailly between 350 and 400 pièces of
wine were being made at the rate of some thirty pièces during the long
day of twenty hours, five men being engaged in working the old-fashioned
press, closely resembling a cyder press, and applying its pressure
longitudinally. The must was emptied into large vats, holding about 450
gallons, and remained there for two or three days before being drawn off
into casks. Of the above thirty pièces, twenty resulting from the first
pressure were of the finest quality, four produced by the second
pressure were partly reserved to replace what the first might lose
during fermentation, the residue serving for second-class champagne. The
six pièces which came from the final pressure, after being mixed with
common wine of the district, were converted into champagne of inferior
quality.

We now cross the mountain, sight Ville-en-Selve--the village in the
wood--among the distant trees, and eventually reach Louvois, whence the
Grand Monarque's domineering war minister derived his marquisate, and
where his château, a plain but capacious edifice, may still be seen
nestled in a picturesque and fertile valley, and surrounded by lordly
pleasure grounds. Soon afterwards the vineyards of Bouzy appear in
sight, with the prosperous-looking little village rising out of the
plain at the foot of the vine-clad slopes stretching to Ambonnay, and
the glittering Marne streaking the hazy distance. The commodious new
church was indebted for its spire, we were told, to the lucky
gainer--who chanced to be a native of Bouzy--of the great gold ingot
lottery prize, value £16,000, drawn some years ago. The Bouzy vineyards
occupy a series of gentle inclines, and have the advantage of a full
southern aspect. The soil, which is of the customary calcareous
formation, has a marked ruddy tinge, indicative of the presence of iron,
to which the wine is in some degree indebted for its distinguishing
characteristics--its delicacy, spirituousness, and pleasant bouquet.
Vintagers are passing slowly in between the vines, and carts laden with
grapes come rolling over the dusty roads. The mountain which rises
behind is scored up its sides and fringed with foliage at its summit,
and a small stone bridge crosses the deep ravine formed by the swift
descending winter torrents.

  [Illustration:
  THE VINEYARDS OF BOUZY. (p. 38.)]

  [Illustration:
  PRESSING GRAPES AT M. WERLÉ'S VENDANGEOIR AT BOUZY. (p. 39)]

The principal vineyard proprietors at Bouzy, which ranks, of course, as
a _premier crû_, are M. Werlé, M. Irroy, and Messrs. Moët and Chandon,
the first and last of whom have capacious vendangeoirs here, M. Irroy's
pressing-house being in the neighbouring village of Ambonnay. M. Werlé
possesses at Bouzy from forty to fifty acres of the finest vines,
forming a considerable proportion of the entire vineyard area. At the
Clicquot-Werlé vendangeoir, containing as many as eight presses, about
1,000 pièces of wine are made annually. At the time of our visit, grapes
gathered that morning were in course of delivery, the big basketfuls
being measured off in caques--wooden receptacles, holding two-and-twenty
gallons--while the florid-faced foreman ticked them off with a piece of
chalk on the head of an adjacent cask.

As soon as the contents of some half-hundred or so of these baskets had
been emptied on to the floor of the press, the grapes undetached from
their stalks were smoothed compactly down, and a moderate pressure was
applied to them by turning a huge wheel, which caused the screw of the
press to act--a gradual squeeze rather than a powerful one, and given
all at once, coaxing out, it was said, the finer qualities of the fruit.
The operation was repeated as many as six times; the yield from the
three first pressures being reserved for conversion into champagne,
while the result of the fourth squeeze would be applied to replenishing
the loss, averaging 7½ per cent., sustained by the must during
fermentation. Whatever comes from the fifth pressure is sold to make an
inferior champagne. The grapes are subsequently well raked about, and
then subjected to a couple of final squeezes, known as the _rébêche_,
and yielding a sort of _piquette_, given to the workmen employed at the
pressoir to drink.

The small quantity of still red Bouzy wine made by M. Werlé at the same
vendangeoir only claims to be regarded as a wine of especial mark in
good years. The grapes before being placed beneath the press are allowed
to remain in a vat for as many as eight days. The must undergoes a long
fermentation, and after being drawn off into casks is left undisturbed
for a couple of years. In bottle, where, by the way, it invariably
deposits a sediment, which is indeed the case with all the wines of the
Champagne, still or sparkling, it will outlive, we were told, any
Burgundy.

Still red Bouzy has a marked and agreeable bouquet and a most delicate
flavour, is deliciously smooth to the palate, and to all appearances as
light as a wine of Bordeaux, while in reality it is quite as strong as
Burgundy, to the finer crûs of which it bears a slight resemblance. It
was, I learnt, most susceptible to travelling, a mere journey to Paris
being, it was said, sufficient to sicken it, and impart such a shock to
its delicate constitution that it was unlikely to recover from it. To
attain perfection, this wine, which is what the French term a _vin vif_,
penetrating into the remotest corners of the organ of taste, requires to
be kept a couple of years in wood and half-a-dozen or more years in
bottle.

From Bouzy it was only a short distance along the base of the vine
slopes to Ambonnay, where there are merely two or three hundred acres of
vines, and where we found the vintage almost over. The village is girt
with fir trees, and surrounded by rising ground fringed with solid belts
or slender strips of foliage. An occasional windmill cuts against the
horizon, which is bounded here and there by scattered trees. Inquiring
for the largest vine proprietor we were directed to an open
porte-cochère, and on entering the large court encountered half-a-dozen
labouring men engaged in various farm occupations. Addressing one whom
we took to be the foreman, he referred us to a wiry little old man, in
shirt-sleeves and sabots, absorbed in the refreshing pursuit of turning
over a big heap of rich manure with a fork. He proved to be M. Oury, the
owner of I forget how many acres of vines, and a remarkably intelligent
peasant, considering what dunderheads the French peasants as a rule are,
who had raised himself to the position of a large vine proprietor.
Doffing his sabots and donning a clean blouse, he conducted us into his
little salon, a freshly-painted apartment about eight feet square, of
which the huge fireplace occupied fully one-third, and submitted
patiently to our catechizing.

At Ambonnay, as at Bouzy, they had that year, M. Oury said, only half an
average crop; the caque of grapes had, moreover, sold for exactly the
same price at both places, and the wine had realised about 800 francs
the pièce. Each hectare (2½ acres) of vines had yielded 45 caques of
grapes, weighing some 2¾ tons, which produced 6½ pièces, equal to 286
gallons of wine, or at the rate of 110 gallons per acre. Here the grapes
were pressed four times, the yield from the second pressure being used
principally to make good the loss which the first sustained during its
fermentation. As the squeezes given were powerful ones, all the best
qualities of the grapes were by this time extracted, and the yield from
the third and fourth pressures would not command more than 80 francs the
pièce. The vintagers who came from a distance received either a franc
and a half per day and their food, consisting of three meals, or two
francs and a half without food, the children being paid thirty sous.
M. Oury further informed us that every year vineyards came into the
market, and found ready purchasers at from fifteen to twenty thousand
francs the hectare, equal to an average price of £300 the acre. Owing to
the properties being divided into such infinitesimal portions, they were
rarely bought up by the large champagne houses, who preferred not to be
embarrassed with the cultivation of such tiny plots, but to buy the
produce from their owners.

There are other vineyards of lesser note in the neighbourhood of Reims
producing very fair wines which enter more or less into the composition
of champagne. Noticeable among these are Ville-Dommange and Sacy,
south-west of Reims, and Hermonville and St. Thierry--where the Black
Prince took up his quarters during the siege of Reims--north-west of the
city. The still red wine of St. Thierry, which recalls the growths of
the Médoc by its tannin, and those of the Côte d'Or by its vinosity, is
to-day almost a thing of the past, it being found here as elsewhere more
profitable to press the grapes for sparkling in preference to still
wine.


  [Illustration]

IV.--THE VINES OF THE CHAMPAGNE AND THE SYSTEM OF CULTIVATION.

The Vines chiefly of the Pineau Variety-- The Plant doré of Ay, the
  Plant vert doré, the Plant gris, and the Epinette-- The Soil of the
  Vineyards-- Close Mode of Plantation-- The Operation of Provinage--
  The Stems of the Vines never more than Three Years Old-- Fixing the
  Stakes to the Vines-- Manuring and General Cultivation-- Spring
  Frosts in the Champagne-- Various Modes of Protecting the Vines
  against them-- Dr. Guyot's System-- The Parasites that Prey upon the
  Vines.


In the Champagne the old rule holds good--poor soil, rich product; grand
wine in moderate quantity. Four descriptions of vines are chiefly
cultivated, three of them yielding black grapes, and all belonging to
the Pineau variety, from which the grand Burgundy wines are produced,
and so styled from the clusters taking the conical form of the pine. The
first is the franc pineau, the plant doré of Ay, producing small round
grapes, with thickish skins of a bluish black tint, and sweet and
refined in flavour. The next is the plant vert doré, more robust and
more productive than the former, but yielding a less generous wine, and
the berries of which are dark and oval, very thin skinned and remarkably
sweet and juicy. The third variety is the plant gris, or burot, as it is
styled in the Côte d'Or, a somewhat delicate vine, whose fruit has a
brownish tinge, and yields a light and perfumed wine. The remaining
species is a white grape known as the épinette, a variety of the pineau
blanc, and supposed by some to be identical with the chardonnet of
Burgundy, which yields the famous wine of Montrachet. It is met with all
along the Côte d'Avize, notably at Cramant, the delicate and elegant
wine of which ranks immediately after that of Ay and Verzenay. The
épinette is a prolific bearer, and its round transparent golden berries,
which hang in no very compact clusters, are both juicy and sweet. It
ripens, however, much later than either of the black varieties.

There are several other species of vines cultivated in the Champagne
vineyards, notably the common meunier, or miller, bearing black grapes,
and prevalent in the valley of Epernay, and which takes its name from
the circumstance of the young leaves appearing to have been sprinkled
with flour. There are also the black and white gouais, the meslier,
a prolific white variety yielding a wine of fair quality, the black and
white gamais, the leading grape in the Mâconnais, and chiefly found in
the Vertus vineyards, together with the tourlon, the marmot, and half a
score of others.

The soil of the Champagne vineyards is chalk, with a mixture of silica
and light clay, combined with a varying proportion of oxide of iron. The
vines are almost invariably planted on rising ground, the lower slopes
which usually escape the spring frosts producing the best wines. The new
vines are placed very close together, there often being as many as six
within a square yard. When two or three years old they are ready for the
operation of provinage universally practised in the Champagne, and which
consists in burying in a trench, from 6 to 8 inches deep, dug on one
side of the plant, the two lowest buds of the two principal shoots, left
when the vine was pruned for this especial purpose. The shoots thus laid
underground are dressed with a light manure, and in course of time take
root and form new vines, which bear during their second year. This
operation is performed in the spring, and is annually repeated until the
vine is five years old, the plants thus being in a state of continual
progression, a system which accounts for the juvenescent aspect of the
Champagne vineyards, where none of the wood of the vines showing
aboveground is more than three years old. When the vine has attained its
fifth year it is allowed to rest for a couple of years, and then the
pruning is resumed, the shoots being dispersed in any direction
throughout the vineyard. The plants remain in this condition
henceforward, merely requiring to be renewed from time to time by
judicious provining.

  [Illustration]

The vines are supported by stakes, when of oak costing sixty francs the
thousand; and as in the Champagne a close system of plantation is
followed, no less than 24,000 stakes are required on every acre of land,
making the cost per acre of propping up the vines upwards of £57, or
double what it is in the Médoc and quadruple what it is in Burgundy.
These stakes are set up in the spring of the year by men or women, the
former of whom force them into the ground by pressing against them with
their chest, which is protected with a shield of stout leather. The
women use a mallet, or have recourse to a special appliance, in working
which the foot plays the principal part. The latter method is the least
fatiguing, and in some localities is practised by the men. An expert
labourer will set up as many as 5,000 of these stakes in the course of
the day. After the vines have been hoed around their roots they are
secured to the stakes, and the tops are broken off at a shoot to prevent
them from growing above the regulation height, which is ordinarily from
30 to 33 inches. They are liberally manured with a kind of compost
formed of the loose friable soil dug out from the sides of the mountain,
and of supposed volcanic origin, mixed with animal and vegetable refuse.
The vines are shortened back while in flower, and in the course of the
summer the ground is hoed a second and a third time, the object being,
first, to destroy the superficial roots of the vines and force the
plants to live solely on their deep roots; and, secondly, to remove all
pernicious weeds from round about them. After the third hoeing, which
takes place in the middle of August, the vines are left to themselves
until the period of the vintage. When this is over the stakes supporting
the vines are pulled up and stacked in compact masses, with their ends
out of the ground, the vine, which is left curled up in a heap,
remaining undisturbed until the winter, when the earth around it is
loosened. In the month of February it is pruned and sunk into the earth,
as already described, so as to leave only the new wood aboveground.
Owing to the vines being planted so closely together they starve one
another, and numbers of them perish. When this is the case, or the stems
get broken during the vintage, their places are filled up by provining.

  [Illustration]

The vignerons of the Champagne regard the numerous stakes which support
the vines as affording some protection against the white frosts of the
spring. To guard against the dreaded effects of these frosts, which
invariably occur between early dawn and sunrise, and the loss arising
from which is estimated to amount annually to 25 per cent. some of the
cultivators place heaps of hay, faggots, dead leaves, &c., about twenty
yards apart, taking care to keep them moderately damp. When a frost is
feared the heaps on the side of the vineyard whence the wind blows are
set light to, whereupon the dense smoke which rises spreads horizontally
over the vines, producing the same result as an actual cloud,
intercepting the rays of the sun, warming the atmosphere, and converting
the frost into dew. Among other methods adopted to shield the vines from
frosts is the joining of branches of broom together in the form of a
fan, and afterwards fastening them to the end of a pole, which is placed
obliquely in the ground, so that the fan may incline over the vine and
protect it from the sun's rays. A single labourer can plant, it is said,
as many as eight thousand of these fans in the ground in the course of a
long day.

Dr. Guyot's system of roofing the vines with straw matting, to protect
them alike against frost and hailstorms, is very generally followed in
low situations in the Champagne, the value of the wine admitting of so
considerable an expense being incurred. This matting, which is about a
foot and a half in width, and in rolls of great length, is fastened
either with twine or wire to the vine stakes, and it is estimated that
half-a-dozen men can fix nearly 11,000 yards of it, or sufficient to
roof over 2½ acres of vines, during an ordinary day.

Owing to the system of cultivation by rejuvenescence, and the constant
replenishing of the soil by well-compounded manures, the Champenois
winegrowers entertain great hopes that their vineyards will escape the
ravages of the phylloxera vastatrix. According to Dr. Plonquet of Ay
they are already the prey of no less than fifteen varieties of insects,
which feed upon the leaves, stalks, roots, or fruit of the vines.
Between 1850 and 1860 the vineyards of Ay were devastated by the pyrale,
a species of caterpillar, which feeds on the young leaves and shoots
until the vine is left completely bare. The insect eventually becomes
transformed into a small white butterfly, and deposits its eggs either
in the crevices of the stakes or in the stalks of the vine. All the
efforts made to rid the vineyards of this scourge proved ineffectual
until the wet and cold weather of 1860 put a stop to the insect's
ravages. More recently it has been discovered that its attacks can be
checked by sulphurous acid.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]

V.--PREPARATION OF CHAMPAGNE.

Treatment of Champagne after it comes from the Wine-Press-- Racking
  and Blending of the Wine-- Deficiency and Excess of Effervescence--
  Strength and Form of Champagne Bottles-- The "Tirage" or Bottling of
  the Wine-- The Process of Gas-making commences-- Inevitable Breakage
  follows-- Wine Stacked in Piles-- Formation of Sediment-- Bottles
  placed "sur pointe" and Daily Shaken-- Effect of this occupation on
  those incessantly engaged in it-- "Claws" and "Masks"-- Champagne
  Cellars-- Their Construction and Aspect-- Transforming the "vin
  brut" into Champagne-- Disgorging and Liqueuring the Wine-- The
  Corking, Stringing, Wiring, and Amalgamating-- The Wine's Agitated
  Existence comes to an End-- The Bottles have their Toilettes made--
  Champagne sets out on its beneficial Pilgrimage.


The special characteristic of champagne is that its manufacture only
just commences where that of other wines ordinarily ends. The must flows
direct from the press into capacious reservoirs, whence it is drawn off
into large vats, and after being allowed to clear, is transferred to
casks holding some forty-four gallons each. Although the bulk of the
new-made wine is left to repose at the vendangeoirs until the
commencement of the following year, still when the vintage is over
numbers of long narrow carts laden with casks of it are to be seen
rolling along the dusty highways leading to those towns and villages in
the Marne where the manufacture of champagne is carried on. Chief
amongst these is the cathedral city of Reims, after which comes the
rising town of Epernay, stretching to the very verge of the river, then
Ay, nestled between the vine-clad slopes and the Marne canal, with the
neighbouring village of Mareuil, and finally Avize, in the centre of the
white grape district southwards of Epernay. Châlons, owing to its
distance from the vineyards, would scarcely draw its supply of wine
until the new year. The first fermentation lasts from a fortnight to a
month, according as to whether the wine be _mou_--that is, rich in
sugar--or the reverse. In the former case fermentation naturally lasts
much longer than when the wine is _vert_ or green. This active
fermentation is converted into latent fermentation by transferring the
wine to a cooler cellar, as it is essential it should retain a large
proportion of its natural saccharine to ensure its future effervescence.
The casks have previously been completely filled, and their bungholes
tightly stopped, a necessary precaution to guard the wine from absorbing
oxygen, the effect of which would be to turn it yellow and cause it to
lose some of its lightness and perfume. After being racked and fined,
the produce of the different vineyards is now ready for mixing together
in accordance with the traditional theories of the various
manufacturers, and should the vintage have been an indifferent one a
certain proportion of old reserved wine of a good year enters into the
blend.

The mixing is usually effected in gigantic vats holding at times as many
as 12,000 gallons each, and having fan-shaped appliances inside, which,
on being worked by handles, ensure a complete amalgamation of the wine.
This process of marrying wine on a gigantic scale is technically known
as making the _cuvée_. Usually four-fifths of wine from black grapes are
tempered by one-fifth of the juice of white ones. It is necessary that
the first should comprise a more or less powerful dash of the finer
growths both of the Mountain of Reims and of the River, while, as
regards the latter, one or other of the delicate vintages of the Côte
d'Avize is essential to the perfect _cuvée_. The aim is to combine and
develop the special qualities of the respective crûs, body and vinosity
being secured by the red vintages of Bouzy and Verzenay, softness and
roundness by those of Ay and Dizy, and lightness, delicacy, and
effervescence by the white growths of Avize and Cramant. The proportions
are never absolute, but vary according to the manufacturer's style of
wine and the taste of the countries which form his principal markets.
The wine at this period being imperfectly fermented and crude, the
reader may imagine the delicacy and discrimination of palate requisite
to judge of the flavour, finesse, and bouquet which the _cuvée_ is
likely eventually to develop.

These, however, are not the only matters to be considered. There is,
above everything, the effervescence, which depends upon the quantity of
carbonic acid gas the wine contains, and this, in turn, upon the amount
of its natural saccharine. If the gas be present in excess, there will
be a shattering of bottles and a flooding of cellars; and if there be a
paucity the corks will refuse to pop, and the wine to sparkle aright in
the glass. Therefore the amount of saccharine in the _cuvée_ has to be
accurately ascertained by means of a glucometer; and if it fails to
reach the required standard, the deficiency is made up by the addition
of the purest sugar-candy. If, on the other hand, there be an excess of
saccharine, the only thing to be done is to defer the final blending and
bottling until the superfluous saccharine matter has been absorbed by
fermentation in the cask.

The _cuvée_ completed, the blended wine, now resembling in taste and
colour an ordinary acrid white wine, and giving to the uninitiated
palate no promise of the exquisite delicacy and aroma it is destined to
develop, is drawn off again into casks for further treatment. This
comprises fining with some gelatinous substance, and, as a precaution
against ropiness and other maladies, liquid tannin is at the same time
frequently added to supply the place of the natural tannin which has
departed from the wine with its reddish hue at the epoch of its first
fermentation.

The operation of bottling the wine next ensues, when the Scriptural
advice not to put new wine into old bottles is rigorously followed. For
the tremendous pressure of the gas engendered during the subsequent
fermentation of the wine is such that the bottle becomes weakened and
can never be safely trusted again. It is because of this pressure that
the champagne bottle is one of the strongest made, as indicated by its
weight, which is almost a couple of pounds. To ensure this unusual
strength it is necessary that its sides should be of equal thickness and
the bottom of a uniform solidity throughout, in order that no particular
expansion may ensue from sudden changes of temperature. The neck must,
moreover, be perfectly round and widen gradually towards the shoulder.
In addition--and this is of the utmost consequence--the inside ought to
be perfectly smooth, as a rough interior causes the gas to make efforts
to escape, and thus renders an explosion imminent. The composition of
the glass, too, is not without its importance, as a manufactory
established for the production of glass by a new process turned out
champagne bottles charged with alkaline sulphurets, and the consequence
was that an entire _cuvée_ was ruined by their use, through the
reciprocal action of the wine and these sulphurets. The acids of the
former disengaged hydrosulphuric acid, and instead of champagne the
result was a new species of mineral water.

Most of the bottles used for champagnes come from the factories of
Loivre (which supplies the largest quantity), Folembray, Vauxrot, and
Quiquengrogne, and cost on the average from 28 to 30 francs the hundred.
They are generally tested by a practised hand, who, by knocking them
sharply together, professes to be able to tell from the sound that they
give the substance of the glass and its temper. The washing of the
bottles is invariably performed by women, who at the larger
establishments accomplish it with the aid of machines, sometimes
provided with a revolving brush, although small glass beads are more
generally used by preference. After being washed every bottle is
minutely examined to make certain of its perfect purity.

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]

With the different champagne houses the mode of bottling the wine, which
may take place any time between April and August, varies in some
measure, still the _tirage_, as this operation is called, is ordinarily
effected as follows:--The wine is emptied from the casks into vats or
tuns of varying capacity, whence it flows through pipes into oblong
reservoirs, each provided with a row of syphon taps, on to which the
bottles are slipped, and from which the wine ceases to flow directly the
bottles become filled. Men or lads remove the full bottles, replacing
them by empty ones, while other hands convey them to the corkers, whose
guillotine machines are incessantly in motion; next the _agrafeurs_
secure the corks by means of an iron staple, termed an agrafe; and then
the bottles are conveyed either to a capacious apartment aboveground,
known as a cellier, or to a cool cellar, according to the number of
atmospheres the wine may indicate. It should be explained that air
compressed to half its volume acquires twice its ordinary force, and to
a quarter of its volume quadruple this force--hence the phrase of two,
four, or more atmospheres. The exact degree of pressure is readily
ascertained by means of a manometer, an instrument resembling a pressure
gauge, with a hollow screw at the base which is driven through the cork
of the bottle. A pressure of 5¾ atmospheres constitutes what is styled a
"grand mousseux," and the wine exhibiting it may be safely conveyed to
the coolest subterranean depths, for no doubt need be entertained as to
its future effervescent properties. Should the pressure, however,
scarcely exceed 4 atmospheres, it is advisable to keep the wine in a
cellier aboveground that it may more rapidly acquire the requisite
sparkling qualities. If fewer than 4 atmospheres are indicated it would
be necessary to pour the wine back into the casks again, and add a
certain amount of cane sugar to it, but such an eventuality very rarely
happens, thanks to the scientific formulas and apparatus which enable
the degree of pressure the wine will show to be determined beforehand to
a nicety. Still mistakes are sometimes made, and there are instances
where charcoal fires have had to be lighted in the cellars to encourage
the effervescence to develop itself.

The bottles are placed in a horizontal position and stacked in rows of
varying length and depth, one above the other, to about the height of a
man, and with narrow laths between them. Thus they will spend the summer
providing all goes well, but in about three weeks' time the process of
gas-making inside the bottles is at its height, and may cause an undue
number of them to burst. The glucometer notwithstanding, it is
impossible to check a certain amount of breakage, especially when a hot
season has caused the grapes, and consequently the raw wine, to be
sweeter than usual. Moreover when once _casse_ or breakage sets in on a
large scale, the temperature of the cellar is raised by the volume of
carbonic acid gas let loose, which is not without its effect on the
remaining bottles. The only remedy is at once to remove the wine to a
lower temperature when this is practicable. A manufacturer of the
pre-scientific days of the last century relates how one year, when the
wine was rich and strong, he only preserved 120 out of 6,000 bottles;
and it is not long since that 120,000 out of 200,000 were destroyed in
the cellars of a well-known champagne firm. Over-knowing purchasers
still affect to select a wine which has exploded in the largest
proportion as being well up to the mark as regards its effervescence,
and profess to make inquiries as to its performances in this direction.

It is evident that in spite of the teachings of science the bursting of
champagne bottles has not yet been reduced to a minimum, for whereas in
some cellars it averages 7 and 8 per cent., in others it rarely exceeds
2½ or 3. In the month of October, the first and severest breakage being
over, the newly-bottled wine is definitively stacked in the cellars in
piles from two to half-a-dozen bottles deep, from six to seven feet
high, and frequently a hundred feet or upwards in length. Usually the
bottles remain in their horizontal position for about eighteen or twenty
months, though some firms, who pride themselves upon shipping perfectly
matured wines, leave them thus for double this space of time. All this
while the temperature to which the wine is exposed is, as far as
practicable, carefully regulated; for the risk of breakage, though
greatly diminished, is never entirely at an end.

  [Illustration]

By this time the fermentation is over, but in the interval, commencing
from a few days after the bottling of the wine, a loose dark-brown
sediment has been forming which has now settled on the lower side of the
bottle, and to get rid of which is a delicate and tedious task. The
bottles are placed _sur pointe_, as it is termed--that is to say,
slantingly in racks with their necks downwards, the inclination being
increased from time to time to one more abrupt. The object of this
change in their position is to cause the sediment to leave the side of
the bottle where it has gathered; it afterwards becomes necessary to
twist and turn it, and coagulate it, as it were, until it forms a kind
of muddy ball, and eventually to get it well down into the neck of the
bottle, so that it may be finally expelled with a bang when the
temporary cork is removed and the proper one adjusted. To accomplish
this the bottles are sharply turned in one direction every day for at
least a month or six weeks, the time being indefinitely extended until
the sediment shows a disposition to settle near the cork. The younger
the wine the longer the period necessary for the bottles to be shaken,
new wine often requiring as much as three months. Only a thoroughly
practised hand can give the right amount of revolution and the requisite
degree of slope; and in some of the cellars that we visited men were
pointed out to us who had acquired such dexterity as to be able at a
pinch to shake with their two hands as many as 50,000 bottles in a
single day.

Some of these men have spent thirty or forty years of their lives
engaged in this perpetual task. Fancy being entombed all alone day after
day in vaults which are invariably dark and gloomy, and often cold and
dank, and being obliged to twist sixty to seventy of these bottles every
minute throughout the day of twelve hours. Why the treadmill and the
crank with their periodical respites must be pastime compared to this
maddeningly monotonous occupation, which combines hard labour, with the
wrist at any rate, with next to solitary confinement. One can understand
these men becoming gloomy and taciturn, and affirming that they
sometimes see devils hovering over the bottle-racks and frantically
shaking the bottles beside them, or else grinning at them as they pursue
their humdrum task. Still it may be taken for granted that the men who
reach this stage are accustomed to drink freely of raw spirits, and
merely pay the penalty resulting from over-indulgence.

  [Illustration]

In former times the bottles used to be placed with their heads downwards
on tables pierced with holes, from which they had to be removed and
agitated. In 1818, however, a man named Muller, in the employment of
Madame Clicquot, suggested that the bottles should remain in the tables
whilst being shaken, and further that the holes should be cut obliquely
so that the bottles might recline at varying angles. His suggestions
were privately adopted by Madame Clicquot, but eventually the improved
plan got wind, and the system now prevails throughout the Champagne.
When the bottles have gone through their regular course of shaking they
are examined before a lighted candle to ascertain whether the deposit
has fallen and the wine become perfectly clear. Sometimes it happens
that, twist these men never so wisely, the deposit refuses to stir, and
takes the shape of a bunch of thread technically called a "claw," or an
adherent mass styled a "mask." When this is the case an attempt is made
to start it by tapping the part to which it adheres with a piece of
iron, the result being frequently the sudden explosion of the bottle. As
a precaution, therefore, the workman protects his face with a wire-mask
or gigantic wire spectacles, which give to him a ghoul-like aspect.

  [Illustration]

The cellars of the champagne manufacturers are very varied in character.
The wine that has been grown on the chalky hills undergoes development
in vaults burrowed out of the calcareous strata underlying the entire
district. In excavating these cellars the sides and roofs are frequently
worked smooth and regular as finished masonry. The larger ones are
composed of a number of spacious and lofty galleries, sometimes parallel
with each other, but often ramifying in various directions, and
evidently constructed on no definite plan. They are of one, two, and, in
rare instances, of three stories, and now and then consist of a series
of parallel galleries communicating with each other, lined with masonry,
and with their stone walls and vaulted roofs resembling the crypt of
some conventual building. Others of ancient date are less regular in
their form, being merely so many narrow low winding corridors, varied,
perhaps, by recesses hewn roughly out of the chalk, and resembling the
brigands' cave of the melodrama, while a certain number of the larger
cellars at Reims are simply abandoned quarries, the broad and lofty
arches of which are suggestive of the nave and aisles of some Gothic
church. In these varied vaults, lighted by solitary lamps in front of
metal reflectors, or by the flickering tallow candles which we carry in
our hands, we pass rows of casks filled with last year's vintage or
reserved wine of former years, and piles after piles of bottles of _vin
brut_ in seemingly endless sequence--squares, so to speak, of raw
champagne recruits awaiting their turn to be thoroughly drilled and
disciplined. These are varied by bottles reposing necks downwards in
racks at different degrees of inclination according to the progress
their education has attained. Reports caused by exploding bottles now
and then assail the ear, and as the echo dies away it becomes mingled
with the rush of the escaping wine, cascading down the pile and finding
its way across the sloping sides of the floor to the narrow gutter in
the centre. The dampness of the floor and the shattered fragments of
glass strewn about show the frequency of this kind of accident. The
spilt wine, which flows along the gutter into reservoirs, is usually
thrown away, though there is a story current to the effect that the head
of one Epernay firm cooks nearly everything consumed in his house in the
fluid thus let loose in his cellars.

In these subterranean galleries we frequently come upon parties of
workmen engaged in transforming the perfected _vin brut_ into champagne.
Viewed at a distance while occupied in their monotonous task, they
present in the semi-obscurity a series of picturesque Rembrandt-like
studies. One of the end figures in each group is engaged in the
important process of _dégorgement_, which is performed when the deposit,
of which we have already spoken, has satisfactorily settled in the neck
of the bottle. Baskets full of bottles with their necks downwards are
placed beside the operator, who stands before an apparatus resembling a
cask divided vertically down the middle. This nimble-figured manipulator
seizes a bottle, holds it for a moment before the light to test the
clearness of the wine and the subsidence of the deposit; brings it,
still neck downwards, over a small tub at the bottom of the apparatus
already mentioned; and with a jerk of the steel hook which he holds in
his right hand loosens the _agrafe_ securing the cork, Bang goes the
latter, and with it flies out the sediment and a small glassful or so of
wine, further flow being checked by the workman's finger, which also
serves to remove any sediment yet remaining in the bottle's neck. Like
many other clever tricks, this looks very easy when adroitly performed,
though a novice would probably empty the bottle by the time he had
discovered that the cork was out. Occasionally a bottle bursts in the
_dégorgeur's_ hand, and his face is sometimes scarred from such
explosions. The sediment removed, he slips a temporary cork into the
bottle, and the wine is ready for the important operation of the
_dosage_, upon the nature and amount of which the character of the
perfected wine, whether it be dry or sweet, light or strong, very much
depends.

Different manufacturers have different recipes, more or less complex in
character, and varying with the quality of the wine and the country for
which it is intended; but the genuine liqueur consists of nothing but
old wine of the best quality, to which a certain amount of sugar-candy
and perhaps a dash of the finest cognac spirit has been added. The
saccharine addition varies according to the market for which the wine is
destined: thus the high-class English buyer demands a dry champagne, the
Russian a wine sweet and strong as "ladies' grog," and the Frenchman and
German a sweet light wine. To the extra-dry champagnes a modicum dose is
added, while the so-called "_brut_" wines receive no more than from one
to three per cent. of liqueur.

In some establishments the dose is administered with a tin can or ladle;
but more generally an ingenious machine of pure silver and glass which
regulates the percentage of liqueur to a nicety is employed. The
_dosage_ accomplished, the bottle passes to another workman known as the
_égaliseur_, who fills it up with pure wine. Should a pink champagne be
required, the wine thus added will be red, although manufacturers of
questionable reputation sometimes employ the solution known as _teinte
de Fismes_. The _égaliseur_ in turn hands the bottle to the corker, who
places it under a machine furnished with a pair of claws, which compress
the cork to a size sufficiently small to allow it to enter the neck of
the bottle, and a suspended weight, which in falling drives it home.
These corks, which are principally obtained from Catalonia and
Andalucia, cost more than twopence each, and are delivered in huge sacks
resembling hop-pockets. Before they are used they have been either
boiled in wine, soaked in a solution of tartar, or else steamed by the
cork merchants, both to prevent their imparting a bad flavour to the
wine and to hinder any leakage. They are commonly handed warm to the
corker, who dips them into a small vessel of wine before making use of
them. Some firms, however, prepare their corks by subjecting them to
cold water _douches_ a day or two beforehand. The _ficeleur_ receives
the bottle from the corker, and with a twist of the fingers secures the
cork with string, at the same time rounding its hitherto flat top. The
_metteur de fil_ next affixes the wire with like celerity; and then the
final operation is performed by a workman seizing a couple of bottles by
the neck and whirling them round his head, as though engaged in the
Indian-club exercise, in order to secure a perfect amalgamation of the
wine and the liqueur.

The final manipulation accomplished, the agitated course of existence
through which the wine has been passing of late comes to an end, and the
bottles are conveyed to another part of the establishment, where they
repose for several days, or even weeks, in order that the mutual action
of the wine and the liqueur upon each other may be complete. When the
time arrives for despatching them they are confided to feminine hands to
have their dainty toilettes made, and are tastefully labelled and either
capsuled, or else have their corks and necks imbedded in sealing-wax, or
swathed in gold or silver foil, whereby they are rendered presentable at
the best-appointed tables.

  [Illustration]

Thus completed champagne sets out on its beneficial pilgrimage to
promote the spread of mirth and lightheartedness, to drive away dull
care and foment good-fellowship, to comfort the sick and cheer the
sound. Wherever civilisation penetrates, champagne sooner or later is
sure to follow; and if Queen Victoria's morning drum beats round the
world, its beat is certain to be echoed before the day is over by the
popping of champagne-corks. Now-a-days the exhilarating wine graces not
merely princely but middle-class dinner-tables, and is the needful
adjunct at every _petit souper_ in all the gayer capitals of the world.
It gives a flush to beauty at garden-parties and picnics, sustains the
energies of the votaries of Terpsichore until the hour of dawn, and
imparts to many a young gallant the necessary courage to declare his
passion. It enlivens the dullest of _réunions_, brings smiles to the
lips of the sternest cynics, softens the most irascible tempers, and
loosens the most taciturn tongues. The grim Berliner and the gay
Viennese both acknowledge its enlivening influence. It sparkles in
crystal goblets in the great capital of the North, and the Moslem wipes
its creamy foam from his beard beneath the very shadow of the mosque of
St. Sophia; for the Prophet has only forbidden the use of wine, and of a
surety--Allah be praised!--this strangely-sparkling delicious liquor,
which gives to the true believer a foretaste of the joys of Paradise,
cannot be wine. At the diamond-fields of South Africa and the diggings
of Australia the brawny miner who has hit upon a big bit of crystallised
carbon, or a nugget of virgin ore, strolls to the "saloon" and shouts
for champagne. The mild Hindoo imbibes it quietly, but approvingly, as
he watches the evolutions of the Nautch girls, and his partiality for it
has already enriched the Anglo-Bengalee vocabulary and London slang with
the word "simkin." It is transported on camel-backs across the deserts
of Central Asia, and in frail canoes up the mighty Amazon. The
two-sworded Daimio calls for it in the tea-gardens of Yokohama, and the
New Yorker, when not rinsing his stomach by libations of iced-water,
imbibes it freely at Delmonico's. Wherever civilised man has set his
foot--at the base of the Pyramids and at the summit of the Cordilleras,
in the mangrove swamps of Ashantee and the gulches of the Great Lone
Land, in the wilds of the Amoor and on the desert isles of the
Pacific--he has left traces of his presence in the shape of the empty
bottles that were once full of the sparkling vintage of the Champagne.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration:
  DEVICES FROM THE COMMANDERIE AT REIMS.]

VI.--THE REIMS CHAMPAGNE ESTABLISHMENTS.

Messrs. Werlé and Co., successors to the Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardin--
  Their Offices and Cellars on the site of a Former Commanderie of the
  Templars-- Origin of the Celebrity of Madame Clicquot's Wines--
  M. Werlé and his Son-- The Forty-five Cellars of the Clicquot-Werlé
  Establishment-- Our Tour of Inspection-- Ingenious Liqueuring
  Machine-- An Explosion and its Consequences-- M. Werlé's Gallery of
  Paintings-- Madame Clicquot's Renaissance House and its Picturesque
  Bas-reliefs-- The Werlé Vineyards and Vendangeoirs-- M. Louis
  Roederer's Establishment-- Heidsieck and Co. and their Famous
  "Monopole" Brand-- The Firm Founded in the Last Century-- Their
  various Establishments Inside and Outside Reims-- The Matured Wines
  Shipped by them.


  [Illustration]

The cellars of the great champagne manufacturers of Reims are scattered
in all directions over the historical old city. They undermine its
narrowest and most insignificant streets, its broad and handsome
boulevards, and on the eastern side extend to its more distant
outskirts. Messrs. Werlé and Co., the successors of the famous Veuve
Clicquot-Ponsardin, have their offices and cellars on the site of a
former Commanderie of the Templars in an ancient quarter of the city,
and strangers passing by the spot would scarcely imagine that under
their feet hundreds of busy hands are incessantly at work, disgorging,
dosing, shaking, corking, storing, wiring, labelling, capsuling, waxing,
tinfoiling, and packing hundreds of thousands of bottles of champagne
destined for all parts of the civilised world.

The house of Clicquot, established in the year 1798 by the husband of La
Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardin, who died in 1866, in her 89th year, was
indebted for much of the celebrity of its wine to the lucky accident of
the Russians occupying Reims in 1814 and 1815, and freely requisitioning
the sweet champagne stored in the widow's capacious cellars. Madame
Clicquot's wines were slightly known in Russia prior to this date, but
the officers of the invading army, on their return home, proclaimed
their merits throughout the length and breadth of the Muscovite Empire,
and the fortune of the house was made. Madame Clicquot, as every one
knows, amassed enormous wealth, and succeeded in marrying both her
daughter and granddaughter to counts of the _ancien régime_.

The present head of the firm is M. Werlé, who comes of an old Lorraine
family although born in the ancient free imperial town of Wetzlar on the
Lahn, where Goethe lays the scene of his "Sorrows of Werther," the
leading incidents of which really occurred here. M. Werlé entered the
establishment, which he has done so much to raise to its existing
position, so far back as the year 1821. His care and skill, exercised
over more than half a century, have largely contributed to obtain for
the Clicquot brand that high repute which it enjoys to-day all over the
world. M. Werlé, who has long been naturalised in France, was for many
years Mayor of Reims and President of its Chamber of Commerce, as well
as one of the deputies of the Marne to the Corps Législatif. He enjoys
the reputation of being the richest man in Reims, and, like his late
partner, Madame Clicquot, he has also succeeded in securing brilliant
alliances for his children, his son, M. Alfred Werlé, having married the
daughter of the Duc de Montebello, while his daughter espoused the son
of M. Magne, Minister of Finance under the Second Empire.

  [Illustration:
  MADAME VEUVE CLICQUOT AT EIGHTY YEARS OF AGE.
  (_From the Painting by Léon Coignet_.) (p. 64)]

  [Illustration:
  THE CLICQUOT-WERLÉ ESTABLISHMENT AT REIMS. (p. 65)]

Half-way down the narrow tortuous Rue du Temple is an ancient gateway,
on which may be traced the half-effaced sculptured heads of Phoebus and
Bacchus. Immediately in front is a green _porte-cochère_ forming the
entrance to the Clicquot-Werlé establishment, and conducting to a
spacious trim-kept courtyard, set off with a few trees, with some
extensive stabling and cart-sheds on the left, and on the right hand the
entrance to the cellars. Facing us is an unpretending-looking edifice,
where the firm has its counting-houses, with a little corner tower
surmounted by a characteristic weathercock consisting of a figure of
Bacchus seated astride a cask beneath a vine-branch, and holding up a
bottle in one hand and a goblet in the other. The old Remish Commanderie
of the Knights Templars existed until the epoch of the Great Revolution,
and to-day a few fragments of the ancient buildings remain adjacent to
the "celliers" of the establishment, which are reached through a pair of
folding-doors and down a flight of stone steps, and whence, after being
furnished with lighted candles, we set out on our tour of inspection,
entering first of all the vast cellar of St. Paul, where the thousands
of bottles requiring to be daily shaken are reposing necks downwards on
the large perforated tables which crowd the apartment. It is a
peculiarity of the Clicquot-Werlé establishment that each of the
cellars--forty-five in number, and the smallest a vast apartment--has
its special name. In the adjoining cellar of St. Matthew other bottles
are similarly arranged, and here wine in cask is likewise stored. We
pass rows of huge tuns, each holding its twelve or thirteen hundred
gallons of fine reserved wine designed for blending with more youthful
growths; next are threading our way between seemingly endless piles of
hogsheads filled with later vintages, and anon are passing smaller casks
containing the syrup with which the _vin préparé_ is dosed. At intervals
we come upon some square opening in the floor through which bottles of
wine are being hauled up from the cellars beneath in readiness to
receive their requisite adornment before being packed in baskets or
cases according to the country to which they are destined to be
despatched. To Russia the Clicquot champagne is sent in cases containing
sixty bottles, while the cases for China contain as many as double that
number.

  [Illustration:
  REMAINS OF THE COMMANDERIE AT REIMS.]

The ample cellarage which the house possesses has enabled M. Werlé to
make many experiments which firms with less space at their command would
find it difficult to carry out on the same satisfactory scale. Such, for
instance, is the system of racks in which the bottles repose while the
wine undergoes its diurnal shaking. Instead of these racks being, as
they commonly are, at almost upright angles, they are perfectly
horizontal, which, in M. Werlé's opinion, offers a material advantage,
inasmuch as the bottles are all in readiness for disgorging at the same
time instead of the lower ones being ready before those above, as is the
case when the ancient system is followed, owing to the uppermost bottles
getting less shaken than the others.

After performing the round of the celliers we descend into the _caves_,
a complete labyrinth of gloomy underground corridors excavated in the
bed of chalk which underlies the city, and roofed and walled with solid
masonry, more or less blackened by age. In one of these cellars we catch
sight of rows of work-people engaged in the operation of dosing,
corking, securing, and shaking the bottles of wine which have just left
the hands of the _dégorgeur_ by the dim light of half-a-dozen tallow
candles. The latest invention for liqueuring the wine is being employed.
Formerly, to prevent the carbonic acid gas escaping from the bottles
while the process of liqueuring was going on, it was necessary to press
a gutta-percha ball connected with the machine, in order to force the
escaping gas back. The new machine, however, renders this unnecessary,
the gas by its own power and composition forcing itself back into the
wine.

In the adjoining cellar of St. Charles are stacks of bottles awaiting
the manipulation of the _dégorgeur_, while in that of St. Ferdinand men
are engaged in examining other bottles before lighted candles to make
certain that the sediment is thoroughly dislodged and the wine perfectly
clear before the disgorgement is effected. Here, too, the corking,
wiring, and stringing of the newly-disgorged wine are going on. Another
flight of steps leads to the second tier of cellars, where the moisture
trickles down the dank dingy walls, and save the dim light thrown out by
the candles we carried, and by some other far-off flickering taper stuck
in a cleft stick to direct the workmen, who with dexterous turns of
their wrists give a twist to the bottles, all is darkness. On every side
bottles are reposing in various attitudes, the majority in huge square
piles on their sides, others in racks slightly tilted, others, again,
almost standing on their heads, while some, which through over-inflation
have come to grief, litter the floor and crunch beneath our feet.
Tablets are hung against each stack of wine indicating its age, and from
time to time a bottle is held up before the light to show us how the
sediment commences to form, or explain how it eventually works its way
down the neck of the bottle, and finally settles on the cork. Suddenly
we are startled by a loud report resembling a pistol-shot, which
reverberates through the vaulted chamber, as a bottle close at hand
explodes, dashing out its heavy bottom as neatly as though it had been
cut by a diamond, and dislocating the necks and pounding in the sides of
its immediate neighbours. The wine trickles down, and eventually finds
its way along the sloping sides of the slippery floor to the narrow
gutter in the centre.

Ventilating shafts pass from one tier of cellars to the other, enabling
the temperature in a certain measure to be regulated, and thereby
obviate an excess of breakage. M. Werlé estimates that the loss in this
respect during the first eighteen months of a _cuvée_ amounts to 7 per
cent., but subsequently is considerably less. In 1862 one champagne
manufacturer lost as much as 45 per cent. of his wine by breakages. The
Clicquot _cuvée_ is made in the cave of St. William, where 120 hogsheads
of wine are hauled up by means of a crane and discharged into the vat
daily as long as the operation lasts. The _tirage_ or bottling of the
wine ordinarily commences in the middle of May, and occupies fully a
month.

  [Illustration:
  RENAISSANCE HOUSE AT REIMS, IN WHICH MADAME CLICQUOT RESIDED. (p. 69)]

M. Werlé's private residence is close to the establishment in the Rue du
Temple, and here he has collected a small gallery of high-class modern
paintings by French and other artists, including Meissonnier's
"Card-players," Delaroche's "Beatrice Cenci on her way to Execution,"
Fleury's "Charles V. picking up the brush of Titian," various works by
the brothers Scheffer, Knaus's highly-characteristic _genre_ picture,
"His Highness on a Journey," and several fine portraits, among which is
one of Madame Clicquot, painted by Léon Coignet, when she was eighty
years of age, and another of M. Werlé by the same artist, regarded as a
_chef-d'oeuvre_. Before her father's death Madame Clicquot used to reside
in the Rue de Marc, some short distance from the cellars in which her
whole existence centered, in a handsome Renaissance house, said to have
had some connection with the row of palaces that at one time lined the
neighbouring and then fashionable Rue du Tambour. This, however, is
extremely doubtful. A number of interesting and well-preserved
bas-reliefs decorate one of the façades of the house looking on to the
court. The figures are of the period of François Premier and his son
Henri II., who inaugurated his reign with a comforting edict for the
Protestants, ordaining that blasphemers were to have their tongues
pierced with red-hot irons, and heretics to be burnt alive, and who had
the ill-luck to lose his eye and life through a lance-thrust of the
Comte de Montgomerie, captain of his Scotch guards, whilst jousting with
him at a tournament held in honour of the marriage of his daughter
Isabelle with the gloomy widower of Queen Mary of England, of sanguinary
fame.

  [Illustration]

The first of these bas-reliefs represents two soldiers of the Swiss
guard, the next a Turk and a Slav tilting at each other, and then comes
a scroll entwined round a thistle, and inscribed with this enigmatical
motto: "Giane le sur ou rien." In the third bas-relief a couple of
passionate Italians are winding up a gambling dispute with a
hand-to-hand combat, in the course of which table, cards, and dice have
got cantered over; the fourth presenting us with two French knights,
armed _cap-à-pie_, engaged in a tourney; while in the fifth and last a
couple of German lansquenets essay their gladiatorial skill with their
long and dangerous weapons. Several years back a tablet was discovered
in one of the cellars of the house, inscribed "Ci-gist vénérable
religieux maîstre Pierre Derclé, docteur en théologie, jadis prieur de
céans. Priez Dieu pour luy. 1486," which would almost indicate that the
house had originally a religious character, although the warlike spirit
of the bas-reliefs decorating it renders any such supposition with
regard to the existing building untenable.

The Messrs. Werlé own numerous acres of vineyards, comprising the very
finest situations in the well-known districts of Verzenay, Bouzy, Le
Mesnil, and Oger, at all of which places they have vendangeoirs or
pressing-houses of their own. Their establishment at Verzenay contains
seven presses, that at Bouzy eight, at Le Mesnil six, and at Oger two,
in addition to which grapes are pressed under their own supervision at
Ay, Avize, and Cramant in vendangeoirs belonging to their friends.

Since the death of Madame Clicquot the legal style of the firm has been
Werlé and Co., successors to Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardin, the mark, of
which M. Werlé and his son are the sole proprietors, still remaining
"Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardin," while the corks of the bottles are branded
with the words "V. Clicquot-P. Werlé," encircling the figure of a comet.
The style of the wine--light, delicate, elegant, and fragrant--is
familiar to all connoisseurs of champagne. What, however, is not equally
well known is that within the last few years the firm, in obedience to
the prevailing taste, have introduced a perfectly dry wine of
corresponding quality to the richer wine which made the fortune of the
house.

The house of M. Louis Roederer, founded by a plodding German named
Schreider, pursued the sleepy tenor of its way for years, until all at
once it felt prompted to lay siege to the Muscovite connection of La
Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardin and secure a market for its wine at Moscow and
St. Petersburg. It next opened up the United States, and finally
introduced its brand into England. The house possesses cellars in
various parts of Reims, and has its offices in one of the oldest
quarters of the city--namely, the Rue des Élus, or ancient Rue des
Juifs, records of which date as far back as 1103. These offices are at
the farther end of a courtyard beyond which is a second court, where
carts being laden with cases of champagne seemed to indicate that some
portion of the shipping business of the house is here carried on.
M. Louis Roederer refused our request for permission to visit his
establishments, so that it is only of their external appearance that
we are able to speak. One of them--the façade of which is rather
imposing, and which has a carved head of Bacchus surmounting the
_porte-cochère_--is situated in the Boulevard du Temple, while the
principal establishment, a picturesque range of buildings of
considerable extent, is in the neighbouring Rue de la Justice.

The old-established firm of Heidsieck and Co., which has secured a
reputation in both hemispheres for its famous Monopole and Dry Monopole
brands, has its cellars scattered about Reims, the central ones, where
the wine is prepared and packed, being situated in the narrow winding
Rue Sedan, at no great distance from the Clicquot-Werlé establishment.
The original firm dates back to 1785, when France was struggling with
those financial difficulties that a few years later culminated in that
great social upheaving which kept Europe in a state of turmoil for more
than a quarter of a century. Among the archives of the firm is a patent,
bearing the signature of the Minister of the Prussian Royal Household,
appointing Heidsieck and Co. purveyors of champagne to Friedrich William
III. The champagne-drinking Hohenzollern _par excellence_, however, was
the son and successor of the preceding, who, from habitual
over-indulgence in the exhilarating sparkling beverage during the last
few years of his reign, acquired the _sobriquet_ of King Clicquot.

On passing through the large _porte-cochère_ giving entrance to Messrs.
Heidsieck's principal establishment, one finds oneself in a small
courtyard with the surrounding buildings overgrown with ivy and
venerable vines. On the left is a dwelling-house enriched with elaborate
mouldings and cornices, and at the farther end of the court is the
entrance to the cellars, surmounted by a sun-dial bearing the date 1829.
The latter, however, is no criterion of the age of the buildings
themselves, as these were occupied by the firm at its foundation,
towards the close of the last century. We are first conducted into an
antiquated-looking low cellier, the roof of which is sustained with rude
timber supports, and here bottles of wine are being labelled and packed,
although this is but a mere adjunct to the adjacent spacious
packing-room provided with its loading platform and communicating
directly with the public road. At the time of our visit this hall was
gaily decorated with flags and inscriptions, the day before having been
the fête of St. Jean, when the firm entertain the people in their employ
with a banquet and a ball, at which the choicest wine of the house
liberally flows. From the packing-room we descend into the cellars,
which, like all the more ancient vaults in Reims, have been constructed
on no regular plan. Here we thread our way between piles after piles of
bottles, many of which having passed through the hands of the disgorger
are awaiting their customary adornment. The lower tier of cellars is
mostly stored with _vin sur pointe_, and bottles with their necks
downwards are encountered in endless monotony along a score or more of
long galleries. The only variation in our lengthened promenade is when
we come upon some solitary workman engaged in his monotonous task of
shaking his 30,000 or 40,000 bottles per diem.

The disgorging at Messrs. Heidsieck's takes place, in accordance with
the good old rule, in the cellars underground, where we noticed large
stocks of wine three and five years old, the former in the first stage
of _sur-pointe_, and the latter awaiting shipment. It is a speciality of
the house to ship only matured wine, which is necessarily of a higher
character than the ordinary youthful growths, for a few years have a
wonderful influence in developing the finer qualities of champagne. At
the time of our visit, in the spring of 1877, when the English market
was being glutted with the crude, full-bodied wine of 1874, Messrs.
Heidsieck were continuing to ship wines of 1870 and 1872, beautifully
rounded by keeping and of fine flavour and great delicacy of perfume,
and of which the firm estimated they had fully a year's consumption
still on hand.

Messrs. Heidsieck and Co. have a handsome modern establishment in the
Rue Coquebert--a comparatively new quarter of the city where champagne
establishments are the rule--the courtyard of which, alive with workmen
at the time of our visit, is broad and spacious, while the surrounding
buildings are light and airy, and the cellars lofty, regular, and well
ventilated. In a large cellier here, where the tuns are ranged side by
side between the rows of iron columns supporting the roof, the firm make
their _cuvée_; here too the bottling of their wine takes place, and
considerable stocks of high-class reserve wines and more youthful
growths are stored ready for removal when required by the central
establishment. The bulk of Messrs. Heidsieck's reserve wines, however,
repose in the outskirts of Reims, near the Porte Dieu-Lumière, in one of
the numerous abandoned chalk quarries, which of late years the champagne
manufacturers have discovered are capable of being transformed into
admirable cellars.

In addition to shipping a rich and a dry variety of the Monopole brand,
of which they are sole proprietors, Messrs. Heidsieck export to this
country a rich and a dry Grand Vin Royal. It is, however, to their
famous Monopole wine, and especially to the dry variety, which must
necessarily comprise the finest growths, that the firm owe their
principal celebrity.


  [Illustration:
  STATUE OF LOUIS XIII. ON THE REIMS HÔTEL DE VILLE]

VII.--THE REIMS ESTABLISHMENTS (_continued_).

The Firm of G. H. Mumm and Co.-- Their Large Shipments to the United
  States-- Their Establishments in the Rue Andrieux and the Rue
  Coquebert-- Bottle-Washing with Glass Beads-- The Cuvée and the
  Tirage-- G. H. Mumm and Co.'s Vendangeoirs at Verzenay-- Their
  Various Wines-- The Gate of Mars-- The Establishment of M. Gustave
  Gibert on the Site of the Château des Archevêques-- His Cellars in
  the Vaults of St. Peter's Abbey and beneath the old Hôtel des Fermes
  in the Place Royale-- Louis XV. and Jean Baptiste Colbert--
  M. Gibert's Wines-- Jules Mumm and Co., and Ruinart père et fils--
  House of the Musicians-- The Counts de la Marck-- The Brotherhood of
  Minstrels of Reims-- Establishment of Périnet et fils-- Their
  Cellars of Three Stories in Solid Masonry-- Their Soft, Light, and
  Delicate Wines-- A Rare Still Verzenay-- M. Duchâtel-Ohaus's
  Establishment and Renaissance House-- His Cellars in the Cour St.
  Jacques and Outside the Porte Dieu-Lumière.


Messrs. G. H. Mumm and Co. have their chief establishment in the Rue
Andrieux, in an open quarter of the city, facing the garden attached to
the premises of M. Werlé, and only a short distance from the grand
triumphal arch known as the Gate of Mars, by far the most important
Roman remain of which the Champagne can boast. The head of the firm,
Mr. G. H. Mumm, is the grandson of the well-known P. A. Mumm, the large
shipper of hocks and moselles, and is the only surviving partner in the
champagne house of Mumm and Co., established at Reims in 1825, and
joined by Mr. G. H. Mumm so far back as the year 1838. The firm not only
ship their wine largely to England, but head the list of shipments to
the United States, where their brand is held in high repute, with nearly
half a million bottles, being more than twice the quantity shipped by
M. Louis Roederer--who comes third on the list in question--and a fourth
of the entire shipments of champagne to the United States.

The establishment of Messrs. G. H. Mumm and Co., in the Rue Andrieux, is
of comparatively modern construction. A large _porte-cochère_ conducts
to a spacious courtyard, bordered with sheds, beneath which huge stacks
of new bottles are piled and having a pleasant garden lying beyond. On
the left is a large vaulted cellier, where the operations of disgorging,
liqueuring, and corking the wine are performed, and which communicates
with the vast adjoining packing department. From this cellier entrance
is gained to the cellars beneath, containing a million bottles of _vin
brut_ in various stages of development. This forms, however, merely a
portion of the firm's stock, they having another three millions of
bottles stored in the cellars of their establishment in the Rue
Coquebert, where a scene of great animation presented itself at the time
of our visit, several scores of women being engaged in washing bottles
for the _tirage_, which, although it was early in May, had already
commenced. The bottles, filled with water, and containing a certain
quantity of glass beads in lieu of the customary shot, which frequently
leave minute particles of lead--deleterious alike to health and the
flavour of the wine--adhering to the inside surface of the glass, are
placed horizontally in a frame, and by means of four turns of a handle
are made to perform sixty-four rapid revolutions. The beads are then
transferred to other bottles, which are subjected in their turn to the
same revolving process.

The _cuvée_, commonly composed of from two to three thousand casks of
wine from various vineyards, with a due proportion of high-class
vintages, is made in a vat holding 4,400 gallons. The _tirage_ or
bottling is effected by means of two large tuns placed side by side, and
holding twelve hogsheads of wine each. Pipes from these tuns communicate
with a couple of small reservoirs, each of them provided with
half-a-dozen self-acting syphon taps, by means of which a like number of
bottles are simultaneously filled. Only one set of these taps are set
running at a time, as while the wine is being drawn off from one tun the
other is being refilled from the casks containing the _cuvée_ by means
of a pump and leathern hose, which empties a cask in little more than a
couple of minutes. Three gangs of eight men each can fill, cork, and
secure with _agrafes_ from 35,000 to 40,000 bottles during the day. The
labour is performed partly by men regularly employed by the house and
partly by hands engaged for the purpose, who work, however, under the
constant inspection of overseers appointed by the firm.

At Messrs. G. H. Mumm's the champagne destined for shipment has the
heads of the corks submerged in a kind of varnish, with the object of
protecting them from the ravages of insects, and preventing the string
and wire from becoming mouldy for several years. In damp weather, when
this varnish takes a long time to dry, after the bottles have been
placed in a rack with their heads downwards to allow of any superfluous
varnish draining from the corks, the latter are subjected to a moderate
heat in a machine pierced with sufficient holes to contain 500 bottles,
and provided with a warming apparatus in the centre. Here the bottles
remain for about twenty minutes.

  [Illustration:
  THE TIRAGE OR BOTTLING OF CHAMPAGNE
  AT THE ESTABLISHMENT OF MESSRS. G. H. MUMM & CO. (p. 76.)]

  [Illustration:
  MESSRS. G. H. MUMM & CO.'S VENDANGEOIR AT VERZENAY. (p. 77)]

Messrs. G. H. Mumm and Co. have a capacious vendangeoir at Verzenay,
near the entrance to the village when approaching it from Reims. The
building contains four presses, three of which are worked with large
fly-wheels requiring several men to turn them, while the fourth acts
with a screw applied by means of a long pole. At the vintage 3,600
kilogrammes, or nearly 8,000lbs., of grapes are put under each press,
a quantity sufficient to yield eight to ten hogsheads of wine of
forty-four gallons each, suitable for sparkling wine, besides three or
four hogsheads of inferior wine given to the workmen to drink. The
pressing commences daily at six in the morning, and lasts until
midnight; yet the firm are often constrained to keep their grapes in the
baskets under a cool shed for a period of two days. This cannot,
however, be done when they are very ripe, as the colouring matter from
the skins would become extracted and give a dark and objectionable tint
to the wine.

Messrs. G. H. Mumm and Co. ship four descriptions of champagne--Carte
Blanche, a pale, delicate, fragrant wine of great softness and refined
flavour; a perfectly dry variety of the foregoing, known as their Extra
Dry; also an Extra Quality and a First Quality--both high-class wines,
though somewhat lower in price than the two preceding.

Within a few minutes' walk of Messrs. G. H. Mumm's--past the imposing
Gate of Mars, in the midst of lawns, parterres, and gravel-walks, where
coquettish nursemaids and their charges stroll, accompanied by the
proverbial _piou-piou_--is the principal establishment of M. Gustave
Gibert, whose house claims to-day half a century of existence. On this
spot formerly stood the feudal castle of the Archbishops of Reims,
demolished nearly three centuries ago. By whom this stronghold was
erected is somewhat uncertain. The local chronicles state that a château
was built at Reims by Suelf, son of Hincmar, in 922, and restored by
Archbishop Henri de France two and a half centuries later. War or other
causes, however, seems to have rendered the speedy rebuilding of this
castle necessary, as a new Château des Archevêques appears to have been
erected at Reims by Henri de Braine between 1228 and 1230. The
circumstance of the Archbishops of Reims being dukes and peers as well
as primates of the capital of the Champagne accounts for their
preference for a fortified place of residence at this turbulent epoch.

On the investiture of a new archbishop it was the custom for him to
proceed in great pomp from the château to the church of Saint Remi, with
a large armed guard and a splendid retinue of ecclesiastical, civil, and
military dignitaries escorting him. The pride of the newly-created "duke
and peer" having been thus gratified, the "prelate" had to humble
himself, and on the morrow walked barefooted from the church of St. Remi
to the cathedral. After the religious wars the château was surrendered
to Henri IV., and in 1595 the Remois, anxious to be rid of so formidable
a fortress, which, whether held by king or archbishop, was calculated to
enforce a state of passive obedience galling to their pride, purchased
from the king the privilege to demolish it for the sum of 8,000 crowns.
Tradition asserts that the Remish Bastille was destroyed in a single
day, but this is exceedingly improbable. Its ruins certainly were not
cleared away until the close of the century.

When the old fortress was razed to the ground its extensive vaults were
not interfered with, but many long years afterwards were transformed
into admirable cellars for the storage of champagne. Above them are two
stories of capacious celliers where the wine is blended, bottled, and
packed, the vaults themselves comprising two tiers of cellars which
contain wine both in cask and bottle. M. Gibert's remaining stocks are
stored in the ancient vaults of the abbey of St. Peter, in the heart of
the city, and in the roomy cellars which underlie the old Hôtel des
Fermes in the Place Royale, where in the days of the _ancien régime_ the
farmers-general of the province used to receive its revenues. On the
pediment of this edifice is a bas-relief with Mercury, the god of
commerce, seated beside a nymph and surrounded by children engaged with
the vintage and with bales of wool, and evidently intended to symbolise
the staple trades of the capital of the Champagne. A bronze statue rises
in the centre of the Place which from its Roman costume and martial
bearing might be taken for some hero of antiquity did not the
inscription on the pedestal apprise us that it is intended for the
"wise, virtuous, and magnanimous Louis XV.," a misuse of terms which has
caused a transatlantic Republican to characterise the monument as a
brazen lie. Leading out of the Place Royale is the Rue de Cérès, in
which there is a modernised 16th-century house claiming to be the
birthplace of Jean Baptiste Colbert, son of a Reims wool-merchant, and
the famous minister who did so much to consolidate the finances which
the royal voluptuary, masquerading at Reims in Roman garb, afterwards
made such dreadful havoc of.

  [Illustration:
  THE CELLIERS AND CELLARS OF M. GUSTAVE GIBERT.
  (_Near the Porte de Mars, Reims_.) (p. 78.)]

  [Illustration:
  THE PLACE ROYALE AT REIMS,
  SHOWING THE ENTRANCE TO THE CELLARS OF M. GUSTAVE GIBERT. (p. 79)]

M. Gustave Gibert possesses pressing-houses at Ay and Bouzy, and has
moreover at both these places accommodation for large reserve stocks of
wine in wood. As all the wines which he sends into the market are
vintaged by himself, he can ensure their being of uniform high quality.
His _Vin du Roi_ is notable for perfume, delicacy, perfect
effervescence, and that fine flavour of the grape which characterises
the grand wines of the Champagne. It is a great favourite with the King
of Sweden and Norway, and the labels on the bottles bear his name and
arms. M. Gibert's brand has acquired a high reputation in the North of
Europe, and having of late years been introduced into England, is
rapidly making its way there. The merits of the wines have been again
and again publicly recognised, no less than ten medals having been
successively awarded M. Gibert at the Exhibitions of Toulouse in 1858,
Bordeaux in 1859, Besançon in 1860, Metz and Nantes in 1861, London in
1862, Bayonne and Linz in 1864, and Oporto and Dublin in 1865. This long
list of awards has led to the wines being placed "_hors concours_,"
nevertheless M. Gibert continues to submit them to competition whenever
any Exhibition of importance takes place. The wines are shipped to
England, Germany, Russia, and Northern Europe, Spain and Portugal,
Calcutta, Java, Melbourne, and Hong-Kong, besides being largely in
request for the Paris market.

On quitting M. Gibert's central establishment we proceed along the
winding, ill-paved Rue de Mars, past the premises of Messrs. Jules Mumm
and Co., an offshoot from the once famous firm of P. A. Mumm and Co., to
the Place de l'Hôtel de Ville, in one corner of which stands a massive
and somewhat pretentious-looking house, dating back to the time of Louis
Quatorze. Here are the offices of Ruinart père et fils, who claim to
rank as the oldest existing house in the Champagne. The head of the
firm, the Vicomte de Brimont, is a collateral descendant of the Dom
Ruinart, whose remains repose nigh to those of the illustrious Dom
Perignon in the abbey church of Hautvillers. From the Place de l'Hôtel
de Ville we proceed through the narrow Rue du Tambour, originally a
Roman thoroughfare, and during the Middle Ages the locality where the
nobility of Reims principally had their abodes. Half-way up this street,
in the direction of the Place des Marchés, stands the famous House of
the Musicians, one of the most interesting architectural relics of which
the capital of the Champagne can boast. It evidently dates from the
early part of the fourteenth century, but by whom it was erected is
unknown. Some ascribe it to the Knights Templars, others to the Counts
of Champagne, while others suppose it to have been the residence of the
famous Counts de la Marck, who in later times diverged into three
separate branches, the first furnishing Dukes of Cleves and Julich to
Germany and Dukes of Nevers and Counts of Eu to France, while the second
became Dukes of Bouillon and Princes of Sedan, titles which passed to
the Turennes when Henri de la Tour d'Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne,
married the surviving heiress of the house. The third branch comprised
the Barons of Lumain, allied to the Hohenzollerns. Their most famous
member slew Louis de Bourbon, Archbishop of Liège, and flung his body
into the Meuse, and subsequently became celebrated as the Wild Boar of
the Ardennes, of whom all readers of _Quentin Durward_ will retain a
lively recollection.

To return, however, to the House of the Musicians. A probable conjecture
ascribes the origin of the quaint mediæval structure to the Brotherhood
of Minstrels of Reims, who in the thirteenth century enjoyed a
considerable reputation, not merely in the Champagne, but throughout the
North of France. The house takes its present name from five seated
statues of musicians, larger than life-size, occupying the Gothic niches
between the first-floor windows, and resting upon brackets ornamented
with grotesque heads. It is thought that the partially-damaged figure on
the left-hand side was originally playing a drum and a species of
clarionet. The next one evidently has the remnants of a harp in his
raised hands. The third or central figure is supposed merely to have
held a hawk upon his wrist; whilst the fourth seeks to extract harmony
from a dilapidated bagpipe; and the fifth, with crossed legs, strums
complacently away upon the fiddle. The ground floor of the quaint old
tenement is to-day an oil and colour shop, the front of which is covered
with chequers in all the tints of the rainbow.

  [Illustration]

Leading from the Rue du Tambour is the Rue de la Belle Image, thus named
from a handsome statuette of the Virgin which formerly decorated a
corner niche; and beyond is the Rue St. Hilaire, where Messrs. Barnett
et fils, trading under the designation of Périnet et fils, and the only
English house engaged in the manufacture of champagne, have an
establishment which is certainly as perfect as any to be found in Reims.
Aboveground are several large store-rooms, where vintage casks and the
various utensils common to a champagne establishment are kept, and a
capacious cellier, upwards of 150 feet in length, with its roof resting
on huge timber supports. Here new wine is stored preparatory to being
blended and bottled, and in the huge tun, holding nearly 3,000 gallons,
standing at the further end, the firm make their _cuvée_, while adjacent
is a room where stocks of corks and labels, metal foil, and the like are
kept.

There are three stories of cellars--an exceedingly rare thing anywhere
in the Champagne--all constructed in solid masonry on a uniform
plan--namely, two wide galleries running parallel with each other and
connected by means of transverse passages. Spite of the great depth to
which these cellars descend they are perfectly dry; the ventilation,
too, is excellent, and their different temperatures render them
especially suitable for the storage of champagne, the temperature of the
lowest cellar being 6° Centigrade (43° Fahrenheit), or one degree
Centigrade below the cellar immediately above, which, in its turn is two
degrees below the uppermost one of all. The advantage of this is that
when the wine develops an excess of effervescence any undue proportion
of breakages can be checked by removing the bottles to a lower cellar
and consequently into a lower temperature.

  [Illustration:
  THE CELLIER AND CELLARS OF PÉRINET ET FILS AT REIMS. (p. 82)]

The first cellars we enter are closely stacked with wine in bottle,
which is gradually clearing itself by the formation of a deposit, while
in an adjoining cellar on the same level the operations of disgorging,
liqueuring, and corking are going on. In the cellars immediately beneath
bottles of wine repose in solid stacks ready for the _dégorgeur_, while
others rest in racks in order that they may undergo their daily shaking.
In the lowest cellars reserved wine in cask is stored, as it best
retains its natural freshness and purity in a very cool place. All air
is carefully excluded from the casks, any ullage is immediately checked,
and as evaporation is continually going on the casks are examined every
fortnight, when any deficiency is at once replenished. At Messrs.
Périnet et fils', as at all the first-class establishments, the _vin
brut_ is a _mélange_ comprising the produce of some of the best
vineyards, and has every possible attention paid to it during its
progressive stages of development.

Champagnes of different years were here shown to us, all of them soft,
light, and delicate, and with that fine flavour and full perfume which
the best growths of the Marne alone exhibit. Among several curiosities
submitted to us was a still Verzenay of the year 1857, one of the most
delicate red wines it was ever our fortune to taste. Light in body, rich
in colour, of a singularly novel and refined flavour, and with a
magnificent yet indefinable bouquet, the wine was in every respect
perfect. Not only was the year of the vintage a grand one, but the wine
must have been made with the greatest possible care and from the most
perfect grapes for so delicate a growth to have retained its flavour in
such perfection, and preserved its brilliant ruby colour for such a
length of time.

From the samples shown to us of Périnet et fils' champagne, we were
prepared to find that at some recent tastings in London, the particulars
of which have been made public, their Extra Sec took the first place at
each of the three severe competitions to which it was subjected.

M. Duchâtel-Ohaus's central establishment is in the Rue des Deux Anges,
one of the most ancient streets of Reims, running from the Rue des Élus
to the Rue de Vesle, and having every window secured by iron gratings,
and every door thickly studded with huge nails. These prison-like
façades succeed each other in gloomy monotony along either side of the
way, the portion of M. Duchâtel-Ohaus's residence which faces the street
being no exception to the general rule. Once within its court, however,
and quite a different scene presents itself. Before us is a pleasant
little flower-garden with a small but charming Renaissance house looking
on to it, the windows ornamented with elaborate mouldings, and
surmounted by graceful sculptured heads, while at one corner rises a
tower with a sun-dial displayed on its front. Here and in an adjoining
house the canons of the Cathedral were accustomed to reside in the days
when four-fifths of Reims belonged to the Church.

  [Illustration]

From the garden we enter a capacious cellier where the blending and
bottling of the wine takes place, and in the neighbouring packing-room
encounter a score of workpeople filling, securing, and branding a number
of cases about to be despatched by rail. From the cellier we pass to the
cellars situated immediately underneath, and which, capacious though
they are, do not suffice for M. Duchâtel's stock, portions of which are
stored in some ancient vaults near the market-place, and in the Rue de
Vesle behind the church of St. Jacques. This church, originally built at
the close of the twelfth century, is hemmed in on all sides by old
houses, above which rises its tapering steeple surmounted by a medieval
weathercock in the form of an angel. A life-size statue of the patron
saint decorates the Gothic gateway leading to the church, from which a
troop of Remish urchins in the charge of some Frères de la Doctrine
Chrétienne emerge as we pass by.

The Cour St. Jacques, where M. Duchâtel's cellars are situated, may be
reached by passing through the church, the interior of which presents a
curious jumble of architectural styles from early Gothic to late
Renaissance. One noteworthy object of art which it contains is a
life-size crucifix carved by Pierre Jacques, a Remish sculptor of the
days of the Good King Henri, and from an anatomical point of view a
perfect _chef-d'oeuvre_. The cellars we have come to inspect are two
stories deep, and comprise numerous ancient cavernous compartments, such
as are found in all the older quarters of Reims, and usually in the
vicinity of some church, convent, or clerical abode. It has been
suggested that they were either crypts for sacred retirement and prayer,
dungeons for the punishment of recreant brethren, or tombs for the dead;
but it is far more probable that in the majority of instances they
served then as now simply for the storage of the choice vintages of the
Marne, for we all know the monks of old were tipplers of no ordinary
capacity, who usually contrived to secure the best that the district
provided. These vaults of M. Duchâtel's, in which a considerable stock
of the fine wine of 1874 is stored, are from two to three centuries old,
and probably belonged to the curés of St. Jacques. They are of
considerable extent, are well ventilated, and are walled and roofed with
stone. M. Duchâtel's remaining stock reposes in some new
cellars--certain transformed chalk quarries outside the Porte
Dieu-Lumière, comprising broad lofty galleries and vast circular
chambers--fifty feet or so in height and well lighted from above.

At M. Duchâtel-Ohaus's we tasted a variety of fine samples of his brand,
including a beautiful wine of 1868 and an almost equally good one of
1870, with some of the excellent vintage of 1874, which was then being
prepared for shipment.


  [Illustration]

VIII.--THE REIMS ESTABLISHMENTS (_continued_).

M. Ernest Irroy's Cellars, Vineyards, and Vendangeoirs-- Recognition
  by the Reims Agricultural Association of his Plantations of Vines--
  His Wines and their Popularity at the best London Clubs-- Messrs.
  Binet fils and Co.'s Establishment-- Wines Sold by the Firm to
  Shippers-- Their Cellars-- Samples of Fine Still Ay and Bouzy--
  Their Still Sillery, Vintage 1857, and their Creaming Vin Brut,
  Vintage 1865-- The Offices and Cellars of Messrs. Charles Farre and
  Co.-- Testing the Wine before Bottling-- A Promenade between Bottles
  in Piles and Racks-- Repute in which these Wines are held in England
  and on the Continent-- The New Establishment of Fisse, Thirion, and
  Co. in the Place de Betheny-- Its Construction exclusively in Stone,
  Brick, and Iron-- The Vast Celliers of Two Stories-- Bottling the
  Wine by the Aid of Machinery-- The Cool and Lofty Cellars--
  Ingenious Method of Securing the Corks, rendering the Uncorking
  exceedingly simple-- The Wines Shipped by the Firm.


Few large manufacturing towns like Reims--one of the most important of
those engaged in the woollen manufacture in France--can boast of such
fine promenades and such handsome boulevards as the capital of the
Champagne. As the ancient fortifications of the city were from time to
time razed, their site was levelled and generally planted with trees,
so that the older quarters of Reims are almost encircled by broad and
handsome thoroughfares, separating the city, as it were, from its
outlying suburbs. In or close to the broad Boulevard du Temple, which
takes its name from its proximity to the site of the ancient Commanderie
of the Templars, various champagne manufacturers, including M. Louis
Roederer, M. Ernest Irroy, and M. Charles Heidsieck, have their
establishments, while but a few paces off, in the neighbouring Rue
Coquebert, are the large and handsome premises of Messrs. Krug and Co.

  [Illustration:
  M. ERNEST IRROY'S ESTABLISHMENT AT REIMS. (p. 87)]

The offices of M. Ernest Irroy, who is known in Reims not merely as a
large champagne grower and shipper, but also as a distinguished amateur
of the fine arts, taking a leading part in originating local exhibitions
and the like, are attached to his private residence, a handsome mansion
flanked by a large and charming garden in the Boulevard du Temple. The
laying out of this sylvan oasis is due to M. Vadré, the head gardener of
the city of Paris, who contributed so largely to the picturesque
embellishment of the Bois de Boulogne. M. Irroy's establishment, which
comprises a considerable range of buildings grouped around two
courtyards, is immediately adjacent, although its principal entrance is
in the Rue de la Justice. The vast celliers, covering an area of upwards
of 3,000 square yards, and either stocked with wine in cask or used for
packing and similar purposes, afford the requisite space for carrying on
a most extensive business. The cellars beneath comprise three stories,
two of which are solidly roofed and lined with masonry, while the
lowermost one is excavated in the chalk. They are admirably constructed
on a symmetrical plan, and their total surface is very little short of
7,000 square yards. Spite of the great depth to which these cellars
descend they are perfectly dry, the ventilation is good, and their
temperature moreover is remarkably cool, one result of which is that
M. Irroy's loss from breakage never exceeds four per cent. per annum.
M. Irroy holds a high position as a vineyard-proprietor in the
Champagne, his vines covering an area of nearly 86 acres. At Mareuil and
Avenay he owns some twenty-five acres, at Verzenay and Verzy about
fifteen, and at Ambonnay and Bouzy forty-six acres. His father and his
uncle, whose properties he inherited or purchased, commenced some thirty
years ago to plant vines on certain slopes of Bouzy possessing a
southern aspect, and he has followed their example with such success
both at Bouzy and Ambonnay that in 1873 the Reims Agricultural
Association conferred upon him a silver-gilt medal for his plantations
of vines. M. Irroy owns _vendangeoirs_ at Verzenay, Avenay, and
Ambonnay; and at Bouzy, where his largest vineyards are, he has built
some excellent cottages for his labourers. He has also constructed a
substantial bridge over the ravine which, formed by winter torrents from
the hills, intersects the principal vineyard slopes of Bouzy.

M. Ernest Irroy's wines, prepared with scrupulous care and rare
intelligence, have been known in England for some years past, and are
steadily increasing in popularity. They are emphatically connoisseurs'
wines. The best West-end clubs, such as White's, Arthur's, the old
Carlton, and the like, lay down the _cuvées_ of this house in good years
as they lay down their vintage ports and finer clarets, and drink them,
not in a crude state, but when they are in perfection--that is, in five
to ten years' time. M. Irroy exports to the British colonies and to the
United States the same fine wines which he ships to England.

  [Illustration:
  LABOURERS AT WORK IN M. ERNEST IRROY'S BOUZY VINEYARDS. (p. 88.)]

From M. Irroy's we proceeded to Messrs. Binet fils and Co., whose
establishment in the Rue de la Justice is separated from that of
M. Irroy merely by a narrow path, and occupies the opposite side of the
way to the principal establishment of M. Louis Roederer. The firm of
Binet fils and Co. was founded many years ago, but for a long time they
sold their wines principally to other shippers on the Reims and Epernay
markets, where their cuvées were held in high repute, and only of recent
years have they applied themselves to the shipping trade. Their
establishment has two entrances, one in the Rue de la Justice, and the
other in the Boulevard du Champ de Mars. On passing through the former
we find ourselves in a courtyard of considerable area, with a range of
celliers in the rear and a low building on the left, in which the
offices are installed. In the first cellier we encounter cases and
baskets of champagne all ready to be despatched by rail, with women and
men busily engaged in labelling and packing other bottles which continue
to arrive from the cellars below in baskets secured to an endless chain.
Beyond this range of celliers is another courtyard of smaller dimensions
where there are additional celliers in which wines of recent vintages in
casks are stored.

The vaults, which are reached by a winding stone staircase, are
spacious, and consist of a series of parallel and uniform galleries hewn
in the chalk without either masonry supports or facings. Among the solid
piles of bottles which here hem us in on all sides are a considerable
number of magnums and imperial pints reserved for particular
customers--the former more especially for certain military messes, at
which the brand of Binet fils and Co. is held in deserved esteem. We
tasted here--in addition to several choice sparkling wines, including a
grand _vin brut_, vintage 1865--a still Ay of the year 1870, and some
still Bouzy of 1874. The former, a remarkably light and elegant wine,
was already in fine condition for drinking, while the latter, which was
altogether more vinous, deeper in colour, and fuller in body needed the
ripening influence of time to bring it to perfection. Through their
agents, Rutherford, Drury, and Co., Messrs. Binet fils and Co. achieved
a great success in England with their still Sillery, vintage 1857, and
subsequently with their superb creaming _vin brut_, vintage 1865, of
which we have just spoken, and which is still to be met with at London
clubs of repute.

Some short distance from and parallel with the Rue de la Justice is the
Rue Jacquart, where Messrs. Charles Farre and Co., of whose
establishment at Hautvillers we have already spoken, have their offices
and cellars. We enter a large courtyard, where several railway vans are
being laden with cases of wine from the packing-hall beyond, and in the
tasting-room adjoining find wine being tested prior to bottling, to
ascertain the amount of saccharine it contains. This was accomplished by
reducing a certain quantity of wine by boiling down to one-sixth, when
the saccharometer should indicate 13° of sugar to ensure each bottle
containing the requisite quantity of compressed carbonic acid gas.

Messrs. Farre's cellars, comprising eighteen parallel galleries disposed
in two stories, are both lofty and commodious, and are mainly of recent
construction, the upper ones being solidly walled with masonry, while
those below are simply excavated in the chalk. Here, as elsewhere, one
performed a lengthened promenade between piles after piles of bottles of
the finer vintages and a seemingly endless succession of racks, at which
workmen were engaged in dislodging the sediment in the wine by the dim
light of a tallow candle. It was here that we were assured the more
experienced of these men were capable, when working with both hands, of
shaking the enormous number of 50,000 bottles a day, or at the rate of
seventy to the minute.

The fine wines of Messrs. Charles Farre and Co. have long enjoyed a
well-deserved celebrity, and at the Paris Exhibition of 1855 the firm
secured the highest medal awarded to champagnes. The high repute in
which the brand is held on the Continent is evidenced by the fact that
the Prussian and other courts are consumers of Messrs. Farre's wines.
The firm not only number England, Germany, Austria, Russia, and Northern
Europe, and, as a matter of course, France, among their customers, but
also several of the British colonies and North and South America as
well.

The new establishment of Messrs. Fisse, Thirion, and Co., in the
erection of which they have largely profited by their experience and the
various resources of modern science, is situated in the Place de
Betheny, in the vicinity of the railway goods station and the local
shooting range, largely resorted to at certain seasons of the year, when
the crack shots of the Champagne capital compete with distinguished
amateurs from different parts of France and the other side of the
Channel.

  [Illustration:
  MESSRS. FISSE, THIRION & CO.'S ESTABLISHMENT AT REIMS. (p. 91)]

On entering the courtyard through the iron gate to the right of the
dwelling-houses of the resident partners--flanked by gardens brilliant
with flowers and foliage--we first reach the offices and tasting-rooms,
and then the entrance to the cellars. A speciality of this important
pile of building is that everything employed in its construction is of
stone, brick, or iron, wood having been rigorously excluded from it.
In the rear of the courtyard, which presents that aspect of animation
common to flourishing establishments in the Champagne, is the principal
cellier, with a small building in front, where a steam-pump for pumping
up water from the chalk is installed, while at right angles with the
cellier are the stables and bottle-sheds. The large cellier, which is 20
feet high and 80 feet broad, will be no less than 260 feet in length
when completed. It contains two stories, the floors of both of which are
cemented, the lower story being roofed with small brick arches connected
by iron girders, and the upper one with tiles resting on iron supports.
The cement keeps the temperature remarkably cool in the lower cellier
where wine in cask is stored, the upper cellier being appropriated to
wine in racks _sur pointe_, bales of corks, and the wicker-baskets and
cases in which the wine is packed.

The preparation of the wines in cask and the bottling take place in the
lower of the two celliers, a mere lad being enabled, by the aid of the
mechanism provided, to bottle from six to eight thousand bottles a day.
A single workman can cork about 4,500 bottles, which a second workman
secures with metal agrafes before they are lowered into the cellars. The
latter are of two stories, each being divided into three long parallel
galleries 20 feet high and 23 feet wide, vaulted with stone and floored
with cement. Bordering the endless stacks of bottles are small gutters,
into which the wine flows from the exploded bottles. Lofty, well
ventilated, and beautifully cool, the temperature invariably ranging
from 45° to 47° Fahrenheit, these capitally-constructed cellars combine
all that is required for a champagne establishment of the first class.
The breakage has never exceeded 3 per cent., whereas in some old cellars
which the firm formerly occupied in the centre of the city, their
breakage on one occasion amounted to ten times this quantity.

At Fisse, Thirion, and Co.'s, after the wine has been disgorged and
liqueured, the corks are secured neither with string nor wire, but a
special metal fastener is employed for the purpose. This consists of a
triple-branched agrafe, provided with a kind of hinge. A tiny toy
needle-gun suspended to the agrafe is pulled outwards and turned over
the top of the bottle, whereupon the fastening becomes instantly
disengaged, and anything like trouble, uncleanliness, or annoyance is
entirely avoided. The operation is so easy that a mere child can open a
bottle of champagne, secured by this patent fastener, as easily and
rapidly as a grown-up man.

The firm of Fisse, Thirion, and Co. succeeded that of Fisse, Fraiquin,
and Co.--established originally at Reims in 1821--in 1864, when the
brand of the house was already well known on the Continent, more
especially in Belgium and Holland. Since that time the wines have been
largely introduced into England and the United States, and the firm, who
have secured medals at many of the recent exhibitions, to-day have
agents in the English and Dutch Indies and the various European
settlements in China. Several descriptions of wine are shipped by the
house, the finest being their dry Cuvée Reservèe and their fragrant
soft-tasting Cachet d'Or.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration:
  OLD HOUSE IN THE RUE DES ANGLAIS, REIMS.]

IX.--THE REIMS ESTABLISHMENTS (_concluded_).

La Prison de Bonne Semaine-- Mary Queen of Scots at Reims-- Messrs.
  Pommery and Greno's Offices-- A Fine Collection of Faïence-- The Rue
  des Anglais a former Refuge of English Catholics-- Remains of the
  Old University of Reims-- Ancient Roman Tower and Curious Grotto--
  The handsome Castellated Pommery Establishment-- The Spacious
  Cellier and Huge Carved Cuvée Tun-- The Descent to the Cellars--
  Their Great Extent-- These Lofty Subterranean Chambers Originally
  Quarries-- Ancient Places of Refuge of the Early Christians and the
  Protestants-- Madame Pommery's Splendid Cuvée of 1868-- Messrs. de
  St. Marceaux and Co.'s New Establishment in the Avenue de Sillery--
  Its Garden-Court and Circular Shaft-- Animated Scene in the Large
  Packing Hall-- Lowering Bottled Wine to the Cellars-- Great Depth
  and Extent of these Cellars-- Messrs. de St. Marceaux and Co.'s
  Various Wines.


Nigh the cathedral of Reims and in the rear of the archiepiscopal palace
there runs a short narrow street known as the Rue Vauthier le Noir, and
frequently mentioned in old works relating to the capital of the
Champagne. The discovery of various pillars and statues, together with a
handsome Gallo-Roman altar, whilst digging some foundations in 1837,
points to the fact that a Pagan temple formerly occupied the site. The
street is supposed to have taken its name, however, from some celebrated
gaoler, for in mediæval times here stood "la prison de bonne semaine."
On the site of this prison a château was subsequently built where Mary
Queen of Scots is said to have resided in the days when her uncle,
Cardinal Charles de Lorraine, was Lord Archbishop of Reims. Temple,
prison, and palace have alike disappeared, and where they stood there
now rises midway between court and garden a handsome mansion, the
residence of Madame Pommery, head of the well-known firm of Pommery and
Greno. To the left of the courtyard, which is entered through a
monumental gateway, are some old buildings bearing the sculptured
escutcheon of the beautiful and luckless Stuart Queen, while to the
right are the offices, with the manager's sanctum, replete with artistic
curiosities, the walls being completely covered with remarkable
specimens of faïence, including Rouen, Gien, Palissy, Delft, and
majolica, collected in the majority of instances by Madame Pommery in
the villages around Reims. Here we were received by M. Vasnier, who at
once volunteered to accompany us to the cellars of the firm outside the
city. Messrs. Pommery and Greno originally carried on business in the
Rue Vauthier le Noir, where there are extensive cellars, but their
rapidly-increasing connection long since compelled them to emigrate
beyond the walls of Reims.

In close proximity to the Rue Vauthier le Noir is the Rue des Anglais,
so named from the English Catholic refugees who, flying from the
persecutions of our so-called Good Queen Bess, here took up their abode
and established a college and a seminary. They rapidly acquired great
influence in Reims, and one of their number, William Gifford, was even
elected archbishop. At the end of this street, nigh to Madame Pommery's,
there stands an old house with a corner tower and rather handsome
Renaissance window, which formerly belonged to some of the clergy of the
cathedral, and subsequently became the "Bureau Général de la Loterie de
France," abolished by the National Convention in 1793.

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]

The Rue des Anglais conducts into the Rue de l'Université, where a few
remnants of the old University, founded by Cardinal Charles de Lorraine
(1538-74), attract attention, notably a conical-capped corner tower, the
sculptured ornaments at the base of which have crumbled into dust
beneath the corroding tooth of Time. From the Rue de l'Université our
way lies along the Boulevard du Temple to the Porte Gerbert, about a
mile beyond which there rises up the curious castellated structure in
which the Pommery establishment is installed, and whose tall towers
command a view of the whole of Reims and its environs. As we drive up
the Avenue Gerbert we espy on the right an isolated crumbling Roman
tower, a remnant of the days when Reims disputed with Trèves the honour
of being the capital of Belgic Gaul. Close at hand, and almost under the
walls of the old fortifications, is a grotto to which an ancient origin
is likewise ascribed. In another minute we reach the open iron gates of
Messrs. Pommery's establishment, flanked by a picturesque porter's
lodge, and proceeding up a broad drive alight under a Gothic portico at
the entrance to the spacious and lofty cellier. Iron columns support the
roof of this vast hall, at one end of which is the office and
tasting-room, provided with a telegraphic apparatus by means of which
communication is carried on with the Reims bureaux. Stacked up on every
side of the cellier, and when empty often in eight tiers, are rows upon
rows of casks, 4,000 of which contain wine of the last vintage,
sufficient for a million bottles of champagne. The temperature of this
hall is carefully regulated; the windows are high up near the roof, the
sun's rays are rigidly excluded, so that a pleasant coolness pervades
the apartment. On the left-hand side stands the huge tun, capable of
containing 5,500 gallons of wine, in which the firm make their _cuvée_,
with the monogram P and G, surmounting the arms of Reims, carved on its
head. A platform, access to which is gained by a staircase in a side
aisle, runs round this tonneau; and boys stand here when the wine is
being blended, and by means of a handle protruding above the cask work
the paddle-wheels placed inside, thereby securing the complete
amalgamation of the wine, which has been hoisted up in casks and poured
through a metal trough into the tonneau. Adjoining are the chains and
lifts worked by steam by means of which wine is raised and lowered from
and to the cellars beneath, one lift raising or lowering eight casks,
whether full or empty, in the space of a minute.

  [Illustration:
  THE POMMERY ESTABLISHMENT, IN THE OUTSKIRTS OF REIMS. (p. 96)]

  [Illustration:
  HEAD OVERSEER AT POMMERY AND GRENO'S.]

At the farther end of the hall a Gothic door, decorated with ornamental
ironwork, leads to the long broad flight of steps 116 in number and
nearly twelve feet in width, conducting to the suite of lofty
subterranean chambers where bottles of _vin brut_ repose in their
hundreds of thousands in slanting racks or solid piles, passing
leisurely through those stages of development necessary to fit them for
the _dégorgeur_. Altogether there are thirty large shafts, which were
originally quarries, and are now connected by spacious galleries. This
side of Reims abounds with similar quarries, which are believed to have
served as places of refuge for the Protestants at the time of the League
and after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and it is even
conjectured that the early Christians, the followers of St. Sixtus and
St. Sinicus, here hid themselves from their persecutors. Since the
cellars within the city have no longer sufficed for the storage of the
immense stocks required through the development of the champagne trade,
these vast subterranean galleries have been successfully utilised by
various firms. Messrs. Pommery, after pumping out the water with which
the chambers were filled, proceeded to excavate the intersecting
tunnels, shore up the cracking arches, and repair the flaws in the chalk
with masonry, finally converting these abandoned quarries into
magnificent cellars for the storage of champagne. No less than £60,000
was spent upon them and the castellated structure aboveground. The
underground area is almost 240,000 square feet, and a million bottles of
champagne can be stored in these capacious vaults.

Madame Pommery made a great mark with her splendid _cuvée_ of 1868, and
since this time her brand has become widely popular, the Pommery Sec
especially being highly appreciated by connoisseurs.

  [Illustration:
  THE PACKING HALL OF MESSRS. DE SAINT-MARCEAUX AT REIMS. (p. 99)]

On leaving Messrs. Pommery's we retrace our steps down the Avenue
Gerbert, bordered on either side with rows of plane-trees, until we
reach the treeless Avenue de Sillery, where Messrs. de Saint Marceaux
and Co.'s new and capacious establishment is installed. The principal
block of building is flanked by two advanced wings inclosing a
garden-court, set off with flowers and shrubs, and from the centre of
which rises a circular shaft, covered in with glass, admitting light and
air to the cellars below. In the building to the left the wine is
received on its arrival from the vineyard, and here are ranged hundreds
of casks replete with the choice _crûs_ of Verzenay, Ay, Cramant, and
Bouzy, while some thousands of bottles ready for labelling are stocked
in massive piles at the end of the packing-hall in the corresponding
wing of the establishment. Here, too, a tribe of workpeople are arraying
the bottles with gold and silver headdresses and robing them in pink
paper, while others are filling, securing, marking, and addressing the
cases or baskets to Hong-Kong, San Francisco, Yokohama, Bombay, London,
New York, St. Petersburg, Berlin, or Paris.

The wine in cask, stored in the left-hand wing, after having been duly
blended in a vast vat holding over 2,400 gallons, is drawn off into
bottles, which are then lowered down a shaft to the second tier of
cellars by means of an endless chain, on to which the baskets of bottles
are swiftly hooked. The workman engaged in this duty, in order to
prevent his falling down the shaft, has a leather belt strapped round
his waist, by means of which he is secured to an adjoining iron column.
We descend into the lower cellars down a flight of ninety-three broad
steps--a depth equal to the height of an ordinary six-storied house--and
find no less than four-and-twenty galleries excavated in the chalk,
without any masonry supports, and containing upwards of a million
bottles of champagne. The length of these galleries varies, but they are
of a uniform breadth, allowing either a couple of racks with wine _sur
pointe_, or stacks of bottles, in four rows on either side, with an
ample passage down the centre.

The upper range of cellars comprises two large arched galleries of
considerable breadth, one of which contains wine in wood and wine _sur
pointe_, while the other is stocked with bottles of wine heads downward,
ready to be delivered into the hands of the _dégorgeur_.

MM. de St. Marceaux and Co. have the honour of supplying the King of the
Belgians, the President of the French Republic, and several German
potentates, with an exceedingly delicate champagne known as the Royal
St. Marceaux. The same wine is popular in Russia and other parts of
Europe, just as the Dry Royal of the firm is much esteemed in the United
States. The brand of the house most appreciated in this country is its
Carte d'Or, a very dry wine which, in conjunction with the firm's Extra
Quality, secured the first place at a recent champagne competition in
England.

In the neighbourhood of the Pommery and de St. Marceaux establishments
numerous other champagne manufacturers have their cellars formed from
the abandoned quarries so numerous on this side of the city. Of some of
these firms we have already spoken, but there remain to be mentioned
Messrs. Kunklemann and Co., Ruinart père et fils, George Goulet, Jules
Champion, Théophile Roederer, &c. The cellars of the three last-named
are immediately outside the Porte Dieu-Lumière, near which is a house
with a curious bas-relief on its face, the subject of which has been a
source of much perplexity to local antiquaries.

  [Illustration:
  BAS-RELIEF NEAR THE PORTE DIEU-LUMIÈRE.]


  [Illustration:
  JEAN REMI MOET.]

X.--EPERNAY CHAMPAGNE ESTABLISHMENTS.

Early Records of the Moët Family at Reims and Epernay-- Jean Remi
  Moët Founder of the Commerce in Champagne Wines-- Extracts from the
  Old Account-Books of the Moëts-- First Sales of Sparkling Wines--
  Sales to England in 1788-- "Milords" Farnham and Findlater-- Jean
  Remi Moët receives the Emperor Napoleon, Josephine, and the King of
  Westphalia-- The Firm of Moët and Chandon Constituted-- Their
  Establishment in the Rue du Commerce-- Delivering and Washing the
  New Bottles-- The Numerous Vineyards and Vendangeoirs of the Firm--
  Making the Cuvée in Vats of 12,000 Gallons-- The Bottling of the
  Wine by 200 Hands-- A Hundred Thousand Bottles Completed Daily--
  20,000 Francs' worth of Broken Glass in Two Years-- A Subterranean
  City, with miles of Streets, Cross Roads, Open Spaces, Tramways, and
  Stations-- The Ancient Entrance to these Vaults-- Tablet
  Commemorative of the Visit of Napoleon I.-- Millions of Bottles of
  Champagne in Piles and Racks-- The Original Vaults known as
  Siberia-- Scene in the Packing Hall-- Messrs. Moët and Chandon's
  Large and Complete Staff-- Provision for Illness and Old Age--
  Annual Fête Given by the Firm-- Their Famous "Star" Brand--
  M. Perrier-Jouët, the lucky Grandson of a little Epernay Grocer--
  His Offices and Cellars-- His Wine Classed according to its
  Deserts-- Messrs. Roussillon and Co.'s Establishment-- The
  Recognition accorded to their Wines-- Their Stock of Old Vintages--
  The Extensive Establishment of Messrs. Pol Roger and Co.-- Their
  Large Stock of the Fine 1874 Vintage-- Preparations for the Tirage--
  Their Vast Fireproof Cellier and its Admirable Temperature-- Their
  Lofty and Capacious Cellars of Two Stories.


Those magnates of the champagne trade, Messrs. Moët and Chandon, whose
famous "star" brand is familiar in every part of the civilised globe,
and whose half-score miles of cellars contain as many million bottles of
champagne as there are millions of inhabitants in most of the secondary
European states, have their head-quarters at Epernay in a spacious
château--in that street of châteaux named the Rue du Commerce, but
commonly known as the Faubourg de la Folie--which is approached through
handsome iron gates, and has beautiful gardens in the rear extending in
the direction of the River Marne. The existing firm dates from the year
1833, but the family of Moët--conjectured to have originally come from
the Low Countries--had already been associated with the champagne wine
trade for well-nigh a century previously. If the Moëts came from Holland
they must have established themselves in the Champagne at a very early
date, for the annals of Reims record that in the fifteenth century Jean
and Nicolas Moët were _échevins_ of the city. A Moët was present in that
capacity at the coronation of Charles VII. in 1429, when Joan of Arc
stood erect by the principal altar of the cathedral with her sacred
banner in her hand, and for having contributed to repulse an attempt on
the part of the English to prevent the entrance of the Royal party into
the city, the Moëts were subsequently ennobled by the same monarch.
A mural tablet in the church of St. Remi records the death of D. G.
Moët, Grand Prior, in 1554, and nine years later we find Nicol Moët
claiming exemption at Epernay from the payment of _tailles_ on the
ground of his being a noble. An old commercial book preserved in the
family archives shows that in the year 1743--at the epoch when the
rashness of the Duc de Grammont saved the English army under George II.
from being cut to pieces at Dettingen--a descendant of the foregoing,
one Claude Louis Nicolas Moët, who owned considerable vineyard property
in the vicinity of Epernay, decided upon embarking in the wine trade.
It is his son, however, Jean Remi Moët, born in 1758, who may be looked
upon as the veritable founder of the present commerce in Champagne
wines, which, thanks to his efforts, received a wonderful impulse, so
that instead of the consumption of the vintages of the Marne being
limited as heretofore to the privileged few, it spread all over the
civilised world.

At Messrs. Moët and Chandon's we had the opportunity of inspecting some
of the old account-books of the firm, and more particularly those
recording the transactions of Jean Remi Moët and his father. The first
sales of sparkling wine, on May 23rd, 1743, comprised 301 bottles of the
vintage of 1741 to Pierre Joly, wine-merchant, _bon des douze chez le
Roi_, whatever that may mean, at Paris; 120 bottles to Pierre Gabriel
Baudoin, also _bon des douze_, at Paris; and a similar quantity to the
Sieur Compoin, keeping the "hotellerie ditte la pestitte Escurie," Rue
du Port Maillart, at Nantes in Brittany. The entry specifies that the
wine for Nantes is to be left at Choisy-le-Roi, and taken by land to
Orleans by the carters of that town, who are to be found at the Ecu
d'Orléans, Porte St. Michel, Paris, the carriage as far as Choisy being
4 livres 10 deniers (about 4 francs) for the two half-baskets, and to
Paris 3 livres 15 deniers the basket.

Between 1750 and '60, parcels of wine were despatched to Warsaw, Vienna,
Berlin, Königsberg, Dantzig, Stettin, Brussels, and Amsterdam; but one
found no mention of any sales to England till the year 1788, when the
customers of the firm included "Milord" Farnham, of London, and Messrs.
Felix Calvert and Sylvin, who had a couple of sample bottles sent to
them, for which they were charged five shillings. In the same year
Messrs. Carbonnell, Moody, and Walker (predecessors of the well-known
existing firm of Carbonnell and Co.) wrote in French for two baskets,
of ten dozens each, of _vin de champagne_ "of good body, not too charged
with liqueur, but of excellent taste, and _not at all sparkling_!" while
the Chevalier Colebrook, writing from Bath, requests that 72 bottles of
champagne may be sent to his friend the Hon. John Butler, Molesworth
Street, Dublin, "who if contented with the wine will become a good
customer, he being rich, keeping a good house, and receiving many
amateurs of _vin de champagne_." Shortly afterwards the chevalier
himself receives 50 bottles of still wine, vintage 1783. In 1789 120
bottles of champagne, vintage 1788, are supplied to "Milord" Findlater,
of London--an ancestor, no doubt, of the wine-merchants of the same name
carrying on business to-day, and whom the Moëts in their simplicity
dubbed a "Milord"--and in 1790 the customers of the house include Power
and Michel, of 44, Lamb Street, London, and Manning, of the St. Alban
Tavern, the latter of whom is supplied on March 30th with 130 bottles of
champagne at three livres, or two "schillings," per bottle; while a
month later Mr. Lockart, banker, of 36, Pall Mall, is debited with 360
bottles, vintage 1788, at three shillings.

  [Illustration:
  WASHING BOTTLES AT MESSRS. MOËT & CHANDON'S, EPERNAY. (p. 105)]

In this same year M. Moët despatches a traveller to England named
Jeanson, and his letters, some two hundred in number, are all preserved
in the archives of the house. On the 17th May, 1790, he writes from
London as follows:--"As yet I have only gone on preparatory and often
useless errands. I have distributed samples of which I have no news.
Patience is necessary, and I endeavour to provide myself with it. How
the taste of this country has changed since ten years ago! Almost
everywhere they ask for dry wine, but at the same time require it so
vinous and so strong that there is scarcely any other than the wine of
Sillery which can satisfy them.... To-morrow I dine five miles from
here, at M. Macnamara's. We shall uncork four bottles of our wine, which
will probably be all right." In May, 1792, Jean Remi Moët is married,
and thenceforward assumes the full management of the house. On December
20 of the year following, when the Reign of Terror was fairly
inaugurated, we find the accounts in the ledger opened to this or the
other "citoyen." The orthodox Republican formula, however, did not long
continue, and "sieur" and "monsieur" resumed their accustomed places,
showing that Jean Remi Moët had no sympathy with the Jacobin faction of
the day. In 1805 he became Mayor of Epernay, and between this time and
the fall of the Empire received Napoleon several times at his residence,
as well as the Empress Josephine and the King of Westphalia. The
Emperor, after recapturing Reims from the Allies, came on to Epernay,
on which occasion he presented M. Moët with the cross of the Legion of
Honour. In 1830 the latter was arbitrarily dismissed from his mayoralty
by Charles X., but was speedily reinstated by Louis Philippe, though he
did not retain his office for long, his advanced age compelling him to
retire from active life in the course of 1833. At this epoch the firm,
which, since 1807 had been known as Moët and Co., was remodelled under
the style of Moët and Chandon, the two partners being M. Victor Moët,
son of the outgoing partner, and M. P. G. Chandon, the descendant of an
old ennobled family of the Mâconnais, who had married M. Jean Remi
Moët's eldest daughter. The descendants of these gentlemen are to-day at
the head of the business, the partners being on the one hand M. Victor
Moët-Romont and M. C. J. V. Auban Moët-Romont; and on the other, MM.
Paul and Raoul Chandon de Briailles.

Facing Messrs. Moët and Chandon's offices at Epernay is a range of
comparatively new buildings, with its white façade ornamented with the
well-known monogram M. and C., surmounted by the familiar star. It is
here that the business of blending and bottling the wine is carried on.
Passing through the arched gateway access is obtained to a spacious
courtyard, where carts laden with bottles are being expeditiously
lightened of their fragile contents by the busy hands of numerous
workmen. Another gateway on the left leads into the spacious
bottle-washing room, which from the middle of May until the middle of
July presents a scene of extraordinary animation. Bottle-washing
apparatus, supplied by a steam-engine with 20,000 gallons of water per
diem, are ranged in fifteen rows down the entire length of this hall,
and nearly 200 women strive to excel each other in diligence and
celerity in their management, a practised hand washing from 900 to 1,000
bottles in the course of the day. To the right of this _salle de
rinçage_, as it is styled, bottles are stacked in their tens of
thousands, and lads furnished with barrows, known as _diables_, hurry to
and fro, conveying these to the washers, or removing the clean bottles
to the adjacent courtyard, where they are allowed to drain, prior to
being taken to the _salle de tirage_ or bottling room.

Before, however, the washing of bottles on this gigantic scale
commences, the "marrying" or blending of the wine is accomplished in a
vast apartment, 250 feet in length and 100 feet broad, during the early
spring. The casks of newly-vintaged wine which have been stowed away
during the winter months, in the extensive range of cellars hewn out of
the chalk underlying Epernay, where they have slowly fermented, are
mixed together in due proportions in huge vats, each holding upwards of
12,000 gallons. Some of this wine is the growth of Messrs. Moët and
Chandon's own vineyards, of which they possess as many as 900 acres
(giving constant employment to 800 labourers and vinedressers) at Ay,
Avenay, Bouzy, Cramant, Champillon, Chouilly, Dizy, Epernay, Grauves,
Hautvillers, Le Mesnil, Moussy, Pierry, Saran, St. Martin, Verzy, and
Verzenay, and the average annual cost of cultivating which is about £40
per acre. At Ay the firm own 210 acres of vineyards; at Cramant and
Chouilly, nearly 180 acres; at Verzy and Verzenay, 120 acres; at Pierry
and Grauves, upwards of 100 acres; at Hautvillers, 90 acres; at Le
Mesnil, 80 acres; at Epernay, nearly 60 acres; and at Bouzy, 55 acres.
Messrs. Moët and Chandon, moreover, possess vendangeoirs, or
pressing-houses, at Ay, Bouzy, Cramant, Epernay, Hautvillers, Le Mesnil,
Pierry, Saran, and Verzenay, in which the large number of 40 presses are
installed. At these vendangeoirs no less than 5,450 pièces of fine white
wine, sufficient for 1,360,000 bottles of champagne, are annually
made--that is, 1,200 pièces at Ay, 1,100 at Cramant and Saran, 800 at
Verzy and Verzenay, and smaller quantities at the remaining
establishments. All these establishments have their celliers and their
cellars, together with cottages for the accommodation of the numerous
vinedressers in the employment of the firm.

  [Illustration:
  MESSRS. MOËT & CHANDON'S VENDANGEOIR AT BOUZY. (p. 106)]

  [Illustration:
  BOTTLING CHAMPAGNE AT MESSRS. MOËT & CHANDON'S, EPERNAY. (p. 107)]

Extensive as are the vineyards owned by Messrs. Moët and Chandon, the
yield from them is utterly inadequate to the enormous demand which the
great Epernay firm are annually called upon to supply, and large
purchases have to be made by their agents from the growers throughout
the Champagne. The wine thus secured, as well as that grown by the firm,
is duly mixed together in such proportions as will ensure lightness with
the requisite vinosity, and fragrance combined with effervescence,
a thorough amalgamation being effected by stirring up the wine with long
poles provided with fan-shaped ends. If the vintage be indifferent in
quality the firm have scores of huge tuns filled with the yield of more
favoured seasons to fall back upon to ensure any deficiencies of
character and flavour being supplied.

The casks of wine to be blended are raised from the cellars, half a
dozen at a time, by means of a lift provided with an endless chain, and
worked by the steam-engine of which we have already spoken. They are
emptied, through traps in the floor of the room above, into the huge
vats which, standing upon a raised platform, reach almost to the
ceiling. From these vats the fluid is allowed to flow through hose into
rows of casks stationed below. Before being bottled the wine reposes for
a certain time, is next duly racked and again blended, and is eventually
conveyed through silver-plated pipes into oblong reservoirs, each fitted
with a dozen syphon-taps, so arranged that directly the bottle slipped
on to one of them becomes full the wine ceases to flow.

  [Illustration]

Upwards of 200 workpeople are employed in the _salle de tirage_ at
Messrs. Moët and Chandon's, which, while the operation of bottling is
going on, presents a scene of bewildering activity. Men and lads are
gathered round the syphon-taps briskly removing the bottles as they
become filled, and supplanting them by empty ones. Other lads hasten to
transport the filled bottles on trucks to the corkers, whose so-called
"guillotine" machines send the corks home with a sudden thud. The corks
being secured with _agrafes_ the bottles are placed in large flat
baskets called _manettes_, and wheeled away on tracks, the quarts being
deposited in the cellars by means of lifts, while the pints slide down
an inclined plane by the aid of an endless chain, which raises the
trucks with the empty baskets at the same time the full ones make their
descent into the cellars. What with the incessant thud of the corking
machines, the continual rolling of iron-wheeled trucks over the concrete
floor, the rattling and creaking of the machinery working the lifts, the
occasional sharp report of a bursting bottle, and the loudly-shouted
orders of the foremen, who display the national partiality for making a
noise to perfection, the din becomes at times all but unbearable. The
number of bottles filled in the course of the day naturally varies,
still Messrs. Moët and Chandon reckon that during the month of June a
daily average of 100,000 are taken in the morning from the stacks in the
_salle de rinçage_, washed, dried, filled, corked, wired, lowered into
the cellars and carefully arranged in symmetrical order. This represents
a total of two and a half million bottles during that month alone.

The bottles on being lowered into the cellars, either by means of the
incline or the lifts, are placed in a horizontal position, and with
their uppermost side daubed with white chalk, are stacked in layers from
two to half-a-dozen bottles deep with narrow oak laths between. The
stacks are usually about six or seven feet high and 100 feet and upwards
in length. Whilst the wine is thus reposing in a temperature of about
55° Fahrenheit, fermentation sets in, and the ensuing month is one of
much anxiety. Thanks, however, to the care bestowed, Messrs. Moët and
Chandon's annual loss from bottles bursting rarely exceeds three per
cent., though fifteen was once regarded as a respectable and
satisfactory average. The broken glass is a perquisite of the workmen,
the money arising from its sale, which at the last distribution amounted
to no less than 20,000 francs, being divided amongst them every couple
of years.

  [Illustration]

The usual entrance to Messrs. Moët and Chandon's Epernay cellars--which,
burrowed out in all directions, are of the aggregate length of nearly
seven miles, and have usually between 11,000,000 and 12,000,000 bottles
and 25,000 casks of wine stored therein--is through a wide and imposing
portal, and down a long and broad flight of steps. It is, however, by
the ancient and less imposing entrance, through which more than one
crowned head has condescended to pass, that we set forth on our
lengthened tour through these intricate underground galleries--this
subterranean city with its miles of streets, crossroads, open spaces,
tramways, and stations devoted solely to champagne. A gilt inscription
on a black marble tablet testifies that "on the 26th July, 1807,
Napoleon the Great, Emperor of the French, King of Italy, and Protector
of the Confederation of the Rhine, honoured commerce by visiting the
cellars of Jean Rémi Moët, Mayor of Epernay, President of the Canton,
and Member of the General Council of the Department," within three weeks
of the signature of the treaty of Tilsit. Passing down the flight of
steep slippery steps traversed by the victor of Eylau and Jena, access
is gained to the upper range of vaults, brilliantly illuminated by the
glare of gas, or dimly lighted by the flickering flame of
tallow-candles, upwards of 60,000lbs. of which are annually consumed.
Here group after group of the small army of 350 workmen employed in
these subterranean galleries are encountered engaged in the process of
transforming the _vin brut_ into champagne. At Messrs. Moët and
Chandon's the all-important operation of liqueuring the wine is effected
by aid of machines of the latest construction, which regulate the
quantity administered to the utmost nicety. The corks are branded by
being pressed against steel dies heated by gas, by women who can turn
out 3,000 per day apiece, the quantity of string used to secure them
amounting to nearly ten tons in the course of the year.

There is another and a lower depth of cellars to be explored to which
access is gained by trapholes in the floor--through which the barrels
and baskets of wine are raised and lowered--and by flights of steps.
From the foot of the latter there extends an endless vista of lofty and
spacious passages hewn out of the chalk, the walls of which, smooth as
finished masonry, are lined with thousands of casks of raw wine, varied
at intervals by gigantic vats. Miles of long, dark-brown,
dampish-looking galleries stretch away to the right and left, and though
devoid of the picturesque festoons of fungi which decorate the London
Dock vaults, exhibit a sufficient degree of mouldiness to give them an
air of respectable antiquity. These multitudinous galleries, lit up by
petroleum-lamps, are mostly lined with wine in bottles stacked in
compact masses to a height of six or seven feet, only room enough for a
single person to pass being left. Millions of bottles are thus arranged,
the majority on their sides, in huge piles, with tablets hung up against
each stack to note its age and quality; and the rest, which are
undergoing daily evolutions at the hands of the twister, at various
angles of inclination. In these cellars there are nearly 11,000 racks in
which the bottles of _vin brut_ rest _sur pointe_, as many as 600,000
bottles being commonly twisted daily.

The way runs on between regiments of bottles of the same size and shape,
save where at intervals pints take the place of quarts; and the visitor,
gazing into the black depths of the transverse passages to the right and
left, becomes conscious of a feeling that if his guide were suddenly to
desert him he would feel as hopelessly lost as in the catacombs of Rome.
There are two galleries, each 650 feet in length, containing about
650,000 bottles, and connected by 32 transverse galleries, with an
aggregate length of 4,000 feet, in which nearly 1,500,000 bottles are
stored. There are, further, eight galleries, each 500 feet in length,
and proportionably stocked; also the extensive new vaults, excavated
some five or six years back, in the rear of the then-existing cellarage,
and a considerable number of smaller vaults. The different depths and
varying degrees of moisture afford a choice of temperature of which the
experienced owners know how to take advantage. The original vaults,
wherein more than a century ago the first bottles of champagne made by
the infant firm were stowed away, bear the name of Siberia, on account
of their exceeding coldness. This section consists of several
roughly-excavated low winding galleries, resembling natural caverns, and
affording a striking contrast to the broad, lofty, and regular-shaped
corridors of more recent date.

When the proper period arrives for the bottles to emerge once more into
the upper air they are conveyed to the packing-room, a spacious hall 180
feet long and 60 feet broad. In front of its three large double doors
waggons are drawn up ready to receive their loads. The seventy men and
women employed here easily foil, label, wrap, and pack up some 10,000
bottles a day. Cases and baskets are stacked in different parts of this
vast hall, at one end of which numerous trusses of straw used in the
packing are piled. Seated at tables ranged along one side of the
apartment women are busily occupied in pasting on labels or encasing the
necks of bottles in gold or silver foil, whilst elsewhere men, seated on
three-legged stools in front of smoking caldrons of molten sealing-wax
of a deep green hue, are coating the necks of other bottles by plunging
them into the boiling fluid. When labelled and decorated with either wax
or foil the bottles pass on to other women, who swathe them in pink
tissue-paper and set them aside for the packers, by whom, after being
deftly wrapped round with straw, they are consigned to baskets or cases,
to secure which last no less than 10,000lbs. of nails are annually used.
England and Russia are partial to gold foil, pink paper, and wooden
cases holding a dozen or a couple of dozen bottles of the exhilarating
fluid, whereas other nations prefer waxed necks, disdain pink paper, and
insist on being supplied in wicker baskets containing fifty bottles
each.

  [Illustration:
  THE PACKING HALL AT MESSRS. MOËT AND CHANDON'S, EPERNAY. (p. 112)]

Some idea of the complex character of so vast an establishment as that
of Messrs. Moët and Chandon may be gathered from a mere enumeration of
their staff, which, in addition to twenty clerks and 350 cellarmen
proper, includes numerous agrafe-makers and corkcutters, packers and
carters, wheelwrights and saddlers, carpenters, masons, slaters and
tilers, tinmen, firemen, needlewomen, &c., while the inventory of
objects used by this formidable array of workpeople comprises no fewer
than 1,500 distinct heads. A medical man attached to the establishment
gives gratuitous advice to all those employed, and a chemist dispenses
drugs and medicines without charge. While suffering from illness the men
receive half-pay, but should they be laid up by an accident met with in
the course of their work full salary is invariably awarded to them. As
may be supposed, so vast an establishment as this is not without a
provision for those past work, and all the old hands receive liberal
pensions from the firm upon retiring. Every year Messrs. Moët and
Chandon give a banquet or a ball to the people in their employ--usually
after the bottling of the wine is completed--when the hall in which the
entertainment takes place is handsomely decorated and illuminated with
myriads of coloured lamps.

It is needless to particularise Messrs. Moët and Chandon's wines, which
are familiar to all drinkers of champagne. Their famous "star" brand is
known in all societies, figures equally at clubs and mess-tables, at
garden parties and picnics, dinners and _soirées_, and has its place in
hotel _cartes_ all over the world. One of the best proofs of the wine's
universal popularity is found in the circumstance that as many as 1,000
visitors from all parts of the world come annually to Epernay and make
the tour of Messrs. Moët and Chandon's spacious cellars.

A little beyond Messrs. Moët and Chandon's, in the broad Rue du
Commerce, we encounter a heavy, ornate, pretentious-looking château, the
residence of M. Perrier-Jouët, which presents a striking contrast to the
almost mean-looking premises opposite, where the business of the firm is
carried on. M. Perrier-Jouët is the fortunate grandson of the Sieur
Perrier Fissier, a little Epernay grocer, who some eighty years or so
ago used to supply corks, candles, and string to the firm of Moët and
Co., and who, when the profits arising from this connection warranted
his doing so, discarded his grocer's sleeves and apron and blossomed
forth as a competitor in the champagne trade. Perrier-Jouët and Co.'s
offices are situated on the left-hand side of a courtyard surrounded by
low buildings, which serve as celliers, store-houses, packing-rooms, and
the like. From an inner courtyard where piles of bottles are stacked
under open sheds, the cellars themselves are reached. Previous to
descending into these we passed through the various buildings, in one of
which a party of men were engaged in disgorging and preparing wine for
shipment. In another we noticed one of those heavy beam presses for
pressing the grapes which the more intelligent manufacturers regard as
obsolete, while in a third was the _cuvée_ vat, holding no more than
2,200 gallons. In making their _cuvée_ the firm commonly mix one part of
old wine to three parts of new. An indifferent vintage, however,
necessitates the admixture of a larger proportion of the older growth.
The cellars, like all the more ancient ones at Epernay, are somewhat
straggling and irregular, still they are remarkably cool, and on the
lower floor remarkably damp as well. This, however, would appear to be
no disadvantage, as the breakage in them is calculated never to exceed
2½ per cent.

The firm have no less than five qualities of champagne, and at one of
the recent champagne competitions at London, where the experts engaged
had no means of identifying the brands submitted to their judgment,
Messrs. Perrier-Jouët's First Quality got classed below a cheaper wine
of their neighbours Messrs. Pol Roger and Co., and very considerably
below the Extra Sec of Messrs. Périnet et fils, and inferior even to a
wine of De Venoge's, the great Epernay manufacturer of common class
champagnes.

  [Illustration:
  COURTYARD OF MESSRS. POL ROGER'S ESTABLISHMENT AT EPERNAY. (p. 115)]

Champagne establishments, combined with the handsome residences of the
manufacturers, line both sides of the long, imposing Rue du Commerce at
Epernay. On the left hand is a succession of fine châteaux, commencing
with one belonging to M. Auban Moët, whose terraced gardens overlook the
valley of the Marne, and command views of the vine-clad heights of
Cumières, Hautvillers, Ay, and Mareuil, and the more distant slopes of
Ambonnay and Bouzy, while on the other side of the famous Epernay
thoroughfare we encounter beyond the establishments of Messrs. Moët and
Chandon and Perrier-Jouët the ornate monumental façade which the firm of
Piper and Co.--of whom Messrs. Kunkelmann and Co. are to-day the
successors--raised some years since above their extensive cellars.
A little in the rear of the Rue du Commerce is the well-ordered
establishment of Messrs. Roussillon and Co., the extension of whose
business of late has necessitated their removal to these capacious
premises. The wines of the firm enjoy a high reputation in England,
France, and Russia, and have secured favourable recognition at the
Paris, Philadelphia, and other Exhibitions. Their stock includes
considerable quantities of the older vintages, it being a rule of the
house never to ship crude young wines. It is on their dry varieties that
Messrs. Roussillon and Co. especially pride themselves, and some of the
fine wine of 1874 that was here shown to us was as remarkable for its
delicacy as for its fragrance.

In a side street at the farther end of the Rue du Commerce stands a
château of red brick, overlooking on the one side an extensive
pleasure-garden, and on the other a spacious courtyard, bounded by
celliers, stables, and bottle-sheds, all of modern construction and on a
most extensive scale. These form the establishment of Messrs. Pol Roger
and Co., settled for many years at Epernay, and known throughout the
Champagne for their large purchases at the epoch of the vintage. From
the knowledge they possess of the best crûs, and their relations with
the leading vineyard proprietors, they are enabled whenever the wine is
good to acquire large stocks of it. Having bottled a considerable
quantity of the fine wine of 1874, they resolved to profit by the
exceptional quality of this vintage to commence shipping champagne to
England, where their agents, Messrs. Reuss, Lauteren, and Co., have
successfully introduced the new brand.

Passing through a large open gateway we enter the vast courtyard of the
establishment, which, with arriving and departing carts--the first
loaded with wine in cask or with new bottles, and the others with cases
of champagne--presents rather an animated scene. Under a roof projecting
from the wall of the vast cellier on the right hand a tribe of
"Sparnaciennes"--as the feminine inhabitants of Epernay are termed--are
occupied in washing bottles in readiness for the coming tirage. The
surrounding buildings, most substantially constructed, are not destitute
of architectural pretensions.

The extensive cellier, the area of which is 23,589 square feet, is
understood to be the largest single construction of the kind in the
Champagne district. Built entirely of iron, stone and brick, its
framework is a perfect marvel of lightness. The roof, consisting of rows
of brick arches, is covered above with a layer of Portland cement, in
order to keep it cool in summer and protect it against the winter cold,
two most desirable objects in connection with the manipulation of
champagne. Here an endless chain of a new pattern enables wine in bottle
to be lowered and raised with great rapidity to or from the cellars
beneath--lofty and capacious excavations of two stories, the lowest of
which is reached by a flight of no less than 170 steps.

Epernay, unlike Reims, has little of general interest to attract the
stranger. Frequently besieged and pillaged during the Middle Ages, and
burnt to the ground by the dauphin, son of François I., the town,
although of some note as far back as the time of Clovis, exhibits to-day
no evidence whatever of its great antiquity. The thoroughfare termed the
Rempart de la Tour Biron recalls a memorable incident which transpired
during the siege of the town by Henri IV. While the king was
reconnoitring the defences a cannon-ball aimed at his waving white plume
took off the head of the Maréchal Biron at the moment Henri's hand was
resting familiarly on the maréchal's shoulder. Strange to say, the king
himself escaped unhurt.

  [Illustration:
  VIEW OF AY FROM THE BANKS OF THE MARNE CANAL. (p. 117.)]


  [Illustration:
  THE VENDANGEOIR OF HENRI QUATRE.]

XI.--CHAMPAGNE ESTABLISHMENTS AT AY AND MAREUIL.

The Establishment of Deutz and Geldermann-- Drawing off the Cuvée--
  Mode of Excavating Cellars in the Champagne-- The Firm's New
  Cellars, Vineyards, and Vendangeoir-- The old Château of Ay and its
  Terraced Garden-- The Gambling Propensities of Balthazar Constance
  Dangé-Dorçay, a former Owner of the Château-- The Picturesque
  Situation and Aspect of Messrs. Ayala's Establishment-- A Promenade
  through their Cellars-- M. Duminy's Cellars and Wines-- His new
  Model Construction-- The House Founded in 1814-- Messrs. Bollinger's
  Establishment-- Their Vineyard of La Grange-- The Tirage in
  Progress-- The Fine Cellars of the Firm-- Messrs. Pfungst's frères
  and Co.'s Cellars-- Their Dry Champagnes of 1868, '70, '72, and
  '74-- The Old Church of Ay and its Decorations of Grapes and
  Vineleaves-- The Vendangeoir of Henri Quatre-- The Montebello
  Establishment at Mareuil-- The Château formerly the Property of the
  Dukes of Orleans-- A Titled Champagne Firm-- The Brilliant Career of
  Marshal Lannes-- A Promenade through the Montebello Establishment--
  The Press House, the Cuvée Vat, the Packing-Room, the Offices, and
  the Cellars-- Portraits and Relics at the Château-- The
  Establishment of Bruch-Foucher and Co.-- The handsome Carved
  Gigantic Cuvée Tun-- The Cellars and their Lofty Shafts-- The Wines
  of the Firm.


The historic _bourgade_ of Ay is within a short walk of the station on
the line of railway connecting Epernay with Reims. The road lies across
the light bridge spanning the Marne canal, the tall trees fringing which
hide for a time the clustering houses; still we catch sight of the
tapering steeple of the antique church rising sharply against the green
vine-covered slopes and the fleecy-clouded summer sky. We soon reach the
Place de l'Hôtel de Ville, and continuing onward in the direction of the
steep hills which shelter the town on the north, come to a
massive-looking corner house in front of the broad _porte-cochère_ of
which some railway carts laden with cases of champagne are standing.
Passing through the gateway we find ourselves in an open court, with a
dwelling-house to the right and a range of buildings in front where the
offices of Messrs. Deutz and Geldermann are installed. This is the
central establishment of the firm, whose Extra Dry "Gold Lack" and
"Cabinet" champagnes have long been favourably known in England. Here
are spacious celliers for disgorging and finishing off the wine, a large
packing-hall, and rooms where bales of corks and other accessories of
the trade are stored, the operations of making the _cuvées_ and bottling
being accomplished in an establishment some little distance off.

  [Illustration:
  DRAWING OFF THE CUVÉE AT DEUTZ & GELDERMANN'S, AY. (p. 118)]

  [Illustration:
  EXCAVATING DEUTZ & GELDERMANN'S NEW CELLARS, AY. (p. 119)]

Proceeding thither, we find an elegant château with a charming terraced
garden, lying at the very foot of the vine-clad slopes, and on the
opposite side of the road some large celliers where wine in wood is
stored, and where the _cuvées_ of the firm, consisting usually of
upwards of 50,000 gallons each, are made in a vat of gigantic
proportions, furnished with a raised platform at one end for the
accommodation of the workman who agitates the customary paddles. When
the wine is completely blended it is drawn off into casks disposed for
the purpose in the cellar below, as shown in the accompanying engraving,
and after being fined it rests for about a month to clear itself. To
each of these casks of newly-blended wine a portion of old wine is added
separately, and at the moment of bottling the whole is newly
amalgamated.

Adjoining M. Deutz's château is the principal entrance to the extensive
cellars of the firm, to which, at the time of our visit, considerable
additions were being made. In excavating a gallery the workmen commence
by rounding off the roof, and then proceed to work gradually downwards,
extracting the chalk, whenever practicable, in blocks suitable for
building purposes, which being worth from three to four shillings the
square yard help to reduce the cost of the excavation. When any serious
flaws present themselves in the sides or roof of the galleries, they are
invariably made good with masonry.

This range of cellars now comprises eight long and lofty galleries no
less than 17 feet wide, and the same number of feet in height, and of
the aggregate length of 2,200 yards. These spacious vaults, which run
parallel with each other, and communicate by means of cross passages,
underlie the street, the château, the garden, and the vineyard slopes
beyond, and possess the great advantage of being always dry. They are
capable, we were informed, of containing several million bottles of
champagne in addition to a large quantity of wine in cask.

Messrs. Deutz and Geldermann possess vineyards at Ay, and own a large
vendangeoir at Verzenay, where in good years they usually press 500
pièces of wine. They, moreover, make large purchases of grapes at Bouzy,
Cramant, Le Mesnil, Pierry, &c, and invariably have these pressed under
their own superintendence. Beyond large shipments to England, Messrs.
Deutz and Geldermann transact a considerable business with other
countries, and more especially with Germany, where their brand has been
for years one of the most popular, and is to-day the favourite at
numerous regimental messes and the principal hotels.

The old château of Ay, which dates from the early part of the last
century, belongs to-day to the Count de Mareuil, a member of the firm of
Ayala and Co., one of the leading establishments of the famous
Marne-side crû. Perched half-way up the slope, covered with "golden
plants," which rises in the rear of the village, the château, with its
long façade of windows, commands the valley of the Marne for miles, and
from the stately terraced walk, planted with ancient lime-trees,
geometrically clipped in the fashion of the last century, a splendid
view of the distant vineyards of Avize, Cramant, Epernay, and Chouilly
is obtained. The château formed one of a quartette of seignorial
residences which at the commencement of the present century belonged to
Balthazar Constance Dangé-Dorçay, whose ancestors had been lords of
Chouilly under the _ancien régime_. Dorçay had inherited from an aunt
the châteaux of Ay, Mareuil, Boursault, and Chouilly, together with a
large patrimony in land and money; but a mania for gambling brought him
to utter ruin, and he dispossessed himself of money, lands, and châteaux
in succession, and was reduced, in his old age, to earn a meagre
pittance as a violin-player at the Paris Opera House. The old château of
Boursault, which still exists contiguous to the stately edifice raised
by Mme. Clicquot on the summit of the hill, was risked and lost on a
single game at cards by this pertinacious gamester, whose pressing
pecuniary difficulties compelled him to sell the remaining châteaux one
by one. That of Ay was purchased by M. Froc de la Boulaye, and by him
bequeathed to his cousin the Count de Mareuil, whose granddaughter
became the wife of one of the Messrs. Ayala, and whose son is to-day
their partner.

  [Illustration:
  MESSRS. AYALA & CO.'S ESTABLISHMENT AT AY. (p. 121)]

The offices of the firm adjoin the château, and rather higher up the
hill is their very complete establishment, picturesquely situated in a
hollow formed by some excavations, with the thickly-planted vine-slopes
rising above its red-tiled roof. The boldly-designed basement, the
ascending sweep conducting to the extensive celliers and the little
centre belfry give a character of originality to the building. Carts
laden with cases of champagne are leaving for the railway station, casks
of wine are being transferred from one part of the establishment to
another, bottles are being got ready for the approaching tirage, and in
the packing department, installed in one of the three celliers into
which the story aboveground is divided, quite an animated scene presents
itself. Iron columns support the roofs of this and its companion
celliers, where the firm make their _cuvée_, and the bottling of the
wine takes place. On descending into the basement beneath, the popping
of corks and the continual clatter of machinery intimate that the
disgorging and re-corking of the wine are being accomplished, and in the
dim light we discern groups of workmen engaged in the final manipulation
which champagne has to undergo, while fresh relays of wine are arriving
from the cellars by the aid of endless chains. There are two stories of
these cellars which, excavated in the chalk, extend under the road and
wind round beneath the château, the more modern galleries being broad,
lofty, and admirably ventilated, and provided with supports of masonry
wherever the instability of the chalk rendered this requisite. After a
lengthened promenade through them we come to the ancient vaults
extending immediately under the grounds of the château, where every
particle of available space is utilised, and some difficulty is found in
passing between the serried piles of bottles of _vin brut_--mostly the
fine wine of 1874--which rise continuously on either side.

  [Illustration]

Within a hundred yards of the open space, surrounded by houses of
different epochs and considerable diversity of design, where the Ay
market is weekly held, and in one of the narrow winding streets common
to the town, an escutcheon, with a bunch of grapes for device,
surmounting a lofty gateway, attracts attention. Within, a trim
courtyard, girt round with orange-trees in bright green boxes, and
clipped in orthodox fashion, affords access to the handsome residence
and offices of M. Duminy, well-known in England and America as a shipper
of high-class champagnes, and whose Parisian connection is extensive. On
the right-hand side of the courtyard is the packing-room, and through
the cellars, which have an entrance here, one can reach the celliers in
an adjoining street, where the _cuvée_ is made and the bottling of the
wine accomplished.

M. Duminy's cellars are remarkably old, and consequently of somewhat
irregular construction, being at times rather low and narrow, as well as
on different levels. In addition, however, to these venerable vaults,
packed with wines of 1869, '70, '72, and '74, M. Duminy has various
subterranean adjuncts in other parts of Ay, and is at present engaged in
constructing, at the foot of his vineyards up the mountain slope,
a noble establishment which includes a vast court, upwards of a thousand
square yards in extent, wherein are installed capacious bottle-racks and
bottle-washing machines of the latest improved manufacture. Here are
also handsome and extensive celliers, together with immense underground
cellars, comprising broad and lofty galleries of regular design, the
whole being constructed with a completeness and studied regard for
convenience which bid fair to render this establishment when finished
the model one of the Champagne district.

The house was originally founded so far back as 1814 by
M. Taverne-Richard, who was intimately connected with the principal
vineyard proprietors of the district. In 1842 this gentleman took his
son-in-law, M. Duminy, father of the present proprietor of the
establishment, into partnership, and after the retirement of M. Taverne
he gave a great impetus to the business, and succeeded in introducing
his light and delicate wines into the principal Paris hotels and
restaurants. During its two-thirds of a century of existence the house
has invariably confined itself to first-class wines, taking particular
pride in shipping fully-matured growths. Besides its own large reserve
of these, it holds considerable stocks long since disposed of, and now
merely awaiting the purchasers' orders to be shipped.

A few paces beyond M. Duminy's we come upon an antiquated,
decrepit-looking timber house, with its ancient gable bulging over as
though the tough oak brackets on which it rests were at last grown weary
of supporting their unwieldy burthen. Judging from the quaint carved
devices, this house was doubtless the residence of an individual of some
importance in the days when the principal European potentates had their
commissioners installed at Ay to secure them the finest vintages.
Continuing our walk along the same narrow winding street, we soon reach
the establishment of Messrs. Bollinger, whose house, founded in the year
1829, claims to be the first among the Ay firms who shipped wines to
foreign countries generally, including England, where the brand has long
been held in high repute. Messrs. Bollinger, besides being shippers of
champagne, are extensive vineyard proprietors, owning vinelands at
Bouzy, Verzenay, and Dizy. A vineyard of theirs at the latter place,
known as "La Grange," is said to have formerly belonged to the monks who
founded the abbey of St. Peter at Hautvillers, the legend connected with
which we have already related.

A couple of large gateways offer access to the spacious courtyard of
Messrs. Bollinger's establishment; a handsome dwelling-house standing on
the right, and a small pavilion, in which the offices are installed,
while on the left hand and in the rear of the courtyard rises a range of
buildings of characteristic aspect, appropriated to the business of the
firm. In one of the celliers, which has its open-raftered roof supported
by slim metal columns, we found the tirage going on, the gang of workmen
engaged in it filling, corking, and lowering into the cellars some
20,000 bottles a day. In one corner of the apartment stood the large
_cuvée_ tun--capable of holding some 50 hogsheads--in which the blending
of the wine is effected, and in an adjoining cellier women were briskly
labelling and wrapping up the completed bottles of champagne. The
cellars, constructed some fifty years ago at a cost of nearly £12 the
superficial yard, are faced entirely with stone, and are alike wide and
lofty; this is especially the case with four of the more modern
galleries excavated in 1848, and each 160 feet in length. Besides the
foregoing, Messrs. Bollinger possess other cellars in Ay, where they
store their reserve wines both in bottle and in the wood.

On the northern side of Ay, some little distance from the vineyard owned
by them, the firm of Pfungst frères & Cie. have their cellars, the
entrance to which lies just under the lofty vine-clad ridge. Messrs.
Pfungst frères lay themselves out exclusively for the shipment of
high-class champagnes, and the excellent growths of the Ay district
necessarily form an important element in their carefully-composed
_cuvées_. A considerable portion of their stock consists of reserves of
old wine, and we tasted here a variety of samples of finely-matured
champagnes of 1868 and '70, as well as the vintages of 1872 and '74. All
of these wines were of superior quality, combining delicacy and
fragrance with dryness, the latter being their especial feature. In
addition to their business with England, Messrs. Pfungst frères ship
largely to India and the United States.

  [Illustration]

It is on this side of the town that the fine old Gothic church, dating
as far back as the twelfth century, is situated. Many of the mouldings
and the capitals of the columns both inside and outside the building are
covered over with grape-laden vine-branches, and the sculptured figure
of a boy bearing a basket of grapes upon his head surmounts the handsome
Renaissance doorway, seemingly to indicate the honour in which the
vine--the source of all the prosperity of the little town--was held both
by the mediæval and later architects of the edifice. Nigh to the church
stands the old house with its obliterated carved escutcheons, known
traditionally as the Vendangeoir of Henri Quatre. This monarch loved the
wine of the place almost as well as his favourite vintage of Arbois, and
dubbed himself, as we have already mentioned, Seigneur of Ay, whose
inhabitants he sought to gratify by confirming the charter which
centuries before had been granted to the town.

  [Illustration]

Within half-an-hour's walk of Ay, in an easterly direction, is the
village of Mareuil, a long straight street of straggling houses, bounded
by trees and garden-plats, with vine-clad hills rising abruptly behind
on the one side, and the Marne canal flowing placidly by on the other.
The archaic church, a mixture of the Romanesque and Early Gothic, stands
at the farther end of the village, and some little distance on this side
of it is a massive-looking eighteenth-century building, spacious enough
to accommodate a regiment of horse, but conventual rather than
barrack-like in aspect, from the paucity of windows looking on to the
road. A broad gateway leads into a spacious courtyard to the left of
which stands a grand château, while on the right there rises an ornate
round tower of three stories, from the gallery on the summit of which a
fine view over the valley of the Marne is obtained. The buildings
inclosing the court on three sides comprise press-houses, celliers, and
packing-rooms, an antiquated sundial marking the hour on the blank space
above the vines that climb beside the entrance gateway. The more ancient
of these tenements formed the vendangeoir of the Dukes of Orleans at the
time they owned the château of Mareuil, purchased in 1830 by the Duke de
Montebello, son of the famous Marshal Lannes, and minister and
ambassador of Louis Philippe and Napoleon III.

The acquisition of this property, to which were attached some important
vineyards, led, several years later, to the duke's founding, in
conjunction with his brothers, the Marquis and General Count de
Montebello, a champagne firm, whose brand speedily acquired a notable
popularity. To-day the business is carried on by their sons and heirs,
for all the original partners in the house have followed their valiant
father to the grave. Struck down by an Austrian cannon-ball in the
zenith of his fame, the career of Marshal Lannes, brief as it was,
furnishes one of the most brilliant pages in French military annals.
Joining the army of Italy as a volunteer in 1796, he was made a colonel
on the battle-field in the gorges of Millesimo, when Augereau's bold
advance opened Piedmont to the French. He fought at Bassano and Lodi,
took part in the assault of Pavia and the siege of Mantua, and at
Arcola, when Napoleon dashed flag in hand upon the bridge, Lannes was
seriously wounded whilst shielding his general from danger. He
afterwards distinguished himself in Egypt, and led the van of the French
army across the Alps, displaying his accustomed bravery both at
Montebello and Marengo. At Austerlitz, where he commanded the right wing
of the army, he greatly contributed to the victory, and at Jena,
Friedland, and Eylau his valour was again conspicuous. Sent to Spain,
he defeated the Spaniards at Tudela, and took part in the operations
against Saragossa. Wounded at the battle of Essling, when the Archduke
Charles inflicted upon Napoleon I. the first serious repulse he had met
with on the field of battle, the valiant Lannes expired a few days
afterwards in the Emperor's arms.

  [Illustration:
  THE MONTEBELLO ESTABLISHMENT AT MAREUIL. (p. 126)]

  [Illustration:
  CHÂTEAU OF MAREUIL, BELONGING TO THE DUKE OF MONTEBELLO. (p. 127.)]

We were met at Mareuil, on the occasion of our visit, by Count Alfred
Ferdinand de Montebello, the present manager of the house, and conducted
by him over the establishment. In the press-house, to the left of the
courtyard, were two of the ponderous presses used in the Champagne, for,
like all other large firms, the house makes its own wine. Grapes grown
in the Mareuil vineyards arrive here in baskets slung across the backs
of mules, muzzled so that while awaiting their loads they may not devour
the fruit within reach. In a cellier adjoining the press-house stands a
large vat, capable of holding 50 pièces of wine, with a crane beside it
for hauling up the casks when the _cuvée_ is made. Here the tirage
likewise takes place, and in the range of buildings, roofed with glass,
in the rear of the tower, the bottled wine is labelled, capped with
foil, and packed in cases for transmission to Paris, England, and other
places abroad.

A double flight of steps, decorated with lamps and vases, leads to the
handsome offices of the firm, situated on the first floor of the tower,
while above is an apartment with a panelled ceiling, gracefully
decorated with groups of Cupids engaged in the vintage and the various
operations which the famous wines of the Mountain and the River undergo
during their conversion into champagne. On the ground floor of the tower
a low doorway conducts to the spacious cellars, which, owing to the
proximity of the Marne, are all on the same level as well as constructed
in masonry. The older vaults, where the Marquis de Pange, a former owner
of the château, stored the wine which he used to sell to the champagne
manufacturers, are somewhat low and tortuous compared with the broad and
lofty galleries of more recent date, which have been constructed as the
growing connection of the firm obliged them to increase their stocks.
Spite, however, of numerous additions, portions of their reserves have
to be stored in other cellars in Mareuil. Considerable stocks of each of
the four qualities of wine supplied by the firm are being got ready for
disgorgement, including Cartes Noires and Bleues, with the refined Carte
Blanche and the delicate Crêmant, which challenge comparison with brands
of the highest repute.

In the adjacent château, the gardens of which slope down to the Marne
canal, there are various interesting portraits, with one or two relics
of the distinguished founder of the Montebello family, notably Marshal
Lannes's gold-embroidered velvet saddle trappings, his portrait and that
of Marshal Gerard, as well as one of Napoleon I., by David, with a
handsome clock and candelabra of Egyptian design, a bust of Augustus
Cæsar, and a portrait of the Regent d'Orléans.

Another champagne house of standing at Mareuil is that of Bruch-Foucher
and Co., whose establishment is situated near the village mairie.
Entering by a lofty porte-cochère, we notice on the left hand a spacious
packing-room, where men and women are expeditiously completing some
shipping order, while beyond are the offices, looking on to a terraced
garden whence a pleasant view is gained of the verdant valley of the
Marne. From the packing-room a broad staircase leads to the cellars
beneath, which can also be reached from a venerable range of buildings
on the opposite side of the road, where young wines and old cognac
spirit, used in the preparation of the liqueur, are stored in the wood.

In one of these ancient celliers is a vast tun, capable of containing
nearly 5,000 gallons, carved over with an elaborate device of vineleaves
and bunches of grapes entwined around overflowing cornucopia and bottles
of champagne. This handsome cask, in which the firm make their _cuvée_,
is a worthy rival of the sole antique ornamental tun that still reposes
in the Royal cellars at Wurzburg. In Messrs. Bruch-Foucher and Co.'s
capacious cellars, faced and vaulted with stone, from eight to nine
hundred thousand bottles of wine are stored. The cellars form a single
story, and extend partly under the adjacent vineyard slopes, deriving
light and ventilation from numerous shafts which are occasionally no
less than 150 feet in height. Messrs. Bruch-Foucher and Co., who are
owners of vineyards at Mareuil, ship three qualities of champagne, the
finest being their Carte d'Or and their Monogram Carte Blanche. Their
chief business is with England, Germany, and the United States, where
their brands enjoy considerable repute.


  [Illustration:
  DOORWAY OF AVIZE CHURCH.]

XII.--CHAMPAGNE ESTABLISHMENTS AT AVIZE AND RILLY.

Avize the Centre of the White Grape District-- Its Situation and
  Aspect-- The Establishment of Giesler and Co.-- The Tirage and the
  Cuvée-- Vin Brut in Racks and on Tables-- The Packing-Hall, the
  Extensive Cellars, and the Disgorging Cellier-- Bottle Stores and
  Bottle-Washing Machines-- Messrs. Giesler's Wine-Presses at Avize
  and Vendangeoir at Bouzy-- Their Vineyards and their Purchases of
  Grapes-- Reputation of the Giesler Brand-- The Establishment of
  M. Charles de Cazanove-- A Tame Young Boar-- Boar-Hunting in the
  Champagne-- M. de Cazanove's Commodious Cellars and
  Carefully-Selected Wines-- Vineyards Owned by Him and His Family--
  Reputation of his Wines in Paris and their Growing Popularity in
  England-- Interesting View from M. de Cazanove's Terraced Garden--
  The Vintaging of the White Grapes in the Champagne-- Roper frères'
  Establishment at Rilly-la-Montagne-- Their Cellars Penetrated by
  Roots of Trees-- Some Samples of Fine Old Champagnes-- The Principal
  Châlons Establishments-- Poem on Champagne by M. Amaury de Cazanove.


Avize, situated in the heart of the Champagne white grape district, may
be reached from Epernay by road through Pierry and Cramant or by the
Châlons Railway to Oiry Junction, between which station and Romilly
there runs a local line, jocularly termed the _chemin de fer de
famille_, from the general disregard displayed by the officials for
anything approaching to punctuality. Avize can scarcely be styled a
town, and yet its growing proportions are beyond those of an ordinary
village. It lies pleasantly nestled among the vines, sheltered by bold
ridges on the north-west, with the monotonous plains of La Champagne
pouilleuse, unsuited to the cultivation of the vine, stretching away
eastward in the direction of Châlons. Avize cannot pretend to the same
antiquity as its neighbour Vertus, and lacks the many picturesque
vestiges of which the latter can boast. Its church dates back only to
the 15th century, although the principal doorway in the Romanesque style
evidently belongs to a much earlier epoch. There is a general air of
trim prosperity about the place, and the villagers have that well-to-do
appearance common to the inhabitants of the French wine districts. Only
at vintage time, however, are there any particular outdoor signs of
activity, although half a score of champagne firms have their
establishments here, giving employment to the bulk of the population,
and sending forth their two or three million bottles of the sparkling
wine of the Marne annually.

  [Illustration:
  MAKING THE CUVÉE AT MESSRS. GIESLER'S, AT AVIZE. (p.131)]

Proceeding along the straight level road leading from the station to the
village we encounter on our right hand the premises of Messrs. Giesler
and Co., the reputation of whose brand is universal. When M. Giesler
quitted the firm of P. A. Mumm, Giesler, and Co., at Reims, in 1838,
he removed to Avize and founded the present extensive establishment.
Entering through a large open gateway we find ourselves within a
spacious courtyard with a handsome dwelling-house in the rear, and all
the signs of a champagne business of magnitude apparent. A spiral
staircase conducts to the counting-house on the first story of a range
of buildings on the left hand, the ground floor of which is divided into
celliers. Passing through a door by the side of this staircase we enter
a large hall where the operation of bottling the wine is going on. Four
tuns, each holding five ordinary pièces of wine, and raised upon large
blocks of wood, are standing here, and communicating with them are
bottling syphons of the type commonly employed in the Champagne. Messrs.
Giesler do not usually consign the newly-bottled wine at once to the
cellars, but retain it aboveground for about a fortnight in order that
it may develop its effervescent qualities more perfectly. We find many
thousands of these bottles stacked horizontally in the adjoining
celliers, in one of which stands the great _cuvée_ tun wherein some
fifty hogsheads of the finest Champagne growths are blended together at
one time, two hundred hogsheads being thus mingled daily while the
_cuvées_ are in progress. The casks of wine having been hoisted from the
cellars to the first floor by a crane, and run on to a trough, their
bungs are removed, and the wine flows through an aperture in the floor
into the huge tun beneath, its amalgamation being accomplished by the
customary fan-shaped appliances, set in motion by the turning of a
wheel. In an adjacent room is the machine used for mixing the liqueur
which Messrs. Giesler add so sparingly to their light and fragrant
wines.

There are a couple of floors above these celliers, the uppermost of
which is used as a general store, while in the one beneath many
thousands of bottles of _vin brut_ repose _sur pointe_, either in racks
or on tables as at the Clicquot-Werlé establishment. This latter system
requires ample space, for as the _remueur_, or workman who shakes the
bottles, is only able to use one hand, the operation of dislodging the
sediment necessarily occupies a much longer time than is requisite when
the bottles rest in racks.

  [Illustration:
  PREPARING THE LIQUEUR AT MESSRS. GIESLER'S.]

