
I go into the Cabinet as an envoy of my party, not to govern, but to
fight. If I were younger, I would have shouldered a gun. But as my age
does not permit this I will, nevertheless, face the enemy and defend the
cause of humanity.

I am confident of final victory, and without hesitation as to its
subsequent role in France, the party will never deviate from the line of
conduct laid out. As the solidarity of workmen does not shut out the
right to defend themselves against traitor workmen, so international
solidarity does not exclude the right of one nation to defend itself
against a Government traitor to the peace of Europe.

France has been attacked, and she will have no more ardent defenders
than the workmen's party.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: JULES GUESDE,
French Cabinet Minister and Exponent of French Socialism.
(_Photo from Trans Atlantic Co._)]


MINISTER JULES GUESDE.

Editorial Article in the New Yorker Volkszeitung, Aug. 28.


Who would have suspected in 1904 that Jules Guesde would come to be once
more a member of a Ministry, popular in its majority? Who would have
thought then--it was in the time of the memorable debates over
socialistic "ministerialism" in the Amsterdam Congress of the
International--that there ever could come a time when this clear-headed
and unswerving exponent of academic socialism would be forced by the
need of the hour to take a step which in ordinary circumstances would be
absolutely inconceivable for him?

And now this has actually happened. Jules Guesde, who has been
called--in contrast to the easily moved emotional Jaurès--the
stiff-necked dogmatist, is not only become Minister, but with him
another proved Socialist champion, Marcel Sembat, who for his part too
would rather have split the party than to have approved the entrance of
Millerand into the Cabinet of Waldeck Rousseau.

But now these two are sitting on the same Ministerial bench, not only
with this self-same Millerand, but with the much more deeply despised
renegade Briand, with the anti-Socialist abettor Ribot, and the
disgusting reactionary and favorite of the Czar, Pelcassi. The world
seems to be unhinged.

Yet the incomprehensible is under the existing circumstances only too
easily understood, Guesde and Sembat have taken this difficult step,
because there was no other choice for them, they had to take it. They,
as representatives of a party which had sent 102 members to the Chamber
of Deputies, could not refuse, when this was the question, to create a
Ministry for Defense.

That was the question! It was demanded of all the larger parties that
they put up their best--that is, their intellectually strongest--men for
a Cabinet whose sole task was the defense of France. When this task is
accomplished, when the war is ended in one way or the other, then the
Ministry will undoubtedly dissolve, and the Ministerial magnificance of
Comrades Guesde and Sembat will be at an end until the opportunity
offers of creating a Socialist Ministry.

France, according to all news emanating from the scene of hostilities,
is in an extraordinarily difficult situation. Should the German Army
succeed, as seems already to have been the case in two places, in
breaking through the French-Belgian-English chain of defense, then the
way to Paris is as good as open. If nothing more, at least the reported
preparations of the Parisians indicate that a siege is expected there in
the very near future; and since Paris is still the heart of France, the
taking of that city would be one with the fall of the French Republic.

If in such an hour of danger a nation calls upon its sons, there is for
them no choice; they must answer the call.

Jules Guesde and Marcel Sembat did no more than their duty!


       *       *       *       *       *


"REVOLUTION!"

Cry Raised by Jean Jaurès at Session of International Socialist Bureau,
Brussels, July 29.

The diplomats negotiate. It seems that they will be satisfied to take
from Servia a little of its blood. We have, therefore, a little rest to
insure peace. But to what lesson is Europe submitted? When after twenty
centuries of Christianity, when after 100 years of the triumph of the
principles of the rights of men, how is it possible that millions of
persons, without knowing why, can kill each other?

And Germany? If she knew of the Austrian note, it is inexcusable to have
permitted such a step. And if she did not know of this Austrian note,
what is her Governmental wisdom? You have an agreement which drags you
into war and you do not know what you have been dragged for? I ask, What
people have shown so much anarchy?

Nevertheless the authorities hesitate. Let us profit by it and organize.
For us, French Socialists, our duty is simple. We do not need to impose
on our Government a policy of peace. They are practicing it. I, who have
never hesitated to bring upon my head the hatred of our patriots by my
desire to bring about a Franco-German understanding, have the right to
say that at this time the French Government desires peace.

The French Government is the best ally for peace of the English
Government, which has taken the initiative in conciliation and gives to
Russia advice of prudence and patience.

As for us, it is our duty to insist that it shall speak with force that
Russia may abstain. If unfortunately Russia does not abstain, it is our
duty to say, "We do not know of any other treaty except the one which
binds us to the human race."

This is our duty, and in expressing it we find ourselves in accord with
our German comrades who demand of their Government to see to it that
Austria moderates its acts. It is possible that the telegram of which I
spoke is due partly to that desire of the German workers. One cannot go
against the wish of four millions of enlightened consciences.

Do you know what the proletariat is? They are the men who have
collectively an affection for peace and a horror for war. The
chauvinists, the nationalists, &c., are men who have collectively an
affection for war and carnage. When they feel, however, over their heads
the menace of conflicts, or wars which may put an end to their
capitalist existence, then they remind themselves that they have friends
who seek to reduce the storm. But for the supreme masters the ground is
mined. In the drunkenness of the first battles they succeed in pulling
along the masses. In proportion as typhus completes the work of death
and misery these men will turn to the masters of Germany, France,
Russia, Austria, Italy, and so on, and will demand what reason they can
give for all those corpses. And then the revolution will tell them: Go
and demand grace from God and men.


       *       *       *       *       *


COMPOSURE IS NECESSARY.

Editorial Article for l'Humanite, Written by Jean Jaurès on the Night
He Was Assassinated, July 31.


If we put things at their worst, if we take, in view of the most
formidable hypothesis, the necessary precautions, let us keep the
lucidity of our spirit, the firmness of our reason. To judge from all
the common elements, it does not seem that the international situation
is desperate. To be sure, it is grave, but all chances of an amicable
adjustment have not disappeared. On one side it is evident that if
Germany had a design to attack us she would have proceeded according to
the famous sudden attack. On the contrary, she has allowed days to pass,
and France, like Russia, could have put to profit this delay, the one,
Russia, in order to proceed to a partial mobilization, the other,
France, to take precautions compatible with the maintenance of peace.

On the other hand, Austria and Russia have entered into direct
negotiations. Russia demands of Austria what treatment she reserves for
Servia. Austria answers that she will respect her "territorial
integrity." Russia figures that it is not enough and that it must also
include that "the sovereign rights of Servia are guaranteed."

Even if discord comes between the views of Austria and those of Russia,
one could measure the distance of the ideas and work on a solution of a
problem whose points are determined. It is then, it seems, that the
English idea of mediation which seeks a form, its means of expression,
but which in the end will prevail, for it embodies the profound
sentiments of the people, and without doubt the desire of the rulers
who feel rising toward them, like punishment, this peril of war, with
which for a moment they thought of playing like a diplomatic toy.

If we judge what war itself will be and the effects it will produce by
panic, sinister rumors, economic difficulties, monetary difficulties,
and the financial disasters which the mere possibility of a conflict
creates; when we think that even now we must postpone payments, and
prepare to decree a forced circulation for the paper certificates, one
asks if the most crazy or the sanest of men are capable to open such a
crisis.

The greatest danger at this time is not, if I can say it, in the events
themselves. It is not even in the real dispositions of the
chancelleries, however guilty they may be; it is not in the real will of
the people; it is in the nervousness which is gaining, in the worry
which is spread, in the sudden impulse which grows from fear, of the
growing uncertainty, prolonged anxiety. To these crazy panics the crowd
may give in, and it is not sure that the Governments, too, may give in.
They spend their time (delicious occupation) to frighten and to reassure
each other. And this, do not mistake, can last for weeks. Those who
imagine that a diplomatic crisis must be or can be settled in a few days
are mistaken. Just as the battles of modern war develop on an immense
front, last seven or eight days, the same way the diplomatic battles,
placing now in the game entire Europe and involving a number of powerful
nations, will spread necessarily over several weeks. To resist this test
one must have nerves of steel, or, better still, they need a firm
reasoning, clear and calm. It is to the intelligence of the people, it
is to their reasoning, that we must now make an appeal if we wish them
to remain masters of themselves, escape the panics, dominate the
excitement, and supervise the march of men and things, to spare the
human race from the horror of war.

The danger is great, but it is not unavoidable if we preserve clearness
of mind and a strong will, if we have both heroism of patience and
heroism of action. The clear view of our duty will give us the power to
accomplish it.

All the militant Socialist members of the Federation of the Seine are
called, for next Sunday morning, to Wagram Hall, to a meeting where the
situation will be explained, where the action which the International
expects of you will be defined.

A number of meetings will keep in action the thought and will of the
proletariat and will prepare the magnificent demonstration which will be
a prelude to the labors of the International Congress.

What counts now is the continuity of action, the constant awakening of
the reason and conscience of the workers. There lies true salvation.
There lies the guarantee of the future.


       *       *       *       *       *


PRESSURE FOR PEACE.

Resolutions of International Socialist Bureau at Brussels, July 29.


In assembly of July 29 the International Socialist Bureau has heard
declarations from representatives of all nations threatened by a world
war, describing the political situation in their respective countries.

