LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret! don't talk like that of Mrs. Erlynne,
you don't know how unjust it is!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Turning to him.]  You are very jealous of Mrs.
Erlynne's honour.  I wish you had been as jealous of mine.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Your honour is untouched, Margaret.  You don't
think for a moment that--[Puts book back into desk.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  I think that you spend your money strangely.
That is all.  Oh, don't imagine I mind about the money.  As far as
I am concerned, you may squander everything we have.  But what I DO
mind is that you who have loved me, you who have taught me to love
you, should pass from the love that is given to the love that is
bought.  Oh, it's horrible!  [Sits on sofa.]  And it is I who feel
degraded! YOU don't feel anything.  I feel stained, utterly
stained.  You can't realise how hideous the last six months seems
to me now--every kiss you have given me is tainted in my memory.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [Crossing to her.]  Don't say that, Margaret.  I
never loved any one in the whole world but you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Rises.]  Who is this woman, then?  Why do you
take a house for her?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I did not take a house for her.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You gave her the money to do it, which is the
same thing.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne -

LADY WINDERMERE.  Is there a Mr. Erlynne--or is he a myth?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Her husband died many years ago.  She is alone in
the world.

LADY WINDERMERE.  No relations?  [A pause.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  None.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Rather curious, isn't it?  [L.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [L.C.]  Margaret, I was saying to you--and I beg
you to listen to me--that as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne, she
has conducted herself well.  If years ago -

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh!  [Crossing R.C.]  I don't want details about
her life!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [C.]  I am not going to give you any details
about her life.  I tell you simply this--Mrs. Erlynne was once
honoured, loved, respected.  She was well born, she had position--
she lost everything--threw it away, if you like.  That makes it all
the more bitter.  Misfortunes one can endure--they come from
outside, they are accidents.  But to suffer for one's own faults--
ah!--there is the sting of life.  It was twenty years ago, too.
She was little more than a girl then.  She had been a wife for even
less time than you have.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not interested in her--and--you should not
mention this woman and me in the same breath.  It is an error of
taste.  [Sitting R. at desk.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you could save this woman.  She wants
to get back into society, and she wants you to help her.  [Crossing
to her.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Me!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How impertinent of her!  [A pause.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I came to ask you a great favour, and I
still ask it of you, though you have discovered what I had intended
you should never have known that I have given Mrs. Erlynne a large
sum of money.  I want you to send her an invitation for our party
to-night.  [Standing L. of her.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are mad!  [Rises.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  I entreat you.  People may chatter about her, do
chatter about her, of course, but they don't know anything definite
against her.  She has been to several houses--not to houses where
you would go, I admit, but still to houses where women who are in
what is called Society nowadays do go.  That does not content her.
She wants you to receive her once.

LADY WINDERMERE.  As a triumph for her, I suppose?

LORD WINDERMERE.  No; but because she knows that you are a good
woman--and that if she comes here once she will have a chance of a
happier, a surer life than she has had.  She will make no further
effort to know you.  Won't you help a woman who is trying to get
back?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!  If a woman really repents, she never wishes
to return to the society that has made or seen her ruin.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I beg of you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Crossing to door R.]  I am going to dress for
dinner, and don't mention the subject again this evening.  Arthur
[going to him C.], you fancy because I have no father or mother
that I am alone in the world, and that you can treat me as you
choose.  You are wrong, I have friends, many friends.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [L.C.]  Margaret, you are talking foolishly,
recklessly.  I won't argue with you, but I insist upon your asking
Mrs. Erlynne to-night.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [R.C.]  I shall do nothing of the kind.
[Crossing L. C.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  You refuse?  [C.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Absolutely!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Ah, Margaret, do this for my sake; it is her last
chance.

LADY WINDERMERE.  What has that to do with me?

LORD WINDERMERE.  How hard good women are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  How weak bad men are!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, none of us men may be good enough for
the women we marry--that is quite true--but you don't imagine I
would ever--oh, the suggestion is monstrous!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why should YOU be different from other men?  I am
told that there is hardly a husband in London who does not waste
his life over SOME shameful passion.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am not one of them.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not sure of that!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are sure in your heart.  But don't make chasm
after chasm between us.  God knows the last few minutes have thrust
us wide enough apart.  Sit down and write the card.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Nothing in the whole world would induce me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [Crossing to bureau.]  Then I will!  [Rings
electric bell, sits and writes card.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are going to invite this woman?  [Crossing to
him.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [Pause.  Enter PARKER.]  Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lord.  [Comes down L.C.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have this note sent to Mrs. Erlynne at No. 84A
Curzon Street.  [Crossing to L.C. and giving note to PARKER.]
There is no answer!

[Exit PARKER C.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, if that woman comes here, I shall insult
her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, don't say that.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I mean it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Child, if you did such a thing, there's not a
woman in London who wouldn't pity you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  There is not a GOOD woman in London who would not
applaud me.  We have been too lax.  We must make an example.  I
propose to begin to-night.  [Picking up fan.]  Yes, you gave me
this fan to-day; it was your birthday present.  If that woman
crosses my threshold, I shall strike her across the face with it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you couldn't do such a thing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You don't know me!  [Moves R.]

[Enter PARKER.]

Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I shall dine in my own room.  I don't want
dinner, in fact.  See that everything is ready by half-past ten.
And, Parker, be sure you pronounce the names of the guests very
distinctly to-night.  Sometimes you speak so fast that I miss them.
I am particularly anxious to hear the names quite clearly, so as to
make no mistake.  You understand, Parker?

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  That will do!

[Exit PARKER C.]

[Speaking to LORD WINDERMERE]  Arthur, if that woman comes here--I
warn you -

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you'll ruin us!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Us!  From this moment my life is separate from
yours.  But if you wish to avoid a public scandal, write at once to
this woman, and tell her that I forbid her to come here!

LORD WINDERMERE.  I will not--I cannot--she must come!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Then I shall do exactly as I have said.  [Goes
R.]  You leave me no choice.  [Exit R.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [Calling after her.]  Margaret!  Margaret!  [A
pause.]  My God!  What shall I do?  I dare not tell her who this
woman really is.  The shame would kill her.  [Sinks down into a
chair and buries his face in his hands.]

ACT DROP


SECOND ACT


SCENE

Drawing-room in Lord Windermere's house.  Door R.U. opening into
ball-room, where band is playing.  Door L. through which guests are
entering.  Door L.U. opens on to illuminated terrace.  Palms,
flowers, and brilliant lights.  Room crowded with guests.  Lady
Windermere is receiving them.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [Up C.]  So strange Lord Windermere isn't
here.  Mr. Hopper is very late, too.  You have kept those five
dances for him, Agatha?  [Comes down.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [Sitting on sofa.]  Just let me see your card.
I'm so glad Lady Windermere has revived cards.--They're a mother's
only safeguard.  You dear simple little thing!  [Scratches out two
names.]  No nice girl should ever waltz with such particularly
younger sons!  It looks so fast!  The last two dances you might
pass on the terrace with Mr. Hopper.

[Enter MR. DUMBY and LADY PLYMDALE from the ball-room.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [Fanning herself.]  The air is so pleasant
there.

PARKER.  Mrs. Cowper-Cowper.  Lady Stutfield.  Sir James Royston.
Mr. Guy Berkeley.

[These people enter as announced.]

DUMBY.  Good evening, Lady Stutfield.  I suppose this will be the
last ball of the season?

LADY STUTFIELD.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It's been a delightful
season, hasn't it?

DUMBY.  Quite delightful!  Good evening, Duchess.  I suppose this
will be the last ball of the season?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It has been a very
dull season, hasn't it?

DUMBY.  Dreadfully dull!  Dreadfully dull!

MR. COWPER-COWPER.  Good evening, Mr. Dumby.  I suppose this will
be the last ball of the season?

DUMBY.  Oh, I think not.  There'll probably be two more.  [Wanders
back to LADY PLYMDALE.]

PARKER.  Mr. Rufford.  Lady Jedburgh and Miss Graham.  Mr. Hopper.

[These people enter as announced.]

HOPPER.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  How do you do, Duchess?
[Bows to LADY AGATHA.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Mr. Hopper, how nice of you to come so
early.  We all know how you are run after in London.

HOPPER.  Capital place, London!  They are not nearly so exclusive
in London as they are in Sydney.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah! we know your value, Mr. Hopper.  We wish
there were more like you.  It would make life so much easier.  Do
you know, Mr. Hopper, dear Agatha and I are so much interested in
Australia.  It must be so pretty with all the dear little kangaroos
flying about.  Agatha has found it on the map.  What a curious
shape it is!  Just like a large packing case.  However, it is a
very young country, isn't it?

HOPPER.  Wasn't it made at the same time as the others, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  How clever you are, Mr. Hopper.  You have a
cleverness quite of your own.  Now I mustn't keep you.

HOPPER.  But I should like to dance with Lady Agatha, Duchess.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Well, I hope she has a dance left.  Have you a
dance left, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  The next one?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

HOPPER.  May I have the pleasure?  [LADY AGATHA bows.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Mind you take great care of my little
chatterbox, Mr. Hopper.

[LADY AGATHA and MR. HOPPER pass into ball-room.]

[Enter LORD WINDERMERE.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I want to speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  In a moment.  [The music drops.]

PARKER.  Lord Augustus Lorton.

[Enter LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Good evening, Lady Windermere.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Sir James, will you take me into the ball-
room?  Augustus has been dining with us to-night.  I really have
had quite enough of dear Augustus for the moment.

[SIR JAMES ROYSTON gives the DUCHESS his aim and escorts her into
the ball-room.]

PARKER.  Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Bowden.  Lord and Lady Paisley.  Lord
Darlington.

[These people enter as announced.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [Coming up to LORD WINDERMERE.]  Want to speak to
you particularly, dear boy.  I'm worn to a shadow.  Know I don't
look it.  None of us men do look what we really are.  Demmed good
thing, too.  What I want to know is this.  Who is she?  Where does
she come from?  Why hasn't she got any demmed relations?  Demmed
nuisance, relations!  But they make one so demmed respectable.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are talking of Mrs. Erlynne, I suppose?  I
only met her six months ago.  Till then, I never knew of her
existence.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You have seen a good deal of her since then.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [Coldly.]  Yes, I have seen a good deal of her
since then.  I have just seen her.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Egad! the women are very down on her.  I have been
dining with Arabella this evening!  By Jove! you should have heard
what she said about Mrs. Erlynne.  She didn't leave a rag on her.
. . [Aside.]  Berwick and I told her that didn't matter much, as
the lady in question must have an extremely fine figure.  You
should have seen Arabella's expression! . . . But, look here, dear
boy.  I don't know what to do about Mrs. Erlynne.  Egad!  I might
be married to her; she treats me with such demmed indifference.
She's deuced clever, too!  She explains everything.  Egad! she
explains you.  She has got any amount of explanations for you--and
all of them different.

LORD WINDERMERE.  No explanations are necessary about my friendship
with Mrs. Erlynne.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Hem!  Well, look here, dear old fellow.  Do you
think she will ever get into this demmed thing called Society?
Would you introduce her to your wife?  No use beating about the
confounded bush.  Would you do that?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here to-night.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Your wife has sent her a card?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne has received a card.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Then she's all right, dear boy.  But why didn't you
tell me that before?  It would have saved me a heap of worry and
demmed misunderstandings!

[LADY AGATHA and MR. HOPPER cross and exit on terrace L.U.E.]

PARKER.  Mr. Cecil Graham!

[Enter MR. CECIL GRAHAM.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  [Bows to LADY WINDERMERE, passes over and shakes
hands with LORD WINDERMERE.]  Good evening, Arthur.  Why don't you
ask me how I am?  I like people to ask me how I am.  It shows a
wide-spread interest in my health.  Now, to-night I am not at all
well.  Been dining with my people.  Wonder why it is one's people
are always so tedious?  My father would talk morality after dinner.
I told him he was old enough to know better.  But my experience is
that as soon as people are old enough to know better, they don't
know anything at all.  Hallo, Tuppy!  Hear you're going to be
married again; thought you were tired of that game.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You're excessively trivial, my dear boy,
excessively trivial!

CECIL GRAHAM.  By the way, Tuppy, which is it?  Have you been twice
married and once divorced, or twice divorced and once married?  I
say you've been twice divorced and once married.  It seems so much
more probable.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  I have a very bad memory.  I really don't remember
which.  [Moves away R.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  Lord Windermere, I've something most particular to
ask you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am afraid--if you will excuse me--I must join
my wife.

LADY PLYMDALE.  Oh, you mustn't dream of such a thing.  It's most
dangerous nowadays for a husband to pay any attention to his wife
in public.  It always makes people think that he beats her when
they're alone.  The world has grown so suspicious of anything that
looks like a happy married life.  But I'll tell you what it is at
supper.  [Moves towards door of ball-room.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [C.]  Margaret!  I MUST speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Will you hold my fan for me, Lord Darlington?
Thanks.  [Comes down to him.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [Crossing to her.]  Margaret, what you said
before dinner was, of course, impossible?

LADY WINDERMERE.  That woman is not coming here to-night!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [R.C.]  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here, and if you
in any way annoy or wound her, you will bring shame and sorrow on
us both.  Remember that!  Ah, Margaret! only trust me!  A wife
should trust her husband!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [C.]  London is full of women who trust their
husbands.  One can always recognise them.  They look so thoroughly
unhappy.  I am not going to be one of them.  [Moves up.]  Lord
Darlington, will you give me back my fan, please?  Thanks. . . . A
useful thing a fan, isn't it? . . . I want a friend to-night, Lord
Darlington:  I didn't know I would want one so soon.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Lady Windermere!  I knew the time would come some
day; but why to-night?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I WILL tell her.  I must.  It would be terrible
if there were any scene.  Margaret . . .

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne!

[LORD WINDERMERE starts.  MRS. ERLYNNE enters, very beautifully
dressed and very dignified.  LADY WINDERMERE clutches at her fan,
then lets it drop on the door.  She bows coldly to MRS. ERLYNNE,
who bows to her sweetly in turn, and sails into the room.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You have dropped your fan, Lady Windermere.
[Picks it up and hands it to her.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [C.]  How do you do, again, Lord Windermere?  How
charming your sweet wife looks!  Quite a picture!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [In a low voice.]  It was terribly rash of you to
come!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Smiling.]  The wisest thing I ever did in my life.
And, by the way, you must pay me a good deal of attention this
evening.  I am afraid of the women.  You must introduce me to some
of them.  The men I can always manage.  How do you do, Lord
Augustus?  You have quite neglected me lately.  I have not seen you
since yesterday.  I am afraid you're faithless.  Every one told me
so.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [R.]  Now really, Mrs. Erlynne, allow me to
explain.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [R.C.]  No, dear Lord Augustus, you can't explain
anything.  It is your chief charm.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Ah! if you find charms in me, Mrs. Erlynne -

[They converse together.  LORD WINDERMERE moves uneasily about the
room watching MRS. ERLYNNE.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [To LADY WINDERMERE.]  How pale you are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Cowards are always pale!

LORD DARLINGTON.  You look faint.  Come out on the terrace.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [To PARKER.]  Parker, send my cloak out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Crossing to her.]  Lady Windermere, how beautifully
your terrace is illuminated.  Reminds me of Prince Doria's at Rome.

[LADY WINDERMERE bows coldly, and goes off with LORD DARLINGTON.]

Oh, how do you do, Mr. Graham?  Isn't that your aunt, Lady
Jedburgh?  I should so much like to know her.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [After a moment's hesitation and embarrassment.]
Oh, certainly, if you wish it.  Aunt Caroline, allow me to
introduce Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So pleased to meet you, Lady Jedburgh.  [Sits beside
her on the sofa.]  Your nephew and I are great friends.  I am so
much interested in his political career.  I think he's sure to be a
wonderful success.  He thinks like a Tory, and talks like a
Radical, and that's so important nowadays.  He's such a brilliant
talker, too.  But we all know from whom he inherits that.  Lord
Allandale was saying to me only yesterday, in the Park, that Mr.
Graham talks almost as well as his aunt.

LADY JEDBURGH.  [R.]  Most kind of you to say these charming things
to me!  [MRS.  ERLYNNE smiles, and continues conversation.]

DUMBY.  [To CECIL GRAHAM.]  Did you introduce Mrs. Erlynne to Lady
Jedburgh?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Had to, my dear fellow.  Couldn't help it!  That
woman can make one do anything she wants.  How, I don't know.

DUMBY.  Hope to goodness she won't speak to me!  [Saunters towards
LADY PLYMDALE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [C.  To LADY JEDBURGH.]  On Thursday?  With great
pleasure.  [Rises, and speaks to LORD WINDERMERE, laughing.]  What
a bore it is to have to be civil to these old dowagers!  But they
always insist on it!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [To MR. DUMBY.]  Who is that well-dressed woman
talking to Windermere?

DUMBY.  Haven't got the slightest idea!  Looks like an edition de
luxe of a wicked French novel, meant specially for the English
market.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So that is poor Dumby with Lady Plymdale?  I hear
she is frightfully jealous of him.  He doesn't seem anxious to
speak to me to-night.  I suppose he is afraid of her.  Those straw-
coloured women have dreadful tempers.  Do you know, I think I'll
dance with you first, Windermere.  [LORD WINDERMERE bits his lip
and frowns.]  It will make Lord Augustus so jealous!  Lord
Augustus!  [LORD AUGUSTUS comes down.]  Lord Windermere insists on
my dancing with him first, and, as it's his own house, I can't well
refuse.  You know I would much sooner dance with you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [With a low bow.]  I wish I could think so, Mrs.
Erlynne.

MRS ERLYNNE.  You know it far too well.  I can fancy a person
dancing through life with you and finding it charming.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [Placing his hand on his white waistcoat.]  Oh,
thank you, thank you.  You are the most adorable of all ladies!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  What a nice speech!  So simple and so sincere!  Just
the sort of speech I like.  Well, you shall hold my bouquet.  [Goes
towards ball-room on LORD WINDERMERE'S arm.]  Ah, Mr. Dumby, how
are you?  I am so sorry I have been out the last three times you
have called.  Come and lunch on Friday.

DUMBY.  [With perfect nonchalance.]  Delighted!

[LADY PLYMDALE glares with indignation at MR. DUMBY.  LORD AUGUSTUS
follows MRS. ERLYNNE and LORD WINDERMERE into the ball-room holding
bouquet]

LADY PLYMDALE.  [To MR. DUMBY.]  What an absolute brute you are!  I
never can believe a word you say!  Why did you tell me you didn't
know her?  What do you mean by calling on her three times running?
You are not to go to lunch there; of course you understand that?

DUMBY.  My dear Laura, I wouldn't dream of going!

LADY PLYMDALE.  You haven't told me her name yet!  Who is she?

DUMBY.  [Coughs slightly and smooths his hair.]  She's a Mrs.
Erlynne.

LADY PLYMDALE.  That woman!

DUMBY.  Yes; that is what every one calls her.

LADY PLYMDALE.  How very interesting!  How intensely interesting!
I really must have a good stare at her.  [Goes to door of ball-room
and looks in.]  I have heard the most shocking things about her.
They say she is ruining poor Windermere.  And Lady Windermere, who
goes in for being so proper, invites her!  How extremely amusing!
It takes a thoroughly good woman to do a thoroughly stupid thing.
You are to lunch there on Friday!

DUMBY.  Why?

LADY PLYMDALE.  Because I want you to take my husband with you.  He
has been so attentive lately, that he has become a perfect
nuisance.  Now, this woman is just the thing for him.  He'll dance
attendance upon her as long as she lets him, and won't bother me.
I assure you, women of that kind are most useful.  They form the
basis of other people's marriages.

DUMBY.  What a mystery you are!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [Looking at him.]  I wish YOU were!

DUMBY.  I am--to myself.  I am the only person in the world I
should like to know thoroughly; but I don't see any chance of it
just at present.

[They pass into the ball-room, and LADY WINDERMERE and LORD
DARLINGTON enter from the terrace.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Her coming here is monstrous, unbearable.
I know now what you meant to-day at tea-time.  Why didn't you tell
me right out?  You should have!

LORD DARLINGTON.  I couldn't!  A man can't tell these things about
another man!  But if I had known he was going to make you ask her
here to-night, I think I would have told you.  That insult, at any
rate, you would have been spared.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I did not ask her.  He insisted on her coming--
against my entreaties--against my commands.  Oh! the house is
tainted for me!  I feel that every woman here sneers at me as she
dances by with my husband.  What have I done to deserve this?  I
gave him all my life.  He took it--used it--spoiled it!  I am
degraded in my own eyes; and I lack courage--I am a coward!  [Sits
down on sofa.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  If I know you at all, I know that you can't live
with a man who treats you like this!  What sort of life would you
have with him?  You would feel that he was lying to you every
moment of the day.  You would feel that the look in his eyes was
false, his voice false, his touch false, his passion false.  He
would come to you when he was weary of others; you would have to
comfort him.  He would come to you when he was devoted to others;
you would have to charm him.  You would have to be to him the mask
of his real life, the cloak to hide his secret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are right--you are terribly right.  But where
am I to turn?  You said you would be my friend, Lord Darlington.--
Tell me, what am I to do?  Be my friend now.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Between men and women there is no friendship
possible.  There is passion, enmity, worship, love, but no
friendship.  I love you -

LADY WINDERMERE.  No, no!  [Rises.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes, I love you!  You are more to me than
anything in the whole world.  What does your husband give you?
Nothing.  Whatever is in him he gives to this wretched woman, whom
he has thrust into your society, into your home, to shame you
before every one.  I offer you my life -

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington!

LORD DARLINGTON.  My life--my whole life.  Take it, and do with it
what you will. . . . I love you--love you as I have never loved any
living thing.  From the moment I met you I loved you, loved you
blindly, adoringly, madly!  You did not know it then--you know it
now!  Leave this house to-night.  I won't tell you that the world
matters nothing, or the world's voice, or the voice of society.
They matter a great deal.  They matter far too much.  But there are
moments when one has to choose between living one's own life,
fully, entirely, completely--or dragging out some false, shallow,
degrading existence that the world in its hypocrisy demands.  You
have that moment now.  Choose!  Oh, my love, choose.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Moving slowly away from him, and looking at him
with startled eyes.]  I have not the courage.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [Following her.]  Yes; you have the courage.
There may be six months of pain, of disgrace even, but when you no
longer bear his name, when you bear mine, all will be well.
Margaret, my love, my wife that shall be some day--yes, my wife!
You know it!  What are you now?  This woman has the place that
belongs by right to you.  Oh! go--go out of this house, with head
erect, with a smile upon your lips, with courage in your eyes.  All
London will know why you did it; and who will blame you?  No one.
If they do, what matter?  Wrong?  What is wrong?  It's wrong for a
man to abandon his wife for a shameless woman.  It is wrong for a
wife to remain with a man who so dishonours her.  You said once you
would make no compromise with things.  Make none now.  Be brave!
Be yourself!

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am afraid of being myself.  Let me think!  Let
me wait!  My husband may return to me.  [Sits down on sofa.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  And you would take him back!  You are not what I
thought you were.  You are just the same as every other woman.  You
would stand anything rather than face the censure of a world, whose
praise you would despise.  In a week you will be driving with this
woman in the Park.  She will be your constant guest--your dearest
friend.  You would endure anything rather than break with one blow
this monstrous tie.  You are right.  You have no courage; none!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Ah, give me time to think.  I cannot answer you
now.  [Passes her hand nervously over her brow.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  It must be now or not at all.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Rising from the sofa.]  Then, not at all!  [A
pause.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You break my heart!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mine is already broken.  [A pause.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  To-morrow I leave England.  This is the last time
I shall ever look on you.  You will never see me again.  For one
moment our lives met--our souls touched.  They must never meet or
touch again.  Good-bye, Margaret.  [Exit.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  How alone I am in life!  How terribly alone!

[The music stops.  Enter the DUCHESS OF BERWICK and LORD PAISLEY
laughing and talking.  Other guests come on from ball-room.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Margaret, I've just been having such a
delightful chat with Mrs. Erlynne.  I am so sorry for what I said
to you this afternoon about her.  Of course, she must be all right
if YOU invite her.  A most attractive woman, and has such sensible
views on life.  Told me she entirely disapproved of people marrying
more than once, so I feel quite safe about poor Augustus.  Can't
imagine why people speak against her.  It's those horrid nieces of
mine--the Saville girls--they're always talking scandal.  Still, I
should go to Homburg, dear, I really should.  She is just a little
too attractive.  But where is Agatha?  Oh, there she is:   [LADY
AGATHA and MR. HOPPER enter from terrace L.U.E.]  Mr. Hopper, I am
very, very angry with you.  You have taken Agatha out on the
terrace, and she is so delicate.

HOPPER.  Awfully sorry, Duchess.  We went out for a moment and then
got chatting together.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [C.]  Ah, about dear Australia, I suppose?

HOPPER.  Yes!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, darling!  [Beckons her over.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [Aside.]  Did Mr. Hopper definitely -

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  And what answer did you give him, dear child?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [Affectionately.]  My dear one!  You always
say the right thing.  Mr. Hopper!  James!  Agatha has told me
everything.  How cleverly you have both kept your secret.

HOPPER.  You don't mind my taking Agatha off to Australia, then,
Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [Indignantly.]  To Australia?  Oh, don't
mention that dreadful vulgar place.

HOPPER.  But she said she'd like to come with me.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [Severely.]  Did you say that, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, you say the most silly things
possible.  I think on the whole that Grosvenor Square would be a
more healthy place to reside in.  There are lots of vulgar people
live in Grosvenor Square, but at any rate there are no horrid
kangaroos crawling about.  But we'll talk about that to-morrow.
James, you can take Agatha down.  You'll come to lunch, of course,
James.  At half-past one, instead of two.  The Duke will wish to
say a few words to you, I am sure.

HOPPER.  I should like to have a chat with the Duke, Duchess.  He
has not said a single word to me yet.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I think you'll find he will have a great deal
to say to you to-morrow.  [Exit LADY AGATHA with MR. HOPPER.]  And
now good-night, Margaret.  I'm afraid it's the old, old story,
dear.  Love--well, not love at first sight, but love at the end of
the season, which is so much more satisfactory.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Good-night, Duchess.

[Exit the DUCHESS OF BERWICK on LORD PAISLEY'S arm.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  My dear Margaret, what a handsome woman your
husband has been dancing with!  I should be quite jealous if I were
you!  Is she a great friend of yours?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!

LADY PLYMDALE.  Really?  Good-night, dear.  [Looks at MR. DUMBY and
exit.]

