Critics have a good-natured way of stigmatizing, for the initiated, all
poetry that is not poetry, by saying that it is "elegant," "harmonious,"
or, worse than all, "descriptive." This last commonly means that the
author has done for his readers precisely what they could do for
themselves,--that he has made a catalogue of the natural objects to be
found in a certain number of acres, which differs from the literary
efforts of an auctioneer only in this, that each line begins with a
capital and contains the same number of syllables. He counts the number
of cabbages in a field, of cows in a pasture, and tells us how many
times a squirrel ran up (or down) a given tree in a given time. He
informs us that the bark of the shagbark is shaggy, that the
sleep-at-noon slumbers at mid-day, that moss is apt to grow on fallen
tree-trunks in damp places,--treats us as the old alchemists do, who
give us a list of the materials out of which gold (if it had any moral
sense) would at once consent to be made, but somehow won't,--and leaves
us impressed with that very dead certainty, that things are so-and-so,
which is the result of verses that are only so-so.

Readers of the "Atlantic" need not be told that Dr. Palmer is not a
descriptive poet of this fashion. They have known how to appreciate his
sketches of East Indian life, so vivid, picturesque, and imaginative
that they could make "Griffins" feel twinges of liver-complaint, and so
true that we have heard them pronounced "incomparable" by men familiar
with India. Dr. Palmer is no mere describer; he sees with the eye of a
poet, touches only what is characteristic, and, while he seems to
surrender himself wholly to the Circe Imagination, retains the polished
coolness of the man of the world, and the _brownness_ of the man of the
nineteenth century. He not only knows how to observe, but how to
write,--both of them accomplishments rare enough in an age when
everybody is ready to contract for their display by the column. His
style is nervous and original, not harassingly pointed like a
chestnut-burr, but full of _esprit_ or wit diffused,--that Gallic leaven
which pervades whole sentences and paragraphs with an indefinable
lightness and palatableness. It is a thoroughly American style, too, a
little over-indifferent to tradition and convention, but quite free of
the _sic-semper-tyrannis_ swagger. Uncle Bull, who is just like his
nephew in thinking that he has a divine right to the world's oyster,
cannot swallow it properly till he has donned a white choker, and
refuses to be comforted when Jonathan disposes of it in his rapid way
with the shell for a platter. We confess that we prefer the
free-and-easy manner in its proper place to the diplomatic way of always
treating the reader with sentiments of the highest consideration, and
like a book all the more for having an Occidental flavor.

But it is not merely or chiefly as being among the cleverest and
liveliest of modern light literature that we value Dr. Palmer's books.
They have a true poetic value, and instruct as much as they entertain.
While he is telling us a San Francisco story, the truth of the
accessories and the skill with which they are grouped bring the
California of 1849 before us with unmatched vividness. We have been
getting knowledge and learning a deep moral without suspecting it, as if
by our own observation and experience. In the same way "Asirvadam the
Brahmin" is a prose poem that lets us into the secret of the Indian
revolt. It is seldom that we meet with volumes of more real power than
these, or whose force is so artistically masked under ease and
playfulness. We prefer the "Old" part of the book to the "New." It seems
to us to show a better style of handling. There is something of
melodrama in the style of the California stories,--a flavor of blue
lights and burnt cork. At the same time, we must admit that there is a
melodramatic taint in our American life:--witness the Sickles vulgarity.
Young America is _b'hoyish_ rather than boyish, and perhaps the "New"
may be all the truer to Nature for what we dislike in it.

"The New and the Old" is fittingly dedicated to the Autocrat of all the
Breakfast-Tables, than whom no man has done more to demonstrate that wit
and mirth are not incompatible with seriousness of purpose and
incisiveness of thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Napoleonic Ideas_. By Prince NAPOLEON LOUIS BONAPARTE. Translated by
JAMES A. DORR. New York: D. Appleton & Company. 1859.

This publication has at least that merit which is one of the first in
literature,--it is timely. Though we look upon the Emperor of the French
as a kind of imperial Jonathan Wild, it does not the less concern us to
make a true estimate of his intellectual capacity. Nothing is more
unwise than to assume that a man's brain must be limited because his
moral sense is small; yet no mistake is more common. Napoleon the Third
may play an important part in History, though by no possibility an
heroic one. In reading this little volume, one cannot fail to be struck
with the presence of mind and the absence of heart of which it gives
evidence. It is the advertisement of a charlatan, whose sole inheritance
is the right to manufacture the Napoleonic pill, and we read with
unavoidable distrust the vouchers of its wonderful efficacy. We do not
fancy the Bonapartist grape-cure, nor believe in it.

Mr. Dorr's translation is excellent. He understands French, and is able
to do it into English elegantly and accurately without any trace of
foreign idiom. This is no easy thing; for our general experience has
been that translators read French like Englishmen and write English like
Frenchmen.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Country Life_. By R. MORRIS COPELAND. Boston: John P. Jewett & Company.
1859.

In an article on "Farming Life in New England," published in a former
volume of the "Atlantic," a valued contributor drew attention to the
painful lack of beauty in the lives and homes of our rural population.
Some attempts were made to show that his statements were exaggerated;
but we are satisfied that they were true in all essential particulars.
The abolition of entails, (however wise in itself,) and the consequent
subdivision of estates, will always put country life, in the English
sense of the words, out of the question here. Our houses will continue
to be tents; trees, without ancestral associations, will be valued by
the cord; and that cumulative charm, the slow result of associations, of
the hereditary taste of many generations, must always be wanting. Age is
one of the prime elements of natural beauty; but among us the love of
what is new so predominates, that we have known the largest oak in a
county to be cut down by the selectmen to make room for a shanty
schoolhouse, simply because the tree was of "no account," being hollow
and gnarled, and otherwise delightfully picturesque. Our people are
singularly dead also to the value of beauty in public architecture; and
while they clear away a tree which the seasons have been two centuries
in building, they will put up with as little remorse a stone or brick
abomination that shall be a waking nightmare for a couple of centuries
to come. But selectmen are not chosen with reference to their knowledge
of Price or Ruskin.

Mr. Copeland's book is specially adapted to the conditions of a
community like ours. Its title might have been "Rural Æsthetics for Men
of Limited Means, or the Laws of Beauty considered in their Application
to Small Estates." It is a volume happily conceived and happily
executed, and meets a palpable and increasing want of our civilization.
Whatever adds grace to the daily lives of a people, and awakens in them
a perception of the beauty of outward Nature and its healthful reaction
on the nature of man,--whatever tends to make toil unsordid, and to put
it in relations of intelligent sympathy with the beautiful progression
of the seasons,--adds incalculably to the wealth of a country, though
the increase may not appear in the Report of the Secretary of the
Interior.

Mr. Copeland's volume is calculated to do this, and his own
qualifications for the task he has undertaken are manifold. Chief among
them we should reckon a true enthusiasm for the cause he advocates, and
a hearty delight in out-of-doors-life. He writes with the zeal and
warmth of a reformer; but these are tempered by practical knowledge, and
such a respect for the useful as will not sacrifice it to the merely
pretty. His volume contains not only suggestions in landscape-gardening,
guided always by the true principle of making Nature our ally rather
than attempting to subdue her, but minute directions for the greenhouse,
grapery, conservatory, farm, and kitchen-garden. One may learn from it
how to plant whatever grows, and to care for it afterwards. Engravings
and plans make clear whatever needs illustration. The book has also the
special merit of _not_ being adapted to the meridian of Greenwich.

We do not always agree with Mr. Copeland; we dissent especially from his
prejudice against the noble horsechestnut-tree, with its grand
thunder-cloud of foliage, its bee-haunted cones of bloom, and its
polished fruit so uselessly useful to children,--Bushy Park is answer
enough on that score; but we cordially appreciate his taste and ability.
His book will justify a warm commendation. It is laid out on true
principles of landscape-farming. The stiff and square economical details
are relieved by passages of great beauty and picturesqueness. The
cockney who owns a snoring-privilege in the suburbs will be stimulated
to a sense of latent beauty in clouds and fields; and the farmer who
looks on the cosmic forces as mere motive-power for the wheels of his
money-mill will find the truth of the proverb, that more water runs over
the dam than the miller wots of, and learn that Nature is as lavish of
Beauty as she is frugal in Use. Even to the editor, whose only fields
are those of literature, and whose only leaves grow from a
composing-stick, the advent of a book like this is refreshing. It
enables him to lay out with a judicious economy the gardens attached to
his Spanish manor-houses, and to do his farming without risk of loss, in
the most charming way of all, (especially in July weather,)--by proxy.
Without leaving our study, we have already raised some astonishing
prize-vegetables, and our fat cattle have been approvingly mentioned in
the committee's report. We have found an afternoon's reading in Mr.
Copeland's book almost as good as owning that "place in the country"
which almost all men dream of as an ideal to be realized whenever their
visionary ship comes in.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Life in New York_. By JONATHAN SLICK. Philadelphia: Peterson &
Brothers.

The advantages of a favorable introduction are very obvious. A person
who enters society fortified with eulogistic letters, giving assurance
of his trustworthiness, so far as respectability and good behavior are
concerned, is tolerably sure of a comfortable reception. But if, unable
to sustain the character his credentials ascribe to him, he immediately
begin to display bad manners, ignorance, and folly, he not only forfeits
the position to which he has gained accidental access, but also brings
discredit upon his too hasty indorser.

In literature it is not different. The collection of printed matter
which appears under the title of "High Life in New York" is accompanied
by a note, signed by the publishers, who are naturally supposed to know
something of the real value of the works they issue, in which "editors
are forewarned that it is a volume which, for downright drollery and
hearty humor, has never had its equal in the productions of any American
pen," and are otherwise admonished in various ways calculated to inspire
lofty expectations, and to fill the mind with exalted visions of coming
joy. But when it appears, on examination, that the book is as utterly
unworthy of these elaborate commendations as any book can possibly
be,--that it is from beginning to end nothing but a dead level of
stagnant verbiage, a desolate waste of dreary platitude,--the reader
cannot but regard the publishers' ardent expressions of approbation as
going quite beyond the license allowable in preliminary puffs.

"High Life in New York" represents a class of publications which has, of
late, in many ways, been set before the public with too great
liberality. The sole object seems to be to exhibit the "Yankee"
character in its traditional deformities of stupidity and
meanness,--otherwise denominated simplicity and shrewdness. Mr. Jonathan
Slick is in no respect different from the ordinary fabulous Yankee. An
illiterate clown he is, who, visiting New York, contrives by vice of
impudence, to interfere very seriously with certain conventionalities of
the metropolis. He overthrows, by his indomitable will, a great many
social follies. He eats soup with a knife and fork; wears no more than
one shirt a week; forces his way into ladies' chambers at unseemly
hours, to cure them of timidity; and introduces sundry other reforms,
all of which are recorded as evidences of glorious independence and a
true nobility of spirit. Sometimes he goes farther,--farther than we
care to follow him. It would be easy to show wherein he is offensive,
not to say disgusting; but we are not so disposed. It is not considered
necessary for the traveller who has dragged his way over a muddy road to
prove the nastiness of his pilgrimage by imparting the stain to our
carpets.

In this book, as in most of its class, the Yankee dialect is employed
throughout, the author evidently believing that bad spelling and bad
grammar are the legitimate sources of New England humor. This shows that
he mistakes means for ends,--just as one who supposes that Mr. Merryman,
in the circus, must, of necessity, be funny, because he wears the motley
and his nose is painted red. The Yankee dialect is Mr. Jonathan Slick's
principal element of wit; his second is the onion. The book is redolent
of onions. That odorous vegetable breathes from every page. A woman
weeps, and onions are invoked to lend aromatic fragrance to a stale
comparison. In one place, onions and education are woven together by
some extraordinary rhetorical machinery; in another, religion is
glorified through the medium of the onion; until at last the narrative
seems to resolve itself into a nauseating nightmare, such as might
torture the brain of some unhappy dreamer in a bed of onions.

Why such works are ever written at all, it is difficult to imagine; but
how it is, that, when written, they find publishers, is inconceivable.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Great Auction-Sale of Slaves, at Savannah, Georgia_. New York:
Published by the American Anti-Slavery Society.

This little pamphlet, reprinted from the columns of the "New York
Tribune," possesses a double interest. It furnishes the best and most
minute description of an auction-sale of slaves that has ever been
published; and it admirably illustrates the enterprise and prompt energy
which often distinguish the journalism of America above that of any
other country.

The slave-sale of which it is a record took place on the second and
third days of March last, in the city of Savannah. For many reasons, it
had been looked forward to with more than usual interest. The position
of the owner, Mr. Pierce M. Butler, of Philadelphia, and the large
number (no less than four hundred and thirty-six) and superior quality
of the human chattels offered for sale, added to the importance of the
event. The "Tribune" had one of its best descriptive writers, Mr.
Mortimer Thomson, on the spot. The duty Mr. Thomson undertook was not
without danger; for a somewhat extensive notoriety as an _attaché_ of
the "Tribune" was not likely to insure him the most cordial reception at
the South. Had his presence been discovered, the temper of the people of
Savannah would speedily have betrayed itself; and had his purpose been
suspected, their wrath would assuredly have culminated in wreakages of a
nature unfavorable to his personal comfort. But with caution, and the
aid of Masonic influences, he escaped detection, and accomplished his
aim. The result of his observations was a report of considerable length,
in which every striking incident of the sale was narrated with accurate
fidelity. Although written mostly on the rail and against time, under
circumstances which would be fatal to the labors of any man not inured
by newspaper experience to all sorts of literary hardships, the style is
clear, distinct, and often eloquent. The scene and the transaction are
brought vividly to the reader's mind. The throng of eager
speculators,--the heavy-eyed and brutal drivers,--the sprightlier
representatives of Chivalry,--the unhappy slaves, abandoning hope as
they enter the mart, excepting in rare cases, where, grasping at straws,
they pray in trembling tones that their ties of love may remain
unsevered,--the operations of the sale,--the shrinking women, standing
submissively under the vile jests of the reckless crowd,--are portrayed
with all the emphasis of truth. One little episode in particular, the
love-story of Jeffrey and Dorcas, is a more affecting history than
romance can show.

The effect of this publication in the "Tribune" was prodigious. It was
widely circulated through all the journals of the North. The
Anti-Slavery Society preserved it in a pamphlet. The ire of a good
portion of the Southern journals was ludicrous to witness, and proved
how keenly the blow was felt. The report was republished in Great
Britain,--first in the London "Times," and subsequently, as a pamphlet,
in Edinburgh, in Glasgow, and in Belfast. In one publisher's
announcement, at least, it was advertised as "Greeley's Account of the
Great Slave-Sale."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Popular Tales from the Norse_. By GEORGE WEBBE DASENT, D.C.L. With an
Introductory Essay on the Origin and Diffusion of Popular Tales. New
York: D. Appleton & Co. 12mo. pp. lxix., 379.

The tales of which this volume presents the first English
translation--though, as regards some of them, hardly the first English
version--appear to have been collected about twenty or twenty-five years
ago. Two gentlemen, Messrs. Asbjörnsen and Moe, (the name of the first
of whom begets much confidence in his ability for the task,) went out
among the most unlettered and rudest of the common folk of Norway and
Sweden, and there, from the lips of old women and little children,
gathered these stories of the antique time. Of what age the stories are,
nobody knows,--those who listened to them in their childhood, to relate
them in turn in their declining years, least perhaps of all. For they
are a part of the inheritance common to all the races that have sprung
from the Asiatic ancestor, who, at periods the nearest of which is far
beyond the ken of history, and at intervals of centuries, sent off
descendants to find a resting-place in Europe; and it is one great
object, if not the principal object, of the original collectors and the
translator of these tales to exhibit in them a bond of union among all
European peoples.

Indeed, the tales in their present form may be regarded as examples in
point appended to the translator's Essay which opens the volume. For
they will add little to our stock of available stories, for either
youthful or adult reading. The best of them already are a part of our
nursery lore, and are known to the English race under forms better
adapted to English taste and sympathies than those under which they are
here presented; and nearly all of those that are exceptions to this
remark are unfitted for "home consumption," either by the objectionable
nature of their subjects, by the still more objectionable tendency of
their teaching, or by a yet more fatal demerit,--their lack of interest.
They are in some respects notably tame and puerile,--with a puerility
which is not childish simplicity, but a lack of inventive fancy, and
which exhibits itself in bald repetition. The giant, for instance,
always complains of a smell of Christian blood, and is always answered
by the formula, that a crow flew over the chimney and must have dropped
a bone down it; the hero almost always meets three old women, or three
Trolls, or three enchanted beasts or birds, of whom he in that case
always asks the same questions, receiving the same replies, _verbatim_.
There is a reason for this sameness, which is indicative of the rude
condition of the people among whom the tales have been perpetuated; but
the sameness palls none the less upon more cultivated minds. Mr. Dasent
characterizes these people as "an honest and manly race,--not the race
of the towns and cities, but of the dales and fells, free and unsubdued,
holding its own in a country where there are neither lords nor ladies,
but simple men and women. Brave men and fair women," etc. (p. lxviii.)
And he says of the tales, that in no other collection is "the general
tone so chaste, are the great principles of morality better worked out,
and right and wrong kept so steadily in sight." (p. lxii.) We cannot
agree with him in this appreciation of the moral tone of the stories,
many of which certainly speak ill for the honesty and manliness of the
race among which they have been for centuries cherished
household-treasures. For in a large proportion of those that have a
successful hero, he obtains his success either by lying or some kind of
deceit or treachery, by stealing, or by imposing upon the credulity or
feebleness of age; and of those in which the hero is himself victorious
over oppression, we are not able to recollect one which exhibits the
beauty of moderation and magnanimity, not to say of Christian charity
and forgiveness. Mr. Dasent mentions it as an admirable trait of the
tales, that, "in the midst of every difficulty and danger, arises that
old Norse feeling of making the best of everything and keeping a good
face to the foe." Certainly the heroes of these tales do make the best
of everything, but they are not at all scrupulous as to their way of
making it; and they do also keep a good face to the foe, when (often by
craft, theft, or violence) they have obtained some implement or other
gift of supernatural power which places their opponents entirely at
their mercy and with no risk to themselves. But of a manful contest on
equal terms, or of a victory obtained over tyrannous power by a union of
patience, boldness, and honest skill, or even by undegrading stratagem,
the collection affords no instance that we remember.

