"Only information," she said, leading the way into the drawing-room.
"Hallo, what's this? A fire!"

"A small involuntary contribution from the office. I brought it home
under my hat. Well, what's the news?"

"That if we want any coal we shall have to fetch it ourselves. And we
can get it in small amounts from greengrocers. Why greengrocers, I don't
know."

"I suppose they have to have fires to force the cabbages. But what about
the striking coal-porters? If you do their job, won't they picket you or
pick-axe you or something?"

"Oh, of course, I should hate to go alone. But I shall be all right if
you come with me."

Celia's faith in me is very touching. I am not quite so confident about
myself. No doubt I could protect her easily against five or six great
brawny hulking porters ... armed with coal-hammers ... but I am
seriously doubtful whether a dozen or so, aided with a little luck,
mightn't get the better of me.

"Don't let us be rash," I said thoughtfully. "Don't let us infuriate
them."

"You aren't afraid of a striker?" asked Celia in amazement.

"Of an ordinary striker, no. In a strike of bank-clerks, or--or
chess-players, or professional skeletons, I should be a lion among the
blacklegs; but there is something about the very word coal-porter
which----You know, I really think this is a case where the British Army
might help us. We have been very good to it."

The British Army, I should explain, has been walking out with Jane
lately. When we go away for week-ends we let the British Army drop in to
supper. Luckily it neither smokes nor drinks nor takes any great
interest in books. It is a great relief, on your week-ends in the
country, to _know_ that the British Army is dropping in to supper, when
otherwise you might only have suspected it. I may say that we are rather
hoping to get a position in the Army Recruiting film on the strength of
this hospitality.

"Let the British Army go," I said. "We've been very kind to him."

"I fancy Jane has left the service. I don't know why."

"Probably they quarrelled because she gave him caviare two nights
running," I said. "Well, I suppose I shall have to go. But it will be no
place for women. To-morrow after-noon I will sally forth alone to do it.
But," I added, "I shall probably return with two coal-porters clinging
round my neck. Order tea for three."

Next evening, after a warm and busy day at the office, I put on my
top-hat and tail coat and went out. If there was any accident I was
determined to be described in the papers as "the body of a well-dressed
man." To go down to history as "the body of a shabbily-dressed
individual" would be too depressing. Beautifully clothed, I jumped into
a taxi and drove to Celia's greengrocer. Celia herself was keeping warm
by paying still more calls.

"I want," I said nervously, "a hundredweight of coal and a cauliflower."
This was my own idea. I intended to place the cauliflower on the top of
a sack, and so to deceive any too-inquisitive coal-porter. "No, no," I
should say, "not coal; nice cauliflowers for Sunday's dinner."

"Can't deliver the coal," said the greengrocer.

"I'm going to take it with me," I explained.

He went round to a yard at the back. I motioned my taxi along and
followed him at the head of three small boys who had never seen a
top-hat and a cauliflower so close together. We got the sack into
position.

"Come, come," I said to the driver, "haven't you ever seen a
dressing-case before? Give us a hand with it or I shall miss my train
and be late for dinner."

He grinned and gave a hand. I paid the greengrocer, pressed the
cauliflower into the hand of the smallest boy, and drove off....

It was absurdly easy.

There was no gore at all.

"There!" I said to Celia when she came back. "And when that's done I'll
get you some more."

"Hooray! And yet," she went on, "I'm almost sorry. You see, I was
working off my calls so nicely, and you'd been having some quite busy
days at the office, hadn't you?"

A. A. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: This is not a cloak-room but the lounge of a fashionable
London hotel.]

       *       *       *       *       *

OLYMPIC TALENT.

(A topical fantasy suggested by the decay of our athletic prowess and
the apparent apathy of the nation as to the fate that may befall it in
the international contest of 1916.)

  My England, so the chance has fled!
    Olympian years to come shall knot not
  The athlete's guerdon for thy head
    But crown the wigs of Serbs and what not.

  There were who sought thy shame to shield
    From men that mocked the sea-kings' fibres
  By opening funds, but these appealed
    To singularly few subscribers.

  "A trifling hundred thou.," they wrote,
    "To ease the joints and stiffening sockets."
  The public acted like a goat,
    They kept the cash inside their pockets.

  So mused I sadly; and since new
    Sensations oft from grief can jerk us
  I went to see the "Wonder Zoo,"
    Herr HAGENBECK's surprising circus.

  There where the Model Homes were built
    That left some while ago the bard bored
  I watched the Nubian lions wilt
    In imitation lairs of cardboard.

  And sudden, whilst I saw them roll--
    Those monster cats--beyond their ha-ha,
  A solace came into my soul,
    I murmured _sotto voce_, "Aha!

  "If but yon sunken fence were filled,
    So that these grim-faced brutes might cross it,
  Are there no athletes here undrilled,
    Veiled by their adipose deposit?

  "In slothful ease Britannia shirks;
    But haply, near these sundering ditches,
  Some mute inglorious miler lurks
    Under a morning coat and breeches.

  "Oh, if the gulf were bridged! What late,
    What all undreamed-of hurdle-winners
  Might blossom from a natural hate
    Of forming parts of feline dinners?

  "Yes, even I, the motley fool,
    Starting from scratch and willy nilly
  Might prove it needs no Yankee school
    To knock the level hundred silly.

  "The gymnast's art should all be mine
    As, clambering from the scene of pillage,
  I roosted safe in yon red pine
    (Left over from the Russian village).

  "Ay, and if all old tales are wrong
    And lions climb--from that asylum
  I should come out extremely, strong,
    Using my brolly for a pilum."

Evoe.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDOMITABLES.

There is trouble ahead for some of our Peers.

I have just come across three fore-warnings of it.

The first was in the train. A fat man was telling his grievance to a
thin man.

"I'll stick at nothing," he said. "I mean to see this through. The idea!
Why, we've only been in the house seven weeks. Remember that. Remember
also that gas is half-a-crown a thousand. And understand that we're most
economical; we're always turning the lights down, my wife and I. Now
then; in spite of this the rascals want me to pay on sixty thousand
feet! It's preposterous. We couldn't have got through so much if we had
never let a burner or a stove go out day or night. And we're economical!
What do you say to that?"

The thin man said that he had never heard anything so infamous in his
life.

"But I'm going to fight it, I can tell you," said the fat man. "Oh yes.
If necessary I'll take it to the House of Lords."

"Quite right," said the thin man, picking up his paper.

The second case was late at night, in the corner of a restaurant. Two
men were talking near me and I heard most of it.

"It was like this," said one, who might have been a journalist from the
look of him, to the other, whom I could not exactly place, but fancied
he was perhaps remotely connected with music. He yawned rather more than
I should have liked had I been the narrator. "It was like this. There
were eight of us to dinner and five of us had old brandy at two bob a
go. Only five. The first lot was poured out by the waiter, so there can
be no trouble over that; that's ten bob. Then three or four of us had
another go. Do you see?"

The musician came back to earth and said that he saw.

"Very well. Even supposing that we did overpour a little, we didn't have
more than ten portions altogether. That I can swear to. Yet what do you
think the bill said? 'Liqueurs, two pounds.' Think of it!"

The musician woke up and made the motions of a man thinking of it and
finding it the limit.

"Of course I refused to pay," the journalist went on.

"Of course," said the musician.

"And now we're fighting it. But I don't care if it breaks me, I'll
resist it. If necessary I'll take it to the House of Lords."

The third case happened only this morning. I met in the street an artist
friend.

"Hullo," I said, "I don't often see you out and about at this hour when
there's so little decent daylight."

"No," he said, "it's an awful bore, but I've got to see a lawyer. The
fact is I'm in for litigation."

"You?" I cried.

"Yes, me. It's dead against my nature, I know, but this is serious. In
the public interest a fellow must do something unpleasant now and then."

"What is it?" I asked, drawing him towards a comfortable resort where
cordials against this appalling weather were obtainable.

"The fact is," he said, "my wife's been poisoned."

"Poisoned!"

"I don't mean in the BORGIA way. Not any CATHERINE DE MEDICI tricks.
No, merely in a London restaurant. Out shopping the other day she had
lunch in one of those West End places and she's been ill ever since. A
dish of curry. Well, I'm going to have those people's blood, and
incidentally some money too, I hope."

"I wish you joy of the experience," I said.

"I know all about that," he replied dismally; "but it's got to be done.
And I'm going through with it."

"You'll stick at nothing?" I said.

"Nothing," he replied. "If necessary--"

"I know," I said.

"What?"

"If necessary you'll take it to the House of Lords."

"Yes; but how did you know?"

"I guessed it," I replied; "but you'll be horribly congested there."

And so, I repeat, there is a busy time ahead for some of our Peers.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNCLE STEVE'S FAIRY.

  You've 'eard 'em tell o' fairy folk
    An' all the luck they bring?
  Now don't you 'eed the lies that's spoke;
    _They don't do no such thing_;
  You see my thumb, Sir, 'ow it's tore?
  You'll say, may'ap, a badger boar
    'As done it? By your leave,
  An' that's a bloomin' fairy, Sir, that bit old Uncle Steve!

  'Twas me an' Ebenezer Mogg
    An' little Essex Jim,
  The chap that's got the lurcher dog
    That's cleverer than 'im,
  As met to 'ave a bit o' sport
  Among the covers at the Court,
    Upon the strict q.t.--
  That's Ebenezer, then, an' Jim, an' Toby-dog an' me.

  At 'alf-past ten or so that night
    We left "The Chequers'" bar;
  'Twas dark, an' down the velvet 'eight
    Of 'eaven fell a star;
  The moon was settin' through the trees
  As big an' white as 'alf a cheese,
    The very best she could,
  Since we 'ad got the long-net out to try the 'Ome Park wood.

  We laid it 'long the cover side,
    A furlong "mesh an'-pin";
  We sent the lurcher rangin' wide
    To drive the rabbits in;
  A soft, sweet night in late July
  We lay among the bracken 'igh
    That 'eld the mid-day sun,
  While mute an' wise ole Toby ranged enjoyin' of the fun.

  But soon we 'ears the rabbits squeak,
    A-kickin' in the cords,
  An' gets among 'em, so to speak,
    Like gentlemen an' lords;
  We slips along their necks to wring,
  When Mogg 'e 'oilers out, "By Jing!
    Look, lads, 'ere's summut fresh--
  A bloomin' fairy-airy 's got 'isself into the mesh!"

  We flashed the lanthorn on to 'im;
    I tell you, Sir, 'e lay
  A nasty, ugly little limb,
    An' yallerer than clay;
  An' wicious--Ebenezer Mogg
  Wanted to back 'im 'gainst the dog;
    But Jim 'e says, "No go;
  This 'ere'll fetch a mort o' brass for Mr. BARNUM's show!"

  I grabs the little jumpin'-jack;
    Says I, "It's gettin' late;
  We'll shove the beggar in the sack
    An' see, at any rate."
  'Twas then ole Buckshot an' his crew
  Come dashin' at us 'cross the dew;
    The varmint bit like mad;
  I shook 'im off--'e disappeared; but _I_ was fairly 'ad!

  They brought me up at Thornleigh 'Eath;
  I got a fortnight's stretch;
    An' still I feels 'is wicked teeth,
  That spiteful little wretch;
    An' still my thumb 's all any'ow
  In weather (as it is just now)
    That's frosty, 'ard an' chill;
  'Tis few things seems to do it good.... Why, thank 'ee, Sir, I will!

       *       *       *       *       *

WHY OUR CHEMISTS ARE SO BRIGHT AND HEALTHY.

"Folle.--How charming to have a manicure set presented to you! When
filling it with the necessary manicure preparations, include the ----
Nail Polish, which all chemists keep; it keeps them so bright and
healthy."

_Lady's Pictorial._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Harassed Shopman._ "Ah, Mrs. Judkins, I am having an
awful time just now. My right hand is away with a swollen foot."]

       *       *       *       *       *

BILLIARDS À LA GOLF.

"I want a billiard cue," I said; "one I can travel with
comfortably--that folds up, or telescopes, or does something of that
kind, you know."

"Yes, Sir," said the salesman. "This style of cue with a secret joint
would probably suit you. It unscrews in the middle, is handy to carry,
and absolutely reliable when fitted together."

"And now about a case?"

"Yes, Sir. Do you want a case for the secret-jointed cue only, or a case
for your whole kit?"

"My whole kit?"

"Your complete set of cues, Sir."

"Never heard of such a thing."

"I assure you, Sir, that all the best people go in for sets--just as
with golf, Sir. This is a complete set; the whole, including the case,
for ten guineas." And he showed me a long green-lined mahogany box
containing foreign-looking cues (in addition to a secret-jointed one)
packed as carefully as a set of drawing instruments.

"Would you mind explaining this mystery box to me?" I asked.

"Certainly, Sir," said the obliging young man. "This set of cues has
been designed for the billiard player who spends his summer on the golf
links and comes back in the autumn to billiards with the golf-habit
highly developed. That is, the habit acquired on the links of using
different clubs for the various shots. Now this cue--"

"Oh, that, of course, is an ordinary cue," I interrupted. "Never mind
that one; introduce me to the others."

"Pardon me, Sir, it only _looks_ like an ordinary cue. A steel tube has
been inserted down its interior--"

"Do I understand that billiard cues have also taken to hunger-striking?"

The shopman forced a polite but cheerless smile and continued, "This
makes the cue perfectly rigid and inflexible--"

"It has the same effect on the hunger-strikers, I am told."

"--and eminently suitable for its special purpose. We call it the
'Driver' cue--for driving off from baulk and for follow-throughs,
forcing strokes and all-round cannons."

"Ah, and what is the hammer-headed instrument for? It looks more like a
club than a cue."

"Yes, Sir. There is nothing in the rules to prevent the use of a club.
If I may point it out to you, Sir, there is here a special appeal to the
ladies, who are now coming into the game in ever increasing numbers. Up
to the present time most lady players have failed completely to bring
off a successful massé shot; but with the 'Hammer' cue used as a
club--over the shoulder (_so_)--"

"I see! You play it with a downward smashing blow, eh? An appeal to the
militant billiardette?"

"Precisely, Sir."

"And what is this for?" I pulled out of the case a cue with the point
flattened on one side, as if some one had begun to sharpen it like a
pencil and left off after the first big slash.

"That is called the 'Jumper,'" explained the young man, "and may be
roughly likened to the niblick in golf. Playing it with the flat side of
the point lying on the table (_so_) you can lift or jump a ball over any
obstacle, such as a cut in the cloth, or ash accidentally dropped from
your opponent's cigar. In Snooker it is a _sine qua non_.

"Here, again, is what we call the 'Potter'; it is telescopic. One hand
only is required when using the 'Potter.' You take aim as with a pistol,
the inner tube or cue being projected against the ball by means of
concealed springs which are worked by this trigger in the butt. The
sights are adjustable for long or short shots."

"And this fellow with the open nozzle?"

"That is our 'Patent Vacuum' cue, Sir, for screw-back shots. By means of
this miniature bellows in the butt a jet of air is pumped upon the ball,
through the open nozzle or tip, at whatever velocity is desired. When
the striking ball has made contact with the object ball, suction is
immediately produced by releasing this fan, which you may see just
inside the nozzle."

"By Jove!" I said, "I must have one of those. No, I won't take the whole
set; I can't afford a caddie to go round a billiard room with me."

"Thank you, Sir," returned the shopman. "Perhaps you might consider our
latest marking-board for your own room--our Cinema-Board. For the slate
in the centre we have substituted revolving illuminated films showing
the leading players at work. Information and instruction hand-in-hand
with pleasure. When you go to the board to register the score you often
get a hint from the moving picture.... No, Sir? Have you seen our
musical pockets? Quite the latest New Year billiard novelty. When the
ball drops into the net the weight presses on this stop, which releases
a musical phrase from a musical-box under the table. We have some
delightful rag-time effects for Pool.... Not to-day, Sir? Thank you,
Sir. The 'Vacuum Patent' and the secret-jointed cue shall be delivered
this afternoon. Good day, Sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BARGAIN.

[Illustration: "Look here, old chap, I'll dance twice with your ugly
little sister if you'll take my mater down to grub."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PIDGIN TROT.

The Paris Academy of Dancing Masters, according to a contemporary,
announce a real successor to the Tango in the "Ta-tao." This dance is at
any rate of respectable antiquity, as it has been popular in China since
the year 2450 B.C. We anticipate an influx of slit-eyed professors from
the Middle Kingdom, and are therefore brushing up our pidgin English in
order that _Mr. Punch's_ readers may be able to deal with the situation
in the ball-rooms and at Ta-tao teas. Thus:--

_Student._ Chin-chin, Mr. Dance-pidgin-man!

_Plofessor._ Chin-chin, sah!

_Student._ You jussee now come this-side?

_Plofessor._ My hab jussee come Luntun.

_Student._ You talkee Yin-ke-li?

_Plofessor._ Can do. My sabby Englishee allo same you. My talkee tlue
pidgin, no talkee lie pidgin.

_Student._ That b'long first chop! My wantchee catchee you teachee my,
allo same same you dancee ta-tao.

_Plofessor._ My teachee numbah one plopah!

_Student._ So-fashion eh? How muchee plice?

_Plofessor._ My no makee squeeze-pidgin. My teachee velly well. S'pose
you talkee plice....

_Student._ S'pose you catchee two dollah one-piecee time? Can do?

_Plofessor._ No can! My wantchee save face! My plice ten dollah, by'mby
twenty dollah one-piecee time, allo same tango fashion.

_Student._ That ting no b'long leason! You b'long clevah
inside--understand? My sabby heap foleign debble.... You catchee plenty
cumshah!

_Plofessor._. My no lose face....

etc., etc., _da capo_.

_Nut._ _You_-piecee here? Chin-chin!

_Noisette._. Allo same you. You sabby plenty girl-chilo here?

_Nut._ My _don't_ tink. Who-man b'long that boy-chilo you jussee talkee
down-side?

_Noisette._ That b'long _my_ pidgin!

_Nut._ Solly! S'pose you wantchee one-piecee dance? My b'long numbah one
good boy!

_Noisette._ Can do first chop.

_Nut._ You sabby-dancee ta-tao?

_Noisette._ Can do two-piecee step so-fashion, one-piecee step
_so_-fashion....

_Nut._ You b'long quite top-side.... I say, this lingo is about the
edge. Put me down for the chow-chow--I mean supper, what!

_Noisette._ Sorry. Full up. Ta-tao!

Zig-Zag.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRICE OF ADMIRALTY.

[Illustration: Mr. Punch. "YOU SEEM A LITTLE ANXIOUS, MADAM."

Britannia. "YES; I'M WAITING TO KNOW WHETHER I'M TO LAY DOWN THE SHIPS I
WANT----"

Mr. Punch. "OR LAY DOWN YOUR TRIDENT!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

Mrs. A as "Furthest North."

Mr. B as "A Bath."

Mr. C as "The Duke of Marlborough."

Miss D as "A Comfy Winter Evening."

Mr. E as "A Country Squire".

The Brothers F as "A Baby Grand."

Theatre and Tyre Companies are no longer going to be allowed a monopoly
in advertising at fancy balls. From private information we are able to
anticipate some novelties for the next carnival.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MOAN OF THE OLD HORSES.

(See correspondence in _The Spectator_ upon the sufferings of old horses
exported alive to Antwerp.)

  "Master, it was long ago you rode me;
    Master, you were careful of me then;
  Never was there anyone bestrode me
    Equal to my master among men.
  When we flew the hedge and ditch together--
    '_Good lass!_'--how it made me prick my ear!
  Horn and hound, bright steel and polished leather,
    Long ago--if you but saw me here!"

          _Pitiless wind and heaving surge,
            A fevered foot and a running sore,
          The siren's shriek for a funeral dirge,
            And a hobble to death on the further shore._

  "Master, it was long ago you bought me;
    Master, you were proud to see me strain,
  Matching all my might as nature taught me
    With the loaded burden of the wain.
  When I drew the harvest waggon single--
    '_Good lad!_'--how I turned my head to see!
  Chain and hames and brasses all a-jingle,
    Long ago--do you remember me?"

          _Pitiless surge and driving hail,
            A ship a-roll in a dazing roar,
          A shoulder split on an iron rail,
            And a hobble to death on the further shore._

  "Master, you were saddened when we parted,
    Begged of my new master to be kind;
  Divers owners since and divers-hearted
    Leave me old and weary, lame and blind.
  Voices in the tempest passing over--
    '_Good lass!_'--I can scarcely turn my head.
  Oats and deep-strewn stall and rack of clover,
    Long ago--and oh that I were dead!"

          _Piteous fate--too long to live,
            Piteous end for a friend of yore;
          Was it too much of a boon to give
            A merciful death on the nearer shore?_

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NEW "WHITE HOPE."

    "'I passed through several drawing-rooms,' she says. 'I saw
    ladies who were so shy that they couldn't utter a word before
    me, but who suddenly put a ribbon round my wrist to measure
    it'--you know, of course, by reputation Polaire's 15-inch
    wrist."--_Sunday Chronicle._

If the biceps is in proportion, Bandsman BLAKE should tremble.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE PLAY.

"The Darling of the Gods."

Though the Gallery, on the night when I attended, received it with rapt
interest rather than delirious enthusiasm, _The Darling of the Gods_
promises once more to justify its title. The play has undergone very
little modification since it was produced a decade ago. It remains pure
melodrama incidentally set in a Japanese dress, and sprinkled with a few
Japanese words. Here and there it may reproduce the Japanese attitude of
mind, as distinct from details of custom, but the general spirit of it
follows the traditional Anglo-Saxon lines. Anybody who knows no more of
Japan than may be gathered from the pages of LAFCADIO HEARN will at
least have learned that her youth is taught to regard the love-interest
of an ordinary English novel as an indecency; and so will recognise the
improbability of the romantic element in the play. Still, all that is of
little consequence, for there must have been very few who went to His
Majesty's to improve their acquaintance with comparative ethnology.

The play has pleasant things for the eye; and one of the best of them
was the face of Mr. GEORGE RELPH as _Kara_, leader of the Samurai. But
there were horrors, too; notably the senile amorousness of _Zakkuri_ and
the offensive little figure of _It_, his shadow--an interpolation in the
bill of fare. A properly qualified dwarf I might have welcomed; but this
precocious babe with the false moustache and the sham bald crown and the
cynical giggle, who ought to have been in the nursery instead of serving
his master with liquid stimulants and assisting in all sorts of
wickedness, was a peculiarly nauseating object, and got on my nerves far
more than the terrors of the torture-chamber. This painful business was
done off, and indeed most of the bloody work was carried on out of
sight--a curious economy in a play where there was so much talk of
lethal tools. It is true that an arrow once flopped on to the stage, but
it only brought a note from a friend's hand. Swords, too, were now and
then raised to strike, but were always arrested in mid-air. Even in the
last stand of the Samurai, where one might reasonably have hoped for
some hand-to-hand play, nothing happened except one fatal shot from an
unseen musket, and even then the stricken body fell into the wings. If
it hadn't been for the throttling of a spy and a touch or two of
hara-kiri in the dark of the Bamboo Forest we should have had
practically no corpses at all.

Sir HERBERT TREE was again the most likely exotic, and played his
revolting part with great gusto and a permissible amount of humour. Miss
MARIE LÖHR, whose delicate grace of feature and colouring lost something
by her dusky disguise, was sufficiently Japanese in the first scene, and
did the right twittering with her feet; but when the virgin
light-heartedness of _Yo-San_ was changed to tragic despair she mislaid
her Orientalism and reverted to her attractive English self. She brought
a true pathos into the scene where she is left out of mind by her lover,
to whom, at a pinch, all that is unfair to love was fair in war. I shall
never, by the way, quite understand how _Kara_ so far forgot his manners
and obligations as to threaten her with death for a betrayal to which he
owed his own life and with it the opportunity of killing her. With this
reservation, _Kara_ is a brave and noble figure, and Mr. RELPH made him
look like it.

I was disappointed that Mr. PHILIP MERIVALE should have had no better
chance than was afforded by the part of a dumb servant for the display
of that delightful personality which so shone in his _Cassio_ and his
_Doughty_; but he was quietly admirable in the most thrilling scene of
all--outside the Shoji of _Yo-San_. One missed the fine performance of
Miss HILDYARD as the outcast Geisha, with its suggestion of SADI YAKKO's
manner.

The play was again admirably mounted, and the final scene of reunion in
the clouds (reached after an interval where every minute, by Greenwich
time, was a hundred years) contrived to escape the banality which
commonly attends these transfigurations. I was glad, too, to observe
that, in the code of etiquette which prevails in "the first Celestial
Heaven," the European habit of osculation is recognised; though it seems
that you have to go through a very hell of a time before you get to it.

O. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Burglar_ (_holding jewel-case_). "Sorry to trouble yer,
Mum, but would yer mind helping me choose a present for the Missus? It's
her birthday termorrer."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OLD MASTER.

As these things go, I reckon our sale went pretty well. Just before
closing time we held a rubbish auction, with Ginger in the chair. Ginger
would make an absolute Napoleon among auctioneers. He can bully, lie,
despair, wheedle and take you into his confidence in one breath.

He had sold four table-centres and a pair of babies' boots for songs
when Mrs. James Allen came up to his platform and explained a parcel
which she handed up in agitated whispers.

Ginger accepted it with a whistle that was not without its moral effect
on the mass. He released it from its wrappings reverently and, after a
short scrutiny, spake out.

"We have here, ladies and gentlemen, what I have no hesitation in
regarding as the gem of the sale. It has by a highly unfortunate
mischance lain hidden up to five minutes ago. It is nothing less, in
fact, than an indisputably genuine Van Ruiter--(sensation)--which
Colonel Allen has very nobly consented to sacrifice for--for the
splendid cause which has assembled us here to-day. (Applause.) This
little canvas, ladies and gentlemen, apart from being an authenticated
example of such an artist as Van Ruiter, is a possession which any man
might be proud of. It is called 'The Two Windmills' and is, I hope,
known to most of you by reputation. What shall we say for this, ladies
and gentlemen?"

"Sevenpence," said a humourist.

"Mr. Archer is pleased to be amusing," said Ginger with more than his
usual asperity. "Mr. Archer says seven-pence. Well, I'll say five
guineas. Any advance on five guineas, ladies and gentlemen? Going,
going--"

Now I shouldn't have thought there were sixteen shillings left in the
bazaar grounds outside the stall boxes. But before the hammer showed any
signs of descent a still small voice from the background said, "Six
pounds."

It was Mrs. Newman. She is worth anything between five and six figures,
and hunts the antique indiscriminately.

Ginger bowed comprehendingly and began talking again.

"Ladies and gentlemen, six pounds offered for a _signed_ Van Ruiter.
Look, you can see the signature. Is this to go at six pounds? There's no
reserve. Van Ruiter's 'Two Windmills' going at six pounds. Any advance?
Sir Robert, a man of your taste--"

Sir Robert Firley had been looking on waveringly. He is a man of no
taste at all except it be in the matter of old brandy; but he hates Mrs.
Newman and he wavered no longer.

"Six guineas," he said.

"Seven pounds," said Mrs. Newman.

"Guineas," growled Sir Robert.

"Eight pounds," said Mrs. Newman.

"Guineas," from Sir Robert.

"Ten pounds," said Mrs. Newman more shrilly.

"Guineas." Sir Robert was now well set and looked good for a century.

Mrs. Newman hesitated. Ginger gave her the right sort of look. To speak
was to break the spell. She set her teeth.

"Fifteen pounds," she said through them.

"Guineas," said Sir Robert with his unfailing originality.

Amid furious but suppressed excitement the struggle went on. It was only
at seventy-five pounds that Sir Robert began to feel silly and the prize
fell to Mrs. Newman.

"I congratulate you, madam," said Ginger warmly. "Even as it is you have
got it at a remarkable price."

She went away happy.

Afterwards I approached Ginger.

"_Was_ that a genuine Van Ruiter, really?" I asked.

"Sure," said Ginger carelessly.

"But--er--" I asked, "who is Van Ruiter? What's his school? I don't know
much about these Dutchmen."

"Van Ruiter," said Ginger severely, "is a painter in oils. His work has
been known to fetch as much as seventy-five pounds. As for his school,
there _was_ a man of that name at Marlborough with me. And as the canvas
of 'The Two Windmills' is dated 1912 it might be him."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Chauffeur of Large Car_ (_who has been admonished for
taking up too much of the narrow road_). "Garn! If there ain't enough
room for yer, put that thing on yer foot and roller-skate with it on the
pavement."]

       *       *       *       *       *

A CHILD AMONG THE PROPHETS.

_The Evening News_ called attention to the following as one of the
"special features" of a recent issue:--

    "FORECASTS OF SPRING MILLINERY

    By Miss Bessie Ascough (Age 7)."

       *       *       *       *       *

MIRANDA'S WILL.

I am not legal adviser to Miranda's family; nevertheless she came to see
me on business the other day. I saw at once by her serious air that it
was something of first-rate importance.

"I want a will," she said; "one of those things that people leave when
they die."

"Some people leave them and some don't," I said.

"I mean the things that show who is to have your belongings."

"Undoubtedly you mean wills."

"Do you sell them?"

"Sometimes."

"I should like to see some."

"What size?" I asked facetiously.

"Sixes--long ones," said Miranda, looking at her hands.

"I remember," I murmured.

Miranda looked up with a start and assumed her severest expression.

"I'm afraid you're not treating the matter seriously. Perhaps I had
better go to father's solicitor; he's older and quite serious. But then
he's rather bald and uninteresting. I think he takes snuff."

I retorted in my most professional manner. "I beg your pardon; I think
you must have misunderstood me. I meant that all wills are not quite the
same; some are longer than others."

"Not too long, then," she said. "You might show me some medium size
ones. I should like to do the thing fairly well."

"We don't exactly stock them; they're generally made to order."

"I'm sorry; I wanted one at once. You know I was twenty-one the other
day." (I knew it to my cost.) "Father says that everyone over twenty-one
ought to make a will."

"Your father's views on the subject are very sound. If you'll give me
your instructions, I'll make you one." I spread a sheet of paper in
front of me.

"But surely you can make a will without my help?"

"Not very easily. It's something like being measured for a gown. I must
know what you have to leave and to whom you wish to leave it."

"But I don't want anybody to know."

"I'm not anybody."

"I know. I don't think, though, that I quite care to tell you."

"Then I'm afraid there'll be some little difficulty about executing your
wishes in the matter."

"How much do wills cost?" she asked irrelevantly.

"It depends on the length."

"How much a yard?"

"We mostly sell them by the folio, not by the yard."

"How many feet are there in a folio?"

"You'll have to ask a law-stationer that."

"How much would a medium-sized will cost? Half-a-crown?"

"More than that," I said.

"Much more?" She turned over some coins in her purse.

"A good deal more."

"But I saw some in a chemist's for ninepence. Perhaps I'd better buy one
of those."

"You might," I said doubtfully.

"You said that as though you didn't think that chemists sell very good
wills."

"There's nothing really the matter with them. They consist of some
printed words and spaces--mostly spaces. If you happen to execute them
the right way the Judge afterwards decides what they mean."

"But how does he know?"

"He doesn't. That's what makes it so interesting. After a number of
barristers have explained what they might mean, the Judge says what they
ought to mean, and they mean that."

"So there would have to be a law-suit?"

"Almost inevitably."

"And you make good wills?"

