I have lately been much interested in a pack of cards, complete
(fifty-two) in their number and suits, engraved in the time of the
Commonwealth at the Hague, and representing the chief personages and the
principal events of that period. I have been able, by reference to
historical authorities, and, in particular, to the Ballads and
Broadsides in the British Museum, forming the collection presented to
the nation by George III., to explain the whole pack, with the exception
of two. These are "Parry, Father and Sonne," and "Simonias slandering
the High Priest, to get his Place." The former simply represents two
figures, without any thing to offer a clue to any event; the latter
gives the representation of six Puritans, forming an assembly, who are
being addressed by one of the body. I cannot find any notice of
Simonias, or to whom such a name has been applied, in any of the
Commonwealth tracts with which I am acquainted. Probably some of your
readers can help me in this matter. Of these cards I can find no notice:
they are not mentioned by Singer, and appear to have escaped the
indefatigable research of Mr. Chatto. They were purchased at the Hague,
more than thirty years since, for thirty-three guineas, and are
exceedingly curious: indeed they form a bundle of Commonwealth tracts.
All the principal persons of the time figure in some characteristic
representation, and the private scandal is also recognised in them.
Thus, Oliver is to be found under a strong conflict with Lady Lambert;
Sir Harry Mildmay solicits a citizen's wife, for which his own corrects
him; and he is also being beaten by a footboy,--which event is alluded
to in Butler's _Posthumous Works_. General Lambert, of whom your pages
have given some interesting information, is represented as "The Knight
of the Golden Tulip," evidently in reference to his withdrawal with a
pension to Holland, where he is known to have ardently cultivated
flowers, and to have drawn them in a very superior manner. I hope this
communication may enable me to complete my account of these cards, the
explanation of which may probably throw light upon some of the stirring
events of that extraordinary period of our history.

T. J. PETTIGREW.

Saville Row.

       *       *       *       *       *


MOVABLE METAL TYPES ANNO 1435.

A vellum MS. has lately come into my possession, containing the Service
for the Dead, Prayers, &c., with the tones for chanting, &c., in Latin,
written for a German Order, apparently about the year 1430.

This tome, which is in small 4to., is very remarkable and valuable on
account of the binding. This is red leather, stamped with double lines
forming lozenges, and powdered with additional stamps, Or, a lion, a
fleur-de-lys, an eagle, and a star. The whole is on the plain leather,
without any gilding.

But in addition hereto, a full inscription runs along each back, at top
and bottom and each side, stamped with _movable metal types_ applied by
hand, {406} without gold, as is done by the bookbinder to this day in
blind stamping.

The legend on the first back is as follows:

     _At top._--"DIEZ . PUCHLE[=I]
     _Continued to the right._--IST . S. . MARGRETEN .
     _At the bottom._--SCHUEST . AB[=T] . ZU .
     _Continued to the left._--S. . KATHERE[=I] . ZU . MUR."

That is,--

     "Diez puchlein ist schwester Margreten, sehuest abtisse zu
     Sankt Katherein zu Mur."

The legend on the last back is,--

    _At top._--"NACH . CRIST .
    _Continued to the right._--GEPURT . MCCCCXXXV .
    _At bottom._--UVART . GEPUN
    _Continued to the left._--D[=E] . DIEZ . PUCH ... K."

That is,--

    "Nach Crist gepurt MCCCCXXXV uvart gepunden diez puch ... k."

The whole inscription will therefore be, in English,--

    THIS BOOKLET
    IS SISTER MARGARET'S,
    SISTER-ABBESS AT
    SAINT CATHERINE'S AT MUR.

