
--ESSAYS, BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL. Chiefly on the British Poets. By
_David Masson_, LL.D., Professor of Rhetoric in the University of
Edinburgh. 8vo. 12_s_. 6_d_.

"_Distinguished by a remarkable power of analysis, a clear statement of
the actual facts on which speculation is based, and an appropriate beauty
of Language. These essays should be popular with serious men_."--
_Athenæum_.

BRITISH NOVELISTS AND THEIR STYLES. Being a Critical Sketch of the History
of British Prose Fiction. Crown 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

"_Valuable for its lucid analysis of fundamental principles, its breadth
of view, and sustained animation of style_."--_Spectator_.


Mistral (F.).
-------------


--MIRELLE: a Pastoral Epic of Provence. Translated by _H. Crichton_. Extra
fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_This is a capital translation of the elegant and richly-coloured
pastoral epic poem of M. Mistral which, in_ 1859, _he dedicated in
enthusiastic terms to Lamartine... It would be hard to overpraise the
sweetness and pleasing freshness of this charming epic_."--_Athenæum_.


Myers (Ernest).
---------------


--THE PURITANS. By _Ernest Myers_. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth. 2_s_. 6_d_.

"_It is not too much to call it a really grand poem, stately and
dignified, and showing not only a high poetic mind, but also great power
over poetic expression_."--_Literary Churchman_.


Myers (F.W.H.)
--------------


--ST. PAUL. A Poem. By _F.W.H. Myers_. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo.
2_s_. 6_d_.

"_It breathes throughout the spirit of St. Paul, and with a singular
stately melody of verse_."--_Fortnightly Review_.


Nettleship
----------


ESSAYS ON ROBERT BROWNING'S POETRY. By _John T. Nettleship_. Extra fcap.
8vo. 6_s_. 6_d_.


Noel
----


BEATRICE, AND OTHER POEMS. By the Hon. _Roden Noel_. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"Beatrice _is in many respects a noble poem; it displays a splendour of
landscape painting, a strong definite precision of highly-coloured
description, which has not often been surpassed_."--_Pall Mall Gazette_.


Norton
------


THE LADY OF LA GARAYE. By the _Hon. Mrs Norton_. With Vignette and
Frontispiece. Sixth Edition Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

"_There is no lack of vigour, no faltering of power, plenty of passion,
much bright description, much musical verse... Full of thoughts
well-expressed, and may be classed among her best works_."--_Times_.


Orwell
------


--THE BISHOP'S WALK AND THE BISHOP'S TIMES. Poems on the days of
Archbishop Leighton and the Scottish Covenant. By _Orwell_. Fcap.
8vo. 5_s_.

"_Pure taste and faultless precision of language, the fruits
of deep thought, insight into human nature, and lively
sympathy_."--_Nonconformist_.


Palgrave (Francis T.).
----------------------


--ESSAYS ON ART. By _Francis Turner Palgrave_, M.A., late Fellow of Exeter
College, Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

_Mulready_--_Dyce_--_Holman Hunt_--_Herbert_--_Poetry, Prose, and
Sensationalism in Art_--_Sculpture in England_--_The Albert Cross, &c_.

SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS AND SONGS. Edited by _F.T. Palgrave_. Gem Edition.
With Vignette Title by _Jeens_. 3_s_. 6_d_.

"_For minute elegance no volume could possibly excel the 'Gem
Edition.'"_--_Scotsman_.


Patmore
-------


Works by COVENTRY PATMORE:

THE ANGEL IN THE HOUSE.

BOOK I. _The Betrothal_; BOOK II. _The Espousals_; BOOK III. _Faithful for
Ever. With Tamerton Church Tower. Two vols. fcap._ 8_vo_. 12_s_.

_A New and Cheap Edition in one vol._ 18_mo., beautifully printed on
toned paper, price_ 2_s_. 6_d_.

THE VICTORIES OF LOVE. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

"_The intrinsic merit of his poem will secure it a permanent place in
literature.... Mr. Patmore has fully earned a place in the catalogue of
poets by the finished idealization of domestic life_."--_Saturday Review_.


Rossetti
--------


Works by CHRISTINA ROSSETTI:--

GOBLIN MARKET, AND OTHER POEMS. With two Designs by _D.G. Rossetti_.
Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_She handles her little marvel with that rare poetic discrimination which
neither exhausts it of its simple wonders by pushing symbolism too far,
nor keeps those wonders in the merely fabulous and capricious stage. In
fact she has produced a true children's poem, which is far more delightful
to the mature than to children, though it would be delightful to
all_."--_Spectator_.

THE PRINCE'S PROGRESS, AND OTHER POEMS. With two Designs by _D.G.
Rossetti_. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_Miss Rossetti's poems are of the kind which recalls Shelley's definition
of Poetry as the record of the best and happiest moments of the best and
happiest minds.... They are like the piping of a bird on the spray in the
sunshine, or the quaint singing with which a child amuses itself when it
forgets that anybody is listening."_--_Saturday Review_.


Rossetti (W.M.).
----------------


--DANTE'S HELL. _See_ "_Dante_."

FINE ART, chiefly Contemporary. By _William M. Rossetti_. Crown 8vo.
10_s_. 6_d_.

_This volume consists of Criticism on Contemporary Art, reprinted from_
Fraser, The Saturday Review, The Pall Mall Gazette, _and other
publications_.


Roby
----


STORY OF A HOUSEHOLD, AND OTHER POEMS. By _Mary K. Roby_. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.


Shairp (Principal).
-------------------


--KILMAHOE, a Highland Pastoral, with other Poems. By _John Campbell
Shairp_. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_Kilmahoe is a Highland Pastoral, redolent of the warm soft air of the
Western Lochs and Moors, sketched out with remarkable grace and
picturesqueness."_--_Saturday Review_.


Smith
-----


Works by ALEXANDER SMITH:--

A LIFE DRAMA, AND OTHER POEMS. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s_. 6_d_.

CITY POEMS. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

EDWIN OF DEIRA. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_A poem which is marked by the strength, sustained sweetness, and compact
texture of real life_."--_North British Review_.


Smith
-----


POEMS. By CATHERINE BARNARD SMITH. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_Wealthy in feeling, meaning, finish, and grace; not without passion,
which is suppressed, but the keener for that_."--_Athenæum_.


Smith (Rev. Walter).
--------------------


--HYMNS OF CHRIST AND THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. By the Rev. _Walter C. Smith_,
M.A. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_These are among the sweetest sacred poems we have read for a long time.
With no profuse imagery, expressing a range of feeling and expression by
no means uncommon, they are true and elevated, and their pathos is
profound and simple_."--_Nonconformist_.


Stratford de Redcliffe (Viscount).
----------------------------------


--SHADOWS OF THE PAST, in Verse. By _Viscount Stratford De Redcliffe_.
Crown 8vo. 10_s_. 6_d_.

"_The vigorous words of one who has acted vigorously. They combine the
fervour of politician and poet_."--_Guardian_.


Trench
------


Works by R. CHENEVIX TRENCH, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. See also Sections
"_Philosophy_," "_Theology_," &c.

POEMS. Collected and arranged anew. Fcap. 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

ELEGIAC POEMS. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s_. 6_d_.

CALDERON'S LIFE'S A DREAM: The Great Theatre of the World. With an Essay
on his Life and Genius. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

HOUSEHOLD BOOK OF ENGLISH POETRY. Selected and arranged, with Notes, by
_R.C. Trench_, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5_s_. 6_d_.

_This volume is called a "Household Book," by this name implying that it
is a book for all_--_that there is nothing in it to prevent it from being
confidently placed in the hands of every member of the household.
Specimens of all classes of poetry are given, including selections from
living authors. The Editor has aimed to produce a book "which the
emigrant, finding room for little not absolutely necessary, might yet find
room for in his trunk, and the traveller in his knapsack, and that on some
narrow shelves where there are few books this might be one_."

"_The Archbishop has conferred in this delightful volume an important gift
on the whole English-speaking population of the world_."--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.

SACRED LATIN POETRY, Chiefly Lyrical. Selected and arranged for Use.
Second Edition, Corrected and Improved. Fcap. 8vo. 7_s_.

"_The aim of the present volume is to offer to members of our English
Church a collection of the best sacred Latin poetry, such as they shall be
able entirely and heartily to accept and approve_--_a collection, that is,
in which they shall not be evermore liable to be offended, and to have the
current of their sympathies checked, by coming upon that which, however
beautiful as poetry, out of higher respects they must reject and
condemn_--_in which, too, they shall not fear that snares are being laid
for them, to entangle them unawares in admiration for ought which is
inconsistent with their faith and fealty to their own spiritual
mother_."--_Preface_.


Turner
------


SONNETS. By the Rev. _Charles Tennyson Turner_. Dedicated to his brother,
the Poet Laureate. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

"_The Sonnets are dedicated to Mr. Tennyson by his brother, and have,
independently of their merits, an interest of association. They both love
to write in simple expressive Saxon; both love to touch their imagery in
epithets rather than in formal similes; both have a delicate perception of
rythmical movement, and thus Mr. Turner has occasional lines which, for
phrase and music, might be ascribed to his brother.... He knows the haunts
of the wild rose, the shady nooks where light quivers through the leaves,
the ruralities, in short, of the land of imagination_"--_Atheneum_.

SMALL TABLEAUX. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s. 6d_.

"_These brief poems have not only a peculiar kind of interest for the
student of English poetry, but are intrinsically delightful, and will
reward a careful and frequent perusal. Full of naiveté, piety, love, and
knowledge of natural objects, and each expressing a single and generally a
simple subject by means of minute and original pictorial touches, these
sonnets have a place of their own_."--_Pall Mall Gazette_.


Vittoria Colonna
----------------


LIFE AND POEMS. By Mrs. _Henry Roscoe_. Crown 8vo. 9_s_.

_The life of Vittoria Colonna, the celebrated Marchesa di Pescara, has
received but cursory notice from any English writer, though in every
history of Italy her name is mentioned with great honour among the poets
of the sixteenth century. "In three hundred and fifty years," says her
biographer Visconti, "there has been no other Italian lady who can be
compared to her."_

"_It is written with good taste, with quick and intelligent sympathy,
occasionally with a real freshness and charm of style_"--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.


Webster
-------


Works by AUGUSTA WEBSTER:--

DRAMATIC STUDIES. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_A volume as strongly marked by perfect taste as by poetic power_."
_Nonconformist_.

PROMETHEUS BOUND OF AESCHYLUS. Literally translated into English Verse.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 3_s. 6d_.

"_Closeness and simplicity combined with literary skill_."--_Athenæum_.

MEDEA OF EURIPIDES. Literally translated into English Verse. Extra fcap.
8vo. 3_s. 6d_.

"_Mrs. Webster's translation surpasses our utmost expectations. It is a
photograph of the original without any of that harshness which so often
accompanies a photograph_."--_Westminster Review_.

A WOMAN SOLD, AND OTHER POEMS. Crown 8vo. 7_s. 6d_.

"_Mrs. Webster has shown us that she is able to draw admirably from the
life; that she can observe with subtlety, and render her observations with
delicacy; that she can impersonate complex conceptions, and venture into
which few living writers can follow her_."--_Guardian_.


Woolner
-------


MY BEAUTIFUL LADY. By THOMAS WOOLNER. With a Vignette by _Arthur Hughes_.
_Third Edition_. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

