Is it not evident that, if there be a salvation from this position, it is
only one: that one which Jesus teaches?--"Seek ye first the Kingdom of
God and His righteousness (that which is within you), and all the
rest--_i.e._ all that practical welfare toward which man is
striving--will of itself be realized."

Such is the law of life: practical welfare is attained not when man
strives toward this practical welfare--such striving, on the contrary,
for the most part removes man from the attainment of what he seeks; but
only when man, without thinking of the attainment of practical welfare,
strives toward the most perfect fulfilment of that which before God,
before the Source and Law of his life, he regards as right. Then only,
incidentally, is practical welfare also attained.

So that the true salvation of men is only one thing: the fulfilment of
the will of God by each individual man within himself--_i.e._ in that
portion of the universe which alone is subject to his power. In this is
the chief, the only, destiny and duty of every individual man, and at the
same time this is the only means by which every individual man can
influence others; and, therefore, to this, and to this only, should all
the efforts of every man be directed.

May 2, 1904.


                                  XII


I had only just despatched the last of the preceding pages of this paper
when the dreadful news came of a new iniquity committed in regard to the
Russian people by those light-minded men who, crazed with power, have
appropriated the right of managing them. Again coarse and servile slaves
of slaves, dressed up in various dazzling attires--varieties of Generals
wishing to distinguish themselves, or to earn the right to add one more
little star, fingle fangle, or scrap of ribbon to their idiotic glaring
get-up, or else from stupidity or carelessness--again these miserable men
have destroyed amid dreadful sufferings thousands of those honorable,
kind, hard-working laborers who feed them. And again this iniquity not
only does not cause those responsible for it to reflect and repent, but
one hears and reads only about its being necessary as speedily as
possible to mutilate and slaughter a greater number of men, and to ruin
still more families, both Russian and Japanese.

More than this, to prepare men for fresh iniquities of this kind, the
perpetrators of these crimes, far from recognizing what is evident to
all--viz. that for the Russians this event, even from their patriotic,
military point of view, was a scandalous defeat--endeavor to assure
credulous people that these unfortunate Russian laboring men--lured into
a trap like cattle into a slaughterhouse, of whom several thousands have
been killed and maimed merely because one General did not understand what
another General had said--have performed an act of heroism because those
who could not run away were killed and those who did run away remained
alive. As to the fact that one of these immoral and cruel men,
distinguished by the titles of Generals, Admirals, drowned a quantity of
peaceful Japanese, this is also described as a great and glorious act of
heroism, which must gladden the hearts of Russians. And in all the papers
are reprinted this awful appeal to murder:--

"Let the two thousand Russian soldiers killed on the Yalu, together with
the maimed _Retvisan_ and her sister ships, with our lost torpedo-boats,
teach our cruisers with what devastation they must break in upon the
shores of base Japan. She has sent her soldiers to shed Russian blood,
and no quarter should be afforded her. Now one cannot--it is sinful--be
sentimental; we must fight; we must direct such heavy blows that the
memory of them shall freeze the treacherous hearts of the Japanese. Now
is the time for the cruisers to go out to sea to reduce to ashes the
towns of Japan, flying as a dreadful calamity along its shores. No more
sentimentality."

The frightful work commenced is continued. Loot, violence, murder,
hypocrisy, theft, and, above all, the most fearful fraud--the distortion
of religious teachings, both Christian and Buddhistic--continue. The
Tsar, the chief responsible person, continues to review the troops, to
thank, reward, and encourage them; he issues an edict for the calling out
of the reserves; his faithful subjects again and again lay down their
property and lives at the feet of him they call, only with their lips,
their adored Monarch. On the other hand, desiring to distinguish
themselves before each other in deeds and not in words only, they tear
away the fathers and the bread-winners from their orphaned families,
preparing them for slaughter. The worse the position of Russia, the more
recklessly do the journalists lie, transforming shameful defeats into
victories, knowing that no one will contradict them; and they quietly
collect money from subscriptions and sales. The more money and labor of
the people is devoted to the war, the more is grabbed by various
authorities and speculators, who know that no one will convict them
because every one is doing the same. The military, trained for murder,
having passed years in a school of inhumanity, coarseness, and idleness,
rejoice--poor men--because, besides an increase of their salary, the
slaughter of superiors opens vacancies for their promotion. Christian
pastors continue to invite men to the greatest of crimes, continue to
commit sacrilege, praying God to help the work of war; and, instead of
condemning, they justify and praise that pastor who, with the cross in
his hands on the very scene of murder, encouraged men to the crime. The
same thing is going on in Japan. The benighted Japanese go in for murder
with yet greater fervor, owing to their victories; the Mikado also
reviews and rewards his troops; various Generals boast of their bravery,
imagining that, having learned to kill, they have acquired enlightenment.
So, too, groan the unfortunate working people torn from useful labor and
from their families. So their journalists also lie and rejoice over their
gains. Also probably--for where murder is elevated into virtue every kind
of vice is bound to flourish--also probably all kinds of commanders and
speculators earn money; and Japanese theologians and religious teachers
no less than the masters in the techniques of armament do not remain
behind the Europeans in the techniques of religious deceit and sacrilege,
but distort the great Buddhistic teaching by not only permitting but
justifying that murder which Buddha forbade. The Buddhistic scientist,
Soyen-Shaku, ruling over eight hundred monasteries, explains that
although Buddha forbade manslaughter he also said he could never be at
peace until all beings are united in the infinitely loving heart of all
things, and that, therefore, in order to bring into harmony that which is
discordant it is necessary to fight and to kill men.[2]

  [2] In the article it is said: "This triple world is my own possession.
      All the things therein are my own children ... the ten thousand
      things in this world are no more than the reflections of my own
      self. They come from the one source. They partake of the one body.
      Therefore I cannot rest, until every being, even the smallest
      possible fragment of existence, is settled down to its proper
      appointment.... This is the position taken by the Buddha, and we,
      his humble followers, are but to walk in his wake. Why, then, do we
      fight at all? Because we do not find this world as it ought to be.
      Because there are here so many perverted creatures, so many wayward
      thoughts, so many ill-directed hearts, due to ignorant
      subjectivity. For this reason Buddhists are never tired of
      combating all productions of ignorance, and their fight must be to
      the bitter end. They will show no quarter. They will mercilessly
      destroy the very root from which arises the misery of this life. To
      accomplish this end, they will never be afraid of sacrificing their
      lives...." There follow, just as is usual with us, entangled
      arguments about self-sacrifice and kindness, about the
      transmigration of souls and about much else--all this for the sole
      purpose of concealing the simple and clear commandment of Buddha:
      not to kill. Further it is said: "The hand that is raised to strike
      and the eye that is fixed to take aim do not belong to the
      individual, but are the instruments utilized by a principle higher
      than transient existence." ("The Open Court," May, 1904. "Buddhist
      Views of War," by the Right Rev. Soyen-Shaku.)

It is as if there never had existed the Christian and Buddhistic teaching
about the unity of the human spirit, the brotherhood of men, love,
compassion, the sacredness of human life. Men, both Japanese and
Russians, already enlightened by the truth, yet like wild animals, nay,
worse than wild animals, throw themselves upon each other with the sole
desire to destroy as many lives as possible. Thousands of unfortunates
groan and writhe in cruel sufferings and die in agony in Japanese and
Russian field hospitals, asking themselves in bewilderment why this
fearful thing was done with them, while other thousands are already
rotting in the earth or on the earth, or floating in the sea, in swollen
decomposition. And scores of thousands of wives, fathers, mothers,
children, are bemoaning their bread-winners; uselessly destroyed. Yet all
this is still too little; new and newer victims are being prepared. The
chief concern of the Russian organizers of slaughter is that on the
Russian side the stream of food for cannon--three thousand men per day
doomed to destruction--should not be interrupted for one minute. The
Japanese are preoccupied with the same thing. The locusts are incessantly
being driven down into the river in order that the rows behind may pass
over the bodies.

When will this cease, and the deceived people at last recover themselves
and say: "Well, go you yourselves, you heartless Tsars, Mikados,
Ministers, Bishops, priests, generals, editors, speculators, or however
you may be called, go you yourselves under these shells and bullets, but
we do not wish to go and we will not go. Leave us in peace, to plough,
and sow, and build,--and also to feed you." It would be so natural to say
this now, when amongst us in Russia resounds the weeping and wailing of
hundreds of thousands of mothers, wives, and children, from whom are
being snatched away their bread-earners, the so-called "reserve." These
same men, the majority of the reserve, are able to read; they know what
the Far East is; they know that war is going on, not for anything which
is in the least necessary to Russia, but for some dealings in strange
land, leased lands, as they themselves call them, on which it seemed
advantageous to some corrupt speculators to build railways and so gain
profit; also they know, or might know, that they will be killed like
sheep in a slaughterhouse, since the Japanese possess the latest
improvements in tools of murder, which we do not, as the Russian
authorities who are sending these people to death had not thought in time
of furnishing themselves with the same weapons as the Japanese. Knowing
all this, it would indeed be so natural to say, "Go you, those who have
brought on this work, all you to whom war is necessary, and who justify
it; go you, and face the Japanese bullets and mines, but we will not go,
because we not only do not need to do this, but we cannot understand how
it can be necessary to any one."

But no, they do not say this; they go, and they will continue to go; they
cannot but go as long as they fear that which ruins the body and not that
which ruins both the body and the soul. "Whether we shall be killed,"
they argue, "or maimed in these chinnampos, or whatever they are called,
whither we are driven, we do not know; it yet may happen that we shall
get through safely, and, moreover, with rewards and glory, like those
sailors who are now being feasted all over Russia because the Japanese
bombs and bullets did not hit them, but somebody else; whereas should we
refuse, we should be certainly sent to prison, starved, beaten, exiled to
the province of Yakoutsk, perhaps even killed immediately." So with
despair in their hearts, leaving behind a good rational life, leaving
their wives and their children,--they go.

Yesterday I met a Reservist soldier accompanied by his mother and wife.
All three were riding in a cart; he had had a drop too much; his wife's
face was swollen with tears. He turned to me:--

"Good-by to thee! Lyof Nikolaevitch, off to the Far East."

"Well, art thou going to fight?"

"Well, some one has to fight!"

"No one need fight!"

He reflected for a moment. "But what is one to do; where can one
escape?"

I saw that he had understood me, had understood that the work to which he
was being sent was an evil work.

"Where can one escape?" That is the precise expression of that mental
condition which in the official and journalistic world is translated into
the words--"For the Faith, the Tsar, and the Fatherland." Those who,
abandoning their hungry families, go to suffering, to death, say as they
feel, "Where can one escape?" Whereas those who sit in safety in their
luxurious palaces say that all Russian men are ready to sacrifice their
lives for their adored Monarch, and for the glory and greatness of
Russia.

Yesterday, from a peasant I know, I received two letters, one after the
other. This is the first:--

"Dear Lyof Nikolaevitch,--Well, to-day I have received the official
announcement of my call to the Service; to-morrow I must present myself
at the headquarters. That is all. And after that--to the Far East to meet
the Japanese bullets. About my own and my household's grief I will not
tell you; it is not you who will fail to understand all the horror of my
position and the horrors of war; all this you have long ago painfully
realized, and you understand it all. How I have longed to visit you, to
have a talk with you! I had written to you a long letter in which I
described the torments of my soul; but I had not had time to copy it,
when I received my summons. What is my wife to do now with her four
children? As an old man, of course, you cannot do anything yourself for
my folks, but you might ask some of your friends in their leisure to
visit my orphaned family. I beg you earnestly that if my wife proves
unable to bear the agony of her helplessness with her burden of children
and makes up her mind to go to you for help and counsel, you will receive
and console her. Although she does not know you personally, she believes
in your word, and that means much. I was not able to resist the summons,
but I say beforehand that through me not one Japanese family shall be
orphaned. My God! how dreadful is all this--how distressing and painful
to abandon all by which one lives and in which one is concerned."

The second letter is as follows: "Kindest Lyof Nikolaevitch, Only one day
of actual service has passed, and I have already lived through an
eternity of most desperate torments. From 8 o'clock in the morning till 9
in the evening we have been crowded and knocked about to and fro in the
barrack yard, like a herd of cattle. The comedy of medical examination
was three times repeated, and those who had reported themselves ill did
not receive even ten minutes' attention before they were marked
'Satisfactory.' When we, these two thousand satisfactory individuals,
were driven from the military commander to the barracks, along the road
spread out for almost a verst stood a crowd of relatives, mothers, and
wives with infants in arms; and if you had only heard and seen how they
clasped their fathers, husbands, sons, and hanging round their necks
wailed hopelessly! Generally I behave in a reserved way and can restrain
my feelings, but I could not hold out, and I also wept. [In journalistic
language this same is expressed thus: "The upheaval of patriotic feeling
is immense."] Where is the standard that can measure all this immensity
of woe now spreading itself over almost one-third of the world? And we,
we are now that food for cannon, which in the near future will be offered
as sacrifice to the God of vengeance and horror. I cannot manage to
establish my inner balance. Oh! how I execrate myself for this
double-mindedness which prevents my serving one Master and God."

This man does not yet sufficiently believe that what destroys the body is
not dreadful, but that which destroys both the body and the soul,
therefore he cannot refuse to go; yet while leaving his own family he
promises beforehand that through him not one Japanese family shall be
orphaned; he believes in the chief law of God, the law of all
religions--to act toward others as one wishes others to act toward
oneself. Of such men more or less consciously recognizing this law, there
are in our time, not in the Christian world alone, but in the Buddhistic,
Mahomedan, Confucian, and Brahminic world, not only thousands but
millions.

There exist true heroes, not those who are now being fêted because,
having wished to kill others, they were not killed themselves, but true
heroes, who are now confined in prisons and in the province of Yakoutsk
for having categorically refused to enter the ranks of murderers, and who
have preferred martyrdom to this departure from the law of Jesus. There
are also such as he who writes to me, who go, but who will not kill. But
also that majority which goes without thinking, and endeavors not to
think of what it is doing, still in the depth of its soul does now
already feel that it is doing an evil deed by obeying authorities who
tear men from labor and from their families and send them to needless
slaughter of men, repugnant to their soul and their faith; and they go
only because they are so entangled on all sides that--"Where can one
escape?"

Meanwhile those who remain at home not only feel this, but know and
express it. Yesterday in the high road I met some peasants returning from
Toula. One of them was reading a leaflet as he walked by the side of his
cart.

I asked, "What is that--a telegram?"

"This is yesterday's,--but here is one of to-day." He took another out of
his pocket. We stopped. I read it.

"You should have seen what took place yesterday at the station," he said;
"it was dreadful. Wives, children, more than a thousand of them, weeping.
They surrounded the train, but were allowed no further. Strangers wept,
looking on. One woman from Toula gasped and fell down dead. Five
children. They have since been placed in various institutions; but the
father was driven away all the same.... What do we want with this
Manchuria, or whatever it is called? There is sufficient land here. And
what a lot of people and of property has been destroyed."

Yes, the relation of men to war is now quite different from that which
formerly existed, even so lately as the year '77. That which is now
taking place never took place before.

The papers set forth that, during the receptions of the Tsar, who is
travelling about Russia for the purpose of hypnotizing the men who are
being sent to murder, indescribable enthusiasm is manifested amongst the
people. As a matter of fact, something quite different is being
manifested. From all sides one hears reports that in one place three
Reservists have hanged themselves; in another spot, two more; in yet
another, about a woman whose husband had been taken away bringing her
children to the conscription committee-room and leaving them there; while
another hanged herself in the yard of the military commander. All are
dissatisfied, gloomy, exasperated. The words, "For the Faith, the King,
and the Fatherland," the National Anthem, and shouts of "Hurrah" no
longer act upon people as they once did. Another warfare of a different
kind--the struggling consciousness of the deceit and sinfulness of the
work to which people are being called--is more and more taking possession
of the people.

Yes, the great strife of our time is not that now taking place between
the Japanese and the Russians, nor that which may blaze up between the
white and yellow races, not that strife which is carried on by mines,
bombs, bullets, but that spiritual strife which without ceasing has gone
on and is now going on between the enlightened consciousness of mankind
now waiting for manifestation and that darkness and that burden which
surrounds and oppresses mankind.

In His own time Jesus yearned in expectation, and said, "I came to cast
fire upon the earth, and how I wish that it were already kindled." Luke
xii. 49.

That which Jesus longed for is being accomplished, the fire is being
kindled. Then do not let us check it, but let us spread and serve it.

13 May, 1904.

I should never finish this paper if I were to continue to add to it all
that corroborates its essential idea. Yesterday the news came in of the
sinking of the Japanese ironclads; and in the so-called higher circles of
Russian fashionable, rich, intellectual society they are, without the
slightest conscientious scruples, rejoicing at the destruction of a
thousand human lives. Yet to-day I have received from a simple seaman, a
man standing on the lowest plane of society, the following letter:[3]

"Much respected Lyof Nikolaevitch, I greet you with a low bow, with love,
much respected Lyof Nikolaevitch. I have read your book. It was very
pleasant reading for me. I have been a great lover of reading your works.
Well, Lyof Nikolaevitch, we are now in a state of war, please write to me
whether it is agreeable to God or not that our commanders compel us to
kill. I beg you, Lyof Nikolaevitch, write to me please whether or not the
truth now exists on earth. Tell me, Lyof Nikolaevitch. In church here a
prayer is being read, the priest mentions the Christ-loving army. Is it
true or not that God loves war? I pray you, Lyof Nikolaevitch, have you
got any books from which I could see whether truth exists on earth or
not? Send me such books. What they cost, I will pay. I beg you, Lyof
Nikolaevitch, do not neglect my request. If there are no books then send
me a letter. I will be very glad when I receive a letter from you. I will
await your letter with impatience. Good-by for the present. I remain
alive and well and wish the same to you from the Lord God. Good health
and good success in your work."


  [3] The letter is written in a most illiterate way, filled with
      mistakes in orthography and punctuation.
                                                              (Trans.)