Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals; Jon Ingram, Keith
Edkins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


{33}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 64.]
SATURDAY, JANUARY 18, 1851.
[Price, with Index to Vol. II., 9d. Stamped Edition, 10d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                   Page
    Authorship of Henry VIII., by Samuel Hickson               33
    The Cavalier's Farewell, by F.H.                           34
    Gray's Elegy, by Henry H. Breen                            35
    The "Nineveh" Monuments and Milton's Nativity Ode
      illustrated from Lucian                                  35
    Minor Notes:--Gaudentia di Lucca--George Wither
      the Poet, a Printer--"Preached as a dying man to dying
      Men"--Authors of Anonymous Works--Umbrellas              36

  QUERIES:--
    Sonnet (query, by Milton) on the Library at Cambridge,
      by C. Howard Kenyon                                      37
    Burying in Church Walls                                    37
    Minor Queries:--Meaning of Venwell or Venville--
      Erasmus and Farel--Early Culture of the Imagination--
      Sir Thomas Bullen's Drinking Horn--Peter
      Sterry--"Words are Men's Daughters," &c.--Robert
      Henryson--Gawyn Douglas--Darby and Joan--
      William Chilcot--Benj. Wheeler's Theological Lectures--
      Sir Alexander Cumming--Cross between a
      Wolf and Hound--Landwade Church, and Moated
      Grange--Dr. Bolton, Archbishop of Cashel--Genealogy
      of the Talbots, &c. &c.                                  38

  REPLIES:--
    Dragons                                                    40
    Origin of the Family Name of Bacon, by ProBa ConScientia   41
    Replies to Minor Queries:--Cockade--Form of Prayer
      for King's Evil--"Aver," Hogs not Pigs--Pilgarlic
      --Collar of Esses--Filthy Gingram--The Life and
      Death of Clancie--"Rab. Surdam"--"Fronte Capillatâ"
      --Taylor's Holy Living--Portrait of Bishop
      Henchman--Lines attributed to Charles Yorke--
      Rodolph Gualter--"Annoy" used as a Noun--Culprit,
      Origin of the Word--Passage in Bishop Butler
      --Wat the Hare--The Letter Yogh--Did Elizabeth
      visit Bacon in Twickenham Park--Mock-Beggar--
      Cardinal Chalmers--Binsey, God help me!--Midwives
      Licensed--Dr. Timothy Thristcross--History
      of the Bohemian persecution--"Earth has no Rage"
      --Couplet in De Foe--Private Memoirs of Queen
      Elizabeth--Abbot's House at Bucksden--Bab in the
      Bowster--Sir Cloudesley Shovel--Noli me tangere
      --Cad                                                    42

  MISCELLANEOUS:--
    Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     46
    Notices to Correspondents                                  46
    Advertisements                                             47

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

AUTHORSHIP OF HENRY VIII.

In my last communication on the subject of _Henry VIII._, I referred to
certain characteristic _tricks_ of Fletcher's style of frequent occurrence
in that play, and I now beg leave to furnish you with a few instances. I
wish it, however, to be understood, that I advance these merely as
illustrative specimens selected at random; as there is scarcely a line of
the portions of the play I assume to be Fletcher's but would furnish some
evidence to a diligent student of this writer's style: and that, although I
think each separate instance as strongly characteristic of Fletcher as it
is unlike Shakspeare, it is only in their aggregate number that I insist
upon their importance.

The first instance to which I call attention is the use of the substantive
"one" in a manner which, though not very uncommon, is used by no writer so
frequently as Fletcher. Take the following:--

  "_So_ great ones."--_Woman's Prize_, II. 2.
  "And yet his songs are sad ones."--_Two Noble Kinsmen_, II. 4.

and the title of the play, _The False One_.

Compare with these from _Henry VIII._:--

  "This night he make a supper, and a great one."--Act I. 3.
  "Shrewd ones."--"Lame ones."--"_so_ great ones."--_Ibid._
                  "I had my trial,
  And must needs say a noble one."--Act II. 1.
  "A wife--a true one."--Act III. 1.
  "They are a sweet society of fair ones."--Act I. 4.

Fletcher habitually uses "thousand" without the indefinite article, as in
the following instances:

  "Carried before 'em thousand desolations."--_False One_, II. 9.
  "Offers herself in thousand safeties to you."--_Rollo_, II. 1.
  "This sword shall cut thee into thousand pieces."--_Knight of Malta_, IV.
      2.

In _Henry VIII._ we have in the prologue:

              "Of thousand friends."
  "Cast thousand beams upon me."--Act IV. 2.

The use of the word "else" is peculiar in its position in Fletcher:--

  "'Twere fit I were hang'd else."--_Rule a Wife_, II.
  "I were to blame else."--_Ibid._
  "I've lost me end else."--Act IV.
  "I am wide else."--_Pilgrim_, IV. 1.

In _Henry VIII._, the word occurs in precisely the same position:--

  "Pray God he do! He'll never know himself, else."--Act II. 2.
  "I were malicious, else."--Act IV. 2.

{34} The peculiarly idiomatic expression "I take it" is of frequent
occurrence in Fletcher, as witness the following:--

  "This is no lining for a trench, I take it."--_Rule a Wife_, III.
  "And you have land i' th' Indies, as I take it."--_Ibid._ IV.
  "A fault without forgiveness, as I take it."--_Pilgrim_, IV. 1.
  "In noble emulation (so I take it)."--_Ibid._ IV. 2.

In one scene of _Henry VIII._, Act I. 3., the expression occurs twice: "One
would take it;" "There, I take it."

Of a peculiar manner of introducing a negative condition, one instance from
Fletcher, and one from _Henry VIII._ in reference to the same substantive,
though used in different senses, will suffice:

                  "All noble battles,
  Maintain'd in thirst of honour, not of blood."--_Bonduca_, V. 1.
                  "And those about her
  From her shall read the perfect ways of honour,
  And by those claim their greatness, not by blood."--_Henry VIII._, V. 4.

Of a kind of parenthetical asseveration, a single instance, also, from each
will suffice:

  "My innocent life (I dare maintain it, Sir)."--_Wife for a Month, IV. 1._
  "A woman (I dare say, without vain glory)
  Never yet branded with suspicion."--_Henry VIII., III. 1._

"A great patience," in _Henry VIII._, may be paralleled by "a brave
patience," in _The Two Noble Kinsmen_: and the expression "aim at,"
_occurring at the close of the verse_ (as, by the bye, almost all
Fletcher's peculiarities do) as seen in Act III. 1.,

  "Madam, you wander from the good we aim at,"

is so frequently to be met with in Fletcher, that, having noted four
instances in the _Pilgrim_, three in the _Custom of the Country_, and four
in the _Elder Brother_, I thought I had found more than enough.

Now, Sir, on reading _Henry VIII._, and meeting with each of these
instances, I felt that I remembered "the trick of that voice;" and, without
having at present by me any means for reference, I feel confident that of
the commonest examples not so many can be found among all the rest of the
reputed plays of Shakspeare, as in _Henry VIII._ alone, or rather in those
parts of _Henry VIII._ which I reject as Shakspeare's; while of the more
remarkable, I think I might challenge the production of a single instance.

My original intention in the present paper was merely to call attention to
a few such expressions as the foregoing; but I cannot resist the impulse to
quote one or two parallels of a different character:--

  _Henry VIII._:
  "The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!"--Act IV. 2.

  Fletcher:
  "The dew of sleep fall gently on you, sweet one!"--_Elder Brother_, IV.
      3.
  "Blessings from heaven in thousand showers fall on ye!"--_Rollo_, II. 3.
  "And all the plagues they can inflict, I wish it,
  Fall thick upon me!"--_Knight of Malta_, III. 2.

  _Henry VIII._:
                  "To-day he puts forth
  The tender leaves of hope, to-morrow blossoms."--Act III. 2.

  Fletcher:
  "My long-since-blasted hopes shoot out in blossoms."--_Rollo_, II. 3.

These instances, of course, prove nothing; yet they are worth the noting.
If, however, I were called upon to produce two passages from the whole of
Fletcher's writings most strikingly characteristic of his style, and not
more in expression than in thought, I should fix upon the third scene of
the first act of _Henry VIII._, and the soliloquy of Wolsey, Beginning--

  "Farewell, a long farewell to all my greatness!"

In conclusion, allow me to remark, that I am quite content to have been
anticipated by MR. SPEDDING in this discovery (if discovery you and your
readers will allow it to be), for the satisfaction I am thereby assured of
in the concurrence of so acute a critic as himself, and of a poet so true
as the poet-laureate.

SAMUEL HICKSON.

Dec. 10. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CAVALIER'S FAREWELL.

The following song is extracted from the MS. Diary of the Rev. John Adamson
(afterwards Rector of Burton Coggles, Lincolnshire) commencing in 1658. Can
any of your readers point out who was the author?--

  "THE CAVALIER'S FAREWELL TO HIS MISTRESS BEING CALLED TO THE WARRS."

                  1.

  "Ffair Ffidelia tempt no more,
  I may no more thy deity adore
  Nor offer to thy shrine,
  I serve one more divine
  And farr more great y{^n} you:
    I must goe,
    Lest the foe
  Gaine the cause and win the day.
  Let's march bravely on
  Charge ym in the Van
  Our Cause God's is,
  Though their odds is
    Ten to one.

  {35}

                  2.

  "Tempt no more, I may not yeeld
    Although thine eyes
    A Kingdome may surprize:
    Leave off thy wanton toiles
    The high borne Prince of Wales
  Is mounted in the field,
    Where the Royall Gentry flocke.
      Though alone
      Nobly borne
    Of a ne're decaying Stocke,
    Cavaleers be bold
    Bravely hold your hold,
    He that loyters
    Is by Traytors
      Bought and sold.

                  3.

  "One Kisse more and yn farewell
      Oh no, no more,
      I prethee giue me ore.
    Why cloudest thou thy beames,
    I see by these extreames,
  A Woman's Heaven or Hell.
    Pray the King may haue his owne,
      And the Queen
      May be seen
    With her babes on England's Throne.
    Rally up your Men,
    One shall vanquish ten,
    Victory we
    Come to try thee
      Once agen.

Query: Who was the author of the above?

F.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

GRAY'S ELEGY.

J.F.M. (Vol. i., p. 101.) remarks, "I would venture to throw out a hint,
that an edition of this _Elegy_, exhibiting all the known translations,
arranged in double columns, might be made a noble monument to the memory of
Gray." It has been asserted that there is scarcely a thought in this
_Elegy_ that Gray has not borrowed from some writer, ancient or modern and
if this be true, I would take the liberty of adding a hint to that of
J.F.M., namely, that the proposed edition should contain a _third_ column,
exhibiting all the known plagiarisms in this famous _Elegy_. To begin with
the first line--

  "The curfew tolls the knell of parting day."

Lord Byron, in his notes to the third canto of _Don Juan_, says that this
was adopted from the following passage in Dante's _Purgatory_, canto viii.:

  ---- "si ode squilla di lontano
  Che paja 'l giorno pianger che si muore."

And it is worthy of notice that this passage corresponds with the first
line of Giannini's translation of the Elegy, as quoted by J.F.M.:--

  "Piange la squilla 'l giorno, che si muore."

I must add, however, that long before Lord Byron thought of writing _Don
Juan_, Mr. Cary, in his excellent translation of the Italian poet, had
noticed this plagiarism in Gray; and what is more, had shown that the
principal thought, the "giorno che si muore," was borrowed by Dante from
Statius's

  "Jam moriente die."

HENRY H. BREEN.

St. Lucia, West Indies, Nov. 1850.

    [The preceding communication was accompanied by several others, and by
    the following gratifying letter, which we print as a fresh proof that
    our paper is fulfilling the object for which it was instituted, namely,
    that of promoting literary intercourse between men of letters
    throughout the world and that it is as favourably received by our
    fellow countrymen abroad, as it has been by those who are enabled to
    receive it wet from the press:--

    "Owing to the difficulty of procuring the early numbers of 'NOTES AND
    QUERIES,' especially at this distance from Britain, I have been
    compelled to wait for its publication in a collected form. I am now in
    possession of the first volume, and beg leave to offer you a few Notes
    which have occurred to me on perusing its contents. I am fully sensible
    of the disadvantage of corresponding with you from so remote a corner
    of the globe, and am prepared to find some of my remarks anticipated by
    other correspondents nearer home; but having deeply suffered from the
    literary isolation consequent upon a residence of twenty-one years in
    this country, I shall gladly submit to any disadvantage which shall not
    involve a total exclusion from the means of inter-communication so
    opportunely afforded by your excellent periodical.

    "HENRY H. BREEN."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NINEVEH MONUMENTS AND MILTON'S NATIVITY ODE ILLUSTRATED FROM LUCIAN.

Layard in his _Nineveh_, vol. ii., p. 471., in his description of "the
sacred emblems carried by the priests," says, they are principally the
fruit or cone of the pine.

    "... and the square utensil which, as I have already remarked, appears
    to have been of embossed or engraved metal, or of metal carved to
    represent wicker work, or sometimes actually of wicker work."

He adds, that M. Lajard "has shown the connection between the cone of the
cypress and the worship of Venus in the religious systems of the East;"
that it has been suggested that "the square vessel held the holy water,"
that, "however this may be, it is evident from their constant occurrence on
Assyrian monuments, that they were very important objects in religious
ceremonies. Any attempt to explain their use and their typical {36}
meaning, can at present be little better than ingenious speculation."

There is a passage in Lucian _De Dea Syria_, § 13., which may serve to
elucidate this feature in the Nineveh marbles. He is referring to the
temple of Hierapolis and a ceremony which Deucalion was said to have
introduced, as a memorial of the great flood and the escaping of the
waters:

    [Greek: "Dis ekastou eteos ek thalassês ydôr es ton nêon apikneetai;
    pherousi de ouk irees mounon alla pasa Syriê kai Arabiê, kai perêthen
    tou Euphrêteô, polloi anthrôpoi es thalassan erchontai, kai pantes ydôr
    pherousai, ta, prôta men en tôi nêôi ekchrousi,"] &c.

