Having attended to the _bienséances_, we sallied out for sightseeing,
going first to the principal mosque, as it was in our way and evidently
considered by our guides one of the "lions." Whether it was owing to
the rank of some of our party or to the presence of the pasha's cavasses
I don't know, but we walked straight into this mosque, without taking
off our boots or putting papooshes over them--the first and last time,
in my experience of the East, in which such a thing was done. There was
suppressed grumbling on the part of some dervishes and some
old-fashioned turbaned individuals grouped in the arcaded porch, but
nobody seemed to care much about them. There was nothing particular to
see inside the mosque after we got there. It had not the grand
proportions or elaborate decoration of some of the Cairene mosques,
neither was the pulpit as handsomely carved or the hanging lamps and
ostrich-shells as numerous. The coolness of the thick-walled, domed
building was, however, most grateful, for the heat in the streets was by
this time almost insufferable, and the smells awful.

But we had no time for coolness or comfort on this day. We were to dine
with the vice-consul at two o'clock, and we had not yet seen the fair.
Passing hurriedly through the principal bazaars, we could only glance
about, for we were almost suffocated by the surging crowds, which
pressed upon us in spite of the utmost exertions of our cavasses.
Indeed, we were all too much accustomed to bazaars to have much
curiosity about these. Escaping to the outskirts of the town, where the
real fair was held, we found the fun growing fast and furious, and the
different sights and sounds more and more bewildering. Here were
hundreds of tents and other temporary erections, and swarms of people of
the quaintest appearance, buying and selling, cooking, eating and
drinking, praying, quarrelling and chaffing. Of course the blue cotton
long shirts of the indigenous Fellahs lent the principal color to the
crowd, but this was relieved by the most brilliant-colored clothing
among the visitors and traders, including the red fez on most heads, the
red and yellow headgear of the Arabs, the black caps of the Copts, and
the white uniforms of the viceroy's nizam or regular soldiers. Sherbet-
and water-sellers pervaded the scene, and added the chatter of their
voices and the clatter of their brass cups to the already indescribable
din. There were piles of different sorts of grain; harness for horses,
camels and buffaloes; heaps of carpets and rugs and clothing; fez caps,
papooshes, pipes and tobacco, mostly the common Jibileh; brass and
copper cups and cooking utensils, and cheap jewelry and trinkets.
Farther on was a space reserved for buying and selling horses, donkeys,
camels and cattle, and here were to be seen fellows who would not be off
their feet at Tattersall's or at a Kentucky "quarter race," so much are
jockeys and horse-dealers alike all the world over. It was really
amusing to recognize the well-known "horsey" look from under the
_kufieh_ of an Arab whenever the chance for a "trade" presented itself.

Near the horse-fair we became aware of music of a peculiar kind, with a
good deal of tambourine in it, proceeding from a closed tent; and upon
its becoming known that our party was present, out streamed from the
door a group of musicians and almehs, or dancing-women; the latter in
rather light attire, but covered, as to their heads, bosoms, arms and
ankles, with strings of jingling coins--some with toe-rings, and all
with the eyes heavily lined out with kohl and fingers stained with
henna. These people have not, for many years, been permitted publicly to
exercise their vocation in Northern Egypt, but have been banished away
up the Nile. I presume their presence at the fair was winked at by the
authorities, and they were probably not the best of their class. Some of
the women were by no means bad-looking, and they danced with a sway of
figure and a grace and abandon perfect in their way. It is the same
dance, with the same steps and gestures, which is painted on the walls
of many an ancient Egyptian tomb, and transmitted from the time of
Osortasen and the Pharaoh who knew Joseph. A tremendous crowd at once
collected on the prospect of a dance at the expense of the strangers,
and, gaping over each other's shoulders, divided their stares between
our party and the almehs. The sun, all this time, was beating down upon
the scene with power sufficient, one would have thought, to bake the
unprotected brains of most of the company. One of our party became
fairly ill from this cause, and we were all glad to escape from the
reeking markets and streets, and to take refuge once more in the cool
and spacious house of our vice-consul.

Here we managed to cool off a little, and in due time were ushered into
the dining-room, where was a table handsomely decked and furnished in
the European style. Our host took his place at the head of the table,
but during the whole dinner never touched a morsel, occupying himself in
superintending the movements of the numerous servants and in smiling
blandly on each of us as we caught his eye, and evidently inviting us by
his gestures to "go in and win." When we had had eight or ten courses of
the usual soups, fish and roast and boiled, accompanied by wine of
several sorts, we began to feel that there was a limit to our capacity.
But there appeared to be none to the resources of our host's larder and
kitchen, for course after course of native dishes was now brought on,
and we were pressed to try one after another of strange-looking and
still stranger-tasting concoctions. Finally, the list of these seemed to
be exhausted, and the roasts began over again, until, on the appearance
of a huge turkey stuffed with pistachios, my right-hand neighbor, who
had a statistical mind, announced that this formed the twentieth course.
At this point the consul-general interfered, and informed our host, with
many thanks and compliments, that we could positively eat no more. With
a gratified smile and the air of a general who had won a victory he
turned to his servants and ordered the cooking to cease. We were told
afterward that it was the etiquette of a grand repast among wealthy
people of this class that the courses should continue to appear until
the guests asked the host's mercy or gave other decided evidence of
repletion. Our consul-general, knowing this, had been willing to let us
see how far the thing could go.

When we had risen from table and taken seats upon the divan, the wife
and daughter of our host (Syrian Christians) served us with basins of
perfumed water and fine fringed towels, after which they raised the
hands of the principal members of the party to their lips and foreheads
and thanked them for the great honor they had done them.

The sun was by this time low, and the time for our train had quite
arrived. So we left the house of our entertainer to walk the short
distance to the station. On the way we met the horses of one of the
viceroy's squadrons going to water. Beautiful animals they were--all
dark bay or chestnut, splendidly groomed, and marching to the sound of
the trumpet as steadily as if each carried a rider. The men in charge of
them were well-set-up, soldier-like fellows, who, barring their white
uniforms and dark faces, might have just ridden out of Knightsbridge
Barracks or the gate of Saumur.

At the station we found our car just being attached to the evening-train
from Cairo; which train, by the by, had been waiting for us for some
time, to the very apparent disgust of the English-speaking and other
European passengers. The native passengers seemed to take the delay
calmly and as a matter of course, some of them spreading their
prayer-carpets upon the platform to recite the evening prayer, to which
the muezzins were calling from the minarets as we left the town: "La
Illah illa Allah! Mohammed du russûl Ala-a-h!"

We were soon off, passing through most monotonous scenery, with
constantly recurring groups of Fellahs and their animals returning from
their long day of labor, and filing along the causeways and embankments
toward the mud villages and towns, over which the pigeons were whirling
their last flight before betaking themselves to their cotes for the
night. The air became cooler and the moon rose as we rolled along the
embankment of Lake Mareotis, and the whole scene was so calm and
peaceful and conducive to reverie that it seemed a rude awakening when
we dashed into the station at Alexandria and the touts and donkey-boys
began their tiresome yells and shouts, as if they had never left off
since morning: "Onkle Sam, sir! werry good donkey, my master."--"Dis Jim
Crow! more better, sir!"--"Hôtel Mediterranée, signori!" Bidding
good-night to our pleasant and courteous fellow-sightseers, we were
soon clattering through the streets to the custom-house landing. Our
cutter was waiting: "Up oars! let fall! give way all!" and twenty-four
strong, bronzed arms were pulling us over the smooth surface of the
moonlit harbor. In ten minutes we were once more on board our floating
home, and turned in forthwith, tired enough to sleep without rocking.

     E. S.


ACROSS STRANGE WATERS.


    These winter days, my love, are short and sad--
                Oh, sad and short!
    But future summers will not make us glad,
                Of Fate the sport.

    I go; and where we have been you abide,
                To face the light
    Of days that pour their splendor far and wide,
                And mock the night.

    How you will hate their brightness well I know--
                Their fragrant ways,
    Thick set with bloom, free winds that come and go,
                And birds that praise

    The triumph of the summer, and are glad
                Of their desire,
    Fulfilled in warmth, with mirth and music mad,
                And set on fire

    Of Love, to whom all sweet things do belong:
                Those new, bright days,
    With overflow of blossoms and glad song,
                You will not praise.

    Nor shall the swift, short nights, when skies bend low,
                And through the blue
    The white moon moves on silently and slow,
                Bring rest to you.

    The day will vex you, and the night deny
                Your idle prayer:
    Shall I, across strange waters, hear your cry,
                And be aware?

     LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON.


C. G.; OR, LILLY'S EARRINGS.


I.

Not since the day on which we heard of Lee's surrender had there been
such a commotion in the house. We who had grown up since that date had
ceased to expect anything in the way of pleasure, for "the war" was a
ghost that wouldn't be laid. Did we want fine dresses, we were asked
where the money was coming from, now that Uncle David had lost all his
property by the war; did we vainly long for a trip to a Northern city,
we were consoled by the announcement that if it had not been for the war
Uncle David would have taken us to Europe; if we complained that we had
to keep our own rooms in order and sweep the parlors besides, a
dignified reference was made to the former number of servants in the
establishment; and when we roundly declared that life wasn't worth
living without a dessert for dinner every day, somebody would say that
it could hardly be expected we should set such a table as we did before
the war. Positively, we didn't know how old we were, for Aunt Nanny
declared that her memory wasn't a yard long on account of the trouble
she had had during the war, and the family Bible had been "confiscated"
by a pious private of taking propensities. Lilly was the older, however:
we knew that. She was half a head taller than I, and had a dignified
figure, though she looked like a child in the face and had a good many
child's ways. She never knew what to do with her hands, for one thing,
and when a little embarrassed she had a sweet cunning habit of putting
one hand up to her mouth and laughing behind it. Her mouth was her
prettiest feature. It had a bewitching way of dimpling at the corners,
and the twenty-four pearls behind it had never been touched by the
dentist. This, Aunt Nanny said, was the one good result of the war; for
we had to eat boiled rice and drink cold water instead of plum-cake and
coffee; so we kept our teeth sound.

We were orphans. Our names were Lilly and Stella Tresvant. Our father
had been killed during the war, and our mother had died of grief. We
were little children then, and had been sent to the Island City,
Galveston, to live with Aunt Nanny and Uncle David. We thought ourselves
quite grown-up now. Since we came to our island home we had never been
away from it. It was forlorn enough, though it was a pretty place, all
overgrown with oleanders and cape-jessamines. We used to get so tired
watching the sea, hearing the restless beat, beat of the waves against
the shore, and seeing the far-off birds dip their wings into the water!
There was an old book in Uncle David's library that I suppose we had
read a dozen times. It was called _Rasselas_, and was about a young
prince and his sister who lived in a Happy Valley, and yet could never
be happy until they got away. "I can sympathize with them," Lilly used
to say with such a mournful look in her big gray eyes; "and yet what was
their case compared to ours? They didn't have to wear their
grandmother's clothes made over, I'm very sure."

But the turning came in our long lane. One year Uncle David's crop was
uncommonly good. He made a bale to the acre, got it all picked in good
time, and the hands paid off without any grumbling. His plantation was
in the interior, and just before the cotton was sent off we all went up
to have a look at it. There were about fifty bales--a very good crop for
these times, though Aunt Nanny declared it wouldn't have been a drop in
the bucket "before the war." But it looked like immense wealth to Lilly
and myself.

"Only think, Stella!" said Lilly to me: "if we had just a single bale
apiece, what a good time we might have!"

Now, it happened that Uncle David overheard this. He was walking about
the yard, as silent as usual, but he was holding his spectacles in his
hand, and that was with him a sign of great good-humor. We could always
tell the state of the cotton-market by the position of Uncle David's
spectacles; and, as Mrs. Gargery tied on her apron when upon a
"rampage," so uncle jammed his spectacles close to his eyes when things
were very much out of joint.

"Well, girls," he said, "you've been pretty good lately, and I'll
present you each with a bale of cotton."

We couldn't speak for surprise. But I flew at Uncle David and gave him
such a kissing as he had never had from anybody, I suppose, for he
blushed quite red.

Then we ran off to the cotton-press to see the last bales pressed. As
often as we had watched that revolving screw and the two mules going
slowly round squeezing the huge bale--it was rather a primitive press
this, made by the carpenter on the place--we had never looked with an
interest to compare with that which we now felt. It was our own property
being squeezed into shape; and we actually stood there until the
bale in press was rolled out, corded and tied. It was a great
five-hundred-pounder at least; and "That's mine," said Lil.

When we had been at home a few days a lady called to see us who had been
an old friend of our mother's: Mrs. Long was her name. She was sparkling
with jewels, and Lil and I were quite dazzled by them and her pretty
clothes and her careless way of saying that she thought of "running over
to New Orleans for a couple of months," just as we should have proposed
to run down to the beach to pick up shells.

"I wish I could take these two girls with me," she said, waving her hand
toward Lilly and me. "Would it not be possible, dear Miss Nanny?"

Aunt Nanny shook her head, and began the usual doleful story about the
war and its consequences; but Lilly gave me a quick look, and her face
absolutely flashed. Then she slyly raised those long slim fingers of
hers and spelled out, "_The cotton_."

Well, pretty soon we heard from the cotton. Uncle David had sent it to
England, and it had brought a good price. In he came one day and tossed
a little packet into my lap and into Lil's. We opened them, and out
tumbled five twenty-dollar gold-pieces.

"Well, young ladies," said he, "what shall you do with your wealth?"

"Go to New Orleans," said Lilly as coolly as ever she spoke in her life.

"Pooh! pooh!" said Aunt Nanny: "just put it in the bank for a nest-egg."

"Now, Aunt Nanny," said Lilly, who had a perfect genius for argument,
"what under heaven do we want with a nest-egg? Uncle David gave us this
without any conditions: we were to do just as we pleased with it. And I
am tired of staying on this old sand-bar: it just makes me sick to smell
the oleanders. I want to go somewhere--to see something of life. Mrs.
Long would be delighted to have us go over to New Orleans with her: this
money will buy us some new dresses; so _why_ can't we do it?"

"I think they might go, Nanny," said that blessed Uncle David; and then
Maum' Hepsey came in. She had been our black mammy, and was a privileged
character.

"Lor', yes, Miss Nanny!" said she: "let de chillen go, for massy's sake.
Dey gits tired joggin' along here in de same ole ruts. 'Tain't gwine ter
cost so very much; an' I'm willin' ter 'conomize six months ter help
'long."

The end of it all was that Aunt Nanny had to give her consent--that is,
she said, if Mrs. Long really wanted us. So she dressed in her best--a
long velvet cloak and a brocaded silk that looked very _ark_aic--and
went the same day to find out that lady's mind. She came back, of
course, with a warm repetition of Mrs. Long's invitation, and an urgent
entreaty to be ready in a week's time. Hence the commotion in our
family, for much had to be done in that week of preparation.

I did not suspect Lilly was not quite happy until one morning when we
were walking on the beach before breakfast. It was a morning to make one
in love with life. I danced along the hard shining white beach, and was
more interested in watching the water, that broke into as many ripples
as if the fishes were doing the diagonal waltz under the waves, than in
looking at Lilly's face; but finally I noticed that she had an ugly
little frown on her forehead.

"After all, Stell," she said, "one hundred dollars won't go a great
way."

"Well, of course, Lil, we don't expect to launch out, like Dinah, in
'gorgeous array.'"

"No, but we don't want to look like Southern paupers."

"As we are," said I, laughing.

"No matter: we must put the best foot foremost," said Lil, looking very
pretty and pale and earnest as the salt wind blew back her hair: "our
new silks, with some of Aunt Nanny's old lace, will do very well, but
how I wish we had some jewelry!"

"Oh, I don't care for that," said I.

"Good enough reason: you are younger than I am, and don't need it." (One
would have thought Lilly thirty years old.) "But I should look like a
different being with earrings. I must have a pair."

"The only question is how to get them," said I prosaically, for I'm
always acting as a drag on Lilly's wheels.

"True," she said with a tragic air. "Dear me! I'm tempted to duck my
head under the water, and let it stay there, when I think of all the
troubles of life."

    "'You would be a mermaid fair,
        Sitting alone, sitting alone,'

and all strung round with corals and pearls. But I'd rather be Stella
Tresvant on her way to New Orleans--and breakfast."

"Breakfast, indeed!" said Lilly with an accent of scorn.

Still, she ate this meal with a becoming appetite, and after it was
ended proposed that we should go and have a chat with Maum' Hepsey.

We found Maum' Hepsey in her cabin, sitting in a rickety old
rocking-chair, a short black pipe in her mouth from which she was
drawing vigorous whiffs of comfort. A slow fire was burning in the
fireplace, and on it was a huge black kettle half filled with white
Southern corn. This was "lye hominy" in course of preparation--the
succulent lye hominy dear to every Southern heart.

"Lor', chillen!" said Maum' Hepsey, "it's too hot for you to be in here.
Massy knows if I wazn't seasoned to it I'd drap in my tracks, dis fire
is so pow'ful drawin'."

"Oh, never mind, maum'; we can sit in the door. We just came to talk to
you about our troubles."

"Sakes alive! I thought your troubles waz about over, now dat you're
gwine ter have a trip to Orleans."

"That's it," sighed Lil: "we're going off to that grand city, where I
suppose the ladies wear silks and satins every day, and we've nothing to
wear."

"Whar's de money for de cotton?" Maum' Hepsey demanded, her lower jaw
dropping in such a surprised way that the black pipe fell out and barely
escaped the lye hominy.

"A hundred dollars doesn't go very far," said Lil contemptuously.

"Well, chillen, in my young days dat waz pretty much of a sum--sho's yo'
born it waz."

"Things are different now; and besides, Maum' Hepsey, you don't know how
a dressed-up lady ought to look."

"Highty-tighty!" said maum', while her eyes sparkled alarmingly. "As if
I ain't seen mo' finery in a month dan you has in every blessed year of
your life! Lor'! when my young mars' brung his bride over from Orleans
dat chile didn't have a gownd in her trunk dat warn't made of Injy silk;
an' she did look han'some a-trailin' round in 'em. An' you tell me I
donno what fine dressin' is! Go 'long, chile! you've lost your manners."

Maum' Hepsey was really offended, and I hastened to soothe her: "Lil
only meant that you didn't know how the ladies dressed now. We are to
have two new dresses, maum', but Lilly's trouble is that she hasn't any
jewelry."

She shook her turbaned head: "Jewelry costs a sight of money, honey. My
young mis', she had a ring on her finger wid a stun in it like a star.
'Twarn't no bigger 'n a baby hazelnut, but, sho's yo' born, chillen, dat
ring cost _ten hundred dollars_!"

"That was a diamond," said Lilly in an awed voice. "I never expect to
have one if I live to be a thousand years old."

"Chillen," said Maum' Hepsey, lowering her voice, "why don't you git
Miss Nanny to let you open dat trunk in de attic?"

"Whose is it, Maum' Hepsey?"

"Lor', honey! didn't you never hear 'bout dat trunk? It was lef' wid
your Uncle David for sto'age durin' de war. A slim, dark-complected
young man brought it one evenin' about sundown, an' from dat day to dis
none of us has ever set eyes on him."

"What do you suppose became of him?"

"De good Lord knows, honey. Mos' likely he waz killed: men dropped down
like oleander-blossoms in de high winds in dem dreadful days. Now, I
shouldn't wonder, chillen, if dar waz _money_ in dat trunk."

"So there might be," said Lilly with a start.

"It must ha' held somethin' valerble," said Maum' Hepsey, looking like a
solemn old owl, "else why should he ha' been so mighty pertickeler 'bout
havin' it stored safe? Den, ag'in, he must ha' been killed, else why
shouldn't he ha' come back for it? An' why should we let de
things--whatever is in it--moulder away, instead o' gettin' de good of
'em like sensible folks?"

