"Before you go," interrupted my wife, "what are we going to do about the
burial?"

"How does one usually dispose of dead cats?" I asked. "I thought the
dustman--"

"Out of the question."

"I know it is forbidden by the by-laws of the Corporation, but a shilling
----"

"How stupid you are! If anything were to decide Cook to go it would be
handing over Dundee's remains to the dustman. You know how particular Cook
is about funerals."

I knew indeed. The rate of mortality among her friends and relations was
abnormally high, and on account, as I suspect, of her skill in cookery she
was in frequent demand as a mourner. By continual attendance she had
cultivated a nice sense of what was fitting on these occasions and posed as
an authority on the subject.

"Very well, then, let's have him buried," I said.

"Where?"

"In our garden."

"Who by?"

"Palmer or Emily."

Palmer and Emily are respectively the parlour- and house-maid.

"Both would say it was not the work for which they were engaged. They would
leave at the same time as Cook, if I asked them."

"Who else can we get?" I asked.

"Yourself," my wife made answer.

"Me? But I can't be seen by all the street burying a cat." I should explain
that our only garden is in front of the house.

"If you wait till it is dark you needn't be afraid of anyone seeing you,"
protested my wife.

"And run the risk of being detected by some suspicious policeman. No, thank
you."

"Then if you won't do it yourself you must find someone who will. It is our
last hope of persuading Cook to stay."

"By heaven!" I cried, looking at my watch, I am a quarter-of-an-hour late.
I must run."

This was my customary device to evade the embarrassing dilemmas which my
wife not infrequently thrust upon me at this hour. So for the moment I
escaped. All day in the office I was fully occupied. From time to time the
memory of Dundee lying stark in the basement obtruded itself upon my
thoughts, but I dismissed the vision as one does a problem one has not the
courage to face.

The problem remained unsolved when I stepped out of the train on my return
from the City. To gain time for reflection I resolved to make a détour. As
I struck into an unfamiliar side street, I looked up, and there in front of
me stood an undertaker's shop.

The inspiration! I entered. From the back premises advanced to meet me the
undertaker, with a visage tentatively wobegone, not yet knowing whether I
was widower, orphan, businesslike executor or merely the busybody family
friend. I unfolded my difficulty. Beneath the outer crust of professional
melancholy there evidently seethed within the undertaker a lava of
joviality.

"Certainly, Sir, certainly," he said. "It is not perhaps strictly in my
line, but one of my assistants will be delighted to earn an extra shilling
or so by obliging you. What name and address?"

I joyfully gave both and made my way home.

Midway through dinner came a ring at the front-door bell. Palmer
interrupted her service to answer, and returned to me with a card on a
salver.

"A gentleman to see you, Sir," she announced.

"How strange, at this hour! Who can it be?" asked my wife.

"The gentleman to bury Dundee," I explained in a lowered voice, as I passed
the visiting-card, deeply edged with black, across the table to her.

Next morning my wife was able to announce that Cook had consented to stay.
The burial of Dundee by a real undertaker had gratified her sense of the
correct. I departed to the City filled with self-complacency.

For a month I dwelt in this fool's paradise. Then one evening my wife
gently broke the news.

"I have something serious to tell you. Cook has given notice."

"Who is dead now?" I asked.

"No one. She is engaged to be married."

"Married?"

"Yes, to the young undertaker."

"What young undertaker?"

"The one who buried Dundee."

It was too true. At supper, after the inhumation, a mutual esteem had
sprung up that rapidly ripened into love. The enterprising young
journeyman, so enamoured of his calling that he consented to inter dumb
creatures in his leisure time, had evidently discerned in Cook, with her
wealth of funeral lore, a helpmeet worthy of himself; while Cook on her
side, conquered by his diligence and discretion, considered she had secured
a respectable settlement for life, with the prospect of obsequies of the
highest class for herself.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Cheery Member (to Club pessimist_). "HULLO, OLD CHAP!
HAVING A BAD CROSSING?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

CLERICAL EDUCATION.

[The Rev. KENNEDY BELL, in _The Daily Sketch_, deplores the dreariness of
parish magazines and suggests, with a view to brighten their contents, that
clergymen should serve an apprenticeship on the daily Press.]

  The Reverend Mr. KENNEDY BELL
  Is wholly unable to say all's well
  With the state of our parish magazines,
  And is moved to indicate the means
  Of making their pages bright and snappy
  And bored subscribers cheerful and happy.
  Now the most original of his hints
  For galvanizing these dreary prints
  Is this: That every parson, before
  He aspires to be parish editor,
  Should join the staff of a leading daily
  And learn to write genially and gaily.
  It may be a counsel of sheer perfection,
  And yet, perhaps, on further reflection,
  We may admit that something is gained
  By the plan of having clergymen trained
  In the very heart of the Street of Ink
  To paint their parish magazines pink.
  So generous laymen may haply decide
  That it _may_ be worth their while to provide
  Each KENNEDY BELL with stepping-stones
  To rise to the height of a KENNEDY JONES.
  But others, a small and dwindling crew,
  Possibly fit, but certainly few,
  And cursed with a most pronounced capacity
  For suffering from inept vivacity,
  Would gladly be reckoned as unenlightened
  Could they keep one class of journal un-"brightened."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "MY DEAR, YOU ARE NOT DANCING."

"NO--MOST PROVOKING. I MISLAID MY PARTNER AT PADDINGTON, AND HE HASN'T THE
FAINTEST IDEA WHERE THE DANCE IS."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PASSING OF THE LITTER.

It happened only a couple of weeks ago, but the horrible memory comes back
to me as if it only happened yesterday. It was my own fault, because with a
telephone loose about the place one ought not to encourage other pets.

"Well," I said to Sibyl, "there we are, and we must make the best of them."

Sibyl sniffed as she usually does when these periodical occurences happen
in our house.

"Which of them are you going to keep?" she asked, "and is it really
necessary to keep any of them?"

"Well," I said; "but----"

"What I mean to say," said Sibyl, "better do away with them when they are
quite young. It would be far more humane."

"I am with you up to a point," I said; "I admit they are not a very
prepossessing lot."

"How they came to be born at all is what I cannot understand," said Sibyl,
who is always like that when trying to be serious.

"Well," I said, "I have decided to keep one of them--No. 1."

"But surely," said Sibyl, "that the most delicate one of the lot."

That, I well knew, was quite true. Whether I should ever rear No. 1 was a
matter for time to prove. It was so delicate that once or twice already it
had been on the verge of collapse, but I had rallied it each time.

"As for the others," I said, "we shall have to get rid of them."

I need not go into painful details, but the thing was easily done. That
very evening, unfortunately, through an oversight, No. 1 perished also.

For this I blame McWhirter.

"The number of my bus is 21," he said in the theatre buffet that night; "by
the way what's yours?"

"Whisky," I said absent-mindedly, "and not much soda."

And it was only after I had drunk it that I realised my error. It was then
too late.

And that is how New Year Resolution No. 1--the most delicate of the
litter--passed away at the early age of one week.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR PLUTOCRATIC SPORTSMEN AGAIN.

    "Wanted, set of gold clubs, with bag, for lady."--_Local Paper_.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIFE.

A MODERN NOVEL--SPASMODIC SCHOOL.

                  I.

  Her parents were hygienic, so they never let a germ intrude
  Within the cells and tissues of the girl they christened Ermyntrude;
  They bathed her body every hour and all internal harm allayed
  By pouring Condy's Fluid on her butter and her marmalade;
  And when they dressed her took good care to tuck her chest-protector in--
  Result, she grew up strong and fair as any peach or nectarine.

                  II.

  She had no fear of lion or of tiger (in imprisonment)
  And in an awful storm at sea she asked the mate what mizzen meant;
  It was a plucky act; if I'd neglected to report it you'd
  Never have known the depth and true dimensions of her fortitude.
  If you remain agnostic, if you hold it still not proven, I'll
  Give fifty more examples of her courage when a juvenile;
  They lie in my portfolio, all printed, filed and docketed,
  Including one in which a stick of dynamite she pocketed.

                  III.

  She also painted: one could tell her pictures mid a billion,
  So daubed were they with ochre blots and splashes of vermilion;
  She claimed to be a connoisseur of _objets d'art_ and curios,
  But what attracted notice was her openwork and lury hose,
  Fashioned in every colour from magenta down to cinnabar,
  Suggestive of a rainbow or the various liquors _in_ a bar.

                  IV.

  So when she came to twenty-one, the age they call discretional,
  The trooping of her followers was, in a word, processional.

                  V.

  But she disdained flamboyant types and snubbed the gay and gildy brand;
  Instead she loved a decadent whose pagan name was Hildebrand,
  Until that sad occasion when she met him coming back o' night,
  His system loaded up with bhang and opium and aconite.

                  VI.

  An artist next attracted her; she turned on her cajoleries,
  And soon in unison they laughed at other people's drolleries;
  His speech was polychromous (as the speech of many a carman is);
  He mostly talked of masses, lights, half-tones and colour-harmonies;
  That was his doom, for one fine day he went to his sarcophagus,
  The word "_chiaroscuro_" stuck deep down in his oesophagus.

                  VII.

  I do not know; it may have been her hose that took poor Rendall in,
  Who previously had flirted with her elder sister, Gwendoline.
  This Rendall was a wholesale dealer, very rich and large in all
  His habits, though he always said his profits were but marginal.
  Well, Rendall kept on waddling round her, like a tired and tardy yak;
  His movements showed beyond a doubt that his disease was cardiac;
  He took her on the river; after thinking for a time, aloud
  He said, "I will propose to you; that is, of course, if I'm allowed."

                  VIII.

  And she replied, "If I were going to propose, I'm blest if I
  Would personate an elder who is just about to testify.
  Now first of all I must remark that Love has come to grip you late
  In life, but, passing over that, I've certain things to stipulate:
  You must exhibit interest, as even Goth or Vandal would,
  In curios and bric-à-brac, in ivories and sandalwood;
  And you must cope with cameo, veneer, relief and lacquer (Ah!
  And, parenthetically, pay my debts at bridge and baccarat).
  I dote on Futurism, and so a mate would give me little ease
  Whose views were strictly orthodox on MYRON and PRAXITELES.
  You do not understand," she sneered, "so gross is your fatuity;
  Well then, I answer 'No,' without a trace of ambiguity."

                  IX.

  And Rendall turned back sad at heart; but in a stride his honey-bee
  Was in his arms exclaiming, "Then would wasted all your money be.
  Come, I will take you with your faults and try to make the best of you;
  Your purse is good; perhaps in time I may improve the rest of you."

                  [_Publishers' Note_.

  Readers who are not sated yet and still for more are hungering
  Will find Vol. II. describe how E. gave cause for scandal-mongering.
  Vol. III. narrates how R. became enamoured of a fairy at
  A ball, was robbed of all his wealth and joined the proletariat.
  How E. washed clothes to earn her bread, while R. reclined in beery ease
  Upon his bed, will be exposed in Vol. IV. of this series.
  And further volumes show exactly what was worst and best in E.,
  And how at last, aged eighty-four, she found her life's true destiny.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A SIDE-SLIP.

    "Just before the war we were in danger of having the ugly and even
    abominable word 'aviator' fostered upon us. Just as that word seemed
    victorious, _The Times_ suddenly announced that it had decided once and
    for all to use 'airman' instead, and there can be no doubt that the
    example there set, which was copied by journalists on other papers,
    secured the predominance of a good new English word over a deformed
    importation."--_Times Literary Supplement_.

    "The volume contains some 500 portraits of New England aviators."--
    _Same paper, same date, same page_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "QUARTER MILE CHAMPIONSHIP.--Record, Sgt. Smith (North Staffords), 5
    2-5secs.

  Wilkinson........ 1
  Goddard.......... 2
  Worsley.......... 3

An excellent win, Wilkinson putting in a wonderful spurt in the last 30
years."--_Indian Paper_.

From which we infer that he did not succeed in lowering Sergeant Smith's
remarkable record.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MAN WHO COULD DO IT HIMSELF.

[Illustration: "HORACE, THERE'S SOMETHING WRONG WITH THE BOILER. SHALL I
GET THE PLUMBER?"]

[Illustration: "PLUMBER? OF COURSE NOT--]

[Illustration: I'LL PUT IT RIGHT.]

[Illustration: JUST GET ME A SPANNER--]

[Illustration: AND A HAMMER--]

[Illustration: AND A LADDER--]

[Illustration: AND SOME STRING--]

[Illustration: AND A WOODEN PLUG OR TWO--]

[Illustration: AND AS MANY TOWELS AS YOU CAN FIND--]

[Illustration: AND ALL THE BLANKETS IN THE HOUSE--]

[Illustration: AND--]

[Illustration: THE DOCTOR."]

       *       *       *       *       *

SHAKSPEARE THE TRADUCER.

The members of the League of Scottish Veterans of the World War met
recently in New York, and after "due deliberation" (_Query_, Can Scotchmen
deliberate "duly" in New York now?) passed a resolution demanding that
SHAKSPEARE'S tragedy, _Macbeth_, be removed from the curriculum of English
literature studies in American schools.

Apparently this was an example of "dry" Scotch humour. A neighbouring city
had previously banned _The Merchant of Venice_ from its schools on the
ground that the character of _Shylock_ was a libel on the Jewish race. If
Jewish children no longer had to pay for school editions of _The Merchant
of Venice_ should Scottish infants still have to squander their bawbees on
a play that insulted their forbears? Perish the thought! "We consider,"
they declared, "that if a Jewish gabardine is to be cleaned by American
Boards of Education the stain should likewise be removed from the Scottish
kilt." And if there are no reliable cleaners in the U.S.A. it should be
sent to Perth.

