Brutality is acknowledged by the most distinguished Teutonic
psychologists to have an important place in modern warfare, as serving
to maintain a properly submissive attitude on the part of the unarmed
enemy, and the College has been established to complete this side in the
training of cadets for the Imperial German field army.

TRAINING BY GRAMOPHONE.

Many difficulties have had to be surmounted. For instance it was found
that, in spite of training students, proceeding to the front showed
hesitation in the execution of non-combatants, and grew pale on first
hearing the cries of women and children. This difficulty is being
obviated by means of gramophone records taken in Belgium, which serve to
inure the novice to the sounds of anguish. By the time he proceeds to
the front no cries for mercy have any power to move him.

LITERÆ INHUMANIORES.

The curriculum is extensive. In addition to regular musketry practice at
moving and stationary Red Cross waggons, hospital bomb drill, etc.,
courses of lectures are being given by thinkers of the first eminence.
Some of the most celebrated names on the contemporary record of German
culture are to be found in our staff list. During the coming term, for
instance, Dr. Junker, of the BERNHARDI School of Philosophy, will give a
series of discourses on "The Evolution of the Doctrine of Blood and
Iron," "Infantile Mortality and its Promotion," "Philosophic Doubts
regarding the Value of Mercy," illustrated by photographs taken in
Louvain; and a course of lectures on "The Debt of Art to Atrocity" will
be delivered by Professor Blutwurst, who occupies the ATTILA Chair of
Anatomy in the University of Leipzig.

RECREATION.

The proper recreation of students is not neglected and sports are
encouraged. Paper chases are held frequently, the paper torn up for the
trail being provided by the courtesy of the Foreign Office, who supply
the College with all treaties found upon their shelves.

RECORDS IN BRUTALITY.

The Principal desires it to be known that he will always be glad to hear
from past students now serving with the Imperial Forces who have
performed any notable act of inhumanity towards non-combatants.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _Teutonic Barber._ "SHAFE, SIR?"

_Customer._ "YE-ES---- THAT IS, NO!---- I THINK I'LL TRY A HAIR-CUT."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OUTPOST.

  The lurid sunset's slanting rays
    Incarnadine the soldier's deed;
  His rugged countenance betrays
    The bulldog breed.

  Not his to shun the stubborn fight,
    The combat against heavy odds,
  Alone, unaided--'tis a sight
    For men and gods!

  And now his back is bowed and bent,
    Now crouching, now erect, he stands,
  And now the red life blood is sprent
    From both his hands.

  He takes his punishment on trust,
    As one who sees and yet is blind,
  For every lacerating thrust
    Comes from behind.

  The twilight creeps, the sun has gone,
    But triumph fills the soldier's breast;
  He's sewn his back brace-buttons on
    While fully dressed!

       *       *       *       *       *

JAMES FEELS BETTER.

THE Sergeant-Major was speaking.

"Company--'SHUN!"

We 'shunned. We stood motionless (all but one of us) waiting for his
next words. Then he spoke again.

"Blank blanket," he yelled, "what the blank are you doing?" He was
looking at me, and my heart was in my mouth. "Blanket," he went on, "if
you want to scratch your nose, step out here and scratch it. My blank!"
My heart dropped back again. He must be talking to James behind me. I
longed to look round and watch the generous waves of colour stealing
over James's classic features, to fix with a reproachful eye that Roman
proboscis which he had been grooming; but duty, or natural integrity of
character, or fear of the Sergeant-Major, or something, held me fast.

"Company--dis-MISS!"

We turned to the right and I took James affectionately by the arm.
"How's the neb?" I said.

And then James told me what he thought of the Sergeant-Major.

"Pretty good rot," he said, "talking like that to a man in my position.
Cursing a married man with a family as if he were a rotten schoolboy. If
I met him in ordinary life he'd say 'Sir' to me--probably ask me for a
job, and go about in a holy fear that I was going to sack him."

"Discipline, James," I said. "Think how good it is for you to be ordered
about for a change. And think how jolly it must be for the
Sergeant-Major to swear at well-known public men. Don't grudge him his
little bit of pleasure. And finally, think how stimulating it is for the
rest of us. I assure you, James, there's nothing more bracing to a man
than to hear another man being cursed."

James muttered to himself. We lit our pipes and sat down among some
other members of our platoon. James was silent, but we others talked
eagerly about the difference between "Right form" and "On the right form
company," and other matters which had suddenly become of great
importance.

"Let's go and have a little private drill," said one of the keen ones.

"It'll only turn into a rag," I said.

"But of course we shall have to agree to take it seriously and obey
orders. Who'll come?"

About ten of us offered ourselves. I looked at James; to my surprise he
jumped up quickly. We went off to a corner of the field, and lined up
two deep.

"And now who'll drill us?" said James.

We all hung back nervously. To obey an order as one of ten is so much
easier than to give an order as one of one.

"I will, if you like," said James doubtfully, "but I'm not sure if----"

"Go on," we all said; "have a try."

James stepped out of the ranks and faced us.

"Cover off, there," he said briskly. "Squad--_'shun_!" We were five
files, and I was No. 3 in the front rank. "Stand at--_ease_ ... Number
Three, what the blank are you smoking for? Number Three--the stout one
in the front rank. Put that pipe away, Private Haldane. Blanket, Sir,
this isn't a Cabinet meeting; you're drilling."

"Steady, James, old man," I said.

"Silence in the ranks! Two days cells for Private Haldane--both of them
week-days. 'Shun! Number!... Form _fours_!"

We formed fours. Of course it is absurdly easy, even with an odd number
of files, but it is also absurdly easy to forget.

"As you were!" shouted James. "The last file is always an even number.
Surely you ought to know that by this time, Private Kitchener. The
fourth file--Private Asquith and Private Tree, chest out, Private
Tree--the fourth file stands fast. 'Form _fours_! Right _turn_! Form two
_deep_! 'Bout _turn_! Form _fours_! I thought so; Private Tree is wrong
again. _Silence_, Private Haldane! Private Haldane will be shot at dawn
to-morrow. Private Tree will be shot at dawn on the day after, this
giving him time to prepare his farewell speech. Right _turn_! Where
_are_ you, Private Carson? Try and remember that you're not reviewing
troops just now; you're attempting to decide as quickly as possible
which is your right hand and which is your left. You'll find it a much
harder job. The Army Corps will advance. By the right, quick _march_!
Step out, Private Tich, my lad, step out."

James was now thoroughly enjoying himself.

"Left _incline_! Theirs not to reason why, Private Kipling; if I had
meant 'right incline, and stop at the canteen,' I should have said
so.... Tut-tut, Private Tree, 'left incline' doesn't mean 'advance like
a crab'.... Right _incline_! And now where are you, Private Masterman?
Left behind _again_. Halt! Dress up by the right. Blanket, Private
Haldane, you're _still_ talking. Private Haldane will be blown from the
guns at dusk. As you were. It's no good taking half measures with
Private Haldane; kindness is wasted on him. Private Haldane will be
stopped jam for tea this afternoon."

And then a smile came over James's face. He repressed it, drew himself
up, and surveyed us sternly.

"Squad, _'shun_! Scratch--_noses_!"

       * * *

"Thank you, I feel much better," said James.

    A. A. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

DISCOVERERS' RIGHTS.

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--Unless the blackberrying season is to be utterly ruined
and thousands of homes thus rendered poisonously unhappy, something must
be done to make people play the game.

Why is it that this simple little fruit should have such a bad influence
on otherwise nice persons? But it has. It makes them utterly selfish and
inconsiderate.

Take our experience last week on the Common. We went out with
baskets--three of us--Elsa, Dolores, and me, and, after hunting about
for some time and getting fearfully scratched, we came upon a perfectly
priceless group of bushes which no one had discovered.

The blackberries were there in millions, ripe too, and all sparkling in
that patent-leather way which makes the mouth water and prevents as many
getting into the basket as ought to. We were of course fearfully bucked
by finding such a spot, and began at once in earnest. Judge then of our
dismay when another party of blackberriers, attracted, I imagine, by our
cries of rapture, came up and began picking too! These were the two
Misses Blank, whom we know very slightly. They ought, of course, to have
gone right away and done their own discovering. Instead of that they
just nodded, and then snatched away at our bushes as though they were in
their own garden. One of them even came up to a bush on which Elsa was
engaged. What was she to do? She could not remonstrate, as we knew them
so slightly, so she abandoned the bush with a gesture of contempt which
should have made a dummy blush, but had no effect whatever on these
thick-skinned Prussians, as we now believe they must be. Probably their
real name is Fressen, Elsa thinks.

Common decency (I don't mean this for a joke, but I suppose it is one)
should prevent anybody from going to a place discovered by somebody
else; and why I write is to ask you if there is not an unwritten law
against such conduct, and if so will you make it widely known?

It would be dreadful if all the blackberrying parties during this
September and October were to be ruined by people like the Misses
Fressen.

    I am,    Yours faithfully,
    FAIR PLAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: BY REQUEST.

_Visitor (to Percy of "The Mauve Merriments.")_ "WHAT WOULD YOU CHARGE
TO SING 'IT'S A LONG WAY TO TIPPERARY' INTO AUNTIE'S EAR-TRUMPET?"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT CAMPAIGN.

The formal declaration of war (altogether unexpected by the best minds
of the community, though the opposing armies had been mobilised for a
month previously), came like a bolt from the blue on September 1st. In
an instant the whole country was engaged in sanguinary conflict. We give
with reserve the following reports which have reached us from our
correspondents at the front:--

CIVILIANS IN THE BATTLE LINE.

On the north-eastern frontier a keen encounter occurred between the
famous Albion South End Corps and an invading division of the
redoubtable Cockspur troops. Fifteen thousand spectators from posts of
vantage round the field witnessed the fearful onslaught of the enemy.
Civilians were so moved by the imminent peril of the home troops that,
arming themselves with stones and bottles, and shouting "----" (excised
by Censor), they flung themselves on the wings of the invading army and
utterly routed them. It is rumoured that the Cockspurs contemplate
reprisals. In the event of the South End Corps invading their country it
is believed that all civilians will fight to the death against the
invader.

THE OLD BRITISH SPIRIT.

Thrilling scenes were witnessed at the opening of the Ealham Thursday
campaign. A huge crowd, thirsting for a sight of the conflict, gathered
in the confines of the battlefield. A force of blue-clad mercenaries
held them in check for a time. But thirty thousand volunteers are worth
more than a hundred paid men. With magnificent unanimity the Britons
formed in column. The dense black mass pressed forward. For a moment the
conflict was fearful. Then the thin blue line of the mercenaries gave
way and they fled in disgraceful rout. A moment later thirty thousand
unconquerable Britons, laden with booty from the pay-boxes, stood
triumphant on the shilling reserved mound. That wonderful charge had
captured the position.

OUTRAGES ON NON-COMBATANTS.

We record with deep regret a violation of the laws of war by the General
of the Shatterham Wanderers army. In the heat of the combat with the
Notts Strollers brigade he ignored the whistled appeal for an armistice
to pick up the wounded. Proceeding steadily he fired a deadly shot into
the enemy's fortifications. A neutral officer, under the protection of
the Red Cross, courageously protested against this infamy. In an excess
of military fury the General smote the neutral officer to the earth. It
is believed that, unless the offending General be instantly submitted to
a regular court-martial, the Shatterham Wanderers' army will be solemnly
declared outside the pale of humanity. (NOTE.--The Censor allows the
foregoing account to be printed but disclaims all responsibility for its
correctness.)

BRILLIANT RECRUITING CAMPAIGN.

Great weakness has been observed amongst the advanced sharpshooters of
the Bullington Arsenal corps. "We must have men at any cost," said their
determined Secretary. A cheering crowd attended him to the station as he
set out for ---- (excision by the Censor), accompanied by two
commissionaires bearing armoured bags of bullion. A rumour reaches us
that at the cost of four thousand pounds the Secretary has secured two
famous shots. Great anxiety is felt in Bullington. Crowds gather round
the headquarters of the corps and ask, "Will they come in time?"

LATER.--A wire from Scotland confirms the news. The Union Jack is flying
over the headquarters. It is felt that the great recruiting campaign has
saved Britain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: "HELLO, MARIA! STOPPED SEWING FOR TO-DAY?"

"YES, SAMPSON. I THINK THERE IS MORE NEED OF MEN THAN OF PYJAMAS. I HAVE
DECIDED TO PART WITH YOU, AND SHALL GIVE YOU TO LORD KITCHENER--MYSELF!
GET YOUR HAT ON."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TIRPITZ TOUCH.

(_A new nautical ballad._)

  They faced the winds, the waves, the fogs,
    For they were a gallant band,
  And they ventured forth, the bold sea dogs,
    From the bight of Heligoland.

  Six ships of war they steamed along,
    Audacious and yet discreet,
  When lo! on the skyline, fifteen strong,
    They sighted another fleet.

  Oh! theirs was indeed a perilous choice,
    'Twas a case of fight or flee,
  When the captain cried in a resolute voice,
    "Let us fight, my lads," cried he.

  "Long have we panted to come to grips,
    And here we shall gain our wish;
  Moreover, I fancy that yonder ships
    Have nothing on board but fish."

  Then up spake a grizzled _Goeben_ lad,
    "We be far from land or fort;
  I should feel more safe if I knew we had
    A battleship in support."

  "There be six of us, and fifteen of them;
    Have a care while the odds are thus;
  We may rake 'em with shell from stern to stem,
    But they might throw herrings at us."

  The captain he said, "Take heart of grace;
    There's many a risk to run;
  A herring's an awkward thing to face,
    But it's not so bad as a gun."

  "My mariners all, be not afraid
    To venture on bold designs;
  Remember ye come of the stock that made
    The North Sea stiff with mines."

  "So clear the decks for a scrap, my braves,
    Since fight ye must and shall,
  Like sons of the men who rule the waves,
    The waves of the Kiel Canal."

  So all that day they fought and drank
    Of the battle's fierce delight,
  And blazed and blazed away till they sank
    Those trawling boats ere night.

  Then they steamed away, Yeo ho! Yeo ho!
    Brave men who had gained their wish,
  With lots of captives of war in tow,
    And any amount of fish.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Distinction.

    "The members of the Cheltenham Club do not play on Sundays; the
    ladies and gentlemen of the Cotswold Hills Club do play on the
    Sabbath."--_The Homefinder._

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: HAIL! RUSSIA!

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: THE LAST OF THE NUTS OF SANDY COVE;

OR, HOW TO MAKE USE OF OUR STAY-AT-HOMES.

_Lady in the background (also engaged in making night-wear for the
wounded)._ "I SAY! I WONDER IF YOU WOULD BE SO GOOD AS TO LEND HIM TO US
WHEN YOU'VE FINISHED WITH HIM."

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: THE RT. HON. JOHN BURNS FAILS TO RECOGNISE HIS PORTRAIT
AS PAINTED BY A GERMAN PRESS AGENCY ARTIST.

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

(EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.)

_House of Commons, Wednesday, Sept. 9._--Parliament met again after
brief recess. Compared with recent rushes at critical epochs, attendance
scanty. Among absentees the SPEAKER, who has well earned the holiday
deferred by exigencies of war.

PREMIER in place at Question time. Did not stop long. Expected to make
statement on position and prospects of Home Rule and Welsh Church Bills.
As his magnificent speech at Guildhall testified afresh, when occasion
arises he can say the right thing in perfect phrase. Constitutionally is
disinclined to talk.

No absolute need to make preliminary statement. Everyone knows these
matters are settled; nor are details of settlement a secret. Prorogation
will be decreed early next week, and, in accordance with provisions of
Parliament Act, Home Rule Bill and Welsh Church Disestablishment Bill
will be added to Statute Book. But an interval will elapse before they
become operative, an opportunity to be used for final effort to arrive
at compromise between conflicting parties.

Proceedings, in the main formal, varied by reading of statement from
VICEROY describing how chiefs and people of India are each all one in
enthusiastic loyalty in the hour of England's need, and how lavish are
their offers of help. Reading of Eastern story received with outbursts
of cheering.

"No one to say a good word for the Scourge of Louvain. But let us give
the----, I mean the KAISER, his due. At a stroke he effected the
long-time impossible feat of welding Ireland into a loyal entity
enthusiastically ready to draw the sword in aid of its long-estranged
Sister across the Channel. Less than a year ago India was in state of
ominous unrest that found partial expression in attempt on life of
VICEROY. The KAISER, secretly plotting treacherous design on a friend
and neighbour accustomed to lavish hospitality upon him, took note of
these things. Confidently counted them in when reckoning up his game,
and arranging time and opportunity for opening it. And lo! when he
stands unmasked, he finds among the trustiest wings of the Empire's Army
those supplied by India and Ireland." Thus the MEMBER FOR SARK mused on
his way to the Club to read the latest telegrams from the seat of war.

_Business done._--Various emergency Bills advanced a stage.

_Thursday._--Five weeks ago, when Declaration of War with Germany boomed
across Europe, PREMIER asked the Commons to sanction increase of Army by
half-a-million men. Reply enthusiastically affirmative. To-day comes
down again and, like a young person who shall here be nameless, "asks
for more."

National response to recruitment of first batch most gratifying. Save
60,000 men the half-million already enrolled. At present rate of
progress another couple of days or so will see number completed.
Meanwhile PREMIER asks for another half-million.

These forthcoming, and in present mood of nation there is no doubt on
subject, "We shall be in a position," he added, "to put something like
1,200,000 men in the field," a sight that would make WELLINGTON, not to
mention MARLBOROUGH, stare.

With that patriotic zeal that has marked attitude of Opposition since
war began BONAR LAW warmly supported proposal. Vote agreed to without
debate or division.

_Business done._--Having voted additional half-million men for Army,
House adjourned till Monday.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE PLAY.

"BLUFF KING HAL."

The arrangements for the production of Mr. LOUIS PARKER'S pageant-comedy
had of course been made long before war was contemplated. The completion
of Mr. BOURCHIER'S beard in itself points to a comparatively remote date
for the play's inception. Certainly there is nothing very apposite in
its theme at the present juncture; for HARRY OF ENGLAND, suffering from
the gout, blustering into a sixth marriage, and haunted by the ghosts of
four dead wives and the wraith of the sole survivor, is not a figure
precisely calculated to inspire patriotic fervour. Still, the
circumstances of the play are sufficiently national, and it should serve
well enough as a permissible distraction for non-combatants.

You need not be terrified by the complexity of the cast, which consists
of twenty prominent characters, twenty-four in smaller type, four ghosts
and a wraith, and a sprinkling of nameless "halberdiers, huntsmen,
minstrels, servitors, etc." (The soldier-supers--a type not to be
confused with the super-soldier--were a very scratch lot; and I must
hope that this defect was due to the enlistment of the more martial
spirits in the profession.) The history of the period is made easy for
all intelligences, and the relations of _Katharine Parr_ with her lover,
_Sir Thomas Seymour_, furnish a clear thread of human interest.

It was pleasant to make the acquaintance of two future Queens--_Mary_
and _Elizabeth_--at the less familiar stages of girlhood. _Mary_, very
nicely played by Miss MINA LEONESI, showed no sign of her subsequent
taste for blood; but Miss KATHLEEN JONES, in the part of the pedantic
little _Princess Elizabeth_, gave us some very happy premonitions of the
domineering qualities of the Virgin Queen. The tiny _Prince Edward_,
too, who was prepared to compose an epithalamium for his royal parent's
final wedlock, already gave promise of a scholarly career. Apart,
however, from the charm of Miss VIOLET VANBRUGH as _Katharine Parr_, and
the gentle dignity of Miss ALICE LONNON as _Anne Askew_, there was
little distinction shown by the others, though the _Lord Chancellor
Wriothesley_ of Mr. HUMPHREYS, and Mr. BURTON'S _Bishop Gardiner_,
conducted their villainies with a proper restraint.

The honours of the evening obviously went to Mr. HUGO RUMBOLD, who
devised the admirable scenery and costumes, and to Mr. BOURCHIER in the
title-_rôle_. By nature and constitution he is clearly made for this
part of all others. Occasionally, in asides, his voice was the voice of
Mr. BOURCHIER, but for the rest he identified himself with the
undefeatable _Hal_. I hope he may be persuaded to retain the monarch's
beard as a permanent feature; for, as a finished product, it suits him
well in private life; and, if he is to make a practice of playing the
part of _Henry VIII._, whether to the words of SHAKSPEARE or Mr. PARKER,
I would not, for his own sake and that of his many friends, have him
renew the horrific processes of its growth.

    O. S.

"THE IMPOSSIBLE WOMAN."

The joy of _Tante_ (from which novel Mr. HADDON CHAMBERS has adapted
this play) was that many chapters went by before the reader realised
that _Madame Okraska_ was indeed an impossible woman. One began by
liking her; went on to criticise; decided that she wasn't so nice as the
author intended her to be; and then discovered suddenly that she wasn't
intended to be a sympathetic character at all, and that, in fact, our
changing attitude towards her had been just the changing attitude which
would have been ours in real life. That was Miss ANNE DOUGLAS SEDGWICK'S
art. She took her time. Mr. CHAMBERS on the stage has not the time to
take.

And so "_Tante_" is shown to us at once as a histrionic vampire, feeding
on the admiration and love of others. _Gregory Jardine_, in love with
her ward, _Karen_, has already seen through her; we have seen through
her; the question is, when will _Karen_ see through her. Forget about
the book and you have the foundation of a good play here, on which Mr.
CHAMBERS has built skilfully. I gather from the fact that he took alone
the call for "Author" that he would wish us to forget about the book. I
cannot quite do that, but I can say with confidence that whoever has not
read _Tante_ will enjoy _The Impossible Woman_ fully, and that the
others will at least find it interesting.

Miss LILLAH MCCARTHY was a superb _Okraska_. Since she had to reveal
herself plainly to the audience, the temptation to overplay the part
must have been great, but she resisted it nobly. Mr. GODFREY TEARLE,
still a little apt to smile at the wrong moment, was a thoroughly
efficient _Gregory_; but Miss HILDA BAYLEY did not give me a very clear
idea of Mr. CHAMBERS' _Karen_, and was certainly not Miss SEDGWICK'S.
Miss MAY WHITTY and Mr. HENRY EDWARDS, in the small but important parts
of _Mrs. Talcot_ and _Franz Lippheim_, were of very great assistance to
the play.

    M.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: "I DUNNO 'OO NANCY IS--BUT THAT THERE KAYZER CAN'T BE NO
GENTLEMAN TO STAND BY AN' SEE 'ER KNOCKED ABAHT!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Motto for German sailors who have sunk several herring-boats:--_Nemo
repente fuit Tirpitzimus._

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _Member of Relief Committee (taking down "all
particulars.")_ "THANK YOU, THAT'S ALL. OH, BY THE WAY, I HAVEN'T GOT
YOUR TELEPHONE NUMBER."

       *       *       *       *       *

TEETH-SETTING.

  When the thunder-shaking German hosts are marching over France--
  Lo, the glinting of the bayonet and the quiver of the lance!--
  When a rowdy rampant KAISER, stout and mad and middle-aged,
  Strips his breast of British Orders just to prove that he's enraged;
          When with fire and shot and pillage
          He destroys each town and village;
  When the world is black with warfare, then there's one thing you
        must do:--
  Set your teeth like steel, my hearties, and sit tight and see it through.

  Oh, it's heavy work is fighting, but our soldiers do it well--
  Lo, the booming of the batteries, the clatter of the shell!--
  And it's weary work retiring, but they kept a dauntless front,
  All our company of heroes who have borne the dreadful brunt.
          They can meet the foe and beat him,
          They can scatter and defeat him,
  For they learnt a steady lesson (and they taught a lesson, too),
  Having set their teeth in earnest and sat tight and seen it through.

  Then their brothers trooped to join them, taking danger for a bride,
  Not in insolence and malice, but in honour and in pride;
  Caring nought to be recorded on the muster-roll of fame,
  So they struck a blow for Britain and the glory of her name.
          Toil and wounds could but delight them,
          Death itself could not affright them,
  Who went out to fight for freedom and the red and white and blue,
  While they set their teeth as firm as flint and vowed to see it through.

    R. C. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPORTS AND EXPORTS.

[_A German cargo of lead has been captured._]

  It is not lost to you, so make no moan;
    You shall receive it back, O Potsdam pundit;
  We do but take a temporary loan,
    Intending to refund it.

  And goodly interest it shall not lack,
    A generous rate per cent. for every particle;
  We take the raw material, sending back
    The manufactured article.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. PUNCH'S HOLIDAY STORIES.

V.--A HUNTING MORN.

(_In the approved manner of the Sporting Feuilleton._)

Setting his teeth determinedly, Ralph Wonderson swarmed up the
Virginia-creeper until he reached the closely-shuttered window. Here he
clung precariously with one hand while with the other he produced a
gimlet and noiselessly bored two holes in the green shutters. Was he too
late? The question shot through his brain. With a quick intake of breath
he applied an eye to one hole and an ear to the other and watched and
listened.

In the lighted room before him sat Sir Ernest Scrivener (_alias_
Marmaduke Moorsdyke) and a brutal-looking stranger. Sir Ernest was
speaking.

"Everything, I think, is ready," he said in his cold, level voice. "The
wedding is to take place in the village church to-morrow at eleven. You,
Ragley, will take up your position, disguised as a policeman, by the
church porch, arrest Wonderson on a charge of arson, and detain him
until I arrive, if I should not be already there. I have here the
policeman's uniform complete. We are cub-hunting to-morrow morning, and
at the proper moment I shall leave the hunt and make my way across to
the church, provided with the forged warrant of arrest (which I shall,
as a magistrate, hand to you), the forged death certificate of my
present wife, and the forged special licence for the marriage of Lady
Margaret Tamerton and myself. You will then rush Wonderson off in the
motor which will be waiting, and I shall proceed to marry Lady Margaret.
Yes--yes, everything is quite ready."

"There's just one thing, Sir," said Ragley, "if you'll excuse me
mentioning it. Supposing as how the lady refuses like."

Sir Ernest tossed away his half-smoked cigar and smiled evilly.

"That has been foreseen," he said. "The shock of Wonderson's arrest will
cause her to feel faint. I shall have ready a bottle of smelling salts.
I need not go into details ... drugs ... loss of will power ... you
see...."

The blood boiling in Ralph's ears prevented him from hearing more. Only
the sight of the two murderous-looking revolvers on the table and the
knowledge that he could not afford to take risks at this juncture
stopped him from tearing open the shutters and dashing into the room.

Sir Ernest rose to his feet and simultaneously Ralph slid down the
creeper and regained _terra firma_. His mind was working rapidly.

       * * *

The meet of the Chingerley Hunt made a gay spectacle. The red coats of
the men and the fascinating Parisian _toilettes_ of the ladies shone
resplendently in the morning sunshine, while the champing of the horses'
bits blended harmoniously with the choiring of numberless larks. Through
the brilliant throng moved the Master, Sir Ernest Scrivener, bowing his
greetings right and left as he passed.

A few minutes before the hour fixed for the start the approach of a
solitary horseman caused many eyebrows to lift in surprise, while Sir
Ernest for an instant went white to the teeth. Then he laughed
scornfully.

"Why, Wonderson!" cried one of the Hunt. "What on earth are you doing
here? I understood you were being married this morning."

"That is so," replied Ralph easily. "But I see no reason why I shouldn't
hunt first. DRAKE, you know, played bowls during a crisis, and NERO
fiddled."

As he spoke he watched Sir Ernest narrowly. The Master was making his
way towards the iron cage in which the fox cub was imprisoned. Ralph
edged his horse insensibly nearer.

Amid the eager plaudits of the Hunt Sir Ernest leaned down from his
saddle and raised the catch with a flourish. As he did so a packet of
papers fell from his breast pocket.

In a flash the released cub had pounced upon the papers and carried them
off in his mouth. With a savage oath Sir Ernest plunged his spurs into
his horse's flanks and gave chase. Ralph, perceiving instantly what had
happened and guessing the all-important nature of the papers, was by him
in a stride. Side by side the pair thundered along, while behind them
the hounds and hunters streamed out in a confused and glittering medley.
They were off! The hunt was up.

Crouching low on the necks of their panting steeds, the two protagonists
swept forward, plying remorselessly whip and spur, curb and snaffle. For
a time neither gained an inch. Then, without warning, the fox doubled.
With a single turn of his iron wrist Ralph wrenched his horse round
without the loss of a second, but as he glanced back over his shoulder
he perceived that the Master was only twenty yards behind. Ralph
redoubled his efforts, his eyes glued to the white bundle clenched in
the cub's dripping jaws.

Through field and farmyard, by barn and byre, over rick and river, they
sped, and ever the gap between the fox and Ralph lessened, while the gap
between Ralph and Sir Ernest grew wider, and the savage baying of the
hounds, mingled with the frenzied view halloos of the Hunt, receded
further into the distance. Never had the Chingerley Hunt known such a
chase.

At last Ralph recognized that his chance had come. Leaning over his
horse's ears, he took careful aim and slashed out with his long whip.
Unerringly the lash coiled round the papers and jerked them from the
fox's mouth. A single glance showed him that they were, as he had
anticipated, the forged documents.

Two minutes later Sir Ernest found the exhausted fox lying insensible by
the roadside. Glancing up, he perceived Ralph vanishing over the crest
of a hill.

"Curse him!" he muttered savagely. "Curse him! I must and will overtake
him before he reaches the church or the game is up. If I take a short
cut under the hill I can outwit him yet. Curse him again!"

Mercilessly lashing his foaming horse, he galloped in the direction of
the church. As he rode a sense of the urgency of the situation grew upon
him. If he arrived first, Wonderson could be arrested, if necessary at
the pistol's point, before he entered the churchyard, and the papers
recovered. If he was too late.... He plunged his spurs an inch deep into
his weary mount.

At length the desperate Mazeppa-like dash was over. As he shot through
the lych-gate Sir Ernest breathed a sigh of relief. A policeman stood by
the church porch awaiting him. Wonderson had been beaten.

With an ugly laugh of triumph he swung himself from the horse. Stolidly
the constable turned to face him. Sir Ernest gave one startled
exclamation as he saw, not Ragley, but a stranger. He had been
forestalled.

The heavy hand of a second policeman fell on his shoulder from behind.

"Sir Ernest Scrivener," said a voice solemnly, "I arrest you on a charge
of forgery, and I advise you to come quietly."

Sir Ernest glanced round and saw that he was completely surrounded by
police.

As the handcuffs clicked over his wrists there crashed above him the
joyous clamour of wedding bells.

       * * *

Ralph Wonderson paused for a moment at the lych-gate, his lovely
fair-haired bride clinging to his arm. Standing in the mellow beauty of
the English landscape they made a memorable picture. A red-coated
figure, covered with the stains of hard riding, approached them, bowing
low. In his hand he held a magnificent fox's brush.

"This has been unanimously awarded to you, Sir," he said, "as a memento
of the finest ride in the annals of the Chingerley Hunt."

And, as Ralph and his bride raised the brush to their lips, from the
admiring throng which pressed about them went up that thrilling
immemorial hunting chorus, "_Tally-ho! Yoicks forrard! Rah! Rah!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER MANIFESTO.

We, the undersigned, having carefully considered the situation in all
its bearings and applications, have come to the decision that it is no
longer consonant with the self-respect of Englishmen to share a name
with the great swollen-headed German aggressor--the despiser of
treaties, the desecrator of Belgium and the foe of the liberty of the
world. We therefore give notice that from now and henceforward we
renounce the name of William in all its variations.

  (_Signed_)

    WILLIAM ARCHER.

    WILLIAM ASHMEAD-BARTLETT.

    WILLIAM BOOSEY.

    BURGLAR BILL (Shade of).

    WILLIE CLARKSON.

    WILL CROOKS.

    WILLIAM DE MORGAN.

    WILL EVANS.

    GULIELMO FERRERO.

    WILLIAM GUNN.

    WILLIAM KNIGHT.

    WILLIAM LE QUEUX.

    WILHELM MEISTER (Shade of).

    BILLY MERSON.

    WILLIAM OSLER.

    WILLY POGANY.

    WILLIAM RAMSAY.

    WILLIAM SHAKSPEARE (Shade of).

    WILLIAM THE SILENT (Shade of).

    WILLIAM STRANG.

    BILL SIKES (Shade of).

    WILLIAM WATSON.

    WILLIAM WHITELEY, LTD.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _A Pufflecombe Worthy speaks._ "YOU BE TELLING US, JAMES
BUZZICOTT, 'BOUT THIS 'ERE LOOVANE THERE'S S'MUCH TARK OVER IN THE
PAPERS, AN' THE DESTRUCTION OF A GRAN' OLE BUILDING. BUT WOT DO EE ZAY,
JAMES BUZZICOTT, 'BOUT PUFFLECOMBE AND T'OLD 'BELL AN' HORNS' IF US BE
INVADED? WOT DO EE ZAY 'BOUT THAT?"

       *       *       *       *       *

IT'S AN ILL WIND....

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--I thought you would like to hear about the Intelligence
Bureau which we have established at home since the War broke out. It is
run on German lines and so far has been most successful, although there
are serious risks.

Clarence thought of it. He is my cleverest brother. He got the idea from
a newspaper. Before the War we weren't allowed to read anything in the
papers but the cricket scores, but now we may read all.

The Bureau works like this. Clarence goes to mother and says, "May we go
fishing this afternoon?" Mother says "No," and hurries off to the sewing
meeting somewhere. They are all making things for soldiers, and
soldiers' wives and children, and Belgian peasants. Briefly, when she's
gone, Clarence writes on a piece of paper the fact that Mother has no
objection to our fishing, shows it to our governess, and off we go.
Isn't that clever of Germany? When mother returns she forgets to ask of
the governess what we have been doing, and it is all right.

The other week-end mother went away and wrote to Clarence that we were
to be sure to go to the children's service on Sunday afternoon. Clarence
read the letter aloud, and when it came to that part he said, instead of
"children's service on Sunday afternoon," something about a picnic on
Monday. That is what he calls editing, which is the special duty of an
Intelligence Bureau.

Hoping that other children may find our example useful,

    I remain,
    Yours truly,

    BETH MANN.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Return to Culture.

"GERMANS FALLING BACK ON THE MUSE."

_North Mail._

       *       *       *       *       *

ARMS AND THE WOMAN.

I was working in the garden, tidying up after the weekly visit of the
jobbing gardener, when Bolsover put his head over the hedge. "Heard
about the Pottingers' governess?" he asked excitedly.

"The Pottingers' governess?" I repeated. "No; what about her? Has she
given them notice?"

