     Since I have been at my summer residence, I have received several
     numbers of an Illinois newspaper, and a pamphlet from the same
     quarter, all which contained highly interesting matter relative
     to the question then undecided in your State; I presume I am
     indebted to thy kindness for those documents, for which I feel
     greatly obliged. The letter of Thos. Jefferson addressed to
     thyself, is very interesting, and I have it in contemplation to
     cause it to be printed in a tract form, for general distribution,
     provided such use of it, may be altogether agreeable to thee.

     I have indulged myself with a hope that it may be within the
     range of probability, that thee will make a visit to Philadelphia
     ere long. Not anything would give me more pleasure than thy
     presence in our city, and that gratification would be increased
     by thy making my house thy home. I have much more to communicate
     than I have leisure now to put on paper, as we are today
     preparing to return, on the morrow, to our house in town.

     With sincere regard I remain thy friend,

                                   ROBERTS VAUX.


               GOVERNOR COLES TO ROBERTS VAUX

     _My Dear Sir_:--When I had the happiness to enjoy your society
     last summer in Philadelphia, you were so kind as to express a
     wish to hear from me on my return to this State. I should long
     since have fulfilled the promise then made you to comply with
     this request which I felt was as flattering to me, as it was kind
     in you; but for a mass of business which had accumulated during
     my absence, the preparation for the meeting, and the labor and
     interruption attendant on the session of the Legislature, which
     adjourned a few days since; and the novel and extraordinary
     efforts made by some of my old political opponents to supplant me
     in the office of Governor, by thrusting in my place the
     Lieutenant-Governor a zealous and thorough-going advocate of
     Slavery. I had heard nothing of this intention (for although many
     letters were written to me, it so happened not one ever came to
     hand, or has since been heard of) until I reached Louisville on
     my way home, when I was told by a friend that he had been
     informed by a distinguished opponent of mine that it had been
     determined that I should not be permitted to resume the office of
     Governor. On my arriving in the State, I found that there had
     been several caucuses held in different places, by what are
     called the knowing ones, for the purpose of devising the best
     mode of proceeding, and of organizing their forces to act against
     me. All the Executive officers of the State recognizing me as
     Governor, I found no difficulty in entering at once on the duties
     of the office. The Lieutenant-Governor, however, still remained
     at the seat of Gov't, contending that I had vacated the office by
     my absence from the State, and that he was, under the
     constitution, the acting Governor. On the meeting of the Supreme
     Court, he applied for a mandamus against the Secretary of State.
     The court refused the mandamus on an incidental point, and got
     rid of the main question without deciding it. Soon after this the
     General Assembly met, and efforts were made to induce it to
     recognize the Lieutenant as the acting Governor; but these
     efforts having failed, he made a communication to both Houses,
     setting forth his claims to the office of Governor, and asking to
     be heard by himself or counsel in support of them. Nothing was
     done with this communication, there being only _one_ member in
     _each_ House openly in favor of the Lieutenant-Governor's
     pretensions. There would doubtless have been more if there had
     been any prospect of ousting me. I attribute the unexpected
     unanimity to the circumstance of the question having been stirred
     in time to afford the people an opportunity of making known their
     opinions and feelings to their Representatives previous to their
     leaving home to take their seats in the Legislature. The current
     of public opinion on this question was too strong in my favor to
     be resisted by any but a most desperate antagonist. This effort
     of my opponents has recoiled very much to my advantage, in
     weakening their popularity, and adding to the strength of mine.

     You will recollect my having shown you last summer some
     strictures, which I had been induced to publish on the judge's
     opinion in the malicious suit which had been instituted against
     me for freeing my negroes, in consequence of several
     extraordinary errors of fact, as well as of law, which it
     contained, and the unusual pains taken by the judge to publish
     and circulate these errors to my injury. Two actions have been
     instituted against me for this publication--one by the court--the
     other in the name of the judge as an individual, in which he has
     laid his damages at $5,000. The former is to be tried at
     Edwardsville next month--the latter at this place in April. The
     original suit, or mother of the judge's twin-suits, is still
     pending in our Supreme Court, and is expected will be decided at
     the June term. I trust I shall get rid of all of these suits in
     the course of the spring and summer. I feel the more anxious to
     do so as they are the first suits, that ever were instituted
     against me.

     I have not heard anything of the pamphlets which you were so good
     as to promise to send me. I shall go to St. Louis in about a
     month, when I hope to receive them. I see noticed in the public
     prints a new pamphlet, published by G. and C. Carville, at New
     York, on the emancipation and removal of the slaves of the U. S.
     If you could conveniently lay your hands on this pamphlet, you
     would confer a favor on me by sending it to me by mail. May I ask
     the favor of you to hand to Mr. Fry the enclosed five dollar
     note, and request him to forward the National Gazette to William
     Wilson (Chief Justice of the State), Carmi, White county,
     Illinois.

     I beg you to present my kind regards to Mrs. Vaux, and to accept
     my grateful acknowledgments for your very kind and truly friendly
     attentions to me while in Philadelphia; and permit me again to
     renew to you the assurance of my obligations to you for the
     services rendered to humanity and to Illinois during the late
     vile effort to prostitute their rights and character and to
     repeat that the virtuous and benevolent interest you evinced on
     that occasion will ever endear you to

                                   EDWARD COLES.


               GOVERNOR COLES TO A. COWLES

     _Dear Sir_:--Believing that I should have been able to prove that
     I had not libeled Judge McRoberts, and explain how the Grand Jury
     had been induced to present me for so doing, it was with great
     regret that I heard you had thought proper to dismiss the
     prosecution. Fearing that some malicious person may misrepresent
     this transaction at some future day, when those who now
     understand it may have forgotten many of the details in relation
     to it, or perhaps be dead, or have removed from the country, I
     have determined to ask the favor of you to give me a written
     answer to the following questions:

     Did you summon or request Judge McRoberts to appear before the
     Grand Jury, which presented me for libeling him?

     Did not Judge McRoberts request to see the indictment before it
     was delivered to the Grand Jury, and did he not examine and alter
     it, and if so what were the alterations made by him?

     Did you ask Mr. Blackwell to aid you in the prosecution of me,
     and do you know whether he was employed by Judge McRoberts to do
     so?

     As you have expressed the opinion verbally to several persons,
     that I had not libeled Judge McRoberts, I ask the favor of you to
     give me your opinion in writing, whether the matter contained in
     the indictment was a libel?

     With great respect, I am &c., &c.,
                                   EDWARD COLES.

     A. COWLES, ESQ.,
       Circuit Attorney,
         Edwardsville.

     P. S.--Why was not Judge McRoberts returned as a witness, on the
     back of the indictment?


     EXTRACT FROM A LETTER FROM GOVERNOR COLES TO JOHN
     RUTHERFORD

     I give you many thanks, my dear Sir, for your long and truly
     affectionate letter of February, and assure you, I feel great
     contrition for having so long delayed the expression of them, and
     of saying how much gratified I was at perusing your kind letter,
     and the glad tidings it gave me of the health and happiness of
     our dear Emily and her little ones; and also the pleasure I have
     since derived at finding from the newspapers in what a flattering
     manner your fellow citizens have elected you to represent them in
     the Legislature.

     I am greatly gratified at your election, not only from the regard
     I have for you as a man, etc., and the consequent interest I take
     in, and the pleasure I derive from your success; but I am
     particularly so in seeing men of your principles in relation to
     negro Slavery in the Councils of Virginia, as it cheers me with
     the hope that something will soon be done to repudiate the
     unnatural connection which has there so long existed between the
     freest of the free and the most slavish of slaves.

     Even if it were feasible, from the extraordinary apathy in the
     great mass of the people, and the zeal displayed by many to
     perpetuate the evil, I could not hope for speedy emancipation,
     but I do trust for the honor as well as interest of the State
     that ameliorating laws will be speedily passed, which will
     gradually have the effect of reconciling and habituating the
     masters, and preparing the slaves for a change which, as Mr.
     Jefferson says, must sooner or later take place with or without
     the consent of the masters. It behooves Virginia to move in this
     great question; and it is a solemn duty which her politicians owe
     to their country, to themselves, and to their posterity, to look
     ahead and make provision for the future, and secure the peace,
     prosperity and glory of their country.

     The policy of Virginia for some years past has been most
     unfortunate. So far from acting as if Slavery were an evil which
     ought to be gotten rid of, every measure which could be taken has
     been taken to perpetuate it, as if it were a blessing. Her
     political pilots have acted like the inexperienced navigator,
     who, to get rid of the slight inconvenience of the safety-valves
     have hermetically sealed them, not foreseeing that the inevitable
     consequence will be the bursting of the boiler, and dreadful
     havoc among all on board. No law has been passed under the
     _commonwealth_ to ameliorate the black code of the _colony_ of
     Virginia; on the contrary, new laws have been passed, adding to
     the oppression of the unfortunate negroes, and which have not
     only abridged the rights of humanity, but of the citizen. Such is
     the character of the law which restricts and to a great degree
     prohibits the master from manumitting his slave. The idea should
     be ever present to the politicians of Virginia, that the state of
     Slavery is an unnatural state, and cannot exist forever; it must
     come to an end by consent or by force; and if by consent, it must
     from all experience, as from the nature of things, be preceded by
     ameliorating laws, which will have the effect of gradually and
     imperceptibly loosening the bonds of servitude.

     Nothing is more erroneous than the idea which is entertained by
     many, that ameliorating laws, and especially manumissions, are
     productions of insurrections among the slaves. The history of the
     British and Spanish West Indies shows that in those Islands where
     they have prevailed most, the slaves have behaved best, and
     insurrections have occurred oftenest where the slaves have been
     most oppressed and manumissions most restricted. Indeed, we never
     hear of insurrections in the Spanish Islands, where the slaves
     are most under the protection of the law, and where there are no
     restrictions on manumissions. Virginia should repeal the law
     against emancipation, prohibit the domestic slave-trade--which is
     nearly allied in all its odious features to the African slave
     trade--restrict the power of the master in disposing of his
     slaves, by preventing him from separating the child from its
     parent, the husband from his wife, etc., and if possible, connect
     the slave under proper modifications to the soil, or at least to
     the vicinity of his birth; instruct the slaves especially in the
     duties of Religion; extend to them the protection of the laws,
     and punish severity in the master, and when cruelly exercised by
     him, it should vest the right in the slave to his freedom; or to
     be sold at an assessed valuation. These and many other provisions
     might be adopted which would have a most salutary effect, and
     especially the Spanish provision, which gives the right to the
     slave to buy a portion of his time as soon as he can procure the
     means, either by his own labor or by the bounty of others; thus,
     for instance, suppose a negro worth $600 on paying $100, he is
     entitled to one day in each week, and so on. In connection with
     the emancipation of slaves, I should provide for the removal by
     bounty and otherwise, of free negroes from the country, as the
     natural difference, and unfortunate prejudice existing between
     the whites and blacks would make it the interest of both to be
     separated. This subject, is too big for a letter, and I can only
     add, that if I could see ameliorating laws adopted, if I did not
     live to see the emancipation, I should at least die with the
     happy consolation of believing that measures were in progress for
     the consummation of ultimate justice to the descendants of the
     unfortunate African; and that my country, and the descendants of
     my family, if not my nephews and nieces, would lie down in peace
     and safety, and would not have entailed on them an unnatural and
     odious system, productive of strife, enmity and war, between
     themselves and their domestics. I was in hopes to have been able
     by this time to have informed you and my other friends of the
     result of the malicious suit instituted against me for freeing my
     negroes, and which is pending in our Supreme Court. The case was
     argued last week, but the court has adjourned to the 1st Monday
     of January, next, without deciding it. I was much disappointed in
     not getting a decision; I have however but little fear as to the
     result.


FOOTNOTES:

[230] These letters are taken from E. B. Washburne's _Sketch of Edward
Coles, Second Governor of Illinois, and of the Slavery Struggle of
1823-1824_.

[231] _Ibid._, p. 18.

[232] Jefferson's reply was published in THE JOURNAL OP NEGRO HISTORY,
Vol. III, p. 83.

[233] The last paragraph of Mr. Birkbeck's letter cannot but excite
admiration. The quotation from Horace applied with great force to the
case of Governor Coles:

"Neither the ardor of citizens ordering base things, nor the face of
the threatening tyrant shakes a man just and tenacious of principle
from his firm intentions."


SOME UNDISTINGUISHED NEGROES


SOLOMON HUMPHRIES. Traveling through this country in 1833 at the very
time when free Negroes were being denounced as an evil of which this
country should by all means rid itself, C. D. Arfwedson found in
Macon, Georgia a thrifty free Negro named Solomon Humphries, well
known by all classes including local officials and even the governor
of the State. Humphries had by dint of energy acquired his freedom and
had made himself an asset in his community. He was then keeping a
large grocery store and had more credit than many other merchants in
the town, for he had accumulated about $20,000 worth of property. He
had a neat and comfortably furnished home, presided over by his wife,
an intelligent woman of color, who was often seen driving with him in
his own unostentatious carriage. He was sought by the wealthiest
people of the city whom he lavishly entertained at his home, doing
them the honor of waiting on them in person himself, although he had a
number of slaves who could have rendered this service. Making it a
rule to be especially hospitable to strangers, he invited Arfwedson to
be his guest while in the city; but on account of having planned
to go to Columbus that day, Arfwedson could not accept his
invitation.--_Arfwedson's United States and Canada in 1833 and 1834_,
I, p. 425.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEGRO COLONIZATIONIST. While the American Colonization Society was
being denounced by the free Negroes of the North, many blacks of the
same status in the South had a different attitude toward the movement,
especially during the twenties before it had been discovered that
Liberia was not suitable for a civilized people. One of the Negroes of
the South to be won to this movement was a free man of color named
Creighton, a slave owner of Charleston, South Carolina. He had
accumulated considerable wealth and had begun to feel that it would be
better for him to spend his remaining days in a land of freedom.
Several other free blacks were induced to go with him. In disposing of
his property he offered his slaves, the alternative of being liberated
on the condition of accompanying him on his expedition or of remaining
in this country to be sold as other property. Only one of his slaves
could be prevailed upon to accept freedom on these terms and go with
him to Liberia. Creighton then closed up his business in Charleston,
purchased for the enterprise a schooner _The Calypso_ and set sail for
Africa, October 17, 1821.--_Niles Register_, XXI, p. 163; taken from
_The New York Commercial Advertiser_.

       *       *       *       *       *

A MORALIST. A white cooper called upon a Negro who owned a fine farm
near Cincinnati and expressed a desire to purchase some stave timber
from him. The Negro inquired as to what use the cooper would make of
it. The latter replied that he had a contract to make some whisky
barrels.

"Well, Sir," was the prompt reply, "I have the timber and want the
money, but no man can purchase a single stave or hoop pole, or a
particle of grain from me for that purpose."

The cooper, of course, became unusually angry on receiving such a
stern reproof and contemptuously addressed this man of color, calling
him a "Nigger."

"That is very true," mildly replied the Negro. "I can't help that, but
I _can_ help selling my timber to make whisky barrels, and I mean to
do it."--_The Weekly Herald and Philanthropist_, May 13, 1846.

       *       *       *       *       *

A BENEVOLENT NEGRO. Before the Northwest Territory became disturbed by
the influx of free Negroes and fugitives running away from persecution
in the South, there had been enough trouble with white vagrants to
lead to drastic laws for the protection of certain communities.
Michigan, which did not until 1827 pass a measure dealing especially
with undesirable Negroes, had prior to this time a law providing for
selling idle and dissolute persons at auction. At one of the sales in
1821 a Negro bought a white man and ordered him to follow his master,
and the order was obeyed. But the benevolent black took his servant to
the steamboat, paid his passage and restored him his freedom, making
himself satisfied with sending the white vagrant out of the
territory.--_Niles Register_, XXI, p. 214.


BOOK REVIEWS


_Harvard Studies._ I. _Varia Africana._ I. ORIC BATES, Editor, F. H.
STERNS, Asst. Editor. Introduction by THEODORE ROOSEVELT. The African
Department of the Peabody Museum of Harvard University, Cambridge,
1917. Quarto. Pp. 292.

In the introduction to the Harvard African studies ex-President
Roosevelt describes the enterprise which this volume represents as
"the first serious attempt by Americans to contribute to the real
study of the African." He might have added, with almost equal truth,
that it is the first serious attempt by Americans to study the Negro.

Books have been written by Americans about the black man. Howard
University, Washington, D. C., has a library of such books. There are
other private collections, some of them running into several thousand
volumes. Most of them are written in a controversial spirit. Many of
them are theological, seeking to show, on the basis of scriptural
quotations, that the social status of the black man is pre-ordained
and eternally fixed. Others are pseudo-scientific attempts to solve
the race problem by showing that the black man is not quite human.
Some of them seek to prove, on the basis of anthropological data, that
the Negro has no soul, hence efforts to Christianize him are
hopeless.--Many more are written by Negroes to preserve some record of
their meager history, or to defend the race against the monstrous
attacks upon its humanity.

Such books are interesting and valuable as records of the sentiments
and attitudes which the racial struggle has called forth in the black
man and in the white. The strange distortions of fact and opinion
which they record are significant, not so much for what they tell us
of the Negro, as for what they reveal of the intensity of the racial
conflict, and of the nature of the passions involved. Most books on
the Negro in America published prior to 1900, and some books written
since that time, are mainly valuable as source books for the social
psychologist and the students of human nature. As literature they
represent a melancholy anthology. As records of human nature, under
the strains and stresses of a tragic although peaceful conflict, they
have a new and fascinating interest. It is in this sense that we can
say, spite of all that has been written, that there are no scientific
studies of the American Negro, there are only materials awaiting
scientific interpretation.

It must be regarded as an event of the first importance, therefore,
that an institution of the authority of Harvard University and the
Peabody Museum proposes to publish a series of studies intended to
cover the whole wide range of native African life and to extend these
studies eventually to the descendants of the African peoples in
America. No study of the Negro in America will be complete which does
not take account of the African background of the race. On the other
hand, no attempt to assess the qualities and capacities of the native
African, living in his isolated and primitive environment, will be
adequate which does not take account of the Negro's progress under the
conditions of a civilized environment. As a matter of fact the
Africans are the only contemporaneous primitive people who have
anywhere achieved race consciousness and civilization without losing
their racial identity. As a consequence almost every fundamental
process and stage of civilization, from the most primitive to the most
cosmopolitan man, is somewhere represented in the contemporary life of
the Negro in Africa and America. It is this fact which lends
significance to the present volume, since these studies propose to
cover eventually the whole range of Negro life in Africa and America,
so far as that can be done within the limits of the anthropological
sciences. An editorial note at the end of this first volume describes
the plan and scope of the proposed series of publications.

     The Harvard African Studies is designed to consist of annual
     volumes--under the title of Varia Africana--made up of
     miscellaneous papers, and of occasional monographs presenting the
     results of original field or laboratory research.

     The scope of the volumes may be defined as African anthropology
     in the widest sense. Only original papers are desired, but these
     may be of any length compatible with their presentation in a
     volume which is essentially in the nature of a journal, and may
     deal with any of the following subjects: psychology, archæology,
     ethnography, linguistics, sociology, ethno-geography, religion,
     folklore, or technology. A range so wide must perforce be limited
     in some directions, and the editors have therefore decided upon
     the exclusion of purely historical papers, even when the latter
     embody the political records of native tribes. As an exception to
     this rule, the editors may be willing, under certain
     circumstances, to accept historical material which, by
     establishing the presence of this or that group of people in a
     certain locality, or by throwing light on the nature or date of a
     migration, bears on racial questions and problems of primitive
     culture.

     The series is open to papers of a non-controversial character
     dealing with a topic sadly in need of more scientific
     treatment--we refer to the question of the American Negro. The
     anthropometrist, the sociologist, and the folklorist have in this
     direction a field of research which, if approached with adequate
     knowledge, can be made to yield invaluable results. As these
     results cannot but be of practical importance, the editors are
     particularly anxious to have an opportunity of presenting them.

As a further indication of the method and purpose of these studies the
editors emphasize that an effort will be made not only to add to the
mass of information already extant in the writings of explorers,
traders, and missionaries, but to correlate and organize the
information already existing.

     Travelers, missionaries, administrators, and scientists have
     published a vast amount of valuable information regarding the
     various peoples and regions in Africa. As yet, however, there has
     been comparatively little correlation of this evidence. Now that
     the day of the reconnaissance explorer is essentially past, and
     we begin to receive accurate and detailed studies of single
     tribes, it is highly desirable to have the great mass of
     published material carefully sifted, so that the future student
     and investigator may be able to make his efforts as productive as
     possible.

     From even a few such documents, it might be possible to plot
     cultural areas, as has been done for North America--the areas in
     question being regions of fairly uniform culture, marked off with
     some sharpness from other such areas. It would then appear
     whether the African areas depended on geographic conditions, on
     plant or animal distributions, or on the superior inventive
     genius of certain tribes or races. On the other hand, it might
     appear that the whole culture area hypothesis was untenable, and
     that within any given geographic area, or within any given tribe,
     there would exist elements of culture which were adopted at
     widely differing times and belonged to different culture levels.
     Thus, a true stratification of cultures might be exposed. Yet
     again, it might be found that people living in similar
     environments tended to develop a like culture regardless of any
     contact or close ethnic affinities.

At the present moment the task of correlating existing material in
such a way as to test the validity of current theories and
presuppositions of the anthropological sciences is quite as important
as that of adding to existing collections of information. In this way
only can the mass of information now extant be made available for the
use of students in the secondary social sciences, like sociology and
political science, which are dealing with immediate and practical
problems. It is only in this way, for example, that the knowledge we
have gained of the Negro in Africa will contribute to the solution of
the race problem in America.

Interesting as is the prospect which opens with the first volume of
the African Studies, the untechnical reader will probably be more
impressed with imposing appearance of the volume, with the character
of its illustration and its general typographical appearance than with
its contents. These consist of twelve articles of an average length of
23 pages dealing with the following types: _Siwan customs_, _Oral
surgery in Egypt during the Old Empire_, _Worship of the Dead as
practiced by some African Tribes_, _The Paleoliths of the Eastern
Desert_, _Notes on the Nungu Tribe_, _Nassawara Province_, _A study of
the Ancient Speech of the Canary Islands_, _Benin Antiquities in the
Peabody Museum_, _The Utendi of Mwana Kupon_, _Notes on Egyptian
Saints_, _Dafûr Gourds_, _An Inscription from Gebel Barkal_, and
_Ancient Egyptian Fishing_.

Perhaps the most interesting of these articles, for the sociologist,
is that of R. H. Blanchard entitled _Notes an Egyptian Saints_.
Sainthood, as the author remarks, "is not a difficulty of achievement
in the Islamic world." Every hamlet has its shrine and in the larger
villages there will usually be found two or three such sanctuaries.
Once a year, on his birthday, a festival and religious fair in honor
of the saint is held. The primitive character of these religious
celebrations is attested by the orgiastic and often licentious
performances that accompany them. For example on the occasion of the
festival of el-Hamâl et-Rayah, a purely local celebrity, "the whole
adult male population of the town, in defiance of all orthodox Moslem
sentiment, intoxicated themselves with whatever alcoholic beverages
they could procure. Half a dozen prostitutes, hired for the occasion,
set up their booths or tents in the town, and received all comers.
There was among the revelers a great deal of horseplay of the most
licentious character, particularly in the vicinity of the booths if
the _sharamît_. Drunken men were dragged into the lanes by their
friends, and there left lying, exposed to the village wags and wits.
In 1914 this festival was modified by Government, which suppressed the
more offensive features of the celebration."

One of the most interesting of these saints referred to was "an old
Negro slave well known for his long, harmless, pious life." It is
generally held that the body of a man who has during his life attained
an unusual degree of sanctity is gifted with a supernatural power
which is often exerted on those who carry his bier to the grave. The
supernatural power of this old Negro saint was attested to in the
following peculiar way: "Having died toward evening, he would not, on
any account, have himself buried the same evening, and the bearers, in
spite of all their shouting of _la ilah ill Alllah_ (sic), could not
bring the corpse to the graveyard. It remained therefore, all night in
the house (though the people do not like to keep a corpse at night),
watched by a multitude of people praying. Next morning also it could
not be buried for a long time, the blessed dead compelled the bearers
to go through all the streets of the town, till at last, on the
recommendations of the governor, the higher officials carried the bier
to the grave, even the Turkish soldiers could not accomplish it. The
whole town was in uproar. The Mohammadans say the angels exercise this
coercive power. The Christians believe it is the devil."

It seems probable, as the author suggests, that we have in these
religious festivals in honor of a local celebrity surviving examples
of localized and more primitive type of religious cult which has not
yet been wholly superseded by the religion of Islam, with its wider
outlook and more rational conceptions of life. The notes here recorded
suggest at once questions which can only be answered by further
investigation and by comparison of the materials gathered in this
region with those that are now being brought to light in other fields.
It is the purpose of the Harvard African studies to answer these
questions, so far as they can be answered by a study of African life.

Interesting from other points of view are the reproductions of the
remarkable collection of Benin antiquities at the Peabody Museum, of
the celebrated Vai syllabary, and of an interesting poem of 100 lines
in the Suaheli language said to have been dictated by a dying mother
to her daughter. Transliteration and translation accompany the
reproduction in the original script.

                                   ROBERT E. PARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Fifty Years and Other Poems._ By JAMES WELDON JOHNSON. With an
Introduction by BRANDER MATTHEWS. The Cornhill Co., Boston, 1917. Pp.
xiv, 92.

From time to time for the last fifteen years Mr. James Weldon Johnson
has been remarked as one of the literary men of the race. He has now
brought together his verses in a little volume, _Fifty Years and Other
Poems_, an introduction to which has been written by Professor Brander
Matthews, of Columbia University. The task was eminently worth while.

The book falls into two parts. The first is made up of poems in the
commonly accepted forms, though there are one or two examples of
_vers libre_; and the second is entitled _Jingles and Croons_. This
second division consists of dialect verses, especially the songs that
have been set to music, most frequently by the poet's brother, Mr. J.
Rosamond Johnson. Outstanding are the very first lines, _Since you
went away_. It is well that these pieces have been brought together.
For artistic achievement, however, attention will naturally be fixed
upon the first division. _Fifty Years_ was written in honor of the
fiftieth anniversary of the emancipation of the race. Professor
Matthews speaks of it as "one of the noblest commemorative poems yet
written by any American--a poem sonorous in its diction, vigorous in
its workmanship, elevated in its imagination, and sincere in its
emotion." This is high praise, and yet it may reasonably be asked if
there are not in the book at least four pieces of finer poetic
quality. These are, first of all, the two poems that originally
appeared in the Century, _Mother Night_ and _O Black and Unknown
Bards_, and _The White Witch_ and _The Young Warrior_. The first of
these four poems is a sonnet well rounded out. The second gains merit
by reason of its strong first and last two stanzas. _The White Witch_
chooses a delicate and difficult theme, but contains some very strong
stanzas. _The Young Warrior_ is a poem of rugged strength and one that
deserves all the popularity it has achieved with Mr. Burleigh's
musical setting. Mr. Johnson is strongest in the simple, direct, and
sometimes sensuous expression that characterizes these latter poems,
and it is to be hoped that he may have the time and the inclination to
write many more like them.

                                   BENJAMIN BRAWLEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Battles and Victories of Allen Allensworth._ By CHARLES ALEXANDER.
Sherman, French and Company, Boston, 1914. Pp. 429.

Here we have the story of a successful Negro born a slave in Kentucky
but who, determined to succeed, rose to the distinction of a teacher
and preacher and finally to that of a chaplain in the United States
army with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. The value of this book to
the historian, however, is not the mere sketch of Colonel Allensworth
but the valuable facts bearing on the history of the Negroes in
various parts of the United States. The philanthropic attitude of the
Quakers toward Negroes, the life of the slave on the Mississippi, the
relations between the poor whites and the slaves, the escape of
fugitives to Canada, and the work of the abolitionists are all
mentioned from page to page.

The larger portion of the book, however, gives details of the life of
Allensworth, which would interest only those who knew him personally.
But his founding a town in California inhabited altogether by Negroes
stamps him as a pioneer whose achievements in this field must engage
the attention of the historian. The detailed accounts of his service
as a chaplain in the United States army in the Spanish-American War
and later in the Philippines add other valuable experiences which the
public should know. The book contains also references to the work of
Frederick Douglass, Judge William Jay and John Brown. The author
mentions also scores of other persons who have in various ways helped
to make the history of the Negro in the United States and especially
those who were effective in bringing about the emancipation of the
race.

The style of this book is decidedly rough. The work does not show
organization. It is written in such a way as to indicate that the
writer recorded his facts as they came to him at random without regard
as to the principles of composition. It was wholly unnecessary for him
to wander astray, discussing in detail the careers of almost every man
of that time influencing the life of the Negro, without showing the
connection between those facts and the life of the subject of this
sketch. The chief value of this work, therefore, is that of a source
book.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Negro Migrant in Pittsburgh, A study in Social Economics._ By
ABRAHAM EPSTEIN. Published under the supervision of the School of
Economics, University of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh, Pa., 1918.

The movement of the Negroes from the South to the North during the
present world war bids fair to be recorded as the most significant
event of our local history during this decade. In about two years a
million Negroes have gone North to take the places of those immigrants
who annually sought our shores prior to this upheaval. To show the
significance of the exodus a number of writers have sketched it in
newspapers and magazines. Books bearing on the subject are
forthcoming. The first scientific study of the transplanted southern
Negroes to appear in print, however, is Epstein's interesting and
valuable work.

Departing from the newspaper Pullman-palace-car method of studying
social conditions, Mr. Epstein assiduously applied himself to the task
of making a house-to-house investigation of the home life of this
large and typical community of Negroes recently brought to the North.
He learned whence they came, their antecedent circumstances, why they
abandoned their old homes, what they seek in the North and to what
extent they are realizing their dreams. The various factors
contributing to the solution of their local problems in Pittsburgh and
those effective in confusing the situation are well treated.

This work is especially valuable in its portrayal of home conditions.
The author directed his attention to what these migrants do, where
they live, how they spend their earnings and how they amuse
themselves. In this treatment, therefore, appears a discussion of
health, disease and crime as influenced by the presence of these
newcomers from a section in which their condition differed materially
from what they find in the North. Whether or not we agree with him in
his conclusions, therefore, this treatise must claim the attention of
students of present-day problems, desiring to deal with facts rather
than theories.

On the whole, Mr. Epstein does not find the Negro an exception to any
other migrant. Most of the facts which he sets forth are after all
favorable to blacks when one considers that their peculiar
circumstances are due to race prejudice and the proscription of trades
unions. The author did not find them unusually afflicted with disease,
as was predicted, and he saw no evidence of a wave of crime. Most of
the offenses charged to the account of the migrants are of the petty
sort which arise from the stimulus given such by the denizens of vice
tolerated by the community. Students of Negro life and history,
therefore, should read this dissertation.

                                   C. G. WOODSON.


NOTES


Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard who was kind enough to call our attention
to the misprint of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton Hart, for Sir Thomas
Fowell Buxton, Bart., on page 20 of the January number of THE JOURNAL
OF NEGRO HISTORY, has sent us the following note in William Lloyd
Garrison's own words concerning his relations with this distinguished
friend of the Negro in England:

"On arriving in London I received a polite invitation by letter from
Mr. Buxton to take breakfast with him. Presenting myself at the
appointed time, when my name was announced, instead of coming forward
promptly to take me by the hand, he scrutinized me from head to foot,
and then inquired, somewhat dubiously, 'Have I the pleasure of
addressing Mr. Garrison, of Boston, in the United States?' 'Yes, sir,'
I replied, 'I am he; and I am here in accordance with your
invitation.' Lifting up his hands he exclaimed, 'Why, my dear sir, I
thought you were a black man! And I have consequently invited this
company of ladies and gentlemen to be present to welcome Mr. Garrison,
the black advocate of emancipation from the United States of America!'
I have often said that that is the only compliment I have ever had
paid to me that I care to remember, or to tell of! For Mr. Buxton had
somehow or other supposed that no white American could plead for those
in bondage as I had done, and therefore I must be black!"

"The worthy successor of Wilberforce, our esteemed friend and
coadjutor, Thomas Fowell Buxton," had this picture drawn of him by his
guest (Mr. Garrison) on his return to America:

"Buxton has sufficient fleshly timber to make two or three
Wilberforces. He is six feet and a half in height, though rather
slender than robust. What a formidable leader of the anti-slavery
cause in appearance! We always felt delighted to see him rise in his
seat in Parliament to address the House, for his towering form
literally caused his pro-slavery opponents to 'hide their diminished
heads.' He is a very good speaker, but not an orator: his manner is
dignified, sincere, and conciliating, and his language without
pretence. But he has hardly decision, energy, and boldness enough for
a leader. His benevolent desires for the emancipation of the colonial
slaves led him to accede to a sordid compromise with the planters, and
he advocated the proposition to remunerate these enemies of the human
race, and to buy up wholesale robbery and oppression, in opposition to
the remonstrances of the great body of English abolitionists, and it
furnishes a dangerous precedent in the overthrow of established
iniquity and crime throughout the world. The results of the bargain do
not (January, 1836) reach Mr. Buxton's anticipations.... Still, aside
from this false step, Mr. Buxton deserves universal admiration and
gratitude for his long-continued, able and disinterested efforts,
amidst severe ridicule and malignant opposition, to break every yoke
and set the oppressed free."

       *       *       *       *       *

President Nathan B. Young, of the Florida Agricultural and Mechanical
College, has kindly directed our attention to the following facts
which appeared in an article in the _Tampa Tribune_, showing how
adoption of the Thirteenth Amendment was effected:

"How the vote that made the Federal amendment abolishing slavery was
polled in the house of representatives on January 26, 1863, was told
to a representative of _The Tribune_ yesterday by the reading clerk of
that congress--now a Florida winter resident and nearing ninety years
of age.

"A change of two votes would have defeated the amendment; and urgent
business kept one man from being present to cast his vote against the
measure, so it is seen that history came near being made another way
that memorable day.

"The story was told, with all the vigor and freshness of a man just
from the existing scenes and actions, by E. W. Barber, editor of the
Jackson (Mich.) _Daily Patriot_, now at Crooked Lake, happy in the
summer of Florida's winter. Mr. Barber was reading clerk for the
thirty-eighth, thirty-ninth and fortieth congresses, from December,
1863 to 1869; and he is today the only official of that body who is
living. He will be ninety years old on the third of July, coming, and
is wonderfully preserved, all except his leg. Indeed he laughingly
declared that he would have been a dead tree if he had not been pruned
of a dead limb!


_Tells of Memorable Day_

"On the morning of December 26, 1863, said Mr. Barber, there was a
stillness in the house that betokened doubt even then of the passage
of the amendment, for but four men in the world knew that it was a
matter of accomplishment before the roll was called.

"The senate had already passed the amendment, he said, and the house
had defeated it in the first session of the congress; and there was a
doubt of its passage over in the lower body.

"After its defeat in the house, the party machinery was put in motion
to bring into line sufficient votes to make the necessary
three-fourths required. J. M. Ashley of Toledo and Augustus Frank of
Warsaw, N. Y., were appointed a committee of two to see if votes
enough could be secured at the short session to pass the bill through
the house.

"Edward W. Barber, the reading clerk, and Richard U. Sherman, the
tally clerk, kept a secret rollcall under lock and key in their desk,
and on this was marked the name of every man who had voted against the
amendment. As a man was changed or converted, his name was reported to
these two and his name added to those already secured for the
amendment. One by one the change came, and at last one day when a name
was added--the member from the Gettysburg district--Ashley exclaimed
"There, by God. We've got enough."

"That day in the house Ashley, who had changed his vote to "nay" after
the defeat of the bill earlier so he could move its reconsideration,
and had complied with that parliamentary condition, gave notice that
on January 26 he would call up the bill for a vote.


_Measure Sways in Balance_

"Betting ran high for and against the passage of the amendment, says
Mr. Barber. The odds were that it would not be passed because of the
violent opposition which it had evoked at the former attempt. There
were but four men who knew how the matter would go, and those were E.
W. Barber, reading clerk; Richard U. Sherman, tally clerk; J. M.
Ashley, and Augustus Frank, the committee of two named to get the
proper number of votes for the bill.

"The margin was close, two changes would have defeated it; and one
member opposed to the amendment was absent, so he said afterward,
because a large number of soldiers from his state were at Aquia Creek,
and he felt he must pay them some attention. The name of this member
was not given.

"Mr. Barber is still editing his paper, sending some fourteen
editorials a week to Jackson, Mich., for publication in _The Daily
Patriot_, from his Florida home, five miles south of Lake Wales.

"He has been coming to Florida for forty-five years and, while he has
been delaying his coming until well into December, he said yesterday
that from now on he expects to come early in November and stay until
well into spring.

"He is a most entertaining and interesting speaker and is full of
enthusiasm for his adopted home and his future prospects here."

       *       *       *       *       *

A group of Southern folks have organized a Southern Publicity
Committee to advertise among themselves some of the South's
constructive work in racial matters. They propose to furnish Southern
daily papers with brief and accurate accounts of things actually being
done in definite places by given persons or groups or States in the
South, for or in cooperation with Negroes for Negro betterment, and to
make the South a better place, morally and economically, for both
races to live in.

The chairman of the committee is Dr. J. H. Dillard, director of the
Jeanes and Slater Funds, a Virginian, and an LL.D. of three Southern
universities, including his alma mater, Washington and Lee. The other
members are Dr. Thomas Jesse Jones, specialist of the U. S. Bureau of
Education; Mrs. Percy V. Pennypacker, of the National Federation of
Women's Clubs; the Rt. Rev. Theodore D. Bratton, D.D., of the Diocese
of Mississippi; Messrs. Clark Howell of the Atlanta Constitution;
Arthur B. Krock, of the Louisville Courier-Journal; D. P. Toomey, of
the Dallas News; C. P. J. Mooney of the Memphis Commercial-Appeal; E.
E. Britton, formerly of the Raleigh Observer, private secretary to
Secretary Daniels; Jackson Davis of Richmond, general field agent of
the General Education Board; Walter Parker, general manager of the New
Orleans Association of Commerce; the Rev. J. W. Lee, D.D., of St.
Louis, the well-known Southern Methodist minister, author and
lecturer; Dr. W. S. Currell, president of the South Carolina State
University; Dr. Chas. L. Crow, of the State university of Florida; Dr.
W. D. Weatherford, of Nashville, Tenn., secretary of the International
Y. M. C. A.; and Mrs. John D. Hammond of Georgia, who will act as
secretary for the committee.

The Committee will undertake publicity work in behalf of the best
aspects of our inter-racial relations in no spirit of boastfulness or
of self-satisfaction as Southerners. They are aware of the shadows,
the back eddies, the sinister influences in the lives of both races.
But they believe the good outweighs the evil, and deserves at least as
wide a hearing; and that to give publicity to successful constructive
work done by their own people will encourage others to similar
efforts, and will further the interests of both races. They ask a
hearing from the Southern public for these aspects of Southern life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dean Benjamin P. Brawley, of Morehouse College, has brought out a new
work entitled _The Negro in Literature and Art_, published by Duffield
and Company, New York City. It was incorrectly reported in our last
issue that this work was to be published by Dodd, Mead and Company.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dean Brawley contributed to the _Sewanee Review_ for January an
article entitled _Richard le Gallienne and the Tradition of Beauty_.
This is a literary study of merit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. James H. Dillard contributed to _School and Society_ an article
entitled _County Machinery for Colored Schools in the South_. It
contains information both helpful and valuable to persons interested
in the education of the Negro.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. M. Ponton's _Life and Times of Henry M. Turner_ has come from the
press of A. B. Caldwell Publishing Company, Atlanta, Georgia.

       *       *       *       *       *

G. P. Putnam's Sons have announced the publication of Ella Loun's
_Reconstruction in Louisiana_.

       *       *       *       *       *

J. E. Semmes has published _John H. B. Latrobe and His Times,
1803-1891_, through the Norman Remington Company, Baltimore.


THE JOURNAL

OF

NEGRO HISTORY

VOL. III--JULY, 1918--NO. 3


SLAVERY IN KENTUCKY

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION


This study is an attempt to give a connected and concise account of
the institution of slavery as it existed in the State of Kentucky from
1792 to 1865. Much has been written of slavery in other States, but
there has not been published a single account which deals adequately
with the institution in Kentucky. A scholarly treatise on _The
Anti-Slavery Movement in Kentucky_, by Professor Asa E. Martin, of
Pennsylvania State College, has appeared but, as this work is limited
to a discussion of the history of the movement to overthrow slavery,
our study parallels and supplements it.

In this study the chief emphasis has been placed upon the legal,
economic and social history of slavery in Kentucky, mention being made
of a few of the interesting anti-slavery incidents when these are
known to have influenced the local status of the slave. We have first
considered the inception of the system as based fundamentally upon the
type of land settlement and tenure, followed by a study of the growth
of the slave population, which brings in the question of the local
economic value of the slave. An attempt has been made to explain the
internal slave trade; and to consider to what extent Kentucky served
as a breeding State for slaves destined to the market in the lower
South.

In the chapter on the legal status of slavery special emphasis has
been placed not only upon the legal position of the institution but
upon the general evolution of the rights of the Negro in servitude.
This section is vitally connected with the anti-slavery movement after
about the year 1835. The problem of the fugitive slave and the general
rights of emancipation and of the freed Negro have been approached
purely from the legal standpoint.

The chapter on the social status of the slave considers the conditions
of slave life that were more or less peculiar to Kentucky. There has
often been made the statement, that in Kentucky Negro servitude was
generally on a higher plane than in the States to the south and the
treatment of slaves was much more humane. Some light has been thrown
on these questions.

As a supplement to the discussion of the legal and social status a
general summary of public opinion regarding emancipation and
colonization has been added. Although for the most part consisting of
previously published material this section has been treated from the
viewpoint of the existing institution and not from the anti-slavery
side which occasioned most of the original publication.

This study has been made from a consideration of the contemporary
evidence as found in newspapers, statements of slaves, and general
evidence of travelers and citizens of Kentucky during the period
before the Civil War. The material for the study of this field is not
only scattered throughout the country but for the most part it is very
meager compared with the records of States like Virginia and Missouri.
All the documents, papers, manuscripts and works known to be of value,
however, have been consulted. The most valuable records for this
treatise are to be found in the Durrett Collection at the University
of Chicago, the extensive files of early Kentucky papers in the
Library of the American Antiquarian Society, and the documents in the
Kentucky State Library at Frankfort.

To Mr. Clarence S. Brigham, of the American Antiquarian Society, Mr.
Edward A. Henry, of the University of Chicago Library, and Mr. Frank
Kavanaugh, of the Kentucky State Library, I am indebted for invaluable
assistance rendered in securing material for this work. The treatment
of the legal status of slavery would have been very meager, were it
not for the valuable aid given by Dr. George E. Wire, of the Worcester
County (Massachusetts) Law Library. To Miss Florence Dillard, of the
Lexington (Kentucky) Public Library, I am indebted for assistance
given throughout the period of my studies. To Prof. George H.
Blakeslee, of Clark University, I owe more than to any one else--for
his inspiration during my three years of study, for his most valuable
aid in the correction of the manuscript, his candid judgment and
judicial reasoning and the many suggestions which have helped to make
this study what it is.

                                   IVAN E. MCDOUGLE

  CLARK UNIVERSITY,
      WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS.


CHAPTER II

THE DEVELOPMENT OF SLAVERY


It is impossible to understand slavery in Kentucky without some
knowledge of the method by which the land was settled in the latter
part of the eighteenth century. Between 1782 and 1802 the seven States
which had interest in western lands ceded their rights to the United
States and all that territory with the exception of Kentucky and the
Connecticut Reserve in Ohio was made a part of the public domain.
Hence, one of the distinguishing features of the settlement of
Kentucky as compared with Ohio was that in the latter State the land
was sold by the Federal Government to settlers coming from all parts
of the country but particularly from the northeastern section. The
result of this was that few citizens of Ohio held more than 640 acres.

Kentucky had been reserved by Virginia and consequently the method of
settlement was purely a matter governed by that State and was separate
and apart from the system which was employed by the United States
Government. Furthermore, Kentucky lands were all given out by 1790,
just one year after the beginning of our national period. The federal
land policy was at that time just beginning. Virginia gave out the
lands in Kentucky by what is known as the patent system, and all the
settlers in Kentucky held their lands by one of three different kinds
of rights.

In the first place there were those who were given tracts in the new
territory as a reward for military services which had been rendered in
the Revolution. This had been provided for by the legislature of
Virginia as early as December, 1778.[234] No land north of the Ohio
River was to be granted out as a military bounty until all the "good
lands" in the Kentucky region had been exhausted. The size of these
tracts was to be governed by the official status of the recipient in
the late war, and the bounties finally granted by Virginia ranged all
the way from one hundred to fifteen thousand acres.[235]

The Virginia legislature of 1779 found it necessary to establish a
second method of settlement in Kentucky in response to the demands of
the large number of people who were migrating to the west of the
Alleghenies. Provision was made for the granting of preemption rights
to new settlers and also for the introduction of a very generous
system of settlement rights. These settlement and preemption rights
were almost inseparable, as the latter was dependent upon the former.
It was provided that four hundred acres of land would be given to
every person or family who had settled in the region before the first
of January, 1778.[236] The word "settlement" was stated to mean either
a residence of one year in the territory or the raising of a crop of
corn. In addition to the above grant every man who had built only a
cabin or made any improvement on the land was entitled to a preemption
of one thousand acres, providing such improvements had been made prior
to January 1, 1778. Preference in the grants was to be given to the
early settlers and even the most famous heroes of the Revolution were
not allowed to interfere with the rights of those who held a
certificate of settlement.

Thus far provision had been made only for those who had settled before
1778. To them was given the best of the land. Thereafter all
settlement and preemption rights ceased and the further distribution
of land in Kentucky was by means of treasury warrants. A person
desiring land in Kentucky would appear at one of the Virginia land
offices and make an entry and pay a fee amounting to about two cents
per acre. The paper he would receive would give the approximate
location of the tract and the recipient would proceed to have the
land surveyed at his pleasure. Within three months after the survey
had been made he was to appear at the land office and have the same
recorded. A copy of this record was to be taken to the assistant
register of the land office in Kentucky and there it was to remain six
months in order to give prior settlers, if any, the right to prove
their claims to the property. No such evidence being produced a final
record of the patent was to be made and a copy given to the original
grantee.[237]

An interesting example of this method of settlement is shown by the
experience of Abraham Lincoln, the grandfather of President Lincoln.
On March 4, 1780, soon after the establishment of the new system, he
appeared at the land office in Richmond, Virginia, and was given three
treasury warrants, each for four hundred acres of land in Kentucky.
The first and third of these warrants were not returned for the final
recording until May 16, 1787, at which time Beverly Randolph, Governor
of Virginia, issued a final deed of 800 acres of land in Lincoln
County, Kentucky, to Abraham Lincoln.[238] The second treasury warrant
was not returned until July 2, 1798, more than a decade after the
death of Abraham Lincoln and six years after Kentucky had become a
State. At that time the warrant was presented with a record of the
survey by Mordecai Lincoln, the eldest son of Abraham. After some
period of investigation the deed for the four hundred acres in
Jefferson County was turned over to Mordecai Lincoln on April 26,
1799.[239]

The result of this method of granting land was that Kentucky was
settled by a comparatively few men who rented their property to
tenants. A large number of the military bounties were never settled by
the original owners but were farmed by the later incoming tenant
class. George Washington had been given five thousand acres and this
land was actually settled by the poorer white element. In the case of
the land warrant property it was true that it was usually granted to
the poorer class of early settlers but as in the instance of the
Lincoln family the land soon passed into the hands of the wealthier
settlers either by purchase or through law suits. It is commonly
stated that Daniel Boone thus became landless and was forced to
migrate to Missouri.[240]

Thus we see that Kentucky was distinctly different from all the other
settlements to the west of the Alleghenies in the original system of
land tenure and she further inherited from her mother State of
Virginia the ancient theory of a landed aristocracy which was based
upon tenantry. The early inhabitants of Kentucky can be easily divided
into three classes, the landed proprietors, their slaves, and the
tenant class of whites. The second and third classes tended to keep
alive the status of the former and led to the perpetuation of the
landed aristocracy. In Kentucky, however, the laws of descent were
always against primogeniture and this resulted in the division of the
lands of the wealthier class with each new generation.

The institution of slavery in Kentucky, as in every other State,
depended for the most part upon the existence of large plantations.
The only reason Kentucky had such large estates was because of the
method by which the land was given out by the mother State.
Economically Kentucky was not adapted to plantation life. The greater
part of the State required then, as it still does, the personal care
and supervision of the owner or tenant. The original distribution of
land made this impossible and there grew up a large class of
landholders who seldom labored with their hands, because of the
traditional system. A large number of inhabitants as early as 1805,
Michaux found, were cultivating their lands themselves, but those who
could do so had all the work done by Negro slaves.[241]

With passing years, while Kentucky maintained slavery, it came to
have a social system not like that in the South but one more like the
typical structure of the middle nineteenth century West. There were
several reasons for this. In the first place, the absence of the
policy of primogeniture in time came to distribute the lands over a
much larger population. In the second place, while all the land in
Kentucky had been granted by the year 1790, the patrician land-holding
element was completely submerged by the flood of so-called plebeians
who came in soon after Kentucky became a State. In 1790 there were
only 61,133 white people in Kentucky, and although all the land had
been granted, the white population in the next decade nearly tripled,
reaching 179,871 in 1800, and this increase, at a slightly smaller
rate, continued down to about 1820. Still further the nature of the
soil made it more profitable for the wealthier landed class to let out
their holdings to the incoming whites who did their own work and in
time came to own the property. "Each year increased this element of
the state at the expense of the larger properties."[242]

POPULATION FROM 1790 TO 1860 WITH RATES OF INCREASE
+=======================================================================+
|    |       |Per   |       |Per   |       |Per   |              |Per   |
|    | White |Cent  |Free   |Cent  |Slave  |Cent  | Total        |Cent  |
|    |       |Incr. |Colored|Incr. |       |Incr. |              |Incr. |
+----+-------+------+-------+------+-------+------+--------------+------+
|1790| 61,133|      |    114|      | 11,830|      |   73,077     |      |
|1800|179,871|194.22|    741|550.00| 40,343|241.02|  220,955     |202.36|
|1810|324,237| 80.26|  1,713|131.17| 80,561| 99.69|  406,511     | 83.98|
|1820|434,644| 34.05|  2,759| 61.06|126,732| 57.31|  564,317[243]| 38.82|
|1830|517,787| 19.12|  4,917| 78.21|165,213| 30.36|  687,917     | 21.09|
|1840|590,253| 13.99|  7,317| 48.81|182,258| 10.31|  779,828     | 13.36|
|1850|761,413| 28.99| 10,011| 36.81|210,981| 15.75|  982,405     | 25.98|
|1860|919,484| 20.76| 10,684|  6.72|225,483|  6.87|1,155,684[244]| 17.64|

A study of the growth of the slave and white population of Kentucky
from 1790 to 1860 is necessary to an adequate understanding of the
slave problem. It will be found advantageous to deal with two sets of
figures--one relating to the slave population within the State and the
other with the slave increase in Kentucky as compared with the
general increase throughout the United States. It would not be of any
value to compare the figures for Kentucky with those of any other
State, for that would involve the discussion of local factors which
are beyond the scope of this investigation.

First of all we shall take the census statistics for the State for all
eight of the enumerations which were taken during the slavery era. The
figures for the year 1790 were originally taken when Kentucky was a
part of the State of Virginia, but they are included, since Kentucky
became a State before the census was published. Furthermore they
furnish an interesting light upon the growth of the slave population
during the first decade of the new commonwealth. The important part of
this table is in the increases, on a percentage basis, in the slave
and white populations. Another viewpoint of the growth of the slave
population may be seen in this little table:

  RATIO OF SLAVES TO THE TOTAL POPULATION

        Per Cent
  1790    16.1
  1800    18.2
  1810    19.18
  1820    22.4
  1830    24.0
  1840    23.3
  1850    21.4
  1860    19.5

Here it will be seen that the proportion of slaves increased down to
1830 and then began to decline. Most authorities are agreed that this
was in a large measure due to the enactment of the law of 1833
forbidding the importation of slaves into Kentucky. But before dealing
with that question it would be well to have before us the figures for
the whole country at the same period.


  FREE NEGRO AND SLAVE POPULATION OF THE UNITED STATES, 1790 TO 1860,
  WITH RATES OF INCREASE

  ====================================================================
       | Free Negro |Per Cent Increase| Slaves   |Per Cent Increase  |
  --------------------------------------------------------------------
  1790 |    59,557  |                 |  697,624 |                   |
  1800 |   108,435  |       82.1      |  893,602 |        28.1       |
  1810 |   186,446  |       71.9      |1,191,362 |        33.3       |
  1820 |   233,634  |       25.3      |1,538,022 |        29.1       |
  1830 |   319,599  |       36.8      |2,009,043 |        30.6       |
  1840 |   386,293  |       20.9      |2,487,355 |        23.8       |
  1850 |   434,495  |       12.5      |3,204,313 |        28.8       |
  1860 |   488,070  |       12.3      |3,953,760 |        23.4       |
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

The facts seem more significant, if we compare the slave increase in
Kentucky with that of the Negroes in the country as a whole. Bearing
in mind that Kentucky was a comparatively new region when it became a
State and that at that time slavery was firmly established along the
seaboard, we are not surprised to find that the slave increase in
Kentucky was much more rapid for the first three or four decades than
it was in the nation as a whole. After the year 1830 the increase in
the United States, on a percentage basis, was much greater than in
Kentucky. It seems that the institution started in with a boom and
then eventually died down in Kentucky.

There were several reasons for this fact. A glance at the increase of
whites in Kentucky for the last three decades will show that they were
forging ahead while the slaves were relatively declining. This was due
to a large amount of immigration of that class of white people who
were not slaveholding. A second factor was the non-importation act of
1833. About the same time there came to be a conviction among a large
portion of the population that slavery in Kentucky was economically
unprofitable. There is abundant ground for the position that the law
of 1833 was passed because of a firm conviction that there were enough
slaves in the State. The only ones who could profit by any amount of
importation were the slave dealers and beyond a certain point even
their trade would prove unprofitable. If there was ever a single
slaveholder who defended importation on the ground that more slaves
were needed in Kentucky he never spoke out in public and gave his
reasons for such a position.

Unfortunately there are few statistics concerning the number of
slaveholders in Kentucky. Cassius M. Clay in his appeal to the people
in 1845 stated that there were 31,495 owners of slaves in the
State.[245] The same year the auditor's tax books showed that there
were 176,107 slaves in Kentucky.[246] This would mean an average of
5.5 slaves for each owner. The accuracy of these figures is
substantiated by those for the census of 1850 which gave 210,981
slaves held by 38,456 slaveholders or an average of 5.4 to each owner.
These holders were classified according to the number of slaves held
as follows:

  Holders of 1 slave                            9,244
  Holders of over 1 and less than 5 slaves     13,284
  Holders of 5 and under 10 slaves              9,579
  Holders of 10 and under 20 slaves             5,022
  Holders of 20 and under 50 slaves             1,198
  Holders of 50 and under 100 slaves               53
  Holders of 100 and under 200 slaves               5
                                               38,385[247]

This distribution shows that, although the average number of slaves
held may have been 5.4 for each slaveholder, 21,528 or 50 per cent of
them held less than five slaves each, and that 34,129 or 88 per cent
held less than 20 each. Of the 132,920 free families in the State only
28 per cent held any slaves at all. This was somewhat below the
average for the whole South. The total number of families holding
slaves in the United States, by the census of 1850, was 347,525. With
an average of 5.7 persons to each family there were about 2,000,000
persons in the relation of slave owners, or about one third of the
whole white population of the slave States. In South Carolina,
Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana about one half of the white
population was thus classified. As stated above, this percentage in
Kentucky was only twenty-eight.

This comparison can be more clearly shown by a table of the slave
States from the census of 1850 showing the number of white people, the
slaveholders, slaves, and the average number of slaves for each
slaveholder.

  ======================================================================
                | Whites | Slave   |Per Cent  | Slaves | Average per   |
                |        | holders |of Whites |        | Holder        |
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Alabama       | 426,514|  29,295 |    6.8   | 342,844|     11.6      |
  Arkansas      | 162,189|   5,999 |    3.7   |  47,100|      7.8      |
  Florida       |  47,203|   3,520 |    7.4   |  39,310|     11.1      |
  Georgia       | 521,572|  38,456 |    7.3   | 381,622|      9.9      |
  Kentucky      | 761,413|  38,385 |    5.0   | 210,981|      5.4      |
  Louisiana     | 255,491|  20,670 |    8.0   | 244,809|     11.4      |
  Maryland      | 417,943|  16,040 |    3.8   |  90,368|      5.6      |
  Mississippi   | 295,718|  23,116 |    7.8   | 309,878|     13.4      |
  Missouri      | 592,004|  19,185 |    3.2   |  87,422|      4.5      |
  North Carolina| 553,028|  28,303 |    5.1   | 288,548|     10.2      |
  South Carolina| 274,563|  25,596 |    9.3   | 384,984|     15.0      |
  Tennessee     | 756,836|  33,864 |    4.4   | 239,459|      7.0      |
  Texas         | 154,034|   7,747 |    5.2   |  58,161|      7.5      |
  Virginia      | 894,800|  55,063 |    6.1   | 472,528|      8.5      |
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Among the fourteen real slaveholding States of the Union Kentucky
stood ninth in the number of slaves in 1850, but was third in the
number of slave owners and with the exception of Missouri had less
slaves for each owner than any other State. From the third column of
this table, however, we are rather surprised to find that not only in
Missouri but in Arkansas, Maryland and Tennessee the number of
slaveholders was smaller in proportion to the total white population
than in Kentucky.


              Value of Slaves at    Value of Real and Personal Property
              $400 per Head               Less the Value of Slaves

  Alabama         $137,137,600              $ 81,066,732
  Arkansas          18,840,000                21,001,025
  Florida           15,724,000                 7,474,734
  Georgia          152,672,800               182,752,914
  Kentucky          84,392,400               217,236,056
  Louisiana         97,923,600               136,075,164
  Maryland          36,147,200               183,070,164
  Mississippi      123,951,200               105,000,000
  Missouri          34,968,800               102,278,907
  North Carolina   115,419,200               111,381,272
  South Carolina   153,993,600               134,264,094
  Tennessee         95,783,600               111,671,104
  Texas             23,264,400                32,097,940
  Virginia         189,011,200               202,634,638

Helper in his _Impending Crisis_ made the following interesting table
from the census figures for 1850. He set a perfectly arbitrary
valuation of $400 on each slave, but, if one takes into account the
infants and the aged unable to work, his general appraisement of the
slave group is fair enough for the time and for a basis of comparison.
It will be seen at a glance that after taking out the value of the
slaves in all the States Kentucky was the richest southern
commonwealth.

From the three preceding tables it is apparent that while the Kentucky
slaveholders represented about 28 per cent of the white population of
the State, on the average they held less slaves than in the other
Southern States. Slave property in Kentucky was a much smaller part of
the wealth of the commonwealth than in the States to the south. The
relatively large number of holders is to be explained by the type of
slavery which existed in the State. Many persons held a few servants
in bondage and those who held many slaves were very few in number.

The question of the sale of slaves from Kentucky into the southern
market presents a much more formidable problem. The chief charge that
the anti-slavery people made against Kentucky was that the State
regularly bred and reared slaves for the market in the lower South.
What was the attitude of the Kentucky slaveholder and the people in
general on the question of the domestic slave trade? There is no doubt
that in the later years of slavery there were sold in the State many
slaves who ultimately found their way into the southern market
notwithstanding the contempt of the average Kentucky slaveholder for
the slave trade. This trend of opinion will be seen as we proceed. If
the sentiment was decidedly against such human commerce how did so
many slaves become victims of the slave trader?

There were five general causes which led to the sale of slaves in
Kentucky: (1) When they became so unruly that the master was forced to
sell; (2) when their sale was necessary to settle an estate; (3) when
the master was reduced to the need of the money value in preference to
the labor; (4) when captured runaways were unclaimed after one year;
and (5) when the profit alone was desired by unscrupulous masters.
Many other reasons have been given, but a careful investigation of
all available material confines practically every known case of sale
to one of the above classifications. Mrs. Stowe in her _Key to Uncle
Tom's Cabin_[249] maintained that the prevalence of the slave trade in
Kentucky was due to the impoverishment of the soil beyond recovery and
the decrease in the economic value of the slave to its owner. This
argument is fallacious, for the very blue-grass region which held most
of the slaves is today the most fertile section of the State.

As long as a slave conducted himself in accordance with the spirit of
the slave code there was little chance of his owner selling him
against his will. The president of the Constitutional Convention of
1849 stated that in the interior of the State, where slaves were the
most numerous, very few Negroes were sold out of the State and that
they were mostly those whose bad and ungovernable disposition was such
that their owners could no longer control them[250]. A true picture of
the average master's attitude has been given us by Prof. N. S. Shaler.
"What negroes there were," said he, "belonged to a good class. The
greater number of them were from families which had been owned by the
ancestors of their masters in Virginia. In my grandfather's household
and those of his children there were some two dozen of these blacks.
They were well cared for; none of them were ever sold, though there
was the common threat that 'if you don't behave, you will be sold
South.' One of the commonest bits of instruction my grandfather gave
me was to remember that my people had in a century never bought or
sold a slave except to keep families together. By that he meant that a
gentleman of his station should not run any risk of appearing as a
'negro trader,' the last word of opprobrium to be slung at a man. So
far as I can remember, this rule was well kept and social ostracism
was likely to be visited on any one who was fairly suspected of buying
or selling slaves for profit. This state of opinion was, I believe,
very general among the better class of slave owners in Kentucky. When
negroes were sold it was because they were vicious and intractable.
Yet there were exceptions to this high-minded humor."[251]

When a master had a bad Negro about the only thing that could be done
for the sake of discipline was to sell him. If the owner kept the
slave, the latter would corrupt his fellows and if he were set free,
the master would reward where he ought to punish. The human interest
which the owner took in his servant when the demands of the
institution necessitated his sale is shown in the case of the Negro
Frank, owned by A. Barnett, of Greensburg. Witness these words of the
master in a runaway advertisement: "His transgressions impelled me,
some years since to take him to New Orleans and sell him, where he
became the property of a Spaniard, who branded him on each cheek thus,
(B), which is plain to be seen when said negro is newly shaved. I went
to New Orleans again last May, where, having my feelings excited by
the tale Frank told me, I purchased him again."[252] After the master
had gone to all this trouble in the interest of the slave the latter
ran away shortly after his return to Kentucky.

     [Transcriber's Note: In the previous paragraph, (B) actually
     appears as the letter B, rotated 90 degrees, counter-clockwise.]

It was often necessary to sell slaves in order to settle an estate. It
was seldom possible for a man to will his property in Negroes without
some divisions becoming necessary at the hands of the executor in the
just interest of the heirs. These public auctions usually took place
on court day, at the courthouse door and were conducted by the master
commissioner of the circuit court. The following advertisement reveals
the necessity and the procedure:

     SALE OF NEGROES

     By virtue of a decree of the Fayette Circuit, the undersigned
     will, as Commissioner to carry into effect said decree, sell to
     the highest bidder, on the public square in the city of
     Lexington, on Monday the 10th of March next, being county court
     day, the following slaves, to wit:

     Keiser, Carr, Sally, Bob, Susan, Sam, Sarah and Ben; belonging to
     the estate of Alexander Culbertson, deceased. The sale to be on a
     credit of three months, the purchaser to give bond with approved
     security. The sale to take place between the hours of 11 o'clock
     in the morning and 3 o'clock in the evening.

     February 26, 1834         JOHN CLARK, _Commissioner_[253]

On the same day the sheriff of the county might appear at the
courthouse door in accordance with a previous announcement and auction
off any unclaimed runaway that had been lodged in the county jail or
hired out under his authority for a period of a year or more. The
slaves thus sold were usually fugitives from the lower South who had
been apprehended on their way to Ohio or Indiana. Although the utmost
publicity would have been given to their capture, in accordance with
the law, few of the planters of the far South seem ever to have
claimed their property. The usual legal code in this matter is shown
by the notice below:

     NOTICE: Agreeably to an act of the General Assembly, passed
     January 11, 1845, I will, on the first Monday of May, 1846,
     before the Court House door, in the city of Louisville, sell to
     the highest bidder, on a credit of six months, the purchaser
     giving bond with good security, having the force and effect of a
     replevin bond, JOHN, a runaway slave, 18 or 19 years of age, 5
     feet 3 or 4 inches high, a rather heavy built, supposed to be the
     property of Daniel McCaleb or Calip, residing on the coast some
     twenty miles below New Orleans.

                         F. S. J. RONALD _Deputy Sheriff_
                  for JAMES HARRISON _Sheriff Jefferson Co_.[254]
     Feb. 25, 1846.

Under the three causes of sale thus far cited the blame would not be
placed upon the master. In the case of the unruly Negro the owner was
according to the ethics of that day not at fault. In the settlement of
an estate the slaveholder was no longer a factor, for his demise alone
had brought the sale. In the case of the runaway the owner was
unknown. Mrs. Stowe probably showed the attitude of the average
Kentucky master when she pictured Uncle Tom as being sold for the
southern market only because of the economic necessities of the owner.
When in such a position the master felt called upon to explain the
necessities of the case. He was very careful not to be cast under the
suspicion of public opinion as a "slave trader," which, as Shaler has
said, was the "last word of opprobrium." Witness a few instances in
evidence:

     NEGROES FOR SALE

     A yellow negro woman of fine constitution, and two children, from
     the country, and sold for no fault but to raise money. Will not
     be sold to go down the river. Her husband, a fine man, can be had
     also. Apply at the store of

                              JARVIS AND TRABUE--3rd & Main[255]

The editor of the _Lexington Reporter_ was very careful not to get
under the ban of his constituents when he was forced to sell a farm
hand and his wife.

     FOR SALE

     A negro man, a first rate farm hand, about 27 years of age; and a
     very likely woman, the wife of the man, about 22 years of age, a
     good house servant. They will not be sold separately, or to any
     person wishing to take them out of the State. Enquire at this
     office.[256]

In 1834 Thomas J. Allen, a citizen of Louisville, desired to exchange
his property in the city for 40 or 50 slaves, but he specifically
stated that they were to be for his own use and that he wanted them to
be "in families."[257] The same attitude appears in the case of a
house servant for sale with the reasons for such specifically stated:

     FOR SALE

     I wish to sell a negro woman, who has been accustomed to house
     work. She is an excellent cook, washes and scours, and is in
     every respect, an active and intelligent servant. I do not
     require her services, which is my only reason for wishing to
     dispose of her.

                                   MASLIN SMITH[258]

The prevalence of statements giving the reasons for and the
restrictions upon these sales should show beyond any reasonable doubt
that public opinion would not tolerate any suspicion of a heartless
traffic in slaves. These sentiments were especially prevalent in the
central portion of the State. The only case known to the writer where
a large number of slaves were sold without any qualification was near
Harrodsburg in August, 1845; but in this instance all the man's
property, including 450 acres of land, was sold at the same time.[259]

There were, naturally, some unscrupulous masters who cared little for
the fate of their slaves when sold. They placed no restrictions upon
the sale, either in destination or in the break-up of family ties. We
will cite only two, one for the earlier and one for the later period,
noticeable chiefly for the lack of regard for Negro family life.

     NEGROES FOR SALE

     The subscriber has for sale a negro man and woman, each about 24
     years of age, both are excellent plantation hands, together with
     two children. They will be sold separately or altogether.

                                   LUIDORES LUCAS[260]

     FOR SALE

     I wish to sell a negro woman and four children. The woman is 22
     years old, of good character, a good cook and washer. The
     children are very likely, from 6 years down to 1-1/2. I will sell
     them together or separately to suit purchasers.

                                   J. T. UNDERWOOD.[261]

The aggregate of all these causes was sufficient to bring about a
supply for the southern market. The question now arises as to how the
demand was met commercially. To what extent were there slave traders
in Kentucky? George Prentice, the famous editor of the _Louisville
Journal_, himself a loyal exponent of slavery, early pointed out that
Kentucky had an ample supply of Negroes and that they were being sent
south in large numbers. He further stated that any one who wanted
slaves could always purchase them by leaving an order in
Louisville.[262] This opinion was expressed at a time when the
non-importation act of 1833 had been in force for sixteen years, which
meant that Kentucky was producing slaves faster than she needed them.
It was only two months after this that Richard Henry Collins in an
editorial in the _Maysville Eagle_ gave a flagrant example of a slave
trader in Kentucky who violated the spirit as well as the letter of
the law. But the sentiment of the people on the slave dealer had been
expressed much earlier. In 1833 a Lexington editor felt exasperated
because of the appearance of a large group of slaves in the streets of
the city on their way to be sold south. When another trader appeared
with his Negro slaves held together with a chain he voiced his wrath
in this fashion:

     "A few weeks ago we gave an account of a company of men, women
     and children, part of them manacled, passing through the streets.
     Last week, a number of slaves were driven through the main street
     of our city, among them were a number manacled together, two
     abreast, all connected by, and supporting, a heavy iron chain,
     which extended the whole length of the line."[263]

About the same time a citizen of Danville sold a Negro woman to a
regular slave trader. The news spread around the town rapidly and to
save himself from the threats of the gathering mob the owner was
compelled for his own safety to follow the slave dealer and repurchase
the woman at a decided increase in price.[264]

It is very difficult to find out how many slave dealers there were in
the State, for few of them ever came out in the open and advertised
their trade. As would be expected from its size and situation
Louisville was the place where the dealer could ply his trade to the
best advantage. It was the central business point and the port from
which most slaves from Kentucky were shipped down the Ohio and
Mississippi. There is no mention in the newspapers of any dealers
there before the year 1845. Thereafter there were several who
advertised for any number of slaves and made no secret of the purpose
of purchase. In the _Journal_ for October 29, 1845, William Kelly
called for all persons who had slaves to sell to see him and offered
them the highest prices. He further stated that he had slaves for
sale. His name does not often appear in succeeding years. During the
next decade there were four regular dealers who apparently did
considerable business: T. Arterburn, J. Arterburn, William F. Talbott,
and Thomas Powell. Later John Mattingly came upon the scene presumably
from St. Louis. In July, 1845, the Arterburn brothers began a series
of advertisements which ran for several years. "We wish to purchase
100 negroes for the Southern market, for which we will pay the highest
prices in cash."[265] Talbott began his publicity in 1848 with these
words: "The subscriber wishes to purchase 100 negroes, for which he
will pay the highest cash prices. Can always be found at the
Louisville Hotel."[266] Two years later he was still advertising, but
had ceased placing any limit on the number to be bought and had moved
his quarters to the Hotel O'Rain.[267] Thomas Powell also began in
1848 with this stock phraseology--"Persons having negroes for sale can
find a purchaser at the highest cash prices by calling on the
subscriber, on Sixth Street, between Main and Market, adjoining H.
Duncan's stable."[268] This advertisement ran continually for a
period of two years. John Mattingly evidently came from Missouri in
the same year, and remained until 1852, when he returned to St. Louis
to ply his trade.[269] While he was in Louisville he ran an
advertisement in the _Journal_ after this fashion: "The undersigned
wishes to purchase 100 negroes both men and women, for which he will
pay the highest cash prices. Those who have negroes for sale would do
well to call on him at the Gait House."[270]

It is noticeable that none of the Louisville directories for this
period mention any slave dealers. This failure may have been due
merely to the fact that there were so few traders in the city and that
they were more or less transient residents. On the other hand, public
opinion apparently never acknowledged that there were any real
citizens of the city engaged in the slave trade. Beginning in 1840 the
_Louisville Journal_ published a weekly paper called _Louisville
Prices Current_. In 1855 this was succeeded by the _Commercial Review
and Louisville Prices Current_, which was published by the Louisville
Chamber of Commerce. These two papers devoted themselves exclusively
to the commercial transactions of the city and gave price quotations
weekly for every conceivable kind of goods in the market together with
the volume of sales. Strange to say, there has not been found a single
issue of either of these papers, which mentions the selling price of
slaves or any transaction in Negroes. If there was a trade in slaves
which was regarded purely as a commercial enterprise, as some would
have us think, then it is very hard to understand why these splendid
trade papers did not contain any account of the business.

There were some Louisville business men who bought and sold slaves as
only one of the branches of their commercial activities. This would
account to some extent for the failure to list traders in the local
directories for it is noticeable that such men never called themselves
slave dealers. As early as the year 1825 John Stickney established
the _Louisville Intelligence Office_ on Main Street, which was a sort
of labor and real estate exchange. He advertised that he sold books;
had money to loan; houses for rent and sale; horses and Negroes for
sale and hire; carriages for sale; conducted a labor exchange, and
recommended the best boarding houses.[271] A year later J. C. Gentry
opened the "Western Horse Market" at the corner of Market and Fourth
Streets. He advertised that he conducted a livery stable, and also
sold on commission, at public or private sale, horses, carriages,
cattle, wagons and slaves; and that he would conduct an auction on
Wednesdays and Saturdays.[272] A similar case was that of A. C. Scott,
who in 1854 opened a real estate and land office but who stated in the
press that he not only bought and sold land and rented houses but that
he would sell and hire slaves.[273] Consequently Scott was listed as a
real estate and land agent in the local directories. It is impossible
to determine how many of these occasional slave dealers there were,
but in so far as available material shows these three were the only
ones to announce their trade publicly.

It would appear from all the evidence at hand that while Kentucky
furnished many slaves for the southern market there was no general
internal slave trade, as a commercial enterprise. There were in
Louisville, however, a few heartless business men who took advantage
of the decreasing value of slave labor in Kentucky and the rising
prices of slaves in the far South. In this respect, Kentucky became a
field of supply for the slave markets of the lower South.

Unfortunately there are no statistics available by which the number of
slaves sent south can be computed. The most comprehensive anti-slavery
publication on the internal slave trade was unable to decide with
certainty what proportion of slaves for the southern market was
furnished by each of the so-called breeding States. The author of
_Slavery and Internal Slave Trade in the United States_ estimated
that 80,000 slaves were annually exported from seven States to the
South. He gave no figures that were not his own estimates. He ranked
the seven States, however, in the order of the number of slaves which
he thought they furnished as follows: Virginia, Maryland, North
Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri and Delaware.[274]

Martin estimates that Kentucky sent on the average about 5,000 slaves
to the southern market.[275] Again this must be considered purely
conjectural. It is reasonable to suppose that during the last two
decades of the slavery era there were few slaves imported into
Kentucky that were intended for the purely Kentucky market. What
Negroes came into Kentucky were for the most part on their way to the
more profitable southern trade. The average death rate among the
slaves during this period was 1.9 per one hundred and the birth rate
was 3.2, or an excess of births over deaths of 1.1 per hundred. This
would make the annual natural increase among the slave population
about 2,000 per year. Comparing this with the growth of the slave
group from 1840 to 1850 we find that the increase of slaves was much
more. But it was during the next decade that the slave trade reached
its height and here we find that the slave population increased
14,502, whereas the natural increase during that period should have
been 23,190. Hence the slaves failed to reach even their natural
increase by a deficiency of 8,688. Taken literally that would mean
that during the ten-year period that number of slaves were exported
from Kentucky. But it is reasonable to suppose that many more than
that were sent to the South. With the exception of the last decade,
however, the slave population of Kentucky increased faster than the
mere natural increase of the Negroes. The law would not permit of any
importation of slaves intended for Kentucky, so the export of purely
Kentucky slaves appears never to have been prominent except during the
decade from 1850 to 1860.

The selling price of slaves naturally presents itself at this point.
In Kentucky these records are very few because the tax books in
practically all the counties of the State have been destroyed. We have
no accurate statements extant before about the year 1855. The prices
which we have obtained are quotations from the auction of slaves of
estates to settle the interests of the heirs. On January court day, in
1855, there were sold in the settlement of estates in Bourbon,
Fayette, Clark and Franklin Counties Negro men who brought $1,260,
$1,175, $1,070, $1,378, $1,295, $1,015 and $1,505.[276] The county
commissioner of Harrison auctioned the slaves of the deceased George
Kirkpatrick with the following prices received:

     America     40 years of age  }
     Peggy        6 years of age  } all for $1,600
     Eliza        4 years of age  }
     Brown        6 months of age }

     Peter       23 years  of age      $1,290
     Emanuel     24 years  of age         750
     Tom         16 years  of age       1,015
     Ann         14 years  of age         775
     Emma        12 years  of age         865
     Sarah       26 years  of age         350[277]

The county commissioner at Henderson received the following prices for
slaves in the settlement of several estates on January 28, 1858:[278]

     Ruth          33 years of age        $   800
     Willis        59 years of age            475
     George        35 years of age          1,200
     Delphy        80 years of age             75
     Leila         65 years of age            282
     Clarissa      24 years of age          1,131
     Andrew        19 years of age          1,500
     Susan         17 years of age            470
     Jennie        17 years of age          1,100
     Cupid         85 years of age             74
     Eliza         32 years of age            500
     Bell          41 years of age          1,000

This sale is most significant for the cases of "Delphy," 80 years old,
and "Cupid," 85 years of age. It is difficult to account for such a
sale in any discussion of the slave trade, but it does show the
humanitarian side of Kentucky slavery. Negroes at such an age had no
economic value even if they were given away, because the expense of
their maintenance was more than the value of any possible labor they
could perform.

At Georgetown in December of the same year we have this record:[279]

     Griffin      45 years of age     $  640
     Mary         14 years of age      1,060
     Ellen        12 years of age        800
     Elizabeth    11 years of age        406 (one-eyed)
     Sanford       9 years of age        700
     Arabel       10 years of age        690
     Adam         41 years of age        700
     Bettie        3 years of age        260
     Aaron        28 years of age      1,191
     Sam          25 years of age      1,350

The auction of the slaves of the estate of Spencer C. Graves at
Lexington in April, 1859, brought these prices:[280]

     John       18 years of age                 $1,500
     Dick       21 years of age                  1,400
     Jerry      38 years of age                    700
     Major      50 years of age                    480
     Charles    31 years of age                  1,155
     John Jr    18 years of age                  1,140
     Billy      31 years of age                  1,100
     Isabella   40 years, with 3 children, ages
                   11, 5 and 2                   1,610
     Rebecca    30 years, with 3 children, ages
                   11, 6 and 4                   2,410
     Lucy       18 years of age, with infant     1,280
     Davidella  31 years of age                  1,220
     Mary Ann   31 years of age                    835
     Patience   18 years of age                  1,350
     Catharine  15 years of age                  1,130

Such a series of prices would show beyond a reasonable doubt that the
value of slaves was determined entirely by the increasing demand for
slaves in the lower South and was in no way an indication of the value
of slave labor within Kentucky. As was pointed out earlier in this
chapter, the labor value of an agricultural slave in the State
steadily decreased after about the year 1830.

Was slavery profitable to the Kentucky planters? In the many debates
on the slavery question which took place after 1830 no one ever stood
out in the affirmative. The only ones to discuss the economic side of
the issue were those in opposition to slavery. As has often been said
of the Kentucky situation, "the program was to use negroes to raise
corn to feed hogs to feed negroes, who raised more corn to feed more
hogs." Tobacco was the largest crop raised in the State and corn came
next. Neither proved to be peculiarly adapted to slave labor. There
were few large plantations in the State where it could be made
advantageous. What Negro work there was to be done was never confined
to any particular kind of cultivation but was used in the manner of
farm labor today in the State. Squire Turner, of Madison County, in
the Constitutional Convention of 1849 made a careful summary of the
existing economic problems of slavery. "There are," said he, "about
$61,000,000 worth of slave property in the state which produces less
than three per cent profit on the capital invested, or about half as
much as the moneyed capital would yield. There are about 200,000
slaves in Kentucky. Of these about seventy-five per cent are
superannuated, sick, women in unfit condition for labor, and infants
unable to work, who yield no profit. Show me a man that has forty or
fifty slaves on his estate, and if there are ten out of that number
who are available and valuable, it is as much as you can expect. But
my calculation allows you to have seventy-five per cent who are barely
able to maintain themselves, to pay for their own clothing, fuel,
house room and doctor's bills. Is there any gentleman who has a large
number of slaves, who will say that they are any more profitable than
that?"[281]

No one in the convention answered the last question put by Squire
Turner. But regardless of such an economic condition, not a single
piece of remedial legislation was passed and the members of the
Constitutional Convention added a provision to the Bill of Rights
which rooted the slavery system firmer than ever. That most admirable
of all southern characters, and at the same time the most difficult to
understand, the Kentucky master, took little heed of a question of
dollars and cents when it interfered with his moral and humanitarian
sentiments. He had inherited, in most cases, the slaves that were his.
He knew well enough that the system did not pay but supposing that he
should turn his slaves loose, what would become of them? What could
they do for a living? The experience of later years proved that his
apparently obstinate temperament was mixed with a good deal of wisdom,
for once the slaves were set free their status was not to any great
extent ameliorated if they went abroad from the plantation where they
had lived from childhood.

There was a certain amount of profit in the labor of able-bodied
slaves but they only represented a fraction of the Negroes whom the
master was called upon to support. The law compelled the owner to
maintain his old and helpless slaves and this represented the spirit
of the large majority of the slaveholders. Those were rare cases
indeed when an owner was hailed into court for failing to provide for
an infirm member of his slave household. The true Kentuckian never
begrudged the expense that such support incurred. One of the ablest
lawyers of the State, Benjamin Hardin, made the statement that "if it
were not for supporting my slaves, I would never go near a
courthouse."[282]

Rev. Stuart Robinson, speaking before the Kentucky Colonization
Society in 1849, gave another viewpoint of the economic value of the
slave. "The increase of slaves in Kentucky," said he, "has hardly
reached three thousand annually for eighteen years past. The increase
since 1840 has been 27,653--the increase for the year just closed
2,921. In twenty-six counties, embracing one fourth of the slave
population--some of them the largest slave-holding counties--there has
been an actual decrease in the last year of 881 slaves. In twelve
other counties the increase has been only twenty-three. There are ten
counties in the State, which contain one third of all the slave
population of Kentucky; in these ten counties, the increase of slaves
for five years past has been 2,728--an increase of less than one per
cent per annum. Nor is this slow increase of slavery to be attributed
to any stagnation or decline of public prosperity, for in the meantime
the state has been growing in population and wealth as heretofore.
During these five years the taxable property of the Commonwealth has
increased in value more than seventy-six millions. Now this decrease
of slaves while the other property of the commonwealth is increasing
must arise from one of three causes--and in either case the inference
is the same as to the fate of slavery in Kentucky. (1) Is it because
the climate is unhealthy to the African? If so then African labor
cannot continue. (2) Is it owing to emigration? Then something is
wrong in the system of labor, that causes the emigration of our
people--for no finer soil--no more desirable residence can be found in
the world. (3) Or is it owing to the domestic slave trade? Then for
some reason slave labor is less profitable here than elsewhere, and
must soon be given up."[283]

These figures quoted by the speaker on the slave population for year
by year are available in the auditor's tax books for the years 1840 to
1859:[284]

     1840      164,817
     1841      168,853
     1842      171,035
     1843      176,107
     1844      178,837
     1845      182,742
     1846      185,582
     1847      189,549
     1848      192,470
     1849      195,110
     1850      196,847
     1851      196,336
     1852      200,867
     1853      200,015
     1854      200,181
     1855      202,790
     1856      201,160
     1857      201,590
     1858      207,559
     1859      208,625

The very small growth shown here would barely account for the natural
increase among the slaves by virtue of the high birth rate. The
mortality rates were about the same for slaves as for whites. The
relative decline was undoubtedly due to the rising prices for slaves
which were sent to the South and the consequent decreasing value of a
slave's labor to the Kentuckian. He knew beyond a doubt that the time
would eventually come when he would have to part with his slave and
that portion of the holders who were not averse to selling their
chattels did so during this period.


FOOTNOTES:

[234] Hening's Statutes, Vol. X, p. 50.

[235] Hening's Statutes, Vol. XI, p. 309; Treat, P. J., _National Land
System_, p. 235.

[236] _Ibid._, Vol. X, pp. 35-45.

[237] Winterbotham, _An Historical Geographical Commercial and
Topographical View of the United States_, Vol. 3, pp. 156-157.

[238] Kentucky Land Grants, Book 13, p. 59.

[239] _Ibid._, Book 8, p. 228.

[240] Shaler's _Autobiography_, p. 33.

[241] Michaux (Thwaite's Reprint), _Travels to the West of the
Allegheny Mountains_, Vol. 3, p. 237.

[242] Shaler, N. S., _Kentucky_, p. 196.

[243] Includes 182 Indians.

[244] Includes 33 Indians.

[245] Greeley, Horace, _Writings, Speeches and Addresses of Cassius M.
Clay_, p. 177.

[246] _Collected Documents_, 1847, p. 581.

[247] De Bow's _Statistical Review_, p. 95.

[248] Adapted from De Bow's _Statistical Review_, pp. 67, 85, 99.

[249] Stowe, _Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin_, p. 143.

[250] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, October 17, 1849.

[251] Shaler's _Autobiography_, p. 36.

[252] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, December 24, 1829.

[253] _Lexington Observer and Kentucky Reporter_, February 27, 1834.

[254] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, March 4, 1846.

[255] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, September 3, 1845.

[256] _Lexington Observer_ and _Kentucky Reporter_, Jan. 28, 1835.

[257] _Ibid._, July 9, 1834.

[258] _Lexington Observer_ and _Kentucky Reporter_, Jan. 7, 1835.

[259] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, August 6, 1845.

[260] _Bairdstown Candid Review_, June 20, 1809.

[261] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, May 2, 1849.

[262] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, September 26, 1849.

[263] _Lexington Western Luminary_, June 5, 1833.

[264] Blanchard and Rice, _Debates on Slavery_, p. 133.

[265] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, July 30, 1845.

[266] _Ibid._, July 19, 1848.

[267] _Ibid._, August 14, 1850.

[268] _Ibid._, August 2, 1848.

[269] _St. Louis Daily Times_, October 14, 1852.

[270] _Louisville Daily Journal_, November 23, 1848.

[271] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, November 2, 1825.

[272] _Ibid._, September 13, 1826.

[273] _Louisville Daily Times_, March 1, 1854.

[274] _Slavery and Internal Slave Trade in the U. S._, p. 12.

[275] Martin, Asa E., _Anti-Slavery Movement in Kentucky_, p. 89.

[276] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 74.

[277] _Cynthiana News_, January 10, 1858.

[278] _Henderson Weekly Commercial_, January 29, 1858.

[279] _Georgetown Gazette_, December 23, 1858.

[280] _Weekly Free South_ (Newport), April 29, 1859.

[281] Debates of the Convention of 1849, p. 73.

[282] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, p.
544.

[283] _Presbyterian Herald_, April 12, 1849.

[284] _Collected Documents_, 1847, pp. 581-583; 1853, pp. 401-403;
1860, pp. 241-246.


CHAPTER III

THE LEGAL STATUS OF SLAVERY


Slavery in its more economic form naturally spread to the Kentucky
district as the western frontier of Virginia became settled. Of the
293,427 slaves which were held in the State of Virginia in the year
1790, however, only 11,830 were in the district of Kentucky, which at
that time had a total population of 73,077. Few thought, however, of
disputing the rights of the institution in the newly created State.
The final convention which met to form a constitution was held at
Danville, beginning on April 2, 1792, and in the course of its
proceedings it was apparent that there was no fundamental division
among the delegates regarding any of the proposed provisions with the
exception of the one dealing with slavery. Virginia had stipulated in
giving permission for the formation of the new State that slavery as
an established institution should not be disturbed, and this policy
had the support of a majority of the members of the constitutional
convention. George Nichols, a native of the Old Dominion, was the
leader of the assembly and had charge of most of the work which was
done and naturally was most interested in carrying out the wishes of
his native State in the formation of the new document. The only
serious opponent was David Rice, a noted Presbyterian minister, but,
having resigned on April 11, he was not present at the time when the
slavery issue came up for final settlement.

A separate vote was taken on Article IX, the slavery section, which
passed 26 to 19. It was finally provided that

     The legislature shall have no power to pass laws for the
     emancipation of slaves without the consent of their owners, or
     without paying their owners, previous to such emancipation, a
     full equivalent in money, for the slaves emancipated; they shall
     have no power to prevent immigrants to this state, from bringing
     with them such persons as are deemed slaves by the laws of any
     one of the United States, so long as any person of the same age
     or description shall be continued in slavery by the laws of this
     state: that they shall pass laws to permit the owners of slaves
     to emancipate them, saving the rights of creditors, and
     preventing them from becoming a charge to the county in which
     they reside; they shall have full power to prevent slaves from
     being brought into this state as merchandise; they shall have
     full power to prevent any slave being brought into this state
     from a foreign country, and to prevent those from being brought
     into this state, who have been since the first of January, 1789,
     or may hereafter be imported into any of the United States from a
     foreign country. And they shall have full power to pass such laws
     as may be necessary to oblige the owners of slaves to treat them
     with humanity, to provide for them necessary clothes and
     provisions, to abstain from all injuries to them extending to
     life or limb, and in case of their neglect or refusal to comply
     with the directions of such laws, to have such slave or slaves
     sold for the benefit of their owner or owners.[285]

In any discussion of the slavery question in Kentucky in its
historical aspects this article of the first constitution is
fundamental. It is evident that even at that early day the difficulty
of the slavery problem was already in the minds of the people in spite
of many other apparently more pressing issues. The article itself
remained practically intact throughout the existence of slavery in the
State. Were there ever in later years gathered within the confines of
the State any body of men who had a better grasp of the future? The
single instance of the recommendation that the legislature should pass
laws permitting the emancipation of slaves only under the provision
that they should be guaranteed from becoming a public charge to the
county shows the comprehension of a difficulty that could not at such
an early date have developed to any great degree, but which in later
decades was a formidable problem. We may well say with John Mason
Brown, however, that "the system of slavery thus contemplated was
designed to be as mild, as human, and as much protected from traffic
evils as possible, but it was to be emphatically perpetual, for no
emancipation could be had without the assent of each particular owner
of each individual slave."[286]

The session of the State assembly which met in November, 1792, only
attempted to carry out the constitutional provision prohibiting
commercial transactions with slaves. No person was permitted to buy
of, or sell to, any slave, any manner of thing whatsoever without a
written permit descriptive of the article under the penalty of four
times the value of the thing bought or sold. The jurisdiction of such
cases was given to the county court, if they concerned values of more
than five pounds. The slave was to receive ten lashes, which by the
standards of those days was a meager punishment for any offense.[287]
Whenever possible the slave was not brought into consideration as an
offender. The theory seems to have been that the slave was better off
when left alone. It was only when some unscrupulous outsider came in
to use the slave either as a victim or as an object of profit that it
was necessary to draw the strings tighter on the Negro, not because of
any inherent tendency to crime so much as to keep the slave from
becoming unruly when in the power of a superior influence.

It was not until the session of 1798 that the legislature drew up the
fundamental slave code which was to carry out all the recommendations
of the constitutional convention and which remained the basis of all
legal action throughout the entire period of slavery. Among the early
acts of the State had been the temporary adoption of the statutes of
Virginia on the treatment of slaves and slavery problems, which were
then in force.[288] These remained as a slave code for Kentucky until
the enactment in 1798 of these new laws, which contained forty-three
articles and involved almost every question that could come up for
legal consideration in connection with the institution. The experience
of six years as a separate State had served to show that many
existing provisions of the Virginia code were not readily adapted to
the rapidly growing State, and then too there was a decided tendency
to ameliorate the condition of the slave as much as possible. In
Kentucky they were not then, at least, confronted with such a large
mass of slaves that they could not meet problems in a much easier
manner than in the Old Dominion.

In the beginning, it was naturally found necessary to place some
restrictions on the slave and his movements. He was not allowed to
leave his master's plantation without written permission and if he did
go away, any person could apprehend the offender and take him before a
justice of the peace, who was empowered to order the infliction of
stripes at his discretion. Furthermore, he was not to wander off to
any other plantation without the written permission of his owner, with
the provision in this instance that he was not to be taken before a
justice of the peace, but before his owner, who was entitled to
inflict ten lashes upon the offender. Should the slave be found
carrying any powder, shot, a gun, club, or any weapon he could be
apprehended by any free person and taken before a justice and a much
severer penalty exacted in the form of thirty-nine lashes, "well laid
on, on the bare back."[289] It is clear that this law was drawn up to
keep the slave from becoming a public menace and not as a sign of
absolute restriction on the servant, for it was further provided in
Section 6 that in case the slave lived in a frontier community he
could go to the local justice of the peace and secure a permit to keep
and use guns, powder, shot and other weapons for either offensive or
defensive purposes. This permission was to be indorsed by any free
Negro, mulatto or Indian and did not necessarily involve the approval
of the owner of the slave.

It was declared unlawful for slaves to engage in riots, unlawful
assemblies, in trespasses or in seditious speech and, if so accused,
they were to be taken before the local justice who was to punish them
at his discretion. But the Negroes themselves were not to be
considered as the only guilty ones. In order to prevent any such
disorderly meetings no owner of slaves was to be allowed to permit any
slave not belonging to him to remain on his plantation for more than
four hours at any one time under a nominal penalty to such owner of
$2; but, if he allowed more than five such slaves to assemble on his
property, he was to be fined more severely. If such a group were
brought together by the written permission of the owner and for
business reasons, however, there was involved no offense
whatever.[290] It was realized that oftentimes the chief leaders in
the unlawful meetings of slaves were free Negroes and sympathetic
whites. Were any such to be found present they were to be arrested and
if found guilty when tried before a justice of the peace, should be
fined 15 shillings, to be paid, not to the court, but to the informer
and if the money was not forthcoming the court was to have twenty
lashes inflicted--no matter whether the convicted be white or black.
Inasmuch as the degree of punishment of the slaves for being present
at such a meeting was not specified it would seem that the legislature
meant that the free persons involved should be treated more severely
than slaves by the court.

The law of 1792 regarding trading with slaves had not proved to be
effective, for in many cases the owner for a stipulated wage paid by
the slave had permitted him to go at large and engage in trade as if
he were a free man. The legislature found that this encouraged the
slaves to commit thefts and engage in various evil practices and
naturally censured the owner. A fine of $50 was to be paid by the
master for each offending slave and no punishment whatever was to be
given the latter. But should the servant go so far as to hire himself
out, he would be imprisoned by order of the court and, at the next
session of the county court, he would be sold. One fourth of the money
thus received was to be applied to the county funds and 5 per cent was
to be given to the sheriff and the owner was to receive the remaining
70 per cent. Here too the slave was not punished and his condition of
servitude was not changed. It was merely a change of owners. Again the
offending owner was the victim and for his carelessness he was
deprived of 30 per cent of the money value of his slave.[291]

The leading Kentucky case bearing on slaves engaged in trade is that
of Bryant _vs._ Sheely (5 Dana, 530). Five of the main points are
worth mentioning here:

     1. To buy or receive any article from a slave, without the
     consent of his master, in writing, specifying the article, is a
     highly penal offense.

     2. A sale made by a slave, without such written consent, is void,
     and does not divest the master of his property; he may sue for,
     and recover it; or he may waive his right to the specific thing,
     affirm the sale, and recover the price or value, if it was not
     paid to the slave.

     3. A general permission to a slave to go at large and trade for
     himself as a free man, is contrary to public policy, and a
     violation of a penal statute. The owner or master of a slave
     could maintain no action for any claim acquired by a slave while
     acting under such illegal license.

     4. But a slave may be permitted by his master to buy or sell
     particular articles, and any form of consent or permission given
     by the master, or his assent after the fact, will give validity
     to the sale--though the purchaser may be liable to the penalty,
     if the consent be not in writing.

     5. A slave, being authorized by his master to sell any particular
     thing, becomes the agent of his master for that purpose; and from
     the authority to sell, an authority to transfer the property, and
     to fix and receive the price must be inferred; but the slave
     cannot exercise or receive an authority to maintain any action in
     relation to it; the right of action for the price belongs to the
     master, and if he sues, that fact itself is sufficient evidence
     that he authorized or approved and confirmed the sale.

Unlike the more southerly States, Kentucky did not leave the slave
helpless in the courts. If a slave were charged with a capital crime
he was brought before the court of quarter sessions, which was
composed of the various county justices of the peace. They were to
constitute a court of oyer and terminer. But they alone were not to
decide the fate of the Negro, for the sheriff was required to empanel
a jury of twelve men from among the bystanders, who were to constitute
the trial jury. It was explicitly stated that legal evidence in such a
case would be the confession of the offender, the oath of one or more
credible witnesses, or such testimony of Negroes, mulattoes, or
Indians as should seem convincing to the court. When a slave was
called upon to testify in such a case, the court, the witness "not
being a Christian," found it necessary to administer the following
charge that he might be under the greater obligation to declare the
truth: "You are brought hither as a witness, and by the direction of
the law I am to tell you, before you give your evidence, that you must
tell the truth and nothing but the truth, and that if it be found
hereafter that you tell a lie, and give false testimony in this
matter, you must, for so doing, receive thirty-nine lashes on your
bare back, well laid on, at the common whipping post."[292]

Section 22 of the law of 1798 provided that the master or owner of any
slave might appear in court at a trial of his servant and "make what
just defense he can for such slave." The only restriction was that
such defense should not interfere with the form of the trial.
Naturally the liberally disposed slaveholders interpreted this to mean
that they could employ counsel to defend their Negroes and it remained
a disputed question down to 1806, when the legislature made the
provisions more specific. By this new law it was provided that it was
not only the privilege but the duty of the owner of a slave who was
being prosecuted to employ an attorney to defend him. The owner
neglecting to do so the court must assign counsel to defend the slave
and the costs thereby incurred were to be charged to the owner. The
fee for defense was not to exceed $200 and if not forthcoming the
court was empowered to recover the amount in the manner of any other
debt of similar amount. It was plainly the intention of the
legislature to provide a just trial for any slave, for they even went
so far as to enact that the lawyer appointed by the court for the
prisoner should "defend such slave as in cases of free persons
prosecuted for felony by the laws of this state."[293]

When the slave was convicted of an offense which was punishable by
death but which was within the benefit of clergy the capital penalty
was not pronounced, but the offender was burnt in the hand or
inflicted with any other corporal penalty at the discretion of the
court. Should the criminal be sentenced to suffer death, thirty days
were to elapse before the execution, except where it was a case of
conspiracy, insurrection or rebellion. When the court had decided to
sentence the slave to the death penalty a valuation of the Negro was
made. This statement was to be turned over to the State auditor of
public accounts who was required to issue a warrant on the treasury
for the amount in favor of the owner of the convicted party. The owner
on his part was to turn over to the treasurer the certificate of the
clerk of the court showing that the slave had been condemned and the
statement of the sheriff that the offender had been executed or had
died before execution.[294]

This matter of the payment to the owner of the value of the executed
slave appears never to have been questioned to any extent even by the
abolitionists in the legislature until the session of 1830 when a bill
was introduced for the repeal of the law. The bill was lost but in the
course of the debate it was stated that while Kentucky contained over
160,000 slaves only about one fifth of the tax-paying whites were
slaveholders and that $68,000 had already been paid out of the State
treasury as indemnity for slaves executed. After the defeat of this
bill there was offered a substitute which proposed that a tax of one
fourth of one per cent should be levied upon the value of all slaves
in the State for the creation of a fund out of which to make such
disbursements, but this was likewise lost.[295]

Until 1811 there were no special enactments on slave crimes and their
punishments. The court had, therefore, more or less range in the
exactment of penalties but the legislature of 1811 passed during the
first fortnight of its session a specific law governing slave crimes.
Only four offenses were to be regarded as punishable by death: (1)
conspiracy and rebellion, (2) administering poison with intent to
kill, (3) voluntary manslaughter and (4) rape of a white woman. If any
slaves were to be found guilty of consulting or advising the murder of
any one, every such consultation was to constitute an offense and be
punishable by any number of stripes not exceeding one hundred.[296]

As time went on the list of capital crimes was increased as a natural
result of the growth of the slave population and their growing state
of unrest after the incoming of the anti-slavery propaganda. By the
close of the slavery era in Kentucky there were eleven offenses for
which slaves should suffer death: (1) murder, (2) arson, (3) rape of a
white woman, (4) robbery, (5) burglary, (6) conspiracy, (7)
administering poison with intent to kill, (8) manslaughter, (9)
attempting to commit rape on a white woman, (10) shooting at a white
person with intent to kill, and (11) wounding a white person with
intent to kill. It will readily be seen that from a practical
standpoint these eleven offenses can be narrowed down to eight. The
severity of the slave code can be shown by comparison of the capital
crimes for white persons at the same time. These were four in number,
(1) murder, (2) carnal abuse of a female under ten years of age, (3)
wilful burning of the penitentiary and (4) being an accessory to the
fact.[297]

Virginia had early enacted that slaves should be considered as real
estate in the settlement of inheritances. But the growing tendency to
look upon the slaves in all things else as personal chattels led to
such legal and popular confusion that the Virginia assembly often
observed that they were "real estate in some respects, personal in
others, and both in others." Regardless of such legal complexity it
was not until 1793 that it was enacted that "all negro and mulatto
slaves in all courts of judicature shall be held and adjudged to be
personal estate."

In drawing up the slave code of 1798 Kentucky disregarded the legal
experience of Virginia and her more recent remedial legislation and
enacted that "all negro, mulatto or Indian slaves, in all courts of
judicature and other places within this commonwealth, shall be held,
taken and adjudged to be real estate, and shall descend to the heirs
and widows of persons departing this life, as lands are directed to
descend." It was further provided, however, that "all such slaves
shall be liable to the payment of debts, and may be taken by execution
for that end, as other chattels, or personal estate may be."[298]

Such a law coupled with the legal precedents of Virginia served to
intensify the mixed property conception of the slave. The confusion,
however, was purely legal, for slaves were held in all other respects
as personalty; but in cases of inheritance and the probation of wills
the Kentucky Court of Appeals was often called upon to define clearly
the legal status of the Negro in bondage. The first important decision
was handed down in 1824 in the case of Chinn and wife _vs._ Respass,
in which it was pointed out that while slaves were by law made real
estate for the purpose of descent and dower, yet they had in law many
of the attributes of personal estate. They would pass by a nuncupative
will, and lands would not; they could be limited, in a grant or devise
no otherwise than personal chattels; and personal actions might be
brought to recover the possession of them. Furthermore "they were in
their nature personal estate, being moveable property, and as such
might attend the person of the proprietor wherever he went; and in
practice they were so considered by the people in general."[299]

Conversely, the court was often called upon to interpret the phrase
"personal estate" in wills and contracts, where it appeared without
any other restrictive expression or provision, and it consistently
held that the term should be construed as embracing slaves.[300]
Gradually the personal property conception began to secure even legal
precedence over that of real estate when the two interpretations came
into close conflict. This was accomplished by placing more stress on
the proviso in the original slave code, which placed slaves in the
hands of the administrator as assets for the payment of debts. This
led to increasing power for the executor who could even defeat the
title of the heirs, though the property may have been specifically
devised. Hence it was not surprising that in the Revised Statutes of
1852 it was provided that slaves should thereafter be deemed and held
as personal estate. Coming after all doubt of the personalty of slaves
had been removed by the decisions of the highest tribunal in the
State, this law meant little more than the repeal of the old statute
making slaves real estate.

The wonder is that Kentucky should have chosen to hold to an
antiquated legal conception for fifty years after Virginia had proved
its fallacy by her experience in the eighteenth century. While it did
little harm, it had few advantages. The existence of the theory was
chiefly noticeable in the frequent legal battles over technicalities
in the settlement of estates. In the popular mind slaves were always
considered personal property, and the spirit of the slave code itself
embodied that conception as regarded all things save the question of
inheritance.

With respect to the liberty of the slaves the code of 1798 clearly
shows that the existing type of slavery was purely rural, for the
restrictions on slaves concerned only the plantation Negroes. Strictly
understood, the slave was not to leave the farm of his owner without a
pass from his master, the main purpose being to keep the Negroes from
congregating on any one farm. Later when emissaries from the North
became unusually active the rights and privileges of the slaves were
further restricted. This change was due to the current belief that
these foreign individuals were bent upon stirring up strife among the
slaves and inciting them to insurrection. Once started such a scheme
would have resulted in anarchy especially in the towns. The real
curbing provisions were not started until along in the thirties when
these outside forces had begun to make their appearance in the urban
communities.[301]

In some parts of the State were instituted mounted patrols, who went
about at night and watched the movement of slaves. They were to
apprehend any servant who was caught away from his home plantation
without a pass from his master.[302] Such an institution was based on
good Negro psychology, for his fear of the spirits of night was well
known. Citizens of that time have told us many tales of the dread
which the slave had of meeting these night raiders whom they termed
"patter-rollers" and how they came to sing of them in true Negro
fashion:

    Over the fence and through the paster,
    Run, nigger, run, oh, run a little faster,
      Run, nigger, run,
    The patter-roller ketch you.

Such a system of county patrols did not prove to be sufficient as the
slave population grew and the towns became larger and more attractive
to the country slave. The legislature of 1834 in drawing up a law
concerning tavern keepers had this problem clearly in mind when they
provided that no person should sell, give or loan any spirituous
liquors to slaves, other than his own, under a penalty of $10 for
each offense. Furthermore, if the offender was a licensed liquor
dealer, he should have his license taken away from him for the term of
two years.[303] That even this measure did not prove effective enough
to curb the evil of Negroes congregating in the towns is shown by the
further provision passed March 6, 1850, to increase the fine to $50
for each offense.[304] A still further extension was that of February
27, 1856, which provided that free Negroes were to be included in the
restriction unless they presented a certificate from "some white
person of respectable character." No slaves or free Negroes were to be
employed in the selling or distribution of liquor nor were they to be
allowed to visit or even loaf around any place where intoxicants were
kept for sale.[305] The session of 1858 made the force of the law more
explicit by defining very clearly the jurisdiction in such cases.[306]

Not only the State authorities but the towns as well were active in
the measures adopted to meet the growing problem. The best available
sample of the many provisions which the town councils drew up is this
one which was passed by the trustees of Henderson in 1840:

     It shall be and is hereby made, the duty of the Town Sergeant or
     either of his assistants, to punish with any number of lashes not
     exceeding ten, all or any negro slave or slaves who may be found
     in any grog shop, grocery or other place where spirituous liquors
     are retailed in said town, or who may be found on the streets of
     said town after ten o'clock at night, unless it shall appear to
     the said Town Sergeant, or assistant, that said negro slave or
     slaves, are acting under the orders of his, her or their master
     or mistress, and it shall further be the duty of the Town
     Sergeant, or either of his assistants, to enter into any grog
     shop, grocery or other place where spirituous liquors are
     retailed, in said town, whenever he shall be informed that any
     negro slave or slaves are collected therein. Provided, said Town
     Sergeant, or assistant, can enter the same peaceably and without
     force.[307]

This town regulation offers perhaps another proof of the oft-repeated
statement regarding the slave laws of Kentucky that while they
appeared severe on the statute books they were always mild in the
enforcement. The regulation of the movement of slaves in the towns was
always subject to the local conditions. Beginning about 1850 there was
a growing feeling in some of the more thickly populated sections of
the State that the type of Negro slave who sought to frequent the
village saloons would sooner or later start an insurrection. But no
such uprising ever occurred and the fear of such seems to have been
due to the current animosity towards the activities of the
abolitionists, which was prevalent throughout the State.

In the course of time it was considered necessary to treat more
seriously also the importation of slaves. The advisability of
preventing the importation of bondmen had been foreseen in Kentucky
from the experience of the mother State of Virginia which had enacted
a stringent law in 1778 imposing a penalty of one thousand pounds and
the forfeiture of the slave upon the importer of any into that
commonwealth. The ninth article of the Kentucky Constitution of 1792
had provided that the legislature "shall have full power to prevent
slaves being brought into this commonwealth as merchandise; they shall
have full power to prevent any slave being brought into this state
from a foreign country, and to prevent those from being brought into
this state, who have been since the first of January, 1789, or may
hereafter be imported into any of the United States from a foreign
country."[308]

The session of the State assembly in 1794 drew up a law concerning the
importation and emancipation of slaves but it was largely a mere
modification of the law of the State of Virginia. It was not until the
adoption of the slave code of 1798 that the question was firmly
settled by a more definite statement. By article 25 of that act it was
provided "that no slave or slaves shall be imported into this state
from any foreign country, nor shall any slave who has been imported
into the United States from any foreign country since the first day of
January, 1789, or may hereafter be imported into the United States
from any foreign country under the penalty of $300."

This was merely carrying out the provisions of the constitution.
Section 26 provided that "no slave or slaves shall be imported into
this state as merchandise, and any person offending herein, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of $300 for each slave so imported, to be
recovered by action of debt or information, in any court having
cognizance of the same, one half to the prosecutor, the other half to
the use of the commonwealth." More significant was the proviso that
"this act shall not extend to prevent any citizen of this state
bringing for his own use, provided, they have not been brought into
the United States from any foreign country since January 1, 1789; nor
shall it be construed to prevent persons emigrating to this state
bringing their slaves with them, but either a citizen of this state or
persons emigrating to this state may bring slaves not prohibited by
this act."[309]

An act of 1814 amended the above by prohibiting the importation of
slaves by any of the emigrants if they did not intend to settle in
Kentucky.[310] An attempt was made by a law of February 8, 1815, to
remedy some of the defects which had been found. The legal penalty for
importation was increased to $600 for each slave imported and a fine
of $200 was added for every person buying or selling such slave. No
indictment was to be subject to a shorter limitation than five years
and once so accused no person was to be discharged or acquitted unless
he could produce evidence to show that within sixty days of his
arrival in Kentucky he had deposited the following oath, duly signed,
in the county clerk's office where he resides: "I, ...., do swear that
my removal to the state of Kentucky was with the intention of
becoming a citizen thereof, and that I have brought no slave or
slaves to this state, with the intention of selling them."[311]

It is evident from all contemporary discussions of the question of
importation that it was the firm conviction that in order to do
justice to the slave and the institution as a whole within the State
it was necessary to prevent the infusion of any foreign slave element.
Once such a policy had been carried out to a successful conclusion,
they would have been confronted only with a purely domestic type of
slavery and its increase. With such an ideal condition, for those
times, the institution eventually would have been easily handled. But
these early lawmakers, while no doubt honest in their intentions, did
not have the wisdom that was tempered with experience, and the
unscrupulous slave traders found further defects in the law and took
advantage of them. A careful examination of the law of 1794, the
codification of 1798, and the amendments of 1814 and 1815 will show
that the whole theory of non-importation is summed up in the word
_intent_. It was the intent with which the slaves were introduced, and
to this alone the penalty attached. They were not to be imported as
merchandise but every citizen could import slaves for his own use.
Once these slaves were within the State there was no penalty provided
if they were sold. There was nothing to prevent a man from selling
what slaves he had imported and later going without the confines of
the State and bringing in more. If he were brought before the court,
he would claim that he had not intended to sell them when they were
brought in, and no one could place a penalty on his intentions. It
seems that there were other violators of the spirit of the law, who
never sold any of the slaves but brought them into the State in large
numbers and then hired them out for such long terms as 99 years.[312]
The fundamental idea of the law had been to place a curb on the
increase of the slave population by importation and these acts were in
direct opposition to the intention of the enactments.

An index of the inefficiency of the existing provisions regarding
importation can be found in the figures on the growth of the slave
population during this period when it is borne in mind that legally
slaves could not be imported, except for personal use, after the year
1794. The slave population in 1790 had been 11,830 and by 1800 had
increased to 40,343 or at the rate of 241.02 per cent; in 1810 there
were 80,561 slaves or an increase of 99.69 per cent; in 1820 there
were 126,732, a gain of 57.31 per cent; and by 1830 they had increased
30.36 per cent to a total of 165,213. During the same period there was
a great increase in the white population but it was always from 20 per
cent to 40 per cent below that of the slaves. It appears that the law
prohibiting importation was not as effective as it should have been.
While none of the statesmen appear to have figured from the
statistical viewpoint there was no end of discussion regarding the
necessity of extending the law to include more than the question of
intent at the time of importation.

The avowed resolution of Kentucky to deal with the slavery question in
the most humane manner and to stop any unscrupulous dealing in slaves
for the mere sake of profit is nowhere more clearly shown than in the
firm action which was taken not only in the court room but in the
legislative halls when it was found that advantage had been taken of
the letter of the law at the expense of its spirit. On February 2,
1833, the legislature passed a law prohibiting all importation of
slaves even for personal use. The only exception provided in this case
was that emigrants were allowed to bring in slaves, if they took the
oath that had been provided in the law of 1815. The evil mentioned
above brought about by hiring slaves for excessively long terms was
prohibited by declaring illegal any contract which extended beyond one
year and exacting a penalty of $600 for each offense. This law of 1833
was destined to be the crux of many a heated argument for the
remainder of the slavery period. Many a candidate for office during
the next thirty years rose to victory or fell in defeat because of
his position with regard to this one statute of the State. It was the
briefest of all the enactments on the slavery question but it was by
far the most important and far-reaching provision that the legislature
ever enacted in connection with the institution.[313]

It is noticeable that this measure was not brought about in any sense
by the activities of the abolitionists, for they had not at that time
made their appearance in the State. It was an honest endeavor on
the part of the native population, slaveholding as well as
non-slaveholding, to carry out the spirit of their State constitution
which had been adopted back in 1792. Thomas F. Marshall, who later was
the leader of the Lexington group which removed Cassius M. Clay's
_True American_ to Cincinnati, has borne testimony to the fact that
the slaveholding element voted for the law of 1833. "At the time of
the passage of this law," said he, "the sect known by the title of
'abolitionists' had not made their appearance. And, as I was sworn
then upon the constitution of my country, by all the obligations of
that oath, I affirm now that I do not believe that the principles and
designs ascribed to that party were in the contemplation of any human
being who voted for the law. I was myself not only never an
abolitionist, but never an emancipationist upon any plan which I ever
heard proposed."[314]

But the question was not settled for all time, for with the coming of
the abolitionist element there was a general tendency throughout the
State to enact stricter laws governing slaves. Many who had voted for
the enactment began to cry for a repeal of the law, but it was not
until the session of 1841 that it was seriously debated in the general
assembly. Then after a long and ardent discussion in the House of
Representatives a vote was taken on the ninth of January--with 34 in
favor of the repeal and 53 against it. Never within the previous
decade had a bill before the House produced such popular
interest.[315] It came up in the Senate at the session of 1843 but
after another warm debate it failed by a vote of 14 to 21. Sentiment
for the repeal continued to grow and in 1849 the law was amended so as
"no longer to prohibit persons from purchasing and bringing into the
State slaves for their own use."[316] This changed the situation back
to what it was before 1833, for it will be recalled that the main
feature of the law of 1833 compared with that of 1815 was the
prohibition of importation even for personal use. It could easily have
been predicted that such an amendment would pass, for the legislature
of 1847 had passed 27 distinct resolutions granting to as many
individuals the right to import slaves for personal use. The session
of 1848 made 24 similar provisions.

This apparently radical swing towards the side of the slave owner in
1849 was more than likely brought about by the very intense campaign
which was carried on by the emancipationists. Such a movement served
to unite the slave forces against any attack upon the institution.
This tendency was shown not only in the halls of the State legislature
but in the constitutional convention which met later in the same year.
Although the abolitionists had looked forward to some advanced
constitutional provisions on emancipation and the inclusion of the law
of 1833 in the organic law of the State they were astounded to be met
with the virtual repeal of that statute by the legislature. On the
other hand the constitutional convention not only rejected bodily all
the reform measures but added to the Bill of Rights this extraordinary
amendment: "The right of property is before and higher than any
constitutional sanction, and the right of the owner of a slave to such
slave and its increase is the same and as inviolable as the right of
the owner of any property whatsoever."

The slave trader once more had the courage to appear in the State.
Richard Henry Collins in an editorial in the _Maysville Eagle_,
November 6, 1849, gives us some vivid evidence of the effect which the
repeal of the law of 1833 had had in a few weeks' time. "A remarkably
forcible and practical argument in favor of incorporating the negro
law of 1833 into the new constitution reached this city in bodily
shape on Sunday, per the steamer _Herman_ from Charleston, Virginia.
Forty-four negroes--men, women and children--of whom seventeen men had
handcuffs on one hand and were chained together, two and two, passed
through this city for the interior of the State, under charge of two
regular traders. We opine that few who saw the spectacle would
hereafter say aught against the readoption of the anti-importation act
of 1833." Such scenes as this were the result of the passage of an
innocent-looking measure which allowed citizens to import slaves for
their own use, but which could really be made to include almost any
influx of slaves.

No further change in the importation laws was made until the crisis
immediately preceding the Civil War, when practically all opposition
was removed and the law of 1833 was abolished in its entirety.[317]
Explanations of the sudden turn of mind are not hard to find for the
enactment was passed amid the turmoil and chaos brought on by an
impending war and the radical slaveholders found it easy to get votes
for their side in a last vain endeavor to save the institution, not so
much from an economic standpoint as from a matter of principle. The
last chapter in the legal history of the importation problem in
Kentucky, however, had not yet been written. After three years of the
armed conflict between the North and the South, Kentucky, which had
remained loyal to the Union and fought against the slave power of the
South, reenacted on February 2, 1864, the old law of 1798 on the
prohibition of the importation of slaves.[318] The wording was
somewhat different, but the essential provisions were the same.
Coming at such a time, it never had any significance in the slavery
problem in the State, but it is interesting as one of the last vain
efforts of the institution before it was mustered out of the State by
an amendment to the federal constitution, which was passed without the
assent of the State legislature of Kentucky.

No less serious than the question of importation was the problem of
the fugitive slave. This has been treated many times and every
discussion of it has involved much of what transpired in Kentucky or
on its borders. It is not the purpose here to repeat any of that story
because it belongs rather to the anti-slavery field, and, furthermore,
has been recently very well treated by A. E. Martin in his
_Anti-slavery Movement in Kentucky_. We are here concerned with the
legal phase of the fugitive problem as it existed in Kentucky
throughout this period, as an internal question; in the relation
between the State and other States; and between the State and the
federal authorities. In so far as it relates to the law within the
State such a discussion naturally divides itself into two
phases--those measures which affected the fugitive slave himself, and
those which were directed towards conspirators who might have brought
about the escape of slaves. The former group of laws were enacted, for
the most part, in the early days of statehood, for a runaway slave was
a natural evil in any condition of servitude. The latter group of
measures were passed in the later days of the institution when the
anti-slavery propagandists came in from the North, for until then
there were no cases of enticement. A large majority of those who were
placed on trial for conspiracy in the history of slavery in Kentucky
proved to be outsiders who had come into the State after 1835. The
citizens of the commonwealth who were opposed to the institution were
satisfied to confine themselves to mere words advocating the
emancipation of slaves.

The State early adopted the slave code of Virginia in regard to the
treatment of runaway slaves just as it did in regard to the general
legal rights of the bonded Negro but provided more drastic regulations
in 1798. Any person who suspected a Negro of being a runaway slave
could take him before a justice of the peace, and swear to his belief
in the guilt of the accused. Being provided with a certificate from
the justice where he found the slave, the apprehender could then take
the fugitive back to the owner and might collect ten shillings as a
reward and an additional shilling for each mile of travel necessary in
bringing the slave to the master. If the money should not be paid, the
person entitled to it could recover the sum in any court of record in
the State upon the production of his certificate of apprehension as
legal evidence.[319]

In many cases the runaway could not be identified as the property of
any particular owner, so provision was made for the commitment of the
offender to the county jail. The keeper was forthwith to post a
bulletin on the courthouse with a complete description of the Negro.
If at the end of two months no claimant appeared the sheriff was to
publish an advertisement in the _Lexington Gazette_ for three
consecutive months so that the news of capture would reach a larger
public. In the meantime the sheriff was authorized to hire out the
fugitive and the wages thus received were to pay for the reward of the
captor and the expenses incurred by the county officials. If the owner
appeared during the period and proved his property, he could have the
slave at once in spite of any labor contract, providing he would pay
any excess of expenses over wages received. But often the master never
appeared and if a year had expired since the last advertisement had
been published in the _Gazette_, the sheriff could sell the slave and
place the proceeds of the sale plus the wages received over the
expenses, in the county treasury. This sum was credited to the unknown
owner, for if he should appear at any future time the county would
reimburse him for his loss, otherwise the fund reverted to the
county.[320]

This legal code for the apprehension of runaway slaves remained
practically unchanged throughout the period of slavery. The only
amendments which were ever made were those for the increase of the
reward to the captor and it is significant that the first of these
changes did not come until more than a generation later in 1835. Then
the compensation was divided into three classes: for those captured in
their own county, $10; in another county, $20; out of the State,
$30.[321] Just three years later it was found necessary to increase
this by the following interesting law: "The compensation for
apprehending fugitive slaves taken without this commonwealth, and in a
State where slavery is not tolerated by law, shall be one hundred
dollars, on the delivery to the owner at his residence within this
commonwealth, and seventy-five dollars if lodged in the jail of any
county in this commonwealth, and the owner be notified so as to be
able to reclaim the slave."[322] There were no more advances until a
law of March 3, 1860, increased the reward to one hundred and fifty
dollars if the slave were caught outside the State and brought back to
the home county; one hundred and twenty-five dollars if caught outside
the State and brought back to any county in Kentucky; and twenty
dollars if caught anywhere in the home county.

The trend of these laws, from the viewpoint of the rewards alone,
shows the increasing importance of the fugitive problem to the
slaveholding group. It is noticeable that from the year 1798 until
1835 there was not sufficient pressure upon the State legislature to
increase the reward to the captor of a runaway. It is further evident
from the scarcity of contemporary advertisements that there were
comparatively few Negroes who ventured forth from the neighborhood of
their masters. But with the rise of the anti-slavery movement in the
North and the growth of abolition sentiment as expressed by the
apostles of Negro freedom who had come from across the Ohio, the
slaves tended to run away in ever-increasing numbers. This was soon
followed by a more rigid policy of apprehension upon the part of the
Kentucky legal authorities, apparent in the increasing reward.

Not all cases of fugitives were to be reached by a mere system of
capture and reward. Barely did a slave make his escape into a free
State without the aid of some one in sympathy with him. Hence the need
for legal machinery to punish those who assisted runaways. From a
chronological point of view the laws governing such cases divide
themselves into two parts; in the early days they refer to those who
would help a slave who had already escaped; in the later period they
were directed towards those who induced slaves to leave their home
plantations.

Whichever of the free States he tried to reach it was necessary for
the Negro to cross the Ohio River to get to his haven of refuge. If
the Kentucky authorities could prevent him from crossing the stream on
the northern and western boundary, they could prevent any slave from
making a successful escape. Consequently the legislature as early as
1823 attempted to solve the problem by passing a law forbidding
masters of vessels and others from employing and removing Negroes out
of the State.[323] This act prevented runaways from securing work on a
steamboat with the specific purpose of leaving once they were on free
soil. But as usual this enactment was not effective, because there was
a loop-hole in it. The State assembly in 1831, therefore, provided
that no ferryman on the Ohio River should transport slaves across from
Kentucky. No other person, not owning or keeping a ferry, was to be
permitted to set slaves over, or to loan them boats or watercraft.
Slaves could only cross the river when they had the written consent of
their masters. Each and every owner of a ferry was required to give
bond in the sum of $3,000 to carry out the spirit of the law; and for
every violation he was subject to a fine of $200.[324]

Not content with their previous efforts the general assembly of 1838
went still further and prohibited slaves from going as passengers on
mail stages or coaches anywhere within the State, except upon the
written request of their owners, or in the master's company. The
liability for the enforcement of the law rested upon the stage
proprietors, who were to be fined $100 for each slave illegally
transported.[325]

No stringent laws were made against the enticement of slaves to run
away until 1830 when the abolitionists first began to appear. Until
that time there seems to have been no need for any legal enactment
regarding the question. The only trouble previously had been with the
whites and free Negroes who aided a slave already on his way to the
North. It was in response to the popular demand that on January 28,
1830, the State legislature provided severe penalties for any person
found guilty of (1) enticing a slave to leave his owner, (2)
furnishing a forged paper of freedom, (3) assisting a slave to escape
out of the State, (4) enticing a slave to run away, or (5) concealing
a runaway slave. Should a person be suspected of any one of these
offenses and not be found guilty, he was to give security for his good
behavior to avoid all accusation in the future.[326]

The most interesting legal case based on this law was that of Delia
Webster, a young lady from Vermont, who was tried in the Fayette
Circuit Court in December, 1844, for the enticement of a Negro slave
boy from Lexington. The details of the trial show that the court was
just and fair in spite of the fact that both Miss Webster and her
copartner, Calvin Fairbank, were not citizens of the State and had
furthermore used all kinds of deceit to accomplish their purpose. For
the sake of aiding one Negro slave boy to reach freedom they went to
the expense and trouble to feign an elopement to Ohio via Maysville,
but the Lexington authorities caught them as they were coming back on
the Lexington Pike near Paris. At the trial it was shown that
Fairbank was in Kentucky for no other reason than to induce slaves to
escape to the North and that Miss Webster had come to Lexington as a
school teacher merely as a cloak for her abolitionist work. The
evidence offered by the prosecution was damaging in the extreme. The
defense put forth no data for her side at all, evidently preferring to
be hailed as a martyr to the cause for which she stood. The jury
brought in a verdict of guilty and she was sentenced to serve two
years in the State penitentiary.[327]

The young accomplice, Calvin Fairbank, proved to be the most
persistent abolitionist the Kentucky authorities ever encountered. He
pleaded guilty to the indictment as charged and was sentenced to serve
15 years in the penitentiary, to which he was taken February 18, 1845.
Evidently convinced that he had been punished sufficiently Governor
John J. Crittenden pardoned him August 23, 1849, on condition that he
leave the State at once.[328] But such an ardent young enthusiast for
the cause of Negro freedom soon found that there were other slaves who
were in need of his aid and on November 3, 1851, he came across from
Jeffersonville to Louisville under the cover of night and "kidnapped"
a young mulatto woman who had been doomed to be sold at auction.[329]
Presumably in the hope of rescuing other slaves he remained in the
vicinity for several days until on the morning of November 9 he was
arrested by the Kentucky authorities. Fairbank was placed in jail
pending his trial, which took place in the following March, when he
was again sentenced to serve 15 years at hard labor in the State
penitentiary. He began his term March 9, 1852.[330] This time he was
not so fortunate in an early release. The chief executives of the
State from time to time refused to pardon him. In April, 1864,
Governor Bramlette was called to Washington by President Lincoln for
a conference and Richard T. Jacobs, the Lieutenant-Governor, became
the acting Governor. This son-in-law of Thomas H. Benton had taken
more or less pity on Fairbank, for he had stated to the prisoner that
if he ever became the chief executive he would release him. The
opportunity thus being presented for the first time, Jacob pardoned
Fairbank on April 15, 1864, after a continuous imprisonment of twelve
years. Such was the experience in Kentucky of an ardent northern
abolitionist who boasted that he had "liberated forty-seven slaves
from hell."[331]

The systematic stealing of slaves from Kentucky had begun about 1841
and at the time of the Webster and Fairbank trial was at its height.
This movement was one of the results growing out of the animosity
created by another legal case which occurred in 1838--that of the Rev.
John B. Mahan of Brown County, Ohio. This Methodist minister, although
living in the State of Ohio, was indicted by the grand jury of Mason
County, Kentucky, for having aided in the escape of certain slaves.
Governor Clark, of Kentucky, then issued a requisition on the Governor
of Ohio for Mahan as a "fugitive from justice." Upon receipt of the
demand, the chief executive of Ohio immediately issued a warrant for
the arrest of the minister. A short time later he became convinced
that this step had been too hasty, because Mahan had never been in
Kentucky. His offense had merely consisted in helping runaways along
the "underground railroad," once they were on free soil.

Hence, Governor Vance sent a special messenger to the chief executive
of Kentucky redemanding the alleged fugitive from justice. Governor
Clark made this very cordial and diplomatic reply:

     The position assumed by you in relation to the fact of Mahan
     having never been within the limits of Kentucky is clearly
     correct, and if upon the legal investigation of the case it be
     found true, he will doubtless be acquitted. I feel great
     solicitude that this citizen of your state, who has been arrested
     and brought to Kentucky, upon my requisition, shall receive
     ample and full justice, and that, if upon legal investigation he
     be found innocent of the crime alleged against him, he shall be
     released and set at liberty. I will, therefore, address a letter
     to the judge and commonwealth attorney of the Mason Circuit,
     communicating to them the substance of your letter, and the
     evidence which you have transmitted to me.[332]

The efforts of the Governor of Ohio were eventually successful, for in
spite of his slaveholding sympathies Governor Clark wrote to the judge
of the Mason Circuit and the latter charged the jury in no uncertain
terms regarding the jurisdiction in the case. After a trial of six
days Mahan was acquitted.

The importance of this case does not rest in the trial and its events
but rather in the reactions which it had upon the Kentucky populace.
No one doubted that Mahan was guilty of aiding slaves; but it was seen
that he had been shrewd enough to confine his activities to the State
of Ohio, where the Kentucky authorities had no jurisdiction. In his
opening message to the State legislature, which met the next month
after the acquittal of Mahan, Governor Clark voiced the sentiment of a
large majority of Kentuckians. Bear in mind that these words came from
the same man who a month before had advised the Circuit judge of the
illegality of the Mahan indictment.

     Some of the abolitionists of an adjoining state, not contented
     with the mere promulgation of opinions and views calculated to
     excite a feeling of disaffection among our slave population, and
     to render this description of property insecure in the hands of
     its proprietors, have extended their operations so far as to
     mingle personally with our slaves, to enter into arrangements
     with them, and to afford them the means and facilities to escape
     from their owners. This flagitious conduct is not to be
     tolerated--it must be checked in its origin by the adoption of
     efficient and energetic measures, or it will, in all human
     probability, lead to results greatly to be deprecated by every
     friend to law and order. This demon-like spirit that rages
     uncontrolled by law, or sense of moral right, must be
     overcome--it must be subdued; its action in the state should be
     prohibited under such penalties as will effectually curb its
     lawlessness and disarm its power.[333]

In pursuance of this and similar recommendations the State legislature
early in 1839 despatched a delegation of members to the general
assembly of Ohio then meeting at Columbus. These men were charged to
secure a law in Ohio for the better security of Kentucky fugitive
slave property. The Kentucky officials had always been confronted with
the problem of recovering runaways captured in Ohio, even when they
personally knew the captive. The old law of 1807 in Ohio was never lax
in the enforcement, but the plea of habeas corpus was habitually used
for the defendant and, furthermore, it often happened that the
necessary proofs of ownership were not in evidence. These facts
coupled with the publicity of the Mahan trial brought about the
peculiar legislative commission from Kentucky.

Here was a delegation from a slave commonwealth sent to a free State
to demand a rigorous fugitive slave law for their own benefit. The
Kentucky committee went even further and suggested the provisions of
the proposed enactment--and the remarkable thing was that they
actually succeeded. Although Ohio was known to be the home of
anti-slavery interests the law passed without any difficulty. By its
provisions a slave owner or his agent could appear before any judge,
justice or mayor, who was authorized to issue a warrant to any sheriff
in Ohio calling upon him to arrest the fugitive and bring him before
any judge in the county where caught. Upon proof of his ownership to
the court the owner was entitled to a certificate for removal. A heavy
fine and imprisonment were the penalty for any interference with the
execution of either the warrant or the removal of the slave. The vote
on this measure in the House of Representatives was 53 to 15. There
has been made an analysis of this roll call, which shows that the
opposition all came from northern Ohio--whereas those in the southern
part of the State voted for it because they were not inclined to allow
any disturbance of the friendly commercial relationship which they had
with their neighbor State to the south. Moreover, they objected to
their locality being used as a place of refuge for unfortunate
Negroes.[334]

Henceforth Ohio became a veritable hunting ground for fugitive slaves,
but the wiser of the Negroes and the abolitionists diverted their
efforts to other fields of escape, especially through Indiana and
Illinois. The legal authorities at this time began to realize that
their hope lay in the enactment of a federal law but no definite steps
were taken until after the affair of Francis Troutman at Marshall,
Michigan, in January, 1847. Troutman came from Kentucky to Michigan to
bring back six runaways that had been located at Marshall. When he had
found them and was about to take them before a magistrate for
identification, a crowd of citizens of the town put in their
appearance and threatened injury to Troutman and his three Kentucky
companions. Although the latter were acting in accordance with the law
the mob would not let them proceed in any manner--not even to appear
before the magistrate--but demanded that they leave town within two
hours. In the meantime they were all four arrested, tried and found
guilty of trespass.[335] When these events were reported back to
Kentucky mass meetings were held throughout the State in protest
against the Michigan action. The State legislature drew up a
resolution calling upon Congress to enact a new fugitive slave
law.[336] The Senate referred the petition to the Committee on
Judiciary and they later reported a new fugitive slave bill which was
read twice and then pigeonholed. The same action was repeated at the
next session in 1849.

The general feeling in Kentucky was intensified just at this time by a
decision of the United States Supreme Court in the case of Jones _vs._
Van Zandt, which had been pending in various courts for five years. In
April, 1842, John Van Zandt, a former Kentuckian, then living in
Springdale just north of Cincinnati, was caught in the act of aiding
nine fugitive slaves to escape, and one of them got away even from the
slave catchers. Consequently Wharton Jones, the Kentucky owner,
brought suit against Van Zandt in the U. S. Circuit Court under the
federal fugitive slave act of 1793 for $500 for concealing and
harboring a fugitive slave. The jury returned a verdict for the
plaintiff in the sum of $1,200 as damages on two other counts in
addition to the penalty of $500 for concealing and harboring. Salmon
P. Chase was the lawyer for Van Zandt and in a violent attack on the
law 1793 he appealed to the U. S. Supreme Court on the grounds that
this statute was repugnant to the Constitution of the United States
and to the sixth article of the Ordinance of 1787. Van Zandt in the
appeal had the advantage of the services of William H. Seward in
addition to Chase while Jones was represented by Senator Morehead, of
Kentucky. Justice Levi Woodbury in rendering the decision of the court
sustained all the judgments against Van Zandt and denied that the law
of 1793 was opposed to either the Constitution or the Ordinance of
1787.[337]

At last the people of Kentucky had secured a firm ruling from the
highest judicial authority on the force of the existing laws. Cold
reason in the light of that day, apart from all anti-slavery
propaganda, justified them in making these demands. Henceforth, there
was no doubt about the legality of their position--it was a question
merely of the illegal opposition to the return of fugitives from the
States to the North. The Troutman case and many others, however, had
served as an index of northern sentiment in the matter, for the
troubles of the Kentucky slaveholder were just beginning. A year
later, in 1848, a requisition was issued on the Governor of Ohio for
the return of fifteen persons charged with aiding in the escape of
slaves. Imagine the feeling in Kentucky when Governor Bell of Ohio
positively refused to give these persons up, stating that the laws of
Ohio did not recognize man as property. It was apparently a political
move on his part, for there was no question of the property conception
of slavery involved whatsoever. He acted in direct opposition to the
laws of his State enacted in 1839 and to the federal fugitive slave
law of 1793.

After two decades of struggle the abolitionists had come into their
own and it was almost impossible to recover slaves who had run away in
spite of the legal machinery that had been set up. Furthermore, the
more extreme abolitionists had disregarded all law, orders and rights
of private property and had even gone so far as to proclaim that there
was a "higher law than the Constitution." Against such a powerful foe
the forces of all parties in Kentucky united in a firm stand,
demanding more stringent measures. The Supreme Court had decided that
the existing law was sufficient to recover fugitives and to demand and
secure damages for the interference with that right. With the coming
of new conditions, however, it was realized on all sides that new and
most extreme measures were necessary.

The existing circumstances are well shown by the attitude of Henry
Clay, senator from Kentucky as well as author of the Compromise of
1850. Noted for his leanings towards the North, throughout his public
career of more than half a century, and as far back as 1798 the
advocate of gradual emancipation in Kentucky, he felt called upon in
this crisis to express the irritation of his own people:

     I have very little doubt, indeed, that the extent of loss to the
     state of Kentucky, in consequence of the escape of her slaves is
     greater, at least in proportion to the total number of slaves
     that are held within that commonwealth, even than in Virginia. I
     know full well, and so does the honorable senator from Ohio know,
     that it is at the utmost hazard and insecurity to life itself,
     that a Kentuckian can cross the river and go into the interior to
     take back his fugitive slave from whence he fled. Recently an
     example occurred even in the city of Cincinnati in respect to one
     of our most respectable citizens. Not having visited Ohio at all,
     but Covington, on the opposite side of the river, a little slave
     of his escaped over to Cincinnati. He pursued it; he found it in
     the house in which it was concealed; he took it out, and it was
     rescued by the violence and force of a negro mob from his
     possession--the police of the city standing by, and either
     unwilling or unable to afford the assistance which was requisite
     to enable him to recover his property.

     Upon this subject I do think that we have just and serious cause
     of complaint against the free states. I think they fail in
     fulfilling a great obligation, and the failure is precisely upon
     one of those subjects which in its nature is the most irritating
     and inflaming to those who live in the slave states.[338]

The Fugitive Slave Law of 1793 was superseded by that of 1850 by a
sort of political bargaining on the other measures of the Compromise.
The letter of the new law was not much different from the one of
1793--the chief changes being in the exaction of severer penalties and
the transfer of jurisdiction to the federal courts. But even if
members from the North did vote for the new provision there was no
public sentiment in the North back of its enforcement. Everyone in
Kentucky was heartily in favor of it, but that mattered little. The
effectiveness of any fugitive slave law depended upon the spirit in
which it was met in the North, for it was there that the law was to be
applied. It remained for a more or less forgotten decision of the
Supreme Court in 1861 to show the greatest weakness of all laws for
the recovery of runaway slaves in the North.

In October, 1859, the Woodford County (Kentucky) grand jury returned
an indictment against Willis Lago, a free Negro, charging him with the
seduction and enticement of Charlotte, a Negro slave, from her owner,
C. W. Nickols. A copy of this indictment certified and authenticated
according to the federal law was presented to the Governor of Ohio by
the authorized agent of the Governor of Kentucky and the arrest and
delivery of the fugitive from justice demanded. The Governor of Ohio
referred the matter to the Attorney-General of the State and upon his
advice the chief executive refused to deliver up the Negro. The
Supreme Court having original jurisdiction in suits between two
States, the demand for a mandamus to compel the Governor of Ohio to
deliver Lago to the Kentucky authorities was heard by that body in a
suit under the title of Kentucky _vs._ Dennison (the Governor of
Ohio). The decision of the court was rendered by Chief Justice Taney
and it contained five important statements: (1) "It was the duty of
the executive authority of Ohio upon the demand made by the Governor
of Kentucky, and the production of the indictment, duly certified to
cause Lago to be delivered up to the agent of the Governor of
Kentucky, who was appointed to demand and receive him." (2) "The duty
of the Governor of Ohio was merely ministerial, and he had no right to
exercise any discretionary power as to the nature or character of the
crime charged in the indictment." (3) "The word 'duty' in the act of
1793 means the moral obligation of the state to perform the compact,
in the Constitution, when Congress had, by that act, regulated the
mode in which the duty should be performed." (4) "But Congress cannot
coerce a state officer, as such, to perform any duty by act of
Congress. The state officer may perform if he thinks proper, and it
may be a moral duty to perform it. But if he refuses, no law of
Congress can compel him." (5) "The Governor of Ohio cannot, through
the judiciary or any other department of the general government, be
compelled to deliver up Lago; and upon that ground only this motion
for a mandamus is overruled."[339]

This decision came as a fitting climax to the legal history of the
fugitive slave problem as it concerned Kentucky. Such an
interpretation placed by the highest judicial authority upon an act of
Congress which had stood throughout the slavery era in Kentucky showed
beyond any doubt whatever that the legal battle over slavery questions
was at an end. If any solution was to be found in the future it would
not be in the legislative halls nor in the court room.

Emancipation was an important question closely connected with that of
the fugitive. This was one of the problems to be discussed in the
Constitutional Convention of 1792. There were some few members who
were in favor of immediate liberation and others inclined towards a
scheme of gradual release of the Negro from bondage. But, as has been
shown in the early part of this chapter, the group in favor of the
existing institution easily dominated the convention and drew up the
famous article IX, which remained without change throughout the
slavery era as a part of the fundamental constitutional law. It is
significant that it was provided that the legislature should have no
power to pass laws for the emancipation of slaves without the consent
of their owners, or without paying their owners, previous to such
emancipation, a full equivalent in money, for the slaves so
emancipated: that the legislature should not pass laws to permit the
owners of slaves to emancipate them, saving the rights of creditors,
and preventing them from becoming a charge to the counties in which
they resided.

From a purely objective viewpoint it is doubtful if a fairer legal
guide for the institution of slavery in relation to the rights of
emancipation could have been drawn up. On one side, it prevented the
State authorities from depriving a slaveholder of his property without
due compensation. On the other hand, no unscrupulous master was to
free his old and invalid slaves and thereby inflict the burden of
their support upon the community as a whole. But this constitutional
provision had no legal force in itself. It was to serve as a guide for
the enactment of statute laws later.

The State assembly on December 17, 1794, proceeded to the enactment of
the first emancipation law of the State. The contents of Article IX of
the Constitution were carefully followed and the detailed legal code
of emancipation laid down in these words:

     It shall be lawful for any person by his or her last will and
     testament, or by any other instrument in writing, under his or
     her hand and seal, attested and proved in the county court by
     two witnesses, or acknowledged by the party in the court of the
     county where he or she resides, to emancipate or set free his or
     her slave or slaves: who shall thereupon be entirely and fully
     discharged from the performance of any contract entered into
     during servitude, and enjoy as full freedom as if they had been
     born free. And the said court shall have full power to demand
     bond and sufficient security of the emancipator, his or her
     executors or administrators, as the case may be, for the
     maintenance of any slave or slaves that may be aged or infirm,
     either of body or mind, to prevent their becoming chargeable to
     the county. And every slave so emancipated shall have a
     certificate of freedom from the clerk of such court on parchment
     with the county seal affixed thereto, for which the clerk shall
     charge the emancipator five shillings; saving, however, the
     rights of creditors and every person or persons, bodies politic
     and corporate, except the heirs or legal representatives of the
     person so emancipating their slaves.[340]

This law remained throughout the slavery period in Kentucky and the
only changes which were ever made in it were in the minor details to
untangle some legal ambiguities. The law of 1823, however, is
important in showing the discrepancies of the original provisions. By
this amendment it was enacted that when the county courts received
proof or acknowledgment of a deed of emancipation, or of a will
emancipating slaves, they were to note on their record a description
of any such slaves. The certificate of freedom which was given to the
Negro was also to contain this description and no other certificate
was to be issued except on the presentation of proof that the first
one had been lost or when such was required for use as evidence in
some suit. If any slave thus liberated was found to have presented his
certificate to another still held in bondage with a design of freeing
him, the emancipated slave was to suffer severe penalties.[341] These
added provisions apparently came to fill all the gaps in the previous
law and no further amendments of importance were needed to make the
laws of emancipation run smoothly.

Of all the many slavery cases which were brought before the Court of
Appeals in the next thirty years it is interesting to note that nearly
all of them concerned themselves more or less with the question of
freedom. The very fact that they reached the highest court is also
conclusive evidence that the law was not quite as clear as one would
at first suppose. Close study of the findings of the court will show
that the judiciary was always consistent in its interpretation of the
law and that most of the cases were carried up from the lower courts
because of disputes between the heirs of an estate and the
administrator as to their precedence in the matter of slaves. This
part of the controversy concerned itself with the property conception
of the slave, whether he was real or personal estate, which was
discussed earlier in this chapter. The purely emancipation cases
before the Court of Appeals divide themselves into three parts: (1)
those which concerned the interpretation of the statute law, (2) those
suits for freedom which were based on the question of residence and
(3) those which involved persons detained as slaves.

Most of the first class of cases concerned themselves with the
emancipation of slaves by will. The number of slaveholders who freed
their Negroes during their own lifetime seems to have been very small.
On the other hand, from a study of the slave cases in court it appears
to have been a very common thing for an owner to provide for the
freedom of his slaves in his will. The right of a master to dispose of
his own property was beyond dispute, but, as is often the case, the
heirs were seldom satisfied and they brought the will into court on
one or more technical grounds in an attempt to break the document
which freed so much valuable property. The court in every case held
that the right of the owner was absolute and that if by the letter of
his will his slaves were freed, that right was subject to no dispute.
Furthermore, when the Negroes were thus emancipated they did not pass
to the personal representatives of the deceased, as assets. They
passed by will just as land, and the devise took effect at the death
of the testator, whether it be a devise to the slave, of his freedom,
or of the slave, to another. The servant, thus affected, had only to
appear before the county court and establish his emancipation. This
accomplished, it was the duty of the court to give him a certificate
of freedom without the consent of the representatives of the
emancipator.[342] The right of disposal rested with the owner, who
could emancipate by act, or by will, and he who denied the right
or placed any claim against it was compelled to show the
prohibition.[343]

While the owner had absolute powers of disposal of his own slaves he
could not draw up a will of prospective freedom which would hold in
spite of the rights of his heirs. If a master desired to be very
lenient with his servants, he had to make their freedom absolute and
in writing. This was well brought out in the case of an apparently
kind-hearted Kentucky slaveholder who provided in his will that his
slaves were to select their own master without regard to price. They
chose as their future owner a man who did not need them, but who
offered to take them at about half their real value. The court held
that in such a case the executor was not bound to accept the offer,
since the interests of those entitled to the proceeds of the sale, as
well as the desire and comfort of the slaves, were to be
regarded.[344] Another owner had the right idea, but defeated his own
intentions by willing all his forty slaves to the Kentucky
Colonization Society. The court held that such an act by no means
freed the slaves and that by the laws of the State until they were
free they could be hired out and the proceeds considered as a part of
the estate.[345]

As in all border States there were many legal battles for freedom,
which involved the question of residence on free soil. These cases
were largely concerned with the question of the right of a citizen of
Kentucky to pass through a free State on business or pleasure attended
by his slaves or servants without losing his right of ownership over
such slaves. The principle involved was early considered in the
Kentucky Court of Appeals and faithfully carried out in succeeding
generations, viz.: that a "fixed residence" or being domiciled in a
non-slaveholding State would operate to release the slave from the
power of the master; but that the transient passing or sojourning
therein had no such effect. In an early case in 1820 involving a suit
for freedom the court held that a person of color from Kentucky who
was permitted to reside in a free State could prosecute his right to
freedom in any other State. It was held to be a vested right to
freedom, which existed wherever he went.[346] In another instance an
owner permitted his slave to go at large for twenty years, but the
court held that that alone did not give him freedom. Still under this
liberty of movement the slave went off into a free State to reside and
the court held that the Negro was then free because his right grew out
of the law of the free State and not out of that in which the owner
resided.[347] An owner permitted his slave to go to Pennsylvania and
remain there for a longer period than six months, with a knowledge of
the law passed in that State in 1780, and the Kentucky Court of
Appeals held that the slave was entitled to his freedom and that even
if the slave had returned to Kentucky his right could be asserted
there just as well as in Pennsylvania.[348] But should a slave go with
his master to a free State and later return to Kentucky with him,
whatever status he had then was to be determined by the law of
Kentucky and not by the rule of any State where the slave might have
been.[349] The fact that a slave stayed in New York for three months
before his return to Kentucky, his owner knowing he was there, and
making no effort to bring him away, did not give to such slave a right
to freedom.[350] A slaveholder sent one of his servants over into
Illinois to cut some wood for a few weeks and later the latter brought
suit for freedom on the grounds of residence in a free State but the
court denied any such right, since the slave returned to his master in
Kentucky voluntarily.[351]

If an emancipated Negro for any reason was held in slavery and later
established his right to freedom in court, he could not recover
compensation for his services or damages for his detention, unless he
could prove that he was held under full knowledge of his right or with
good reason to believe him free. If pending his suit for freedom he
should be hired out by order of the court, the net hire was to be
awarded to him if he succeeded.[352]

The actual number of manumissions which took place in Kentucky will no
doubt never be known. Among the few statistics are those of the
federal census for 1850 and 1860 and they include only the figures for
the one census year. According to this source in 1850 only 152 slaves
were voluntarily set free in the State or one slave out of every
1,388, a percentage of only .072; and in 1860 there were 170 Negroes
recorded as freed or one out of every 1,281 slaves, a percentage of
only .078. We can easily assume from the accounts which we have from
papers of that time that these numbers were far short of those that
were really set free by their masters. It was the custom of many
owners who were about to free their slaves to take them to Cincinnati
and there have them set free in the Probate Court.

Early in 1859, forty-nine slaves from Fayette County, mostly women and
children, were brought to Cincinnati and set free and later sent to a
colony of emancipated Negroes in Green County, Ohio.[353] In March of
the same year Robert Barnet of Lincoln County, Kentucky appeared with
eighteen slaves--a father, mother, nine children and three
grandchildren and another woman and four boys, who were all
emancipated in the Cincinnati Probate Court. Before crossing the
Ohio, while in Covington, he was offered $20,000 for all of them but
he stated that he would refuse even $50,000.[354] In January, 1860,
William McGinnis, of Bourbon County, appeared with fourteen slaves
before the same probate court and set them all free.[355]

The law of Kentucky plainly provided that no slave was to be
emancipated unless bond were given that he would immediately leave the
State. Hence it was but natural that a master who intended setting his
slaves free should take them as slaves to a free State and there give
them their freedom, thus satisfying his own conscience and at the same
time removing any future legal trouble that might ensue on account of
his former slaves being found in the State of Kentucky. For this
reason it would seem that a large number of the kind-hearted
slaveholders who freed their slaves did so outside the bounds of
Kentucky and thus that State was deprived of the credit for many
emancipations which took place voluntarily at the hands of her own
slaveholders.


FOOTNOTES:

[285] _Littell's Laws_, 1: 32.

[286] Brown, John Mason, _The Political Beginnings of Kentucky_, p.
229.

[287] _Littell's Laws_, 1: 44.

[288] _Ibid._, 1: 161.

[289] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 113.

[290] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 114.

[291] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 116-117.

[292] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 117-118.

[293] _Littell's Laws_, 3: 403.

[294] _Ibid._, 2: 117-118.

[295] _Niles' Register_, February 2, 1830.

[296] _Littell's Laws_, 4: 223-224.

[297] Stroud, _Laws relating to Slavery_, p. 86. Littell & Swigert, 2:
1066-9; 1060-4.

[298] It would perhaps be well to point out here the general
common-law difference between the treatment of real and personal
estate in a will. The title of the personal property of the deceased
is vested in the executor and he holds it for the payment of debts and
distribution according to the will of the testator. On the other hand
the real estate vests in the devisees or heirs and does not go to the
administrator, unless by statute enactment, which was in part true in
Kentucky, in the case above, where the slaves, although real estate,
were held liable for the debts of their master. _Littell's Laws_, 2:
120.

[299] _T. B. Monroe's Report I._, 23.

[300] Beatty _vs._ Judy, 1 Dana, 101. Plumpton _vs._ Cook, 2 A. K.
Marshall, 450.

[301] Rothert, _History of Muhlenburg County_, p. 343.

[302] Young, B. H., _History of Jessamine County_, p. 89.

[303] Session Laws, 1834, p. 726.

[304] _Ibid._, 1850, p. 51.

[305] _Ibid._, 1856, Vol. 1, pp. 42-44.

[306] _Ibid._, 1858, Vol. 1, pp. 47-48.

[307] Starling, p. 290.

[308] _Littell's Laws_, 1: 32.

[309] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 119.

[310] _Ibid._, 5: 293.

[311] _Ibid._, 5: 435-437.

[312] Barre, W. L., _Speeches and Writings of Thomas F. Marshall_, p.
115.

[313] Section 1 of the law 1833 read: "Each and every person or
persons who shall hereafter import into this state any slave or
slaves, or who shall sell or buy, or contract for the sale or
purchase, for a longer term than one year, of the service of any such
slave or slaves, knowing the same to have been imported, shall forfeit
and pay $600 for each slave so imported, sold, or bought, or whose
service has been so contracted for; recoverable by indictment of a
grand jury or any action of debt, in the name of the Commonwealth in
any circuit court, where the offenders may be found." Session Laws,
1833, pp. 258-261.

[314] Barre, W. L., p. 116.

[315] _Niles' Register_, January 23, 1841.

[316] Collins, Vol. 1, p. 83.

[317] Session Laws, 1860, Vol. 1, p. 104.

[318] _Ibid._, 1864, pp. 70-72.

[319] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 5-6.

[320] _Ibid._, 2: 5-6.

[321] Session Laws, 1835, pp. 82-83.

[322] _Ibid._, 1838, p. 158.

[323] Session Laws, 1823, p. 178.

[324] _Ibid._, 1831-2, pp. 54-55.

[325] Session Laws, 1838, p. 155.

[326] _Ibid._, 1830, pp. 173-175.

[327] _Western Law Journal_, 2: 232-235 (best report of the trial).
_Niles' Register_, December 21, 1844. Webster; Delia A., _Kentucky
Jurisprudence_, pp. 1-84.

[328] Fairbank, _How the Way was Prepared_, pp. 53, 57.

[329] _Ibid._, p. 85.

[330] _Ibid._, p. 103.

[331] Fairbank, pp. 144, 149.

[332] _American Anti-slavery Society Report_, 1839, p. 90.

[333] _American Anti-slavery Society Report_, 1839, pp. 93-94.

[334] Chaddock, F. E., _Ohio before 1850_, p. 86.

[335] McMaster, _History of the United States_, Vol. 7: 262-263.

[336] Senate Document No. 19, 30th Congress, 1st Session.

[337] 5 Howard's Reports, 215-232.

[338] Colton, Reed and McKinley, _Works of Henry Clay_, Vol. 3: 329.

[339] 24 Howard's Reports, 109-110.

[340] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 246-247.

[341] Session Laws, 1823, p. 563.

[342] Black _vs._ Meaux, 4 Dana, 189.

[343] Susan _vs._ Ladd, 6 Dana, 30

[344] Hopkins _vs._ Morgan's executor, 3 Dana, 17.

[345] Isaac et al. _vs._ Graves' executor, 16 Ben Monroe, 365.

[346] Rankin _vs._ Lydia, 2 A. K. Marshall, 467.

[347] 15 Ben Monroe, 328.

[348] 14 _Ibid._, 355.

[349] 12 _Ibid._, 542.

[350] 4 Metcalfe, 231.

[351] 11 Ben Monroe, 210.

[352] 4 Dana, 589, 7 Dana, 360.

[353] _American Anti-Slavery Society Report_, 1859, p. 79.

[354] _Weekly Free South_ (Newport), March 4, 1859.

[355] _American Anti-Slavery Society Report_, 1860, p. 44.


CHAPTER IV

THE SOCIAL STATUS OF THE SLAVE


As many of the slave regulations were enacted to deal with extreme
cases and some of them were not generally enforced, it is necessary to
consider also the social status of the blacks to determine exactly
what the institution was in Kentucky. In this commonwealth slavery was
decidedly patriarchal. The slave was not such an unfortunate creature
as some have pictured him. He usually had set apart for himself and
his family a house which was located near the master's mansion. While
this home may have been a rude cabin made of small logs, with a roof
covered with splits and an earthen floor, likely as not the master's
son was attending school a few weeks in the year in a neighboring log
cabin which boasted of no more luxuries than the humble slave
dwelling. The servant and his family were well fed and had plenty of
domestic cloth for all necessary wearing apparel.

The kind of clothing which the Kentucky slave had can be seen best by
a study of the runaway slave advertisements where a description of
apparel was often essential to the apprehension of the Negro. "Billy"
in 1803 ran away from his owner in Lexington and took such a variety
of clothing with him that the master was unable to give a description
of them.[356] "Jack," running away from his owner in Mercer County,
had on when he left and took with him "one pale blue jeans coat, one
gray jeans coat, and an old linsey coat; one pair of cloth pantaloons,
one pair of jeans, and one of linen."[357] "Thenton," when leaving his
master in Warren County, took with him "a new black smooth fur hat, a
yellow woollen jeans frock coat, more than half worn; three shirts,
two of coarse cotton and one entirely new, the third a bleached
domestic and new; one blanket; one pair of pantaloons, of cotton and
flax."[358] "Jarret," from Leitchfield, wore when he left "a smooth
black Russia hat" and took with him "a pair of buckskin saddle bags
... and a great deal of clothing, to wit: one brown jeans frock coat,
and pantaloons of the same; also, a brown jeans overcoat, with large
pockets in the side; a new dark colored overcoat, two pair blue cloth
pantaloons, and an old silver watch."[359] The clothing of "Esau,"
from Meade County, was described as "brown jeans pants, black cassinet
pants, blue cloth pants, three fine shirts, one black silk vest and
one green vest, one brown jeans frock coat, one pale blue coat, velvet
collar; coarse shoes and black hat."[360] "Stewart" left his master in
Bullitt County dressed in typical Negro attire--"a black luster coat,
made sack fashion, and a pair of snuff colored cassinet pantaloons;
also, a black fur hat with low crown and broad brim, and vest with
purple dots on it."[361] "George," living in Marion County, had an
outfit of "Brown jeans frock coat (skirt lined with home-made flannel
dyed with madder), a pair of new black and yellow twilled negro jeans
pantaloons, white socks, factory shirt with linen bosom, and black
wool hat."[362] An owner advertising in 1852 stated that his slave
"Andy" had three suits of clothes with him when he ran away.[363] It
is perfectly evident from the reading of these slave advertisements
that the male Negroes were as substantially clothed as any members of
their race could expect to be at that time even in a state of freedom.
The surplus clothing as described above was all a part of the slave's
own property and not taken from the master's wardrobe. There were many
cases of theft but they need not be considered in this discussion. A
large majority of all runaway slaves were men and even when
advertisements dealt with female fugitives it was only on rare
occasions that the owner attempted to give a description of the
clothing which was worn. Will Morton in 1806 gave a list of "Letty's"
clothing as "two or three white muslin dresses, one of fancy chintz,
salmon colored linsey petticoat, white yarn stockings, and good shoes,
with sundry other clothing of good quality."[364] At such an early
date in the history of Kentucky slavery the apparel of this young
slave woman compares very favorably with that which was worn by the
white people.

In sickness the slaves were cared for by the same physician who looked
after the master and his family and should occasion demand assistance
any member of the owner's household might be found nursing a sick
Negro. There was no limit to the supply of fuel for the winter, for
the slaves had the right to cut timber for their own use anywhere in
the woods of the estate.[365]

As in Virginia, the slave was permitted to have a little "truck-patch"
of half an acre or more, where he could raise any crop that he
desired. In Kentucky these small plots of ground were nearly always
filled with sweet potatoes, tobacco and watermelons. The soil was not
only conducive to their cultivation but they were the three favorite
agricultural products for personal consumption. These particular crops
needed little cultivation once they were planted and such as was
necessary could easily be done on Saturday afternoons, when the slave
was at leisure.

Historians have reminded us that in most of the Southern States there
was a tendency for the more energetic of the slaves to work for pay
during their idle hours and thus eventually secure a sufficient
surplus to buy their own freedom. In Kentucky such cases were very
rare. Most Negroes seem to have been content with their condition in
such bondage as existed in the State. There were many cases in which a
Negro refused to purchase his freedom although he had the necessary
amount of money. George Brown, the famous Negro author of
_Recollections of an Ex-slave_, published in the _Winchester
Democrat_, has given us some experiences which testify to the feeling
existing between master and slave. In 1857 his mistress was offered
$2,100 for George, but when talking the matter over with him she found
that he had serious objections to the prospective purchaser. She
showed an interest in Brown's welfare by refusing to sell him. In
later years when freedom was within his grasp for the asking, Brown
"bought himself" for $1,000 because, as he says in his own words, it
was not honorable for him to "swindle his young mistress out of her
slave." Such was the example of a Kentucky slave who purchased his own
freedom, not for his own benefit, but for that of his mistress.

Another factor entered into this question. In the later years, once a
slave secured his liberty, he was immediately required to leave the
State and if such a one had lived all his life in Kentucky, he would
naturally hesitate to depart into an unknown region. Many of the
slaves did earn considerable money by cobbling shoes, cutting wood,
and making brooms, but most of them showed little tendency to save
their earnings for any future deliverance from bondage. They were more
concerned then--as they often are even yet--with the pleasures of the
day. More often they were to be found wasting their spare change on
whisky, a problem which grew greater for the master with passing
years.

In addition to the regular Saturday afternoon and Sunday off every
week the slaves were given several other holidays throughout the year,
the most extensive being at Christmas time. At Easter they were
allowed two or three days rest and when an election was being held
there was no work done outside of the regular chores. The general
election day in those times was the first Monday in August and it was
the custom for most of the slaves throughout the "penny-royal" and
"bluegrass" to journey to the county seat, where they would all
congregate and have a general frolic in accordance with Negro
standards of a good time. In the later years of slavery the towns had
established sufficient control of the Negroes gathering in their
jurisdiction so that the drink evil was more or less mitigated. The
fear of the law was a great incentive to their proper conduct on those
rare occasions when they had a whole day in town to themselves without
any tasks to perform for their master. As Rothert has well observed,
however, the slave sometimes did have to care for his drunken owner
and take him home. To the student acquainted with Kentucky history and
social conditions such a brief statement suggests a wealth of material
on the local type of slavery.

That ardent abolitionist from across the sea, James Silk Buckingham,
has recorded a characteristic picture of the Kentucky slave at rest
and in gala attire:

     "We remained at Henderson the greater part of the day, it being a
     holiday with the negro slaves on the estate, so that it was
     difficult to get the requisite number of hands to complete the
     landing in a short time. Some of the female slaves were very
     gaily dressed, and many of them in good taste, with white muslin
     gowns, blue and pink waists, ribbons, silk handkerchiefs or
     scarfs, straw bonnets, and a reticule for the pocket handkerchief
     held on the arm. In talking with them, and inquiring the reason
     of the holiday, one said she believed it was Easter, another said
     it was Whitsuntide, and a third thought it was midsummer. They
     were chiefly the household slaves, who are always better treated,
     better dressed, and more indulgent than the field laborers. The
     men who were employed in landing the cargo appeared to be more
     cheerful in their general aspect and behavior than the field
     slaves I have seen at the South: and there is no doubt that in
     Kentucky their condition is very much better than in most other
     states, their work lighter, their food and clothing better, and
     their treatment more kind and humane."[366]

Legally, there were no marriages among the slaves. They were not
citizens, but property. The men were urged to take their "wives" from
among the women of the home estate, if a suitable companion could be
found. But if not they eventually secured one in the neighborhood and
the master usually allowed the slave a pass to see his wife every
night in the week. While such a cohabitation was not exactly a legal
affair most of them were held as sacred as those more legalized unions
among the master class. Many masters paid an unconscious tribute to
these unions. When there ran away a slave who had a wife living in the
neighborhood or even at a great distance the owner would make mention
of the exact locality of the wife in order that people in that region
would be on the lookout for the fugitive. J. C. Bucklin in 1824 did
not give much of a description of David, who had left his master, but
he very carefully stated that he had a "wife and children at William
Shirley's, about 16 miles from this place, on the Westport Road."[367]
An owner in Fayette county after giving a detailed picture of "Arthur"
added that "Capt. Peter Poindexter, eight miles from Lexington owns
his wife, and I expect that he will be in that neighborhood."[368] A
more extreme example was that of "Dick," a Lexington slave who ran
away to New Orleans, the owner thought, because "he has a wife living
in that city, and he has been heard to say frequently that he was
determined to go to New Orleans."[369] Such cases as this were the
logical consequence of the slavery system. They existed in Kentucky
just as in any other slave State, but they were few compared with
those slaves unions that were never broken.

It was to the economic as well as humanitarian interest of the master
to have sympathy with the peace and contentment of his servant. Thus
most of them took care that the family relationships of the slaves
should not be disturbed. Oftentimes when the owner of either a husband
or a wife was on the point of moving out of the county the masters
would get together and make a trade which would obviate any disruption
of the slave family. Under such conditions a man would part with a
servant who otherwise could not have been bought at any price. Such a
situation was possible only in a State where the personal interest in
a slave and his welfare took precedence over merely his economic value
to the owner.[370]

Charles Stewart in _My Life as a Slave_ has given us his own
experiences of home life and marriage among slaves in Kentucky. He
lived in Paris and was engaged in handling race horses. Soon after
coming from Virginia to Kentucky he fell in love with a young mulatto
girl, who was the property of a Mr. Robertson, who gave his consent to
their marriage, promising never to part them by his own free will. In
his own dialect Stewart dictated his story. "So I married her, an' tuk
her to a little house I had fixed up near de stables, an' she
clear-starched an' sewed an' broidered an' wukked wid de hand-loom,
an' made more pretty things dan I could count. She paid her marster,
en course, reg'lar, so much a month fur her hire, but, lor', she neber
touched her airnin's fur dat. I had plenty of money to hire as many
wives as I wanted, but dis one was de onliest one I eber did want, an'
so it was easy enough." After two years his wife became very sick and
died and the grief of the Negro man was touching in the extreme. "She
was jes' as fond o' me as I was of her, an' it did 'pear hard luck to
lose her jes' as I was makin' up my mind to buy her out and out, only
en course, it was a fortunate thing I hadn't bought her, as long as
she had to die, kase den I would ha' lost her an' de money too. Arter
she was in de ground it jes' 'peared to me like eberything was
different; I tuk a dislikement to Paris, an' I didn't feel like goin'
home to Virginny." His master agreed to let him go wherever he liked
if he could find an owner to suit him and finally Stewart went to
Louisiana after an interview with Senator Porter of that State. He was
to stay six months to see how he liked it and then if agreeable he was
to stay there. He must have been a rather unusual Negro, for his
selling price was finally fixed at $3,500.[371]

But life among the slaves of Kentucky was not by any means a path of
roses. Many anti-slavery leaders attested to this fact. The most
trustworthy statement that was ever made on this general subject was
that embodied in the pamphlet of the Presbyterian Synod of Kentucky in
1835 advocating gradual emancipation. The following brief extracts are
most significant:

     "The system produces general licentiousness among the slaves.
     Marriage, as a civil ordinance, they cannot enjoy. Until slavery
     waxeth old, and tendeth to decay, there cannot be any legal
     recognition of the marriage rite, or the enforcement of its
     consequent duties. For, all the regulations on this subject would
     limit the master's absolute right of property in the slaves. In
     his disposal of them he could no longer be at liberty to consult
     merely his own interest ... their present quasi-marriages are
     continually voided (at the master's pleasure).... They are in
     this way brought to consider their matrimonial alliances as
     things not binding, and act accordingly. We are then assured by
     the most unquestionable testimony that licentiousness is the
     necessary result of our system."

One would infer from this observation of apparently fair-minded men
that slave unions were not very sacred affairs and that any disruption
of them would amount to little, but in the same document these
Presbyterian preachers give a back-handed compliment to the stability,
at least in temperament, of the average slave marriage.

     "Brothers and sisters, parents and children, husbands and wives,
     are torn asunder and permitted to see each other no more. These
     acts are daily occurring in the midst of us. The shrieks and
     agony often witnessed on such occasions proclaim with a trumpet
     tongue, the iniquity of our system. There is not a neighborhood
     where these heartrending scenes are not displayed; there is not a
     village or road that does not behold the sad procession of
     manacled outcasts, whose mournful countenances tell that they are
     exiled by force, from all that their hearts hold dear."

It is strange that these two opposing views should appear in the same
pamphlet, but nevertheless they are both undoubtedly true pictures of
slavery in Kentucky. It is merely a question as to which of the two
represented the majority of cases. Licentiousness there was, but it
was certainly very much less among the slaves of Kentucky than in the
far South. Slave unions were treated with more respect by the masters
of Kentucky than in most slave States. As has been pointed out in a
previous chapter, the very fact that the few instances of inhuman
separation of slave families produced such a storm of public
disapproval shows that it was not a very general practice in the
State.

From the legal standpoint the slave had no rights or privileges in the
attainment of even a meager education. On the other hand Kentucky was
the only slave State, with the exception of Maryland and Tennessee,
which never passed any laws forbidding the instruction of slaves. Thus
no penalty was attached to Negro education, neither was any
encouragement given. Those slaves who learned to read were the
servants of masters who because of conscientious scruples taught them
how to read the Bible. Few slaves ever learned to write, for they
might then be tempted to serve as unofficial dispensers of passes in
the owner's name. The general objection to any reasonable amount of
education was the tendency towards dissatisfaction with the servile
status thereby aroused. If the slave could learn to read well, it was
feared that he would become a victim of the "filthy" abolitionist
literature, which through the resultant effect upon the Negroes would
have produced no end of trouble to the slavery system. Hence, for the
most part, the Kentucky slave remained in blissful ignorance, and well
for him as such and the institution he represented that his learning
was no greater.[372]

Out of a collection of some three hundred and fifty runaway slave
advertisements concerning Kentucky slaves the author has found 71
cases in which mention was made that the Negro could read and 37
instances in which he could write. The latter cases are all included
in the former classification also. On that basis a little over ten
per cent of the slaves could read and write and about twenty per cent
could read but were unable to write. There are, however, two strong
reasons against any such general conclusion. In the first place, the
more a slave learned the more liable he was to become dissatisfied and
run away; and secondly, the careful mention which was made in
advertisements of the Negro's ability to read or write would tend to
show that it was more or less an unusual accomplishment.

Taking up the question of the education of slaves in the State, the
Presbyterian Synod of Kentucky said in 1834 that "Slavery dooms
thousands of human beings to hopeless ignorance ... if slaves are
educated it must involve some outlay upon the part of the master....
It is inconsistent with our knowledge of human nature to suppose that
he will do this for them. The present state of instruction among this
race remains exactly what we might ... naturally anticipate.
Throughout the whole land (State), so far as we can learn, there is
but one school in which, during the week, slaves can be taught. The
light of three or four Sabbath schools is seen glimmering through the
darkness that covers the black population of the whole State. Here and
there a family is found where humanity and religion impel the
master, mistress or children to the laborious task of private
instruction."[373]

It should be added in this connection that the same statement would
hold true of the free Negro population of Kentucky at the same period.
Until long after the Civil War there was no provision made for their
education other than that of individual enterprise. The public
education of the whites was not on a plane comparable to that of any
of the Northern States until after the reconstruction period, and even
then Kentucky lagged behind for years.

The church and its influence for the betterment of society under the
slavery system was more effective than the school. The chief religious
paper of the State was the _Presbyterian Herald_ and one of its most
persistent pleas was that the proper religious instruction of the
Negro servant class would answer most of the objections to the
institution. "The most formidable weapon in the hands of the
abolitionist," said the editor, "is the indifference which he charges
to the Christian slaveholder toward the spiritual welfare of the slave
under his control. Disarm him of this weapon, and you have done much
to render him powerless."[374]

Religious instruction in families of Christian habits of life,
however, was not so sadly neglected. The household servants were
usually brought to the house during the family worship and the
scriptures were not merely read to them but explained. No restrictions
were ever placed on church attendance either by law or by custom. Many
slaves united with the white churches and throughout the State today
one may find any number of old churches whose records still show
several of these Negroes on the church rolls. Most of them are very
kindly remembered for their good moral character and abiding faith.
Such a condition was not so prevalent among the agricultural slaves,
except where they were few in numbers. Even here, however, the
religious instinct was not suppressed in any manner. Their religion at
the most was a very crude imitation of the worship of their masters.
They were not confined to the rear seats of the white churches for
their attendance at Sunday services. They could hold their own
meetings in schoolhouses and vacant church edifices.

It was these distinctively slave gatherings that gave rise to one of
the most interesting of all Negro characters--the preacher. Tradition
and story have related many a charming picture of this quaint
representative of Negro faith, but unfortunately few life stories of
any of them have ever been preserved. In nearly all the county
histories we find mention of several of these Negro exhorters who
seemingly were men of some degree of intelligence. The majority of
them were apparently themselves slaves, subject to the will of their
masters, and while the restrictions on their movements were very lax,
they seldom if ever spoke beyond the borders of their home
county.[375]

One of the famous Negro preachers of the early nineteenth-century
South was Josiah Henson. From 1825 to 1828 he was a slave in Daviess
County, Kentucky, and in his autobiography he has given us a picture
of the circumstances under which he became a slave preacher. "In
Kentucky," said he, "the opportunities of attending on the preaching
of whites, as well as of blacks, were more numerous; and partly
attended by them, and the campmeetings which occurred from time to
time, and partly from studying carefully my own heart, and observing
the developments of character around me, in all the stations of life
which I could watch, I became better acquainted with those religious
feelings which are deeply implanted in the breast of every human
being, and learnt by practice how best to arouse them, and keep them
excited, and in general to produce some good religious impressions on
the ignorant and thoughtless community by which I was surrounded.... I
cannot but derive some satisfaction, too, from the proofs I have had
that my services have been acceptable to those to whom they have been
rendered. In the course of the three years from 1825 to 1828 I availed
myself of all the opportunities of improvement which occurred and was
admitted as a preacher by a conference of the Methodist Episcopal
Church."[376]

In Ballard County there was another interesting exhorter. Advertising
for his Negro Jack who had run away in 1850, C. B. Young pointed out
that although he was a slave and the property of the "subscriber" he
was a well-educated Baptist preacher and in the pursuit of his
vocation he was well known by "many of the citizens of Paducah,
McCracken County, and also by citizens of Hickman and Fulton Counties,
and is thought by many to be a free man."[377]

The only credentials which the Negro preacher carried, according to
his own testimony, came directly from the Lord. His education was only
of a sufficient character to enable him to read the Bible and line out
the words of the hymns. His creed was never the creation of any school
of theology. It was usually an original interpretation of supernatural
phenomena varying widely even in one individual from time to time.
Convinced of his supernatural calling, he felt inferior to no one in
the power of exegesis. As long as he held his balance and remained on
terra firma his followers believed in him as he believed in himself.
But as Lucius Little has well said: "Once in a while a colored
preacher lost his influence with his congregation by drinking too
deeply of the Pierian spring. Too much learning raised him out of
their orbit. They fell on stony ground." Strange, yet how true, that
the more ignorant a slave minister was, the more power of influence
for good he had among his fellow human beings.[378]

James Lane Allen has given us a splendid little sketch of three of
these native characters whom he evidently knew in his younger days:

     "One of these negro preachers was allowed by his master to fill a
     distant appointment. Belated once, and returning home after the
     hour forbidden for slaves to be abroad, he was caught by the
     patrol and cruelly whipped. As the blows fell, his words were,
     'Jesus Christ suffered for righteousness' sake; so kin I."

     Another was recommended for deacon's orders and actually
     ordained. When liberty came, he refused to be free, and continued
     to work in his master's family until his death. With considerable
     knowledge of the Bible and a fluent tongue, he would nevertheless
     sometimes grow confused while preaching and lose his train of
     thought. At these embarrassing junctures it was his wont suddenly
     to call out at the top of his voice, "Saul, Saul. Why persecutest
     thou me?" The effect upon his hearers was electrifying:--as none
     but a very highly favored being could be thought worthy of
     enjoying this persecution. He thus converted his loss of mind
     into spiritual reputation.

     A third named Peter Cotton, united the vocations of exhorter and
     wood-chopper. He united them literally, for one moment Peter
     might be seen standing on his log chopping away, and the next
     kneeling down beside it praying. He got his mistress to make him
     a long jeans coat and on the ample tails of it to embroider, by
     his direction, sundry texts of scripture, such as "Come unto Me,
     all ye that are heavy laden." Thus literally clothed with
     righteousness, Peter went from cabin to cabin, preaching the
     Word. Well for him if that other Peter could have seen him."[379]

One of the dominant features of such a type of religion among the
Negroes was the resulting prevalence of superstition. It almost seems
that in their ignorance they adopted every form of supernatural fear
that was ever known among our ancestors. But if it had ended there the
matter would not have been so important socially. In their constant
association with white children they brought their fears of
"ghost-hauntings" and other fantastic ideas into the minds of the very
young. The peculiarity of the Negro slave as compared with the other
superstitious races was his own sinister imaginative productions. They
related none of the valuable tales of ancient mythology, but rather
did they fill the earth with goblins, witches and ghosts--the result
of their own dreams and fancies.[380]

The many stories of this sort which a "mammy" related to a child a
half century ago can be reproduced by the old man of the twentieth
century and the effect of the old ideas of magic is still with him.
The prevalence of superstitious ideas in Kentucky today might easily
be traced back to the associations of slavery times. But such a
weakness may not always have done harm; not every child was so
influenced. The natural play of the Negro instinct was worth much to
his peace and contentment. Here again Shaler has given us a rather
unique observation from his own experience:

     "The only movements of the spirit in the religious field that I
     can remember came from two sources: my mother's singing.... The
     other spiritual influence came from the negroes. A number of them
     used to meet at night to talk religion beneath a shed which lay
     open to the northern sky. One of them, well named "Old Daniel,"
     had a fervid imagination and excellent descriptive powers. He
     would picture the coming of the great angel as if it were before
     his eyes; the path of light shooting down from about the North
     star,--the majesty of his train. Then the rolling of the heavens
     "like a scroll"--I did not know what this process was like, but
     it seemed vaguely fine--and then the burning up of the world. I
     was always greatly moved when hearing these exhortations which
     must indeed have been rather wonderful things, but they made no
     permanent impression upon me. In fact I regarded them as 'nigger
     talk.'"[381]

The patriarchal character of slavery as it existed in Kentucky is best
shown in the relationship which generally existed between the master
and his slave. The pioneers who brought their slaves with them from
Virginia encountered many dangers not only in crossing the mountains
but after they had settled in the new State. Many were the times when
the slave proved himself a hero and even encountered death in order to
protect the master and his family. Tradition and history have handed
down many of these stories to us, but the most famous of all, as well
as the best authenticated, was the experience of Monk Estill, who was
the slave of Colonel James Estill, of Madison County. In a struggle
with the Indians in 1782 in the region where Mount Sterling is now
located Monk cried out to his master in the thick of the fray: "Don't
give way, Marse Jim; there's only twenty-five of the Injuns and you
can whip them." Colonel Estill was killed and Monk was taken prisoner
but he soon managed to escape, and after joining his comrades carried
one of the wounded men twenty-five miles. The young master was so
grateful to Monk that he gave him his freedom and kept him in the best
of comfort the rest of his life. This was the experience of what is
supposed to have been the first slave in the district of
Kentucky.[382]

Not only was the slave on a par with his master when it came to facing
dangers but even in the field of sports he had as pleasant an outing
as his overlord. While the one may have spent the day in fox hunting
or deer driving, when nightfall came the Negro was apt to emerge from
his quarters followed by his faithful dog in search of possum or coon.
While the master may have enjoyed a feast of venison at his table the
Negro was just as well satisfied with the less valuable but savory
game that graced his own meal.

With the exception of the house servants most of the slaves of the
State were employed in agricultural pursuits, but, as we have seen
elsewhere, even here they were not to be found in large droves as in
the States of the South. There were only a few big landed estates
which were cultivated by the owners under their own supervision and in
the large majority of cases the field slaves worked side by side with
the whites. Often an owner's circumstances compelled him to labor in
the fields with his slaves and when doing so he rarely demanded more
of them than he did himself. Such a condition was not only true in the
early days when there were few slaves but it extended throughout the
slavery era.[383] The stories of the mildness of the institution in
Kentucky which reached the North were little accredited by the radical
element, which could never see any virtue in servile labor. Perhaps
the most zealous abolitionist who visited the State was J. W.
Buckingham, who wrote in 1840 that the "condition of the Negroes, as
to food, clothing, and light labor struck me as being better in
Kentucky than in any other State."[384] While traveling in the heart
of the slave section of the State between Frankfort and Louisville he
saw many instances of black and white laborers, slave and free,
working side by side in the same field.[385]

The relation between the owner and the household type of slave was of
a more intimate nature and the master was careful to pick only the
best of the Negroes. In such an environment we see the picture of the
Kentucky gentleman of song and story, and the Negro in all the best
that tradition has related of him. The latter became identified with
the family of the master in sentiment and feeling. Under ordinary
circumstances he had nothing to worry about, and with no cares
pressing upon him, he became as happy as any Negro ever was. If the
crops failed, or the owner became bankrupt he had none of the anxiety
of his master, although he may have displayed the greatest sympathy
with the existing condition. It was his duty to give only his labor to
his master and in return he was sheltered, clothed and supported when
sick or too old to labor; and at last when his earthly toils were
over, he was given a Christian burial. The humble affection which the
slave had for his master in conjunction with the extreme confidence
which he held for the outcome of all pecuniary troubles is shown by
instances in the life history of every slaveholding family. No matter
what might be the circumstances and conditions of the estate the slave
could go on in his daily work without any fears or cares, except for
the one great cloud that in the event of a disruption of the estate
through a legal process he might be sold to satisfy his master's
creditors.

From our present viewpoint the treatment may have been at times rather
harsh but we must be careful to judge it from the general standard of
those times. It has been pointed out that it would bear "favorable
comparison with the treatment of the white sailors in the British and
American navies of the same period."[386] The slave code allowed a
much severer policy than was generally carried out, for it must be
considered that the law was made to fit the worst cases, where such
action was justifiable. Often the attitude of the master appeared
harsher than it was really meant to be. It may have been merely a
display of authority on his part when he reprimanded a servant who
had really committed only a minor indiscretion.[387]

There were naturally other scenes in which the treatment of slaves
would not appear in such a favorable light. The chronically bad
master, however, was at all times and under all circumstances under
the ban of a just public sentiment. Should, by chance, a slave under
such a one secure vengeance on his heartless overlord, the general
feeling of the community was on the side of the slave. Strange to say,
it was very often true that persons who had known little concerning
slavery until they came to Kentucky, as soon as they had accumulated a
sufficient surplus, became the owners of slaves and proved to be the
hardest taskmasters.[388] Much light is thrown on this situation by
Shaler. "There is a common opinion," said he, "that the slaves of the
Southern households were subjected in various ways to brutal
treatment. Such, in my experience, was not the case. Though the custom
of using the whip on white children was common enough, I never saw a
negro deliberately punished in that way until 1862, when, in military
service, I stayed at night at the house of a friend. This old man,
long a widower, had recently married a woman from the state of Maine,
who had been the governess of his children. In the early morning I
heard a tumult in the back yard, and on looking out saw a negro man,
his arms tied up to a limb of a tree, while the vigorous matron was
administering on his back with a cowhide whip. At breakfast I learned
that the man had well deserved the flogging, but it struck me as
curious that in the only instance of the kind that I had known the
punishment was from the hands of a Northern woman."[389] Shaler lived
in Campbell County in the extreme northern section of the State, where
there were only a few slaves and the treatment was milder perhaps than
in any other part of Kentucky.

The general attitude is best shown by the two laws passed in 1816 and
1830. It had always been considered that the slave, being the property
of his owner, it remained for him and for him alone to serve as the
disciplinarian of the Negro. The increasing abuse of this right by
outsiders led to a law in 1815 giving the owners a power of action
against persons abusing their slaves, and in February, 1816, the
provisions were made more specific. If any person should "whip, strike
or otherwise abuse the slave of another" without the owner's consent,
the latter could recover damages in any circuit court in the
commonwealth--regardless of whether or not the punishment so inflicted
injured the ability of the slave to render service to his master.[390]

Some of the contemporary comment would seem to imply that the theory
of the law was based on the property conception of the slave and not
upon humanitarian motives. In other words, it was perfectly proper to
punish any slave as one saw fit as long as one did not interfere with
the property value of the _servant_. Fearon, while visiting the State
in 1818, came across an example of this kind and after telling the
story of the punishment makes this comment: "It appears that this boy
(the one who had been whipped) was the property of a regular
slave-dealer, who was then absent at Natchez with a cargo. Mr. Lawe's
humanity fell lamentably in my estimation when he stated, that
'whipping niggers, if they were his own, was perfectly right, and they
perhaps deserved it; but what made him mad was, that the boy was left
under his care by a friend, and he did not like to have a friend's
property injured.'"[391] The conduct observed by Fearon was clearly in
violation of the law of 1816, unless the absent master had given over
his rights in full to the man Lawe, who administered the punishment.
It may have been the spirit of the laws of Kentucky that Lawe had in
mind when he spoke to Fearon. On the other hand, it could easily be
given the interpretation which Fearon made. The trend of public
opinion was more and more in the interest of justice for the slave as
the law of 1830 shows:

     If any owner of a slave shall treat such slave cruelly, so as in
     the opinion of the jury, to endanger the life or limb of such
     slave, or shall not supply his slave with sufficient food or
     raiment, it shall and may be lawful for any person acquainted
     with the fact or facts, to state and set forth in a petition to
     the Circuit Court, the facts, or any of them aforesaid, of which
     the defendant hath been guilty, and pray that such slave or
     slaves may be taken from the possession of the owner, and sold
     for the benefit of such owner, agreeably to the 7th article of
     the Constitution.[392]

In accordance with this law, if a jury of twelve men were convinced
that a master treated his slave cruelly, or failed to provide him the
proper food and clothing, the slave would be sold into better hands
and the master would have to pay the costs of the suit. Most assuredly
there was no place in the eyes of the law for an inhuman slaveholder.
Not only was such a one a criminal in the eyes of the courts but he
was socially ostracized in the ordinary circles of the community.[393]

Two instances of this kind in Lexington will show the public feeling.
In 1837 Mrs. Turner, the wife of a wealthy Lexington judge, was
accused of inhuman cruelty. Her own husband was the chief complainant,
stating that "that woman has been the cause of the death of six of my
servants by her severities." The trial caused intense excitement among
the people of Lexington, more so perhaps for the reason that the
defendant was a member of a prominent Boston family and her husband
was a former judge of the criminal court in New Orleans. The court
proceedings were brought to an end when the woman was pronounced
insane and placed in the asylum.[394]

Early in 1839 a Mr. and Mrs. Maxwell were tried in Lexington for the
inhuman treatment of a female slave servant. The indignation of the
citizens of Lexington is apparent from the publicity that was given to
the proceedings in the local papers. A Dr. Constant testified that he
saw Mrs. Maxwell whipping the Negro severely, without being particular
whether she struck her in the face or not. The lacerations had brought
blood in considerable quantities for he had found some on the steps.
He had noticed previously that the slave had been thinly clad and was
barefooted even in cold weather. During the previous months he had
noticed several scars on her and at one time she had had one eye tied
up for a week. A Mr. Winters was once passing along the street and saw
one of the boys whipping the slave girl with a cowhide. Whenever she
turned her face to him he would hit her across the face either with
the butt end or small end of the whip to make her turn around square
to the lash, in order that he might get a fair blow at her. A Mr. Say
had noticed several wounds on her person, chiefly bruises. Capt.
Porter, the keeper of the workhouse, thought the injuries on Milly's
person were very bad, some of them appeared to be burns, and some were
bruises or stripes from a cowhide whip. The trial was held amidst a
turmoil of resentment against the defendants and there was apparently
no one in sympathy with them whatever.[395]

Any discussion of the relationships in slavery times would be
incomplete without adding the characterisation of the Kentucky master
as drawn by a celebrated author who was born in the heart of the
bluegrass and was thoroughly familiar with the type:

     "The good in nature is irrepressible. Slavery, evil as it was,
     when looked at from the remoteness of human history as it is to
     be, will be judged an institution that gave development to a
     certain noble type of character.

     "Along with other social forces peculiar to the age, it produced
     in Kentucky a kind of farmer the like of which will never appear
     again. He had the aristocratic virtues: highest notions of
     personal liberty and personal honor, a fine especial scorn of
     anything that was little, mean, cowardly. As an agriculturist he
     was not driving or merciless or grasping; the rapid amassing of
     wealth was not among his passions, the contention of splendid
     living not among his thorns. To a certain carelessness of riches
     he added a certain profuseness of expenditure; and indulgent
     towards his own pleasures, towards others, his equals or
     dependents, he bore himself with a spirit of kindness and
     magnanimity. Intolerant of tyranny, he was no tyrant. To say of
     such a man, as Jefferson said of every slave-holder, that he
     lived in the perpetual exercise of the most boisterous passions
     and unremitting despotism, and in the exaction of the most
     degrading submission, was to pronounce judgment hasty and unfair.

     "Rather did Mrs. Stowe, while not blind to his faults, discern
     his virtues when she made him, embarrassed by death, exclaim: "If
     anybody had said to me that I should sell Tom down south to one
     of those rascally traders, I should have said, 'Is thy servant a
     dog that he should do this thing?'"[396]


FOOTNOTES:

[356] _Lexington Gazette_, August 23, 1803.

[357] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, July 10, 1824.

[358] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, October 15, 1845.

[359] _Ibid._, October 22, 1845.

[360] _Ibid._, September 27, 1848.

[361] _Ibid._, May 16, 1849.

[362] _Ibid._, December 10, 1851.

[363] _Ibid._, December 22, 1852.

[364] _Lexington Gazette_, April 12, 1806.

[365] The best contemporary treatment of this subject in general is by
Dr. R. J. Spurr--the sole printed text being in Perrin's _History of
Bourbon County_, pp. 59-60.

[366] Buckingham, _Eastern and Western States_, Vol. 3: 41.

[367] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, August 11, 1824.

[368] _Lexington Gazette_, June 14, 1803.

[369] _Lexington Intelligencer_, July 7, 1838.

[370] Perrin (Bourbon County), p. 60.

[371] _Harper's Magazine_, October, 1884, pp. 730-738.

[372] Clarke, _Sufferings of Lewis and Milton Clarke_, p. 104.
Rothert, _History of Muhlenburg County_, p. 104. Perrin (Bourbon
County), p. 60.

[373] _Address to the People of Kentucky_, p. 8.

[374] _Presbyterian Herald_, April 16, 1846. See especially the
editorial and articles in the issue of October 4, 1849.

[375] Rothert, _History of Muhlenburg County_, p. 340.

[376] Henson, _Life of Josiah Henson_, pp. 26-27.

[377] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, March 27, 1850.

[378] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, pp.
544-545.

[379] Allen, James Lane, _Blue Grass Region of Kentucky_, pp. 77-78.

[380] Robertson's _Autobiography_, pp. 124-125.

[381] Shaler's _Autobiography_, pp. 57-58.

[382] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 2, pp. 634-636.

[383] Cotterill, _History of Pioneer Kentucky_, p. 245. Little, L. P.,
_Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, p. 543.

[384] Buckingham, _Eastern and Western States_, Vol. 3: 7-8.

[385] _Op. cit._, Vol. 3: 8.

[386] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, pp.
541-2.

[387] A typical example of this has been related by one of Kentucky's
distinguished sons:

"In the households where I was intimate the slaves were about on the
same footing as the other members of the family; they were subjected
to sudden explosions of the master's temper much as were his children.
I well remember a frequent scene in my grandfather's house, where it
was the custom that I should go every Sunday afternoon for counsel and
instruction. They were at first somewhat fearsome occasions for a
little lad thus to be alone with an aged and stately grandfather. I
soon won his interest, in some measure by my fears, and came greatly
to enjoy the intercourse, for he knew how to talk to a boy, and we
became, in a way, boys together, in our sense of the funny side of
things. It was the custom, too, for him to divide the session of three
or four hours with a brief nap taken in his chair....

"As his rooms were near the negro quarter he would make ready for his
siesta by sending forth the servantman who waited on him, bidding him
tell the people that they were to keep quiet during the performance. I
can see him now with his pig-tail hanging down behind the back of the
easy chair and a handkerchief over his face as he courted slumber. For
a minute or two it would be still, then the hidden varlets would be as
noisy as before. Then the pig-tail would begin to twitch, and he would
mutter: 'Jim, tell those people they _must_ be still.' Again a minute
of quiet, and once more the jabbering and shouting. Now with a leap he
would clutch his long walking-stick and charge the crowd in the
quarter, laying about him with amazing nimbleness, until all the
offenders were run to their holes. Back he would come from his
excursion and settle himself to sleep. I could see that his rage was
merely on the surface and that he had used it for a corrective, for he
evidently took care not to hurt anyone." Shaler's _Autobiography_, p.
37.

[388] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, p.
543.

[389] Shaler's _Autobiography_, pp. 36-37.

[390] _Littell's Laws_, Vol. 5: 578-579.

[391] Fearon, _Sketches in America_, p. 241.

[392] Session Laws, 1830, p. 174.

[393] Blanchard and Rice, _Debate on Slavery_, p. 135.

[394] _American Slavery As It Is_, p. 87.

[395] _Lexington Reporter_, January 15, 1809.

[396] Allen, James Lane, _Blue Grass Region of Kentucky_, pp. 67-68.


CHAPTER V

PUBLIC OPINION REGARDING EMANCIPATION AND COLONIZATION


Although the facts herein set forth indicate that slavery in Kentucky
was a comparatively mild form of servitude it is not the aim here to
leave the impression that the anti-slavery element found no grounds
for attacking the institution. On the contrary, there were various
elements that devised schemes for exterminating the institution. This
was especially true of the churches, which represented more than any
other one force the sentiment of the State on the subject of
emancipation. The three prominent Protestant denominations of the
State were the Presbyterians, the Baptists, and the Methodists. The
only one of the three which maintained a general continuous policy
throughout the early nineteenth century on the question of slavery was
the Presbyterian.

It was on the eve of the first Constitutional Convention of 1792 that
David Rice, at that time the leader of the Presbyterians in Kentucky,
published a pamphlet under the nom-de-plume of PHILANTHROPOS entitled
_Slavery Inconsistent with Justice and Good Policy_. While the author
went into the general evils of slavery, such as the lack of protection
to female chastity, lack of religious and moral instruction, and the
comparative unproductiveness of slave labor, he was not one of those
violent opponents of the institution, who would abolish the whole
system without any constructive measures. A large part of his treatise
was devoted to the supposed sanction of the scriptures and his own
evidence that the same source was against rather than in favor of the
system then in vogue. It was but natural that Rice should recommend
that the convention should put an end to slavery in Kentucky in view
of his firm opinions in the matter, but he had a clear vision of the
future and he expressed his conviction that "a gradual emancipation
only can be advisable." He summed up his ideas in this sentence: "The
legislature, if they judged it expedient, would prevent the
importation of any more slaves; they would enact that all born after
such a date should be free; be qualified by proper education to make
useful citizens, and be actually freed at a proper age."[397] He put
these ideas forth as a citizen of Kentucky who was interested in its
welfare and as a prospective member of the constitutional convention.
When that body assembled at Danville he did not hesitate to voice his
views again but the forces of slavery were dominant and the majority
enacted the famous article IX, which determined the slave code of the
State until the institution was abolished by the 13th amendment to the
federal constitution. The significance of the attitude of David Rice
lies in the fact that as early as the year 1792 he put forth the idea
of gradual emancipation, a policy far in advance of his age but which
in the course of time was held by a large number of the fair-minded
statesmen of Kentucky.

In 1794 the Transylvania Presbytery, which was the governing body of
that sect at that time for the whole State, passed a resolution asking
that slaves should be instructed to read the Bible, having in view the
sole idea that when freedom did come to them they would be prepared
for it.[398] The same body in 1796 expressed the following fair-minded
attitude in the form of a resolution:

     Although the Presbytery are fully convinced of the great evil of
     slavery, yet they view the final remedy as alone belonging to the
     civil powers; and also do not think that they have sufficient
     authority from the word of God to make it a term of Christian
     communion. They, therefore, leave it to the consciences of the
     brethren to act as they may think proper; earnestly recommending
     to the people under their care to emancipate such of their slaves
     as they may think fit subjects of liberty; and that they also
     take every possible measure, by teaching their young slaves to
     read and give them such other instruction as may be in their
     power, to prepare them for the enjoyment of liberty, an event
     which they contemplate with the greatest pleasure, and which,
     they hope, will be accomplished as soon as the nature of things
     will admit.[399]

In the year 1797 the same organization decided that slavery was a
moral evil but on the question of whether those persons holding slaves
were guilty of a moral evil they decided in the negative. As to what
persons were guilty they were unable to decide and the matter was
postponed for future action.[400]

As early as 1800 the West Lexington Presbytery pointed to the trouble
and division which slavery was likely to cause among the churches, but
they were unable to come to any decision upon the exclusion of
slaveholding members from church privileges and in a letter to the
Synod of Virginia they asked for the judgment of higher ecclesiastical
authorities.[401] In 1802 the same body decided on a policy of
non-interference with the rights of the slaveholding members of the
church.[402]

Beginning in 1823 the Synod of Kentucky advocated the cause of the
American Colonization Society. Their general attitude on the slavery
question was an open one as late as the year 1833 when they adopted a
resolution to the effect that "inasmuch as in the judgment of the
Synod it is inexpedient to come to any decision on the very difficult
and delicate question of slavery as it is within our bounds;
therefore, resolved, that the whole matter be indefinitely
postponed."[403] The vote on this resolution stood 41 to 36.

The enactment of the law of 1833 forbidding the importation of slaves
into Kentucky seems to have induced the Synod to take a step in
advance, for when they next met in 1834 at Danville they adopted by
the decisive vote of 56 to 7 a resolution calling for the appointment
of a committee of ten to draw up a plan for the instruction and future
emancipation of slaves in the State.[404] The following year this
committee published a 64-page pamphlet entitled "An Address to the
Presbyterians of Kentucky proposing a plan for the instruction and
emancipation of their slaves." Many editions of this work were
published throughout the country even as late as 1862 when it was
issued by the United Presbyterian Board of Publication in Pittsburgh.
It was heralded throughout the northern section of the United States
as a very able document and was regarded all the more valuable because
it was published in a slaveholding State. The major portion of the
pamphlet was taken up with the general arguments setting forth the
evils of the slavery system but in the last few pages they set down
their plan for the gradual emancipation of the slaves in Kentucky--the
most able contribution towards a reconstruction of the existing social
system in the State which had been made up to that time.

"The plan, then, which we propose is, for the master to retain during
a limited period, and with regard to the welfare of the slave, that
authority which he before held, in perpetuity, and solely for his own
interest. Let the full liberty of the slave be secured against all
contingencies, by a recorded deed of emancipation, to take effect at a
specified time. In the meanwhile, let the servant be treated with
kindness--let all those things which degrade him be removed--let him
enjoy means of instruction, let his moral and religious improvement be
sought--let his prospects be presented before him, to stimulate him to
acquire those habits of foresight, economy, industry, activity, skill
and integrity, which will fit him for using well the liberty he is
soon to enjoy." The actual plan of potential freedom was stated
briefly in these words: "(1) We would recommend that all slaves now
under 20 years of age, and all those yet to be born in our possession,
be emancipated as they severally reach their 25th year. (2) We
recommend that deeds of emancipation be drawn up, and recorded in our
respective county courts, specifying the slaves whom we are about to
emancipate, and the age at which each is to be free. (3) We recommend
that our slaves be instructed in the common elementary branches of
education. (4) We recommend that strenuous and persevering efforts be
made to induce them to attend upon the ordinary services of religion,
both domestic and public. (5) We recommend that great pains be taken
to teach them the Holy Scriptures; and that, to effect this the
instrumentality of Sabbath Schools, wherever they can be enjoyed, be
united with that of domestic instruction."[405]

This appeal was not to the officials of the State but to the members
of a particular religious body by its governing organization. The
success or failure of the plan depended entirely upon the individual
slaveholder's attitude in the matter. The committee added this
sentence by way of explanation: "These are measures which all ought to
adopt; and we know of no peculiarity of circumstances in the case of
any individual which can free him from culpability if he neglects
them."[406]

The sentiments embodied in this appeal were not, however, any
indication of the feeling among the slaveholding Presbyterians of the
State nor were they expressive of the Synod itself, for that body
never took any action upon the address, it being the work of the
committee of ten entirely.[407] Davidson, writing in 1847, made the
following comment on the sentiment of the church people in Kentucky at
that time. "In the morbid and feverish state of the public mind, it is
not to be concealed, that by some they (the Committee) were considered
as going to an unwarrantable and imprudent length. The northern
abolitionists were waging a hot crusade against slavery, sending out
itinerant lecturers, and loading the mails with inflammatory
publications. Their measures were marked with a fanatical virulence
rarely exhibited, and the people were exasperated beyond forbearance
... the effects were truly disastrous. The prospect of emancipation
was retarded for years. The laws bearing on the slave population were
made more stringent than ever, and their privileges were curtailed.
In Kentucky, the religious meetings of the blacks were broken up or
interrupted and their Sabbath schools dispersed."[408]

When the subject of emancipation was under discussion in the Kentucky
Synod one of the elders arose and stated that he owned one hundred
slaves, nearly all of whom he had inherited. Many of them were so old
that they could not provide for themselves, others were women and
children whom no one was willing to feed and clothe for their labor.
He stated emphatically that he had no desire to hold them in bondage,
but that he was willing to do whatever was best for the slaves
themselves. If he should free them, what would become of the aged and
the women and children? Furthermore, it was a serious matter to give
bond and security for the support of so many slaves of different ages
and character. He could not send them out of the State, for they were
intermarried with the slaves of others; and as to giving them wages,
he could not, for they were eating him up as it was. With a feeling of
intense interest in the slave and anxiety on his own behalf to do the
right, he asked his brethren of the Synod, what he ought to do.[409]
The position of this kind-hearted Kentucky slaveholder shows more
clearly than any other picture we could draw the difficulties of
emancipation in Kentucky even when one was convinced of the evils of
the slavery system.

The final word of the Presbyterian Church on the whole subject of
slavery was sounded at its General Assembly in Cincinnati in 1845,
when a resolution was adopted, as submitted by Nathan L. Rice, of
Kentucky, stating that it was not competent for the church to
legislate where Christ and his apostles had not legislated. This, at
least for the time being, proved acceptable to the churches south of
the Ohio and avoided a breach in the Presbyterians such as had just
taken place among the Methodists and Baptists.

The Baptists as a State organization did not pursue a policy
similar to that of the Presbyterians. After the failure of the
emancipationist campaign in 1792 and again at the constitutional
convention in 1799 a few members of the Baptist Church began a
movement for immediate abolition under the lead of several
ministers--Tarrent, Barrow, Sutton, Holmes and others. The policy
which they advocated was not only one of immediate abolition but of
non-fellowship with the slaveholders within their own denomination.
There was no general governing body for the State, as the Baptists had
several so-called associations which covered only a few counties each.
The trend of opinion throughout the various commonwealth organizations
was apparently against the position held by the emancipationist group,
for the latter in 1807 withdrew from the regular organizations and
established an association of their own which they called the Licking
Locust Association. They were only able to muster the assent of twelve
churches to their newer group and soon died out in importance.[410]
The real sentiment of the Baptists was no doubt much like that of the
Presbyterians, but these early advocates of Negro freedom in their own
organization were entirely too radical even for their own church
membership. Had they followed a course of action and policy more in
keeping with their own constituents they might have accomplished much
good, whereas, as it was, they only stirred up the feeling within
their own denomination to such an extent that thereafter little
progress was made towards a policy of even gradual emancipation of the
slave.

Throughout the slavery era, however, the Baptists in the State were
divided into the "regular" and the "separatists," the former being in
favor of non-interference with the question and the latter
representing the advocates of emancipation in one form or another.
Both agreed that slavery was an evil, but the regular group was
unwilling to make it the cause of the expulsion of a slaveholder from
the church. In May, 1845, a "Southern Baptist Convention" was held at
Augusta, Georgia. The meeting had been hastily called and
representatives were present only from Maryland, South Carolina,
North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, Kentucky, and the
District of Columbia. Mississippi, Arkansas, Tennessee and Florida
were represented only by letters. The convention had been summoned as
a protest against the action of the "Acting Board" of the church in
the country in refusing to consent to the appointment of a slaveholder
to any field of foreign missionary labors.[411] In June of the same
year the Kentucky Baptists for the most part withdrew from the
northern organization and pledged themselves to this newly formed
southern convention. The creed was not changed. It was simply a matter
of rebuke toward the northern section's attitude on the slavery
question.[412]

The Methodists had also struggled to find a peaceful solution of the
problem of harmonizing Christianity with slavery. At the meeting of
the General Conference of the Methodist Church in 1845, several days
were taken up in the debate over the status of Bishop James Osgood
Andrew, of Kentucky. By inheritance and marriage he was a slaveholder.
Finally he was requested by a vote of 110 to 68 "to desist from the
exercise of the office of Bishop while this impediment remained." The
southerners in the convention became unusually indignant, declaring
that the infliction of such a stigma upon Bishop Andrew would make it
impossible for them to maintain the influence of Methodism in the
South.[413] So they withdrew from the convention and in May, 1845,
held a convention of the Methodist churches of the Southern States in
Louisville. After a nineteen-days' session they decided to set up an
organization of their own to be known as the "Methodist Episcopal
Church South" and to have their first meeting at Petersburg, Virginia,
in May, 1846.[414]

The Kentucky Methodist Conference met at Frankfort on September 17,
1845, and the entire attention of the meeting was given over to the
question of whether they would adhere to the general conference or
would pledge themselves to the newly formed southern organization.
Bishop Andrew appeared at Frankfort at the crucial moment and stated
all the facts concerning himself and the action which the Louisville
Conference had taken as a result of the trouble in the previous
General Conference. By a vote of 146 to 5 they then declared that
henceforth they would adhere to the Methodist Episcopal Church South,
and that all proceedings, records and official acts would thereafter
be in the name of the "Kentucky Conference of the Methodist Episcopal
Church South."[415]

At its annual conference in 1858 held in Hopkinsville the Louisville
Conference held a very heated debate over the rules of the church
regarding slaveholders. Finally they voted to expunge from the General
Rules the one which forbade "the buying and selling of men, women and
children, with the intention to enslave them."[416] The regulation
thus repealed, although it was a part of the rules of Methodism, was
just another indication of the sentiment in Kentucky at that time to
resent more and more the encroachments of the North on the slave
system of the South and to hang on to the institution with a grim
determination. But they were not willing to go to unwarrantable
lengths, for at the Kentucky Conference held in Germantown in March,
1860, a proposition submitted by the sister conferences to the South
with a view to further altering the rules on slavery was denied.[417]

The churches of Kentucky for the most part pursued a policy of
benevolent neutrality in the struggle which the slave forces of the
State were having with their neighbors to the North. The Baptists and
Methodists within the commonwealth officially never made any positive
contribution to the forces of either side, and they took no definite
stand until the whole southern division of their general national
organization withdrew from membership in the national conventions and
set up an organization of their own. When this much had been done
both the Methodists and Baptists of Kentucky pledged their allegiance
to their respective newly formed southern conventions. On the other
hand the Presbyterians of the State maintained a policy that was
distinctively their own, separate and apart from any acts of their
national organization. They were the only religious body in Kentucky
to issue officially a constructive plan for the betterment of social
and economic conditions under slavery. When it came to the advocacy of
even gradual emancipation they were careful to state that the plan was
only published for the benefit of the slaveholding members of their
own religious body. The Presbyterians went further in their
interference with the institution of slavery in the State than any
other religious body, but even they were not willing to try to extend
their home missionary field beyond their own membership. On the whole,
the churches in Kentucky merely followed the dictates of public
opinion on the subject of slavery, trying to pursue a policy of
neutrality as long as possible and then when it was no longer
feasible, most of them sided with the slaveholding group. The northern
section of none of these religious bodies, however, was driven out of
the State. There were a good many of the so-called "northern" churches
which remained loyal to the old national organizations.

The summary of the actions of the three principal religious bodies of
the State shows that there was a growing sentiment against the
institution of slavery. Kentucky being a slaveholding State, the
significance of this attitude was very important. While it may be true
that the majority sentiment even among the churches was not in favor
of the elimination of slavery the very fact that even a minority were
coming to the front unmolested by violence and threats and favoring
the gradual elimination of the established institution revealed the
general trend of public opinion among the people of Kentucky. These
measures were taken entirely upon their own initiative and were not
prompted by an outside anti-slavery influence.

Any discussion of the evolution of public opinion in Kentucky on the
subject of emancipation and of slavery in general would be incomplete
without describing the attitude of Henry Clay toward the institution
in Kentucky. During almost the entire period of slavery in Kentucky he
was the foremost citizen of the State and one of the principal
slaveholders. From those two viewpoints alone anything that he had to
say on the local type and problems of slavery is valuable in this
connection.

The general position of Clay on the subject of Negro servitude has
never been very widely understood. Among the radical abolitionists of
the North he was looked upon as a friend of slavery for the sake of
political advancement and among the slaveholders in some parts of the
South he was regarded as almost a member of the Garrisonian group of
the enemies of slavery. To understand Clay's real position we need
only to consider his relation to the institution as it existed in his
native State.

Coming from Virginia to Lexington in 1797, Clay soon found ample
opportunities for a public career. He first came into prominence as a
writer on slavery in the columns of the _Lexington Gazette_ and the
_Kentucky Reporter_. When the constitutional convention of 1799 was
called for a revision of the fundamental law of the State Clay bent
all his efforts towards the adoption of a system of gradual
emancipation for the slaves of Kentucky. It was pointed out that there
were relatively few slaves in the State and that a progressive plan of
liberation would be much easier than at any future time.

The consensus of opinion at the time was that the emancipationists led
by this young man from Virginia would have been successful, had it not
been for the intervening excitement produced by the Alien and Sedition
Laws and the resulting famous Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of
1798. Clay threw himself heart and soul into the newer campaign
against the mistakes of the Federalists and the former enthusiasm for
the gradual freedom of the slaves seems to have died down in his
thought as well as among the Kentucky people in general. Thus the
constitutional convention of 1799 left the conditions of slavery as
they were.

In a speech delivered three decades later before the Kentucky
Colonization Society, Clay said in commenting on his position in 1798:
"More than thirty years ago, an attempt was made, in this
commonwealth, to adopt a system of gradual emancipation, similar to
that which the illustrious Franklin had mainly contributed to
introduce in 1780, in the state founded by the benevolent Penn. And
among the facts of my life which I look back to with most satisfaction
is that of my having cooperated, with other zealous and intelligent
friends, to procure the establishment of that system in this state. We
were overpowered by numbers, but submitted to the decision of the
majority with that grace which the minority in a republic should ever
yield to that decision. I have, nevertheless, never ceased, and shall
never cease, to regret a decision, the effects of which have been to
place us in the rear of our neighbors, who are exempt from slavery, in
the state of agriculture, the progress of manufactures, the advance of
improvements, and the general progress of society."[418] In his famous
speech in the Senate on Abolition in 1839, referring further to his
activities in 1798, Clay stated that "no one was rash enough to
propose or think of immediate abolition. No one was rash enough to
think of throwing loose upon the community, ignorant and unprepared,
the untutored slaves of the state."[419]

Clay's private dealings with the institution were always consistent
with his political principles on the subject of slavery. He bought
many slaves during his lifetime but he never sold any.[420] Clay
believed that the slaves should be freed, but at the same time
considered the difficulties attendant upon instant emancipation. Among
the mass of the slaveholders of the State, Clay was one of the very
few who held a perfectly consistent attitude on gradual emancipation
as was finally shown by his will.[421]

With a more radical policy than that of Henry Clay the Kentucky
Abolition Society had been established as early as 1807, but its
membership was composed largely of Presbyterian and Baptist preachers
who were not in sympathy with the stand taken by the constitutional
convention of 1799. It was not until about 1830 that there began in
the State any real movement which was wide enough in influence to be
taken as an indication of the trend of public opinion. It will be
recalled that it was not until 1835 that the Presbyterian Synod was
able to decide on a plan of gradual emancipation.

It was in 1831 that some 48 slaveholders of Kentucky met and declared
themselves in favor of the gradual liberation of the slaves.[422]
James G. Birney, who was at that time living in Danville, took this
statement of the slave owners rather seriously and sent out an
invitation to the prominent men of the State to attend an
emancipation convention on December 6, 1831. After several months of
determined effort Birney only succeeded in getting together nine men,
all slaveholders. It is evident from the writings of Birney that he
thought these men were all determined to free their slaves and that
whatever plan he should propose would be accepted. But when the nine
slaveholders began to talk about the existing conditions in Kentucky
Birney's eyes were opened. It was pointed out that those who advocated
immediate emancipation were coming more and more to be victims of
social ostracism. Furthermore, Birney learned that there was among the
prominent slaveholders of the State a sort of secret organization
which had been formed to protect the constitutional rights of Kentucky
slaveholders against the encroachments of the people from the North.
James G. Birney was one of the most intelligent of the Kentuckians who
favored emancipation, but the ardent enthusiasm which he had hitherto
held for the future of his cause in Kentucky was decidedly cooled by
this little gathering of nine slaveholders. These men showed him a
point of view about which he had thought very little. Outside of the
new vision which this conference gave to Birney the only result of the
deliberations was that there was formed a society of slaveholders
which advocated the gradual emancipation of the future offspring of
slaves when they reached the age of twenty-one.[423]

Soon after this episode Birney came out in opposition to both gradual
emancipation and colonization. The majority of liberal-minded
Kentuckians were coming more and more to believe in these two
propositions as the ultimate solution of the slave problems of the
State and once Birney came out in opposition to them he was put down
as a radical abolitionist. In July, 1835, the feeling of the people of
Danville was aroused to the highest pitch and his anti-slavery paper
_The Philanthropist_ was forced to suspend publication when the local
printer was bought out.[424] The feeling of the people throughout the
State, however, was well shown by the fact that for the next two
months Birney made personal visits to Lexington, Frankfort and
Louisville in an attempt to get a printer to issue his newspaper. He
was entirely unsuccessful and on September 13 he wrote to Gerrit Smith
that he had determined to move to Cincinnati.[425] While the people of
the State could not agree with Birney's attitude on slavery they were
the first to admire his courage. George D. Prentice, the pro-slavery
editor of the _Louisville Journal_, had this comment to make:

     "He is an enthusiastic, but, in our opinion, a visionary
     philanthropist, whose efforts, though well intended, are likely
     to be of no real service to the cause of humanity. He at least
     shows, however, that he has the courage to reside among the
     people whose institutions he assails. He is not like William
     Lloyd Garrison living in Massachusetts, and opening the battery
     upon the states five hundred or one thousand miles off. He is not
     such a coward or fool as to think of cannonading the South from
     the steeple of a New England meeting house."

The climax of Birney's career in Kentucky had been reached in the
early part of 1835 when he split with the Kentucky Colonization
Society. Judge Underwood in the annual colonization address at
Frankfort had attempted to show that the only way to exterminate
slavery in the State was by African colonization. He advocated the
expenditure of $140,000 annually for the transportation of four
thousand Negroes between the ages of seventeen and twenty. The plan if
followed for fifty years he stated would rid the State of all
slaves.[426] In a letter to Gerrit Smith on January 31, 1835, Birney
voiced his opposition to the plan of Judge Underwood and to any scheme
of colonization. Thus on another point he was to be classed as a
radical abolitionist and his career of usefulness in Kentucky was at
an end. If he had chosen a more middle ground and aided the cause of
colonization, he would no doubt have accomplished much good. As it
was, he was forced to leave the State after many threats and
thereafter he stormed the institution of slavery in his native State
from a safe region north of the Ohio River. From that time on
everything that he uttered in opposition to slavery in Kentucky was
met with a strong current of opposition. Where Birney might have
accomplished much for his native State he really did harm because he
went beyond the point where the people would listen to his advice. In
September, 1834, he visited Henry Clay and that most liberal of all
Kentucky slaveholders pointed out to Birney the error of his ways but
the latter showed no signs of listening to advice and thereafter Clay
and Birney were sworn political antagonists. Had Birney joined with
Clay at this time there might have been a much brighter future in
Kentucky for the cause of emancipation. As it was, Birney never
receded from his position and when the Presbyterian Synod came out
with its plan of gradual emancipation Birney voiced his determined
opposition to the scheme because it did not favor the immediate
liberation of the slaves.[427] With the advent of the abolition
movement most of the Kentucky masters who were in favor of gradual
emancipation receded from their position and held on firmly to the
existing institution.[428]

The series of events from 1831 to 1835, centering around the
activities of Birney, brought the attention of the public to the
slavery question more than ever. As was common in all other movements
of popular interest it became the custom for local gatherings to be
held to discuss the problem. It was always customary at the conclusion
of these meetings to draw up a series of resolutions and it is
noticeable that they all voiced a similarity of sentiment on the
slavery question. A typical set of resolves were those drawn up at a
gathering held in Shelbyville in June, 1835:

     "_Resolved_, that the system of domestic slavery as it now exists
     in this commonwealth, is both a moral and a political evil, and
     in violation of the rights of man.

     "_Resolved_, as the opinion of this meeting, that the additional
     value which would be given to our property, and its products by
     the introduction of free white labor, would in itself be
     sufficient, under a system of gradual emancipation, to transport
     the whole of our colored population.

     "_Resolved_, that no system of emancipation will meet with our
     approbation, unless colonization be inseparably connected with
     it, and that any scheme of emancipation which will leave the
     blacks within our borders, is more to be deprecated than slavery
     itself."[429]

These resolutions were just another indication that the sentiment of
the people of Kentucky during the decade from 1830 to 1840 was in
favor of gradual emancipation of the slaves and their colonization in
Africa. We have seen that this was the plan of the various church
bodies, and also of Kentucky's greatest statesman, Henry Clay. Added
to this we find that the majority of the liberal-minded people of the
State held to the same conviction. But why, one asks, did all this
feeling come to naught. The answer can be better expressed in the
words of a contemporary Kentuckian, Nathaniel Shaler: "From the local
histories the deliberate student will easily become convinced that if
there had been no external pressure against slavery at this time there
would still have been a progressive elimination of the slave element
from the population by emancipation on the soil, by the sale of slaves
to the planters of the Southern States, and by their colonization in
foreign parts."[430]

During the decade from 1840 to 1850 this outside pressure of which
Shaler speaks was at its height. We have seen typical examples of it
within the borders of Kentucky in the discussion of the cases of Delia
Webster, Calvin Fairbank and John B. Mahan. The change in the trend of
popular thought during this period does not show itself much in the
open until 1849, when the third constitutional convention was about to
assemble. It was then that all phases of the problem of slavery were
discussed, in the press, in the pulpit, on the platform and in the
elections. George IX Prentice in an editorial gave the best exposition
of Kentucky sentiment. He said: "The sentiment of Kentucky we believe
to be, that slavery is an evil which must be borne with patience,
simply because there is no known plan for its rapid extinction which
would not produce incalculable sacrifices and appalling risks. At the
same time we think the people of Kentucky are not inclined to increase
the evil, but are inclined to favor its gradual emancipation and
remote termination, by prohibiting the further introduction of slaves
and by some provision tending to encourage voluntary emancipation with
colonization. These measures they believe, taken in connection with
the known tendency in widening circles to substitute free for slave
labor, will hasten the social revolution in question as fast as it can
be carried with safety to the Commonwealth or with benefit to the
colonized negro."[431]

So universal was this feeling that even Cassius M. Clay, the only real
abolitionist left in the State, came out more or less in favor of it.
Under his leadership there was held at Frankfort, April 25, 1849, an
emancipation convention to which all the more radical element were
invited. Clay himself proved to be the most radical member of the
convention but when they came to draw up a series of resolutions the
only ones to pass were those which favored the absolute prohibition of
the importation of any more slaves into Kentucky and the complete
power to enforce and perfect, under the new constitution, whenever the
people desired it, a system of gradual emancipation of the
slaves.[432] Here we are confronted with the unusual fact that the
radical element of the State agreed with the plan of George D.
Prentice, one of the chief pro-slavery men of Kentucky, and with that
of Henry Clay.

While sojourning for his health in New Orleans in February, 1849, Clay
sent Richard Pindell for publication a letter on the gradual
emancipation of slavery in Kentucky, as the State at that time was
about to hold another constitutional convention. This long and able
document constitutes the most constructive program for the progressive
elimination of slavery from the State that was ever drawn up. It
embodied not only the fundamental principles of Clay's attitude on the
Kentucky slavery question but it undoubtedly typified the real
position of the average high-minded Kentucky slaveholder of that day.
Clay frankly admitted that he had little hope of the immediate success
of the plan, but he thought it was his duty to present the facts of
the problem to the people of his own State, at a time when they were
about to alter the existing constitution. The spirit of the plan as
well as its context shows that Clay had thoroughly considered the
emancipation question from all aspects, especially in relation to its
practical operation. The actual plan was based on three principles:
(1) that any gradual emancipation should be slow in its operation, so
as not to disturb the existing habits of society; (2) as an
indispensable condition the liberated slaves were to be sent out of
the State and colonized in Africa; (3) and the expenses of their
transportation and six months subsistence were to be borne by a fund
supplied by the labor of the freed negro.

Regarding the progressive plan of liberation, Clay suggested that a
certain date, January 1, 1855 or 1860, be fixed for the commencement
of the plan. All slaves born after that date were to be free at the
age of twenty-five; but they were liable thereafter to be hired out
under State authority for a period of not more than three years, in
order to raise money to pay for their expenses of transportation to
their colony and their subsistence for the term of six months. It was
suggested that the offspring of those who were to be free at
twenty-five should be free at their birth, but subject to
apprenticeship until they reached their majority and then to be hired
out as in the case of the parent to pay the expenses of transportation
to the colony and their settlement there. In the meanwhile the master
would have the usual legal rights over the slaves and could sell,
devise or remove them out of the State.

Clay considered colonization to be an indispensable part of his scheme
and went so far as to say that he would be "utterly opposed" to any
system of emancipation without it. He firmly believed that the nearly
two hundred thousand blacks along with their descendants "could never
live in peace and harmony and equality with the residue of the
population" if they were free. He thought the expense of colonizing
should be borne by a fund from the labor of the liberated Negro
because he was the individual who secured the most benefit thereby.
The non-slaveholder should not be taxed for any share in the expense
and the slaveholder would have enough sacrifices to make without any
additional financial burdens. Clay figured that the average annual
hire of each slave would be about fifty dollars, or one hundred and
fifty dollars for the whole period of three years. One third of this
sum would be required for the transportation of the Negro to Africa
and the other two thirds would go towards a fund to establish him in
his new country.[433]

The persistence of Clay in his avowed convictions on the subject of
slavery and emancipation in Kentucky was kept up in spite of the fact
that within a few days after the publication of his plan of
emancipation throughout Kentucky the House of Representatives at
Frankfort by the unanimous vote of 93 to 0 declared that "we the
representatives of the people of Kentucky, are opposed to abolition or
emancipation of slavery in any shape or form whatever, except as now
provided by the laws and constitution of the state."[434] This was
their answer to the plea set forth by Clay and strange to say the same
group of men voted unanimously at the same session to return Clay for
six years more to the United States Senate.

A convention of the so-called "Friends of Constitutional Reform" had
been held at the State capital on February 5, 1849, and had drawn up a
series of twelve resolutions on the several questions which were to be
debated in the constitutional convention. They made mention
incidentally of the desired reforms in connection with slavery stating
"that we do not desire or contemplate any change in the relative
condition of master and slave in the new Constitution, and intend a
firm and decided resistance to any such change. We have no objection
to a proper provision for colonizing the present free blacks, and
those who shall hereafter be set free, but protest against abolition
or emancipation without the consent of the owner, unless upon full
compensation and colonization."[435]

This element dominated the convention. The body not only ignored any
plan of emancipation but drew the reins of the existing institution
tighter than ever before by incorporating in the Bill of Rights the
famous phrase that "the right of property is before and higher than
any constitutional sanction, and the right of the owner of a slave to
such slave and its increase is the same and as inviolable as the right
of the owner of any property whatsoever." Such a statement was,
however, not brought on by the words of Clay, but was a direct
answer to the "higher law than the constitution" plea of the
abolitionists.[436] The convention amended the standard article on
slavery with a section to the effect that the "General Assembly should
pass laws providing that any free negro or mulatto immigrating to,
and any slave thereafter emancipated in, and refusing to leave that
State, should be deemed guilty of a felony, punished by confinement in
the penitentiary."

The obvious purpose of this amendment was to reduce the number of
Negroes in the State. Accordingly every slave emancipated was forced
to leave the State and the Negro population was decreased just so much
every time any slaves were set free. The convention was thus willing
to do something towards eliminating the Negro, but was not in favor of
any scheme of a general gradual liberation of the slaves. The
necessary legislative act for carrying out the provision of the
constitution was enacted March 24, 1851.[437] This law only went half
way in that it only prevented those Negroes who had been freed in
Kentucky from living in the State. It was not until March 3, 1860,
that the prohibition was extended to all free Negro immigration into
the State.[438] An interesting development of this policy was shown in
the enactment of the legislature in 1863 which declared it unlawful
for any Negro or mulatto claiming to be free under the Emancipation
Proclamation to migrate to or remain in the State. Any Negro violating
this law was to be treated as a runaway slave.[439]

The desire of the State authorities to eliminate the free Negro was
accompanied by constructive measures in behalf of the emancipated
slave. On March 3, 1856, the State legislature passed a law
appropriating $5,000 annually to aid the Kentucky Colonization Society
in the transportation of free Negroes to Liberia.[440] The universal
sentiment of the time was that the salvation of the Negro race rested
in their elimination from the State even as free men and their
transportation to their native African soil. Henry Clay of all others
was the most persistent advocate of colonization.

We have seen that the general trend of public opinion from about 1798
had been progressively in favor of gradual emancipation provided it
was coupled with some form of colonization which would remove the
liberated Negroes from the State. Public sentiment, however, received
a serious set-back about 1838 with the beginning of the Underground
Railroad system and the incoming of the abolitionist literature. In a
speech in the Kentucky legislature of 1838 James T. Morehead, one of
the leading anti-slavery statesmen of the State, portrayed the coming
of the newer era in the history of Kentucky slavery when the people
would make more strenuous efforts to hold firmly to the slavery
institution. Morehead pictured the popular mind in these words: "Any
man who desires to see slavery abolished--any friend of emancipation,
gradual or immediate--- who supposes for a moment that now is the time
to carry out this favorite policy, must be blind to the prognostics
that lower from every quarter of the political sky. Sir, the present
is not the period to unmanacle the slave in this or any other state of
the Union. Four years ago you might have had some hope. But the wild
spirit of fanaticism has done much to retard the work of emancipation
and to rivet the fetters of slavery in Kentucky.... The advocates of
abolition--the phrenzied fanatics of the North, neither sleep nor
slumber. Their footsteps are even now to be seen wherever mischief can
be perpetrated--and it may be that while the people of Kentucky are
reposing in the confidence of fancied security, the tocsin of
rebellion may resound through the land--the firebrand of the
incendiary may wrap their dwellings in flames--their towns and cities
may become heaps of ashes before their eyes and their minds drawn off
from all thoughts of reforming the government to consider the means
necessary for their self-preservation--the protection of their
families and all that is dear to men."[441]

Such was the idea of one of the most prominent public men of Kentucky
and such became in time the opinion of the average citizen who had
come to believe in gradual emancipation as the hope and solution of
the Negro problem in the State. The future course of events regarding
slavery in Kentucky is to be explained by this radical change of
mind. Thus did the wise and constructive plans of the gradual
emancipationists come to naught with the incoming of the radical
abolitionist movement which the Kentucky populace thought would bring
about a civil insurrection among the slaves in their own State. The
abolitionists misunderstood the gradual emancipation movement in
Kentucky and really fanned the flame of the pro-slavery sentiment that
came in its place.


FOOTNOTES:

[397] Davidson, _History of the Presbyterian Church in Kentucky_, p.
336.

[398] _Minutes of Transylvania Presbytery_, Vol. 1, p. 147.

[399] _Minutes of Transylvania Presbytery_, Vol. 2, pp. 102-3.

[400] _Ibid._, Vol. 2, pp. 163, 224.

[401] _Minutes W. Lexington Presbytery_, Vol. 1, p. 38.

[402] _Ibid._, p. 81.

[403] _Minutes of Kentucky Synod_, Vol. 5, pp. 28, 31.

[404] _Minutes of Kentucky Synod_, Vol. 5, pp. 50-52.

[405] _Address to Presbyterians of Kentucky_, pp. 33-34.

[406] _Ibid._, p. 34.

[407] Davidson, _History of the Presbyterian Church in Kentucky_, p.
340.

[408] _Op. cit._, p. 340.

[409] Blanchard and Rice, _Debate on Slavery_, p. 88.

[410] Spencer, _History of the Baptists in Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 186.

[411] _Niles' Register_, May 24, 1845.

[412] _Ibid._, June 28, 1845.

[413] _Ibid._, June 8, 1844.

[414] _Ibid._, May 17, 24, 31, 1845.

[415] _Niles' Register_, September 27, 1845.

[416] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 81.

[417] _Ibid._, Vol. 1, p. 83.

[418] Schurz, Carl, _Henry Clay_, Vol. 1, p. 31.

[419] Colton, _Works of Clay_, Vol. 6, p. 153.

[420] His attitude was perhaps best shown when, on a visit to
Richmond, Indiana, in the fall of 1846, he was presented with a
petition by a Quaker by the name of Mendenhall asking him to liberate
all the slaves he owned. Clay made a rather lengthy speech to the
gentleman on the general principles of the question and then, came
down to the practical side of the problem:

"Without any knowledge of the relation in which I stand to my slaves,
or their individual condition, you, Mr. Mendenhall, and your
associates, who have been active in getting up this petition, call
upon me forthwith to liberate the whole of them. Now let me tell you,
that some half a dozen of them, from age, decrepitude, or infirmity,
are wholly unable to gain a livelihood for themselves, and are a heavy
charge upon me. Do you think that I should conform to the dictates of
humanity by ridding myself of that charge, and sending them forth into
the world with the boon of liberty, to end a wretched existence in
starvation? Another class is composed of helpless infants, with or
without improvident mothers. Do you believe as a Christian, that I
should perform my duty toward them by abandoning them to their fate?
Then there is another class who would not accept their freedom if I
would give it to them. I have for many years owned a slave that I
wished would leave me, but he would not. What shall I do with that
class?"

"What my treatment of my slaves is you can learn from Charles, who
accompanies me on this journey, and who has traveled with me over the
greater part of the United States, and in both the Canadas, and has
had a thousand opportunities, if he had chosen to embrace them, to
leave me. Excuse me, Mr. Mendenhall, for saying that my slaves are as
well fed and clad, look as sleek and hearty, and are quite as civil
and respectful in their demeanor, and as little disposed to wound the
feelings of any one, as you are."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I shall, Mr. Mendenhall, take your petition into respectful and
deliberate consideration; but before I come to a final decision, I
should like to know what you and your associates are willing to do for
the slaves in my possession, if I should think proper to liberate
them. I own about fifty, who are probably worth about fifteen thousand
dollars. To turn them loose upon society without any means of
subsistence or support would be an act of cruelty. Are you willing to
raise and secure the payment of fifteen thousand dollars for their
benefit, if I should be induced to free them? The security of the
payment of that sum would materially lessen the obstacle in the way of
their emancipation."--Colton, Reed & McKinley, _Works of Henry Clay_,
Vol. 6, pp. 388-390.

This sums up in Clay's own words his treatment of the slaves that were
under his control. It is not to be presumed in any case that general
conditions in the State were like this. There were obvious reasons why
Clay couldn't get one or two of his slaves to accept freedom when he
offered it, for they realized that they were far better off under his
own particular care than they could ever hope to be under an
absolutely free status in society.

[421] So consistent was Clay in deed as well as words in spite of all
that the opposing forces had accomplished in the "State of Kentucky
that when he died he left a will which did for his own slaves just
what he would have had others do in his lifetime. As long as he lived
he refused to emancipate his slaves but when he passed away he left a
written document, the following portion of which forms the eminent
climax to a career of continuous labors for the eventual good of the
Kentucky slave owners as well as the slaves themselves.

"In the sale of any of my slaves, I direct that members of families
shall not be separated without their consent.

"My will is, and I accordingly direct, that the issue of all my female
slaves, which shall be born after the first day of January, 1850,
shall be free at the respective ages, of the males at twenty-eight,
and of the females at twenty-five; and that the three years next
preceding their arrival at the age of freedom, they shall be entitled
to their hire or wages for those years, or of the fair value of their
services, to defray the expense of transporting them to one of the
African colonies and of furnishing them with an outfit on their
arrival there.

"And I further direct, that they be taught to read, to write, and to
cipher, and that they be sent to Africa. I further will and direct,
that the issue of any of the females, who are so to be entitled to
their freedom, at the age of twenty-five, shall be free at their
birth, and that they be bound out as apprentices to learn farming, or
some useful trade, upon the condition also, of being taught to read,
to write, and to cipher. And I direct also, that the age of twenty-one
having been attained, they shall be sent to one of the African
colonies, to raise the necessary funds for which purpose, if they
shall not have previously earned them, they must be hired out for a
sufficient length of time.

"I require and enjoin my executors and descendants to pay particular
attention to the execution of this provision of my will. And if they
should sell any of the females who or whose issue are to be free, I
especially desire them to guard carefully the rights of such issue by
all suitable stipulations and sanctions in the contract of sale. But I
hope that it may not be necessary to sell any such persons who are to
be entitled to their freedom, but that they may be retained in the
possession of some of my descendants."--Colton, Reed & McKinley, Vol.
3, p. 153.

[422] Birney, William, _James G. Birney and his Times_, p. 132.

[423] Birney, William, _James G. Birney and his Times_, p. 133.

