This book brings before the minds of children, in a most attractive
manner, many of the great dramatic poet's works, acquainting them
with the characters and plots of the plays in a delicate way, and in
a style that is certain to make them long for the time when they
shall read the whole for themselves. The introductory history by Dr.
Furnivall is full of charm and instruction. This entirely new edition
has full-page colour and black and white drawings by John H. Bacon,
A.R.A., Arthur Dixon, Howard Davie and Harold Copping. Printed on
rough art paper. 10 full-page colour plates. 144 pp. letterpress,
crown 4to.


CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM TENNYSON

BY NORA CHESSON

NEW EDITION

The most popular poems of Tennyson, "The Lily Maid," "Lady Clare,"
"The Lord of Burleigh," "The Story of King Arthur," etc., etc., retold
in prose, and so introducing to the minds of young people the great
poet's works, and familiarising them with his celebrated characters.
This is a new edition, with additional beautiful illustrations in
colour and black and white by John H. Bacon, A.R.A., Gordon Browne,
R.I., Arthur Dixon and others. Printed on rough art paper. 10
full-page colour plates. 144 pp. letterpress, crown 4to.

[Illustration: _From "Children's Stories from Tennyson."_]


[Illustration: _From "Children's Stories from Italian Fairy Tales."_]

CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM ITALIAN FAIRY TALES AND LEGENDS

BY LILIA ROMANO

ILLUSTRATED BY HOWARD DAVIE Their charm enhanced by the numerous
characteristic illustrations, these stories, with their vivid local
colouring, gathered from the fairy tales and folk-lore of lovely
Italy, translated and retold, form a truly magnificent volume. Printed
on rough art paper. 12 full-page colour plates. 144 pp. letterpress,
crown 4to.


CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM JAPANESE FAIRY TALES AND LEGENDS

BY N. KATO

ILLUSTRATED BY HARRY G. THEAKER

The stories most sympathetic to the feelings of the English-reading
juvenile public have been collected and translated, and the book,
with its fascinating illustrations in colour and black and white, has
proved a valuable addition to the series. Printed on rough art paper.
10 full-page colour plates. 144 pp. letterpress, crown 4to.


CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM RUSSIAN FAIRY TALES AND LEGENDS

ILLUSTRATED BY A.A. DIXON

Translated from the original, and adapted by Miss Seraphima Pulman,
these stories are truly charming, while they are valuable as giving
an insight into Russian life and habits. The illustrations possess
all that delicacy and beauty which is characteristic of the artist.
Printed on rough art paper. 12 full-page colour plates. 144 pp.
letterpress, crown 4to.


CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM INDIAN LEGENDS

BY M. DOROTHY BELGRAVE AND HILDA HART

ILLUSTRATED BY HARRY G. THEAKER

Written with much feeling and charm, while the artist has delineated
the episodes with strikingly beautiful drawings in colour and black
and white, this book is also popular as furthering the knowledge of a
land and people so closely bound in the heart of the British Empire.
Printed on rough art paper. 12 full-page colour plates. 144 pp.
letterpress, crown 4to.


CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM FRENCH FAIRY TALES

BY DORIS ASHLEY

ILLUSTRATED BY MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL

Tales to be read with breathless interest, so full of incident and
romance are they, and in dealing with them the writer has shown
consummate tact, both in her choice of stories and her manner
of handling them, and this, combined with the wholly fascinating
illustrations, in colour and black and white, has resulted in an
altogether lovely volume. Printed on rough art paper. 12 full-page
colour plates. 144 pp. letterpress, crown 4to.

[Illustration: _From "Children's Stories from French Fairy Tales_"]


CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM THE NORTHERN LEGENDS

BY M. DOROTHY BELGRAVE AND HILDA HART

ILLUSTRATED BY HARRY G. THEAKER

