It is instructive to look at the various kinds of cabbages, such as
cauliflower and Brussels sprouts, kale and curly greens, and remember
that they are all scions of the not very promising wild cabbage found on
our shores. And are not all the aristocrat apple-trees of our orchards
descended from the plebeian crab-apple of the roadside? We know far too
little about the precise origin of our cultivated plants, but there is
no doubt that after man got a hold of them he took advantage of their
variability to establish race after race, say, of rose and
chrysanthemum, of potato and cereal. The evolution of cultivated plants
is continuing before our eyes, and the creations of Mr. Luther Burbank,
such as the stoneless plum and the primus berry, the spineless cactus
and the Shasta daisy, are merely striking instances of what is always
going on.

There is reason to believe that the domestic dog has risen three times,
from three distinct ancestors--a wolf, a jackal, and a coyote. So a
multiple pedigree must be allowed for in the case of the dog, and the
same is true in regard to some other domesticated animals. But the big
fact is the great variety of breeds that man has been able to fix, after
he once got started with a domesticated type. There are over 200
well-marked breeds of domestic pigeons, and there is very strong
evidence that all are descended from the wild rock-dove, just as the
numerous kinds of poultry are descended from the jungle-fowl of some
parts of India and the Malay Islands. Even more familiar is the way in
which man has, so to speak, unpacked the complex fur of the wild rabbit,
and established all the numerous colour-varieties which we see among
domestic rabbits. And apart from colour-varieties there are long-haired
Angoras and quaint lop-eared forms, and many more besides. All this
points to evolution going on.


The Romance of the Wheat

It is well-known that Neolithic man grew wheat, and some authorities
have put the date of the first wheat harvest at between fifteen thousand
and ten thousand years ago. The ancient civilisations of Babylonia,
Egypt, Crete, Greece, and Rome were largely based on wheat, and it is
highly probable that the first great wheatfields were in the fertile
land between the Tigris and the Euphrates. The oldest Egyptian tombs
that contain wheat, which, by the way, never germinates after its
millennia of rest, belong to the First Dynasty, and are about six
thousand years old. But there must have been a long history of wheat
before that.

Now it is a very interesting fact that the almost certain ancestor of
the cultivated wheat is at present living on the arid and rocky slopes
of Mount Hermon. It is called _Triticum hermonis_, and it is varying
notably to-day, as it did long ago when it gave rise to the emmer, which
was cultivated in the Neolithic Age and is the ancestor of all our
ordinary wheats. We must think of Neolithic man noticing the big seeds
of this Hermon grass, gathering some of the heads, breaking the brittle
spikelet-bearing axis in his fingers, knocking off the rough awns or
bruising the spikelets in his hand till the glumes or chaff separated
off and could be blown away, chewing a mouthful of the seeds--and
resolving to sow and sow again.

That was the beginning of a long story, in the course of which man took
advantage of the numerous variations that cropped up in this sporting
stock and established one successful race after another on his fields.
Virgil refers in the "Georgics" to the gathering of the largest and
fullest ears of wheat in order to get good seed for another sowing, but
it was not till the first quarter of the nineteenth century that the
great step was taken, by men like Patrick Sheriff of Haddington, of
deliberately selecting individual ears of great excellence and
segregating their progeny from mingling with mediocre stock. This is the
method which has been followed with remarkable success in modern times.

One of the factors that assisted the Allies in overcoming the food
crisis in the darkest period of the war was the virtue of Marquis Wheat,
a very prolific, early ripening, hard red spring wheat with excellent
milling and baking qualities. It is now the dominant spring wheat in
Canada and the United States, and it has enormously increased the real
wealth of the world in the last ten years (1921). Now our point is
simply that this Marquis Wheat is a fine example of evolution going on.
In 1917 upwards of 250,000,000 bushels of this wheat were raised in
North America, and in 1918 upwards of 300,000,000 bushels; yet the whole
originated from a single grain planted in an experimental plot at Ottawa
by Dr. Charles E. Saunders so recently as the spring of 1903.

[Illustration: THE WALKING-FISH OR MUD-SKIPPER (PERIOPHTHALMUS), COMMON
AT THE MOUTHS OF RIVERS IN TROPICAL AFRICA, ASIA, AND NORTH-WEST
AUSTRALIA

It skips about by means of its strong pectoral fins on the mud-flats; it
jumps from stone to stone hunting small shore-animals; it climbs up the
roots of the mangrove-trees. The close-set eyes protrude greatly and are
very mobile. The tail seems to help in respiration.]

[Illustration: _Photo: "The Times."_

THE AUSTRALIAN MORE-PORK OR PODARGUS

A bird with a frog-like mouth, allied to the British Nightjar. Now in
the London Zoological Gardens.

The capacious mouth is well suited for engulfing large insects such as
locusts and mantises, which are mostly caught on the trees. During the
day the More-pork or Frog-mouth sleeps upright on a branch, and its
mottled brown plumage makes it almost invisible.]

[Illustration: PELICAN'S BILL, ADAPTED FOR CATCHING AND STORING FISHES

There is an enormous dilatable sac beneath the lower jaw.]

[Illustration: HORNBILL'S BILL, ADAPTED FOR EXCAVATING A NEST IN A TREE,
AND ALSO FOR SEIZING AND BREAKING DIVERSE FORMS OF FOOD, FROM MAMMALS TO
TORTOISES, FROM ROOTS TO FRUITS

The use of the helmet or casque is obscure.]

[Illustration: SPOONBILL'S BILL, ADAPTED FOR SIFTING THE MUD AND
CATCHING THE SMALL ANIMALS, E.G. FISHES, CRUSTACEANS, INSECT LARVÆ,
WHICH LIVE THERE]

[Illustration: FALCON'S BILL, ADAPTED FOR SEIZING, KILLING, AND TEARING
SMALL MAMMALS AND BIRDS]

[Illustration: AVOCET'S BILL, ADAPTED FOR A CURIOUS SIDEWAYS SCOOPING IN
THE SHORE-POOLS AND CATCHING SMALL ANIMALS]

[Illustration: PUFFIN'S BILL, ADAPTED FOR CATCHING SMALL FISHES NEAR THE
SURFACE OF THE SEA, AND FOR HOLDING THEM WHEN CAUGHT AND CARRYING THEM
TO THE NEST

The scaly covering is moulted in the autumn.]

