Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Norma
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


The American Missionary

AUGUST, 1896

VOL. L.   No. 8.


CONTENTS

EDITORIAL.

  THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND, 241
  SHARES--LEADERS, 242
  HARRIET BEECHER STOWE, 244

THE SOUTH.

  THE HISTORIES OF OUR CHURCHES, 245
  DEER LODGE, TENN., 245

ANNIVERSARY EXERCISES.

  COMMENCEMENT AT FISK UNIVERSITY, 247
  HOWARD UNIVERSITY, 249
  LINCOLN ACADEMY, 249
  ALLEN NORMAL SCHOOL, 251
  SALUDA SEMINARY, 253
  BURRELL SCHOOL, 253
  BLOWING ROCK, N.C., 254
  ENFIELD--LINCOLN SCHOOL, MERIDIAN, 255
  A LESSON IN HOME BUILDING, 256
  ITEM, 256

THE INDIANS.

  CLOSING EXERCISES AT SANTEE NORMAL SCHOOL, 257

THE CHINESE.

  SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH, 259

SHARES JUBILEE YEAR FUND, 260

WOMEN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS, 262

RECEIPTS, 264


NEW YORK: PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

          Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class mail matter.


       *       *       *       *       *


_American Missionary Association._


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

  REV. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D.
  Rev. F.P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. C.J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  GEORGE S. HICKOK.
  JAMES H. OLIPHANT.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  EAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.


  _For Two Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.


  _For One Year._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A.J.F. BEHRENDS.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. Jos. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary of the
Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty
dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on label
to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made afterward
the change on the label will appear a month later. Please send early
notice of change in post-office address, giving the former address and
the new address, in order that our periodicals and occasional papers may
be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I give and bequeath the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American Missionary
Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the State of New
York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. L. AUGUST, 1896. No. 8.


       *       *       *       *       *


The Jubilee Year Fund.

Extract from the appeal of the Executive Committee of the American
Missionary Association:


Fifty Dollars a Share.

It is proposed to raise during the next six months a special Jubilee
Year Fund of $100,000 in shares of $50 each, with the hope and
expectation that these shares will be taken by the friends of missions
without lessening those regular contributions which must be depended
upon to sustain the current work.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                           FORM OF A PLEDGE.                        |
  |                                                                    |
  |                 Share, $50.               $100,000.                |
  |                                                                    |
  | THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND                                              |
  | OF THE                                                             |
  | AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.                                   |
  |                                                                    |
  | I hereby take .... shares (Fifty Dollars each) in the              |
  | Jubilee Year Fund of the American Missionary Association,          |
  | to be paid before the close of the fiscal year, Sept. 30, 1896.    |
  |                                                                    |
  |                          Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  |
  |                                                                    |
  |                          P.O. Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+


JUBILEE SHARES.

Our readers will notice that our jubilee share list is increasing in
numbers. We have reason to be grateful to God in that he has moved the
hearts of so many and led them to help our Lord's needy ones. We would
that those who have responded to our appeals could see the things that
we see, and hear the things which we hear. We have nothing but gratitude
for the fact that in this time of financial distress and uncertainty,
when money is so hard to get, the cause which we bring to the Christian
love and patriotism of good people is not losing, but gaining in their
sympathies and help. This trying year--trying to so many, therefore
trying to us--brings a jubilee thanksgiving to us, in that we are not
sinking deeper into the horrible pit and miry clay of debt, but are
little by little being pulled out of the slough. We know not how long
the pull may be, but if those who love the Lord Jesus Christ will pull
all together we shall not fail, and we need not be discouraged. Our feet
will get upon a rock and our goings be established; for which we pray.


LEADERS.

