Produced by Cornell university, Joshua Hutchinson, Donald
Perry and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


The American Missionary

February, 1889.
Vol. XLIII. No. 2


CONTENTS.


EDITORIAL.

  OUR LIST OF GOOD SAMARITANS

  AN EXPLICIT WARNING--PRIVILEGES OF LIFE MEMBERSHIP

  THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY--THE ROMAN CATHOLICS AND THE FREEDMEN

  NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND

  DEATH OF PROF. A. HATCH

  LIST OF OUR FIELD WORKERS

  CONVENTION OF COLORED ROMAN CATHOLICS

  AMONG THE TENNESSEE MOUNTAINS

  ITEMS FROM THE FIELD


THE CHINESE.

  GLIMPSE AT SHADY SIDE

  ANNIVERSARY OF CHINESE MISSIONS


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  THE MOUNTAIN GIRLS


RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.


President, Rev. Wm. M. Taylor, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. Behrends, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. F.A. Noble, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. Alex. McKenzie, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. D.O. Mears, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. Henry Hopkins, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. Beard, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. Hubbard, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  Peter McCartee.
  Chas. P. Peirce.


_Executive Committee._

  John II. Washburn, Chairman.
  Addison P. Foster, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

    J.E. Rankin,
    Wm. H. Ward,
    J.W. Cooper,
    John H. Washburn,
    Edmund L. Champlin.

  _For Two Years._

    Lyman Abbott,
    Chas. A. Hull,
    J.R. Danforth,
    Clinton B. Fisk,
    Addison P. Foster.

  _For One Year._

    S.B. Halliday,
    Samuel Holmes,
    Samuel S. Marples,
    Charles L. Mead,
    Elbert B. Monroe.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. Ryder, _21 Cong'l House, Boston_.
  Rev. J.E. Roy, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

  Rev. Chas. W. Shelton


_Field Superintendents._

  Rev. Frank E. Jenkins.
  Prof. Edward S. Hall.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. Emerson, _56 Reade St., N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment
of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.


VOL. XLIII. FEBRUARY, 1889. No. 2.


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR LIST OF GOOD SAMARITANS.

This number of the MISSIONARY contains the annual list of our workers,
who go down the Jericho road to care for those who have been wronged,
the poor and ignorant, who need the Gospel. Our ministers and teachers
are not like the priest and the Levite, who looked upon the poor man and
then "passed by on the other side;" nor do they merely pity and utter
words of sympathy. They take right hold and help. They "pour in the oil
and the wine," and they build the _inns_--that is, the churches and
schoolhouses where they instruct and help the needy ones till they can
take care of themselves and help to take care of others--the most
genuine kind of assistance.

It must be remembered that this requires expenditure. The oil and the
wine, the inn and the constant attendance, call for money. Our
constituents, who furnish this, want the work done and well done, and
they are willing to pay for it. But sometimes they need to be reminded
of the cost. At our last Annual Meeting, the "two pence" which they had
during the year put into our hands, counted in American money, amounted
to $323,147.22; and they said: "Whatsoever thou spendest more, when I
come again I will repay thee." We are very careful to watch the receipts
and expenditures, and we find that for the three months since the Annual
Meeting, we have received from all sources $66,958.43; whereas, the
current expenditures for the three months require about $86,000. We give
this timely notice that they who commit to us this work may remit to us
what is needed.

Let it be understood that the generous gift of that noble friend of the
Negro race was not entrusted to us to do the work of the good Samaritans
of the Churches. We are not permitted to use it for this. The yearly
income of the Daniel Hand Fund is to do the work of Daniel Hand--no
more. For this, God will reward him and generations will bless him, but
he leaves the churches and individual Christians to carry on their own
work as before and to reap the blessings of it. We cannot give the
Daniel Hand Fund to the churches. We cannot expend it for the churches. It
relieves no one of duty and privilege. It is limited also, to its use.
The churches and the schools to which we are already committed call for
a great increase in self-denial and benevolence.

Pastors and members of the churches, the work is increasingly great. It
enlarges itself. Other denominations are increasing their efforts to
meet the pressing emergency. Let it not be said that our churches--the
first in the field and the most efficient--are falling behind in the
ranks. Let our banner be ever at the front. Let us do our work.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN EXPLICIT WARNING.

One of our missionaries was recently at the North soliciting aid in
sustaining his work. His appeal was repeatedly met by the response: "The
Association is rich--it has just had a gift of more than a million of
dollars." When he explained that only the interest can be used, and this
for educational work only, the reply was: "This interest can be used in
payment of appropriations already made for schools, thus releasing just
so much for other purposes."

Now this is exactly what _cannot_ be done. The Daniel Hand Fund is for
_new_ work, and only in the industrial, primary and normal schools. It
is a priceless boon in this department, for we can now make enlargements
here which were greatly needed, but for which we had not the means; but
no part of this Fund can be applied to meet appropriations for other
portions of the work. If our constituents will not enable us to meet
those other demands, we can only report a debt; the Daniel Hand Fund
cannot help us. We are confident this needs only to be understood, for
we cannot believe that the 457,584 members of our churches have any wish
to shelter themselves behind Daniel Hand.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRIVILEGES OF LIFE MEMBERSHIP.

The question is sometimes asked in letters we receive, What are the
privileges of a Life Member in the A.M.A.? We answer:

1. The privilege of voting at the Annual Meeting. Our amended
constitution says: "Members of evangelical churches may be constituted
members of this Association for life by the payment of $30 into its
treasury, with the written declaration at the time or times of payment
that the sum is to be applied to constitute a designated person a Life
Member, and such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment
shall have been completed."

2. A Life Member is entitled to THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY and to the
ANNUAL REPORT gratuitously, if desired.

3. The highest privilege is that of being a _live_ member, doing all
that he can to promote the interests of the Association and of the needy
peoples for whom it labors.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We have two objects in printing this magazine. First, to have it read,
and, secondly, to have it paid for. The main purpose is the first, of
course, for we wish to have it read if it is not paid for, yet we
greatly prefer to have it both read and paid for. We believe that those
who pay for it are most likely to read it, and for this reason we fear
that this item will be seen only by those who do not need this reminder,
but we draw the bow at a venture and tell our readers that the price of
the magazine is 50 cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

We wish to inform the pastors and churches that we have just issued a
new _Annual Leaflet_, brief and packed with facts, and suitable for
distribution in the pews before collections are taken for the
Association. We shall be glad to furnish a supply gratuitously whenever
called for.

Our Annual Report, also, is ready for distribution. Those who wish it
will please send us a postal card requesting it.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ROMAN CATHOLICS AND THE FREEDMEN.

Soon after the war the Roman Catholics seemed to have made a strong
effort to win the Freedmen to their faith, and many Protestants felt a
good degree of apprehension that the splendors of the ceremonial and the
absence of race distinction might captivate the Negro. But the effort
was unsuccessful and appeared for a time to have been abandoned. It has
often been said, however, that the Church of Rome never surrenders an
undertaking; it may delay and wait for more auspicious times, but in the
end it perseveres. There are some indications of the renewal of the zeal
of the Papacy for the Negro. The article in another part of the
magazine, entitled "The Colored Catholic Congress," is an evidence.

One thing is certain. The Roman Catholic Church deserves praise for its
disregard of the color-line. The rich and the poor, the white and the
black, bow at the same altar, and one of the highest dignitaries of the
church is not ashamed to stand side by side with the black man on a
great public occasion. Protestants at the North and the South must not
allow the Romanists to surpass them in this Christ-like position.

       *       *       *       *       *

We ask our friends to read Mr. Dodge's article about the school at
Pleasant Hill, Tenn. One thousand dollars has already been pledged for
this building, on condition that the remainder of the $5,000 be secured.
We ask that this remainder be given by _individuals_, and not taken from
Church or Sunday-school contributions--all of which are needed for
current work.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND.

