As I happen to possess a good portrait of one of them, I should like to
know something of their history.

CANTAB.

University Club.

_"Homo unius libri."_--To whom does this saying ing originally belong? The
_British Critic_ gives it to St. Thomas Aquinas:

    "When asked on one occasion who is in the way to become learned, he
    answered, 'Whoever will content himself with the reading of a single
    book."--_The British Critic_, No. LIX. p. 202.

W. FRASER.

Tor-Mohun.

_"Now the fierce bear," &c._--Can any of your readers inform me who is the
author of the following lines?

 "Now the fierce bear and leopard keen,
  All perished as they ne'er had been;
  Oblivion's their best home.
      .    .    .    .
  There is an oath on high,
  That ne'er on brow of mortal birth,
  Shall blend again the crowns of earth."

[theta].

_Prejudice against Holy Confirmation._--I have found among my rural
parishioners an idea very prevalent, that it is wrong, or at least highly
improper, for a married woman to become a candidate for, or to receive holy
confirmation; and this quite apart from any sectarian views on the matter.
I should like to know if any of my {441} clerical brethren have noticed the
same superstition as I must call it. Labourers' wives in some cases have at
once stated their being married as a valid objection; and in others their
husbands, although Churchmen, have at once entered their _veto_ on their
being confirmed. Can it arise from any vague reminiscence of the practical
rule of the Church of England on the subject, which has been so long
ignored?

W. FRASER.

Tor-Mohun.

_Epigram on MacAdam._--Who was the author of the following epigram?

 "My Essay on Roads, quoth MacAdam, lies there,
    The result of a life's lucubration;
  But does not the title page look rather bare?
    I long for a Latin quotation.

 "A Delphin edition of Virgil stood nigh,
    To second his classic desire;
  When the road-maker hit on the shepherd's reply,
   '_Miror Magis_,' I rather _add_-mire."

[Old English W. N.]

_Jane Scrimshaw._--Can any of your numerous correspondents inform me if
there is any other biographical notice of Jane Scrimshaw, who attained the
advanced age of 127, and resided for upwards of eighty years in the
Merchant Taylors' Almshouse, near Little Tower Hill, than that recorded in
Caulfield's _Memoirs of Remarkable Characters_?

J. T. M.

_The Word "Quadrille."_--May I trouble some kind reader to give me the
origin, derivation, full and literal meaning, and the several senses, in
their regular succession, of the above word _Quadrille_? There seems to be
much uncertainty attached to the word.

VERITATIS AMICUS.

Oxon.

_The Hungarians in Paules._--Perhaps some of the ingenious contributors to
"N. & Q." may be able to assist P. C. S. S. to explain the following
passage in the dedication of a rare little book _Dekker's Dreame_ (Lond.
4to. 1620). It is inscribed:--

    "To the truly accomplished gentleman, and worthy deserver of all men's
    loves, Master Endymion Porter. Sir, if you aske why, from the heapes of
    men, I picke you out only to be that _Murus ahæneus_ which must defend
    me, lett me tell you (what you knowe allready) that bookes are like the
    Hungarians in Paules, who have a priviledge to holde out their Turkish
    history for anie one to reade. They beg nothing: the texted past-bord
    talkes all--and if nothing be given, nothing is spoken, but God knowes
    what they thinke!"

An explanation of the above passage is very earnestly desired by

P. C. S. S.

_Ferns Wanted._--Specimens of the following rare ferns are much wanted to
complete a collection:--_Woodsia ilvensis_, _Woodsia alpina_, _Cystopteris
montana_, _Lastrea cristata_, _Lastrea recurva_, _Lastrea multiflora_,
_Asplenium alterniflorum_, _Trichomanes speciosum_.

The undersigned will feel very much obliged to any charitable person,
residing near the _habitat_ of any of the above-mentioned ferns, who would
take the trouble to forward to him, if not a root, at least a specimen for
drying, he need scarcely say that any expenses will be most cheerfully
defrayed.

HENRY COOPER KEY.

Stretton Rectory, near Hereford.

_Craton the Philosopher._--Two of the figures on the brass font in the
church of St. Bartholomew at Liège are superscribed Johannes Evangelista et
Craton Philosophus.--Can any reader of "N. & Q." say if anything is known
about the latter, who is represented as being baptized by the Evangelist?

R. H. C.

_The Solar Annual Eclipse in the Year 1263._--In the Norwegian account of
Haco's expedition against Scotland, A.D. 1263, published in the original
Islandic from the Flateyan and Frisian MSS., with a literal English version
by the Rev. James Johnstone, I read as follows:

    "While King Haco lay in Ronaldsvo, a great darkness drew over the sun;
    so that only a little ring was bright round the sun, and it continued
    so for some hours."--P. 45.

King Haco, according to the account, left Bergen on his expedition "three
nights before the 'Selian' vigils ... with all his fleet," and, "having got
a gentle breeze, was two nights at sea when he reached that harbour of
Shetland called Breydeyiar Sound (Bressay Sound, I presume) with a great
part of his navy." Here he remained "near half a month, and from thence
sailed to the Orkneys; and continued some time at Elidarwick, which is near
Kirkwall.... After St. Olave's wake (July 18, O. S.) King Haco, leaving
Elidarwick, sailed south before the Mull of Ronaldsha, with all the navy;"
and being joined by Ronald from the Orkneys, with the ships that had
followed him, he "led the whole armament into Ronaldsha, which he left upon
the vigil of St. Lawrence (July 30, O. S.)."

Now I wish to know, 1. On what day in August this eclipse took place, the
day of the week, commencement of the eclipse, &c.

2. Whether any cotemporary, or other writer besides the Icelandic
historian, has recorded this eclipse?

S.

Fitzroy Street.

_D'Israeli--how spelt?_--CAUCASUS is so fortunate as to possess all the
acknowledged works of D'Israeli the elder, as published by himself. In the
title-page of every one of them, the name {442} of the elegant and
accomplished author is spelt (as above) _with_ an apostrophe. In the late
edition of his collected works, by his no less accomplished son, the name
is printed _without_ the apostrophe. Indeed the name so appears in all the
works of Mr. D'Israeli the younger; a practice which he seems to have taken
up even in the lifetime of his father, who spelt it differently. Can any of
your readers inform CAUCASUS of the reason of this difference, and of the
authority for it, and which is the correct mode? He has vainly sought for
information in the Heralds' Visitation books for Buckinghamshire, preserved
in the British Museum.

CAUCASUS.

_Richard Oswald._--Could any of your correspondents give me any information
respecting Mr. Richard Oswald, the commissioner who negociated the Treaty
of 1782 at Paris, with Franklin, and his other colleagues, representing the
United States? Is there any obituary or biographical notice of him in
existence?

L.

_Cromwell's Descendants._--Oliver Cromwell's daughter Bridget was baptized
August 4, 1624; married to Ireton January 15, 1646-7; a widow Nov. 26,
1651; married to General Fleetwood, Lord President in Ireland, before 1652;
died at Stoke, near London, 1681.--Can any of your correspondents furnish
the date of this lady's marriage with Fleetwood; also, a list of her
children and grandchildren by Fleetwood? It is supposed that Captain
Fleetwood's daughter, _i. e._ the General's granddaughter, married a Berry.

ERIN.

_Letter of Archbishop Curwen to Archbishop Parker._--In _The Hunting of the
Romish Fox_, collected by Sir James Ware, and edited by Robert Ware (8vo.,
Dublin, 1683), there is a long account of an image of the Saviour which, to
the astonishment of the good people of Dublin, and by the contrivance of
one Father Leigh, sweated blood in the year 1559. It is added, at p. 90.:

    "The Archbishop of Dublin wrote _this relation and to this effect_, to
    his brother, Archbishop of Canterbury Matthew Parker, who was very
    joyful at the receipt thereof, by reason," &c.

The whole chapter in which this occurs is stated to be "taken out of the
Lord Cecil's _Memorials_." Can any of your readers give me assistance in
finding these _Memorials_, or this letter to Archbishop Parker, or a copy
of it? I intended to have made it an object of inquiry and search in
Dublin, but I have been prevented accomplishing my design of visiting that
country. Perhaps some of your Irish readers may be able to help me.

JOHN BRUCE.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries with Answers.

_Margaret Patten._--I have just seen a curious old picture, executed at
least a century ago, and which was lately found amongst some family papers.
It is a half-length of an old woman in homely looking garments; a dark blue
stuff gown, the sleeves partially rolled up, and white sleeving protruding
from under, not unlike the fashion of to-day; a white and blue checked
apron; around her neck a white tippet and a handkerchief, on her head a
"mutch," or close linen cap, and a lace or embroidered band across her
forehead to hide the absence of hair. She holds something undistinguishable
in one hand.

The picture is about 10 × 8 inches, and is done on glass, evidently
transferred from an engraving on steel. The colours have been laid on with
hand, and then, to preserve and make an opaque back, it has received a
coating of plaster of Paris; altogether in its treatment resembling a
coloured photograph.

By-the-bye, I am sorry I could not get a copy (photographic) of it, or that
would have rendered intelligible what I fear my lame descriptions cannot.
Beneath the figure is the following inscription:

    "MARGARET PATTEN,

    Born in the Parish of Lochnugh, near Pairsley in Scotland, now Liveing
    in the Work House of St. Marg^{ts}, Westminsster, aged 138."

There is no date appended.

The word "Lochnugh" in the inscription is evidently spelt from the Scotch
pronunciation of Lochwinnoch, near Paisley.

I should be very glad if any of your readers or correspondents in London
could ascertain if the name, &c. is to be found in the records of St.
Margaret's, Westminster, and also give me some facts as to the history of
this poor old Scotch woman, left destitute so far from home and kindred.

If it can be authenticated, it will make another item for your list of
longevals.

JAMES B. MURDOCH.

Glasgow.

    [In the Board-room of the workhouse of St. Margaret's, Westminster, is
    a portrait of Margaret Patten, which corresponds with the picture just
    described, and bears the following inscription:

    "MARGARET PATTEN, aged 136: the Gift of John Dowsell, William Goff,
    Matthew Burnett, Thomas Parker, Robert Wright, John Parquot, Overseers,
    anno 1737."

Margaret Patten was buried in the burial-ground of what was then called the
Broadway Church, now Christ Church, and there is a stone on the eastern
boundary wall inscribed, "Near this place lieth MARGARET PATTEN, who died
June 26, 1739, in the Parish Workhouse, aged 136." In Walcott's _Memorials
of {443} Westminster_, p. 288., we are told "she was a native of
Lochborough, near Paisley. She was brought to England to prepare Scotch
broth for King James II., but, owing to the abdication of that monarch,
fell into poverty and died in St. Margaret's workhouse, where her portrait
is still preserved. Her body was followed to the grave by the parochial
authorities and many of the principal inhabitants, while the children sang
a hymn before it reached its last resting-place."]

_Etymology of "Coin."_--What is the etymology of our noun and verb _coin_
and _to coin_? I do not know if I have been anticipated, but beg to suggest
the following:--_Coin_, a piece of cornered metal; _To coin_, the act of
cornering such block of metal.

In Cornwall, the blocks of tin, when first run into moulds from the
smelting furnace, are _square_; and when the metal is to be fined or
assayed, the miner's phrase is, that it is to be _coined_; for the
_corners_ of the moulded block are _cut off_, and subjected to the _assay_;
and the decree of fineness proved is stamped on the now cornerless
block--thereafter called a _coin of tin_. It is, I conceive, by no means a
violent supposition that such _coins of tin_ were current as money very
many ages before either silver, gold, copper, bronze, lead, tin, or any
other metal moulded, stamped, engraved, or fashioned into such coins as we
now know had come into use. We know to what far-back ages the finding of
tin carries us, its find being entirely confined to Cornwall; its presence
near the surface in an ore readily reduced and easily melted making its
reduction into the metallic state possible in the very rudest state of
society and of the arts.

C. D. LAMONT.

Greenock.

    [See Dr. Richardson for the following derivation:--"Fr. _coigner_, It.
    _cuniare_, Sp. _cunar_, _acuñar_, to wedge, and also to coin. Menage
    and Spelman agree from the Latin _cuneus_. '_Cuneus_; sigillum ferreum,
    quo nummus _cuditur_; a forma dictum: atque inde _coin_ quasi _cune_
    pro monetâ.' An iron seal with which metal is stamped; so called from
    the shape. And hence money is called _coin_ (q. _cune_,
    wedge).--_Spelman._" The Rev. T. R. Brown, in an unpublished
    _Dictionary of Difficult Etymology_[1], suggests the following:--"Fr.
    _coign_, a coin, stamp, &c.; Gaelic, _cuin_, a coin. Probably from the
    Sanscrit _kan_, to shine, desire, covet; _kanaka_, gold, &c. The Hebrew
    _ceseph_, money, coin, is derived in like manner from the verb
    _casaph_, to desire, covet. The other meaning attached to the French
    word _coign_, viz. a wedge, appears to be derived from quite a
    different root."]

[Footnote 1: This useful work makes two volumes 8vo.: but how is it the
learned Vicar of Southwick printed only _nine_ copies? Was he thinking of
the sacred _Nine_?]

_Inscription at Aylesbury._--In the north transept of St. Mary's Church,
Aylesbury, occurs the following curious inscription on a tomb of the date
of 1584:

 "Yf, passing by this place, thou doe desire
    To knowe what corpse here shry'd in marble lie,
  The somme of that whiche now thou dost require
    This slender verse shall sone to thee descrie.

 "Entombed here doth rest a worthie Dame,
    Extract and born of noble house and bloud,
  Her sire, Lord Paget, hight of worthie fame
    Whose virtues cannot sink in Lethe floud.
  Two brethern had she, barons of this realme,
    A knight her freere, Sir Henry Lee, he hight,
  To whom she bare three _impes_, which had to name,
    John, Henry, Mary, slayn by fortune spight,
  First two being yong, which cavs'd their parents mone,
    The third in flower and prime of all her yeares:
  All three do rest within this marble stone,
    By which the fickleness of worldly joyes appears.
  Good Frend sticke not to strew with crimson flowers
    This marble stone, wherein her cindres rest,
  For sure her ghost lives with the heavenly powers,
    And guerdon hathe of virtuous life possest."

Can any of your readers give me any other instances of children being
called _imps_? and also tell me wherefore the name was given them? and how
long it continued in use?

T. W. D. BROOKS.

Cropredy, Banbury.

