A WINTER TOUR IN SOUTH AFRICA

by

SIR FREDERICK YOUNG, K.C.M.G.

(Reprinted by permission from the Proceedings of the Royal Colonial
Institute, with large additions, Illustrations, and a Map.)

London:
E.A. Petherick & Co., 33, Paternoster Row, E.C.

1890


[Illustration: MY WAGON.]


TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS, PRINCESS LOUISE, MARCHIONESS OF LORNE,

This Volume, describing a recent tour, during which
   a large portion of Her Majesty's magnificent
     Dominions in South Africa were traversed,
       is, by gracious permission, dedicated
              with feelings of sincere
                      respect.


[Illustration: Decorative]


INTRODUCTION.


The growth of the great Colonies of the British Empire is so phenomenal,
and their development is so rapid, and remarkable, that if we are to
possess a correct knowledge of their actual state, and condition, from
year to year, their current history requires to be constantly
re-written.

The writer of a decade since, is, to-day, almost obsolete. He has only
produced a current record of facts, and places, at the period he wrote.
This is especially the case with South Africa.

I have recently returned from a very interesting tour in that remarkable
country. My impressions were noted down, as they occurred, from day to
day. A summary of my observations, and of the incidents, in connection
with my journey, was the subject of a Paper I read at the opening
meeting of the present Session of the Royal Colonial Institute, on the
12th of November last. I wish it to be understood that the opinions
expressed on that occasion were my own, and that the Institute as a body
is in no way responsible for them. This Paper has formed the outline of
the volume, which--with much new matter from my note book--I now offer
to the public, in the belief, that the narrative of a traveller, simply
seeking instruction, as well as amusement, from a few months tour, while
traversing some 12,000 miles by sea, and 4,000 miles by land, through
the wonderful country in which he lately roamed, might prove of some
use, in awakening additional interest on the part of the general public,
to one of the most promising, and valuable portions of the Colonial
Empire.

In this spirit, I offer my "Winter Tour in South Africa," to my
countrymen, "at home and beyond the seas," in the hope that it may
receive from them, a favourable reception.

On the "Political Situation," I have spoken strongly and frankly, I hope
not too much so. The result of my personal observations has convinced
me, that I have only correctly expressed the opinions, very widely
entertained by large classes of Her Majesty's subjects in South Africa.

I cannot conclude without acknowledging the aid I have derived from the
Statistical information contained in the "Argus Annual," and it also
affords me much pleasure to thank Mr. James R. Boosé, the Librarian of
the Royal Colonial Institute, for the assistance he has rendered me.

FREDERICK YOUNG

5, Queensberry Place, S.W.
_1st January, 1890._


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                       PAGE

MY WAGON                                                       Frontispiece

GOVERNMENT HOUSE, CAPETOWN                                         facing 6

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CAPETOWN                                         facing 8

JOHANNESBURG, MARKET PLACE                                        facing 57

CEMETERY, MAJUBA HILL                                             facing 81

GOVERNMENT HOUSE, MARITZBURG                                      facing 83

A STREET IN MARITZBURG                                            facing 84

TOWN HALL, DURBAN                                                 facing 86

HARBOUR WORKS, DURBAN                                             facing 89

HEX RIVER PASS                                                   facing 107


CONTENTS.


                                                                       PAGE

DEDICATION.                                                              v.

INTRODUCTION.                                                          vii.

THE VOYAGE.--Embark at Southampton--Amusements at
Sea--Lisbon--Madeira--Teneriffe--St. Helena--Longwood--Arrival
at Cape Town                                                            1-4

CAPE TOWN.--Queen's Birthday--Review of Troops--Regatta--Table
Bay--Table Mountain--Hotels--House of Parliament--Observatory--South
African Museum--Public Library--Botanic Gardens--Record Office--Places
of Worship--Harbour Works and Breakwater--Graving Dock--Simon's
Town--Kalk Bay--Constantia--Wynberg--Journey to Kimberley              5-21

KIMBERLEY.--Address of Welcome from the Fellows of the Royal Colonial
Institute--Diamond Industry--Bultfontein Mine--DeBeer's
Mine--Compounds--United Companies--Central Kimberley Diamond
Mine--Kimberley Hospital--Progress of Kimberley--Town Hall--Post
Office--High Court--Public Library--Waterworks--_En route_ for
Bechuanaland--Wagon Travelling--Warrenton--Drake's Farm               22-38

BECHUANALAND.--Scenery--Field for Settlement--Vryburg--Lochnagar
Farm--Prospect of Gold Discovery                                      39-46

KLERKSDORP.--Nooitgedacht Mine--Pan Washing--Klerksdorp Gold Estates
Company--Future of Klerksdorp                                         47-49

POTCHEFSTROOM.--Wagon Journey--Presence of Gold-bearing
Reefs--Vultures--Fort and Cemetery--Chevalier Forssman                50-52

JOHANNESBURG.--Difficulties of Travelling--Appearance of the
Town--Gold--Knights--The Jumpers--Robinson's--Langlaagte--Descent
to the Mines--Market Square--Growth of Johannesburg--Sanitary
arrangements                                                          53-59

PRETORIA.--Water Supply--The Volksraad--President Paul Kruger--High
Court of Justice--Want of Railroads--Growing Prosperity--Post
Office--New Government Buildings--Political and Social Life--Pretoria
Races                                                                 60-65

WATERBURG.--Polonia--Hebron--Salt Pans--Kafirs--Appearance of the
Country--Prospects of Gold--Scarcity of Game--Bush Fire--Narrow
Escape--Transport Driver--Waterburg Sulphur Baths--Nylstroom
Road--Return to Pretoria                                              66-78

PRETORIA TO NATAL.--Coach to Johannesburg--Post Cart
Travelling--Richmond--Heidelburg--Standerton--Newcastle--Eland's
Laagte--Natal Railway--Coal Fields--Laing's Nek--Majuba
Hill--Ingogo--Scenery of Natal                                        79-82

MARITZBURG.--Public Buildings--House of Assembly--Statue of the
Queen--British Troops                                                 83-84

DURBAN.--Railway Journey--Town Hall--Municipal
arrangements--Trade--Harbour Works--The "Berea"--Natal Central
Sugar Company's Manufactory--Trappist Establishment at Marion
Hill--Defences--Embark for Port Elizabeth                             85-96

PORT ELIZABETH.--Trade--Town Hall--Public Library--Ostrich
Feathers--The "Hill"--Botanical Garden--Hospital--Water
Supply--Churches--Presentation of an address                         97-101

GRAHAMSTOWN.--Railway Journey--Scenery--Botanical Gardens--Mountain
Road--Museum--The Prison--Kafir School--Ostrich Farm at Heatherton
Towers--Export of Feathers                                          102-105

PORT ELIZABETH TO CAPE TOWN.--Scenery--Hex River Pass--Arrival at
Cape Town--Lecture at Young Men's Christian Society--Start for
England--Arrival at Southampton                                     106-108

CLIMATE.                                                            109-112

THE NATIVE QUESTION.                                                113-116

