Since writing the above, I have been again with S---- to see
Wordsworth's grave, and, finding the door of the church open, we went
in. A woman and little girl were sweeping at the farther end, and the
woman came towards us out of the cloud of dust which she had raised. We
were surprised at the extremely antique appearance of the church. It is
paved with bluish-gray flagstones, over which uncounted generations have
trodden, leaving the floor as well laid as ever. The walls are very
thick, and the arched windows open through them at a considerable
distance above the floor. And down through the centre of the church runs
a row of five arches, very rude and round-headed, all of rough stone,
supported by rough and massive pillars, or rather square stone blocks,
which stand in the pews, and stood in the same places, probably, long
before the wood of those pews began to grow. Above this row of arches is
another row, built upon the same mass of stone, and almost as broad, but
lower; and on this upper row rests the framework, the oaken beams, the
black skeleton of the roof. It is a very clumsy contrivance for
supporting the roof, and if it were modern we certainly should condemn
it as very ugly; but being the relic of a simple age, it comes in well
with the antique simplicity of the whole structure. The roof goes up,
barn-like, into its natural angle, and all the rafters and cross-beams
are visible. There is an old font; and in the chancel is a niche, where,
judging from a similar one in Furness Abbey, the holy water used to be
placed for the priest's use while celebrating mass. Around the inside of
the porch is a stone bench, placed against the wall, narrow and uneasy,
but where a great many people had sat who now have found quieter
resting-places.

The woman was a very intelligent-looking person, not of the usual
English ruddiness, but rather thin and somewhat pale, though bright of
aspect. Her way of talking was very agreeable. She inquired if we wished
to see Wordsworth's monument, and at once showed it to us,--a slab of
white marble fixed against the upper end of the central row of stone
arches, with a pretty long inscription, and a profile bust, in
bas-relief, of his aged countenance. The monument is placed directly
over Wordsworth's pew, and could best be seen and read from the very
corner-seat where he used to sit. The pew is one of those occupying the
centre of the church, and is just across the aisle from the pulpit, and
is the best of all for the purpose of seeing and hearing the clergyman,
and likewise as convenient as any, from its neighborhood to the altar.
On the other side of the aisle, beneath the pulpit, is Lady Fleming's
pew. This and one or two others are curtained; Wordsworth's was not. I
think I can bring up his image in that corner seat of his pew--a
white-headed, tall, spare man, plain in aspect--better than in any other
situation. The woman said that she had known him very well, and that he
had made some verses on a sister of hers. She repeated the first lines,
something about a lamb; but neither S---- nor I remembered them.

On the walls of the chancel there are monuments to the Flemings, and
painted escutcheons of their arms; and along the side walls also, and on
the square pillars of the row of arches, there are other monuments,
generally of white marble, with the letters of the inscription
blackened. On these pillars, likewise, and in many places in the walls,
were hung verses from Scripture, painted on boards. At one of the doors
was a poor-box, an elaborately carved little box of oak, with the date
1648, and the name of the church--St. Oswald's--upon it. The whole
interior of the edifice was plain, simple, almost to grimness,--or would
have been so, only that the foolish church-wardens, or other authority,
have washed it over with the same buff color with which they have
overlaid the exterior. It is a pity; it lightens it up, and desecrates
it horribly, especially as the woman says that there were formerly
paintings on the walls, now obliterated forever. I could have stayed in
the old church much longer, and could write much more about it, but
there must be an end to everything. Pacing it from the farther end to
the elevation before the altar, I found that it was twenty-five paces
long.

On looking again at the Rothay, I find I did it some injustice; for at
the bridge, in its present swollen state, it is nearer twenty yards than
twenty feet across. Its waters are very clear, and it rushes along with
a speed which is delightful to see, after an acquaintance with the muddy
and sluggish Avon and Leam.

Since tea, I have taken a stroll from the hotel in a different direction
from usual, and passed the Swan Inn, where Scott used to go daily to get
a draught of liquor when he was visiting Wordsworth, who had no wine nor
other inspiriting fluid in his house. It stands directly on the wayside,
a small, whitewashed house, with an addition in the rear that seems to
have been built since Scott's time. On the door is the painted sign of
a swan,--and the name "Scott's Swan Hotel." I walked a considerable
distance beyond it; but a shower coming up, I turned back, entered the
inn, and, following the mistress into a snug little room, was served
with a glass of bitter ale. It is a very plain and homely inn, and
certainly could not have satisfied Scott's wants, if he had required
anything very farfetched or delicate in his potations. I found two
Westmoreland peasants in the room with ale before them. One went away
almost immediately; but the other remained, and, entering into
conversation with him, he told me that he was going to New Zealand, and
expected to sail in September. I announced myself as an American, and he
said that a large party had lately gone from hereabouts to America; but
he seemed not to understand that there was any distinction between
Canada and the States. These people had gone to Quebec. He was a very
civil, well-behaved, kindly sort of person, of a simple character, which
I took to belong to the class and locality, rather than to himself
individually. I could not very well understand all that he said, owing
to his provincial dialect; and when he spoke to his own countrymen, or
to the women of the house, I really could but just catch a word here and
there. How long it takes to melt English down into a homogeneous mass!
He told me that there was a public library in Grasmere, to which he has
access in common with the other inhabitants, and a reading-room
connected with it, where he reads the "Times" in the evening. There was
no American smartness in his mind. When I left the house, it was
showering briskly; but the drops quite ceased, and the clouds began to
break away, before I reached my hotel, and I saw the new moon over my
right shoulder.

       *       *       *       *       *

_July 21._--We left Grasmere yesterday, after breakfast, it being a
delightful morning, with some clouds, but the cheerfullest sunshine on
great part of the mountain-sides and on ourselves. We returned, in the
first place, to Ambleside, along the border of Grasmere Lake, which
would be a pretty little piece of water, with its steep and
high-surrounding hills, were it not that a stubborn and straight-lined
stone fence, running along the eastern shore, by the roadside, quite
spoils its appearance. Rydal water, though nothing can make a lake of
it, looked prettier and less diminutive than at the first view; and, in
fact, I find that it is impossible to know accurately how any prospect
or other thing looks until after at least a second view, which always
essentially corrects the first. This, I think, is especially true in
regard to objects which we have heard much about, and exercised our
imagination upon; the first view being a vain attempt to reconcile our
idea with the reality, and at the second we begin to accept the thing
for what it really is. Wordsworth's situation is really a beautiful one;
and Nab Scaur behind his house rises with a grand, protecting air. We
passed Nab's cottage, in which De Quincey formerly lived, and where
Hartley Coleridge lived and died. It is a small, buff-tinted, plastered,
stone cottage, immediately on the roadside, and originally, I should
think, of a very humble class; but it now looks as if persons of taste
might some time or other have sat down in it, and caused flowers to
spring up about it. It is very agreeably situated, under the great,
precipitous hill, and with Rydal water close at hand, on the other side
of the road. An advertisement of lodgings to let was put up on this
cottage.

I question whether any part of the world looks so beautiful as
England--this part of England, at least--on a fine summer morning. It
makes one think the more cheerfully of human life to see such a bright,
universal verdure; such sweet, rural, peaceful, flower-bordered
cottages,--not cottages of gentility, but dwellings of the laboring
poor; such nice villas along the roadside, so tastefully contrived for
comfort and beauty, and adorned more and more, year after year, with the
care and afterthought of people who mean to live in them a great while,
and feel as if their children might live in them also. And so they plant
trees to overshadow their walks, and train ivy and all beautiful vines
up against their walls,--and thus live for the future in another sense
than we Americans do. And the climate helps them out, and makes
everything moist and green, and full of tender life, instead of dry and
arid, as human life and vegetable life are so apt to be with us.
Certainly, England can present a more attractive face than we can, even
in its humbler modes of life,--to say nothing of the beautiful lives
that might be led, one would think, by the higher classes, whose
gateways, with broad, smooth gravelled drives leading through them, one
sees every mile or two along the road, winding into some proud
seclusion. All this is passing away, and society must assume new
relations; but there is no harm in believing that there has been
something very good in English life,--good for all classes, while the
world was in a state out of which these forms naturally grew.


MONA'S MOTHER.


    In the porch that brier-vines smother,
    At her wheel, sits Mona's mother.
      O, the day is dying bright!
    Roseate shadows, silver dimming,
    Ruby lights through amber swimming,
      Bring the still and starry night.

    Sudden she is 'ware of shadows
    Going out across the meadows
      From the slowly sinking sun,--
    Going through the misty spaces
    That the rippling ruby laces,
    Shadows, like the violets tangled,
    Like the soft light, softly mingled,
      Till the two seem just as one!

    Every tell-tale wind doth waft her
    Little breaths of maiden laughter.
      O, divinely dies the day!
    And the swallow, on the rafter,
      In her nest of sticks and clay,--
    On the rafter, up above her,
    With her patience doth reprove her,
      Twittering soft the time away;
    Never stopping, never stopping,
    With her wings so warmly dropping
      Round her nest of sticks and clay.

    "Take, my bird, O take some other
      Eve than this to twitter gay!"
    Sayeth, prayeth Mona's mother,
    To the slender-throated swallow
      On her nest of sticks and clay;
    For her sad eyes needs must follow
    Down the misty, mint-sweet hollow,
      Where the ruby colors play
      With the gold, and with the gray.
    "Yet, my little Lady-feather,
      You do well to sit and sing,"
    Crieth, sigheth Mona's mother.
    "If you would, you could no other.
      Can the leaf fail with the spring?
    Can the tendril stay from twining
      When the sap begins to run?
    Or the dew-drop keep from shining
      With her body full o' the sun?
    Nor can you, from gladness, either;
      Therefore, you do well to sing.
    Up and o'er the downy lining
      Of your bird-bed I can see
    Two round little heads together,
    Pushed out softly through your wing.
      But alas! my bird, for me!"

    In the porch with roses burning
      All across, she sitteth lonely.
      O, her soul is dark with dread!
    Round and round her slow wheel turning,
    Lady brow down-dropped serenely,
    Lady hand uplifted queenly,
    Pausing in the spinning only
      To rejoin the broken thread,--
    Pausing only for the winding,
    With the carded silken binding
      Of the flax, the distaff-head.

    All along the branches creeping,
    To their leafy beds of sleeping
      Go the blue-birds and the brown;
    Blackbird stoppeth now his clamor,
    And the little yellowhammer
      Droppeth head in winglet down.
    Now the rocks rise bleak and barren
      Through the twilight, gray and still;
    In the marsh-land now the heron
      Clappeth close his horny bill.
    Death-watch now begins his drumming
    And the fire-fly, going, coming,
      Weaveth zigzag lines of light,--
    Lines of zigzag, golden-threaded,
    Up the marshy valley, shaded
      O'er and o'er with vapors white.
    Now the lily, open-hearted,
    Of her dragon-fly deserted,
      Swinging on the wind so low,
    Gives herself, with trust audacious,
    To the wild warm wave that washes
      Through her fingers, soft and slow.

    O the eyes of Mona's mother!
      Dim they grow with tears unshed;
    For no longer may they follow
    Down the misty mint-sweet hollow,
    Down along the yellow mosses
    That the brook with silver crosses.
      Ah! the day is dead, is dead;
    And the cold and curdling shadows,
    Stretching from the long, low meadows,
    Darker, deeper, nearer spread,
    Till she cannot see the twining
    Of the briers, nor see the lining
    Round the porch of roses red,--
    Till she cannot see the hollow,
    Nor the little steel-winged swallow,
      On her clay-built nest o'erhead.

    Mona's mother falleth mourning:
      O, 't is hard, so hard, to see
    Prattling child to woman turning,
      As to grander company!
    Little heart she lulled with hushes
    Beating, burning up with blushes,
    All with meditative dreaming
    On the dear delicious gleaming
    Of the bridal veil and ring;
    Finding in the sweet ovations
    Of its new, untried relations
      Better joys than she can bring.

    In her hand her wheel she keepeth,
    And her heart within her leapeth,
    With a burdened, bashful yearning,
      For the babe's weight on her knee,
      For the loving lisp of glee,
    Sweet as larks' throats in the morning,
      Sweet as hum of honey-bee.

    "O my child!" cries Mona's mother,
    "Will you, can you take another
      Name ere mine upon your lips?
    Can you, only for the asking,
    Give to other hands the clasping
      Of your rosy finger-tips?"

    Fear on fear her sad soul borrows,--
      O the dews are falling fair!
    But no fair thing now can move her;
    Vainly walks the moon above her,
    Turning out her golden furrows
      On the cloudy fields of air.

    Sudden she is 'ware of shadows,
    Coming in across the meadows,
      And of murmurs, low as love,--
    Murmurs mingled like the meeting
    Of the winds, or like the beating
      Of the wings of dove with dove.

    In her hand the slow wheel stoppeth,
    Silken flax from distaff droppeth,
    And a cruel, killing pain
    Striketh up from heart to brain;
    And she knoweth by that token
      That the spinning all is vain,
    That the troth-plight has been spoken,
    And the thread of life thus broken
      Never can be joined again.


AT PADUA.


I.

Those of my readers who have frequented the garden of Doctor Rappaccini
no doubt recall with perfect distinctness the quaint old city of Padua.
They remember its miles and miles of dim arcade over-roofing the
sidewalks everywhere, affording excellent opportunity for the flirtation
of lovers by day and the vengeance of rivals by night. They have seen
the now vacant streets thronged with maskers, and the Venetian Podestà
going in gorgeous state to and from the vast Palazzo della Ragione. They
have witnessed ringing tournaments in those sad, empty squares, and
races in the Prato della Valle, and many other wonders of different
epochs, and their pleasure makes me half sorry that I should have lived
for several years within an hour by rail from Padua, and should know
little or nothing of these great sights from actual observation. I take
shame to myself for having visited Padua so often and so familiarly as I
used to do,--for having been bored and hungry there,--for having had
toothache there, upon one occasion,--for having rejoiced more in a cup
of coffee at Pedrocchi's than in the whole history of Padua,--for having
slept repeatedly in the bad-bedded hotels of Padua and never once dreamt
of Portia,--for having been more taken by the _salti mortali_[A] of a
waiter who summed up my account at a Paduan restaurant, than by all the
strategies with which the city has been many times captured and
recaptured. Had I viewed Padua only over the wall of Doctor Rappaccini's
garden, how different my impressions of the city would now be! This is
one of the drawbacks of actual knowledge.

"Ah! how can you write about Spain when once you have been there?" asked
Heine of Théophile Gautier setting out on a journey thither.

Nevertheless it seems to me that I remember something about Padua with a
sort of romantic pleasure. There was a certain charm which I can dimly
recall, in sauntering along the top of the old wall of the city, and
looking down upon the plumy crests of the Indian-corn that nourished up
so mightily from the dry bed of the moat. At such times I could not help
figuring to myself the many sieges that the wall had known, with the
fierce assault by day, the secret attack by night, the swarming foe upon
the plains below, the bristling arms of the besieged upon the wall, the
boom of the great mortars made of ropes and leather and throwing mighty
balls of stone, the stormy flight of arrows, the ladders planted against
the defences and staggering headlong into the moat, enriched for future
agriculture not only by its sluggish waters, but by the blood of many
men. I suppose that most of these visions were old stage spectacles
furbished up anew, and that my armies were chiefly equipped with their
obsolete implements of warfare from museums of armor and from cabinets
of antiquities; but they were very vivid, for all that.

I was never able, in passing a certain one of the city gates, to divest
myself of an historic interest in the great loads of hay waiting
admission on the outside. For an instant they masked again the Venetian
troops that, in the war of the League of Cambray, entered the city in
the hay-carts, shot down the landsknechts at the gates, and, uniting
with the citizens, cut the German garrison to pieces. But it was a thing
long past. The German garrison was here again; and the heirs of the
landsknechts went clanking through the gate to the parade-ground, with
that fierce clamor of their kettle-drums which is so much fiercer
because unmingled with the noise of fifes. Once more now the Germans are
gone, and, let us trust, forever; but when I saw them, there seemed
little hope of their going. They had a great Biergarten on the top of
the wall, and they had set up the altars of their heavy Bacchus in many
parts of the city.

I please myself with thinking that, if I walked on such a spring day as
this in the arcaded Paduan streets, I should catch glimpses, through the
gateways of the palaces, of gardens full of vivid bloom, and of
fountains that tinkle there forever. If it were autumn, and I were in
the great market-place before the Palazzo della Ragione, I should hear
the baskets of amber-hued and honeyed grapes humming with the murmur of
multitudinous bees, and making a music as if the wine itself were
already singing in their gentle hearts. It is a great field of succulent
verdure, that wide old market-place; and fancy loves to browse about
among its gay stores of fruits and vegetables, brought thither by the
world-old peasant-women who have been bringing fruits and vegetables to
the Paduan market for so many centuries. They sit upon the ground before
their great panniers, and knit and doze, and wake up with a drowsy
"_Comandala?_" as you linger to look at their grapes. They have each a
pair of scales,--the emblem of Injustice,--and will weigh you out a
scant measure of the fruit, if you like. Their faces are yellow as
parchment, and Time has written them so full of wrinkles that there is
not room for another line. Doubtless these old parchment visages are
palimpsests, and would tell the whole history of Padua if you could get
at each successive inscription. Among their primal records there must be
some account of the Roman city, as each little contadinella, remembered
it on market-days; and one might read of the terror of Attila's sack, a
little later, with the peasant-maid's personal recollections of the bold
Hunnish trooper who ate up the grapes in her basket, and kissed her
hard, round red cheeks,--for in that time she was a blooming girl,--and
paid nothing for either privilege. What wild and confused reminiscences
on the wrinkled visage we should find thereafter of the fierce
republican times, of Ecelino, of the Carraras, of the Venetian rule! And
is it not sad to think of systems and peoples all passing away, and
these ancient women lasting still, and still selling grapes in front of
the Palazzo della Ragione? What a long mortality!

The youngest of their number is a thousand years older than the palace,
which was begun in the twelfth century, and which is much the same now
as it was when first completed. I know that, if I entered it, I should
be sure of finding the great hall of the palace--the vastest hall in the
world--dim and dull and dusty and delightful, with nothing in it except
at one end Donatello's colossal marble-headed wooden horse of Troy,
stared at from the other end by the two dog-faced Egyptian women in
basalt placed there by Belzoni.

Late in the drowsy summer afternoons I should have the Court of the
University all to myself, and might study unmolested the blazons of the
noble youth who have attended the school in different centuries ever
since 1200, and have left their escutcheons on the walls to commemorate
them. At the foot of the stairway ascending to the schools from the
court is the statue of the learned lady who was once a professor in the
University, and who, if her likeness belie not her looks, must have
given a great charm to student life in other times. At present there are
no lady professors at Padua, any more than at Harvard; and during late
years the schools have suffered greatly from the interference of the
Austrian government, which frequently closed them for months, on account
of political demonstrations among the students. But now there is an end
of this and many other stupid oppressions; and the time-honored
University will doubtless regain its ancient importance. Even in 1864 it
had nearly fifteen hundred students, and one met them everywhere under
the arcades, and could not well mistake them, with that blended air of
pirate and dandy which these studious young men loved to assume. They
were to be seen a good deal on the promenades outside the walls, where
the Paduan ladies are driven in their carriages in the afternoon, and
where one sees the blood-horses and fine equipages for which Padua is
famous. There used once to be races in the Prato della Valle, after the
Italian notion of horse-races; but these are now discontinued, and there
is nothing to be found there but the statues of scholars and soldiers
and statesmen, posted in a circle around the old race-course. If you
strolled thither about dusk on such a day as this, you might see the
statues unbend a little from their stony rigidity, and in the failing
light nod to each other very pleasantly through the trees. And if you
stayed in Padua over night, what could be better to-morrow morning than
a stroll through the great Botanical Garden,--the oldest botanical
garden in the world,--the garden which first received in Europe the
strange and splendid growths of our hemisphere,--the garden where Doctor
Rappaccini doubtless found the germ of his mortal plant?

On the whole, I believe I would rather go this moment to Padua than to
Lowell or Lawrence, or even to Worcester; and as to the disadvantage of
having seen Padua, I begin to think the whole place has now assumed so
fantastic a character in my mind that I am almost as well qualified to
write of it as if I had merely dreamed it.

The day that we first visited the city was very rainy, and we spent most
of the time in viewing the churches. These, even after the churches of
Venice, one finds rich in art and historic interest, and they in no
instance fall into the maniacal excesses of the Renaissance to which
some of the temples of the latter city abandon themselves. Their
architecture forms a sort of border-land between the Byzantine of Venice
and the Lombardic of Verona. The superb domes of St. Anthony's emulate
those of St. Mark's, and the porticos of other Paduan churches rest
upon the backs of bird-headed lions and leopards that fascinate with
their mystery and beauty.

It was the wish to see the attributive Giottos in the Chapter which drew
us first to St. Anthony's, and we saw them with the satisfaction
naturally attending the contemplation of frescos discovered only since
1858, after having been hidden under plaster and whitewash for many
centuries; but we could not believe that Giotto's fame was destined to
gain much by their rescue from oblivion. They are in no wise to be
compared with this master's frescos in the Chapel of the
Annunziata,--which, indeed, is in every way a place of wonder and
delight. You reach it by passing through a garden lane bordered with
roses, and a taciturn gardener comes out with clinking keys, and lets
you into the chapel, where there is nobody but Giotto and Dante, nor
seems to have been for ages. Cool it is, and of a pulverous smell, as a
sacred place should be; a blessed benching goes round the wall, and you
sit down and take unlimited comfort in the frescos. The gardener leaves
you alone to the solitude and the silence, in which the talk of the
painter and the exile is plain enough. Their contemporaries and yours
are cordial in their gay companionship; through the half-open door
falls, in a pause of the rain, the same sunshine that they saw lie
there; the deathless birds that they heard sing out in the garden trees;
it is the fresh sweetness of the grass mown six hundred years ago that
breathes through all the lovely garden grounds.

How mistaken was Ponce de Leon, to seek the fountain of youth in the New
World! It is there,--in the Old World,--far back in the past. We are all
old men and decrepit together in the present; the future is full of
death; in the past we are light and glad as boys turned barefoot in the
spring. The work of the heroes is play to us; the pang of the martyr is
a thrill of rapture; the exile's longing is a strain of plaintive music
touching and delighting us. We are not only young again, we are
immortal. It is this divine sense of superiority to fate which is the
supreme good won from travel in historic lands, and from the presence of
memorable things, and which no sublimity of natural aspects can bestow.
It is this which forms the wide difference between Europe and
America,--a gulf that it will take a thousand years to bridge.

It is a shame that the immortals should be limited in their pleasures by
the fact that they have hired their brougham by the hour; yet we early
quit the Chapel of Giotto on this account. We had chosen our driver from
among many other drivers of broughams in the vicinity of Pedrocchi's,
because he had such an honest look, and was not likely, we thought, to
deal unfairly with us.

"But first," said the signor who had selected him, "how much is your
brougham an hour?"

So and so.

"Show me the tariff of fares."

"There is no tariff."

"There is. Show it to me."

"It is lost, signor."

"I think not. It is here in this pocket Get it out."

The tariff appears, and with it the fact that he had demanded just what
the boatman of the ballad received in gift,--thrice his fee.

The driver mounted his seat, and served us so faithfully that day in
Padua that we took him the next day for Arquà. At the end, when he had
received his due, and a handsome _mancia_ besides, he was still
unsatisfied, and referred to the tariff in proof that he had been
under-paid. On that confronted and defeated, he thanked us very
cordially, gave us the number of his brougham, and begged us to ask for
him when we came next to Padua and needed a carriage.

From the Chapel of the Annunziata he drove us to the Church of Santa
Giustina, where is a very famous and noble picture by Romanino. But as
this paper has nothing in the world to do with art, I here dismiss that
subject, and with a gross and idle delight follow the sacristan down
under this church to the prison of Santa Giustina.

Of all the faculties of the mind there is none so little fatiguing to
exercise as mere wonder; and, for my own sake, I try always to wonder at
things without the least critical reservation. I therefore, in the sense
of deglutition, bolted this prison at once, though subsequent
experiences led me to look with grave indigestion upon the whole idea of
prisons, their authenticity, and even their existence.

As far as mere dimensions are concerned, the prison of Santa Giustina
was not a hard one to swallow, being only three feet wide by about ten
feet in length. In this limited space, Santa Giustina passed five years
of the paternal reign of Nero (a virtuous and a long-suffering prince,
whom, singularly enough, no historic artist has yet arisen to
whitewash), and was then brought out into the larger cell adjoining, to
suffer a blessed martyrdom. I am not sure now whether the sacristan said
she was dashed to death on the stones, or cut to pieces with knives; but
whatever the form of martyrdom, an iron ring in the ceiling was employed
in it, as I know from seeing the ring,--a curiously well-preserved piece
of ironmongery. Within the narrow prison of the saint, and just under
the grating, through which the sacristan thrust his candle to illuminate
it, was a mountain of candle-drippings,--a monument to the fact that
faith still largely exists in this doubting world. My own credulity, not
only with regard to this prison, but also touching the coffin of St.
Luke, which I saw in the church, had so wrought upon the esteem of the
sacristan, that he now took me to a well, into which, he said, had been
cast the bones of three thousand Christian martyrs. He lowered a lantern
into the well, and assured me that, if I looked through a certain
screenwork there, I could see the bones. On experiment I could not see
the bones, but this circumstance did not cause me to doubt their
presence, particularly as I did see upon the screen a great number of
coins offered for the repose of the martyrs' souls. I threw down some
_soldi_, and thus enthralled the sacristan.

If the signor cared to see prisons, he said, the driver must take him to
those of Ecelino, at present the property of a private gentleman near
by. As I had just bought a history of Ecelino, at a great bargain, from
a second-hand bookstall, and had a lively interest in all the enormities
of that nobleman, I sped the driver instantly to the villa of the Signor
Pacchiarotti.

It depends here altogether upon the freshness or mustiness of the
reader's historical reading whether he cares to be reminded more
particularly who Ecelino was. He flourished balefully in the early half
of the thirteenth century as lord of Vicenza, Verona, Padua, and
Brescia, and was defeated and hurt to death in an attempt to possess
himself of Milan. He was in every respect a remarkable man for that
time,--fearless, abstemious, continent, avaricious, hardy, and
unspeakably ambitious and cruel. He survived and suppressed innumerable
conspiracies, escaping even the thrust of the assassin whom the fame of
his enormous wickedness had caused the Old Man of the Mountain to send
against him. As lord of Padua he was more incredibly severe and bloody
in his rule than as lord of the other cities, for the Paduans had been
latest free, and conspired most frequently against him. He extirpated
whole families on suspicion that a single member had been concerned in a
meditated revolt. Little children and helpless women suffered hideous
mutilation and shame at his hands. Six prisons in Padua were constantly
filled by his arrests. The whole country was traversed by witnesses of
his cruelties,--men and women deprived of an arm or leg, and begging
from door to door. He had long been excommunicated; at last the Church
proclaimed a crusade against him, and his lieutenant and nephew--more
demoniacal, if possible, than himself--was driven out of Padua while he
was operating against Mantua. Ecelino retired to Verona, and maintained
a struggle against the crusade for nearly two years longer, with a
courage which never failed him. Wounded and taken prisoner, the soldiers
of the victorious army gathered about him, and heaped insult and
reproach upon him; and one furious peasant, whose brother's feet had
been cut off by Ecelino's command, dealt the helpless monster four blows
upon the head with a scythe. By some, Ecelino is said to have died of
these wounds alone; but by others it is related that his death was a
kind of suicide, inasmuch as he himself put the case past surgery by
tearing off the bandages from his hurts, and refusing all medicines.


II.

Entering at the enchanted portal of the Villa P----, we found ourselves
in a realm of wonder. It was our misfortune not to see the magician who
compelled all the marvels on which we looked, but for that very reason,
perhaps, we have the clearest sense of his greatness. Everywhere we
beheld the evidences of his ingenious but lugubrious fancy, which
everywhere tended to a monumental and mortuary effect. A sort of
vestibule first received us, and beyond this dripped and glimmered the
garden. The walls of the vestibule were covered with inscriptions
setting forth the sentiments of the philosophy and piety of all ages
concerning life and death; we began with Confucius, and we ended with
Benjamino Franklino. But as if these ideas of mortality were not
sufficiently depressing, the funereal Signor P----had collected into
earthern _amphoræ_ the ashes of the most famous men of ancient and
modern times, and arranged them so that a sense of their number and
variety should at once strike his visitor. Each jar was conspicuously
labelled with the name its illustrious dust had borne in life; and if
one escaped with comparative cheerfulness from the thought that Seneca
had died, there were in the very next pot the cinders of Napoleon to
bully him back to a sense of his mortality.

We were glad to have the gloomy fascination of these objects broken by
the custodian, who approached to ask if we wished to see the prisons of
Ecelino, and we willingly followed him into the rain out of our
sepulchral shelter.

Between the vestibule and the towers of the tyrant lay that garden
already mentioned, and our guide led us through ranks of weeping
statuary, and rainy bowers, and showery lanes of shrubbery, until we
reached the door of his cottage. While he entered to fetch the key to
the prisons, we noted that the towers were freshly painted and in
perfect repair; and indeed the custodian said frankly enough, on
reappearing, that they were merely built over the prisons on the site of
the original towers. The storied stream of the Bacchiglione sweeps
through the grounds, and now, swollen by the rainfall, it roared, a
yellow torrent, under a corner of the prisons. The towers rise from
masses of foliage, and form no unpleasing feature of what must be, in
spite of Signor P----, a delightful Italian garden in sunny weather. The
ground is not so flat as elsewhere in Padua, and this inequality gives
an additional picturesqueness to the place. But as we were come in
search of horrors, we scorned these merely lovely things, and hastened
to immure ourselves in the dungeons below. The custodian, lighting a
candle, (which ought, we felt, to have been a torch,) went before.

We found the cells, though narrow and dark, not uncomfortable, and the
guide conceded that they had undergone some repairs since Ecelino's
time. But all the horrors for which we had come were there in perfect
grisliness, and labelled by the ingenious Signor P---- with Latin
inscriptions.

In the first cell was a shrine of the Virgin, set in the wall. Beneath
this, while the wretched prisoner knelt in prayer, a trap-door opened
and precipitated him down upon the points of knives, from which his body
fell into the Bacchiglione below. In the next cell, held by some rusty
iron rings to the wall, was a skeleton, hanging by the wrists.

"This," said the guide, "was another punishment of which Ecelino was
very fond."

A dreadful doubt seized my mind. "Was this skeleton found here?" I
demanded.

Without faltering an instant, without so much as winking an eye, the
custodian replied, "_Appunto_."

It was a great relief, and restored me to confidence in the
establishment. I am at a loss to explain how my faith should have been
confirmed afterwards by coming upon a guillotine--an awful instrument in
the likeness of a straw-cutter, with a decapitated wooden figure under
its blade--which the custodian confessed to be a modern improvement
placed there by Signor P----. Yet my credulity was so strengthened by
his candor, that I accepted without hesitation the torture of the
water-drop when we came to it. The water-jar was as well preserved as if
placed there but yesterday, and the skeleton beneath it--found as we saw
it--was entire and perfect.

In the adjoining cell sat a skeleton--found as we saw it--with its neck
in the clutch of the garrote, which was one of Ecelino's more merciful
punishments; while in still another cell the ferocity of the tyrant
appeared in the penalty inflicted upon the wretch whose skeleton had
been hanging for ages--as we saw it--head downwards from the ceiling.

Beyond these, in a yet darker and drearier dungeon, stood a heavy oblong
wooden box, with two apertures near the top, peering through which we
found that we were looking into the eyeless sockets of a skull. Within
this box Ecelino had immured the victim we beheld there, and left him to
perish in view of the platters of food and goblets of drink placed just
beyond the reach of his hands. The food we saw was of course not the
original food.

At last we came to the crowning horror of Villa P----, the supreme
excess of Ecelino's cruelty. The guide entered the cell before us, and,
as we gained the threshold, threw the light of his taper vividly upon a
block that stood in the middle of the floor. Fixed to the block by an
immense spike driven through from the back was the little slender hand
of a woman, which lay there just as it had been struck from the living
arm, and which, after the lapse of so many centuries, was still as
perfectly preserved as if it had been embalmed. The sight had a most
cruel fascination; and while one of the horror-seekers stood helplessly
conjuring to his vision that scene of unknown dread,--the shrinking,
shrieking woman dragged to the block, the wild, shrill, horrible screech
following the blow that drove in the spike, the merciful swoon after the
mutilation,--his companion, with a sudden pallor, demanded to be taken
instantly away.

In their swift withdrawal, they only glanced at a few detached
instruments of torture,--all original Ecelinos, but intended for the
infliction of minor and comparatively unimportant torments,--and then
they passed from that place of fear.


III.

In the evening we sat talking at the Caffè Pedrocchi with an abbate, an
acquaintance of ours, who was a Professor in the University of Padua.
Pedrocchi's is the great caffè of Padua, a granite edifice of Egyptian
architecture, which is the mausoleum of the proprietor's fortune. The
pecuniary skeleton at the feast, however, does not much trouble the
guests. They begin early in the evening to gather into the elegant
saloons of the caffè,--somewhat too large for so small a city as
Padua,--and they sit there late in the night over their cheerful cups
and their ices with their newspaper and their talk. Not so many ladies
are to be seen as at the caffè in Venice, for it is only in the greater
cities that they go much to these public places. There are few students
at Pedrocchi's, for they frequent the cheaper caffè; but you may nearly
always find there some Professor of the University, and on the evening
of which I speak, there were two present besides our abbate. Our
friend's great passion was the English language, which he understood too
well to venture to speak a great deal. He had been translating from that
tongue into Italian certain American poems, and our talk was of these at
first. Then we began to talk of distinguished American writers, of whom
intelligent Italians always know at least four, in this
succession,--Cooper, Mrs. Stowe, Longfellow, and Irving. Mrs. Stowe's
_Capanna di Zio Tom_ is, of course, universally read; and my friend had
also read _Il Fiore di Maggio_,--"The Mayflower." Of Longfellow, the
"Evangeline" is familiar to Italians, through a translation of the poem;
but our abbate knew all the poet's works, and one of the other
Professors present that evening had made such faithful study of them as
to have produced some translations rendering the original with
remarkable fidelity and spirit. I have before me here his _brochure_,
printed last year at Padua, and containing versions of "Enceladus,"
"Excelsior," "A Psalm of Life," "The Old Clock on the Stairs," "Sand of
the Desert in an Hour-Glass," "Twilight," "Daybreak," "The Quadroon
Girl," and "Torquemada,"--pieces which give the Italians a fair notion
of our poet's lyrical range, and which bear witness to Professor
Messadaglia's sympathetic and familiar knowledge of his works. A young
and gifted lady of Parma, now unhappily no more, published only a few
months since a translation of "The Golden Legend"; and Professor
Messadaglia, in his Preface, mentions a version of another of our poet's
longer works on which the translator of the "Evangeline" is now engaged.

At last, turning from literature, we spoke with the gentle abbate of
our day's adventures, and eagerly related that of the Ecelino prisons.
To have seen them was the most terrific pleasure of our lives.

"Eh!" said our friend, "I believe you."

"We mean those under the Villa P----."

"Exactly."

There was a tone of politely suppressed amusement in the abbate's voice;
and after a moment's pause, in which we felt our awful experience
slipping and sliding away from us, we ventured to say, "You don't mean
that those are _not_ the veritable Ecelino prisons?"

"Certainly they are nothing of the kind. The Ecelino prisons were
destroyed when the Crusaders took Padua, with the exception of the tower
which the Venetian Republic converted into an observatory."

"But at least these prisons are on the site of Ecelino's castle?"

"Nothing of the sort. His castle in that case would have been outside of
the old city walls."

"And those tortures and the prisons are all--"

"Things got up for show. No doubt, Ecelino used such things, and many
worse, of which even the ingenuity of Signor P---- cannot conceive. But
he is an eccentric man, loving the horrors of history, and what he can
do to realize them he has done in his prisons."

"But the custodian, how could he lie so?"

Our friend shrugged his shoulders. "Eh! easily. And perhaps he even
believed what he said."

The world began to assume an aspect of bewildering ungenuineness, and
there seemed to be a treacherous quality of fiction in the ground under
our feet. Even the play at the pretty little Teatro Sociale, where we
went to pass the rest of the evening, appeared hollow and improbable. We
thought the hero something of a bore, with his patience and goodness;
and as for the heroine, pursued by the attentions of the rich
profligate, we doubted if she were any better than she should be.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: _Salti mortali_ are those prodigious efforts of mental
arithmetic by which Italian waiters, in verbally presenting your
account, arrive at six as the product of two and two.]


POOR RICHARD.

A STORY IN THREE PARTS.


PART II.

Richard got through the following week he hardly knew how. He found
occupation, to a much greater extent than he was actually aware of, in a
sordid and yet heroic struggle with himself. For several months now, he
had been leading, under Gertrude's inspiration, a strictly decent and
sober life. So long as he was at comparative peace with Gertrude and
with himself, such a life was more than easy; it was delightful. It
produced a moral buoyancy infinitely more delicate and more constant
than the gross exhilaration of his old habits. There was a kind of
fascination in adding hour to hour, and day to day, in this record of
his new-born austerity. Having abjured excesses, he practised temperance
after the fashion of a novice: he raised it (or reduced it) to
abstinence. He was like an unclean man who, having washed himself clean,
remains in the water for the love of it. He wished to be religiously,
superstitiously pure. This was easy, as we have said, so long as his
goddess smiled, even though it were as a goddess indeed,--as a creature
unattainable. But when she frowned, and the heavens grew dark, Richard's
sole dependence was in his own will,--as flimsy a trust for an upward
scramble, one would have premised, as a tuft of grass on the face of a
perpendicular cliff. Flimsy as it looked, however, it served him. It
started and crumbled, but it held, if only by a single fibre. When
Richard had cantered fifty yards away from Gertrude's gate in a fit of
stupid rage, he suddenly pulled up his horse and gulped down his
passion, and swore an oath, that, suffer what torments of feeling he
might, he would not at least break the continuity of his gross physical
soberness. It was enough to be drunk in mind; he would not be drunk in
body. A singular, almost ridiculous feeling of antagonism to Gertrude
lent force to this resolution. "No, madam," he cried within himself, "I
shall _not_ fall back. Do your best! I shall keep straight." We often
outweather great offences and afflictions through a certain healthy
instinct of egotism. Richard went to bed that night as grim and sober as
a Trappist monk; and his foremost impulse the next day was to plunge
headlong into some physical labor which should not allow him a moment's
interval of idleness. He found no labor to his taste; but he spent the
day so actively, in the mechanical annihilation of the successive hours,
that Gertrude's image found no chance squarely to face him. He was
engaged in the work of self-preservation,--the most serious and
absorbing work possible to man. Compared to the results here at stake,
his passion for Gertrude seemed but a fiction. It is perhaps difficult
to give a more lively impression of the vigor of this passion, of its
maturity and its strength, than by simply stating that it discreetly
held itself in abeyance until Richard had set at rest his doubts of that
which lies nearer than all else to the heart of man,--his doubts of the
strength of his will. He answered these doubts by subjecting his
resolution to a course of such cruel temptations as were likely either
to shiver it to a myriad of pieces, or to season it perfectly to all the
possible requirements of life. He took long rides over the country,
passing within a stone's throw of as many of the scattered wayside
taverns as could be combined in a single circuit. As he drew near them
he sometimes slackened his pace, as if he were about to dismount, pulled
up his horse, gazed a moment, then, thrusting in his spurs, galloped
away again like one pursued. At other times; in the late evening, when
the window-panes were aglow with the ruddy light within, he would walk
slowly by, looking at the stars, and, after maintaining this stoical
pace for a couple of miles, would hurry home to his own lonely and
black-windowed dwelling. Having successfully performed this feat a
certain number of times, he found his love coming back to him, bereft in
the interval of its attendant jealousy. In obedience to it, he one
morning leaped upon his horse and repaired to Gertrude's abode, with no
definite notion of the terms in which he should introduce himself.

He had made himself comparatively sure of his will; but he was yet to
acquire the mastery of his impulses. As he gave up his horse, according
to his wont, to one of the men at the stable, he saw another steed
stalled there which he recognized as Captain Severn's. "Steady, my boy,"
he murmured to himself, as he would have done to a frightened horse. On
his way across the broad court-yard toward the house, he encountered the
Captain, who had just taken his leave. Richard gave him a generous
salute (he could not trust himself to more), and Severn answered with
what was at least a strictly just one. Richard observed, however, that
he was very pale, and that he was pulling a rosebud to pieces as he
walked; whereupon our young man quickened his step. Finding the parlor
empty, he instinctively crossed over to a small room adjoining it, which
Gertrude had converted into a modest conservatory; and as he did so,
hardly knowing it, he lightened his heavy-shod tread. The glass door was
open and Richard looked in. There stood Gertrude with her back to him,
bending apart with her hands a couple of tall flowering plants, and
looking through the glazed partition behind them. Advancing a step, and
glancing over the young girl's shoulder, Richard had just time to see
Severn mounting his horse at the stable door, before Gertrude, startled
by his approach, turned hastily round. Her face was flushed hot, and her
eyes brimming with tears.

"You!" she exclaimed, sharply.

Richard's head swam. That single word was so charged with cordial
impatience that it seemed the death-knell of his hope. He stepped inside
the room and closed the door, keeping his hand on the knob.

"Gertrude," he said, "you love that man!"

"Well, sir?"

"Do you confess it?" cried Richard.

"Confess it? Richard Clare, how dare you use such language? I'm in no
humor for a scene. Let me pass."

Gertrude was angry; but as for Richard, it may almost be said that he
was mad. "One scene a day is enough, I suppose," he cried. "What are
these tears about? Wouldn't he have you? Did he refuse you, as you
refused me? Poor Gertrude!"

Gertrude looked at him a moment with concentrated scorn. "You fool!" she
said, for all answer. She pushed his hand from the latch, flung open the
door, and moved rapidly away.

Left alone, Richard sank down on a sofa and covered his face with his
hands. It burned them, but he sat motionless, repeating to himself,
mechanically, as if to avert thought, "You fool! you fool!" At last he
got up and made his way out.

It seemed to Gertrude, for several hours after this scene, that she had
at this juncture a strong case against Fortune. It is not our purpose to
repeat the words which she had exchanged with Captain Severn. They had
come within a single step of an _éclaircissement_, and when but another
movement would have flooded their souls with light, some malignant
influence had seized them by the throats. Had they too much pride?--too
little imagination? We must content ourselves with this hypothesis.
Severn, then, had walked mechanically across the yard, saying to
himself, "She belongs to another"; and adding, as he saw Richard, "and
such another!" Gertrude had stood at her window, repeating, under her
breath, "He belongs to himself, himself alone." And as if this was not
enough, when misconceived, slighted, wounded, she had faced about to her
old, passionless, dutiful past, there on the path of retreat to this
asylum Richard Clare had arisen to forewarn her that she should find no
peace even at home. There was something in the violent impertinence of
his appearance at this moment which gave her a dreadful feeling that
fate was against her. More than this. There entered into her emotions a
certain minute particle of awe of the man whose passion was so
uncompromising. She felt that it was out of place any longer to pity
him. He was the slave of his passion; but his passion was strong. In her
reaction against the splendid civility of Severn's silence, (the real
antithesis of which would have been simply the perfect courtesy of
explicit devotion,) she found herself touching with pleasure on the fact
of Richard's brutality. He at least had ventured to insult her. He had
loved her enough to forget himself. He had dared to make himself odious
in her eyes, because he had cast away his sanity. What cared he for the
impression he made? He cared only for the impression he received. The
violence of this reaction, however, was the measure of its duration. It
was impossible that she should walk backward so fast without stumbling.
Brought to her senses by this accident, she became aware that her
judgment was missing. She smiled to herself as she reflected that it had
been taking holiday for a whole afternoon. "Richard was right," she said
to herself. "I am no fool. I can't be a fool if I try. I'm too
thoroughly my father's daughter for that. I love that man, but I love
myself better. Of course, then, I don't deserve to have him. If I loved
him in a way to merit his love, I would sit down this moment and write
him a note telling him that if he does not come back to me, I shall die.
But I shall neither write the note nor die. I shall live and grow stout,
and look after my chickens and my flowers and my colts, and thank the
Lord in my old age that I have never done anything unwomanly. Well! I'm
as He made me. Whether I can deceive others, I know not; but I certainly
can't deceive myself. I'm quite as sharp as Gertrude Whittaker; and this
it is that has kept me from making a fool of myself and writing to poor
Richard the note that I wouldn't write to Captain Severn. I needed to
fancy myself wronged. I suffer so little! I needed a sensation! So,
shrewd Yankee that I am, I thought I would get one cheaply by taking up
that unhappy boy! Heaven preserve me from the heroics, especially the
economical heroics! The one heroic course possible, I decline. What,
then, have I to complain of? Must I tear my hair because a man of taste
has resisted my unspeakable charms? To be charming, you must be charmed
yourself, or at least you must be able to be charmed; and that
apparently I'm not. I didn't love him, or he would have known it. Love
gets love, and no-love gets none."

But at this point of her meditations Gertrude almost broke down. She
felt that she was assigning herself but a dreary future. Never to be
loved but by such a one as Richard Clare was a cheerless prospect; for
it was identical with an eternal spinsterhood. "Am I, then," she
exclaimed, quite as passionately as a woman need do,--"am I, then, cut
off from a woman's dearest joys? What blasphemous nonsense! One thing is
plain: I am made to be a mother; the wife may take care of herself. I am
made to be a wife; the mistress may take care of _her_self. I am in the
Lord's hands," added the poor girl, who, whether or no she could forget
herself in an earthly love, had at all events this mark of a spontaneous
nature, that she could forget herself in a heavenly one. But in the
midst of her pious emotion, she was unable to subdue her conscience. It
smote her heavily for her meditated falsity to Richard, for her
miserable readiness to succumb to the strong temptation to seek a
momentary resting-place in his gaping heart. She recoiled from this
thought as from an act cruel and immoral. Was Richard's heart the place
for her now, any more than it had been a month before? Was she to apply
for comfort where she would not apply for counsel? Was she to drown her
decent sorrows and regrets in a base, a dishonest, an extemporized
passion? Having done the young man so bitter a wrong in intention,
nothing would appease her magnanimous remorse (as time went on) but to
repair it in fact. She went so far as keenly to regret the harsh words
she had cast upon him in the conservatory. He had been insolent and
unmannerly; but he had an excuse. Much should be forgiven him, for he
loved much. Even now that Gertrude had imposed upon her feelings a
sterner regimen than ever, she could not defend herself from a sweet and
sentimental thrill--a thrill in which, as we have intimated, there was
something of a tremor--at the recollection of his strident accents and
his angry eyes. It was yet far from her heart to desire a renewal,
however brief, of this exhibition. She wished simply to efface from the
young man's morbid soul the impression of a real contempt; for she
knew--or she thought that she knew--that against such an impression he
was capable of taking the most fatal and inconsiderate comfort.

Before many mornings had passed, accordingly, she had a horse saddled,
and, dispensing with attendance, she rode rapidly over to his farm. The
house door and half the windows stood open; but no answer came to her
repeated summons. She made her way to the rear of the house, to the
barn-yard, thinly tenanted by a few common fowl, and across the yard to
a road which skirted its lower extremity and was accessible by an open
gate. No human figure was in sight; nothing was visible in the hot
stillness but the scattered and ripening crops, over which, in spite of
her nervous solicitude, Miss Whittaker cast the glance of a connoisseur.
A great uneasiness filled her mind as she measured the rich domain
apparently deserted of its young master, and reflected that she perhaps
was the cause of its abandonment. Ah, where was Richard? As she looked
and listened in vain, her heart rose to her throat, and she felt herself
on the point of calling all too wistfully upon his name. But her voice
was stayed by the sound of a heavy rumble, as of cart-wheels, beyond a
turn in the road. She touched up her horse and cantered along until she
reached the turn. A great four-wheeled cart, laden with masses of newly
broken stone, and drawn by four oxen, was slowly advancing towards her.
Beside it, patiently cracking his whip and shouting monotonously, walked
a young man in a slouched hat and a red shirt, with his trousers thrust
into his dusty boots. It was Richard. As he saw Gertrude, he halted a
moment, amazed, and then advanced, flicking the air with his whip.
Gertrude's heart went out towards him in a silent Thank God! Her next
reflection was that he had never looked so well. The truth is, that, in
this rough adjustment, the native barbarian was duly represented. His
face and neck were browned by a week in the fields, his eye was clear,
his step seemed to have learned a certain manly dignity from its
attendance on the heavy bestial tramp. Gertrude, as he reached her side,
pulled up her horse and held out her gloved fingers to his brown dusty
hand. He took them, looked for a moment into her face, and for the
second time raised them to his lips.

"Excuse my glove," she said, with a little smile.

"Excuse mine," he answered, exhibiting his sunburnt, work-stained hand.

"Richard," said Gertrude, "you never had less need of excuse in your
life. You never looked half so well."

He fixed his eyes upon her a moment. "Why, you have forgiven me!" he
exclaimed.

"Yes," said Gertrude, "I have forgiven you,--both you and myself. We
both of us behaved very absurdly, but we both of us had reason. I wish
you had come back."

Richard looked about him, apparently at loss for a rejoinder. "I have
been very busy," he said, at last, with a simplicity of tone slightly
studied. An odd sense of dramatic effect prompted him to say neither
more nor less.

An equally delicate instinct forbade Gertrude to express all the joy
which this assurance gave her. Excessive joy would have implied undue
surprise; and it was a part of her plan frankly to expect the best
things of her companion. "If you have been busy," she said, "I
congratulate you. What have you been doing?"

"O, a hundred things. I have been quarrying, and draining, and clearing,
and I don't know what all. I thought the best thing was just to put my
own hands to it. I am going to make a stone fence along the great lot on
the hill there. Wallace is forever grumbling about his boundaries. I'll
fix them once for all. What are you laughing at?"

"I am laughing at certain foolish apprehensions that I have been
indulging for a week past. You're wiser than I, Richard. I have no
imagination."

"Do you mean that _I_ have? I haven't enough to guess what you _do_
mean."

"Why, do you suppose, have I come over this morning?"

"Because you thought I was sulking on account of your having called me a
fool."

"Sulking, or worse. What do I deserve for the wrong I have done you?"

"You have done me no wrong. You reasoned fairly enough. You are not
obliged to know me better than I know myself. It's just like you to be
ready to take back that bad word, and try to make yourself believe that
it was unjust. But it was perfectly just, and therefore I have managed
to bear it. I _was_ a fool at that moment,--a stupid, impudent fool. I
don't know whether that man had been making love to you or not. But you
had, I think, been feeling love for him,--you looked it; I should have
been less than a man, I should be unworthy of your--your affection, if I
had failed to see it. I did see it,--I saw it as clearly as I see those
oxen now; and yet I bounced in with my own ill-timed claims. To do so
was to be a fool. To have been other than a fool would have been to have
waited, to have backed out, to have bitten my tongue off before I spoke,
to have done anything but what I did. I have no right to claim you,
Gertrude, until I can woo you better than that. It was the most
fortunate thing in the world that you spoke as you did: it was even
kind. It saved me all the misery of groping about for a starting-point.
Not to have spoken as you did would have been to fail of justice; and
then, probably, I should have sulked, or, as you very considerately say,
done worse. I had made a false move in the game, and the only thing to
do was to repair it. But you were not obliged to know that I would so
readily admit my move to have been false. Whenever I have made a fool of
myself before, I have been for sticking it out, and trying to turn all
mankind--that is, _you_--into a a fool too, so that I shouldn't be an
exception. But this time, I think, I had a kind of inspiration. I felt
that my case was desperate. I felt that if I adopted my folly now I
adopted it forever. The other day I met a man who had just come home
from Europe, and who spent last summer in Switzerland. He was telling me
about the mountain-climbing over there,--how they get over the glaciers,
and all that. He said that you sometimes came upon great slippery,
steep, snow-covered slopes that end short off in a precipice, and that
if you stumble or lose your footing as you cross them horizontally, why
you go shooting down, and you're gone; that is, but for one little
dodge. You have a long walking-pole with a sharp end, you know, and as
you feel yourself sliding,--it's as likely as not to be in a sitting
posture,--you just take this and ram it into the snow before you, and
there you are, stopped. The thing is, of course, to drive it in far
enough, so that it won't yield or break; and in any case it hurts
infernally to come whizzing down upon this upright pole. But the
interruption gives you time to pick yourself up. Well, so it was with me
the other day. I stumbled and fell; I slipped, and was whizzing
downward; but I just drove in my pole and pulled up short. It nearly
tore me in two; but it saved my life." Richard made this speech with one
hand leaning on the neck of Gertrude's horse, and the other on his own
side, and with his head slightly thrown back and his eyes on hers. She
had sat quietly in her saddle, returning his gaze. He had spoken slowly
and deliberately; but without hesitation and without heat. "This is not
romance," thought Gertrude, "it's reality." And this feeling it was that
dictated her reply, divesting it of romance so effectually as almost to
make it sound trivial.

"It was fortunate you had a walking-pole," she said.

"I shall never travel without one again."

"Never, at least," smiled Gertrude, "with a companion who has the bad
habit of pushing you off the path."

"O, you may push all you like," said Richard. "I give you leave. But
isn't this enough about myself?"

"That's as you think."

"Well, it's all I have to say for the present, except that I am
prodigiously glad to see you, and that of course you will stay awhile."

"But you have your work to do."

"Dear me, never you mind my work. I've earned my dinner this morning, if
you have no objection; and I propose to share it with you. So we will
go back to the house." He turned her horse's head about, started up his
oxen with his voice, and walked along beside her on the grassy roadside,
with one hand in the horse's mane, and the other swinging his whip.

Before they reached the yard-gate, Gertrude had revolved his speech.
"Enough about himself," she said, silently echoing his words. "Yes,
Heaven be praised, it _is_ about himself. I am but a means in this
matter,--he himself, his own character, his own happiness, is the end."
Under this conviction it seemed to her that her part was appreciably
simplified. Richard was learning wisdom and self-control, and to
exercise his reason. Such was the suit that he was destined to gain. Her
duty was as far as possible to remain passive, and not to interfere with
the working of the gods who had selected her as the instrument of their
prodigy. As they reached the gate, Richard made a trumpet of his hands,
and sent a ringing summons into the fields; whereupon a farm-boy
approached, and, with an undisguised stare of amazement at Gertrude,
took charge of his master's team. Gertrude rode up to the door-step,
where her host assisted her to dismount, and bade her go in and make
herself at home, while he busied himself with the bestowal of her horse.
She found that, in her absence, the old woman who administered her
friend's household had reappeared, and had laid out the preparations for
his mid-day meal. By the time he returned, with his face and head
shining from a fresh ablution, and his shirt-sleeves decently concealed
by a coat, Gertrude had apparently won the complete confidence of the
good wife.

Gertrude doffed her hat, and tucked up her riding-skirt, and sat down to
a _tête-à-tête_ over Richard's crumpled table-cloth. The young man
played the host very soberly and naturally; and Gertrude hardly knew
whether to augur from his perfect self-possession that her star was
already on the wane, or that it had waxed into a steadfast and eternal
sun. The solution of her doubts was not far to seek; Richard was
absolutely at his ease in her presence. He had told her indeed that she
intoxicated him; and truly, in those moments when she was compelled to
oppose her dewy eloquence to his fervid importunities, her whole
presence seemed to him to exhale a singularly potent sweetness. He had
told her that she was an enchantress, and this assertion, too, had its
measure of truth. But her spell was a steady one; it sprang not from her
beauty, her wit, her figure,--it sprang from her character. When she
found herself aroused to appeal or to resistance, Richard's pulses were
quickened to what he had called intoxication, not by her smiles, her
gestures, her glances, or any accession of that material beauty which
she did not possess, but by a generous sense of her virtues in action.
In other words, Gertrude exercised the magnificent power of making her
lover forget her face. Agreeably to this fact, his habitual feeling in
her presence was one of deep repose,--a sensation not unlike that which
in the early afternoon, as he lounged in his orchard with a pipe, he
derived from the sight of the hot and vaporous hills. He was innocent,
then, of that delicious trouble which Gertrude's thoughts had touched
upon as a not unnatural result of her visit, and which another woman's
fancy would perhaps have dwelt upon as an indispensable proof of its
success. "Porphyro grew faint," the poet assures us, as he stood in
Madeline's chamber on Saint Agnes' eve. But Richard did not in the least
grow faint now that his mistress was actually filling his musty old room
with her voice, her touch, her looks; that she was sitting in his
unfrequented chairs, trailing her skirt over his faded carpet, casting
her perverted image upon his mirror, and breaking his daily bread. He
was not fluttered when he sat at her well-served table, and trod her
muffled floors. Why, then, should he be fluttered now? Gertrude was
herself in all places, and (once granted that she was at peace) to be
at her side was to drink peace as fully in one place as in another.

Richard accordingly ate a great working-day dinner in Gertrude's
despite, and she ate a small one for his sake. She asked questions
moreover, and offered counsel with most sisterly freedom. She deplored
the rents in his table-cloth, and the dismemberments of his furniture;
and although by no means absurdly fastidious in the matter of household
elegance, she could not but think that Richard would be a happier and a
better man if he were a little more comfortable. She forbore, however,
to criticise the poverty of his _entourage_, for she felt that the
obvious answer was, that such a state of things was the penalty of his
living alone; and it was desirable, under the circumstances, that this
idea should remain implied.

When at last Gertrude began to bethink herself of going, Richard broke a
long silence by the following question: "Gertrude, _do_ you love that
man?"

"Richard," she answered, "I refused to tell you before, because you
asked the question as a right. Of course you do so no longer. No. I do
not love him. I have been near it,--but I have missed it. And now good
by."

For a week after her visit, Richard worked as bravely and steadily as he
had done before it. But one morning he woke up lifeless, morally
speaking. His strength had suddenly left him. He had been straining his
faith in himself to a prodigious tension, and the chord had suddenly
snapped. In the hope that Gertrude's tender fingers might repair it, he
rode over to her towards evening. On his way through the village, he
found people gathered in knots, reading fresh copies of the Boston
newspapers over each other's shoulders, and learned that tidings had
just come of a great battle in Virginia, which was also a great defeat.
He procured a copy of the paper from a man who had read it out, and made
haste to Gertrude's dwelling.

Gertrude received his story with those passionate imprecations and
regrets which were then in fashion. Before long, Major Luttrel presented
himself, and for half an hour there was no talk but about the battle.
The talk, however, was chiefly between Gertrude and the Major, who found
considerable ground for difference, she being a great radical and he a
decided conservative. Richard sat by, listening apparently, but with the
appearance of one to whom the matter of the discourse was of much less
interest than the manner of those engaged in it. At last, when tea was
announced, Gertrude told her friends, very frankly, that she would not
invite them to remain,--that her heart was too heavy with her country's
woes, and with the thought of so great a butchery, to allow her to play
the hostess,--and that, in short, she was in the humor to be alone. Of
course there was nothing for the gentlemen but to obey; but Richard went
out cursing the law, under which, in the hour of his mistress's sorrow,
his company was a burden and not a relief. He watched in vain, as he
bade her farewell, for some little sign that she would fain have him
stay, but that as she wished to get rid of his companion civility
demanded that she should dismiss them both. No such sign was
forthcoming, for the simple reason that Gertrude was sensible of no
conflict between her desires. The men mounted their horses in silence,
and rode slowly along the lane which led from Miss Whittaker's stables
to the high-road. As they approached the top of the lane, they perceived
in the twilight a mounted figure coming towards them. Richard's heart
began to beat with an angry foreboding, which was confirmed as the rider
drew near and disclosed Captain Severn's features. Major Luttrel and he,
being bound in courtesy to a brief greeting, pulled up their horses; and
as an attempt to pass them in narrow quarters would have been a greater
incivility than even Richard was prepared to commit, he likewise
halted.

"This is ugly news, isn't it?" said Severn. "It has determined me to go
back to-morrow."

"Go back where?" asked Richard.

"To my regiment."

"Are you well enough?" asked Major Luttrel. "How is that wound?"

"It's so much better that I believe it can finish getting well down
there as easily as here. Good by, Major. I hope we shall meet again."
And he shook hands with Major Luttrel. "Good by, Mr. Clare." And,
somewhat to Richard's surprise, he stretched over and held out his hand
to him.

Richard felt that it was tremulous, and, looking hard into his face, he
thought it wore a certain unwonted look of excitement. And then his
fancy coursed back to Gertrude, sitting where he had left her, in the
sentimental twilight, alone with her heavy heart. With a word, he
reflected, a single little word, a look, a motion, this happy man whose
hand I hold can heal her sorrows. "Oh!" cried Richard, "that by this
hand I might hold him fast forever!"

It seemed to the Captain that Richard's grasp was needlessly protracted
and severe. "What a grip the poor fellow has!" he thought. "Good by," he
repeated aloud, disengaging himself.

"Good by," said Richard. And then he added, he hardly knew why, "Are you
going to bid good by to Miss Whittaker?"

"Yes. Isn't she at home?"

Whether Richard really paused or not before he answered, he never knew.
There suddenly arose such a tumult in his bosom that it seemed to him
several moments before he became conscious of his reply. But it is
probable that to Severn it came only too soon.

"No," said Richard; "she's not at home. We have just been calling." As
he spoke, he shot a glance at his companion, armed with defiance of his
impending denial. But the Major just met his glance and then dropped his
eyes. This slight motion was a horrible revelation. He had served the
Major too.

"Ah? I'm sorry," said Severn, slacking his rein,--"I'm sorry." And from
his saddle he looked down toward the house more longingly and
regretfully than he knew.

Richard felt himself turning from pale to consuming crimson. There was a
simple sincerity in Severn's words which was almost irresistible. For a
moment he felt like shouting out a loud denial of his falsehood: "She is
there! she's alone and in tears, awaiting you. Go to her--and be
damned!" But before he could gather his words into his throat, they were
arrested by Major Luttrel's cool, clear voice, which in its calmness
seemed to cast scorn upon his weakness.

"Captain," said the Major, "I shall be very happy to take charge of your
farewell."

"Thank you, Major. Pray do. Say how extremely sorry I was. Good by
again." And Captain Severn hastily turned his horse about, gave him his
spurs, and galloped away, leaving his friends standing alone in the
middle of the road. As the sound of his retreat expired, Richard, in
spite of himself, drew a long breath. He sat motionless in the saddle,
hanging his head.

"Mr. Clare," said the Major, at last, "that was very cleverly done."

Richard looked up. "I never told a lie before," said he.

"Upon my soul, then, you did it uncommonly well. You did it so well I
almost believed you. No wonder that Severn did."

Richard was silent. Then suddenly he broke out, "In God's name, sir, why
don't you call me a blackguard? I've done a beastly act!"

"O, come," said the Major, "you needn't mind that, with me. We'll
consider that said. I feel bound to let you know that I'm very, very
much obliged to you. If you hadn't spoken, how do you know but that I
might?"

"If you had, I would have given you the lie, square in your teeth."

"Would you, indeed? It's very fortunate, then, I held my tongue. If you
will have it so, I won't deny that your little improvisation sounded
very ugly. I'm devilish glad I didn't make it, if you come to that."

Richard felt his wit sharpened by a most unholy scorn,--a scorn far
greater for his companion than for himself. "I am glad to hear that it
did sound ugly," he said. "To me, it seemed beautiful, holy, and just.
For the space of a moment, it seemed absolutely right that I should say
what I did. But you saw the lie in its horrid nakedness, and yet you let
it pass. You have no excuse."

"I beg your pardon. You are immensely ingenious, but you are immensely
wrong. Are you going to make out that I am the guilty party? Upon my
word, you're a cool hand. I _have_ an excuse. I have the excuse of being
interested in Miss Whittaker's remaining unengaged."

"So I suppose. But you don't love her. Otherwise--"

Major Luttrel laid his hand on Richard's bridle. "Mr. Clare," said he,
"I have no wish to talk metaphysics over this matter. You had better say
no more. I know that your feelings are not of an enviable kind, and I am
therefore prepared to be good-natured with you. But you must be civil
yourself. You have done a shabby deed; you are ashamed of it, and you
wish to shift the responsibility upon me, which is more shabby still. My
advice is, that you behave like a man of spirit, and swallow your
apprehensions. I trust that you are not going to make a fool of yourself
by any apology or retraction in any quarter. As for its having seemed
holy and just to do what you did, that is mere bosh. A lie is a lie, and
as such is often excusable. As anything else,--as a thing beautiful,
holy, or just,--it's quite inexcusable. Yours was a lie to you, and a
lie to me. It serves me, and I accept it. I suppose you understand me. I
adopt it. You don't suppose it was because I was frightened by those
big black eyes of yours that I held my tongue. As for my loving or not
loving Miss Whittaker, I have no report to make to you about it. I will
simply say that I intend, if possible, to marry her."

"She'll not have you. She'll never marry a cold-blooded rascal."

"I think she'll prefer him to a hot-blooded one. Do you want to pick a
quarrel with me? Do you want to make me lose my temper? I shall refuse
you that satisfaction. You have been a coward, and you want to frighten
some one before you go to bed to make up for it. Strike me, and I'll
strike you in self-defence, but I'm not going to mind your talk. Have
you anything to say? No? Well, then, good evening." And Major Luttrel
started away.

It was with rage that Richard was dumb. Had he been but a cat's-paw
after all? Heaven forbid! He sat irresolute for an instant, and then
turned suddenly and cantered back to Gertrude's gate. Here he stopped
again; but after a short pause he went in over the gravel with a
fast-beating heart. O, if Luttrel were but there to see him! For a
moment he fancied he heard the sound of the Major's returning steps. If
he would only come and find him at confession! It would be so easy to
confess before him! He went along beside the house to the front, and
stopped beneath the open drawing-room window.

"Gertrude!" he cried softly, from his saddle.

Gertrude immediately appeared. "You, Richard!" she exclaimed.

Her voice was neither harsh nor sweet; but her words and her intonation
recalled vividly to Richard's mind the scene in the conservatory. He
fancied them keenly expressive of disappointment. He was invaded by a
mischievous conviction that she had been expecting Captain Severn, or
that at the least she had mistaken his voice for the Captain's. The
truth is that she had half fancied it might be,--Richard's call having
been little more than a loud whisper. The young man sat looking up at
her, silent.

"What do you want?" she asked. "Can I do anything for you?"

Richard was not destined to do his duty that evening. A certain
infinitesimal dryness of tone on Gertrude's part was the inevitable
result of her finding that that whispered summons came only from
Richard. She was preoccupied. Captain Severn had told her a fortnight
before, that, in case of news of a defeat, he should not await the
expiration of his leave of absence to return. Such news had now come,
and her inference was that her friend would immediately take his
departure. She could not but suppose that he would come and bid her
farewell, and what might not be the incidents, the results, of such a
visit? To tell the whole truth, it was under the pressure of these
reflections that, twenty minutes before, Gertrude had dismissed our two
gentlemen. That this long story should be told in the dozen words with
which she greeted Richard, will seem unnatural to the disinterested
reader. But in those words, poor Richard, with a lover's clairvoyance,
read it at a single glance. The same resentful impulse, the same
sickening of the heart, that he had felt in the conservatory, took
possession of him once more. To be witness of Severn's passion for
Gertrude,--that he could endure. To be witness of Gertrude's passion for
Severn,--against that obligation his reason rebelled.

"What is it you wish, Richard?" Gertrude repeated. "Have you forgotten
anything?"

"Nothing! nothing!" cried the young man. "It's no matter!"

He gave a great pull at his bridle, and almost brought his horse back on
his haunches, and then, wheeling him about on himself, he thrust in his
spurs and galloped out of the gate.

On the highway he came upon Major Luttrel, who stood looking down the
lane.

"I'm going to the Devil, sir!" cried Richard. "Give me your hand on it."

Luttrel held out his hand. "My poor young man," said he, "you're out of
your head. I'm sorry for you. You haven't been making a fool of
yourself?"

"Yes, a damnable fool of myself!"

Luttrel breathed freely. "You'd better go home and go to bed," he said.
"You'll make yourself ill by going on at this rate."

"I--I'm afraid to go home," said Richard, in a broken voice. "For God's
sake, come with me!"--and the wretched fellow burst into tears. "I'm too
bad for any company but yours," he cried, in his sobs.

The Major winced, but he took pity. "Come, come," said he, "we'll pull
through. I'll go home with you."

They rode off together. That night Richard went to bed miserably drunk;
although Major Luttrel had left him at ten o'clock, adjuring him to
drink no more. He awoke the next morning in a violent fever; and before
evening the doctor, whom one of his hired men had brought to his
bedside, had come and looked grave and pronounced him very ill.


DOCTOR MOLKE.

A SKETCH FROM LIFE.


As my own fancy led me into the Greenland seas, so chance sent me into a
Greenland port. It was a choice little harbor, a good way north of the
Arctic Circle,--fairly within the realm of hyperborean barrenness,--very
near the northernmost border of civilized settlement. But civilization
was exhibited there by unmistakable evidences;--a very dilute
civilization, it is true, yet, such as it was, outwardly recognizable;
for Christian habitations and Christian beings were in sight from the
vessel's deck,--at least some of the human beings who appeared upon the
beach were dressed like Christians, and veritable smoke curled
gracefully upward into the bright air above the roofs of houses from
veritable chimneys.

We had been fighting the Arctic ice and the Arctic storms for so long a
time, that it was truly refreshing to get into this good harbor. The
little craft which had borne us thither seemed positively to enjoy her
repose, as she lay quietly to her anchors on the still waters, in the
calm air and the blazing sunshine of the Arctic noonday. As for myself,
I was simply wondering what I should find ashore. A slender fringe of
European custom bordering native barbarism and dirt was what I
anticipated; for, as I looked upon the naked rocks,--which there, as in
other Greenland ports, afforded room for a few straggling huts of native
fishermen and hunters, with only now and then a more pretentious white
man's lodge,--I could hardly imagine that much would be found seductive
to the fancy or inviting to the eye. A country where there is no soil to
yield any part of man's subsistence seemed to offer such a slender
chance for man in the battle of life, that I could well imagine it to be
repulsive rather than attractive; yet I was eager to see how poor men
might be, and live.

While thus looking forward to a novel experience, I was unconsciously
preparing myself for a great surprise. Whatever there might be of
poverty in the condition of the few dozens of human beings who there
forced a scanty subsistence from the sea, I was to discover one person
in the place who did in no way share it,--who, born as it might seem to
different destinies, yet, voluntarily choosing wild Nature for
companionship, and rising superior to the forbidding climate and the
general desolation, rejoiced here in his own strong manhood, and lived
seemingly contented as well with himself as with the great world of
which he heard from afar but the faint murmurs.

The anchors had been down about an hour, and the bustle and confusion
necessarily attending an entrance into port had subsided. The sails were
stowed, the decks were cleared up, and the ropes were coiled. A port
watch was set. The crew had received their "liberty," and there was much
wondering among them whether Esquimau eyes could speak a tender welcome.
Nor had the Danish flag been forgotten. That swallow-tailed emblem of a
gallant nationality--which, according to song and tradition, has the
enviable distinction of having

    "Come from heaven down, my boys,
    Ay, come from heaven down"--

was fluttering from a white flag-staff at the front of the
government-house, and we had answered its display by running up our own
Danish colors at the fore, and saluting them with our signal-gun in all
due form and courtesy.

Soon after reaching the anchorage I had despatched an officer to look up
the chief ruler of the place, and to assure him of the great pleasure I
should have in calling upon him, if he would name an hour convenient to
himself; and I was awaiting my messenger's return with some impatience,
when suddenly I heard the thump of his heavy sea boots on the deck
above. In a few moments he entered the cabin, and reported that the
governor was absent, but that his office was temporarily filled by a
gentleman who had been good enough to accompany him on board,--the
surgeon of the settlement, Doctor Molke; and then stepping aside, Doctor
Molke passed through the narrow doorway and stood before me, bowing. I
bowed in return, and bade him welcome, saying, I suppose, just what any
other person would have said under like circumstances, (not, however,
supposing for a moment that I was understood,) and then, turning to the
officer, I signified my wish that he should act as interpreter. But that
was needless. My Greenland visitor answered me, in pure, unbroken
English, with as little hesitation as if he had spoken no other language
all his life; and in conclusion he said: "I come to invite you to my
poor house, and to offer you my service. I can give you but a feeble
welcome in this outlandish place, but such as I have is yours; and if
you will accompany me ashore, I shall be much delighted."

The delight was mutual; and it was not many minutes before, seated in
the stern sheets of a whale-boat, we were pulling towards the land.

My new-found friend interested me at once. The surprise at finding
myself addressed in English was increased when I discovered that this
Greenland official bore every mark of refinement, culture, and high
breeding. His manner was wholly free from restraint; and it struck me as
something odd that all the self-possession and ease of a thorough man of
the world should be exhibited in this desert place. He did not seem to
be at all aware that there was anything incongruous in either his dress
or manner and his present situation; yet this man, who sat with me in
the stern sheets of a battered whale-boat, pulling across a Greenland
harbor to a Greenland settlement, might, with the simple addition of a
pair of suitable gloves, have stepped as he was into a ball-room without
giving rise to any other remark than would be excited by his bearing.

His graceful figure was well set off by a neatly fitting and closely
buttoned blue frock-coat, ornamented with gilt buttons, and embroidered
cuffs, and heavily braided shoulder-knots. A decoration on his breast
told that he was a favorite with his king. His finely shaped head was
covered by a blue cloth cap, having a gilt band and the royal emblems.
Over his shoulders was thrown a cloak of mottled seal-skins, lined with
the warm and beautiful fur of the Arctic fox. His cleanly shaven face
was finely formed and full of force, while a soft blue eye spoke of
gentleness and good-nature, and with fair hair completed the evidences
of Scandinavian birth.

My curiosity became much excited. "How," thought I, "in the name of
everything mysterious, has it happened that such a man should have
turned up in such a place?" From curiosity I passed to amazement, as his
mind unfolded itself, and his tastes were manifested. I was prepared to
be received by a fur-clad hunter, a coppery-faced Esquimau, or a meek
and pious missionary, upon whose face privation and penance had set
their seal; but for this high-spirited, high-bred, graceful, and
evidently accomplished gentleman, I was not prepared.

I could not refrain from one leading observation. "I suppose, Doctor
Molke," said I, "that you have not been here long enough to have yet
wholly exhausted the novelty of these noble hills!"

"Eleven years, one would think," replied he, "ought to pretty well
exhaust anything; and yet I cannot say that these hills, upon which my
eyes rest continually, have grown to be wearisome companions, even if
they may appear something forbidding."

Eleven years among these barren hills! Eleven years in Greenland!!
Surely, thought I, this is something "passing strange."

The scene around us as we crossed the bay was indeed imposing, and,
though desolate enough, was certainly not without its bright and
cheerful side. Behind us rose a majestic line of cliffs, climbing up
into the clouds in giant steps, picturesque yet solid,--a great massive
pedestal, as it were, supporting mountain piled on mountain, with caps
of snow whitening their summits, and great glaciers hanging on their
sides. Before us lay the town,--built upon a gnarled spur of primitive
rock, which seemed to have crept from underneath the lofty cliffs, as a
serpent from its hiding-place, and, after wriggling through the sea, to
have stopped at length, when it had almost completely enclosed a
beautiful sheet of water about a mile long by half a mile broad, leaving
but one narrow, winding entrance to it. Through this entrance the swell
of the sea could never come to disturb the silent bay, which lay there,
nestling among the dark rocks beneath the mountain shadows, as calmly as
a Swiss lake in an Alpine valley.

But the rocky spur which supported on its rough back what there was of
the town wore a most woe-begone and distressed aspect. A few little
patches of grass and moss were visible, but generally there was nothing
to be seen but the cold gray-red naked rocks, broken and twisted into
knots and knobs, and cut across with deep and ugly cracks. I could but
wonder that on such a dreary spot man should ever think of seeking a
dwelling-place; and my companion must have interpreted my thoughts, for
he pointed to the shore, and said playfully, "Ah! it is true, you behold
at last the fruits of wisdom and instruction,--a city founded on a
rock." And then, after a moment's pause, he added: "Let me point out to
you the great features of this new wonder. First, to the right there,
underneath that little, low, black, peaked roof, dwells the royal
cook,--a Dane who came out here a long time ago, married a native of
the country, and rejoices in a brood of half-breeds, among whom are four
girls, rather dusky, but not ill-favored. Next in order is the
government-house,--that pitch-coated structure near the flag-staff. This
is the only building, you observe, that can boast of a double tier of
windows. Next, a little higher up, you see, is my own lodge, bedaubed
with pitch, like the other, to protect it against the assaults of the
weather, and to stop the little cracks. Down by the beach, a little
farther on, that largest building of all is the store-house, &c., where
the Governor keeps all sorts of traps for trade with the natives, and
where the shops are in which the cooper fixes up the oil-barrels, and
where other like industrial pursuits are carried on. A little farther on
you observe a low structure where the oil is stored. On the ledge above
the shop you see another pitchy building. This furnishes quarters for
the half-dozen Danish employees,--fellows who, not having married native
wives, hunt and fish for the glory of Denmark. Near the den of these
worthies you observe another,--a duplicate of that in which lives the
cook. There lives the royal cooper; and not far from it are two others,
not quite so pretentious, where dwell the carpenter and blacksmith,--all
of whom have followed the worthy example of the cook, and have dusky
sons and daughters to console their declining years. You may perhaps be
able to distinguish a few moss-covered hovels dotted about here and
there,--perhaps there may be twenty of them in all, though there are but
few of them in sight. These are the huts of native hunters. At present
they are not occupied, for, being without roofs that will turn water,
the people are compelled to abandon them when the snow begins to melt in
the spring, and betake themselves to seal-skin tents, some of which you
observe scattered here and there among the rocks. And now I've shown you
everything,--just in time, too, for here we are at the landing."

We had drawn in close to the end of a narrow pier, run out into the
water on slender piles, and, quickly ascending some steps, the Doctor
led the way up to his house. The whole settlement had turned out to meet
us, men, women, children, and dogs,--which latter, about two hundred in
number, "little dogs and all," set up an ear-splitting cry, wild and
strangely in keeping with every other part of the scene, and like
nothing so much as the dismal evening concert of a pack of wolves. The
children, on the other hand, kept quiet, and clung to their mothers, as
all children do in exciting times; the mothers grinned and laughed and
chattered, "as becomes the gentler sex" in the savage state; while the
men, all smoking short clay pipes, (one of their customs borrowed from
civilization,) looked on with that air of stolid indifference peculiar
to the male barbarian. They were mostly dressed in suits of seal-skins,
but some of them wore greasy Guernsey frocks and other European
clothing. Many of the women carried cunning-looking babies strapped upon
their backs in seal-skin pouches. The heads of men and women alike were
for the most part capless; but every one of the dark, beardless faces
was surmounted by a heavy mass of straight, uncombed, and tangled
jet-black hair. There were some half-breed girls standing in little
groups upon the rocks, who, adding something of taste to the simple need
of an artificial covering for the body, were attired in dresses, which,
although of the Esquimau fashion, were quite neatly ornamented. While
passing through this curious crowd, the eye could not but find pleasure
in the novel scene, the more especially as the delight of these
half-barbarous people was excited to the highest pitch by the strange
being who had come among them.

But if what the eye drank in gave delight, less fortunate the nose; for
from about the store-house and the native huts, and, indeed, from almost
everywhere, welled up that horrid odor of decomposing oil and fish and
flesh peculiar to a fishing-town. On this account, if on no other, I
was not sorry when we reached our destination.

"You like not this Greenland odor?" said my conductor. "Luckily it does
not reach me here, or I should seek a still higher perch to roost
on";--saying which, he opened the door and led the way inside, first
through a little vestibule into a square hall, where we deposited our
fur coats, and then to the right, into a small room furnished with a
table, an old pine bench, a single chair, a case with glass doors
containing white jars and glass bottles having Latin labels, and
smelling dreadfully of doctor's stuffs.

"I always come through here," said my host, "after passing the town. It
gives the olfactories a new sensation. This, you observe, is the place
where I physic the people."

"Have you many patients, Doctor?" I inquired.

"Not very many; but, considering that I go sometimes a hundred miles or
so to see the suffering sinners, I have quite enough to satisfy me. Not
much competition, you know. But come, we have some lunch waiting for us
in the next room, and Sophy will be growing impatient."

A lady, eh?

The room into which the Doctor ushered me was neatly furnished. On the
walls were hung some prints and paintings of fruits and animals and
flowers, and in the centre stood a small round table covered with dishes
carefully placed on a snowy cloth.

All very nice, but who's Sophy?

The Doctor tinkled a little bell, the tones of which told that it was
silver; and then, all radiant with smiles and beaming with good-nature,
Sophy entered. A strange apparition.

"This is my housekeeper," said the Doctor, in explanation; "speak to the
American, Sophy."

And, without embarrassment or pausing for an instant, she advanced and
bade me welcome, addressing me in fair English, and extending at the
same time a delicate little hand, which peeped out from cuffs of
eider-down. "I am glad," said she, "to see the American. I have been
looking through the window at him ever since he left the ship."

"Now, Sophy," said the Doctor, "let us see what you have got us for
lunch."

"O, I haven't anything at all, Doctor Molke," answered Sophy; "but I
hope the American will excuse me until dinner, when I have some nice
trout and venison."

"'Pot-luck,' as I told you," exclaimed my host. "But never mind, Sophy,
let's have it, be it what it may." And Sophy tripped lightly out of the
room to do her master's bidding.

"A right good girl that," said the Doctor, when the door was closed.
"Takes capital care of me."

Strange Sophy! A pretty face of dusky hue, and a fine figure attired in
native costume, neatly ornamented and arranged with cultivated taste.
Pantaloons of mottled seal-skin, and of silvery lustre, tapered down
into long white boots, which enclosed the neatest of ankles and the
daintiest of feet. A little jacket of Scotch plaid, with a collar and
border of fur, covered the body to the waist, while from beneath the
collar peeped up a pure white cambric handkerchief, covering the throat;
and heavy masses of glossy black hair were intertwined with ribbons of
gay red. Marvellous Sophy! Dusky daughter of a Danish father and a
native mother. From her mother she had her rich brunette complexion and
raven hair; from her father, Saxon features, and light blue Saxon eyes.

If the housekeeper attracted my attention, so did the dishes which she
set before me. Smoked salmon of exquisite delicacy, reindeer sausages,
reindeer tongues nicely dried and thinly sliced, and fine fresh Danish
bread, made up a style of "pot-luck" calculated to cause a hungry man
from the high seas and sailors' "prog" to wish for the same style of
luck for the remainder of his days. But when all this came to be washed
down with the contents of sundry bottles with which Sophy dotted the
clean white cloth, the "luck" was perfect, and there was nothing further
to desire.

"Ah! here we are," said my entertainer. "Sophy wishes to make amends for
the dryness of her fare. This is a choice Margaux, and I can recommend
it. But, Sophy, here, you haven't warmed this quite enough. Ah! my dear
sir, you experience the trouble of a Greenland life. One can never get
his wines properly tempered."

One cannot get his wines properly tempered!--and this is the trouble of
a Greenland life!! "Surely," thought I, "one might find something worse
than this."

"Here," picking up the next bottle, "we have some Johannisberg, very
fine as I can assure you; but I have little fancy even for the best of
these Rhenish wines. Too much like a pretty woman without soul. They
never warm the imagination. There's something better to build upon there
close beside your elbow. Since the claret's forbidden us for the
present, I'll drink you welcome in that rich Madeira. Why, do you know,
sir," rattled on the Doctor, as I passed the bottle, seemingly rejoiced
in his very heart at having some one to talk to,--"do you know, sir,
that I have kept that by me here these ten years past? My good old
father sent it to me as a mark of special favor. Why, sir, it has a
pedigree as long as one of Locksley's cloth-yard shafts. But the
pedigree will keep: let's prove it,"--and he filled up two dainty French
straw-stem glasses, and pledged me in the good old Danish style. Then,
when the claret came back, this time all rightly tempered, the Doctor
filled the glasses, and hoped that, when I "left this place, the girls
would pull lustily on the tow-ropes."

Hunger and thirst were soon appeased. "And now," said the Doctor, when
this was done, "I know you are dying for the want of something fresh and
green. You have probably tasted nothing that grew out of dear old Mother
Earth since leaving home";--and he tinkled his silver bell again, and
Sophy of the silver seal-skin pantaloons and dainty boots tripped softly
through the door.

"Sophy, haven't you a surprise for the American?"

Sophy smiled knowingly, and said, "Yes," as she retreated. In a moment
she came back, carrying a little silver dish, with a little green
pyramid upon it. Out from the green peeped little round red
globes,--_radishes_, as I lived!--round red radishes!--_ten_ round red
radishes!

"What! radishes in Greenland!" I exclaimed involuntarily.

"Yes, and raised on my own farm, too; you shall see it by and by." The
Doctor was enjoying my surprise, and Sophy looked on with undisguised
satisfaction. Meanwhile I lost no time in tumbling the pyramid to
pieces, and crunching the delicious bulbs. They disappeared in a
twinkling. Their rich and luscious juices seemed to pour at once into
the very blood, and to tingle at the very finger-tips. I never knew
before the full enjoyment of the fresh growth of the soil. After so long
a deprivation it was indeed a strange, as it will remain a lasting
sensation. Never to my dying day shall I forget the ten radishes of
Greenland.

"You see that I was right," exclaimed my host, after the vigorous
assault was ended. "And now," continued he, addressing Sophy, "bring the
other things."

The "other things" proved to be a plate of fine lettuce, a bit of
Stilton cheese, and coffee in transparent little china cups, and sugar
in a silver bowl, and then cigars,--everything of the best and purest;
and as we passed from one thing to another, I became at length persuaded
that the Arctic Circle was a myth, that my cruise among the icebergs was
a dream, and that Greenland was set down wrongly on the maps. Long
before this I had been convinced that Doctor Molke was a most mysterious
character, and wholly unaccountable.

After we had finished this sumptuous lunch and chatted for a while, the
Doctor surprised me again by asking if I would like a game of billiards.
(Billiards in Greenland, as well as radishes!) "But first," said he,
"let us try this sunny Burgundy. Ah! these red wines are the only truly
generous wines. They monopolize all the sensuous glories and
associations of the fruit. With these red wines one drinks in the very
soul and sentiment of the lands which grow the grapes that breed them."

"Even if drank in Greenland?"

"Yes, or at the very Pole. Geographical lines may confine our bodies;
but nature is an untamed wild, where the spirit roams at will. If I am
here hemmed in by barren hills, and live in a desert waste, yet, as one
of your sweetest poets has put it, my

            'Fancy, like the finger of a clock,
    Runs the great circuit and is still at home';

and truly, I believe that I have in this retreat about as much enjoyment
of life as they who taste of it more freely; for while I can here feel
all the world's warm pulsations, I am freed from its annoyances: if the
sweet is less sweet, the bitter is less bitter. But--Well, let's have
the billiards."

My host now led the way into the billiard-room, which was tastefully
ornamented with everything needful to harmonize with a handsome table
standing in its centre, upon which we were soon knocking the balls about
in an ill-matched game, for he beat me sadly. I was much surprised at
the skilfulness of his play, and remarked that I thought it something
singular that he "should there find any one to keep him so well in
hand."

"Ah! my dear sir," said he, "you have yet much to learn. This country is
not so bad as you think for. Sophy--native-born Sophy--is my antagonist,
and she beats me three times out of five." Wonderful Sophy!

The game finished, my host next led the way into his study. A charming
retreat as ever human wit and ingenuity devised. It was indeed rather a
parlor than a study. The room was quite large, and was literally filled
with odd bits of furniture, elegant and well kept. Heavy crimson
curtains were draped about the windows, a rich crimson carpet covered
the floor, and there were lounges and chairs of various patterns,
adapted for every temper of mind or mood of body,--all of the same
pleasing color. Odd _étagères_, hanging and standing, and a large solid
walnut case, were all well filled with books, and other books were
carefully arranged on a table in the centre of the room. Among them my
eye quickly detected the works of various English authors, conspicuous
among which were Shakespeare, Byron, Scott, Dickens, Cooper, and
Washington Irving. Sam Slick had a place there, and close beside him was
the renowned Lemuel Gulliver; and in science there were, beside many
others, Brewster, Murchison, and Lyell. The books all showed that they
were well used, and they embraced the principal classical stores of the
French and German tongues, beside the English and his own native Danish.
In short, the collection was precisely such as one would expect to find
in any civilized place, where means were not wanting, the disposition to
read a habit and a pleasure, and the books themselves boon companions.

A charming feature of the room was the air of refreshing _négligé_ with
which sundry robes of bear and fox skins were tossed about upon the
chairs and lounges and floor; while the blank spaces of the walls were
broken by numerous pictures, some of them apparently family relics, and
on little brackets were various souvenirs of art and travel.

"I call this my study," said the Doctor; "but in truth there is the real
shop";--and he led me into a little room adjoining, in which there was
but one window, one table, one chair, no shelves, a great number of
books, lying about in every direction, and great quantities of paper. On
the wall hung about two dozen pipes of various shapes and sizes, and a
fine assortment of guns and rifles and all the paraphernalia of a
practised sportsman. It was easy to see that there was one place where
the native-born Sophy did not come.

The chamber of this singular Greenland recluse was in keeping with his
study. The walls were painted light blue, a blue carpet adorned the
floor, blue curtains softened the light which stole through the windows,
and blue hangings cast a pleasant hue over a snowy pillow. Although
small, there was indeed nothing wanting, not even a well-arranged
bath-room,--nothing that the most fastidious taste could covet or
desire.

"And now," said my entertainer, when we had got seated in the study,
"does this present attractions sufficient to tempt you from your narrow
bunk on shipboard? You are most heartily welcome to that blue den which
you admire so much, and which I am heartily sick of, while I can make
for myself a capital 'shake-down' here, or _vice versa_. If neither of
these will suit you, then cast your eyes out of the window, and you will
observe snow enough to build a more truly Arctic lodging."

I stepped to the window, and there, sure enough, piled up beneath it and
against the house, was a great bank of snow, which the summer's sun had
not yet dissolved; and as I saw this, and then looked beyond it over the
wretched little village, and the desolate waste of rocks on which it
stood, and then on up the craggy steeps to the great white-topped
mountains, I could but wonder what strange occurrence had sent this
luxury-loving man, with books only for companions, into such a howling
wilderness. Was it his own fancy? or was it some cruel necessity? In
truth, the surprise was so great that I found myself suddenly turning
from the scene outside to that within, not indeed without an impulse
that the whole thing might have vanished in the interval, as the palace
of Aladdin in the Arabian tale.

My host was watching me attentively, no doubt reading my thoughts, for
as I turned round he asked if I "liked the contrast." To be quite
candid, I was forced to own myself greatly wondering "that a den so well
fitted for the latitude of Paris should be stumbled upon away up here so
near the Pole."

"Hardly in keeping with 'the eternal fitness of things,' eh?"

"Precisely so."

"You think, then, because a fellow chooses to live in barbarous
Greenland, he must needs turn barbarian?"

"Not exactly that, but we are in the habit of associating the
appreciation of comfort and luxury with the desire for social
intercourse,--certainly not with banishment like this."

"Then you would be inclined to think there is something unnatural, in
short, mysterious, in my being here,--tastes, fancies, inclinations, and
all?"

"I confess it would so strike me, if I took the liberty to speculate
upon it."

"Very far from the truth, I do assure you. I am not obliged to be here
any more than you are. I came from pure choice, and am at liberty to
return when I please. In truth, I do go home with the ship to
Copenhagen, once in three or four years, and spend a winter there,
living the while in a den much like what you here see; but I am always
glad enough to get back again. The salary which I receive from the
government does not support me as I live, so you see _that_ is not a
motive. But I am perfectly independent, have capital health, lots of
adventure, hardship enough (for you must know that, if I do sleep under
a sky-blue canopy, I am esteemed one of the most hardy men in all
Greenland) to satisfy the most insatiate appetite and perverse
disposition."

"Sufficient reason, I should say, for a year or so, but hardly one would
think, for a lifetime."

"Why not?"

"Because the novelty of adventure wears off in a little time. Good
health never gives us satisfaction, for we do not give it thought until
we lose it, so that can never be an impelling motive; and as for
independence, what is that, when one can never be freed from himself? In
short, I should say one so circumstanced as you are would die of ennui;
that his mind, constantly thrown back upon itself, must, sooner or
later, result in a weariness even worse than death itself. However, I am
only curious, not critical."

"But you forget these shelves. Those books are my friends; of them I
never grow weary, they never grow weary of me; we understand each other
perfectly,--they talk to me when I would listen, they sing to me when I
would be charmed, they play for me when I would be amused. Ah! my dear
sir, this country is great as all countries are great, each in its way;
and this is a great country to read books in. Upon my word, I wonder
everybody don't fill ships with books and come up here, burn the ships,
as did the great Spaniard, and each spend the remainder of his days in
devouring his ship-load of books."

"A pretty picture of the country, truly; but let me ask how often do
books reach you?"

"Once a year,--when the Danish ship comes out to bring us bread, sugar,
coffee, coal, and such-like things, and to take home the few little
trifles, such as furs, oil, and fish, which the natives have picked up
in the interval."

"Books to the contrary, I should say the ship would not return more than
once without me, were I in your situation."

"So you would think me a sensible fellow, no doubt, if I would pick up
this box and carry it off to Paris, or may be to New York?"

"That's exactly what I was thinking; or rather it would certainly have
appeared to me more reasonable if you had built it there in the first
instance."

"Quite the contrary, I do assure you,--quite the contrary. Indeed, I can
prove to your entire satisfaction that I am a very sensible man; but
wait until I have shown you all my possessions. Will you look at my
farm?"

Farm!--well, this was, after all, exhibiting some claims of the country
to the consideration of a civilized man. A farm in Greenland was
something I was hardly prepared for.

The Doctor now rose and led the way to the rear of the house, into a
yard about eighty feet square, enclosed by a high board fence.

"This is my farm," said the Doctor.

"Where?"

"Here, look. It isn't a large one." And he pointed to a patch of earth
about thirty feet long by four wide, enclosed with boards and covered
over with glass. Under the glass were growing lettuce, radishes, and
pepper-grass, all looking as bright and fresh and green and well
contented as if they, like the man for whose benefit they grew, cared
little where they sprouted, so only they grew. The ten round red
radishes of the recent luncheon were accounted for.

"So you see," exclaimed the Doctor, "something besides a lover of books
can take root in this country. Are you not growing reconciled to it? To
be sure they are fed on pap from home; but so does the farmer who
cultivates them get his books from the same quarter."

"How is that? Do you mean to say you bring the earth they grow in from
home?"

"Even so. This is good rich Jutland earth, brought in barrels by ship
from Copenhagen."

An imported farm! One more novelty.

"Now you shall see my barn";--and we passed over to a little tightly
made building in the opposite corner, where the first thing that greeted
my ears was the bleating of goats and the grunting of pigs; and as the
door was opened, I heard the cackling and flutter of chickens. Twenty
chickens, two pigs, and three goats!

"All brought from Copenhagen with the farm";--and the Doctor began to
talk to them in a very familiar manner in the Danish tongue. They all
recognized the kindly voice of their master, and flocked round him to be
fed; and while this was being done I observed that he had provided for
the safety of his brood by securing in the centre of their house a large
stove, which was now cold, but which in the winter must give them
abundant heat. And so the Doctor, besides his round red radishes and his
nice fresh butter, had pork and milk and eggs of native growth.

The next object of interest to attract attention was the Doctor's
"smoke-house," then in full operation. This was simply a large hogshead,
with one head pierced with holes and the other head knocked out. The end
without a head was set upon a circle of stones, which supported it about
a foot above the ground, and inside of this circle a great volume of
smoke was being generated, and which came puffing out through the holes
in the head above. Inside of this simple contrivance were suspended a
number of fine salmon, the delicate flesh of which was being dried by
the heat, and penetrated by the sweet aroma of the smoke, which came
puffing through the holes. The smoke arose from a smouldering fire of
the leaves and branches of the Andromeda (_Andromeda tetrigona_), the
heather of Greenland,--a trailing plant with a pretty purple blossom,
which grows in sheltered places in great abundance. Besides moss, this
is the only vegetable production of North Greenland that will burn, and
it is sometimes used by the natives for fuel, after it is dried by the
sun, for which purpose it is torn up and spread over the rocks. The
perfume of the smoke is truly delicious, which accounts for the
excellent flavor of the salmon which the Doctor had given me for lunch.
Nothing, indeed, could exceed the delicacy of the fish thus prepared.

The inspection of the Doctor's garden, or "farm," as he facetiously
called it, occupied us during the remainder of the afternoon; and so
novel was everything to me, from the Doctor down to his vegetables and
perfumed fish, that the time passed away unnoticed, and I was quite
astonished when Sophy came to announce "dinner."

We were soon seated at the table where we had been before, and Sophy
served the dinner. Her soup was excellent, the trout were of fine
quality and well cooked, the haunch was done to a turn, the wines were
this time rightly tempered, the champagne needed not to be iced, more of
the round red radishes appeared in season, and then followed lettuce and
cheese and coffee, and then we found ourselves at another game of
billiards, and at length were settled for the evening in the Doctor's
study, one on either side of a table, on which stood all the ingredients
for an arrack punch, and a bundle of cigars.

Our conversation naturally enough ran upon the affairs of the big world
on the other side of the Arctic Circle,--upon its politics and
literature and science and art, passing lightly from one to the other,
lingering now and then over some book which we had mutually fancied. I
found my companion perfectly posted up to within a year, and inquired
how he managed so well. "Ah! you must know," answered he, "that is a
clever little illusion of mine. I'm always precisely one year behind the
rest of the world. The Danish ship brings me a file of papers for the
past twelve months, the principal reviews and periodicals, the latest
maps, such books as I have sent for the year previous, and, beside this,
the bookseller and my other home friends make me up an assortment of
what they think will please me. Now, you see, in devouring this, I
pursue an absolute method. The books, of course, I take up as the fancy
pleases me; but the reviews, periodicals, and newspapers I turn over to
Sophy, and the faithful creature places on my breakfast-table every
morning exactly what was published that day one year before. Clever,
isn't it? You see I get every day the news, and go through the drama of
the year with perhaps quite as much satisfaction as they who live the
passing days in the midst of the occurring events. Each day's paper
opens a new act in the play, and what matters it that the 'news' is one
year old? It is none the less news to me; and, besides, are not Gibbon,
Shakespeare, and Mother Goose still more ancient?"

I could but smile at this ingenious device; and the Doctor, seeing
plainly that I was deeply interested in his novel mode of life, loosened
a tongue which, in truth, needed little encouragement, and rattled away
over the rough and smooth of his Greenland experiences, with an
enjoyment on his part perhaps scarcely less than mine; for it was easy
to see that his love of wild adventure kept pace with his love of
comfort, and that he heartily enjoyed the exposures of his career and
the reputation which his hardihood had acquired for him. I perceived,
too, that he possessed a warm and vivid imagination, and that, clothing
everything he saw and everything he did with a fitting sentiment of
strength or beauty, he had blended wild nature and his own strange life
into a romantic scheme which completely filled his fancy,--apparently,
at least, leaving nothing unsupplied,--and this he enjoyed to the very
bottom of his soul.

The hours glided swiftly away as we sat sipping our punch and smoking
our cigars in that quaint study of the Doctor's, chatting of this and of
that; and a novel feature of the evening was, that, as we talked on and
on, the light grew not dim with the passing hours; for when the hand of
a Danish clock which ticked above the mantel told nine, and ten, and
eleven o'clock, it was still broad day; and then in the full blaze of
sunshine the clock rang out the "witching hour" of midnight. The sun,
low down upon the northern horizon, poured his bright rays over the
hills and sea, throwing the dark shadow of the mountains over the town,
but illuminating everything to right and left with that soft and
pleasant light which we so often see at home in the early morning of the
spring.

After the clock had struck twelve, we threw our fur cloaks over our
shoulders, and strolled out into this strange midnight. Passing through
the town, I remarked the quiet which everywhere prevailed, and how all
nature seemed to have caught the inspiration of the hour. Not a soul was
stirring abroad; the dogs, crouching in clusters, were all asleep; and
it seemed as if my little vessel lay under the shadows of the cliffs
with a consciousness that midnight is a solemn thing even in sunshine;
and never did the sun shine more brightly, or a more brilliantly
illuminated landscape give stronger evidence of day. But wearied nature
had sought repose, even though no "sable cloud with silver lining"
turned upon the world its darkening shadow,--for the hour of rest was
come. Walking on over the rough rocks, we came at length upon the sea,
and I noticed that the very birds which were wont to paddle about in
great flocks upon the waters, or fly gayly through the air, had crawled
upon the shore, and, tucking their heads beneath their wings, had gone
to sleep. Even the little flowers and blades of grass seemed to droop,
as if wearied with the long hours of the day, and, defying the restless
sun to rob them of their natural repose, had fallen to sleep with the
beasts and birds. The very sea itself seemed to have caught the
infection of the hour, dissolving in its blue depths the golden clouds
of day.

The night was far from cold, and, selecting the most tempting and sunny
spot, we sat down upon a rock close beside the sea, watching the gentle
wavelets playing on the sand, and the changing light as the sun rolled
on, glistening upon the hills and upon the icebergs, which, in countless
numbers, lay upon the watery plain before us, like great monoliths of
Parian marble, waiting but for the sculptor's chisel to stand forth in
fluted pillar and solid architrave,--floating Parthenons and Pantheons
and Temples of the Sun.

The scene was favorable to the conversation which had been broken off
when we left the study, and the Doctor came back to it of his own
accord. I was much absorbed with the grandeur of this midnight scene,
and had remained for some time quiet. My companion, breaking in
abruptly, said: "I think I promised to prove to you that I am the most
sensible fellow alive. Now let me tell you, to begin with, that I would
not exchange this view for any other I have ever seen. It is one of
which I am very fond; for at this hour the repose which you here see is
frequently repeated; and, to compare big things with little, it might be
likened to some huge lion sleeping over his prey, which he is not yet
prepared to eat, quick to catch the first sound of movement. There is
something truly terrible in this untamed nature. Man's struggle here
gives him something to rejoice in; and I would not barter it for the
effeminate life to which I should be destined at home, on any account
whatever. Perhaps, if I should there be compelled absolutely to earn my
daily bread, the case might be different, for enforced occupation is
quite too sober an affair to give time for much reflection; but I should
most likely lead an idle sort of life there, and should simply live
without--so far as I can see--a motive. I should encounter few perils,
have few sorrows, fewer disappointments, and want for nothing,--nothing,
indeed, but temptation to exert myself, or prove my own manhood in its
strength, or enjoy the luxury of risking the precious breath of life,
which is so little worth, and which is so easily knocked away. You have
seen one side of me,--how I live. Well, I enjoy life and make the most
of it, after my own fashion, as everybody should do. If it is a
luxurious fashion, as you are pleased to say, it but gives me a keener
relish for the opposite; and that it does not unfit me for encountering
the hardships of the field is proved by the reputation for endurance
which I have among the natives. If I sleep between well-aired sheets one
night, I can coil myself up among my dogs on the ice-fields the next,
and sleep there as well,--I care not if it's as cold as the frigid
circle of Lucifer. If I have a _penchant_ for Burgundy, and like to
drink it out of French glass, I can drink train-oil out of a tin cup
when I am cold and hungry, and never murmur. I like well-fitting
clothes, but rough furs suit me just as well in season. Why, it would
make you laugh fit to kill yourself to see these Danish workingmen,--the
laborers, you know, with whom I sometimes travel,--fellows that can't
read nor write, poor mechanics, rough sailors, 'hewers of wood and
drawers of water' generally for this poor settlement,--who never tasted
Burgundy in all their lives, and would rather have one keg of corn
brandy than a tun of it, and who never took their frugal fare off
anything more tempting than tin. Do you think that these people can,
under any circumstances, be induced to strengthen their limbs with
eating blubber or drinking train-oil? Not a bit of it. Do you think they
can be induced to sleep outside of their own not overly elegant
lodgings, without groaning, and everlastingly desiring to get back
again? Not they."

I could not help asking the Doctor what impelled him to exposure, of
which he had grown so fond.

"The motives are various. I have done a good deal of exploring, have
reached many of the glaciers, have dabbled in natural history,
meteorology, magnetism, &c., &c., besides making many photographs and
geographical surveys, and have sent home to various societies and
museums many curiosities and much information. My name, as you know,
stands well enough among the dons of science. But apart from this, my
duties require me to travel about at all times and all seasons. You must
know that everybody in this country lives upon the shore, and therefore
the settlements are reached only by the sea. In the winter I travel over
the ice with my dog sledge, and in the summer, when the ice has broken
up, I go from place to place in that little five-ton yacht which you saw
lying in the harbor. Sometimes I go from choice, stopping at the
villages, and exhibiting my professional abilities upon Dane or native,
as the case may be. Often I am sent for. The Greenlanders don't like to
die any better than other people, and they all have an impression that,
if Dr. Molke only looks upon them, they are safe. So if an old woman but
gets the belly-ache, away goes her son or husband for the Doctor.
Perhaps it is in summer, and the distance may be a hundred miles or
more. No matter, he gets into his kayak and paddles through all sorts of
weather, and, at the rate of seven knots an hour, comes for me. Glad of
the excuse for a change, to say nothing (and the less perhaps any of us
say on that score the better) of the claims of humanity, I send Sophy
after Adam (a converted native), and directly along comes Adam with his
son Carl; and my medicine and instrument cases, my gun and rifle, and a
plentiful supply of ammunition, a tent, and some fur bedding, a lamp,
and other camp fixtures, and a little simple food, are put into the
boat, and off we go. Perhaps a gale springs up, and we are forced to
make a harbor in some little island; or perhaps it falls calm, and we
crawl into one, under oars. It is sure to be alive with ducks and geese
and snipe. The shooting is superb. Happen what may, come storm or calm
or fine weather, though often wet and cold, and frequently in danger,
yet I have a grand time of it. I may be back in a day, two days, a week,
or I may be gone a month. Then the winter comes back, and I have again
to answer another summons. The same traps are put on the sledge, to
which are harnessed the twelve finest dogs in the town,--my own
team,--and, at the wildest pace with which this wolfish herd can rush
along, Adam guides me to my destination. Perhaps it may be early in the
winter, and the ice is in places thin. We very likely break through, and
get wet, and are in danger of freezing. Perhaps we reach a crack which
we cannot pass, and have to hold on, possibly in a hut of snow, waiting
for the frost to build a bridge for us to pass. This is the wildest and
most dangerous of my experiences,--this dog-sledging it from place to
place in the early or late winter,--and I have had many wild adventures.
In the middle of the winter, when it is dark pretty much all the time,
and the snow is hard and crisp, and the clear, cold bracing air makes
the blood run freely through the veins, is the best time for travelling;
for then we may start a bear, and be pretty sure of catching him before
he gets on rotten ice or across a crack defying us in the pursuit."

By this time the sun had begun to climb above the hills, and the shadow
of the cliffs had passed over the town, so we stole back again to the
Doctor's house. The Doctor insisted that I should not sleep on board, so
we returned to the study, where I was soon wrapt in a sound sleep on the
Doctor's "shake-down," from which I never once awoke until there came a
loud tapping on the door.

"Who's there?"

"Sophy."

"What's Sophy want?"

"Breakfast."

Breakfast indeed! It was hard to believe that I was to come back to the
experiences of life under such a summons, for I had dreamed that I was
on a visit to the Man in the Moon, and was enjoying a genuine surprise
at finding him happy and well contented, seated in the centre of an
extinct volcano, with all the riches of the great satellite gathered
round him, hanging in tempting clusters on its horns.

But my eyes at length were opened wide enough to see, near by, the very
terrestrial ruins of our evening's pastime; and if these had left any
doubts upon my mind as to the reality of my present situation, those
doubts would certainly have been removed by the cheerful voice of the
Doctor; for a loud "Good morning!" came from out the painted chamber,
and from beneath the sky-blue canopy a graceful query of the night.
"What of the night, sleeper?--what of the night?" Then I was quickly out
upon the floor, and dressed, and in the cosey little room where the
fruits and flowers were hanging on the wall, and where the bright face
of Sophy, and aromatic coffee, and a charming little breakfast, were
awaiting us with a kindly welcome.

Breakfast over, I left the Doctor to expend his skill and knowledge on a
patient who had sent to claim his services, and strolled out over the
rocks behind the town,--wondering all the while at the strangeness of
the human fancy and its power on the will; and I reflected, too, and
remembered that, in the explanation of the satisfying character of the
life which my new-found friend was leading, there had been no clew given
to the first great motive which had destined such a finely organized and
altogether splendid man to such a career. Was he exempt from the lot of
other mortals, or must he too own, like all the rest of us, when we own
the truth, that every firm step we ever made in those days of our early
lives when steps were critical, was made to please a woman, to win her
slightest praise, to heal a wound or drown a sorrow of her making? I
would have given much to have the question answered, for then a thing
now mysterious would have become as plain as day; but there was no one
there to heed the question, or to give the answer, and I could only
wander on over the rough rocks, wondering more and more.


A STRUGGLE FOR LIFE.


One morning last April, as I was passing through Boston Common, which
lies pleasantly between my residence and my office, I met a gentleman
lounging along The Mall. I am generally preoccupied when walking, and
often thrid my way through crowded streets without distinctly observing
a single soul. But this man's face forced itself upon me, and a very
singular face it was. His eyes were faded, and his hair, which he wore
long, was flecked with gray. His hair and eyes, if I may say so, were
seventy years old, the rest of him not thirty. The youthfulness of his
figure, the elasticity of his gait, and the venerable appearance of his
head, were incongruities that drew more than one pair of curious eyes
towards him. He was evidently an American,--the New England cut of
countenance is unmistakable,--evidently a man who had seen something of
the world; but strangely old and young.

Before reaching the Park Street gate, I had taken up the thread of
thought which he had unconsciously broken; yet throughout the day this
old young man, with his unwrinkled brow and silvered locks, glided in
like a phantom between me and my duties.

The next morning I again encountered him on The Mall. He was resting
lazily on the green rails, watching two little sloops in distress, which
two ragged ship-owners had consigned to the mimic perils of the Pond.
The vessels lay becalmed in the middle of the ocean, displaying a
tantalizing lack of sympathy with the frantic helplessness of the owners
on shore. As the gentleman observed their dilemma, a light came into his
faded eyes, then died out, leaving them drearier than before. I wondered
if he, too, in his time, had sent out ships that drifted and drifted and
never came to port; and if these poor toys were to him types of his own
losses.

"I would like to know that man's story," I said, half aloud, halting in
one of those winding paths which branch off from the quietness of the
Pond, and end in the rush and tumult of Tremont Street.

"Would you?" replied a voice at my side. I turned and faced Mr. H----, a
neighbor of mine, who laughed heartily at finding me talking to myself.
"Well," he added, reflectingly, "I can tell you this man's story; and if
you will match the narrative with anything as curious, I shall be glad
to hear it."

"You know him then?"

"Yes and no. I happened to be in Paris when he was buried."

"Buried!"

"Well, strictly speaking, not buried; but something quite like it. If
you've a spare half-hour," continued my interlocutor, "we'll sit on this
bench, and I will tell you all I know of an affair that made some noise
in Paris a couple of years ago. The gentleman himself, standing yonder,
will serve as a sort of frontispiece to the romance,--a full-page
illustration, as it were."

The following pages contain the story that Mr. H---- related to me.
While he was telling it, a gentle wind arose; the miniature sloops
drifted feebly about the ocean; the wretched owners flew from point to
point, as the deceptive breeze promised to waft the barks to either
shore; the early robins trilled now and then from the newly fringed
elms; and the old young man leaned on the rail in the sunshine, wearily,
little dreaming that two gossips were discussing his affairs within
twenty yards of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three people were sitting in a chamber whose one large window overlooked
the Place Vendôme. M. Dorine, with his back half turned on the other two
occupants of the apartment, was reading the _Moniteur_, pausing from
time to time to wipe his glasses, and taking scrupulous pains not to
glance towards the lounge at his right, on which were seated
Mademoiselle Dorine and a young American gentleman, whose handsome face
rather frankly told his position in the family. There was not a happier
man in Paris that afternoon than Philip Wentworth. Life had become so
delicious to him that he shrunk from looking beyond to-day. What could
the future add to his full heart? what might it not take away? In
certain natures the deepest joy has always something of melancholy in
it, a presentiment, a fleeting sadness, a feeling without a name.
Wentworth was conscious of this subtile shadow, that night, when he rose
from the lounge, and thoughtfully held Julie's hand to his lip for a
moment before parting. A careless observer would not have thought him,
as he was, the happiest man in Paris.

M. Dorine laid down his paper and came forward. "If the house," he said,
"is such as M. Martin describes it, I advise you to close with him at
once. I would accompany you, Philip, but the truth is, I am too sad at
losing this little bird to assist you in selecting a cage for her.
Remember, the last train for town leaves at five. Be sure not to miss
it; for we have seats for M. Sardou's new comedy to-morrow night. By
to-morrow night," he added laughingly, "little Julie here will be an old
lady, ----'t is such an age from now until then."

The next morning the train bore Philip to one of the loveliest spots
within thirty miles of Paris. An hour's walk through green lanes brought
him to M. Martin's estate. In a kind of dream the young man wandered
from room to room, inspected the conservatory, the stables, the lawns,
the strip of woodland through which a merry brook sang to itself
continually; and, after dining with M. Martin, completed the purchase,
and turned his steps towards the station, just in time to catch the
express train.

As Paris stretched out before him, with its million lights twinkling in
the early dusk, and its sharp spires here and there pricking the sky, it
seemed to Philip as if years had elapsed since he left the city. On
reaching Paris he drove to his hotel, where he found several letters
lying on the table. He did not trouble himself even to glance at their
superscriptions as he threw aside his travelling surtout for a more
appropriate dress.

If, in his impatience to see Mademoiselle Dorine, the cars had appeared
to walk, the fiacre which he had secured at the station appeared to
creep. At last it turned into the Place Vendôme, and drew up before M.
Dorine's residence. The door opened as Philip's foot touched the first
step. The servant silently took his cloak and hat, with a special
deference, Philip thought; but was he not now one of the family?

"M. Dorine," said the servant slowly, "is unable to see Monsieur at
present. He wishes Monsieur to be shown up to the _salon_."

"Is Mademoiselle--"

"Yes, Monsieur."

"Alone?"

"Alone, Monsieur," repeated the man, looking curiously at Philip, who
could scarcely repress an exclamation of pleasure.

It was the first time that such a privilege had been accorded him. His
interviews with Julie had always taken place in the presence of M.
Dorine, or some member of the household. A well-bred Parisian girl has
but a formal acquaintance with her lover.

Philip did not linger on the staircase; his heart sang in his bosom as
he flew up the steps, two at a time. Ah! this wine of air which one
drinks at twenty, and seldom after! He hastened through the softly
lighted hall, in which he detected the faint scent of her favorite
flowers, and stealthily opened the door of the _salon_.

The room was darkened. Underneath the chandelier stood a slim black
casket on trestles. A lighted candle, a crucifix, and some white flowers
were on a table near by. Julie Dorine was dead.

When M. Dorine heard the indescribable cry that rang through the silent
house, he hurried from the library, and found Philip standing like a
ghost in the middle of the chamber.

It was not until long afterwards that Wentworth learned the details of
the calamity that had befallen him. On the previous night Mademoiselle
Dorine had retired to her room in seemingly perfect health. She
dismissed her maid with a request to be awakened early the next morning.
At the appointed hour the girl entered the chamber. Mademoiselle Dorine
was sitting in an arm-chair, apparently asleep. The candle had burnt
down to the socket; a book lay half open on the carpet at her feet. The
girl started when she saw that the bed had not been occupied, and that
her mistress still wore an evening dress. She rushed to Mademoiselle
Dorine's side. It was not slumber. It was death.

Two messages were at once despatched to Philip, one to the station at
G----, the other to his hotel. The first missed him on the road, the
second he had neglected to open. On his arrival at M. Dorine's house,
the servant, under the supposition that Wentworth had been advised of
Mademoiselle Dorine's death, broke the intelligence with awkward
cruelty, by showing him directly to the _salon_.

Mademoiselle Dorine's wealth, her beauty, the suddenness of her death,
and the romance that had in some way attached itself to her love for the
young American, drew crowds to witness the funeral ceremonies which took
place in the church in the Rue d'Aguesseau. The body was to be laid in
M. Dorine's tomb, in the cemetery of Montmartre.

This tomb requires a few words of description. First there was a grating
of filigraned iron; through this you looked into a small vestibule or
hall, at the end of which was a massive door of oak opening upon a short
flight of stone steps descending into the tomb. The vault was fifteen or
twenty feet square, ingeniously ventilated from the ceiling, but
unlighted. It contained two sarcophagi: the first held the remains of
Madame Dorine, long since dead; the other was new, and bore on one side
the letters J. D., in monogram, interwoven with fleurs-de-lis.

The funeral train stopped at the gate of the small garden that enclosed
the place of burial, only the immediate relatives following the bearers
into the tomb. A slender wax candle, such as is used in Catholic
churches, burnt at the foot of the uncovered sarcophagus, casting a dim
glow over the centre of the apartment, and deepening the shadows which
seemed to huddle together in the corners. By this flickering light the
coffin was placed in its granite shell, the heavy slab laid over it
reverently, and the oaken door revolved on its rusty hinges, shutting
out the uncertain ray of sunshine that had ventured to peep in on the
darkness.

M. Dorine, muffled in his cloak, threw himself on the back seat of the
carriage, too abstracted in his grief to observe that he was the only
occupant of the vehicle. There was a sound of wheels grating on the
gravelled avenue, and then all was silence again in the cemetery of
Montmartre. At the main entrance the carriages parted company, dashing
off into various streets at a pace that seemed to express a sense of
relief. The band plays a dead march going to the grave, but _Fra
Diavolo_ coming from it.

It is not with the retreating carriages that our interest lies. Nor yet
wholly with the dead in her mysterious dream; but with Philip Wentworth.

The rattle of wheels had died out of the air when Philip opened his
eyes, bewildered, like a man abruptly roused from slumber. He raised
himself on one arm and stared into the surrounding blackness. Where was
he? In a second the truth flashed upon him. He had been left in the
tomb! While kneeling on the farther side of the stone box, perhaps he
had fainted, and in the last solemn rites his absence had been
unnoticed.

His first emotion was one of natural terror. But this passed as quickly
as it came. Life had ceased to be so very precious to him; and if it
were his fate to die at Julie's side, was not that the fulfilment of the
desire which he had expressed to himself a hundred times that morning?
What did it matter, a few years sooner or later? He must lay down the
burden at last. Why not then? A pang of self-reproach followed the
thought. Could he so lightly throw aside the love that had bent over his
cradle. The sacred name of mother rose involuntarily to his lips. Was it
not cowardly to yield up without a struggle the life which he should
guard for her sake? Was it not his duty to the living and the dead to
face the difficulties of his position, and overcome them if it were
within human power?

With an organization as delicate as a woman's, he had that spirit which,
however sluggish in repose, can leap with a kind of exultation to
measure its strength with disaster. The vague fear of the supernatural,
that would affect most men in a similar situation, found no room in his
heart. He was simply shut in a chamber from which it was necessary that
he should obtain release within a given period. That this chamber
contained the body of the woman he loved, so far from adding to the
terror of the case, was a circumstance from which he drew consolation.
She was a beautiful white statue now. Her soul was far hence; and if
that pure spirit could return, would it not be to shield him with her
love? It was impossible that the place should not engender some thought
of the kind. He did not put the thought entirely from him as he rose to
his feet and stretched out his hands in the darkness; but his mind was
too healthy and practical to indulge long in such speculations.

Philip chanced to have in his pocket a box of wax-tapers which smokers
use. After several ineffectual attempts, he succeeded in igniting one
against the dank wall, and by its momentary glare perceived that the
candle had been left in the tomb. This would serve him in examining the
fastenings of the vault. If he could force the inner door by any means,
and reach the grating, of which he had an indistinct recollection, he
might hope to make himself heard. But the oaken door was immovable, as
solid as the wall itself, into which it fitted air-tight. Even if he had
had the requisite tools, there were no fastenings to be removed: the
hinges were set on the outside.

Having ascertained this, he replaced the candle on the floor, and leaned
against the wall thoughtfully, watching the blue fan of flame that
wavered to and fro, threatening to detach itself from the wick. "At all
events," he thought, "the place is ventilated." Suddenly Philip sprang
forward and extinguished the light. His existence depended on that
candle!

He had read somewhere, in some account of shipwreck, how the survivors
had lived for days upon a few candles which one of the passengers had
insanely thrown into the long-boat. And here he had been burning away
his very life.

By the transient illumination of one of the tapers, he looked at his
watch. It had stopped at eleven,--but at eleven that day, or the
preceding night? The funeral, he knew, had left the church at ten. How
many hours had passed since then? Of what duration had been his swoon?
Alas! it was no longer possible for him to measure those hours which
crawl like snails by the wretched, and fly like swallows over the happy.

He picked up the candle, and seated himself on the stone steps. He was a
sanguine man, this Wentworth, but, as he weighed the chances of escape,
the prospect did not seem encouraging. Of course he would be missed. His
disappearance under the circumstances would surely alarm his friends;
they would instigate a search for him; but who would think of searching
for a live man in the cemetery of Montmartre? The Prefect of Police
would set a hundred intelligences at work to find him; the Seine might
be dragged, _les misérables_ turned over at the dead-house; a minute
description of him would be in every detective's pocket; and he--in M.
Dorine's family tomb!

Yet, on the other hand, it was here he was last seen; from this point a
keen detective would naturally work up the case. Then might not the
undertaker return for the candlestick, probably not left by design? Or,
again, might not M. Dorine send fresh wreaths of flowers, to take the
place of those which now diffused a pungent, aromatic odor throughout
the chamber? Ah! what unlikely chances! But if one of these things did
not happen speedily, it had better never happen. How long could he keep
life in himself?

With unaccelerated pulse, he quietly cut the half-burned candle into
four equal parts. "To-night," he meditated, "I will eat the first of
these pieces; to-morrow, the second; to-morrow evening, the third; the
next day, the fourth; and then--then I'll wait!"

He had taken no breakfast that morning, unless a cup of coffee can be
called a breakfast. He had never been very hungry before. He was
ravenously hungry now. But he postponed the meal as long as practicable.
It must have been near midnight, according to his calculation, when he
determined to try the first of his four singular repasts. The bit of
white-wax was tasteless; but it served its purpose.

His appetite for the time appeased, he found a new discomfort. The
humidity of the walls, and the wind that crept through the unseen
ventilator, chilled him to the bone. To keep walking was his only
resource. A sort of drowsiness, too, occasionally came over him. It took
all his will to fight it off. To sleep, he felt, was to die; and he had
made up his mind to live.

Very strange fancies flitted through his head as he groped up and down
the stone floor of the dungeon, feeling his way along the wall to avoid
the sepulchres. Voices that had long been silent spoke words that had
long been forgotten; faces he had known in childhood grew palpable
against the dark. His whole life in detail was unrolled before him like
a panorama; the changes of a year, with its burden of love and death,
its sweets and its bitternesses, were epitomized in a single second. The
desire to sleep had left him. But the keen hunger came again.

It must be near morning now, he mused; perhaps the sun is just gilding
the pinnacles and domes of the city; or, may be, a dull, drizzling rain
is beating on Paris, sobbing on these mounds above me. Paris! it seems
like a dream. Did I ever walk in its gay streets in the golden air? O
the delight and pain and passion of that sweet human life!

Philip became conscious that the gloom, the silence, and the cold were
gradually conquering him. The feverish activity of his brain brought on
a reaction. He grew lethargic, he sunk down on the steps, and thought of
nothing. His hand fell by chance on one of the pieces of candle; he
grasped it and devoured it mechanically. This revived him. "How
strange," he thought, "that I am not thirsty. Is it possible that the
dampness of the walls, which I must inhale with every breath, has
supplied the need of water? Not a drop has passed my lips for two days,
and still I experience no thirst. That drowsiness, thank Heaven, has
gone. I think I was never wide awake until this hour. It would be an
anodyne like poison that could weigh down my eyelids. No doubt the dread
of sleep has something to do with this."

The minutes were like hours. Now he walked as briskly as he dared up and
down the tomb; now he rested against the door. More than once he was
tempted to throw himself upon the stone coffin that held Julie, and make
no further struggle for his life.

Only one piece of candle remained. He had eaten the third portion, not
to satisfy hunger, but from a precautionary motive. He had taken it as a
man takes some disagreeable drug upon the result of which hangs safety.
The time was rapidly approaching when even this poor substitute for
nourishment would be exhausted. He delayed that moment. He gave himself
a long fast this time. The half-inch of candle which he held in his hand
was a sacred thing to him. It was his last defence against death.

At length, with such a sinking at heart as he had not known before, he
raised it to his lips. Then he paused, then he hurled the fragment
across the tomb, then the oaken door was flung open, and Philip, with
dazzled eyes, saw M. Dorine's form sharply defined against the blue sky.

When they led him out, half blinded, into the broad daylight, M. Dorine
noticed that Philip's hair, which a short time since was as black as a
crow's wing, had actually turned gray in places. The man's eyes, too,
had faded; the darkness had spoiled their lustre.

"And how long was he really confined in the tomb?" I asked, as Mr.
H----concluded the story.

_"Just one hour and twenty minutes!"_ replied Mr. H----, smiling
blandly.

As he spoke, the little sloops, with their sails all blown out like
white roses, came floating bravely into port, and Philip Wentworth
lounged by us, wearily, in the pleasant April sunshine.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. H----'s narrative made a deep impression on me. Here was a man who
had undergone a strange ordeal. Here was a man whose sufferings were
unique. His was no threadbare experience. Eighty minutes had seemed like
two days to him! If he had really been immured two days in the tomb, the
story, from my point of view, would have lost its tragic element.

After this it was but natural I should regard Mr. Wentworth with
deepened interest. As I met him from day to day, passing through the
Common with that same abstracted air, there was something in his
loneliness which touched me. I wondered that I had not before read in
his pale meditative face some such sad history as Mr. H---- had confided
to me. I formed the resolution of speaking to him, though with what
purpose was not very clear to my mind. One May morning we met at the
intersection of two paths. He courteously halted to allow me the
precedence.

"Mr. Wentworth," I began, "I--"

He interrupted me.

"My name, sir," he said, in an off-hand manner, "is Jones."

"Jo-Jo-Jones!" I gasped.

"Not Jo Jones," he returned coldly, "Frederick."

Mr. Jones, or whatever his name is, will never know, unless he reads
these pages, why a man accosted him one morning as "Mr. Wentworth," and
then abruptly rushed down the nearest path, and disappeared in the
crowd.

The fact is, I had been duped by Mr. H----. Mr. H---- occasionally
contributes a story to the magazines. He had actually tried the effect
of one of his romances on me!

My hero, as I subsequently learned, is no hero at all, but a commonplace
young man who has some connection with the building of that pretty
granite bridge which will shortly span the crooked little lake in the
Public Garden.

When I think of the cool ingenuity and readiness with which Mr.
H----built up his airy fabric on my credulity, I am half inclined to
laugh; though I feel not slightly irritated at having been the
unresisting victim of his Black Art.


FREEDOM IN BRAZIL.


    With clearer light, Cross of the South, shine forth
      In blue Brazilian skies;
    And thou, O river, cleaving half the earth
      From sunset to sunrise,
    From the great mountains to the Atlantic waves
      Thy joy's long anthem pour.
    Yet a few days (God make them less!) and slaves
      Shall shame thy pride no more.
    No fettered feet thy shaded margins press;
      But all men shall walk free
    Where thou, the high-priest of the wilderness,
      Hast wedded sea to sea.

    And thou, great-hearted ruler, through whose mouth
      The word of God is said,
    Once more, "Let there be light!"--Son of the South,
      Lift up thy honored head,
    Wear unashamed a crown by thy desert
      More than by birth thy own,
    Careless of watch and ward; thou art begirt
      By grateful hearts alone.
    The moated wall and battle-ship may fail,
      But safe shall justice prove;
    Stronger than greaves of brass or iron mail
      The panoply of love.

    Crowned doubly by man's blessing and God's grace,
      Thy future is secure;
    Who frees a people makes his statue's place
      In Time's Valhalla sure.
    Lo! from his Neva's banks the Scythian Czar
      Stretches to thee his hand
    Who, with the pencil of the Northern star,
      Wrote freedom on his land.
    And he whose grave is holy by our calm
      And prairied Sangamon,
    From his gaunt hand shall drop the martyr's palm
      To greet thee with "Well done!"

    And thou, O Earth, with smiles thy face make sweet,
      And let thy wail be stilled,
    To hear the Muse of prophecy repeat
      Her promise half fulfilled.
    The Voice that spake at Nazareth speaks still,
      No sound thereof hath died;
    Alike thy hope and Heaven's eternal will
      Shall yet be satisfied.
    The years are slow, the vision tarrieth long,
      And far the end may be;
    But, one by one, the fiends of ancient wrong
      Go out and leave thee free.


MY VISIT TO SYBARIS.


It is a great while since I first took an interest in Sybaris. Sybarites
have a bad name. But before I had heard of them anywhere else, I had
painfully looked out the words in the three or four precious anecdotes
about Sybaris in the old Greek Reader; and I had made up my boy's mind
about the Sybarites. When I came to know the name they had got
elsewhere, I could not but say that the world had been very unjust to
them!

O dear! I can see it now,--the old Latin school-room, where we used to
sit, and hammer over that Greek, after the small boys had gone. They
went at eleven; we--because we were twelve years old--stayed till
twelve. From eleven to twelve we sat, with only those small boys who had
been "kept" for their sins, and Mr. Dillaway. The room was long and
narrow; how long and how narrow, you may see, if you will go and examine
M. Duchesne's model of "Boston as it was," and pay twenty-five cents to
the Richmond schools. For all this is of the past; and in the same spot
in space where once a month the Examiner Club now meets at Parker's, and
discusses the difference between religion and superstition, the folly of
copyright, and the origin of things, the boys who did not then belong to
the Examiner Club, say Fox and Clarke and Furness and Waldo Emerson,
thumbed their Greek Readers in "Boston as it was," and learned the truth
about Sybaris! A long, narrow room, I say, whose walls, when I knew them
first, were of that tawny orange wash which is appropriated to kitchens.
But by a master stroke of Mr. Dillaway's these walls were made lilac or
purple one summer vacation. We sat, to recite, on long settees,
pea-green in color, which would teeter slightly on the well-worn floor.
There, for an hour daily, while brighter boys than I recited, I sat an
hour musing, looking at the immense Jacobs's Greek Reader, and waiting
my turn to come. If you did not look off your book much, no harm came to
you. So, in the hour, you got fifty-three minutes and a few odd seconds
of day-dream, for six minutes and two thirds of reciting, unless, which
was unusual, some fellow above you broke down, and a question passed
along of a sudden recalled you to modern life. I have been sitting on
that old green settee, and at the same time riding on horseback in
Virginia, through an open wooded country, with one of Lord Fairfax's
grandsons and two pretty cousins of his, and a fallow deer has just
appeared in the distance, when, by the failure of Hutchinson or Wheeler,
just above me, poor Mr. Dillaway has had to ask me, "Ingham, what verbs
omit the reduplication?" Talk of war! Where is versatility, otherwise
called presence of mind, so needed as in recitation at a public school?

Well, there, I say, I made acquaintance with Sybaris. Nay, strictly
speaking, my first visits to Sybaris were made there and then. What the
Greek Reader tells of Sybaris is in three or four anecdotes, woven into
that strange, incoherent patchwork of "Geography." In that place are
patched together a statement of Strabo and one of Athenæus about two
things in Sybaris which may have belonged some eight hundred years
apart. But what of that to a school-boy! Will your descendants, dear
reader, in the year 3579 A. D., be much troubled, if, in the English
Reader of their day, Queen Victoria shall be made to drink Spartan black
broth with William the Conqueror out of a conch-shell in New Zealand?

With regard to Sybaris, then, the old Jacobs's Greek Reader tells the
following stories: "The Sybarites were distinguished for luxury. They
did not permit the trades which made a loud noise, such as those of
brass-workers, carpenters, and the like, to be carried on in the heart
of the city, so that their sleep might be wholly undisturbed by
noise.... And a Sybarite who had gone to Lacedæmon, and had been invited
to the public meal, after he had sat on their wooden benches and
partaken of their fare, said that he had been astonished at the
fearlessness of the Lacedæmonians when he knew it only by report; but
now that he had seen them, he thought that they did not excel other men,
for he thought that any brave man had much rather die than be obliged to
live such a life as they did." Then there is another story, among the
"miscellaneous anecdotes," of a Sybarite who was asked if he had slept
well. He said, No, that he believed he had a crumpled rose-leaf under
him in the night. And there is yet another, of one of them who said that
it made his back ache to see another man digging.

I have asked Polly, as I write, to look in Mark Lemon's Jest-Book for
these stories. They are not in the index there. But I dare say they are
in Cotton Mather and Jeremy Taylor. Any way, they are bits of very cheap
Greek. Now it is on these stories that the reputation of the Sybarites
in modern times appears to depend.

Now look at them. This Sybarite at Sparta said, that in war death was
often easier than the hardships of life. Well, is not that true? Have
not thousands of brave men said it? When the English and French got
themselves established on the wrong side of Sebastopol, what did that
engineer officer of the French say to somebody who came to inspect his
works? He was talking of St. Arnaud, their first commander. "Cunning
dog," said he, "he went and died." Death was easier than life. But
nobody ever said he was a coward or effeminate because he said this.
Why, if Mr. Fields would permit an excursus in twelve numbers here, on
this theme, we would defer Sybaris to the 1st of April, 1868, while we
illustrated the Sybarite's manly epigram, which these stupid Spartans
could only gape at, but could not understand.

Then take the rose-leaf story. Suppose by good luck you were
breakfasting with General Grant, or Pelissier, or the Duke of
Wellington. Suppose you said, "I hope you slept well," and the great
soldier said, "No, I did not; I think a rose-leaf must have stood up
edgewise under me." Would you go off and say in your book of travels
that the Americans, or the French, or the English are all effeminate
pleasure-seekers, because one of them made this nice little joke? Would
you like to have the name "American" go down to all time, defined as
Webster[B] defines Sybarite?

     A-M[)E]R'I-CAN, _n._ [Fr. _Américain_, Lat. _Americanus_, from
     Lat. _America_, a continent noted for the effeminacy and
     voluptuousness of its inhabitants.] A person devoted to luxury
     and pleasure.

Should you think that was quite fair for your great-grandson's
grandson's descendant in the twenty-seventh remove to read, who is going
to be instructed about Queen Victoria and William the Conqueror?

Worst of all, and most frequently quoted, is the story of the
coppersmiths. The Sybarites, it is said, ordered that the coppersmiths
and brass-founders should all reside in one part of the city, and bang
their respective metals where the neighbors had voluntarily chosen to
listen to banging. What if they did? Does not every manufacturing city
practically do the same thing? What did Nicholas Tillinghast use to say
to the boys and girls at Bridgewater? "The tendency of cities is to
resolve themselves into order."

Is not Wall Street at this hour a street of bankers? Is not the Boston
Pearl Street a street of leather men? Is not the bridge at Florence
given over to jewellers? Was not my valise, there, bought in Rome at the
street of trunk-makers? Do not all booksellers like to huddle together
as long as they can? And when Ticknor and Fields move a few inches from
Washington Street to Tremont Street, do not Russell and Bates, and
Childs and Jenks, and De Vries and Ibarra, follow them as soon as the
shops can be got ready?

"But it is the motive," pipes up the old gray ghost of propriety, who
started this abuse of the Sybarites in some stupid Spartan black-broth
shop (English that for _café_), two thousand two hundred and twenty-two
years ago,--which ghost I am now belaboring,--"it is the motive. The
Sybarites moved the brass-founders, because they wanted to sleep after
the brass-founders got up in the morning." What if they did, you old rat
in the arras? Is there any law, human or divine, which says that at one
and the same hour all men shall rise from bed in this world? My
excellent milkman, Mr. Whit, rises from bed daily at two o'clock. If he
does not, my family, including Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, and Acts, will
not have their fresh milk at 7.37, at which time we breakfast or pretend
to. But because he rises at two, must we all rise at two, and sit
wretchedly whining on our respective camp-stools, waiting for Mr. Whit
to arrive with the grateful beverage? Many is the time, when I have been
watching with a sick child at five in a summer morning, when the little
fellow had just dropped into a grateful morning doze, that I have
listened and waited, dreading the arrival of the Providence morning
express. Because I knew that, a mile and a half out of Boston, the
engine would begin to blow its shrill whistle, for the purpose, I
believe, of calling the Boston station-men to their duty. Three or four
minutes of that _skre-e-e-e_ must there be, as that train swept by our
end of the town. And hoping and wishing never did any good; the train
would come, and the child would wake. Is not that a magnificent power
for one engine-man to have over the morning rest of thirty thousand
sleeping people, because you, old Spartan croaker, who can't sleep easy
underground it seems, want to have everybody waked up at the same hour
in the morning. When I hear that whistle, and the fifty other whistles
of the factories that have since followed its wayward and unlicensed
example, I have wished more than once that we had in Boston a little
more of the firm government of Sybaris.

For if, as it would appear from these instances, Sybaris were a city
which grew to wealth and strength by the recognition of the personal
rights of each individual in the state,--if Sybaris were a republic,
where the individual was respected, had his rights, and was not left to
the average chances of the majority of men,--then Sybaris had found out
something which no modern city has found out, and which it is a pity we
have all forgotten.

I do not say that I went through all this speculation at the Latin
school. I got no further there than to see that the Sybarites had got a
very bad name, and that the causes did not appear in the Greek Reader. I
supposed there were causes somewhere, which it was not proper to put
into the Greek Reader. Perhaps there were. But if there were, I have
never found them,--not being indeed very well acquainted with the lines
of reading in which those who wanted to find them should look for them.

       *       *       *       *       *

What I did find of Sybaris, when I could read Greek rather more easily,
and could get access to some decent atlases, was briefly this.

Well forward in the hollow of the arched foot of the boot of Italy, two
little rivers run into the Gulf of Tarentum. One was named Crathis, one
was named Sybaris. Here stood the ancient city of Sybaris, founded,
about the time of Romulus or Numa Pompilius, by a colony from Greece.
For two hundred years and more,--almost as long, dear Atlantic, as your
beloved Boston has subsisted,--Sybaris flourished, and was the Rome of
that region, ruling it from sea to sea.

It was the capital of four states,--a sort of New England, if you will
observe,--and could send three hundred thousand armed men into the
field. The walls of the city were six miles in circumference, while the
suburbs covered the banks of the Crathis for a space of seven miles. At
last the neighboring state of Crotona, under the lead of Milon the
Athlete (he of the calf and ox and split log), the Heenan or John
Morrissey of his day, vanquished the more refined Sybarites, turned the
waters of the Crathis upon their prosperous city, and destroyed it. But
the Sybarites had had that thing happen too often to be discouraged.
Five times, say the historians, had Sybaris been destroyed, and five
times they built it up again. This time the Athenians sent ten vessels,
with men to help them, under Lampon and Xenocritus. And they, with those
who stood by the wreck, gave their new city the name of Thurii. Among
the new colonists were Herodotus, and Lysias the orator, who was then a
boy. The spirit that had given Sybaris its comfort and its immense
population appeared in the legislation of the new state. It received its
laws from CHARONDAS, one of the noblest legislators of the world. Study
these laws and you will see that in the young Sybaris the individual had
his rights, which the public preserved for him, though he were wholly in
a minority. There is an evident determination that a man shall live
while he lives, and that, too, in no sensual interpretation of the
words.

Of the laws made by Charondas for the new Sybaris a few are preserved.

1. A calumniator was marched round the city in disgrace, crowned with
tamarisk. "In consequence," says the Scholiast, "they all left the
city." O for such a result, from whatever legislation, in our modern
Pedlingtons, great or little!

2. All persons were forbidden to associate with the bad.

3. "He made another law, better than these, and neglected by the older
legislators. For he enacted that all the sons of the citizens should be
instructed in letters, the city paying the salaries of the teachers. For
he held that the poor, not being able to pay their teachers from their
own property, would be deprived of the most valuable discipline." There
is FREE EDUCATION for you, two thousand and seventy-six years before the
date of your first Massachusetts free school; and the theory of free
education completely stated.

4. Deserters or cowards in battle had to sit in women's dresses in the
Forum three days.

5. With regard to the amendment of laws, any man or woman who moved one
did it with a noose round his neck, and was hanged if the people refused
it. Only three laws were ever amended, therefore, all which are recorded
in the history. Observe that the women might move amendments,--and think
of the simplicity of legislation!

6. The law provided for cash payments, and the government gave no
protection for those who sold on credit.

7. Their communication with other nations was perfectly free.

I might give more instances. I should like to tell some of the curious
stories which illustrate this simple legislation. Poor Charondas himself
fell a victim to it. One of the laws provided that no man should wear a
sword into the public assembly. No Cromwells there! Unfortunately, by
accident, Charondas wore his own there one day. Brave fellow! when the
fault was pointed out, he killed himself with it.

Now do you wonder that a city where there were no calumniators, no long
credit, no bills at the grocers, no fighting at town meetings, no
amendments to the laws, no intentional and open association with
profligates, and where everybody was educated by the state to letters,
proved a comfortable place to live in? It is of the old Sybaris that the
coppersmith and the rose-leaf stories are told; and it was the new
Sybaris that made the laws. But do you not see that there is one spirit
in the whole? Here was a nation which believed that the highest work of
a nation was to train its people. It did not believe in fight, like
Milon or Heenan or the old Spartans; it did not believe in legislation,
like Massachusetts and New York; it did not believe in commerce, like
Carthage and England. It believed in men and women. It respected men and
women. It educated men and women. It gave their rights to men and women.
And so the Spartans called them effeminate. And the Greek Reader made
fun of them. But perhaps the people who lived there were indifferent to
the opinions of the Spartans and of the Greek Reader. Herodotus lived
there till he died; wrote his history there, among other things. Lysias,
the orator, took part in the administration. It is not from them, you
may be sure, that you get the anecdotes which ridicule the old city of
Sybaris!

You and I would probably be satisfied with such company as that of
Herodotus and Charondas and Lysias. So we hunt the history down to see
if there may be lodgings to let there this summer, but only to find that
it all pales out in the ignorance of our modern days. The name gets
changed into Lupiæ; but there it turns out that Pausanias made "a
strange mistake," and should have written Copia,--which was perhaps
Cossa, or sometimes Cosa. Pyrrhus appears, and Hadrian rebuilds
something, and the "Oltramontani," whoever they may have been, ravage
it, and finally the Saracens fire and sack it; and so, in the latest
Italian itinerary you can find, there is no post-road goes near it, only
a _strada rotabile_ (wheel-track) upon the hills; and, alas! even the
_rotabile_ gives way at last, and all the map will own to is a _strada
pedonale_, or foot-path. But the map is of the less consequence, when
you find that the man who edited it had no later dates than the
beginning of the last century, when the family of Serra had transferred
the title to Sybaris to a Genoese family without a name, who received
from it forty thousand ducats yearly, and would have received more, if
their agents had been more faithful. There the place fades out of
history, and you find in your Swinburne, "that the locality has _never_
been thoroughly examined"; in your Smith's Dictionary, that "the whole
subject is very obscure, and a careful examination still much needed";
in the Cyclopædia, that the site of Sybaris is lost. Craven saw the
rivers Crathis and Sybaris. He seems not to have seen the wall of
Sybaris, which he supposed to be under water. He does say of Cassano,
the nearest town he came to, that "no other spot can boast of such
advantages." In short, no man living who has written any book about it
dares say that anybody has looked upon the certain site of Sybaris for
more than a hundred years.[C] If a man wanted to write a mythical story,
where could he find a better scene?

Now is not this a very remarkable thing? Here was a city, which, under
its two names of Sybaris or of Thurium, was for centuries the regnant
city of all that part of the world. It could call into the field three
hundred thousand men,--an army enough larger than Athens ever furnished,
or Sparta. It was a far more populous and powerful state than ever
Athens was, or Sparta, or the whole of Hellas. It invented and carried
into effect free popular education,--a gift to the administration of
free government larger than ever Rome rendered. It received and honored
Charondas, the great practical legislator, from whose laws no man shall
say how much has trickled down into the Code Napoleon or the Revised
Statutes of New York, through the humble studies of the Roman jurists.
It maintained in peace, prosperity, happiness, and, as its maligners
say, in comfort, an immense population. If they had not been as
comfortable as they were,--if a tenth part of them had received alms
every year, and a tenth part were flogged in the public schools every
year,--if one in forty had been sent to prison every year, as in the
happy city which publishes the "Atlantic Monthly,"--then Sybaris,
perhaps, would never have got its bad name for luxury. Such a city
lived, flourished, ruled, for hundreds of years. Of such a city all that
you know now with certainty is, that its coin is "the most beautifully
finished in the cabinets of ancient coinage"; and that no traveller even
pretends to be sure that he has been to the site of it for more than a
hundred years. That speaks well for your nineteenth century.

Now the reader who has come thus far will understand that I, having come
thus far, in twenty-odd years since those days of teetering on the
pea-green settee, had always kept Sybaris in the background of my head,
as a problem to be solved, and an inquiry to be followed to its
completion. There could hardly have been a man in the world better
satisfied than I to be the hero of the adventure which I am now about to
describe.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the reader remembers anything about Garibaldi's triumphal entry into
Porto Cavallo in Sicily in the spring of 1859, he will remember that,
between the months of March and April in that year, the great chieftain
made, in that wretched little fishing haven, a long pause, which was not
at the time understood by the journals or by their military critics, and
which, indeed, to this hour has never been publicly explained. I suppose
I know as much about it as any man now living. But I am not writing
Garibaldi's memoirs, nor, indeed, my own, excepting so far as they
relate to Sybaris; and it is strictly nobody's business to inquire as to
that detention, unless it interest the ex-king of Naples, who may write
to me, if he chooses, addressing Frederic Ingham, Esq., Waterville, N.
H. Nor is it anybody's business how long I had then been on Garibaldi's
staff. From the number of his staff-officers who have since visited me
in America, very much in want of a pair of pantaloons, or a ticket to
New York, or something with which they might buy a glass of whiskey, I
should think that his staff alone must have made up a much more
considerable army than Naples, or even Sybaris, ever brought into the
field. But where these men were when I was with him, I do not know. I
only know that there was but a handful of us then, hard-worked fellows,
good-natured, and not above our work. Of its military details we knew
wretchedly little. But as we had no artillery, ignorance was less
dangerous in the chief of artillery; as we had no maps to draw, poor
draughtsmanship did not much embarrass the engineer in chief. For me, I
was nothing but an aid, and I was glad to do anything that fell to me as
well as I knew how. And, as usual in human life, I found that a cool
head, a steady resolve, a concentrated purpose, and an unselfish
readiness to obey, carried me a great way. I listened instead of
talking, and thus got a reputation for knowing a great deal. When the
time to act came, I acted without waiting for the wave to recede; and
thus I sprang into many a boat dry-shod, while people who believed in
what is popularly called prudence missed their chance, and either lost
the boat or fell into the water.

This is by the way. It was under these circumstances that I received my
orders, wholly secret and unexpected, to take a boat at once, pass the
straits, and cross the Bay of Tarentum, to communicate at Gallipoli
with--no matter whom. Perhaps I was going to the "Castle of Otranto." A
hundred years hence anybody who chooses will know. Meanwhile, if there
should be a reaction in Otranto, I do not choose to shorten anybody's
neck for him.

Well, it was five in the afternoon,--near sundown at that season. I
went to dear old Frank Chaney,--the jolliest of jolly Englishmen, who
was acting quartermaster-general,--and told him I must have
transportation. I can see him and hear him now,--as he sat on his barrel
head, smoked his vile Tunisian tobacco in his beloved short meerschaum,
which was left to him ever since he was at Bonn, as he pretended, a
student with Prince Albert. He did not swear,--I don't think he ever
did. But he looked perplexed enough to swear. And very droll was the
twinkle of his eye. The truth was, that every sort of a thing that would
sail, and every wretch of a fisherman that could sail her, had been, as
he knew, and as I knew, sent off that very morning to rendezvous at
Carrara, for the contingent which we were hoping had slipped through
Cavour's pretended neutrality. And here was an order for him to furnish
me "transportation" in exactly the opposite direction.

"Do you know of anything, yourself, Fred?" said he.

"Not a coffin," said I.

"Did the chief suggest anything?"

"Not a nutshell," said I.

"Could not you go by telegraph?" said Frank, pointing up to the dumb old
semaphore in whose tower he had established himself. "Or has not the
chief got a wishing carpet? Or can't you ride to Gallipoli? Here are
some excellent white-tailed mules, good enough for Pindar, whom
Colvocoressis has just brought in from the monastery. 'Transportation
for one!' Is there anything to be brought back? Nitre, powder, lead,
junk, hard-tack, mules, horses, pigs, _polenta_, or _olla podrida_, or
other of the stores of war?"

No; there was nothing to bring back except myself. Lucky enough if I
came back to tell my own story. And so we walked up on the tower deck to
take a look.

Blessed St. Lazarus, chief of Naples and of beggars! a little felucca
was just rounding the Horse Head and coming into the bay, wing-wing. The
fishermen in her had no thought that they were ever going to get into
the Atlantic. May be they had never heard of the Ocean or of the
Monthly. Can that be possible? Frank nodded, and I. He filled up with
more Tunisian, beckoned to an orderly, and we walked down to the
landing-jetty to meet them.

_"Viva Italia!"_ shouted Frank, as they drew near enough to hear.

_"Viva Garibaldi!"_ cried the skipper, as he let his sheet fly and
rounded to the well-worn stones. A good voyage had they made of it, he
and his two brown, ragged boys. Large fish and small, pink fish, blue,
yellow, orange, striped fish and mottled, wriggled together, and flapped
their tails in the well of the little boat. There were even too many to
lie there and wriggle. The bottom of the boat was well covered with
them, and, if she had not shipped waves enough to keep them cool, the
boy Battista had bailed a plenty on them. Father and son hurried on
shore, and Battista on board began to fling the scaly fellows out to
them.

A very small craft it was to double all those capes in, run the straits,
and stretch across the bay. If it had been mine "to make reply," I
should undoubtedly have made this, that I would see the quartermaster
hanged, and his superiors, before I risked myself in any such
rattletrap. But as, unfortunately, it was mine to go where I was sent, I
merely set the orderly to throwing out fish with the boys, and began to
talk with the father.

Queer enough, just at that moment, there came over me the feeling that,
as a graduate of the University, it was my duty to put up those red,
white, and blue scaly fellows, who were flopping about there so briskly,
and send them in alcohol to Agassiz. But there are so many duties of
that kind which one neglects in a hard-worked world! As a graduate, it
is my duty to send annually to the College Librarian a list of all the
graduates who have died in the town I live in, with their fathers' and
mothers' names, and the motives that led them to College, with anecdotes
of their career, and the date of their death. There are two thousand
three hundred and forty-five of them I believe, and I have never sent
one half-anecdote about one! Such failure in duty made me grimly smile
as I omitted to stop and put up these fish in alcohol, and as I plied
the unconscious skipper with inquiries about his boat. "Had she ever
been outside?" "O signor, she had been outside this very day. You cannot
catch _tonno_ till you have passed both capes,--least of all such fine
fish as that is,"--and he kicked the poor wretch. Can it be true, as
C---- says, that those dying flaps of theirs, are exquisite luxury to
them, because for the first time they have their fill of oxygen? "Had he
ever been beyond Peloro?" "O yes, signor; my wife, Caterina, was herself
from Messina,"--and on great saints' days they had gone there often.
Poor fellow, his great saint's day sealed his fate. I nodded to
Frank,--Frank nodded to me,--and Frank blandly informed him that, by
order of General Garibaldi, he would take the gentleman at once on
board, pass the strait with him, "and then go where he tells you."

The Southern Italian has the reputation, derived from Tom Moore, of
being a coward. When I used to speak at school,

    "Ay, down to the dust with them,--slaves as they are!"--

stamping my foot at "dust," I certainly thought they were a very mean
crew. But I dare say that Neapolitan school-boys have some similar
school piece about the risings of Tom Moore's countrymen, which
certainly have not been much more successful than the poor little
Neapolitan revolution which he was pleased to satirize. Somehow or
other, Victor Emanuel is, at this hour, king of Naples. Coward or not,
this fine fellow of a fisherman did not flinch. It is my private opinion
that he was not nearly as much afraid of the enterprise as I was. I made
this observation at the moment with some satisfaction, sent Frank's man
up to my lodgings with a note ordering my own traps sent down, and in an
hour we were stretching out, under the twilight, across the little bay.

No! I spare you the voyage. Sybaris is what we are after, all this time,
if we can only get there. Very easy it would be for me to give you cheap
scholarship from the Æneid, about Palinurus and Scylla and Charybdis.
Neither Scylla nor Charybdis bothered me,--as we passed wing-wing
between them before a smart north wind. I had a little Hunter's Virgil
with me, and read the whole voyage,--and confused Battista utterly by
trying to make him remember something about Palinuro, of whom he had
never heard. It was much as I afterwards asked my negro waiter at Fort
Monroe about General Washington at Yorktown. "Never heard of him,
sir,--was he in the Regular army?" So Battista thought Palinuro must
have fished in the Italian fleet, with which the Sicilian boatmen were
not well acquainted. Messina made no objections to us. Perhaps, if the
sloop of war which lay there had known who was lying in the boat under
her guns, I might not be writing these words to-day. Battista went
ashore, got lemons, macaroni, hard bread, polenta, for themselves, the
_Giornale di Messina_ for me, and more Tunisian; and, not to lose that
splendid breeze, we cracked on all day, passed Reggio, hugged the shore
bravely, though it was rough, ran close under those cliffs which are the
very end of the Apennines,--will it shock the modest reader if I say the
very toe-nails of the Italian foot?--hauled more and more eastward, made
Spartivento blue in the distance, made it purple, made it brown, made it
green, still running admirably,--ten knots an hour we must have got
between four and five that afternoon,--and by the time the lighthouse at
Spartivento was well ablaze we were abreast of it, and might begin to
haul more northward, so that, though we had a long course before us, we
should at last be sailing almost directly towards our voyage's end,
Gallipoli.

At that moment--as in any sea often happens, if you come out from the
more land-locked channel into the larger body of water--the wind
appeared to change. Really, I suppose, we came into the steady southwest
wind which had probably been drawing all day up toward the Adriatic. In
two hours more we made the lighthouse of Stilo, and I was then tired
enough to crawl down into the fearfully smelling little cuddy, and,
wrapping Battista's heavy storm-jacket round my feet, I caught some sort
of sleep.

But not for very long. I struck my watch at three in the morning. And
the air was so unworthy of that name,--it was such a thick paste,
seeming to me more like a mixture of tar and oil and fresh fish and
decayed fish and bilge-water than air itself,--that I voted three
morning, and crawled up into the clear starlight,--how wonderful it was,
and the fresh wet breeze that washed my face so cheerily!--and I bade
Battista take his turn below, while I would lie there and mind the helm.
If--if he had done what I proposed, I suppose I should not be writing
these lines; but his father, good fellow, said: "No, signor, not yet. We
leave the shore now for the broad bay, you see; and if the wind haul
southward, we may need to go on the other tack. We will all stay here,
till we see what the deep-sea wind may be." So we lay there, humming,
singing, and telling stories, still this rampant southwest wind behind,
as if all the powers of the Mediterranean meant to favor my mission to
Gallipoli. The boat was now running straight before it. We stretched out
bravely into the gulf; but, before the wind, it was astonishing how
easily the lugger ran. He said to me at last, however, that on that
course we were running to leeward of our object; but that it was the
best point for his boat, and if the wind held, he would keep on so an
hour longer, and trust to the land breeze in the morning to run down the
opposite shore of the bay.

"If" again. The wind did not keep on. Either the pole-star, and the
dipper, and all the rest of them, had rebelled and were drifting
westward,--and so it seemed; or this steady southwest gale was giving
out; or, as I said before, we had come into the sweep of a current even
stronger, pouring from the Levantine shores of the Mediterranean full up
the Gulf of Tarentum. Not ten minutes after the skipper spoke, it was
clear enough to both of us that the boat must go about, whether we
wanted to or not, and we waked the other boy, to send him forward,
before we accepted the necessity. Half asleep, he got up, courteously
declined my effort to help him by me as he crossed the boat, stepped
round on the gunwale behind me as I sat, and then, either in a lurch or
in some misstep, caught his foot in the tiller as his father held it
firm, and pitched down directly behind Battista himself, and, as I
thought, into the sea. I sprang to leeward to throw something after him,
and found him in the sea indeed, but hanging by both hands to the
gunwale, safe enough, and in a minute, with Battista's help and mine, on
board again. I remember how pleased I was that his father did not swear
at him, but only laughed prettily, and bade him be quick, and step
forward; and then, turning to the helm, which he had left free for the
moment, he did not swear indeed, but he did cry "Santa Madre!" when he
found there was no tiller there. The boy's foot had fairly wrenched it,
not only from his father's hand, but from the rudder-head,--and it was
gone!

We held the old fellow firmly by his feet and legs, as he lay over the
stern of the boat, head down, examining the condition of the
rudder-head. The report was not favorable. I renewed the investigation
myself in the same uncomfortable attitude. The phosphorescence of the
sea was but an unsteady light, but light enough there was to reveal what
daylight made hardly more certain,--that the wrench which had been given
to the rotten old fixtures, shaky enough at best, had split the head of
the rudder, so that the pintle hung but loosely in its bed, and that
there was nothing available for us to rig a jury-tiller on. This
discovery, as it became more and more clear to each of us four in
succession, abated successively the volleys of advice which we were
offering, and sent us back to our more quiet "Santa Madres" or to
meditations on "what was next to best."

Meanwhile the boat was flying, under the sail she had before, straight
before the wind, up the Gulf of Tarentum.

If you cannot have what you like, it is best, in a finite world, to like
what you have. And while the old man brought up from the cuddy his
wretched and worthless stock of staves, rope-ends, and bits of iron, and
contemplated them ruefully, as if asking them which would like to assume
the shape of a rudder-head and tiller, if his fairy godmother would
appear on the top of the mast for a moment, I was plying the boys with
questions,--what would happen to us if we held on at this tearing rate,
and rushed up the bay to the head thereof. The boys knew no more than
they knew of Palinuro. Far enough, indeed, were we from their parish.
The old man at last laid down the bit of brass which he had saved from
some old waif, and listened to me as I pointed out to them on my map the
course we were making, and, without answering me a word, fell on his
knees and broke into most voluble prayer,--only interrupted by sobs of
undisguised agony. The boys were almost as much surprised as I was. And
as he prayed and sobbed, the boat rushed on!

Santa Madre, San Giovanni, and Sant' Antonio,--we needed all their help,
if it were only to keep him quiet; and when at last he rose from his
knees, and came to himself enough to tend the sheets a little, I asked,
as modestly as I could, what put this keen edge on his grief or his
devotions. Then came such stories of hobgoblins, witches, devils,
giants, elves, and fairies, at this head of the bay!--no man ever
returned who landed there; his father and his father's father had
charged him, and his brothers and his cousins, never to be lured to
make a voyage there, and never to run for those coves, though schools of
golden fish should lead the way. It was not till this moment, that,
trying to make him look upon the map, I read myself there the words, at
the mouth of the Crathis River, "Sybaris Ruine."

Surely enough, this howling Euroclydon--for Euroclydon it now was--was
bearing me and mine directly to Sybaris!

And here was this devout old fisherman confirming the words of Smith's
Dictionary, when it said that nobody had been there and returned, for
generation upon generation.

At a dozen knots an hour, as things were, I was going to Sybaris! Nor
was I many hours from it. For at that moment we cannot have been more
than five-and-thirty miles from the beach, where, in less than four
hours, Euroclydon flung us on shore.

The memory of the old green settees, and of Hutchinson and Wheeler and
the other Latin-school boys, sustained me beneath the calamity which
impended. Nor do I think at heart the boys felt so bad as their father
about the djins and the devils, the powers of the earth and the powers
of the air. Is there, perhaps, in the youthful mind, rather a passion
for "seeing the folly" of life a little in that direction? None the less
did we join him in rigging out the longest sweep we had aft, lashing it
tight under the little rail which we had been leaning on, and trying
gentle experiments, how far this extemporized rudder might bring the
boat round to the wind. Nonsense the whole. By that time Euroclydon was
on us, so that I would never have tried to put her about if we had had
the best gear I ever handled, and our experiments only succeeded far
enough to show that we were as utterly powerless as men could be.
Meanwhile day was just beginning to break. I soothed the old man with
such devout expressions as heretic might venture. I tried to turn him
from the coming evil to the present necessity. I counselled with him
whether it might not be safer to take in sail and drift along. But from
this he dissented. Time enough to take in sail when we knew what shore
we were coming to. He had no kedge or grapple or cord, indeed, that
would pretend to hold this boat against this gale. We would beach her,
if it pleased the Virgin; and if we could not,--shaking his head,--why,
that would please the Virgin, too.

And so Euroclydon hurried us on to Sybaris.

The sun rose, O how magnificently! Is there anywhere to see sunrise like
the Mediterranean? And if one may not be on the top of Katahdin, is
there any place for sunrise like the very level of the sea? Already the
Calabrian mountains of our western horizon were gray against the sky.
One or another of us was forward all the time, trying to make out by
what slopes the hills descended to the sea. Was it cliff of basalt, or
was it reedy swamp, that was to receive us. I insisted at last on his
reducing sail. For I felt sure that he was driving on under a sort of
fatality which made him dare the worst. I was wholly right, for the boat
now rose easier on the water, and was much more dry.

Perhaps the wind flagged a little as the sun rose. At all events, he
took courage, which I had never lost. I made his boy find us some
oranges. I made them laugh by eating their cold polenta with them. I
even made him confess, when I called him aft and sent Battista forward,
that the shore we were nearing looked low. For we were near enough now
to see stone pines and chestnut-trees. Did anybody see the towers of
Sybaris?

Not a tower! But, on the other hand, not a gnome, witch, Norna's Head,
or other intimation of the underworld. The shore looked like many other
Italian shores. It looked not very unlike what we Yankees call
salt-marsh. At all events, we should not break our heads against a wall!
Nor will I draw out the story of our anxieties, varying as the waves
did on which we rose and fell so easily. As she forged on, it was clear
at last that to some wanderers, at least, Sybaris had some hospitality.
A long, low spit made out into the sea, with never a house on it, but
brown with storm-worn shrubs, above the line of which were the
stone-pines and chestnuts which had first given character to the shore.
Hard for us, if we had been flung on the outside of this spit. But we
were not. Else I had not been writing here to-day. We passed it by fifty
fathom clear. Of course under its lee was our harbor. Battista let go
the halyards in a moment, and the wet sails came rattling down. The old
man, the boy, Battista, and I seized the best sweeps he had left. Two of
us at each, working on the same side, we brought her head round as fast
as she would bear it in that fearful sea. Inch by inch we wrought along
to the smoother water, and breathed free at last, as we came under the
partial protection of the friendly shore.

Battista and his brother then hauled up the sail enough to give such
headway to the boat as we thought our sweeps would control. And we crept
along the shore for an hour, seeing nothing but reeds, and now and then
a distant buffalo, when at last a very hard knock on a rock the boy
ahead had not seen under water started the planks so that we knew that
was dangerous play; and, without more solicitation, the old man beached
the boat in a little cove where the reeds gave place for a trickling
stream. I told them they might land or not, as they pleased. I would go
ashore and get assistance or information. The old man clearly thought I
was going to ask my assistance from the father of lies himself. But he
was resigned to my will,--said he would wait for my return. I stripped,
and waded ashore with my clothes upon my head, dressed as quickly as I
could, and pushed up from the beach to the low upland.

Clearly enough I was in a civilized country. Not that there was a
gallows, as the old joke says; but there were tracks in the shingle of
the beach showing where wheels had been, and these led me to a
cart-track between high growths of that Mediterranean reed which grows
all along in those low flats. There is one of the reeds on the hooks
above my gun in the hall as you came in. I followed up the track, but
without seeing barn, house, horse, or man, for a quarter of a mile,
perhaps, when behold,--

Not the footprint of a man! as to Robinson Crusoe;--

Not a gallows and man hanging! as in the sailor story above named;--

But a railroad track! Evidently a horse-railroad.

"A horse-railroad in Italy!" said I, aloud. "A horse-railroad in
Sybaris! It must have changed since the days of the coppersmiths!" And I
flung myself on a heap of reeds which lay there, and waited.

In two minutes I heard the fast step of horses, as I supposed; in a
minute more four mules rounded the corner, and a "horse-car" came
dashing along the road. I stepped forward and waved my hand, but the
driver bowed respectfully, pointed back, and then to a board on top of
his car, and I read, as he dashed by me, the word

[Greek: Plêron],

displayed full above him; as one may read _Complet_ on a Paris omnibus.

Now [Greek: Plêron] is the Greek for full. "In Sybaris they do not let
the horse-railroads grind the faces of the passengers," said I. "Not so
wholly changed since the coppersmiths." And, within the minute, more
quadrupedantal noises, more mules, and another car, which stopped at my
signal. I entered, and found a dozen or more passengers, sitting back to
back on a seat which ran up the middle of the car, as you might ride in
an Irish jaunting-car. In this way it was impossible for the conductor
to smuggle in a standing passenger, impossible for a passenger to catch
cold from a cracked window, and possible for a passenger to see the
scenery from the window. "Can it be possible," said I, "that the
traditions of Sybaris really linger here?"

I sat quite in the front of the car, so that I could see the fate of my
first friend [Greek: Plêron],--the full car. In a very few minutes it
switched off from our track, leaving us still to pick up our complement,
and then I saw that it dropped its mules, and was attached, on a side
track, to an endless chain, which took it along at a much greater
rapidity, so that it was soon out of sight. I addressed my next neighbor
on the subject, in Greek which would have made my fortune in those old
days of the pea-green settees. But he did not seem to make much of that,
but in sufficiently good Italian told me, that, as soon as we were full,
we should be attached in the same way to the chain, which was driven by
stationary engines five or six stadia apart, and so indeed it proved. We
picked up one or two market-women, a young artist or two, and a little
boy. When the child got in, there was a nod and smile on people's faces;
my next neighbor said to me, [Greek: Plêron], as if with an air of
relief; and sure enough, in a minute more, we were flying along at a
2.20 pace, with neither mule nor engine in sight, stopping about once a
mile to drop passengers, if there was need, and evidently approaching
Sybaris.

All along now were houses, each with its pretty garden of perhaps an
acre, no fences, because no cattle at large. I wonder if the Vineland
people know they caught that idea from Sybaris! All the houses were of
one story,--stretching out as you remember Pliny's villa did, if Ware
and Van Brunt ever showed you the plans,--or as Erastus Bigelow builds
factories at Clinton. I learned afterwards that stair-builders and
slaveholders are forbidden to live in Sybaris by the same article in the
fundamental law. This accounts, with other things, for the vigorous
health of their women. I supposed that this was a mere suburban habit,
and, though the houses came nearer and nearer, yet, as no two houses
touched in a block, I did not know we had come into the city till all
the passengers left the car, and the conductor courteously told me we
were at our journey's end.

When this happens to you in Boston, and you leave your car, you find
yourself huddled on a steep sloping sidewalk, under the rain or snow,
with a hundred or more other passengers, all eager, all wondering, all
unprovided for. But I found in Sybaris a large glass-roofed station,
from which the other lines of neighborhood cars radiated, in which women
and even little children were passing from route to to route, under the
guidance of civil and intelligent persons, who, strange enough, made it
their business to conduct these people to and fro, and did not consider
it their duty to insult the traveller. For a moment my mind reverted to
the contrast at home; but not long. As I stood admiring and amused at
once, a bright, brisk little fellow stepped up to me, and asked what my
purpose was, and which way I would go. He spoke in Greek first, but,
seeing I did not catch his meaning, relapsed into very passable Italian,
quite as good as mine.

I told him that I was shipwrecked, and had come into town for
assistance. He expressed sympathy, but wasted not a moment, led me to
his chief at an office on one side, who gave me a card with the address
of an officer whose duty it was to see to strangers, and said that he
would in turn introduce me to the chief of the boat-builders; and then
said, as if in apology for his promptness,

    "[Greek: Chrê xeiuon pareonta philein, ethelonta de pempein.]"
    "Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest."

He called to me a conductor of the red line, said [Greek: Xenos], which
we translate guest, but which I found in this case means "dead-head," or
"free," bowed, and I saw him no more.

"Strange country have I come to, indeed," said I, as I thought of the
passports of Civita Vecchia, of the indifference of Scollay's Buildings,
and of the surliness of Springfield. "And this is Sybaris!"

       *       *       *       *       *

We sent down a tug to the cove which I indicated on their topographical
map, and to the terror of the old fisherman and his sons, to whom I had
sent a note, which they could not read, our boat was towed up to the
city quay, and was put under repairs. That last thump on the hidden rock
was her worst injury, and it was a week before I could get away. It was
in this time that I got the information I am now to give, partly from my
own observations, partly from what George the Proxenus or his brother
Philip told me,--more from what I got from a very pleasing person, the
wife of another brother, at whose house I used to visit freely, and
whose boys, fine fellows, were very fond of talking about America with
me. They spoke English very funnily, and like little school-books. The
ship-carpenter, a man named Alexander, was a very intelligent person;
and, indeed, the whole social arrangement of the place was so simple,
that it seemed to me that I got on very fast, and knew a great deal of
them in a very short time.

I told George one day, that I was surprised that he had so much time to
give to me. He laughed, and said he could well believe that, as I had
said that I was brought up in Boston. "When I was there," said he, "I
could see that your people were all hospitable enough, but that the
people who were good for anything were made to do all the work of the
_vauriens_, and really had no time for friendship or hospitality. I
remember an historian of yours, who crossed with me, said that there
should be a motto stretched across Boston Bay, from one fort to another,
with the words, 'No admittance, except on business.'"

I did not more than half like this chaffing of Boston, and asked how
they managed things in Sybaris.

"Why, you see," said he, "we hold pretty stiffly to the old Charondian
laws, of which perhaps you know something; here's a copy of the code, if
you would like to look over it," and he took one out of his pocket. "We
are still very chary about amendments to statutes, so that very little
time is spent in legislation; we have no bills at shops, and but little
debt, and that is all on honor, so that there is not much
account-keeping or litigation; you know what happens to gossips,--gossip
takes a good deal of time elsewhere,--and somehow everybody does his
share of work, so that all of us do have a good deal of what you call
'leisure.' Whether," he added pensively, "in a world God put us into
that we might love each other, and learn to love,--whether the time we
spend in society, or the time we spend caged behind our office desks, is
the time which should be called devoted to the 'business of life,' that
remains to be seen."

"How came you to Boston," said I, "and when?"

"O, we all have to travel," said George, "if we mean to go into the
administration. And I liked administration. I observe that you appoint a
foreign ambassador because he can make a good stump speech in Kentucky.
But since Charondas's time, training has been at the bottom of our
system. And no man could offer himself here to serve on the school
committee, unless he knew how other nations managed their schools."

"Not if he had himself made school-books?" said I.

"No!" laughed George, "for he might introduce them. With us no professor
may teach from a text-book he has made himself, unless the highest
council of education order it; and on the same principle we should never
choose a bookseller on the school committee. And so, to go back," he
said, "when my father found that administration was my passion, he sent
me the grand tour. I learned a great deal in America, and am very fond
of the Americans. But I never saw one here before."

I did not ask what he learned in America, for I was more anxious to
learn myself how they administered government in Sybaris.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inns at Sybaris are not very large, not extending much beyond the
compass of a large private house. Mine was kept by a woman. As we sat
there, smoking on the piazza, the first evening I was there, I asked
George about this horse-railroad management, and the methods they took
to secure such personal comfort.

He said that my question cut pretty low down, for that the answer really
involved the study of their whole system. "I have thought of it a good
deal," said he, "when I have been in St. Petersburg, and in England and
America; and as far as I can find out, our peculiarity in everything is,
that we respect--I have sometimes thought we almost worshipped--the
rights, even the notions or whims, of the individual citizen. With us
the first object of the state, as an organization, is to care for the
individual citizen, be he man, woman, or child. We consider the state to
be made for the better and higher training of men, much as your divines
say that the Church is. Instead of our lumping our citizens, therefore,
and treating Jenny Lind and Tom Heenan to the same dose of public
schooling,--instead of saying that what is sauce for the goose is sauce
for the gander,--we try to see that each individual is protected in the
enjoyment, not of what the majority likes, but of what he chooses, so
long as his choice injures no other man."

I thought, in one whiff, of Stuart Mill, and of the coppersmiths.

"Our horse-railroad system grew out of this theory," continued he. "As
long ago as Herodotus, people lived here in houses one story high, with
these gardens between. But some generations ago, a young fellow named
Apollidorus, who had been to Edinburgh, pulled down his father's house
and built a block of what you call houses on the site of it. They were
five stories high, had basements, and so on, with windows fore and aft,
and, of course, none on the sides. The old fogies looked aghast. But he
found plenty of fools to hire them. But the tenants had not been in a
week, when the Kategoros, district attorney, had him up 'for taking
away from a citizen what he could not restore.' This, you must know, is
one of the severest charges in our criminal code.

"Of course, it was easy enough to show that the tenants went willingly;
he showed dumb-waiters, and I know not what infernal contrivances of
convenience within. But he could not show that the tenants had north
windows and south windows, because they did not. The government, on
their side, showed that men were made to breathe fresh air, and that he
could not ventilate his houses as if they were open on all sides; they
showed that women were not made to climb up and down ladders, and to
live on stages at the tops of them; and he tried in vain to persuade the
jury that this climbing was good for little children. He had lured these
citizens into places dangerous for health, growth, strength, and
comfort. And so he was compelled to erect a statue typical of strength,
and a small hospital for infants, as his penalty. That spirited
Hercules, which stands in front of the market, was a part of his fine.

"Of course, after a decision like this, concentration of inhabitants was
out of the question. Every pulpit in Sybaris blazed with sermons on the
text, 'Every man shall sit under his vine and under his fig-tree.'
Everybody saw that a house without its own garden was an abomination,
and easy communication with the suburbs was a necessity.

"It was, indeed, easy enough to show, as the city engineer did, that the
power wasted in lifting people up, and, for that matter, down stairs, in
a five-story house, in one day, would carry all those people I do not
know how many miles on a level railroad track in less time. What you
call horse-railroads, therefore, became a necessity."

I said they made a great row with us.

"Yes," said he, "I saw they did. With us the government owns and repairs
the track, as you do the track of any common road. We never have any
difficulty.

"You see," he added after a pause, "with us, if a conductor sprains the
ankle of a citizen, it is a matter the state looks after. With you, the
citizen must himself be the prosecutor, and virtually never is. Did you
notice a pretty winged Mercury outside the station-house you came to?"

I had noticed it.

"That was put up, I don't know how long ago, in the infancy of these
things. They took a car off one night, without public notice beforehand.
One old man was coming in on it, to his daughter's wedding. He missed
his connection out at Little Krastis, and lost half an hour. Down came
the Kategoros. The company had taken from a citizen what they could not
restore, namely, half an hour."

George lighted another cigar, and laughed very heartily. "That's a great
case in our reports," he said. "The company ventured to go to trial on
it. They hoped they might overturn the old decisions, which were so old
that nobody knows when they were made,--as old as the dancing horses,"
said he, laughing. "They said _time_ was not a thing,--it was a relation
of ideas; that it did not exist in heaven; that they could not be made
to suffer because they did not deliver back what no man ever saw, or
touched, or tasted. What was half an hour? But the jury was pitiless. A
lot of business men, you know,--they knew the value of time. What did
they care for the metaphysics? And the company was bidden to put up an
appropriate statue worth ten talents in front of their station-house, as
a reminder to all their people that a citizen's time was worth
something."

This was George's first visit to me; and it was the first time,
therefore, that I observed a queer thing. Just at this point he rose
rather suddenly and bade me good evening. I begged him to stay, but had
to repeat my invitation twice. His hand was on the handle of the door
before he turned back. Then he sat down, and we went on talking; but
before long he did the same thing again, and then again.

At last I was provoked, and said: "What is the custom of your country?
Do you have to take a walk every eleven minutes and a quarter?"

George laughed again, and indeed blushed. "Do you know what a bore is?"
said he.

"Alas! I do," said I.

"Well," said he, "the universal custom here is, that an uninvited guest,
who calls on another man on his own business, rises at the end of eleven
minutes, and offers to go. And the courts have ruled, very firmly, that
there must be a _bona fide_ effort. We get into such a habit of it,
that, with you, I really did it unawares. The custom is as old as
Cleisthenes and his wedding. But some of the decisions are not more than
two or three centuries old, and they are very funny.

"On the whole," he added, "I think it works well. Of course, between
friends, it is absurd, but it is a great protection against a class of
people who think their own concerns are the only things of value. You
see you have only to say, when a man comes in, that you thank him for
coming, that you wish he would stay, or to take his hat or his
stick,--you have only to make him an invited guest,--and then the rule
does not hold."

"Ah!" said I; "then I invite you to spend every evening with me while I
am here."

"Take care," said he; "the Government Almanac is printed and distributed
gratuitously from the fines on bores. Their funds are getting very low
up at the department, and they will be very sharp on your friends. So
you need not be profuse in your invitations."

       *       *       *       *       *

This conversation was a clew to a good many things which I saw while I
was in the city. I never was in a place where there were so many
tasteful, pretty little conveniences for everybody. At the quadrants,
where the streets cross, there was always a pretty little sheltered seat
for four or five people,--shaded, stuffed, dry, and always the morning
and evening papers, and an advertisement of the times of boats and
trains, for any one who might be waiting for a car or for a friend.
Sometimes these were votive offerings, where public spirit had spoken in
gratitude. More often they had been ordered at the cost of some one who
had taken from a citizen what he could not repay. The private citizen
might often hesitate about prosecuting a bore, or a nuisance, or a
conceited company officer. But the Kategoroi made no bones about it.
They called the citizen as a witness, and gave the criminal a reminder
which posterity held in awe. Their point, as they always explained it to
me, is, that the citizen's health and strength are essential to the
state. The state cannot afford to have him maimed, any more than it can
afford to have him drunk or ignorant. The individual, of course, cannot
be following up his separate grievances with people who abridge his
rights. But the public accuser can and does.

With us, public servants, who know they are public servants, are always
obliging and civil. I would not ask better treatment in my own home than
I am sure of in Capitol, State-house, or city hall. It is only when you
get to some miserable sub-bureau, where the servant of the servant of a
creature of the state can bully you, that you come to grief. For
instance the State of Massachusetts just now forbids corporations to
work children more than ten hours a day. The _corporations_ obey. But
the overseers in the rooms, whom the corporations employ, work children
eleven hours, or as many as they choose. They would not stand that in
Sybaris.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was walking one day with one of the bright boys of whom I spoke, and I
asked him, as I had his father, if I was not keeping him away from his
regular occupation. Ought he not be at school?

"No," said he; "this is my off-term."

"Pray, what is that?"

"Don't you know? We only go to school three months in winter and three
in summer. I thought you did so in America. I know Mr. Webster did. I
read it in his Life."

I was on the point of saying that we knew now how to train more powerful
men than Mr. Webster, but the words stuck in my throat, and the boy
rattled on.

"The teachers have to be there all the time, except when they go in
retreat. They take turns about retreat. But we are in two choroi; I am
choros-boy now, James is anti-choros. Choros have school in January,
February, March, July, August, September. Next year I shall be
anti-choros."

"Which do you like best,--off-term or school?" said I.

"O, both is as good as one. When either begins, we like it. We get
rather sick of either before the three months are over."

"What do you do in your off-terms?" said I,--"go fishing?"

"No, of course not," said he, "except Strep, and Hipp, and Chal, and
those boys, because their fathers are fishermen. No, we have to be in
our fathers' offices, we big boys; the little fellows, they let them
stay at home. If I was here without you now, that truant-officer we
passed just now would have had me at home before this time. Well, you
see they think we learn about business, and I guess we do. I know I do,"
said he, "and sometimes I think I should like to be a Proxenus when I am
grown up, but I do not know."

I asked George about this, the same evening. He said the boy was pretty
nearly right about it. They had come round to the determination that the
employment of children, merely because their wages were lower than
men's, was very dangerous economy. The chances were that the children
were over-worked, and that their constitution was fatally impaired. "We
do not want any Manchester-trained children here." Then they had found
that steady brain-work on girls, at the growing age, was pretty nearly
slow murder in the long run. They did not let girls go to school with
any persistency after they were twelve or fourteen. After they were
twenty, they might study what they chose.

"But the main difference between our schools and yours," said he, "is
that your teacher is only expected to hear the lesson recited. Our
teacher is expected to teach it also. You have in America, therefore,
sixty scholars to one teacher. We do not pretend to have more than
twenty to one teacher. We do this the easier because we let no child go
to school more than half the time; nor, even with the strongest, more
than four hours a day.

"Why," said he, "I was at a college in America once, where, with
splendid mathematicians, they had had but one man teach any mathematics
for thirty years. And he was travelling in Europe when I was there. The
others only heard recitations of those who could learn without being
taught."

"I was once there," said I.

       *       *       *       *       *

The boat's repairs still lingered, and on Sunday little Phil. came round
with a note from his mother, to ask if I would go to church with them.
If I had rather go to the cathedral or elsewhere, Phil. would show me
the way. I preferred to go with him and her together. It was a pretty
little church,--quite open and airy it would seem to us,--excellent
chance to see dancing vines, or flying birds, or falling rains, or other
"meteors outside," if the preacher proved dull or the hymns undevout.
But I found my attention was well held within. Not that the preaching
was anything to be repeated. The sermon was short, unpretending, but
alive and devout. It was a sonnet, all on one theme; that theme pressed,
and pressed, and pressed again, and, of a sudden, the preacher was done.
"You say you know God loves you," he said. "I hope you do, but I am
going to tell you once more that he loves you, and once more and once
more." What pleased me in it all was a certain unity of service, from
the beginning to the end. The congregation's singing seemed to suggest
the prayer; the prayer seemed to continue in the symphony of the organ;
and, while I was in revery, the organ ceased; but as it was ordered, the
sermon took up the theme of my revery, and so that one theme ran through
the whole. The service was not ten things, like the ten parts of a
concert, it was one act of communion or worship. Part of this was due, I
guess, to this, that we were in a small church, sitting or kneeling near
each other, close enough to get the feeling of communion,--not parted,
indeed, in any way. We had been talking together, as we stood in the
churchyard before the service began, and when we assembled in the church
the sense of sympathy continued. I told Kleone that I liked the home
feeling of the church, and she was pleased. She said she was afraid I
should have preferred the cathedral. There were four large cathedrals,
open, as the churches were, to all the town; and all the clergy, of
whatever order, took turns in conducting the service in them. There were
seven successive services in each of them that Sunday. But each
clergyman had his own special charge beside,--I should think of not more
than a hundred families. And these families, generally neighbors in the
town, indeed, seemed, naturally enough, to grow into very familiar
personal relations with each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

I asked Philip one day how long his brother George would hold his office
of host, or Proxenus. Philip turned a little sharply on me, and asked if
I had any complaints to make, being, in fact, rather a quick-tempered
person. I soothed him by explaining that all that I asked about was the
tenure of office in their system, and he apologized.

"He will be in as long as he chooses, probably. In theory, he remains in
until a majority of the voters, which is to say the adult men and women,
join in a petition for his removal. Then he will be removed at once.
The government will appoint a temporary substitute, and order an
election of his successor."

"Do you mean there is no fixed election-day?"

"None at all," said Philip. "We are always voting. When we stopped just
now I went in to vote for an alderman of our ward, in place of a man who
has resigned. I wish I had taken you in with me, though there was
nothing to see. Only three or four great books, each headed with the
name of a candidate. I wrote my name in Andrew Second's book. He is, on
the whole, the best man. The books will be open three months. No one, of
course, can vote more than once, and at the end of that time there will
be a count, and a proclamation will be made. Then about removal; any one
who is dissatisfied with a public officer puts his name up at the head
of a book in the election office. Of course there are dozens of books
all the time. But unless there is real incapacity, nobody cares.
Sometimes, when one man wants another's place, he gets up a great
breeze, the newspapers get hold of it, and everybody is canvassed who
can be got to the spot. But it is very hard to turn out a competent
officer. If in three months, however, at all the registries, a majority
of the voters express a wish for a man's removal, he has to go out.
Practically, I look in once a week at that office to see what is going
on. It is something as you vote at your clubs."

"Did you say women as well as men?" said I.

"O, yes," said Philip, "unless a woman or a man has formally withdrawn
from the roll. You see, the roll is the list, not only of voters, but of
soldiers. For a man to withdraw, is to say he is a coward and dares not
take his chance in war. Sometimes a woman does not like military
service, and if she takes her name off I do not think the public feeling
about it is quite the same as with a man. She may have things to do at
home."

"But do you mean that most of the women serve in the army?" said I.

"Of course they do," said he. "They wanted to vote, so we put them on
the roll. You do not see them much. Most of the women's regiments are
heavy artillery, in the forts, which can be worked just as well by
persons of less as of more muscle if you have enough of them. Each
regiment in our service is on duty a month, and in reserve six. You know
we have no distant posts."

"We have a great many near-sighted men in America," said I, "who cannot
serve in the army."

"We make our near-sighted men work heavy guns, serve in light artillery,
or, in very bad cases, we detail them to the police work of the camps,"
said he. "The deaf and dumb men we detail to serve the military
telegraphs. They keep secrets well. The blind men serve in the bands.
And the men without legs ride in barouches in state processions.
Everybody serves somewhere."

"That is the reason," said I, with a sigh, "why everybody has so much
time in Sybaris!"

       *       *       *       *       *

But the reader has more than enough of this. Else I would print my
journal of "A Week in Sybaris." By Thursday the boat was mended. I
hunted up the old fisherman and his boys. He was willing to go where my
Excellency bade, but he said his boys wanted to stay. They would like to
live here.

"Among the devils?" said I.

The old man confessed that the place for poor men was the best place he
ever saw; the markets were cheap, the work was light, the inns were
neat, the people were civil, the music was good, the churches were free,
and the priests did not lie. He believed the reason that nobody ever
came back from Sybaris was, that nobody wanted to.

The Proxenus nodded, well pleased.

"So Battista and his brother would like to stay a few months; and he
found he might bring Caterina too, when my Excellency had returned from
Gallipoli; or did my Excellency think that, when Garibaldi had driven
out the Bourbons, all the world would be like Sybaris?"

My Excellency hoped so; but did not dare promise.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You see now," said George, "why you hear so little of Sybaris. Enough
people come to us. But you are the only man I ever saw leave Sybaris who
did not mean to return."

"And I," said I,--"do you think I am never coming here again?"

"You found it a hard harbor to make," said the Proxenus. "We have
published no sailing directions since St. Paul touched here, and those
which he wrote--he sent them to the Corinthians yonder--neither they nor
any one else have seemed to understand."

"Good by."

"God bless you! Good by." And I sailed for Gallipoli.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote B: I am writing in Westerly's snuggery, and in Providence they
believe in Webster. I dare say it is worse in Worcester. A good many
things are.]

[Footnote C: The reader who cares to follow the detail is referred to
Diodorus Siculus, XII.; Strabo, VI.; Ælian, V. H. 9, c. 24; Athenæus,
XII. 518; Plutarch in Pelopidas; Herodotus, V. and VI. Compare Laurent's
Geographical Notes, and Wheeler and Gaisford; Pliny, III. 15, VII. 22,
XVI. 33, VIII. 64, XXXI. 9; Aristotle, Polit. IV. 12, V. 3; Heyne's
Opuscula, II. 74; Bentley's Phalaris, 367; Solinus, 2, § 10, "luxuries
grossly exaggerated"; Scymnus, 337-360; Aristophanes, Vesp. 1427, 1436;
Lycophron, Alex. 1079; Polybius, Gen. Hist. II. 3, on the confederation
of Sybaris, Krotan, and Kaulonia,--"a perplexing statement," says Grote,
"showing that he must have conceived the history of Sybaris in a very
different form from that in which it is commonly represented"; third
volume of De Non, who disagrees with Magnan as to the site of Sybaris,
and says the sea-shore is uninhabitable! Tuccagni Orlandini, Vol. XI.,
Supplement, p. 294; besides the dictionaries and books of travels,
including Murray. I have availed myself, without other reference, of
most of these authorities.]


THE PIANO IN THE UNITED STATES.


Twenty-five thousand pianos were made in the United States last year!

This is the estimate of the persons who know most of this branch of
manufacture, but it is only an approximation to the truth; for, besides
the sixty makers in New York, the thirty in Boston, the twenty in
Philadelphia, the fifteen in Baltimore, the ten in Albany, and the less
number in Cincinnati, Buffalo, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco,
there are small makers in many country towns, and even in villages, who
buy the parts of a piano in the nearest city, put them together, and
sell the instrument in the neighborhood. The returns of the houses which
supply the ivory keys of the piano to all the makers in the country are
confirmatory of this estimate; which, we may add, is that of Messrs.
Steinway of New York, who have made it a point to collect both the
literature and the statistics of the instrument, of which they are among
the largest manufacturers in the world.

The makers' prices of pianos now range from two hundred and ninety
dollars to one thousand; and the prices to the public, from four hundred
and fifty dollars to fifteen hundred. We may conclude, therefore, that
the people of the United States during the year 1866 expended fifteen
millions of dollars in the purchase of new pianos. It is not true that
we export many pianos to foreign countries, as the public are led to
suppose from the advertisements of imaginative manufacturers. American
citizens--all but the few consummately able kings of business--allow a
free play to their imagination in advertising the products of their
skill. Canada buys a small number of our pianos; Cuba, a few; Mexico, a
few; South America, a few; and now and then one is sent to Europe, or
taken thither by a Thalberg or a Gottschalk; but an inflated currency
and a war tariff make it impossible for Americans to compete with
European makers in anything but excellence. In price, they cannot
compete. Every disinterested and competent judge with whom we have
conversed on this subject gives it as his deliberate opinion that the
best American piano is the best of all pianos, and the one longest
capable of resisting the effects of a trying climate; yet we cannot sell
them, at present, in any considerable numbers, in any market but our
own. Protectionists are requested to note this fact, which is not an
isolated fact. America possesses such an astonishing genius for
inventing and combining labor-saving machinery, that we could now supply
the world with many of its choicest products, in the teeth of native
competition, but for the tariff, the taxes, and the inflation, which
double the cost of producing. The time may come, however, when we shall
sell pianos at Paris, and watches in London, as we already do
sewing-machines everywhere.

Twenty-five thousand pianos a year, at a cost of fifteen millions of
dollars! Presented in this manner, the figures produce an effect upon
the mind, and we wonder that an imperfectly reconstructed country could
absorb in a single year, and that year an unprosperous one, so large a
number of costly musical instruments. But, upon performing a sum in long
division, we discover that these startling figures merely mean, that
every working-day in this country one hundred and twelve persons buy a
new piano. When we consider, that every hotel, steamboat, and public
school above a certain very moderate grade, must have from one to four
pianos, and that young ladies' seminaries jingle with them from basement
to garret, (one school in New York has thirty Chickerings,) and that
almost every couple that sets up housekeeping on a respectable scale
considers a piano only less indispensable than a kitchen range, we are
rather inclined to wonder at the smallness than at the largeness of the
number.

The trade in new pianos, however, is nothing to the countless
transactions in old. Here figures are impossible; but probably ten
second-hand pianos are sold to one new one. The business of letting
pianos is also one of great extent. It is computed by the well-informed,
that the number of these instruments now "out," in the city of New York,
is three thousand. There is one firm in Boston that usually has a
thousand let. As the rent of a piano ranges from six dollars to twelve
dollars a month,--cartage both ways paid by the hirer,--it may be
inferred that this business, when conducted on a large scale, and with
the requisite vigilance, is not unprofitable. In fact, the income of a
piano-letting business has approached eighty thousand dollars per annum,
of which one third was profit. It has, however, its risks and drawbacks.
From June to September, the owner of the instruments must find storage
for the greater part of his stock, and must do without most of his
monthly returns. Many of those who hire pianos, too, are persons
"hanging on the verge" of society, who have little respect for the
property of others, and vanish to parts unknown, leaving a damaged piano
behind them.

England alone surpasses the United States in the number of pianos
annually manufactured. In 1852, the one hundred and eighty English
makers produced twenty-three thousand pianos,--fifteen hundred grands,
fifteen hundred squares, and twenty thousand uprights. As England has
enjoyed fifteen years of prosperity since, it is probable that the
annual number now exceeds that of the United States. The English people,
however, pay much less money for the thirty thousand pianos which they
probably buy every year, than we do for our twenty-five thousand. In
London, the retail price of the best Broadwood grand, in plain mahogany
case, is one hundred and thirty-five guineas; which is a little more
than half the price of the corresponding American instrument. The best
London square piano, in plain case, is sixty guineas,--almost exactly
half the American price. Two thirds of all the pianos made in England
are low-priced uprights,--averaging thirty-five guineas,--which would
not stand in our climate for a year. England, therefore, supplies
herself and the British empire with pianos at an annual expenditure of
about eight millions of our present dollars. American makers, we may
add, have recently taken a hint from their English brethren with regard
to the upright instrument. Space is getting to be the dearest of all
luxuries in our cities, and it has become highly desirable to have
pianos that occupy less of it than the square instrument which we
usually see. Successful attempts have been recently made to apply the
new methods of construction to the upright piano, with a view to make it
as durable as those of the usual forms. Such a brisk demand has sprung
up for the improved uprights, that the leading makers are producing them
in considerable numbers, and the Messrs. Steinway are erecting a new
building for the sole purpose of manufacturing them. The American
uprights, however, cannot be cheap. Such is the nature of the American
climate, that a piano, to be tolerable, must be excellent; and while
parts of the upright cost more than the corresponding parts of the
square, no part of it costs less. Six hundred dollars is the price of
the upright in plain rosewood case,--fifty dollars more than a plain
rosewood square.

Paris pianos are renowned, the world over, and consequently three tenths
of all the pianos made in Paris are exported to foreign countries.
France, too, owing to the cheapness of labor, can make a better cheap
piano than any other country. In 1852, there were ten thousand pianos
made in Paris, at an average cost of one thousand francs each; and, we
are informed, a very good new upright piano can now be bought in France
for one hundred dollars. But in France the average wages of
piano-makers are five francs per day; in London, ten shillings; in New
York, four dollars and thirty-three cents. The cream of the business, in
Paris, is divided among three makers,--Erard, Hertz, and Pleyel,--each
of whom has a concert-hall of his own, to give _éclat_ to his
establishment. We presume Messrs. Steinway added "Steinway Hall" to the
attractions of New York from the example of their Paris friends, and
soon the metropolis will boast a "Chickering Hall" as well. This is an
exceedingly expensive form of advertisement. Steinway Hall cost two
hundred thousand dollars, and has not yet paid the cost of warming,
cleaning, and lighting it. This, however, is partly owing to the
good-nature of the proprietors, who find it hard to exact the rent from
a poor artist after a losing concert, and who have a constitutional
difficulty about saying _No_, when the use of the hall is asked for a
charitable object.

In Germany there are no manufactories of pianos on the scale of England,
France, and the United States. A business of five pianos a week excites
astonishment in a German state, and it is not uncommon there for one man
to construct every part of a piano,--a work of three or four months. Mr.
Steinway the elder has frequently done this in his native place, and
could now do it. A great number of excellent instruments are made in
Germany in the slow, patient, thorough manner of the Germans; but in the
fashionable houses of Berlin and Vienna no German name is so much valued
as those of the celebrated makers of Paris. In the London exhibition of
1851, Russian pianos competed for the medals, some of which attracted
much attention from the excellence of their construction. Messrs.
Chickering assert, that the Russians were the first to employ
successfully the device of "overstringing," as it is called, by which
the bass strings are stretched over the others.

The piano, then, one hundred and fifty-seven years after its invention,
in spite of its great cost, has become the leading musical instrument
of Christendom. England produces thirty thousand every year; the United
States, twenty-five thousand; France, fifteen thousand; Germany, perhaps
ten thousand; and all other countries, ten thousand; making a total of
ninety thousand, or four hundred and twenty-two for every working-day.
It is computed, that an average piano is the result of one hundred and
twenty days' work; and, consequently, there must be at least fifty
thousand men employed in the business. And it is only within a few years
that the making of these noble instruments has been done on anything
like the present scale. Messrs. Broadwood, of London, who have made in
all one hundred and twenty-nine thousand pianos, only begin to count at
the year 1780; and in the United States there were scarcely fifty pianos
a year made fifty years ago.

We need scarcely say that the production of music for the piano has kept
pace with the advance of the instrument. Dr. Burney mentions, in his
History of Music (Vol. IV. p. 664), that when he came to London in 1744,
"Handel's Harpsichord Lessons and Organ Concertos, and the two First
Books of Scarletti's Lessons, were all the good music for keyed
instruments at that time in the nation." We have at this moment before
us the catalogue of music sold by one house in Boston, Oliver Ditson &
Co. It is a closely printed volume of three hundred and sixty pages, and
contains the titles of about thirty-three thousand pieces of music,
designed to be performed, wholly or partly, on the piano. By far the
greater number are piano music pure and simple. It is not a very rare
occurrence for a new piece to have a sale of one hundred thousand copies
in the United States. A composer who can produce the kind of music that
pleases the greatest number, may derive a revenue from his art ten times
greater than Mozart or Beethoven enjoyed in their most prosperous time.
There are trifling waltzes and songs upon the list of Messrs. Ditson,
which have yielded more profit than Mozart received for "Don Giovanni"
and "The Magic Flute" together. We learn from the catalogue just
mentioned, that the composers of music have an advantage over the
authors of books, in being always able to secure a publisher for their
productions. Messrs. Ditson announce that they are ready and willing to
publish any piece of music by any composer on the following easy
conditions: "Three dollars per page for engraving; two dollars and a
half per hundred sheets of paper; and one dollar and a quarter per
hundred pages for printing." At the same time they frankly notify
ambitious teachers, that "not one piece in ten pays the cost of getting
up, and not one in fifty proves a success."

The piano, though its recent development has been so rapid, is the
growth of ages, and we can, for three thousand years or more, dimly and
imperfectly trace its growth. The instrument, indeed, has found an
historian,--Dr. Rimbault of London,--who has gathered the scattered
notices of its progress into a handsome quarto, now accessible in some
of our public libraries. It is far from our desire to make a display of
cheap erudition; yet perhaps ladies who love their piano may care to
spend a minute or two in learning how it came to be the splendid triumph
of human ingenuity, the precious addition to the happiness of existence,
which they now find it to be. "I have had my share of trouble," we heard
a lady say the other day, "but my piano has kept me happy." All ladies
who have had the virtue to subdue this noble instrument to their will,
can say something similar of the solace and joy they daily derive from
it. The Greek legend that the twang of Diana's bow suggested to Apollo
the invention of the lyre, was not a mere fancy; for the first stringed
instrument of which we have any trace in ancient sculpture differed from
an ordinary bow only in having more than one string. A two-stringed bow
was, perhaps, the first step towards the grand piano of to-day.
Additional strings involved the strengthening of the bow that held them;
and, accordingly, we find the Egyptian harps, discovered in the
catacombs by Wilkinson, very thick and massive in the lower part of the
frame, which terminated sometimes in a large and solid female head. From
the two-stringed bow to these huge twelve-stringed Egyptian harps, six
feet high and beautifully finished with veneer, inlaid with ivory and
mother-of-pearl, no one can say how many centuries elapsed. The catgut
strings of the harps of three thousand years ago are still capable of
giving a musical sound. The best workmen of the present time, we are
assured, could not finish a harp more exquisitely than these are
finished; yet they have no mechanism for tightening or loosening the
strings, and no strings except such as were furnished by the harmless,
necessary cat. The Egyptian harp, with all its splendor of decoration,
was a rude and barbaric instrument.

It has not been shown that Greece or Rome added one essential
improvement to the stringed instruments which they derived from older
nations. The Chickerings, Steinways, Erards, and Broadwoods of our day
cannot lay a finger upon any part of a piano, and say that they owe it
to the Greeks or to the Romans.

The Cithara of the Middle Ages was a poor thing enough, in the form of a
large P, with ten strings in the oval part; but it had _movable pegs_,
and could be easily tuned. It was, therefore, a step toward the piano of
the French Exposition of 1867.

But the Psaltery was a great stride forward. This instrument was an
arrangement of _strings on a box_. Here we have the principle of the
sounding-board,--a thing of vital moment to the piano, and one upon
which the utmost care is bestowed by all the great makers. Whoever first
thought of stretching strings on a box may also be said to have half
invented the guitar and the violin. No single subsequent thought has
been so fruitful of consequences as this in the improvement of stringed
instruments. The reader, of course, will not confound the psaltery of
the Middle Ages with the psaltery of the Hebrews, respecting which
nothing is known. The translators of the Old Testament assigned the
names with which they were familiar to the musical instruments of the
Jews.

About the year 1200 we arrive at the Dulcimer, which was an immense
psaltery, with improvements. Upon a harp-shaped box, eighteen to
thirty-six feet long, fifty strings were stretched, which the player
struck with a stick or a long-handled hammer. This instrument was a
signal advance toward the grand piano. It _was_ a piano, without its
machinery.

The next thing, obviously, must have been to contrive a method of
striking the strings with certainty and evenness; and, accordingly, we
find indications of a keyed instrument after the year 1300, called the
Clavicytherium, or keyed cithara. The invention of keys permitted the
strings to be covered over, and therefore the strings of the
clavicytherium were enclosed _in_ a box, instead of being stretched _on_
a box. The first keys were merely long levers with a nub at the end of
them, mounted on a pivot, which the player canted up at the strings on
the see-saw principle. It has required four hundred years to bring the
mechanism of the piano key to its present admirable perfection. The
clavicytherium was usually a very small instrument,--an oblong box,
three or four feet in length, that could be lifted by a girl of
fourteen. The clavichord and manichord, which we read of in Mozart's
letters, were only improved and better-made clavicytheria. How affecting
the thought, that the divine Mozart had nothing better on which to try
the ravishing airs of "The Magic Flute" than a wretched box of brass
wires, twanged with pieces of quill! So it is always, and in all
branches of art. Shakespeare's plays, Titian's pictures, the great
cathedrals, Newton's discoveries, Mozart's and Handel's music, were
executed while the implements of art and science were still very rude.

Queen Elizabeth's instrument, the Virginals, was a box of strings, with
improved keys, and mounted on four legs. In other words, it was a small
and very bad piano. The excellent Pepys, in his account of the great
fire of London of 1666, says: "River full of lighters and boats taking
in goods, and good goods swimming in the water; and only I observed that
hardly one lighter or boat in three that had the goods of a house in it,
but there were a pair of virginalls in it." Why "a pair"? For the same
reason that induces many persons to say "a pair of stairs," and "a pair
of compasses," that is, no reason at all.

It is plain that the virginals, or virgin's clavichord, was very far
from holding the rank among musical instruments which the piano now
possesses. If any of our readers should ever come upon a thin folio
entitled "Musick's Monument," (London, 1676,) we advise him to clutch
it, retire from the haunts of men, and abandon himself to the delight of
reading the Izaak Walton of music. It is a most quaint and curious
treatise upon "the Noble Lute, the best of instruments," with a chapter
upon "the generous Viol," by Thomas Mace, "one of the clerks of Trinity
College in the University of Cambridge." Master Mace deigns not to
mention keyed instruments, probably regarding keys as old sailors regard
the lubber's hole,--fit only for greenhorns. The "Noble Lute," of which
Thomas Mace discourses, was a large, heavy, pot-bellied guitar with many
strings. We learn from this enthusiastic author, that the noble lute had
been calumniated by some ignorant persons; and it is in refuting their
calumnious imputations that he pours out a torrent of knowledge upon his
beloved instrument, and upon the state of music in England in 1675. In
reply to the charge, that the noble lute was a very hard instrument to
play upon, he gives posterity a piece of history. That the lute _was_
hard once, he confesses, but asserts that "it is now easie, and very
familiar."

"The First and Chief Reason that it was Hard in former Times, was,
Because they had to their Lutes but Few Strings; viz. to some 10, some
12, and some 14 Strings, which in the beginning of my Time were almost
altogether in use; (and is this present Year 1675. Fifty four years
since I first began to undertake That Instrument). But soon after, they
began to adde more Strings unto Their Lutes, so that we had Lutes of 16,
18, and 20 Strings; which they finding to be so Great a Convenience,
stayed not long till they added more, to the Number of 24, where we now
rest satisfied; only upon my Theorboes I put 26 Strings, for some Good
Reasons I shall be able to give in due Time and Place."

Another aspersion upon the noble lute was, that it was "a Woman's
Instrument." Master Mace gallantly observes, that if this were true, he
cannot understand why it should suffer any disparagement on that
account, "but rather that it should have the more Reputation and
Honour."

There are passages in this ancient book which take us back so agreeably
to the concert-rooms and parlors of two hundred years ago, and give us
such an insight into the musical resources of our forefathers, that we
shall venture to copy two or three of them. The following brief
discourse upon Pegs is very amusing:--

"And you must know, that from the Badness of the Pegs, arise several
Inconveniences; The first I have named, viz. the Loss of Labour. The 2d.
is, the Loss of Time; for I have known some so extreme long in Tuning
their Lutes and Viols, by reason only of Bad Pegs, that They have
wearied out their Auditors before they began to Play. A 3d.
Inconvenience is, that oftentimes, if a High-stretch'd small String
happen to slip down, 'tis in great danger to break at the next winding
up, especially in wet moist weather, and that It have been long slack.
The 4th. is, that when a String hath been slipt back, it will not stand
in Tune, under many Amendments; for it is continually in stretching
itself, till it come to Its highest stretch. A 5th. is, that in the
midst of a Consort, All the Company must leave off, because of some
Eminent String slipping. A 6th. is, that sometimes ye shall have such a
Rap upon the Knuckles, by a sharp-edg'd Peg, and a stiff strong String,
that the very Skin will be taken off. And 7thly. It is oftentimes an
occasion of the Thrusting off the Treble-Peg-Nut, and sometime of the
Upper Long Head; And I have seen the Neck of an Old Viol, thrust off
into two pieces, by reason of the Badness of the Pegs, meerly with the
Anger and hasty Choller of Him that has been Tuning. Now I say that
These are very Great Inconveniences, and do adde much to the Trouble and
Hardness of the Instrument. I shall therefore inform you how ye may Help
All These with Ease; viz. Thus. When you perceive any Peg to be troubled
with the slippery Disease, assure your self he will never grow better of
Himself, without some of Your Care; Therefore take Him out, and examine
the Cause."

He gives advice with regard to the preservation of the Lute in the moist
English climate:--

"And that you may know how to shelter your Lute, in the worst of Ill
weathers (which is moist) you shall do well, ever when you Lay it by in
the day-time, to put It into a Bed, that is constantly used, between the
Rug and Blanket; but never between the Sheets, because they may be moist
with Sweat, &c.

"This is the most absolute and best place to keep It in always, by which
doing, you will find many Great Conveniencies, which I shall here set
down....

"Therefore, a Bed will secure from all These Inconveniences, and keep
your Glew so Hard as Glass, and All safe and sure; only to be excepted,
That no Person be so inconsiderate, as to Tumble down upon the Bed,
whilst the Lute is There; For I have known several Good Lutes spoil'd
with such a Trick."

We may infer from Master Mace his work, that the trivial virginals were
gaining in popular estimation upon the nobler instrument which is the
theme of his eulogy. He has no patience with those who object to his
beloved lute that it is out of fashion. He remarks upon this subject in
a truly delicious strain:--

"I cannot understand, how Arts and Sciences should be subject unto any
such Phantastical, Giddy, or Inconsiderate Toyish Conceits, as ever to
be said to be in Fashion, or out of Fashion. I remember there was a
Fashion, not many years since, for Women in their Apparel to be so Pent
up by the Straitness, and Stiffness of their Gown-Shoulder-Sleeves, that
They could not so much as Scratch Their Heads, for the Necessary Remove
of a Biting Louse; nor Elevate their Arms scarcely to feed themselves
Handsomly; nor Carve a Dish of Meat at a Table, but their whole Body
must needs Bend towards the Dish. This must needs be concluded by
Reason, a most Vnreasonable, and Inconvenient Fashion; and They as
Vnreasonably Inconsiderate, who would be so Abus'd, and Bound up. I
Confess It was a very Good Fashion, for some such Viragoes, who were
us'd to Scratch their Husbands Faces or Eyes, and to pull them down by
the Coxcombes. And I am subject to think, It was a meer Rogery in the
Combination, or Club-council of the Taylors, to Abuse the Women in That
Fashion, in Revenge of some of the Curst Dames their Wives."

Some lute-makers, this author informs us, were so famous in Europe, that
he had seen lutes of their making, "pittifull, old, batter'd, crack'd
things," that were valued at a hundred pounds sterling each; and he had
often seen lutes of three or four pounds' value "far more illustrious
and taking to a Common eye." In refuting the "aspersion that one had as
good keep a horse (for cost) as a Lute," he declares, that he never in
his life "took more than five shillings the quarter to maintain a Lute
with strings, only for the first stringing I ever took ten shillings."
He says, however: "I do confess Those who will be Prodigal and
Extraordinary Curious, may spend as much as may maintain two or three
Horses, and Men to ride upon them too, if they please. But 20_s._ per
ann. is an Ordinary Charge; and much more they need not spend, to
practise very hard."

Keyed instruments, despite the remonstrances of the lutists, continued
to advance toward their present supremacy. As often as an important
improvement was introduced, the instrument changed its name, just as in
our day the melodeon was improved into the harmonium, then into the
organ-harmonium, and finally into the cabinet organ. The virginals of
1600 became the spinet of 1700,--so called because the pieces of quill
employed in twanging the strings resembled thorns, and _spina_, in
Latin, means thorn. Any lady who will take the trouble to mount to the
fourth story of the Messrs. Chickering's piano store in the city of New
York, may see such a spinet as Mrs. Washington, Mrs. Adams, and Mrs.
Hamilton played upon when they were little girls. It is a small,
harp-shaped instrument on legs, exceedingly coarse and clumsy in its
construction,--the case rough and unpolished, the legs like those of a
kitchen table, with wooden castors such as were formerly used in the
construction of cheap bedsteads of the "trundle" variety. The keys,
however, are much like those now in use, though they are fewer in
number, and the ivory is yellow with age. If the reader would know the
tone of this ancient instrument, he has but to stretch a brass wire
across a box between two nails, and twang them with a short pointed
piece of quill. And if the reader would know how much better the year
1867 is than the year 1700, he may first hear this spinet played upon in
Messrs. Chickering's dusty garret, and then descend to one of the floors
below, and listen to the round, full, brilliant singing of a Chickering
grand, of the present illustrious year. By as much as that grand piano
is better than that poor little spinet, by so much is the present time
better than the days when Louis XIV. was king. If any intelligent
person doubts it, it is either because he does not know that age, or
because he does not know this age.

The spinet expanded into the harpsichord, the leading instrument from
1700 to 1800. A harpsichord was nothing but a very large and powerful
spinet. Some of them had two strings for each note; some had three; some
had three kinds of strings,--catgut, brass, and steel; and some were
painted and decorated in the most gorgeous style. Frederick the Great
had one made for him in London, with silver hinges, silver pedals,
inlaid case, and tortoise-shell front, at a cost of two hundred guineas.
Every part of the construction of the spinet was improved, and many new
minor devices were added; but the harpsichord, in its best estate, was
nothing but a spinet, because its strings were always twanged by a piece
of quill. How astonished would an audience be to hear a harpsichord of
1750, and to be informed that such an instrument Handel felt himself
fortunate to possess!

Next, the piano,--invented at Florence in 1710, by Bartolommeo
Cristofali.

The essential difference between a harpsichord and a piano is described
by the first name given to the piano, which was _hammer-harpsichord_, i.
e. a harpsichord the strings of which were struck by hammers, not
twanged by quills. The next name given to it was _forte-piano_, which
signified soft, with power; and this name became _piano-forte_, which it
still retains. One hundred years were required to prove to the musical
public the value of an invention without which no further development of
stringed instruments had been possible. No improvement in the mere
mechanism of the harpsichord could ever have overcome the trivial effect
of the twanging of the strings by pieces of quill; but the moment the
hammer principle was introduced, nothing was wanting but improved
mechanism to make it universal. It required, however, a century to
produce the improvements sufficient to give the piano equal standing
with the harpsichord. The first pianos gave forth a dull and feeble
sound to ears accustomed to the clear and harp-like notes of the
fashionable instrument.

In that same upper room of the Messrs. Chickering, near the spinet just
mentioned, there is an instrument, made perhaps about the year 1800,
which explains why the piano was so slow in making its way. It resembles
in form and size a grand piano of the present time, though of coarsest
finish and most primitive construction, with thin, square, kitchen-table
legs, and wooden knobs for castors. This interesting instrument has two
rows of keys, and is _both_ a harpsichord and a piano,--one set of keys
twanging the wires, and the other set striking them. The effect of the
piano notes is so faint and dull, that we cannot wonder at the general
preference for the harpsichord for so many years. It appears to have
been a common thing in the last century to combine two or more
instruments in one. Dr. Charles Burney, writing in 1770, mentions "a
very curious keyed instrument" made under the direction of Frederick II.
of Prussia. "It is in shape like a large clavichord, has several changes
of stops, and is occasionally a harp, a harpsichord, a lute, or
piano-forte; but the most curious property of this instrument is, that,
by drawing out the keys, the hammers are transferred to different
strings. By which means a composition may be transposed half a note, a
whole note, or a flat third lower at pleasure, without the embarrassment
of different notes or clefs, real or imaginary."

The same sprightly author tells us of "a fine Rucker harpsichord, which
he has had painted inside and out with as much delicacy as the finest
coach, or even snuff-box, I ever saw at Paris. On the outside is the
birth of Venus; and on the inside of the cover, the story of Rameau's
most famous opera, Castor and Pollux. Earth, Hell, and Elysium are there
represented; in Elysium, sitting on a bank, with a lyre in his hand, is
that celebrated composer himself."

This gay instrument was at Paris. In Italy, the native home of music,
the keyed instruments, in 1770, Dr. Burney says, were exceedingly
inferior to those of the North of Europe. "Throughout Italy, they have
generally little octave spinets to accompany singing in private houses,
sometimes in a triangular form, but more frequently in the shape of an
old virginal; of which the keys are so noisy and the tone is so feeble,
that more wood is heard than wire. I found three English harpsichords in
the three principal cities of Italy, which are regarded by the Italians
as so many phenomena."

To this day Italy depends upon foreign countries for her best musical
instruments. Italy can as little make a grand piano as America can
compose a grand opera.

The history of the piano from 1710 to 1867 is nothing but a history of
the improved mechanism of the instrument. The moment the idea was
conceived of striking the strings with hammers, unlimited improvement
was possible; and though the piano of to-day is covered all over with
ingenious devices, the great, essential improvements are few in number.
The hammer, for example, may contain one hundred ingenuities, but they
are all included in the device of covering the first wooden hammers with
cloth; and the master-thought of making the whole frame of the piano of
iron suggested the line of improvement which secures the supremacy of
the piano over all other stringed instruments forever.

Sebastian Erard, the son of a Strasbourg upholsterer, went to Paris, a
poor orphan of sixteen, in the year 1768, and, finding employment in the
establishment of a harpsichord-maker, rose rapidly to the foremanship of
the shop, and was soon in business for himself as a maker of
harpsichords, harps, and pianos. To him, perhaps, more than to any other
individual, the fine interior mechanism of the piano is indebted; and
the house founded by Sebastian Erard still produces the pianos which
enjoy the most extensive reputation in the Old World. He may be said to
have created the "action" of the piano, though his devices have been
subsequently improved upon by others. He found the piano in 1768 feeble
and unknown; he left it, at his death in 1831, the most powerful,
pleasing, and popular stringed instrument in existence; and, besides
gaining a colossal fortune for himself, he bequeathed to his nephew,
Pierre Erard, the most celebrated manufactory of pianos in the world.
Next to Erard ranks John Broadwood, a Scotchman, who came to London
about the time of Erard's arrival in Paris, and, like him, procured
employment with a harpsichord-maker, the most noted one in England. John
Broadwood was a "good apprentice," married his master's daughter,
inherited his business, and carried it on with such success, that,
to-day, the house of Broadwood and Sons is the first of its line in
England. John Broadwood was chiefly meritorious for a _general_
improvement in the construction of the instrument. If he did not
originate many important devices, he was eager to adopt those of others,
and he made the whole instrument with British thoroughness. The strings,
the action, the case, the pedals, and all the numberless details of
mechanism received his thoughtful attention, and show to the present
time traces of his honest and intelligent mind. It was in this John
Broadwood's factory that a poor German boy named John Jacob Astor earned
the few pounds that paid his passage to America, and bought the seven
flutes which were the foundation of the great Astor estate. For several
years, the sale of the Broadwood pianos in New York was an important
part of Mr. Astor's business. He used to sell his furs in London, and
invest part of the proceeds in pianos, for exportation to New York.

America began early to try her hand at improving the instrument. Mr.
Jefferson, in the year 1800, in one of his letters to his daughter
Martha, speaks of "a very ingenious, modest, and poor young man" in
Philadelphia, who "has invented one of the prettiest improvements in
the forte-piano I have ever seen." Mr. Jefferson, who was himself a
player upon the violin, and had some little skill upon the harpsichord,
adds, "It has tempted me to engage one for Monticello." This instrument
was an upright piano, and we have found no mention of an upright of an
earlier date. "His strings," says Mr. Jefferson, "are perpendicular, and
he contrives within that height" (not given in the published extract)
"to give his strings the same length as in the grand forte-piano, and
fixes his three unisons to the same screw, which screw is in the
direction of the strings, and therefore never yields. It scarcely gets
out of tune at all, and then, for the most part, the three unisons are
tuned at once." This is an interesting passage; for, although the
"forte-pianos" of this modest young man have left no trace upon the
history of the instrument, it shows that America had no sooner cast an
eye upon its mechanism than she set to work improving it. Can it be that
the upright piano was an American invention? It may be. The Messrs.
Broadwood, in the little book which lay upon their pianos in the
Exhibition of 1851, say that the first vertical or cabinet pianos were
constructed by William Southwell, of their house, in 1804, four years
after the date of Mr. Jefferson's letter.

After 1800 there were a few pianos made every year in the United States,
but none that could compare with the best Erards and Broadwoods, until
the Chickering era, which began in 1823.

The two Americans to whom music is most indebted in the United States
are Jonas Chickering, piano-maker, born in New Hampshire in 1798, and
Lowell Mason, singing teacher and composer of church tunes, born in
Massachusetts in 1792. While Lowell Mason was creating the taste for
music, Jonas Chickering was improving the instrument by which musical
taste is chiefly gratified; and both being established in Boston, each
of them was instrumental in advancing the fortunes of the other. Mr.
Mason recommended the Chickering piano to his multitudinous classes and
choirs, and thus powerfully aided to give that extent to Mr.
Chickering's business which is necessary to the production of the best
work. Both of them began their musical career, we may say, in childhood;
for Jonas Chickering was only a cabinet-maker's apprentice when he
astonished his native village by putting in excellent playing order a
battered old piano, long before laid aside; and Lowell Mason, at
sixteen, was already leading a large church choir, and drilling a brass
band. The undertaking of this brass band by a boy was an amusing
instance of Yankee audacity; for when the youth presented himself to the
newly formed band to give them their first lesson, he found so many
instruments in their hands which he had never seen nor heard of, that he
could not proceed. "Gentlemen," said he, "I see that a good many of your
instruments are out of order, and most of them need a little oil, or
something of the kind. Our best plan will be to adjourn for a week.
Leave all your instruments with me, and I will have them in perfect
condition by the time we meet again." Before the band again came
together, the young teacher, by working night and day, had gained a
sufficient insight into the nature of the instruments to instruct those
who knew nothing of them.

Jonas Chickering was essentially a mechanic,--a most skilful, patient,
thoughtful, faithful mechanic,--and it was his excellence as a mechanic
which enabled him to rear an establishment which, beginning with one or
two pianos a month, was producing, at the death of the founder, in 1853,
fifteen hundred pianos a year. It was he who introduced into the piano
the full iron frame. It was he who first made American pianos that were
equal to the best imported ones. He is universally recognized as the
true founder of the manufacture of the piano in the United States. No
man has, perhaps, so nobly illustrated the character of the American
mechanic, or more honored the name of American citizen. He was the soul
of benevolence, truth, and honor. When we have recovered a little more
from the infatuation which invests "public men" with supreme importance,
we shall better know how to value those heroes of the apron, who, by a
life of conscientious toil, place a new source of happiness, or of
force, within the reach of their fellow-citizens.

Henry Steinway, the founder of the great house of Steinway and Sons, has
had a career not unlike that of Mr. Chickering. He also, in his native
Brunswick, amused his boyhood by repairing old instruments of music, and
making new ones. He made a cithara and a guitar for himself with only
such tools as a boy can command. He also was apprenticed to a
cabinet-maker, and was drawn away, by natural bias, from the business he
had learned, to the making of organs and pianos. For many years he was a
German piano-maker, producing, in the slow, German manner, two or three
excellent instruments a month; striving ever after higher excellence,
and growing more and more dissatisfied with the limited sphere in which
the inhabitant of a small German state necessarily works. In 1849, being
then past fifty years of age, and the father of four intelligent and
gifted sons, he looked to America for a wider range and a more promising
home for his boys. With German prudence, he sent one of them to New York
to see what prospect there might be there for another maker of pianos.
Charles Steinway came, saw, approved, returned, reported; and in 1850
all the family reached New York, except the eldest son, Theodore, who
succeeded to his father's business in Brunswick. Henry Steinway again
showed himself wise in not immediately going into business. Depositing
the capital he had brought with him in a safe place, he donned once more
the journeyman's apron, and worked for three years in a New York piano
factory to learn the ways of the trade in America; and his sons obtained
similar employment,--one of them, fortunately, becoming a tuner, which
brought him into relations with many music-teachers. During these three
years, their knowledge and their capital increased every day, for they
lived as wise men in such circumstances do live who mean to control
their destiny. In plain English, they kept their eyes open, and lived on
half their income. In 1853, in a small back shop in Varick Street, with
infinite pains, they made their first piano, and a number of teachers
and amateurs were invited to listen to it. It was warmly approved and
speedily sold. Ten men were employed, who produced for the next two
years one piano a week. In 1855, the Messrs. Steinway, still unknown to
the public, placed one of their best instruments in the New York Crystal
Palace Exhibition. A member of the musical jury has recorded the scene
which occurred when the jury came to this unknown competitor:--

"They were pursuing their rounds, and performing their duties with an
ease and facility that promised a speedy termination to their labors,
when suddenly they came upon an instrument that, from its external
appearance,--solidly rich, yet free from the frippery that was then
rather in fashion,--attracted their attention. One of the company opened
the case, and carelessly struck a few chords. The others were doing the
same with its neighbors, but somehow they ceased to chatter when the
other instrument began to speak. One by one the jurors gathered round
the strange polyphonist, and, without a word being spoken, every one
knew that it was the best piano-forte in the Exhibition. The jurors were
true to their duties. It is possible that some of them had predilections
in favor of other makers; it is certain that one of them had,--the
writer of the present notice. But when the time for the award came,
there was no argument, no discussion, no bare presentment of minor
claims; nothing, in fact, but a hearty indorsement of the singular
merits of the strange instrument."

From that time the Steinways made rapid progress. The tide of
California gold was flowing in, and every day some one was getting rich
enough to treat his family to a new piano. It was the Messrs. Steinway
who chiefly supplied the new demand, without lessening by one instrument
a month the business of older houses. Various improvements in the
framing and mechanism of the piano have been invented and introduced by
them; and, while some members of the family have superintended the
manufacture, others have conducted the not less difficult business of
selling. To this hour, the father of the family, in the dress of a
workman, attends daily at the factory, as vigilant and active as ever,
though now past seventy; and his surviving sons are as laboriously
engaged in assisting him as they were in the infancy of the
establishment.

Besides the Chickerings and the Steinways, there are twenty
manufacturers in the United States whose production exceeds one hundred
pianos per annum. Messrs. Knabe & Co. of Baltimore, who supply large
portions of the South and West, sold about a thousand pianos in the year
1866; W. P. Emerson of Boston, 935; Messrs. Haines Brothers of New York,
830; Messrs. Hallett and Davis of Boston, 462; Ernest Gabler of New
York, 312; Messrs. E. C. Lighte & Co. of New York, 286; Messrs. Hazelton
and Brothers of New York, 269; Albert Webber of New York, 266; Messrs.
Decker Brothers of New York, 256; Messrs. George Steck and Co. of New
York, 244; W. I. Bradbury of New York, 244; Messrs. Lindeman and Sons of
New York, 223; the New York Piano-forte Company, 139. About one half of
all the pianos made in the United States are made in the city of New
York.

To visit one of our large manufactories of pianos is a lesson in the
noble art of taking pains. Genius itself, says Carlyle, means, first of
all, "a transcendent capacity for taking trouble." Everywhere in these
vast and interesting establishments we find what we may call the
perfection of painstaking.

The construction of an American piano is a continual act of defensive
warfare against the future inroads of our climate,--a climate which is
polar for a few days in January, tropical for a week or two in July,
Nova-Scotian now and then in November, and at all times most trying to
the finer woods, leathers, and fabrics. To make a piano is now not so
difficult; but to make one that will stand in America,--that is very
difficult. In the rear of the Messrs. Steinway's factory there is a yard
for seasoning timber, which usually contains an amount of material equal
to two hundred and fifty thousand ordinary boards, an inch thick and
twelve feet long; and there it remains from four months to five years,
according to its nature and magnitude. Most of the timber used in an
American piano requires two years' seasoning at least. From this yard it
is transferred to the steam-drying house, where it remains subjected to
a high temperature for three months. The wood has then lost nearly all
the warp there ever was in it, and the temperature may change fifty
degrees in twelve hours (as it does sometimes in New York) without
seriously affecting a fibre. Besides this, the timber is sawed in such a
manner as to neutralize, in some degree, its tendency to warp, or,
rather, so as to make it warp the right way. The reader would be
surprised to hear the great makers converse on this subject of the
warping of timber. They have studied the laws which govern warping; they
know why wood warps, how each variety warps, how long a time each kind
continues to warp, and how to fit one warp against another, so as to
neutralize both. If two or more pieces of wood are to be glued together,
it is never done at random; but they are so adjusted that one will tend
to warp one way, and another another. Even the thin veneers upon the
case act as a restraining force upon the baser wood which they cover,
and in some parts of the instrument the veneer is double for the purpose
of keeping both in order. An astonishing amount of thought and
experiment has been expended upon this matter of warping,--so much,
that now not a piece of wood is employed in a piano, the grain of which
does not run in the precise direction which experience has shown to be
the best.

The forests of the whole earth have been searched for woods adapted to
the different parts of the instrument. Dr. Rimbault, in his learned
"History of the Piano-forte," published recently in London, gives a
catalogue of the various woods, metals, skins, and fabrics used in the
construction of a piano, which forcibly illustrates the delicacy of the
modern instrument and the infinite care taken in its manufacture. We
copy the list, though some of the materials differ from those used by
American manufacturers.

MATERIALS.                 WHERE USED.

_Woods._     _From_

Oak         Riga           Framing, various parts.

Deal        Norway         Wood-bracing, &c.

Fir         Switzerland    Sounding-board.

Pine        America        Parts of framing, key-bed
                             or bottom.

Mahogany    Honduras       Solid wood of top, and various
                             parts of the framing
                             and the action.

Beech       England        Wrest-plank, bridge or
                             sound-board, centre of
                             legs.

Beef-wood   Brazils        Tongues in the beam,
                             forming the divisions
                             between the hammers.

Birch       Canada         Belly-rail, a part of the
                             framing.

Cedar       S. America     Round shanks of hammers.

Lime-tree   England        Keys.

Pear-tree   ----           Heads of dampers.

Sycamore    ----           Hoppers or levers, veneers
                             on wrest-plank.

Ebony       Ceylon         Black keys.

Spanish                    \
Mahogany    Cuba            \
Rosewood    Rio Janeiro     |
Satinwood   East Indies     |--   For decoration.
White Holly England         |
Zebra-wood  Brazils         |
Other fancy                 /
woods                      /


_Woollen Fabrics._

Baize; green, blue,
     and brown             Upper surface of key-frame,
                             cushions for hammers to fall
                             on, to damp dead part of
                             strings, &c.

Cloth, various qualities   For various parts of the action
                             and in other places, to prevent
                             jarring; also for dampers.

Felt                       External covering for hammers.


_Leather._

Buffalo              Under-covering of hammers-bass.
Saddle                    "         "      tenor and treble.
Basil           \
Calf            |
Doeskin         |--  Various parts of action.
Seal            |
Sheepskin       |
Morocco         /
Sole                 Rings for pedal wires.


_Metal._

Iron            \    Metallic bracing, and in various small
Steel           |--  screws, springs, centres, pins, &c.,
Brass           |    &c., throughout the instrument.
Gun metal       /
Steel wire           Strings.
Steel spun wire      Lapped strings.
Covered copper wire    "        "   lowest notes.


_Various._

Ivory                White keys.

Black lead           To smooth the rubbing surfaces of cloth
                       or leather in the action.

Glue (of a particular quality  \
made expressly for             |--  Woodwork throughout.
this trade.                    /

Beeswax, emery paper,          \
glass paper, French polish,    |--  Cleaning and finishing.
oil, putty powder,             |
spirits of wine, &c., &c.      /

Such are the materials used. The processes to which they are subjected
are far more numerous. So numerous are they and so complicated, that the
Steinways, who employ five hundred and twelve men, and labor-saving
machinery which does the work of five hundred men more, aided by three
steam-engines of a hundred and twenty-five, fifty, and twenty-five
horse-power, can only produce from forty-five to fifty-five pianos a
week. The average number is about fifty,--six grand, four upright, and
forty square. The reader has seen, doubtless, a piano with the top taken
off; but perhaps it has never occurred to him what a tremendous _pull_
those fifty to sixty strings are keeping up, day and night, from one
year's end to another. The shortest and thinnest string of all pulls two
hundred and sixty-two pounds,--about as much as we should care to lift;
and the entire pull of the strings of a grand piano is sixty pounds less
than twenty tons,--a load for twenty cart-horses. The fundamental
difficulty in the construction of a piano has always been to support
this continuous strain. When we look into a piano we see the "iron
frame" so much vaunted in the advertisements, and so splendid with
bronze and gilding; but it is not this thin plate of cast-iron that
resists the strain of twenty tons. If the wires were to pull upon the
iron for one second, it would fly into atoms. The iron plate is screwed
to what is called the "bottom" of the piano, which is a mass of timber
four inches thick, composed of three layers of plank glued together, and
so arranged that the pull of the wires shall be in a line with the grain
of the wood. The iron plate itself is subjected to a long course of
treatment. The rough casting is brought from the foundery, placed under
the drilling-machine, which bores many scores of holes of various sizes
with marvellous rapidity. Then it is smoothed and finished with the
file; next, it is japanned; after which it is baked in an oven for
forty-eight hours. It is then ready for the bronzer and gilder, who
covers the greater part of the surface with a light-yellow bronzing, and
brightens it here and there with gilding. All this long process is
necessary in order to make the plate _retain_ its brilliancy of color.

Upon this solid foundation of timber and iron the delicate instrument is
built, and it is enclosed in a case constructed with still greater care.
To make so large a box, and one so thin, as the case of a piano stand
our summer heats and our furnace heats (still more trying), is a work of
extreme difficulty. The seasoned boards are covered with a double
veneer, designed to counteract all the tendencies to warp; and the
surface is most laboriously polished. It takes three months to varnish
and polish the case of a piano. In such a factory as the Steinways' or
the Chickerings', there will be always six or seven hundred cases
undergoing this expensive process. When the surface of the wood has been
made as smooth as sand-paper can make it, the first coat of varnish is
applied, and this requires eight days to harden. Then all the varnish is
scraped off, except that which has sunk into the pores of the wood. The
second coat is then put on; which, after eight days' drying, is also
scraped away, until the surface of the veneer is laid bare again. After
this four or five coats of varnish are added, at intervals of eight
days, and, finally, the last polish is produced by the hand of the
workman. The object of all this is not merely to produce a splendid and
enduring gloss, but to make the case stand for a hundred years in a room
which is heated by a furnace to seventy degrees by day, and in which
water will freeze at night. During the war, when good varnish cost as
much as the best champagne, the varnish bills of the leading makers were
formidable indeed.

The labor, however, is the chief item of expense. The average wages of
the five hundred and twelve men employed by the Messrs. Steinway is
twenty-six dollars a week. This force, aided by one hundred and two
labor-saving machines, driven by steam-power equivalent to two hundred
horses, produces a piano in one hour and fifteen minutes. A man with the
ordinary tools can make a piano in about four months, but it could not
possibly be as good a one as those produced in the large establishments.
Nor, indeed, is such a feat ever attempted in the United States. The
small makers, who manufacture from one to five instruments a week,
generally, as already mentioned, buy the different parts from persons
who make only parts. It is a business to make the hammers of a piano; it
is another business to make the "action"; another, to make the keys;
another, the legs; another, the cases; another, the pedals. The
manufacture of the hardware used in a piano is a very important branch,
and it is a separate business to sell it. The London Directory
enumerates forty-two different trades and businesses related to the
piano, and we presume there are not fewer in New York. Consequently,
any man who knows enough of a piano to put one together, and can command
capital enough to buy the parts of one instrument, may boldly fling his
sign to the breeze, and announce himself to an inattentive public as a
"piano-forte-maker." The only difficulty is to sell the piano when it is
put together. At present it costs rather more money to sell a piano than
it does to make one.

When the case is finished, all except the final hand-polish, it is taken
to the sounding-board room. The sounding-board--a thin, clear sheet of
spruce under the strings--is the piano's soul, wanting which, it were a
dead thing. Almost every resonant substance in nature has been tried for
sounding-boards, but nothing has been found equal to spruce. Countless
experiments have been made with a view to ascertain precisely the best
way of shaping, arranging, and fixing the sounding-board, the best
thickness, the best number and direction of the supporting ribs; and
every great maker is happy in the conviction that he is a little better
in sounding-boards than any of his rivals. Next, the strings are
inserted; next, the action and the keys. Every one will pause to admire
the hammers of the piano, so light, yet so capable of giving a telling
blow, which evoke all the music of the strings, but mingle with that
music no click, nor thud, nor thump, of their own. The felt employed
varies in thickness from one sixteenth of an inch to an inch and an
eighth, and costs $5.75 in gold per pound. Only Paris, it seems, can
make it good enough for the purpose. Many of the keys have a double
felting, compressed from an inch and a half to three quarters of an
inch, and others again have an outer covering of leather to keep the
strings from cutting the felt. Simple as the finished hammer looks,
there are a hundred and fifty years of thought and experiment in it. It
required half a century to exhaust the different kinds of wood, bone,
and cork; and when, about 1760, the idea was conceived of covering the
hammers with something soft, another century was to elapse before all
the leathers and fabrics had been tried, and felt found to be the _ne
plus ultra_. With regard to the action, or the mechanism by which the
hammers are made to strike the strings, we must refer the inquisitive
reader to the piano itself.

When all the parts have been placed in the case, the instrument falls
into the hands of the "regulator," who inspects, rectifies, tunes,
harmonizes, perfects the whole. Nothing then remains but to convey it to
the store, give it its final polish and its last tuning.

The next thing is to sell it. Six hundred and fifty dollars seems a high
price for a square piano, such as we used to buy for three hundred, and
the "natural cost" of which does not much exceed two hundred dollars.
Fifteen hundred dollars for a grand piano is also rather startling. But
how much tax, does the reader suppose, is paid upon a
fifteen-hundred-dollar grand? It is difficult to compute it; but it does
not fall much below two hundred dollars. The five per cent
manufacturer's tax, which is paid upon the price of the finished
instrument, has also to be paid upon various parts, such as the wire;
and upon the imported articles there is a high tariff. It is computed
that the taxes upon very complicated articles, in which a great variety
of materials are employed, such as carriages, pianos, organs, and fine
furniture, amount to about one eighth of the price. The piano, too, is
an expensive creature to keep, in these times of high rents, and its
fare upon a railroad is higher than that of its owner. We saw, however,
a magnificent piano, the other day, at the establishment of Messrs.
Chickering, in Broadway, for which passage had been secured all the way
to Oregon for thirty-five dollars,--only five dollars more than it would
cost to transport it to Chicago. Happily for us, to whom fifteen hundred
dollars--nay, six hundred and fifty dollars--is an enormous sum of
money, a very good second-hand piano is always attainable for less than
half the original price.

For, reader, you must know that the ostentation of the rich is always
putting costly pleasures within the reach of the refined not-rich. A
piano in its time plays many parts, and figures in a variety of scenes.
Like the more delicate and sympathetic kinds of human beings, it is
naught unless it is valued; but, being valued, it is a treasure beyond
price. Cold, glittering, and dumb, it stands among the tasteless
splendors with which the wealthy ignorant cumber their dreary abodes,--a
thing of ostentation merely,--as uninteresting as the women who surround
it, gorgeously apparelled, but without conversation, conscious of
defective parts of speech. "There is much music, excellent voice, in
that little organ," but there is no one there who can "make it speak."
They may "fret" the noble instrument; they "cannot play upon it."

But a fool and his nine-hundred-dollar piano are soon parted. The red
flag of the auctioneer announces its transfer to a drawing-room
frequented by persons capable of enjoying the refined pleasures. Bright
and joyous is the scene, about half past nine in the evening, when, by
turns, the ladies try over their newest pieces, or else listen with
intelligent pleasure to the performance of a master. Pleasant are the
informal family concerts in such a house, when one sister breaks down
under the difficulties of Thalberg, and yields the piano-stool to the
musical genius of the family, who takes up the note, and, dashing gayly
into the midst of "Egitto," forces a path through the wilderness, takes
the Red Sea like a heroine, bursts at length into the triumphal prayer,
and retires from the instrument as calm as a summer morning. On
occasions of ceremony, too, the piano has a part to perform, though a
humble one. Awkward pauses will occur in all but the best-regulated
parties, and people will get together, in the best houses, who quench
and neutralize one another. It is the piano that fills those pauses, and
gives a welcome respite to the toil of forcing conversation. How could
"society" go on without the occasional interposition of the piano? One
hundred and sixty years ago, in those days beloved and vaunted by
Thackeray, when Louis XIV. was king of France, and Anne queen of
England, society danced, tattled, and gambled. Cards have receded as the
piano has advanced in importance.

From such a drawing-room as this, after a stay of some years, the piano
may pass into a boarding-school, and thence into the sitting-room of a
family who have pinched for two years to buy it. "It must have been,"
says Henry Ward Beecher, "about the year 1820, in old Litchfield,
Connecticut, upon waking one fine morning, that we heard music in the
parlor, and, hastening down, beheld an upright piano, the first we ever
saw or heard of! Nothing can describe the amazement of silence that
filled us. It rose almost to superstitious reverence, and all that day
was a dream and marvel." It is such pianos that are appreciated. It is
in such parlors that the instrument best answers the end of its
creation. There is many a piano in the back room of a little store, or
in the uncarpeted sitting-room of a farm-house, that yields a larger
revenue of delight than the splendid grand of a splendid drawing-room.
In these humble abodes of refined intelligence, the piano is a dear and
honored member of the family.

The piano now has a rival in the United States in that fine instrument
before mentioned, which has grown from the melodeon into the cabinet
organ. We do not hesitate to say, that the cabinet organs of Messrs.
Mason and Hamlin only need to be as generally known as the piano in
order to share the favor of the public equally with it. It seems to us
peculiarly the instrument for _men_. We trust the time is at hand when
it will be seen that it is not less desirable for boys to learn to play
upon an instrument than girls; and how much more a little skill in
performing may do for a man than for a woman! A boy can hardly be a
perfect savage, nor a man a money-maker or a pietist, who has acquired
sufficient command of an instrument to play upon it with pleasure. How
often, when we have been listening to the swelling music of the cabinet
organs at the ware-rooms of Messrs. Mason and Hamlin in Broadway, have
we desired to put one of those instruments in every clerk's
boarding-house room, and tell him to take all the ennui, and half the
peril, out of his life by learning to play upon it! No business man who
works as intensely as we do can keep alive the celestial harmonies
within him,--no, nor the early wrinkles from his face,--without some
such pleasant mingling of bodily rest and mental exercise as playing
upon an instrument.

The simplicity of the means by which music is produced from the cabinet
organ is truly remarkable. It is called a "reed" instrument; which leads
many to suppose that the cane-brake is despoiled to procure its
sound-giving apparatus. Not so. The reed employed is nothing but a thin
strip of brass with a tongue slit in it, the vibration of which causes
the musical sound. One of the reeds, though it produces a volume of
sound only surpassed by the pipes of an organ, weighs about an ounce,
and can be carried in a vest-pocket. In fact, a cabinet organ is simply
an accordeon of immense power and improved mechanism. Twenty years ago,
one of our melodeon-makers chanced to observe that the accordeon
produced a better tone when it was drawn out than when it was pushed in;
and this fact suggested the first great improvement in the melodeon.
Before that time, the wind from the bellows, in all melodeons, was
forced through the reeds. Melodeons on the improved principle were
constructed so that the wind was drawn through the reeds. The credit of
introducing this improvement is due to the well-known firm of Carhart,
Needham, & Co., and it was as decided an improvement in the melodeon as
the introduction of the hammer in the harpsichord.

At this point of development, the instrument was taken up by Messrs.
Mason and Hamlin, who have covered it with improvements, and rendered it
one of the most pleasing musical instruments in the possession of
mankind. When we remarked above, that the American piano was the best in
the world, we only expressed the opinion of others; but now that we
assert the superiority of the American cabinet organ over similar
instruments made in London and Paris, we are communicating knowledge of
our own. Indeed, the superiority is so marked that it is apparent to the
merest tyro in music. During the year 1866, the number of these
instruments produced in the United States by the twenty-five
manufacturers was about fifteen thousand, which were sold for one
million six hundred thousand dollars, or a little more than one hundred
dollars each. Messrs. Mason and Hamlin, who manufacture one fourth of
the whole number, produce thirty-five kinds, varying in power, compass,
and decoration, and in price from seventy-five dollars to twelve
hundred. In the new towns of the great West, the cabinet organ is
usually the first instrument of music to arrive, and, of late years, it
takes its place with the piano in the fashionable drawing-rooms of the
Atlantic States.

