THE TOWER OF BABEL--Nimrod, the son of Cush, an Ethiopian, attempted
to build the Tower of Babel (Gen. x. 8-10 xi. 4-9). One hundred and
two years after the flood, in the land of Shinar--an extensive and
fertile plain, lying between Mesopotamia on the west and Persia on the
east, and watered by the Euphrates,--mankind being all of one
language, one color, and one religion,--they agree to erect a tower of
prodigious extent and height. Their design was not to secure
themselves against a second deluge, or they would have built their
tower on a high mountain, but to get themselves a famous character,
and to prevent their dispersion by the erection of a monument which
should be visible from a great distance. No quarries being found in
that alluvial soil, they made bricks for stone, and used slime for
mortar. Their haughty and rebellious attempt displeased the Lord; and
after they had worked, it is said, twenty-two years, he confounded
their language. This effectually stopped the building, procured it the
name of _Babel_, or _Confusion_, and obliged some of the offspring of
Noah to disperse themselves and replenish the world. The tower of
Babel was in sight from the great city of Babylon. Nimrod was a hunter
and monarch of vast ambition. When he rose to be king of Babylon he
re-peopled Babel, which had been desolate since the confusion of
tongues, but did not dare to attempt the finishing of the tower. The
Scriptures inform us, he became "mighty upon earth;" but the extent of
his conquests is not known. (MALCOM'S _Bible Dictionary_.)

The private houses, in most of the ancient cities, were simple in
external appearance, but exhibited, in the interior, all the splendor
and elegance of refined luxury. The floors were of marble; alabaster
and gilding were displayed on every side. In every great house there
were several fountains, playing in magnificent basins. The smallest
house had three pipes,--one for the kitchen, another for the garden,
and a third for washing. The same magnificence was displayed in the
mosques, churches, and coffee houses. The environs presented, at all
seasons of the year, a pleasing verdure, and contained extensive
series of gardens and villas.

THE GREAT AND SPLENDID CITY OF BABYLON.--This city was founded by
Nimrod, about 2,247 years B.C., in the land of Shinar, or Chaldea, and
made the capital of his kingdom. It was probably an inconsiderable
place, until it was enlarged and embellished by Semiramis; it then
became the most magnificent city in the world, surpassing even Nineveh
in glory. The circumference of both these cities was the same, but the
walls which surrounded Babylon were twice as broad as the walls of
Nineveh, and having a hundred brass gates. The city of Babylon stood
on the river Euphrates, by which it was divided into two parts,
eastern and western; and these were connected by a cedar bridge of
wonderful construction, uniting the two divisions. Quays of beautiful
marble adorned the banks of the river; and on one bank stood the
magnificent Temple of Belus, and on the other the Queen's Palace.
These two edifices were connected by a passage under the bed of the
river. This city was at least forty-five miles in circumference; and
would, of course, include eight cities as large as London and its
appendages. It was laid out in six hundred and twenty five squares,
formed by the intersection of twenty-five streets at right angles The
walls, which were of brick, were three hundred and fifty feet high,
and eighty-seven feet broad. A trench surrounded the city, the sides
of which were lined with brick and waterproof cement. This city was
famous for its hanging gardens, constructed by one of its kings, to
please his queen. She was a Persian, and was desirous of seeing
meadows on mountains, as in her own country. She prevailed on him to
raise artificial gardens, adorned with meadows and trees. For this
purpose, vaulted arches were raised from the ground, one above
another, to an almost inconceivable height, and of a magnificence and
strength sufficient to support the vast weight of the whole garden
Babylon was a great commercial city, and traded to all parts of the
earth then known, in all kinds of merchandise, and she likewise traded
in slaves, and the souls of men. For her sins she has been blotted
from existence,--even her location is a matter of supposition. Great
was Babylon of old; in merchandise did she trade, and in souls. For
her sins she thus became blotted from the sight of men.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ETHIOPIAN KINGS OF EGYPT.

1. _Menes_ was the first king of Egypt. We have accounts of but one of
his successors--Timans, during the first period, a space of more than
two centuries.

2. _Shishak_ was king of Ethiopia, and doubtless of Egypt. After his
death

3. _Zerah_ the son of Judah became king of Ethiopia, and made himself
master of Egypt and Libya; and intending to add Judea to his dominions
made war upon Asa king of Judea. His army consisted of a million of
men, and three hundred chariots of war (2 Chron. xiv. 9).

4. _Sabachus_, an Ethiopian, king of Ethiopia, being encouraged by an
oracle, entered Egypt with a numerous army, and possessed himself of
the country. He reigned with great clemency and justice. It is
believed, that this Sabachus was the same with Solomon, whose aid was
implored by Hosea king of Israel, against Salmanaser king of Assyria.

5. _Sethon_ reigned fourteen years. He is the same with Sabachus, or
Savechus the son of Sabacan or Saul the Ethiopian who reigned so long
over Egypt.

6. _Tharaca_, an Ethiopian, joined Sethon, with an Ethiopian army to
relieve Jerusalem. After the death of Sethon, who had filled the
Egyptian throne fourteen years, Tharaca ascended the throne and
reigned eight years over Egypt.

7. _Sesach_ or Shishak was the king of Egypt to whom Jeroboam fled to
avoid death at the hands of king Solomon. Jeroboam was entertained
till the death of Solomon, when he returned to Judea and was made king
of Israel. (2 Chron. xi. and xii.)

This Sesach, in the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam marched
against Jerusalem, because the Jews had transgressed against the Lord.
He came with twelve hundred chariots of war, and sixty thousand
horses. He had brought numberless multitudes of people, who were all
Libyans, Troglodytes, and Ethiopians. He seized upon all the strongest
cities of Judah, and advanced as far as Jerusalem. Then the king, and
the princes of Israel, having humbled themselves, and implored the
protection of the God of Israel, he told them, by his prophet
Shemaiah, that, because they humbled themselves, he would not utterly
destroy them, as they had deserved but that they should be the
servants of Sesach, in order _that they might know_ the difference of
_his service, and the service of the kingdoms of the country_. Sesach
retired from Jerusalem, after having plundered the treasures of the
house of the Lord, and of the king's house, he carried off every thing
with him, _and even also the three hundred shields of gold which
Salomon had made_.

The following are the kings of Egypt mentioned in Scripture by the
common appellation of Pharaoh:--

8. _Psammetichus_.--As this prince owed his preservation to the
Ionians and Carians, he settled them in Egypt, from which all
foreigners hitherto had been excluded; and, by assigning them
sufficient lands and fixed revenues, he made them forget their native
country. By his order, Egyptian children were put under their care to
learn the Greek tongue; and on this occasion, and by this means, the
Egyptians began to have a correspondence with the Greeks, and, from
that era, the Egyptian history, which till then had been intermixed
with pompous fables, by the artifice of the priests, begins, according
to Herodotus, to speak with greater truth and certainty.

As soon as Psammetichus was settled on the throne, he engaged in a war
against the king of Assyria, on account of the limits of the two
empires. This war was of long continuance. Ever since Syria had been
conquered by the Assyrians, Palestine, being the only country that
separated the two kingdoms, was the subject of continual discord; as
afterwards it was between the Ptolemies and the Seleucidæ. They were
perpetually contending for it, and it was alternately won by the
stronger. Psammetichus, seeing himself the peaceable possessor of all
Egypt, and having restored the ancient form of government, thought it
high time for him to look to his frontiers, and to secure them against
the Assyrian, his neighbour, whose power increased daily. For this
purpose he entered Palestine at the head of an army.

Perhaps we are to refer to the beginning of this war, an incident
related by Diodorus; that the Egyptians, provoked to see the Greeks
posted on the right wing by the king himself in preference to them,
quitted the service, being upwards of two hundred thousand men, and
retired into Ethiopia, where they met with an advantageous settlement

Be this as it will, Psammetichus entered Palestine, where his career
was stopped by Azotus, one of the principal cities of the country,
which gave him so much trouble, that he was forced to besiege it
twenty nine years before he could take it. This is the longest siege
mentioned in ancient history. Psammetichus died in the 24th year of
the reign of Josiah king of Judah; and was succeeded by his son Nechoa
or Necho--in Scriptures frequently called Pharaoh Necho.

9. _Nechao_ or _Pharaoh-Necho_ reigned sixteen years king of Egypt, (2
Chron. xxxv. 20,) whose expeditions are often mentioned in profane
history

The Babylonians and Medes having destroyed Nineveh, and with it the
empire of the Assyrians, were thereby become so formidable, that they
drew upon themselves the jealousy of all their neighbours. Nechao,
alarmed at the danger, advanced to the Euphrates, at the head of a
powerful army, in order to check their progress. Josiah, king of
Judah, so famous for his uncommon piety, observing that he took his
route through Judea, resolved to oppose his passage. With this view he
raised all the forces of his kingdom, and posted himself in the valley
of Megiddo (a city on this side of Jordan, belonging to the tribe of
Manasseh, and called Magdolus by Herodotus). Nechao informed him by a
herald, that his enterprise was not designed against him; that he had
other enemies in view, and that he had undertaken this war in the name
of God, who was with him; that for this reason he advised Josiah not
to concern himself with this war for fear it otherwise should turn to
his disadvantage. However, Josiah was not moved by these reasons; he
was sensible that the bare march of so powerful an army through Judea
would entirely ruin it. And besides, he feared that the victor, after
the defeat of the Babylonians, would fall upon him and dispossess him
of part of his dominions. He therefore marched to engage Nechao; and
was not only overthrown by him, but unfortunately received a wound of
which he died at Jerusalem, whither he had ordered himself to be
carried.

Nechao, animated by this victory, continued his march and advanced
towards the Euphrates. He defeated the Babylonians; took Carchemish, a
large city in that country; and securing to himself the possession of
it by a strong garrison, returned to his own kingdom after having been
absent three months.

Being informed in his march homeward, that Jehoaz had caused himself
to be proclaimed king at Jerusalem, without first asking his consent,
he commanded him to meet him at Riblah in Syria. The unhappy prince
was no sooner arrived there than he was put in chains by Nechao's
order, and sent prisoner to Egypt, where he died. From thence,
pursuing his march, he came to Jerusalem, where he gave the sceptre to
Eliakim (called by him Jehoiakim), another of Josiah's sons, in the
room of his brother; and imposed an annual tribute on the land, of a
hundred talents of silver, and one talent of gold. This being done, he
returned in triumph to Egypt.

Herodotus, mentioning this king's expedition, and the victory gained
by him at Magdolus, (as he calls it,) says that he afterwards took the
city Cadytis, which he represents as situated in the mountains of
Palestine, and equal in extent to Sardis, the capital at that time not
only of Lydia, but of all Asia Minor. This description can suit only
Jerusalem, which was situated in the manner above described, and was
then the only city in those parts that could be compared to Sardis. It
appears besides, from Scripture, that Nechao, after his victory, made
himself master of this capital of Judea; for he was there in person,
when he gave the crown to Jehoiakim. The very name Cadytis, which in
Hebrew, signifies the holy, points clearly to the city of Jerusalem,
as is proved by the learned dean Prideaux.

10. _Psammis_.--His reign was but of six years' duration, and history
has left us nothing memorable concerning him, except that he made an
expedition into Ethiopia.

11. _Apries_.--In Scripture he is called Pharaoh-Hophra; and,
succeeding his father Psammis, reigned twenty-five years.

During the first year of his reign, he was as happy as any of his
predecessors. He carried his arms into Cyprus; besieged the city of
Sidon by sea and land; took it, and made himself master of all
Phoenicia and Palestine.

So rapid a success elated his heart to a prodigious degree, and, as
Herodotus informs us, swelled him with so much pride and infatuation,
that he boasted it was not in the power of the gods themselves to
dethrone him; so great was the idea he had formed to himself of the
firm establishment of his own power. It was with a view to these
arrogant conceits, that Ezekiel put the vain and impious words
following into his mouth: _My river is mine own, and I have made it
for myself_. But the true God proved to him afterwards that he had a
master, and that he was a mere man; and he had threatened him long
before, by his prophets, with all the calamities he was resolved to
bring upon him, in order to punish him for his pride.

12. _Amasis_.--After the death of Apries, Amasis became peaceable
possessor of Egypt, and reigned over it forty years. He was, according
to Plato, a native of the city of Sais.

As he was but of mean extraction, he met with no respect, and was
contemned by his subjects in the beginning of his reign. He was not
insensible of this; but nevertheless thought it his interest to subdue
their tempers by an artful carriage, and to win their affection by
gentleness and reason. He had a golden cistern, in which himself, and
those persons who were admitted to his table, used to wash their feet,
he melted it down, and had it cast into a statue, and then exposed the
new god to public worship. The people hastened in crowds to pay their
adorations to the statue. The king, having assembled the people,
informed them of the vile uses to which this statue had once been put,
which nevertheless was now the object of their religious prostrations;
the application was easy, and had the desired success; the people
thenceforward paid the king all the respect that is due to majesty.

He always used to devote the whole morning to public affairs, in order
to receive petitions, give audience, pronounce sentences, and hold his
councils; the rest of the day was given to pleasure, and as Amasis, in
hours of diversion, was extremely gay, and seemed to carry his mirth
beyond due bounds, his courtiers took the liberty to represent to him
the unsuitableness of such a behaviour; when he answered that it was
impossible for the mind to be always serious and intent upon business,
as for a bow to continue always bent.

It was this king who obliged the inhabitants of every town to enter
their names in a book kept by the magistrates for that purpose, with
their profession and manner of living. Solon inserted this custom
among his laws.

He built many magnificent temples, especially at Sais the place of his
birth. Herodotus admired especially a chapel there, formed of one
single stone, and which was twenty-one cubits in front, fourteen in
depth, and eight in height; its dimensions within were not quite so
large; it had been brought from Elephantina, and two thousand men were
employed three years in conveying it along the Nile.

_Amasis_ had a great esteem for the Greeks. He granted them large
privileges; and permitted such of them as were desirous of settling in
Egypt to live in the city of Naucratis, so famous for its harbour.
When the rebuilding of the temple of Delphi, which had been burnt, was
debated on, and the expense was computed at three hundred talents,
Amasis furnished the Delphians with a very considerable sum towards
discharging their quota, which was the fourth part of the whole
charge.

He made an alliance with the Cyrenians, and married a wife from among
them. He is the only king of Egypt who conquered the island of Cyprus,
and made it tributary. Under his reign Pythagorus came into Egypt,
being recommended to that monarch by the famous Polycrates, tyrant of
Samos, who had contracted a friendship with Amasis, and will be
mentioned hereafter. Pythagoras, during his stay in Egypt, was
initiated in all the mysteries of the country, and instructed by the
priests in whatever was most abstruse and important in their religion.
It was here he imbibed his doctrine of the metempsychosis, or
transmigration of souls.

In the expedition in which Cyrus conquered so great a part of the
world, Egypt doubtless was subdued, like the rest of the provinces,
and Xenophon positively declares this in the beginning of his
Cyropædia, or institution of that prince. Probably, after that the
forty years of desolation, which had been foretold by the prophet,
were expired, Egypt beginning gradually to recover itself, Amasis
shook off the yoke, and recovered his liberty.

Accordingly we find, that one of the first cares of Cambyses, the son
of Cyrus, after he had ascended the throne, was to carry his arms into
Egypt. On his arrival there, Amasis was just dead, and succeeded by
his son Psammetus.

13. _Rameses Miamun_, according to Archbishop Usher, was the name of
this king, who is called Pharaoh in Scripture. He reigned sixty-six
years, and oppressed the Israelites in a most grievous manner. _He set
over them taskmasters, to afflict them with their burdens, and they
built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithon and Raamses. And the
Egyptians made the children of Israel serve with rigour, and they made
their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar and in brick, and in
all manner of service in the field; all their service wherein they
made them serve, was with rigour_. This king had two sons, Amenophis
and Busiris.

14. _Amenophis_, the eldest, succeeded him. He was the Pharaoh under
whose reign the Israelites departed out of Egypt, and who was drowned
in his passage through the Red Sea. Archbishop Usher says, that
Amenophis left two sons, one called Sesothis, or Seaostris, and the
other Armais. The Greeks call him Belus, and his two sons, Egyptus and
Danaus.

15. _Sesostris_ was not only one of the most powerful kings of Egypt,
but one of the greatest conquerors that antiquity boasts of. He was at
an advanced age sent by his father against the Arabians, in order
that, by fighting with them, he might acquire military knowledge. Here
the young prince learned to bear hunger and thirst, and subdued a
nation which till then had never been conquered. The youth educated
with him, attended him in all his campaigns.

Accustomed by this conquest to martial toils he was next sent by his
father to try his fortune westward. He invaded Libya, and subdued the
greatest part of that vast continent.

His army consisted of six hundred thousand foot, and twenty thousand
horse, besides twenty thousand armed chariots.

He invaded Ethiopia, and obliged the nations of it to furnish him
annually with a certain quantity of ebony, ivory, and gold.

He had fitted out a fleet of four hundred sail, and ordering it to
sail to the Red Sea, made himself master of the isles and cities lying
on the coast of that sea. After having spread desolation through the
world for nine years, he returned, laden with the spoils of the
vanquished nations. A hundred famous temples, raised as so many
monuments of gratitude to the tutelar gods of all the cities, were the
first, as well as the most illustrious testimonies of his victories.

16. _Pheron_ succeeded Sesostris in his kingdom, but not in his glory.
He probably reigned fifty years.

17. _Proteus_ was son of Memphis, and according to Herodotus, must
have succeeded the first--since Proteus lived at the time of the siege
of Troy, which, according to Usher, was taken An. Mun. 2820.

18. _Rhampsinitus_ who was richer than any of his predecessors, built
a treasury. Till the reign of this king, there had been some shadow at
least of justice and moderation in Egypt; but, in the two following
reigns, violence and cruelty usurped their place.

19, 20. Cheops and Cephrenus, reigned in all one hundred and six
years. Cheops reigned fifty years, and his brother Cephrenus fifty-six
years after him. They kept the temples closed during the whole time of
their long reign; and forbid the offerings of sacrifice under the
severest penalties. They oppressed their subjects.

21. _Mycerinus_ the son of Cheops, reigned but seven years. He opened
the temples; restored the sacrifices; and did all in his power to
comfort his subjects, and make them forget their past miseries.

22. _Asychis_ one of the kings of Egypt. He valued himself for having
surpassed all his predecessors, by building a pyramid of brick, more
magnificent, than any hitherto seen.

23. _Busiris_, built the famous city of Thebes, and made it the seat
of his empire. This prince is not to be confounded with Busirus, so
infamous for his cruelties.

24. _Osymandyas_, raised many magnificent edifices, in which were
exhibited sculptures and paintings of exquisite beauty.

25. _Uchoreus_, one of the successors of Osymandyas, built the city of
Memphis. This city was 150 furlongs, or more than seven leagues in
circumference, and stood at the point of the Delta, in that part where
the Nile divides itself into several branches or streams. A city so
advantageously situated, and so strongly fortified, became soon the
usual residence of the Egyptian kings.

26. _Thethmosis_ or _Amosis_, having expelled the Shepherd kings,
reigned in Lower Egypt.[645]


FOOTNOTES:

[645] Rollin, vol. i. pp. 129-147.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER VIII.

AFRICAN LANGUAGES.

In the language of the Kafirs, for example, not only the cases but the
numbers and genders of nouns are formed entirely by prefixes,
analogous to articles. The prefixes vary according to number, gender
and case, while the nouns remain unaltered except by a merely euphonic
change of the initial letters. Thus, in Coptic, from _sheri_, a son,
comes the plural _neu-sheri_, the sons; from _sori_, accusation,
_hau-sori_, accusations. Analogous to this we have in the Kafir _ama_
marking the plural, as _amakosah_ the plural of _kosah_, _amahashe_
the plural of _ihashe_, _insana_ the plural of _usana_. The Kafir has
a great variety of similar prefixes; they are equally numerous in the
language of Kongo, in which, as in the Coptic and the Kafir, the
genders, numbers, and cases of nouns are almost solely distinguished
by similar prefixes.

"The Kafir language is distinguished by one peculiarity which
immediately strikes a student whose views of language have been formed
upon the examples afforded by the inflected languages of ancient and
modern Europe. With the exception of a change of termination in the
ablative case of the noun, and five changes of which the verb is
susceptible in its principal tenses, the whole business of declension,
conjugation, &c., is carried on by prefixes, and by the changes which
take place in the initial letters or syllables of words subjected to
grammatical government."[646]

Resources are not yet in existence for instituting a general
comparison of the languages of Africa. Many years will probably elapse
before it will be possible to produce such an analysis of these
languages, investigated in their grammatical structure, as it is
desirable to possess, or even to compare them by extensive collections
of well-arranged vocabularies, after the manner of Klaproth's Asia
Polyglotta. Sufficient data however are extant, and I trust that I
have adduced evidence to render it extremely probable that a principle
of analogy in structure prevails extensively among the native idioms
of Africa. They are probably allied, not in the manner or degree in
which Semitic or Indo-European idioms resemble each other, but by
strong analogies in their general principles of structure, which may
be compared to those discoverable between the individual members of
two other great classes of languages, by no means connected among
themselves by what is called family relation. I allude to the
monosyllabic and the polysynthetic languages, the former prevalent in
Eastern Asia, the latter throughout the vast regions of the New World.
If we have sufficient evidence for constituting such a class of
dialects under the title of African languages, we have likewise
reason--and it is equal in degree--for associating in this class the
language of the ancient Egyptians.[647]

That the written _Abyssinian_ language, which we call _Ethiopick_, is
a dialect of old _Chaldean_, and sister of _Arabick_ and _Hebrew_; we
know with certainty, not only from the great multitude of identical
words, but (which is a far stronger proof) from the similar
grammatical arrangement of the several idioms: we know at the same
time, that it is written like all the _Indian_ characters, from the
left hand to the right, and that the vowels are annexed, as in
Devanagari, to the consonants; with which they form a syllabick system
extremely clear and convenient, but disposed in a less artificial
order than the system of letters now exhibited in the _Sanscrit_
grammars; whence it may justly be inferred, that the order contrived
by PANINI or his disciples is comparatively modern; and I have no
doubt, from a cursory examination of many old inscriptions on pillars
and in caves, which have obligingly been sent to me from all parts of
India, that the _Nagari_ and _Ethiopean_ letters had at first a
similar form. It has long been my opinion, that the _Abyssinians_ of
the _Arabian_ stock, having no symbols of their own to represent
articulate sounds, borrowed those of the black pagans, whom the
_Greeks_ call _Troglodytes_, from their primeval habitations in
natural caverns, or in mountains excavated by their own labour: they
were probably the first inhabitants of _Africa_, where they became in
time the builders of magnificent cities, the founders of seminaries
for the advancement of science and philosophy, and the inventors (if
they were not rather the importers) of symbolical characters. I
believe on the whole, that the _Ethiops_ of _Meroe_ were the same
people with the first _Egyptians_, and consequently, as it might
easily be shown, with the original _Hindus_. To the ardent and
intrepid MR. BRUCE, whose travels are to my taste, uniformally
agreeable and satisfactory, though he thinks very differently from me
on the language and genius of the Arabs, we are indebted for more
important, and, I believe, more accurate information concerning the
nations established near the _Nile_, from its fountains to its mouths,
than all _Europe_ united could before have supplied; but, since he has
not been at the pains to compare the seven languages, of which he has
exhibited a specimen, and since I have not leisure to make the
comparison, I must be satisfied with observing, on his authority, that
the dialects of the _Gafots_ and the _Gallas_, the _Agows_ of both
races, and the _Falashas_, who must originally have used a _Chaldean_
idiom, were never preserved in writing, and the _Amharick_ only in
modern times: they must, therefore, have been for ages in fluctuation,
and can lead, perhaps, to no certain conclusion as to the origin of
the several tribes who anciently spoke them. It is very remarkable, as
MR. BRUCE and MR. BRYAN have proved, that the _Greeks_ gave the
appellation of _Indians_ both to the southern nations of _Africk_ and
to the people, among whom we now live; nor is it less observable,
that, according to EPHORUS, quoted by STRABO, they called all the
southern nations in the world _Ethiopians_, thus using _Indian_ and
_Ethiop_ as convertible terms: but we must leave the gymnosophists of
Ethiopia, who seemed to have professed the doctrines of BUDDHA, and
enter the great _Indian_ ocean, of which their _Asiatick_ and
_African_ brethren were probably the first navigators.[648]


FOOTNOTES:

[646] Kafir Grammar, p. 3.

[647] Prichard, vol. ii. pp. 216, 217.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHERBRO MISSION-DISTRICT, WESTERN AFRICA.

Western Africa is one of the most difficult mission-fields in the
entire heathen world. The low condition of the people, civilly,
socially, and religiously, and the deadly climate to foreigners, make
it indeed a hard field to cultivate. I am fully prepared to indorse
what Rev. F. Fletcher, in charge of Wesleyan District, Gold Coast,
wrote a few months ago in the following language: "The Lord's work in
western Africa is as wonderful as it is deadly. In the last forty
years more than 120 missionaries have fallen victims to that climate;
but to-day the converts to Christianity number at least 30,000, many
of whom are true Christians. In this district we have 6,000 church
members, and though they are poor, last year they gave over 5,000
dollars for evangelistic and educational work.

"_Sherbro Mission_ now has four stations and chapels and over forty
appointments, 112 church members, 164 seekers of religion, 75 acres of
clear land, with carpenter, blacksmith, and tailor shops, in and upon
which, twenty five boys are taught to labor, and where eleven girls
are taught to do all ordinary house work and sewing, with its four day
and Sunday schools, 212 in the former and more than that number in the
latter, and with an influence for good that now reaches the whole
Sherbro tribe, embracing a country at least fifty miles square and
containing about 15,000 people. The seed sown is taking deep root
there, and the harvest is rapidly ripening, when thousands of souls
will be garnered for heaven. Surely we ought to thank God for past
success and resolve to do much more for that needy country in the
future.

"We now have Revs. Corner, Wilberforce, Evans, and their wives, all
excellent missionaries, from America; then Revs. Sawyer, Hero, Pratt,
and their wives, Mrs. Lucy Caulker, and other native laborers, all of
whom are doing us good service. With these six ordained ministers, and
twice that number of teachers and helpers, who are devoting all their
time to the mission, the work is going forward gloriously. Still,
there should be new stations opened and more laborers sent out
immediately."[649]


FOOTNOTES:

[648] Asiatic Researches, vol. iii. pp. 4, 5.

[649] Twenty fifth Annual Report, United Brethren, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Part II

_SLAVERY IN THE COLONIES._


CHAPTER XV.

CONDITION OF SLAVES IN MASSACHUSETTS.

The following memorandum in Judge Sewall's letter book was called
forth by Samuel Smith, murderer of his Negro slave at Sandwich. It
illustrates the deplorable condition of servants at that time in
Massachusetts, and shows Judge Sewall to have been a man of great
humanity.

     "The poorest Boys and Girls in this Province, such as are of
     the lowest Condition; whether they be English, or Indians,
     or Ethiopians: They have the same Right to Religion and
     Life, that the Richest Heirs have.

     "And they who go about to deprive them of this Right, they
     attempt the bombarding of HEAVEN, and the Shells they throw,
     will fall down upon their own heads.

     "Mr. Justice Davenport, Sir, upon your desire, I have sent
     you these _Quotations_, and my _own Sentiment_. I pray GOD,
     the Giver and Guardian of Life, to give his gracious
     Direction to you, and the other Justices, and take leave,
     who am your brother and most humble servant,

                                        "SAMUEL SEWALL.

     "BOSTON, July 20, 1719.

     "I inclosed also the _selling of Joseph_, and my Extract out
     of the _Athenian Oracle_.

     "To Addington Davenport, Esq., etc., going to Judge Sam'l
     Smith of Sandwitch, for killing his Negro."[650]

_Petition of Slaves in Boston_.

On the 23d of June, 1773, the following petition was presented to the
General Court of Massachusetts, which was read, and referred to the
next session:--

     PETITION OF SLAVES IN BOSTON.

     PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

     _To His Excellency, Thomas Hutchinson, Esq., Governor_--

     "To the Honorable, His Majesty's Council, and to the
     Honorable House of Representatives, in general court
     assembled at Boston, the 6th day of January, 1773:--The
     humble petition of many slaves living in the town of Boston,
     and other towns in the province, is this, namely:--

     That Your Excellency and Honors, and the Honorable the
     Representatives, would be pleased to take their unhappy
     state and condition under your wise and just consideration.

     We desire to bless God, who loves mankind, who sent his Son
     to die for their salvation, and who is no respecter of
     persons, that he hath lately put it into the hearts of
     multitudes, on both sides of the water, to bear our
     burthens, some of whom are men of great note and influence,
     who have pleaded our cause with arguments, which we hope
     will have their weight with this Honorable Court.

     We presume not to dictate to Your Excellency and Honors,
     being willing to rest our cause on your humanity and
     justice, yet would beg leave to say a word or two on the
     subject.

     Although some of the negroes are vicious, (who, doubtless,
     may be punished and restrained by the same laws which are in
     force against others of the King's subjects,) there are many
     others of a quite different character, and who, if made
     free, would soon be able, as well as willing, to bear a part
     in the public charges. Many of them, of good natural parts,
     are discreet, sober, honest and industrious; and may it not
     be said of many, that they are virtuous and religious,
     although their condition is in itself so unfriendly to
     religion, and every moral virtue, except _patience_? How
     many of that number have there been and now are, in this
     province, who had every day of their lives embittered with
     this most intolerable reflection, that, let their behavior
     be what it will, neither they nor their children, to all
     generations, shall ever be able to do or to possess and
     enjoy any thing--no, not even _life itself_--but in a manner
     as the _beasts_ that perish!

     We have no property! we have no wives! we have no children!
     we have no city! no country! But we have a Father in heaven,
     and we are determined, as far as his grace shall enable us,
     and as far as our degraded condition and contemptuous life
     will admit, to keep all his commandments; especially will we
     be obedient to our masters, so long as God, in his,
     sovereign providence, shall _suffer_ us to be holden in
     bondage.

     It would be impudent, if not presumptuous, in us to suggest
     to Your Excellency and Honors, any law or laws proper to be
     made in relation to our unhappy state, which although our
     greatest unhappiness, is not our _fault_; and this gives us
     great encouragement to pray and hope for such relief as is
     consistent with your wisdom, justice and goodness.

     We think ourselves very happy, that we may thus address the
     great and general court of this province, which great and
     good court is to us the best judge, under God, of what is
     wise, just and good.

     We humbly beg leave to add but this one thing more we pray
     for such relief only, which by no possibility can ever be
     productive of the least wrong or injury to our masters, but
     to us will be as life from the dead.[651]


FOOTNOTES:

[650] Slavery in Mass., pp 96, 97.

[651] Neil, pp. 39-41.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIII.

THE COLONY OF NEW YORK.

1693, August 21st--All Indians, Negroes, and others not "listed in the
militia," are ordered to work on the fortification for repairing the
same, to be under the command of the captains of the wards they
inhabit. And £100 to be raised for the fortifications.

1722, February 20th.--A law passed by the common council of New York,
"restraining slaves, negroes, and Indians from gaming with moneys." If
found gaming with any sort of money, "copper pennies, copper
halfpence, or copper farthings," they shall be publickly whipped at
the publick whipping-post of this city, at the discretion of the
mayor, recorder, and aldermen, or any one of them, unless the owner
pay to the church wardens for the poor, 3s.

1731, November 18th--If more than three negro, mulatto, or Indian
slaves assemble on Sunday and play or make noise, (or at any other
time at any place from their master's service,) they are to be
publickly whipped fifteen lashes at the publick whipping-post.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW YORK.

Negro slavery, a favorite measure with England, was rapidly extending
its baneful influence in the colonies. The American Register, of 1769,
gives the number of negroes brought in slavery from the coast of
Africa, between Cape Blanco and the river Congo, by different nations
in one year, thus: Great Britain, 53,100; British Americans, 6,300;
France, 23,520; Holland, 11,300; Portugal, 1,700; Denmark, 1,200;
in all, 104,100, bought by barter for European and Indian
manufacturers,--£15 sterling being the average price given for each
negro. Thus we see that more than one half of the wretches who were
kidnapped, or torn by force from their homes by the agents of European
merchants (for such those who supply the market must be considered),
were sacrificed to the cupidity of the merchants of Great Britain; the
traffic encouraged by the government at the same time that the boast
is sounded through the world, that the moment a slave touches the
sacred soil, governed by those who encourage the slavemakers, and
inhabited by those who revel in the profits derived from murder, he is
free. Somerset, the negro, is liberated by the court of king's bench,
in 1772, and the world is filled with the fame of English justice and
humanity! James Grahame tells us that Somerset's case was not the
first in which the judges of Great Britain counteracted in one or two
cases the practical inhumanity of the government and the people: he
says, that in 1762, his grandfather, Thomas Grahame, judge of the
admiralty court of Glasgow, liberated a negro slave imported into
Scotland.

It was in vain that the colonists of America protested against the
practice of slave dealing. The governors appointed by England were
instructed to encourage it, and when the assemblies enacted laws to
prohibit the inhuman traffic, they were annulled by the vetoes of the
governors. With such encouragement, the reckless and avaricious among
the colonists engaged in the trade, and the slaves were purchased when
brought to the colonies by those who were blind to the evil, or
preferred present ease or profit to all future good. Paley, the
moralist, thought the American Revolution was designed by Providence,
to put an end to the slave trade, and to show that a nation
encouraging it was not fit to be intrusted with the government of
extensive colonies. But the planter of the Southern States have
discovered, since made free by that revolution, that slavery is no
evil; and better moralists than Paley, that the increase of slaves,
and their extension over new regions, is the duty of every good
democrat. The men who lived in 1773, to whom America owes her liberty,
did not think so.

Although resistance to the English policy of increasing the number of
negro slaves in America agitated many minds in the colonies,
opposition to the system of taxation was the principal source of
action; and this opposition now centered in a determination to baffle
the designs of Great Britain in respect to the duties on tea.
Seventeen millions of pounds of tea were now accumulated in the
warehouses of the East-India Company. The government was determined,
for reasons I have before given, to assist this mercantile company, as
well as the African merchants, at the expense of the colonists of
America. The East-India Company were now authorized to export their
tea free of all duty. Thus the venders being enabled to offer it
cheaper than hitherto to the colonists, it was expected that it would
find a welcome market. But the Americans saw the ultimate intent of
the whole scheme, and their disgust towards the mother country was
proportionably increased.


INDEX.


  Abbott, Granville S., verses by,  111.

  Adams, Abigail, views on slavery, 227.

  Adams, John, views on slavery, 203;
    letter to Jonathan Sewall on emancipation, 207.

  Adams, Samuel, urges the consideration of the memorial of
      Massachusetts Negroes,  234.

  Adgai, see Crowther.

  Africa, described, 14;
    Negro tribes, 24, 25;
    Negro kingdoms, 26, 28, 31;
    natives engage in the slave-trade, 27;
    laws, 30, 56, 57;
    religion, 30, 81-84, 89, 90;
    war between the different tribes, 35-39;
    war with England, 41-43;
    patriarchal government, 50, 54, 55;
    villages described, 51, 52;
    architecture, 51-53;
    women reign in, 55, 56;
    marriage, 57, 58;
    polygamy, 58;
    status of   the natives, 58, 59;
    warfare, 61, 62;
    agriculture,  62,  63;
    mechanic arts, 63-65;
    languages, 66-70, 90, 459;
    literature, 75-80;
    colony  founded   at Sierra Leone, 86, 87;
    and Liberia, 95, 97;
    first emigrants to, 97;
    republican government established, 100;
    first constitution abolishing slavery in Liberia, 103-105;
    weaker tribes chief source of slavery, 109, 120;
    early Christianity in, 111;
    earliest commerce for slaves between America and, 115;
    slaves from Angola, 134;
    shipload of slaves from Sierra Leone sold at Hispaniola, 138;
    number of Negroes stolen from annually, 237;
    slaves from, sold at Barbadoes, 259;
    cities of, described, 450;
    number of slaves brought from, 463.
    See Negroes.

  African Company, their charter abolished, 41:
    see Royal African Company.

  Akwasi Osai, king of Ashantee, invades Dahomey, 35;
    his defeat and death, 36.

  Alexander, James, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York,
      151, 158, 166.

  Alricks, Peter, resident of New York 1657, 250.

  Amasis, king of Egypt, 457.

  Amenophis, king of Egypt, 458.

  America, introduction of Negro slaves, 116;
    colonies declare independence, 412;
    slavery in, 461;
    slaves imported to British America, 463.

  American Colonization Society locate a colony at Monrovia, 97.

  American Revolution, service of Negroes in the army of the, 324, 334,
      337, 342, 353, 362;
    slavery during the, 402.

  Ames, Edward B., remarks in favor of the government of Liberia, 99.

  Angola, Africa, slaves imported from, 134.

  Anne, queen of England, encourages the slave-trade, 140.

  Anti-slavery societies, memorials to Congress, 437;
    convention held at Philadelphia, 438.

  Apoko, Osai, king of Ashantee, 36.

  Appleton, Nathaniel, defends the doctrine of freedom for all, 204;
    author of "Consideration on Slavery," 218.

  Apries, king of Egypt, 456.

  Argall, Samuel, engaged in the slave-trade, 116, 117.

  Ashantee Empire, described, 34;
    wars of, 35, 37-39;
    revolt in, 36;
    troubles with England, 41, 42;
    massacre of women, 42;
    government, 44.

  Asia, idols with Negro features in, 17;
    traces of the race, 18.

  Asychis, king of Egypt, 458.

  Attucks, Crispus, advertised as a runaway slave, 330;
    figures in the Boston Massacre, 330;
    his death and funeral, 331;
    letter to Gov. Hutchinson, 332.

  Aviia, tribe in Africa, 51.

  Aviro, Alfonso de, discovers Benin in Africa, 26.


  Babel, the tower of, built by an Ethiopian, 453.

  Babylon, description of, 454.

  Bancroft, George, views on slavery, 206.

  Banneker, Benjamin, astronomer and philosopher, 386;
    farmer and inventor, 387;
    mathematician, 388;
    his first calculation of an eclipse, 389;
    letter to George Ellicott, 389;
    character of, 390;
    his business transactions, 391;
    verses addressed to, 392;
    letter to Mrs. Mason, 392;
    his first almanac, 393;
    letter to Thomas Jefferson, 394;
    accompanies commissioners to run the lines of District of Columbia,
      397;
    his habits of studying the heavenly bodies, 397;
    his death, 398.

  Baptist missionaries in Liberia, 101.

  Barbadoes, Negro slaves exchanged for Indians, 174;
    a slave-market for New-England traders,   181;
    Rhode   Island supplied with slaves from, 269.

  Barrère, Peter, treatise on the color of the skin, 19.

  Barton, Col. William, captures Gen. Prescott, 366.

  Bates, John, a slave-trader, 269.

  Belknap, Jeremy, remarks on the slave-trials in Massachusetts, 232.

  Benin, a   kingdom  in  Africa, supplies America with slaves, 26;
    discovered by the Portuguese and colonized, 26;
    the king contracts to Christianize his subjects for a white wife,
      27;
    the kingdom divided, and slave-trade suppressed, 28.

  Berkeley, Sir William, opposed to education and printing, 132.

  Bermuda Islands, slaves placed on Warwick's plantation, 118, 119;
    Pequod Indians exchanged for Negroes at, 173.

  Bernard, John, governor of the Bermudas, 118.

  Beverley, Robert, correction of his History of Virginia, 116.

  Bill, Jacob, a slave-trader, 269.

  Billing, Joseph, sued by his slave Amos Newport, 229.

  Blumenbach, Jean Frederic, opinion in regard to the color of the
      skin, 19.

  Blyden, Edward W., defines the term "Negro," 12;
    president of Liberia College, 102.

  Board of Trade, circular to the governors of the English colonies,
      relative to Negro slaves, 267;
    reply of Gov. Cranston of Rhode Island, 269.

  Bolzius, Henry, favors the introduction of slavery into Georgia, 321.

  Boombo, a Negro chief of Liberia, 106.

  Borden, Cuff, a Negro slave in Massachusetts, sued for trespass and
      ordered to be sold to satisfy judgment, 278.

  Boston, a slave-trader from, 181;
    Negro prohibited from employment in manufacturing hoops, 196;
    number of slaves in, 205;
    instructs the representatives to vote against the slave-trade, 221;
    Negroes charged with firing the town, 226;
    articles for the regulation of  Negroes passed, 226;
    massacre in, 1770, 330;
    Negroes on Castle Island, 376, 378.

  Bowditch, Thomas Edward, commissioner to treat with the Ashantees,
      39.

  Bradley, Richard, attorney-general of New York, prosecutes the
      Negroes, 166.

  Bradstreet, Ann, frees her slave, 207.

  Brazil, slaves sold to the Dutch, 136.

  Brewster, Capt. Edward, banished   by Capt. Argall, 117.

  Brewster, Thomas, a slave-trader, 269.

  Bristol County, Mass., a slave ordered to be sold, to satisfy
      judgment against him for trespass, 278.

  British army, Negroes in the, 87.

  Brown, John, reproved by Virginia committee of 1775 for purchasing
      slaves, 328.

  Brown, Joseph, effect of climate on man, 46.

  Bruce, James, discovers the ruins of the city of Meroe, 6.

  Bunker Hill, Negroes in the battle of, 363.

  Burgess, Ebenezer, missionary to Monrovia, 97.

  Burton, Mary, testifies in the Negro plot at New York, 1741, 147,
      148, 150, 158, 160, 162-164, 167, 168;
    recompensed by the government, 170.

  Busiris, king of Egypt, 458.

  Butler, Nathaniel, commissioner for Virginia Company, 118.


  Cade, Elizabeth, a witness in the Somersett case, 205.

  Calanee, image of Buddha at, 17.

  Caldwell, Jonas, killed at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Campbell, Sir Neill, determines the war with Ashantees, 43.

  Canaan, the curse of, 444.

  Canada, expedition from New York against, 143.

  Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, 6.

  Carey, Lot, vice-agent of Liberia, 101.

  Carey, Peggy, implicated with Negro plot in New York, 1741, 147;
    trial, 152;
    found guilty, 152;
    her evidence, 153;
    sentenced to be hanged, 158.

  Carr, Patrick, wounded at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Cartel, Edwin, a slave-trader, 269.

  Carthage, description of, 452.

  Castle Island, Boston, Negroes sent to the barracks at, 376;
    list of the same, 378.

  Cepharenus, king of Egypt, 458,

  Ceylon, image of Buddha at, 17.

  Chaillu, Paul B. Du, description of the Obongos, 46;
    of the villages of Mandji and Ishogo, 51, 52.

  Chambers, John, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151,
      158, 166.

  Charles V., grants a patent to import Negroes to America, 115.

  Charleston, S.C., slave-market  at, 299,
    Negroes from, recaptured, 376;
    list of, 378;
    claimed by owners, 379.

  Charlestown, Mass., Negro slaves executed at, in 1755, 226.

  Chastellux, Marquis de, describes the bravery of Col. Greene's Negro
      regiment at the battle of Rhode Island, 368.

  Cheops, king of Egypt, 458.

  Chibbu, Kudjoh, captured by the English, 42.

  Chisholm, Major J, services in Ashantee mentioned, 41, 42.

  Christy, David, describes the colony of Liberia, 107.

  Cintra, Piedro de, discoverer of Sierra Leone, 85.

  Clinton, Sir Henry, proclamation concerning fugitive Negroes, 1779,
      357.

  Codman, John, poisoned by his slave, 226.

  Coleman, Elihu, author of "Testimony against making Slaves of Men,"
      318.

  Coney Island, N.Y., slave captured at, 343.

  Congo Empire, Shinga queen of, 55.

  Congress, see United-States Congress.

  Connecticut, slavery in, 252-261;
    Negro slaves introduced, 252;
    number of Negroes in 1680, 253;
    purchase and treatment of slaves and free persons, 253;
    persons manumitting slaves, to maintain them, 254;
    commerce with slaves prohibited, 255;
    punishment of insubordinate slaves, 256;
    social conduct regulated, 257;
    punished for using profane language, 258;
    number of slaves in 1730, 259;
    Indian slaves prohibited, 250;
    Indian and Negro slavery legalized, 259;
    limited rights of free Negroes, 259;
    Negro population in 1762, 260;
    importation of slaves prohibited, 261;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    enlistment of Negroes prohibited, 343;
    enlisted, 345;
    a Colored company recruited by David Humphreys, 361;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Continental army, condition of the, 334;
    Negroes in the, 337;
    Negro regiment raised for the, 342;
    number of men supplied to the, 353;
    return of Negroes in 1778, 362.

  Continental Congress, prohibits the importation of Negroes, 325;
    debate on the discharge of Negroes from the army, 335;
    action on the enlistment of Negroes, 355;
    resolution to establish courts to decide cases of captured slaves,
        370;
    action of the, relative to Negroes captured at sea, 373;
    discussion on the, Western territory, 415, 416;
    last meeting, 416.

  Cooke, Nicholas, governor of Rhode Island, letters to Washington on
      the enlistment of Negroes, 346, 349.

  Cornwallis, Lord, proclamation  offering protection to fugitive
      Negroes, 358.

  Cox, Melville B., missionary to Monrovia, 98.

  Cranston, Samuel, letter to the board of trade, relative to Negro
      slaves in Rhode Island, 269.

  Croker, John, testimony in the Negro plot at New York, 168.

  Crowther, Negro sold into slavery, 32;
    set at liberty by the English, 33;
    fitted for the ministry, returns to Africa as a missionary, 33.

  Cuffe, John, sketch of, 202.

  Cuffe, Paul, a distinguished Negro, 202.

  Cush, ancestor of the Negro race, 10;
    meaning of the term, 13.

  Cushing, Nathan, his opinion, 1783, relative to the South-Carolina
      Negroes, 381.

  Cuvier, Baron, varieties of the human form, 3.

  Cyrene, Africa, mentioned, 5;
    described, 452.


  Dahomey, a Negro kingdom of Africa, described, 28;
    women serve in the army, 29;
    laws, 30;
    invaded by King Akwasi, 35.

  Dalton, Richard, his slave reads Greek, 202.

  Davis, Hugh, a white servant, flogged in Virginia, for consorting
      with a Negro woman, 121.

  Deane, Thomas, mentioned, 196.

  Delaware, slavery in, 249-251;
    settled by Danes and Swedes, 249;
    slavery not allowed by the Swedes, 249;
    conveyed to William Penn, 249;
    granted a separate government, 249;
    slavery introduced, 249;
    first legislation on slavery, 250;
    law for the regulation of servants, 250;
    act restraining manumission of slaves, 250;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Denmark, engaged in the slave-trade, 463.

  Denny, Thomas, representative of Leicester, Mass., instructed to vote
      against slavery, 225.

  Derham, James, a Negro physician of New Orleans, 400.

  Desbrosses, Elias, testimony in the Negro plot in New York, 1741, 165.

  "Desire," ship built for the slave-trade, 174.

  Dodge, Caleb, of Beverly, Mass., sued by his slave, 231.

  Dorsey, Charles W., character of Banneker, the Negro astronomer, 390.

  Duchet, Sir Lionel, engaged in the slave-trade, 138.

  Dummer, William, proclamation against Negroes of Boston, 226.

  Dunmore, Lord, proclamation in regard to fugitive Negroes, 336;
    condemned by the Virginia convention, 341;
    his failure to enlist Negroes, 342.

  Dupuis, M., appointed English consul to the court of Ashantee, 40.

  Dutch man-of-war lands the first Negroes in Virginia, 118;
    engage in the slave-trade, 124;
    import slaves to New Netherlands, 135;
    encourage the trade, 136;
    settlement on the Delaware, 312.


  Earl, John, his connection with the Negro plot at New York, 163.

  East Greenwich, R.I., bridge built at, by Negro impost-tax, 275.

  Egmont, Earl of, opposed to slavery in Georgia, 319.

  Egypt, first settlers of, 6, 10;
    Negro and Mulatto races in, 14;
    slavery in, 17;
    Negro civilization imitated by, 22;
    the Ethiopian kings of, 454.

  Elizabeth, Queen, of England, encourages the slave-trade, 138.

  Elizabeth, N.J., police regulations, 286.

  England, suppresses the slave-trade, 28, 31;
    sends agricultural implements, machinery, and missionaries to
      Africa, 32;
    conduct in the Ashantee war, 38, 41, 42;
    treaty with Ashantee, 42;
    founds a colony in Sierra Leone, 86;
    all slaves declared free on reaching British soil, 86;
    declares slave-trade piracy, 87;
    establishes a mission at Sierra Leone, 89;
    women sent to Virginia, 119;
    laws relating to slavery, 125;
    sanctions the slave-trade, 138-140, 463;
    courts decide in 1677 that a Negro slave is property, 190;
    slavery recognized in, 203;
    agrees to furnish Negroes to the West Indies, 236;
    treaty with United States, 382.

  Enoch, description of the city of, 453.

  Ethiopia, war with Cæsar, 6;
    natives same race as Egyptians, 6;
    meaning of, 13;
    cities of, described, 453;
    kings rule Egypt, 454.


  Fairfax, Va., meeting at, in 1774, pass resolutions against slavery,
      327.

  "Fanny," brig, arrives at Norfolk, Va., with slaves, 328.

  Federal Constitution, proceedings of convention to frame the, 417.

  Ferguson, Dr., describes character of the inhabitants of Sierra Leone,
      90-93.

  Folger, Elisha, captain of ship "Friendship," sued for recovery of a
      slave, 231.

  Forbes, Archibald, mentions Africans nine feet in height, 59.

  Fox, George, views concerning slaves, 313.

  France engaged in the slave-trade, 463.

  Franklin, Benjamin, letter to Dean Woodward on the abolition of
      slavery, 327;
    address to the public on the abolition of slavery, 431.

  Friends, see Quakers.

  Fuller, Thomas, a Negro mathematician, 399.


  Gage, Thomas, refuses to sign the bill to prevent the importation of
      Negroes into Massachusetts, 235, 237.

  Gates, Gen. Horatio, his order not to enlist Negroes, 334.

  George III. in 1751 repeals the act declaring slaves real estate, 125.

  Georgia, slavery in, 316-323;
    colony of, established, 316;
    slavery prohibited in, 316, 317;
    discussion in regard to the admission of slavery, 318-322;
    clandestine importation of Negroes, 320;
    slavery established, 322;
    history of slavery, 322;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    importation of slaves prohibited, 440;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Germantown, Penn., memorial of Quakers against slavery in 1688, 313.

  Glasgow, Scotland, a slave liberated in 1762, 463.

  Goddard, Benjamin, protests against enlisting Negroes in Grafton,
      Mass., 352.

  Godfrey family of South Carolina, killed by a Negro mob, 299.

  Gordon, William, letter on the emancipation of slaves, 402;
    deposed as chaplain of the legislature of Massachusetts, 409.

  Grafton, Mass., protest in 1778 against the enlistment of Negroes,
      352.

  Grahame, Judge Thomas, liberates Negro slave in Glasgow, Scotland,
      463.

  Gray, Samuel, killed at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Greece, Negro civilization imitated by, 22.

  Greene, Col. Christopher, commands a Negro regiment in 1778 at battle
    of Rhode Island, 368;
    his death, 369.

  Greene, Gen. Nathanael, letters to Washington on the raising of a
      Negro regiment, 342;
    on the enlistment of Negroes, the British army, 359;
    at battle of Rhode Island, 368.

  Greenleaf, Richard, sued by his slave, 204, 231.

  Guerard, Benjamin, governor of South Carolina, letter to Gov. Hancock
      relative to slaves recaptured from the British, 380.

  Guyot, Arnold H., opinion on the diversity of the human race, 20.


  Habersham, James, favors slavery in Georgia, 318, 321.

  Ham, the progenitor of the Negro race, 8;
    family of, 9, 11;
    founder of the Babylonian empire, 9.

  Hamilton, Alexander, letter to John Jay on the enlistment of Negroes,
      354;
    opinion in regard to slaves captured by the British, 381.

  Hamilton, Dr., his connection with the Negro plot at New York, 160.

  Hancock, John, letter on the condition of the South-Carolina Negroes
      recaptured from the British, 378.

  "Hannibal," sloop, Negroes captured from, 372.

  Harcourt, Col. William, captures Gen. Charles Lee, 366.

  Harper, ----, one of the founders of the colony at Cape Palmas,
      Liberia, 95.

  Harris, Rev. Samuel, describes bravery of Negro regiment at battle
      of Rhode Island, 369.

  Hawkins, Sir John, a slave-trader, 138.

  "Hazard," armed vessel, recaptures Negroes, 376.

  Hendrick, Cæsar, a slave, sues for his freedom, 204, 231.

  Hessian officer, letter on the employment of Negroes in the army, 343.

  Hillgroue, Nicholas, engaged in the slave-trade, 269.

  Hispaniola, slaves from Sierra Leone sold at, 138.

  Hobby, Mr., Negro in the army claimed by, 384.

  Hogg, Robert, a merchant of New York, robbed by Negroes, 145.

  Holbrook, Felix, petition of, for freedom, 133.

  Holland, growth of slavery in New Netherlands, 134;
    children of manumitted Negroes held as slaves to serve the
      government of, 135;
    slaves exchanged for tobacco, 136;
    engaged in the slave-trade, 463.

  Holt, Lord, his opinion that slavery was unknown to English law, 203.

  Hopkins, John H., views of slavery, 7, 8.

  Hopkins, Samuel, necessity of employing the Negroes in the American
      army, 338.

  Horsmanden, Daniel, one of the judges in the trial of the Negro plot
      at New York, 1741, 148.

  Hotham, Sir Charles, testimony in regard to the abolishment of slavery
      in Liberia, 105, 106.

  Hughson, John, his tavern at New York a resort for Negroes, 147;
    his connection with the Negro plot, 147;
    trial, 152, 157;
    sentenced to be hanged, 158;
    executed, 161.

  Hughson, Sarah, her connection with the New York Negro plot, 152;
    trial, 157;
    respited, 164;
    testimony, 165, 166, 168.

  Human race, the unity of, 443.

  Humphreys, David, recruits a company of colored infantry in
      Connecticut, 361.

  Hutchinson, a commissioner to treat with king of Ashantee, 39.

  Hutchinson, Gov. Thomas, refuses to sign bill to prevent the
      importation of slaves from Africa, 223.


  Indians, taxable, 122, 123;
    not treated as slaves, 123;
    declared slaves, 124, 125;
    denied the right to appear as witnesses, 129;
    act to baptize, 141;
    proclamation against the harboring, 141;
    alarmed on seeing a Negro, 173;
    exchanged for Negroes, 173;
    sent to Bermudas, 173;
    held in perpetual bondage, 178;
    marriage with Negroes, 180;
    introduction of, as slaves, prohibited in Massachusetts, 186;
    importation of, prohibited, 259, 311, 314;
    slavery of, legalized, 259.

  Ishogo villages in Africa described, 52.


  Jacksonburgh, S.C., Negro insurrection at, 299.

  Jamaica, slaves from, sold in Virginia, 328.

  James, Gov., commissioner to treat with king of Ashantee, 39.

  James City, Va., buildings destroyed, 126.

  Jameson, David, volunteers to prosecute the negroes in New York, 151.

  Japan, negro idols in, 17.

  Jefferson, Thomas, author of instructions to the Virginia delegation
      in Congress, 1774, on the abolition of slavery, 328;
    letters to Dr. Gordon relative to the treatment of Negroes in
      Cornwallis's army, 358;
    to Benjamin Banneker, 396;
    his recommendation in regard to slavery in the Western Territory,
      416.

  Jeffries, John P., declares there are no reliable data of the Negro
      race, 15.

  Johnson, David, accused of conspiracy in New York, 163.

  Jones, William, his genealogy of Noah, 11.

  Joseph, the selling of, a memorial by Samuel Sewall, 210;
    answered by John Saffin, 214.

  Josselyn, John, describes attempt to breed slaves in Massachusetts,
      174.


  Kane, William, accused of conspiracy in New York, 162;
    testimony of, in the Negro plot, 162-164, 168.

  Kench, Thomas, letters to the General Assembly of Massachusetts on
      the enlistment of Negroes, 350, 351.

  Kendall, Capt. Miles, deputy governor of Virginia, receives Negro
      slaves in exchange for supplies, 118;
    dispossessed of the same, returns to England to seek equity, 118;
    portion of the Negroes allotted to him, 118;
    none of which he receives, 119.

  Kentucky, admitted into the Union, 437;
    constitution revised, 441.

  Keyser, Elizur, emancipates his slave, 207.

  Knowls, John, confines James Sommersett on board his ship "Mary and
      Ann," 205.

  Knox, Thomas, South Carolina, recaptured slaves delivered to, 377.

  Kudjoh Osai, king of Ashantee, 36.

  Kwamina Osai, succeeds his father Kudjoh as king of Ashantee, 36.


  "Lady Gage," a prize-ship with Negroes, 376.

  Laing, Capt., his services in Ashantee, 42.

  Latrobe, J.H.B., one of the founders of the colony at Cape Palmas,
      Liberia, 95.

  Laurens, Henry, letter to Washington on arming of the Negroes of
      South Carolina, 353.

  Laurens, John, endeavors to raise Negro troops in South Carolina, 356;
    sails for France, 359;
    letters to Washington on his return, urging the enlistment of
      Negroes, 360.

  Lawrence, Major Samuel, commands a company of Negro soldiers, 366.

  Lechmere, Richard, sued by his slave, 230.

  Lee, Gen. Charles, captured by the British, 366.

  Leicester, Mass., representative of, instructed to vote against
      slavery, 225.

  Liberia, founded by Colored people from Maryland, 95;
    population, 95, 97, 102;
    refuge for Colored people, 96;
    native tribes, 97, 98;
    Christian mission founded, 98;
    government, 99;
    a republic, 100;
    school and college established, 100;
    churches, 101;
    trade, 103;
    first constitution, 103;
    slavery and slave-trade abolished, 104;
    treaty with England in regard to slavery, 104;
    testimony of officers of the Royal Navy in regard to the
      slave-trade at, 105;
    revolt in, subdued, 106, 107.

  Lincoln, Gen. Benjamin, letter to Gov. Rutledge of South Carolina,
      on the enlistment of Negroes, 359.

  Livingstone, David, describes African wars, 50, 51;
    status of the Africans, 58, 59;
    skilful in the mechanic arts, 63, 64.

  Locke, John, constitution prepared by, adopted in North Carolina, 302;
    local governments of the South organised on his plan, 414.

  Lodge, Abraham, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151.

  Lodge, Sir Thomas, a slave-trader, 138.

  Lowell, John, sues for the freedom of a slave in Newburyport, Mass.,
      231.

  Lybia, Africa, description of, 452.


  MacBrair, R.M., author of a Mandingo grammar, 70.

  McCarthy, Charles, appointed governor-general of Western Africa, 41;
    war with the Ashantees, 41;
    his defeat and death, 42.

  Madison, James, letter to Joseph Jones, on the arming of the Negroes,
      359.

  Mahoney, Lieut., his description of a Negro idol at Calanee, 17.

  Mandji, a village in Africa described, 51.

  Mankind, unity of, 1, 7, 108, 443;
    varieties of, 3.

  Mansfield, Lord, decision in the case of the Negro Sommersett, 85,
      205.

  Marlow, John, affidavit in the Sommersett case, 206.

  Maryland, appropriates money for the colony at Cape Palmas, 96;
    slaves purchased to evade tax, 128;
    slavery in, 238-248;
    under the laws of Virginia, 238;
    first legislation on slavery, 238;
    population of, 238;
    slavery established by statute, 240;
    Act passed encouraging the importation of Negroes and slaves, 241;
    impost on Negroes, slaves, and white persons imported into, 241;
    duties on rum and wine, 243;
    treatment of slaves and papists, 243;
    convicts imported into, 243;
    convict trade condemned, 244;
    defended, 244;
    slave-code, 246;
    rights of slaves, 246;
    law against manumission of slaves, 246;
    Negro population, 246, 247;
    white population, 247;
    increase of slavery, 247;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    Negroes enlist in the army, 352;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Maryland Colonization Society, found colony of Negroes at Cape Palmas,
      Liberia, 95.

  Mason, George, author of the Virginia resolutions of 1774 against
      slavery, 327.

  Mason, Susanna, addresses a poetical letter to Benjamin Banneker, 392.

  Massachusetts, slavery in, 172-237;
    earliest mention of the Negro in, 173;
    Moore's history of slavery in, 173;
    Pequod War the cause of slavery, 173;
    slaves imported to, 174;
    ship "Desire" arrives with slaves, 174, 176;
    slavery established, 175;
    first statute establishing slavery, 177;
    made hereditary, 179;
    kidnapped Negroes, 180, 182;
    number of slaves, 183, 184;
    tax on slaves, 185;
    Negro population, 185;
    introduction of Indian slaves prohibited, 186;
    Negroes rated with cattle, 187, 188, 196;
    denied baptism, 189;
    Act in relation to marriage of Negro slaves, 191, 192;
    slave-marriage ceremony, 192;
    condition of free Negro, 194, 196;
    Act to abolish slavery, 204;
    slave awarded a verdict against his master, 204;
    emancipation of slaves, 205;
    legislation favoring the importation of white servants, and
      prohibiting the clandestine bringing-in of Negroes, 208;
    importation of Negroes not as profitable as white servants, 208,
      209;
    prohibitory legislation against slavery, 220;
    proclamation against Negroes, 226;
    slaves executed, 226;
    transported and exchanged for small Negroes, 226;
    slaves sue for freedom, 228-232;
    Negroes petition for freedom, 233;
    bill passed for the suppression of the slave-trade, 234, 235;
    vetoed by Gov. Gage, 235;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    emancipation of slaves, 329;
    enlistment of Negroes and emancipation of slaves prohibited, 329;
    enlistment of Negroes opposed, 334, 351;
    mode of enlisting Negroes, 352;
    Negroes serve with white troops, 352;
    number of men furnished to the army, 353;
    act relative to captured Negroes, 370;
    sale of captured Negroes prohibited, 371;
    armed vessels from, recapture Negroes, 376;
    act relative to prisoners of war, 379;
    slaves petition for freedom, 404;
    act against slavery, 405;
    extinction of slavery, 429;
    lawsuits brought by slaves, 430;
    condition of slaves, 461.

  Maverick, Samuel, attempts to breed slaves in Massachusetts, 174.

  Maverick, Samuel, mortally wounded at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Mede, Joseph, his statement in regard to Ham corrected, 10.

  Medford, Mass., representative of, instructed to vote against
      slavery, 225.

  Melville, John, his sermon on Simon mentioned, 6.

  Menes, first king of Egypt, 454.

  Meroe, Egypt, capital of African Ethiopia and chief city of the
      Negroes, 6.

  Methodist Episcopal Church, establishes a mission in Liberia, 98, 100.

  Methodist Missionary Society appropriate money for the mission at
      Monrovia, 98.

  Mifflin, Warner, presents a memorial to Congress in 1792 for the
      abolition of slavery, 437.

  Mills, James, missionary to Monrovia, 97;
    death, 97.

  Missah Kwanta, son of the king of Ashantee, sent to England as a
      hostage, 43.

  Mississippi, slavery in Territory of, prohibited, 1797, 440.

  Monroe, James, town of Monrovia named in honor of, 97.

  Monrovia, Africa, founded, 97;
    population, 97;
    Christian mission established, 98, 99.

  Moore, George H., his history of slavery in Massachusetts commended,
      173;
    mentioned, 180, 183;
    remarks on the bill to prohibit the importation of slaves from
      Africa, 224.

  Morton, Samuel G., the sphinx a shrine of the Negro, 17.

  Murphy, Edward, accused of conspiracy in New York, 163.

  Murray, Joseph, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151,
      158, 166.

  Mycerinus, king of Egypt, 458.


  "Nautilus," ship arrives at Sierra Leone with colony of Negroes, 86.

  Nechao, king of Egypt, 455.

  Negro plot in New York City, 1741, 143-170.

  Negroes, members of the human family, 1, 5;
    descendants of Ham, 3, 8;
    represented in pictures of the crucifixion of Christ, 5;
    an Ethiopian eunuch becomes a Christian, 6;
    same race as Egyptian, 6;
    Cush an ancestor,  10;
    use of the term "Negro," 12, 13;
    antiquity of the race, 14-19;
    early military service, 15;
    figured in a Theban tomb, 15, 16;
    political and social condition, 16;
    the Sphinx a shrine of, 17;
    idols, 17, 18;
    origin of color and hair, 19-21;
    primitive civilization, 22;
    decline, 24;
    kingdoms, 26, 28, 31;
    engage in the slave trade, 27;
    women in the army, 29;
    laws, religion, 30;
    different tribes at war, 30-40;
    war with England, 41-43;
    the Negro type, 45-48;
    physical and mental character affected by climate, 46, 47, 385,
        448;
    longevity, 46;
    slaves the lower class, 47;
    habits, 48;
    susceptible to Christianity, 48;
    idiosyncrasies of the,  50;
    patriarchal government, 50, 54;
    villages, 51, 52;
    pursuits 51;
    architecture, 51, 53;
    women as rulers, 55,  56;
    priests, 55;
    laws, 56, 57;
    marriage, 57, 58;
    status, 58, 59;
    nine feet in height, 59;
    beauty of the, 60, 61;
    warfare, 61, 62;
    agriculture, 62, 63;
    mechanic arts, 63-65;
    languages,  66-70,  90;
    literature,  75-80;
    religion,   81-84, 89, 90;
    free, leave for England, 86;
    colony of, at Sierra Leone, 86;
    serve in the British army, 87;
    their  condition in America,  96;
    found colony at Liberia, 95;
    first importance of, 109;
    military  abilities, 110;
    early Christianity, 111;
    earliest importation to America, 115;
    in Virginia, 116, 118;
    number of, in Virginia, 119, 120;
    prohibition against, 121;
    tax on female, 122, 123;
    law of Virginia declares them slaves, 123, 124;
    repeal of the Act declaring them real estate, 125;
    duty on slaves in Virginia,  126-128;
    traffic encouraged in Virginia, 128;
    no political or military rights in Virginia, 128, 129;
    denied the right to appear as witnesses, 129;
    revolt of free, in Virginia, 130;
    pay taxes, 131;
    in the military service, 131;
    intermarriage of, prohibited, 131;
    denied education, 133;
    children of manumitted, made slaves, 135, 136;
    not allowed to hold real estate in New York, 142;
    earliest mention of, in Massachusetts, 173;
    held in perpetual bondage, 178;
    condition of free, in Massachusetts, 194, 196;
    importation of, not so profitable as white servants, 208;
    Act encouraging the importation of, into Maryland, 241;
    condition of free, in Maryland, 247;
    limited lights of free, 259, 308, 315;
    prohibited the use of the streets in Rhode Island, 264;
    military employment of, 324;
    excluded from the Continental Army, 335;
    allowed to re-enlist, 337;
    in Virginia join the British Army, 339;
    cautioned against joining the latter, 340;
    serve in the army with white troops in Massachusetts, 352;
    efforts to enlist in South Carolina, 351;
    company of, enlisted in Connecticut, 361;
    return of, in the army, 1778, 362;
    as soldiers, 1775-1783, 363;
    at the battle of Bunker Hill, 363;
    at battle of Rhode Island, 368;
    valor of, 369;
    sale of two captured, prohibited in Massachusetts,  371;
    disposal of recaptured, 374, 376;
    education of, prohibited, 385.

  Newburyport, Mass, a slave sues for freedom, 231

  New England Negroes leave for England, 86;
    engaged in the slave trade, 174, 180;
    see Massachusetts.

  New Hampshire, Massachusetts exercises authority over, 309;
    slavery in, 309-311;
    Negro slave emancipated, 309;
    instruction against importation of slaves, 309;
    conduct of servants regulated, 319;
    ill treatment of slaves, 311;
    importation of Indian servants prohibited, 311;
    ill treatment of servants and slaves prohibited, 311;
    duration of slaves in, 311;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  New Jersey, slavery in, 282-288;
    Act in regard to slaves, 282;
    the colony divided, with separate governments, 283;
    entertaining of fugitive servants, or trading with Negroes,
      prohibited, 283;
    Negroes and other slaves allowed trial by a jury, 283;
    publicity in judicial proceedings, 285;
    rights of government of surrendered to the queen, 285;
    conduct of slaves regulated, 285;
    impost tax on imported Negroes, 286, 287;
    trials of slaves regulated, 286;
    security required
  for manumitted slaves, 287;
    slaves prohibited from joining the militia, 288;
    population, 1738-45, 288;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  New Netherlands, see New York.

  Newport, Amos, a slave, sues for his freedom, 229.

  Newport, R.I., Negroes and Indians prohibited the use of the streets,
      264;
    Negro slaves arrive, 269;
    part of them sold, 269;
    vessels fitted out for the slave-trade, 269;
    streets repaired from the impost-tax on Negroes, 273, 275.

  New York, slavery in,  134-171;
    slaves imported from Brazil, 146;
    laws relative to slavery, 139;
    slaves the property of West-India Company, 139;
    supply of slaves, 140;
    Act for regulating slaves, 140;
    Act to baptize slaves, 141;
    expedition against Canada, 143;
    governor of, claims jurisdiction over Pennsylvania, 312;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    Act for raising Negro troops, 352;
    Negro soldiers promised freedom, 411;
    slave population in  1790, 436;
    bill for the gradual extinction of slavery, 440;
    laws in regard to slaves, 463.

  New York City, settled by the  Dutch, 134;
    growth of slavery under the Holland government, 134;
    children of manumitted Negroes made slaves, 135, 136;
    slaves imported from Brazil, 136;
    captured by the English, 138;
    laws on slavery, 139;
    identical with Massachusetts, 139;
    Gov. Dongan arrives, 139;
    General Assembly meet, 139;
    proclamation against the harboring of slaves, 141;
    slaves forbidden the streets after nightfall, 141;
    slave-market erected, 142;
    Negro riot, 143;
    Negro plot, 144-171;
    house of Robert Hogg robbed, 145;
    population,   145;
    fire at Fort George,  145;
    fires  in,  146;
    crew  of Spanish vessel adjudged slaves, 146;
    charged with firing houses, 146;
    house of John Hughson, resort for Negroes, 147;
    act  against entertaining   slaves, 148;
    council meet, request governor to offer reward for incendiaries, 149;
    Negroes deny all knowledge of the fires and plot, 149;
    Supreme Court convened, 149;
    trial of Negroes, 149;
    Negroes hanged, 154;
    fast observed in, 154;
    Negroes arrested, 155;
    chained to a stake, and burned, 157;
    proclamation granting freedom to conspirators who would confess, 159;
    Spanish Negroes sentenced to be hung, 161;
    Hughson executed, 161;
    Negroes hanged, 161, 169;
    thanksgiving, 169;
    Rev. John Ury executed, 169;
    arrests for conspiracy, 170;
    first session of Congress held at, in 1789, 426.

  Nicoll, Benjamin, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151.

  Nineveh, the city of, founded, 9-10.

  Noddle's Island, Mass., slaves on, 176.

  Non-Importation Act passed by Congress, 325.

  Norfolk, Va., arrival of slaves at, 328.

  North Carolina, slaves purchased in, to evade the tax, 128;
    slavery in, 302-308;
    situation of, favorable to the slave-trade, 302;
    the Locke Constitution adopted, 302;
    William Sayle commissioned governor, 303;
    Negro slaves eligible to membership in the church, 304;
    Church of England established in, 304;
    rights of Negroes controlled by their masters, 304;
    act respecting conspiracies, 305;
    form of trying Negroes, 307;
    ill treatment of Negroes, 307;
    emancipation of slaves prohibited, 307;
    limited rights of free Negroes, 308;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Nott, John C., antiquity of the Negro, 15;
    his social condition, 16.


  Oates, Titus, his connection with the Popish plot, 144.

  Obongos of Africa described, 46.

  Ockote, Osai, king of Ashantee, his war with the English, 43.

  Oglethorpe, John, first governor of Georgia, opposed to slavery, 316.

  Ophir, Africa, description of, 452.

  Opoko, Osai, king of Ashantee, 35.

  Osymandyas, king of Egypt, 458.

  Otis, James, speech in favor of freedom to the Negroes, 203.


  Parsons, Theophilus, his opinion on the existence of slavery in
      Massachusetts, 179, 180;
    decision in the case of Winchendon _vs._ Hatfield, 232.

  Pastorius, Francis Daniel, his memorial against slavery, 1688, 313.

  Payne, John, missionary bishop of Africa, 100.

  Pendleton, Edmund, letter to Richard Lee on the slaves of Virginia
      joining the British army, 339.

  Penn, William, Delaware conveyed to, 249;
    grants the privilege of separate government, 249;
    introduces bill for the regulation of servants, 314;
    opposed to slavery, 314.

  Pennsylvania, slavery in, 312-315;
    government organized, 312;
    Swedes and Dutch settlement, 312;
    governor of New York claims jurisdiction over, 312;
    first laws of, 312;
    memorial against slavery, 313;
    Penn presents bill for the better regulation of servants, 314;
    tax on imported slaves, 314;
    importation of Negroes and Indians prohibited, 314;
    petition for the freedom of slaves denied, 314;
    rights of the Negroes, 315;
    tax on Negroes and Mulatto slaves, 315;
    fears for the conduct of the slaves, 315;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Pennsylvania Society for promoting the abolition of  slavery,
      address of  the, 1789, 431.

  Pequod Indians captured in war exchanged for Negroes, 173;
    as slaves, 177.

  Peters, John, married to Phillis Wheatley, 200.

  Peters, Phillis, see Wheatley, Phillis.

  Pheron, king of Egypt, 458.

  Philadelphia, Federal Convention meet at, 417;
    Anti-slavery Convention held at, 438;
    see Pennsylvania.

  Phut, Africa, description of, 452.

  Pickering, Timothy, representative   of Salem, Mass., instructed to
      vote against the importation of slaves, 220.

  Pinny, J.B., missionary to Liberia, 100.

  Pitcairn, John, killed at Bunker Hill by a Negro soldier, 364.

  Plant, Matthias, missionary of the Propagation Society in Mass., 189.

  Po, Fernando, locates Portuguese colony in Africa, 26.

  Poor, Salem, a Negro soldier, his bravery at Bunker Hill, 365.

  Popish   plot   in   England concocted by Titus Gates, 144.

  Portugal, engages in the slave-trade, 26, 31, 463;
    locates colony at Benin, Africa, 26, 27.

  Prescott, Richard, captured by Lieut.-Col. Barton, 366.

  Presbyterian Board of Missions establish missions in Liberia, 100.

  Price, Arthur, arrested for theft in New York, 152;
    testimony in the Negro plot, 152,154.

  Prichard, John C., varieties of the human race, 4.

  Prince, a Negro, assists in the capture of Gen. Prescott, 367.

  Protestant Episcopal Church establishes first mission at Sierra Leone,
      89;
    in Liberia, 100.

  Proteus, king of Egypt, 458.

  Psammetichus, king of Egypt, 455.

  Psammis, king of Egypt, 456.

  Pul, Africa, description of, 452.


  Quakers, opposed to slavery, 218;
    memorial of, against slavery in Pennsylvania, 313;
    the friends of the Negroes, 315;
    memorial to Congress relative to slavery, 439.


  Rameses, Miamun, king of Egypt, 458.

  Raffles, T. Stanford, his researches on the Negro race, 19.

  Reade, W. Winwood, describes patriarchal government of Africa, 55;
    beauty of the Negro, 60, 61;
    people of Sierra Leone, 87.

  Revere, Paul, Negroes placed in his charge at Castle Island, Mass.,
      377.

  Rhampsinitus, king of Egypt, 458.

  Rhode Island, slavery in, 262-281;
    colonial government, 262;
    Act of 1652 to abolish slavery not enforced, 262;
    Negroes and Indians prohibited the use of the streets, 264;
    impost-tax on slaves, 265;
    entertainment of slaves prohibited, 266;
    Negro slaves sold in, 269;
    supply of Negroes from Barbadoes, 269;
    vessels fitted out for the slave-trade, 269;
    value of Negro slaves, 269;
    list of militia-men, including white and black servants, 270;
    clandestine importations and exportations of passengers, Negroes,
      or Indian slaves prohibited, 371;
    masters of vessels required to report the names and number of
      passengers, 272, 274;
    penalties for violating the impost-tax law on slaves, 272;
    portion of the impost-tax on imported Negroes appropriated to
      repair streets of Newport, 273;
    disposition of the money raised by impost-tax, 275;
    slaves imported into, 276;
    impost-tax repealed,  277;
    manumission of aged and helpless slaves regulated,  277;
    Negro slaves rated as chattel property, 278;
    masters of vessels prohibited from carrying slaves out of, 278;
    importation of Negroes prohibited, 280;
    population from 1730-1774, 281;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    act emancipating slaves on joining  the army, 347;
    protest against the enlistment of slaves, 348;
    Negro troops engaged in the battle of, 368;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Ricketts, Capt., services in the Ashantee war, 42.

  Roberts, J.J., president of Liberia, proclamation regarding
      passports, 106.

  Rockwell, Charles, describes Liberia, 96.

  Roman Catholics denied the right to appear as witnesses in Virginia,
      129;
    treatment of, in Maryland, 243;
    denounced by Oates, 144;
    suspected in New York, 160, 162, 164, 167.

  Rome, Negro civilization imitated by, 22.

  Rommes, John, charged with burglary at New  York, 148;
    accused of being in the Negro plot, 153.

  Royal African Company, charter abolished, 41;
    ordered to send  supply of slaves to New York, 140;
    has sole right to trade on the coast of Africa, 316.

  Royall, Jacob, imports Negro slaves into Rhode Island, 276.

  Ruffin, Robert, a slave of, declared free for revealing plot of free
      Negroes in Virginia, 130.

  Rush, Benjamin, his opinion of James Derham the Negro physician, 401.

  Ryase, Andrew, accused of conspiracy in New York, 163.


  Sabachus, king of Ethiopia, 454.

  Saffin, John, reply to Judge Sewall's tract, "The Selling of Joseph,"
      214.

  St. George's Bay Company organized, 86;
    succeeded by the Sierra Leone Company, 86.

  Salem, Mass, representative of, instructed to vote against the
        importation of slaves, 220, 224;
    Negro conspiracy, 227;
    slaves sent to, 209, 376;
    petition of slaves in, 462;
    Negroes captured at sea advertised for sale, 372.

  Salem, Peter, a Negro soldier, his bravery at Bunker Hill, 364.

  Salisbury, Samuel Webster, author of an address on slavery, 1769,
      218.

  Saltonstall, Richard, petitions the General Court of Massachusetts
      against stealing Negroes for slaves, 181.

  Sandwich, Mass, representative of, instructed to vote against
      slavery, 225.

  Sargent, Nathaniel P., opinion, 1783, relative to South-Carolina
      Negroes, 381.

  Savage, Samuel P., letter, 1763, in regard to South Carolina Negroes,
      377.

  Sayle, William, commissioned governor of North Carolina, 302.

  Schultz, John, testimony in the Negro plot at New York, 1741, 463.

  Scotland, a Negro slave liberated in 1762, 403.

  Scott, Bishop, letter on the government of Liberia, 99.

  "Seaflower," ship, arrives at Newport, R.I., from Africa, with slaves,
      269.

  Seba, Africa, description of, 452.

  Sesach, king of Egypt, 454.

  Sesostris, king of Egypt, 458.

  Sethon, king of Egypt, 454.

  Sewall, Jonathan, letter to John Adams on the emancipation of slaves,
      207.

  Sewall, Joseph, sermon on the fires in Boston, 1723, 226.

  Sewall, Samuel, protests against rating Negroes with cattle, 187;
    his hatred of slavery, 210;
    publishes his tract "The Selling of Joseph," 210;
    father of the anti-slavery movement in Massachusetts, 217;
    letter to Addington Davenport on the murder of Smith's slave, 1719,
     461.

  Shaftesbury, Earl of, in favor of introducing slavery into Georgia,
      322.

  Sharp, Granville, one of the founders of Sierra Leone colony, 86.

  Sherbro, mission district, Western Africa, described, 460.

  Shinga, queen of Congo, 55

  Shishak, king of Ethiopia, 454.

  Shodeke, king of Yoruba, Africa, 31.

  Siam, negro idols in, 17.

  Sicana, chief of the Kaffir tribe, a Christian and a poet, 80.

  Sierra Leone, sends colony to Yoruba, Africa, 32;
    discovered, 85;
    Negro colony founded, 86,67;
    attacked by French squadron, 87;
    England takes possession of, 87;
    population, 88, 90;
    trade, 88;
    Christian missions at, 89,90;
    languages of colony, 90;
    character of the inhabitants described by Gov. Ferguson, 90-93;
    slaves from, sold at Hispaniola, 138.

  Sierra Leone Company, organized, 86,
    objects of, 87.

  Simon, a negro, bears the cross of Jesus, 5.

  Slavery, Hopkins's Bible views of, 7, 8;
    in  Egypt, 17,
    in Africa, 25-27,
    Lord Manfield's decision in the Sommersett case, 85;
    colonization, the solution of, 97;
    abolished in Liberia,  104,  105;
    weaker tribes of Africa, chief source of, 109;
    introduced in Virginia, 115, 116, 118;
    made legal in Virginia, 123, 124;
    growth of, in Virginia, 133;
    growth in New York, 134;
    sanctioned by the English, 138;
    New York laws, 139;
    made legal in New York, 140;
    in Massachusetts,  172-237;
    established,  175,  179;
    first statute establishing, in United States, 177;
    sanctioned by the church and courts, 178;
    made hereditary in Massachusetts,   179;
    growth of, in Massachusetts, 183;
    recognized in England, 203;
    act to abolish in Massachusetts, 204;
    prohibitory legislation against, 220-225;
    first legislation in Maryland, 235;
    established by statute,  240;
    increased in  Maryland, 247;
    introduced in Delaware, 249;
    first legislation on, 250;
    Indian and Negro, legalized in Connecticut, 259;
    in New Jersey, 282;
    established in South Carolina, 289;
    perpetual, 290, 291;
    in New  Hampshire 309;
    memorial against, in Pennsylvania, 313;
    prohibited in Georgia, 316;
    Gov. Oglethorpe's opinion on, 316;
    discussion on the admission of, in Georgia, 318-322;
    established in Georgia, 322;
    Washington prevents resolutions against, 327;
    legislation against, demanded, 403;
    act against, in Massachusetts, 405;
    progress of, during the Revolution, 411;
    as a political and legal problem, 412;
    recognized under the new government of United States, 414;
    attempted legislation against,  415;
    advocated by  the Southern States, 418;
    speeches delivered in the convention at Philadelphia on, 420;
    in the Federal Congress, 427;
    extinction  of, in Massachusetts,   429;
    Franklin's address for the abolition of, 431;
    memorials  to Congress for the abolition of, 432, 437;
    bill for the gradual extinction  of, in  New York, 440;
    firmly established, 441.

  Slaves, social condition of white and black, 16;
    the lower class of negroes, 47;
    Lord Mansfield's decision in the Sommersett case, 85, 86;
    declared free on reaching British soil, 86;
    introduced in America, 115;
    first introduced in Virginia, 116, 118;
    on Somer Islands, 118;
    number of, in Virginia, 119, 120, 132, 133;
    prohibition against, 121;
    special tax on female, 122, 123;
    sold for tobacco, 122;
    laws of Virginia in regard to, 123-125;
    act repealed declaring them real estate, 125;
    duty on, 126, 127;
    purchased in Maryland and Carolina to evade the tax, 128;
    tax on sales of, in Virginia, 128;
    reduced, 128;
    repealed, 128;
    revived, 128;
    traffic in, encouraged in Virginia, 128;
    no political or military rights, 128, 129;
    laws in Virginia, 129,  130;
    value  fixed  on, when executed, 129;
    laws of  Virginia in regard to freedom of, 130;
    presented to clergymen, 131;
    prohibition against instructing, 132;
    denied education, 132;
    introduced in New York, 134;
    West India Company trade in, 135;
    manumitted in New York, 135;
    children of the latter held as, 135;
    imported from Brazil to New York, 136;
    exchanged for tobacco, 136;
    intermarry in New York, 137;
    New York to have constant supply, 140;
    Act to regulate, 140, 141;
    Act to baptizse, 140;
    against the harboring of, 141, 148;
    forbidden the streets in New York, 141;
    Negro riot, 143;
    Negro plot, 144-171;
    executed, 154, 161;
    burned, 157;
    Negroes exchanged for Indians, 173;
    Indians sent to Bermudas, 173;
    imported from Barbadoes to Massachusetts, 174;
  ship "Desire" arrives with, 174, 176;
    attempt to breed, in Massachusetts, 174;
    sold in Massachusetts, 175;
    issue of  female, the  property of their master, 180;
    marriage of, 180, 191, 192;
    sold at Barbadoes and West Indies, 181;
    number in Massachusetts, 183, 184;
    tax on, 185;
    rated as cattle, 187, 188, 196;
    denied baptism, 189;
    marriage-ceremony, 192;
    verdict awarded  to  a slave in Massachusetts, 204;
    number in Boston, 205;
    emancipated, 206;
    executed in Massachusetts, 226;
    transported and exchanged for small negroes, 226;
    sue for freedom in Massachusetts, 228-232;
    emancipated   by England,  231;
    slave-code of Maryland, 246;
    laws against manumission of, 246, 250;
    introduced in Connecticut, 252;
    purchase and treatment of, 253;
    persons manumitting to maintain them, 254;
    commerce with, prohibited,  255;
    importation of, prohibited, 259, 261;
    impost-tax on, in Rhode Island, 265;
    entertainment of, prohibited, 266;
    letter of the board of trade relative to, 267;
    Rhode Island supplied with, from  Barbadoes,  269;
    slaves sold in Rhode Island, 269;
    value of, 269;
    clandestine importation and exportation of, prohibited, 271;
    Act relative to freeing Mulatto and Negro, in Rhode Island, 277;
    rated as chattel property, 278;
    masters of vessels prohibited from carrying Negro out of Rhode
      Island, 280;
    importation  of, prohibited,  280;
    allowed trial by jury, in New Jersey, 283;
    impost-tax  on, 286, 287;
    prohibited from joining militia, 288;
    regarded as chattel property in South Carolina, 292;
    branded, 294;
    life  of, regarded as of little consequence, 296;
    education of, prohibited, 298, 300;
    overworking of, prohibited, 298;
    insurrection, 299;
    enlistment of, 300;
    masters compensated for the loss of, 301;
    rights of, controlled by the master in North Carolina, 304;
    emancipation of, prohibited, 307;
    New Hampshire opposed to the importation of, 309;
    ill treatment of, prohibited, 311;
    duration of, in New Hampshire, 311;
    tax on, imported into Pennsylvania, 314, 315;
    petition for freedom of, denied, 314;
    number of slaves in the colonies 1715 and 1775, 325;
    arrival of, at Virginia, from Jamaica, 328;
    severe treatment of, modified, 329;
    the Boston Massacre, 330;
    in the Continental army, 333, 335;
    excluded from the army, 335;
    allowed to re-enlist, 337;
    Lord Dunmore's proclamation  freeing,   336;
    join  the British army, 339;
    prohibited from enlisting in Connecticut, 343;
    Rhode Island emancipates, on joining the army, 347;
    protest against the same, 348;
    masters of enlisted, recompensed,   349;
    serve in the army with white troops, 352;
    Act to enlist, in New York, 352;
    efforts to enlist, in South Carolina, 357;
    treatment of, by Cornwallis, 358;
    exchanged for merchandise, 358;
    disposal of recaptured, 374, 376, 379;
    recaptured, sent to Boston, 376;
    list of recaptured, 377;
    held as personal property, 381, 384;
    education of, prohibited, 385;
    sale of, advertised, 403, 408;
    in Massachusetts petition for freedom, 404;
    rights of, limited in Virginia, 409;
    who served in the army emancipated, 410;
    promised their freedom in New York, 411;
    impost-tax on, introduced in Federal Congress, 427;
    lawsuits instituted by, in Massachusetts, 430;
    number of, in United States, 1790, 436;
    law for the return of fugitive, 438;
    introduction of, prohibited into the Mississippi Territory, 440;
    importation of, prohibited in Georgia, 440;
    condition of, in Massachusetts, 461;
    petition of, in Boston, 462;
    Massachusetts   laws   in regard to, 463.

  Slave-trade, commenced at Benin, Africa, 26;
    natives of Africa engage in, 27;
    suppressed by England, 28, 31;
    at Yoruba, Africa, 31;
    declared piracy by England, 87;
    abolished in Liberia, 104, 105;
    earliest commerce for slaves between Africa and America, 115;
    introduced first in Virginia, 116, 118;
    Dutch engage in the, 124, 135;
    tax on the subjects of Great Britain in the, 127;
    encouraged in Virginia, 128;
    with Angola, Africa, 134;
    encouraged by the Dutch, 135;
    sanctioned by the English, 138;
    encouraged by Queen Elizabeth, 138;
    growth in New York, 140;
    slave-market erected in New York, 142;
    Indians exchanged for Negroes, 173;
    in New England, 174;
    ship "Desire" built for the, 174;
  arrives with cargo of slaves, 174, 176;
    on the coast of Guinea, 180;
    increased in Massachusetts, 184;
    abolished by England, 231;
    bill for the suppression of, in Massachusetts, 235;
    sanctioned in Rhode Island, 265, 273;
    vessels fitted out for the, 269;
    slave-market at Charleston, S.C., 299;
    the situation of South Carolina favorable to the, 302;
    progress during the Revolution, 402;
    discussion in Congress on the restriction of the, 434;
    act against the foreign, 438.

  Slew, Jenny, a slave, sues for her freedom, 228.

  Smeatham, Dr., one of the founders of the Sierra Leone colony, 86.

  Smith, Hamilton, antiquity of the Negro race, 18.

  Smith, Samuel, murders his Negro slave, 461.

  Smith, William, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151,
      158, 166.

  Sommersett, James, a Negro slave, brought to England and abandoned by
      his master, 85, 205;
    discharged, 206.

  Sorubiero, Margaret, connected with the New-York Negro plot, 1741,
      147, 152, 153.

  South Carolina, slaves purchased in, to evade the tax, 128;
    slavery in, 289-301;
    receives two charters from Great Britain, 289;
    Negro slaves in, 289;
    slavery legislation, 289;
    slavery established, 289;
    perpetual bondage of the Negro, 290, 291;
    slaves regarded as chattel property, 292;
    trial of slaves, 292;
    increase of slave population, 292;
    growth of the rice-trade, 292;
    trade with Negroes prohibited, 293;
    conduct of slaves regulated, 293;
    punishment of slaves, 294;
    branded, 294;
    life of slaves regarded as of little consequence, 296;
    fine for killing slaves, 296;
    education of slaves prohibited, 298, 300;
    permitted to be baptized, 298;
    inquiry into the treatment of slaves,  298;
    overworking of slaves prohibited, 298;
    hours of labor, 298;
    slave-market at Charleston, 299;
    Negro insurrection, 299;
    whites authorized to carry fire-arms, 300;
    enlistment of slaves, 300;
    Negroes admitted to the militia service, 300;
    masters compensated for the loss of slaves, 301;
    few slaves manumitted, 301;
    little legislation on slavery from 1754-1776, 301;
    effect of the threatened war with England, 301;
    number of slaves in 1715 and 1775, 325;
    efforts to raise Negro troops, 355;
    Negroes desert from, 355;
    recapture of Negroes from the British, 376;
    slave population, 1790, 436.

  Spain engaged in the slave-trade, 31;
    her colonies in the West Indies to be furnished with Negroes, 237.

  Stanley, Henry M., description of a journey through Africa, 72.

  Staten Island, N.Y., a Negro regiment to be raised there, 342.

  Stephens, Thomas, favors the introduction of slavery in Georgia, 319;
    reprimanded, 320.

  Stewart, Charles, owner of the Negro slave James Sommersett, 205.

  Stone, S.C., a Negro insurrection at, 299.

  Swain, John, suit to recover a slave, 231.

  Swan, James, advocate of liberty for all, 204.

  Swedes, settle on the Delaware River, 312.


  Tacudons, king of Dahomey, 28.

  Tarshish, Africa, description of, 452.

  Taylor, Comfort, sues a slave for trespass, 278.

  Teage, Collin, missionary to Liberia, 101.

  Tembandumba, queen of the Jagas, 56.

  Tharaca, king of Egypt, 454.

  Thethmosis, king of Egypt, 459.

  Thomas, John, letter to John Adams, 1775, on the employment of
      Negroes in the army, 337.

  Thompson, Capt, of ship "Nautilus," arrives at Sierra Leone with
      Negroes, 86.

  Timans, second king of Egypt, 454.

  Tutu Osai, king of Ashantee, 34.

  "Treasurer," ship, sails to West Indies for Negroes, 116;
    arrives at Virginia, 117.

  "Tyrannicide," armed vessel, re-captures Negroes, 376.


  Uchoreus, king of Egypt, 459.

  Undi, African chief, 50.

  United States, condition of the Colored population before the war of
      1861, 96;
    first statute establishing slavery in, 177;
    slave population, 1715 and 1775, 325;
    confederation of the, 374;
    treaty with England, 382;
  the Tory party in favor of slavery, 413;
    the Whigs the dominant party in the Northern States, 414;
    slavery recognized under the new government of the, 414;
    anti-slavery agitation in, 414;
    plan for the disposal of the Western Territory, 416;
    proceedings of Federal Convention, 417;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  United-States Congress, action on the disposal of recaptured Negroes,
      374;
    first session at New York, 1789, 426;
    proceedings, 427;
    memorials to, for the abolition of slavery, 432, 437;
    discussion in, on the restriction of the slave-trade, 433;
    prohibits the introduction of slaves into the Mississippi Territory,
      440.

  Upton, Samuel and William, emancipate their father's slave, 207.

  Ury, John, his connection with the New-York Negro plot, 1741, 160,
      162, 163, 166;
    executed, 169.

  Utrecht, the treaty of, to provide Negroes for the Spanish West
      Indies, 236.


  Van Twiller, Wouter, charged with neglect of public affairs in
      New Netherlands, 249;
    owner of Negro slaves, 250.

  Varick, Cæsar, charged with burglary at New York, 148.

  Varnum, Gen. J.M., letter to Washington on the enlistment of Negroes,
      346.

  Vaughan, Col. James, Legislature of Rhode Island refund tax on two
      child slaves imported by, 276.

  Vermont, slave population, 1790;
    admitted into the Union, 436.

  "Victoria," ship, captures British privateer with Negroes, 376.

  Virginia, slavery in, 115-133;
    slaves first introduced, 116;
    number of, 119;
    forced on the colony, 119;
    the first to purchase slaves, 119;
    women purchased in England and sent to, 119;
    number of slaves, 119, 120, 132, 133;
    population, 120;
    Assembly pass prohibition against Negroes, 121;
    slavery legalized, 123;
    Indians declared slaves, 124, 125;
    Assembly protest against the repeal of the Act declaring Negroes
        real estate, 125, 126;
    impose duty on slaves and servants imported, 126, 127;
    tax on slaves sold, 128;
    reduced, 128, repealed, 128;
    revived, 128;
    prohibit Catholics, Indians, and Negro slaves to appear as
        witnesses, 129;
    pass act to value slave when executed, 129;
    threatened revolt of the free Negroes, 130;
    Act in regard to the freedom of slaves, 130;
    number of slaves in 1715 and 1775, 325;
    arrival of slaves in 1775, 328;
    purchaser of the same reproved, 328;
    instructions to delegation to Congress relative to the abolition
        of slavery, 328;
    Lord Dunmore's proclamation freeing slaves, 336;
    Negroes join the British army, 339, 352;
    declaration of convention against Dunmore's proclamation, 341;
    number of slaves in Cornwallis's army, 358;
    rights of slaves limited, 409;
    slaves who served in the army emancipated, 410;
    slave population, 1790, 436.


  Walklin, Thomas, testimony in the Sommersett case, 205.

  Warren, Joseph, oration on human liberty, 333.

  Warwick, Earl of, slaves on his plantation at the Bermudas, 116, 118.

  Washburn, Emory, views on the slavery laws of Massachusetts, 179.

  Washington, George, acknowledges verses written by Phillis Wheatley,
      200, 201;
    presents Virginia resolutions of 1774 against slavery, 327;
    takes command of the army, 334;
    forbids the enlistment of Negroes, 334;
    instructed to discharge all Negroes and slaves in the army, 335;
    order of, against Negro enlistments, 336;
    letter to Congress on admitting Negroes to the army, 337;
    letter to Joseph Reed on Lord Dunmore's proclamation, 341;
    letter to Gov. Cooke, 345;
    letter to Henry Laurens, on the arming of the Negroes, 353;
    letter to John Laurens on the failure to enlist Negroes in the
        South, 360;
    letter to Sir Guy Carleton relative to Negroes, 381;
    to Gen. Putnam in regard to a Negro in the army claimed by his
        owner, 384;
    president of the Federal Convention, 417.

  Watson, Capt., arrives at Norfolk, Va., with slaves, 328.

  Wayne, Anthony, letter to Lieut.-Col. Meigs relative to Negroes
    captured by him, 375.

  Wesleyan Methodists establish mission at Sierra Leone, 90.

  West India Company, trade in slaves, 135;
    children of manumitted Negroes held as slaves by the, 135;
    cost of the government of New Netherland to the, 136;
    encourage commerce in slaves, 137;
    slaves in New York the property of the, 139.

  West Indies, Negroes captured and made slaves, 117, 118;
    slaves sold at, 181;
    England furnishes Negroes to the, 237.

  Western Territory, plan for the disposal of the, 416;
    slave population, 1790, 436.

  Wheatley, Phillis, an African poetess, 197;
    visits England, 198;
    publishes her poems, 199;
    marries John Peters, 200;
    death of, 200;
    poem to Washington, 200;
    Washington's letter of acknowledgment, 201.

  Whipple, John, sued by Jenny Slew, a slave, 228.

  Whitefield, Rev. George, his plantation and Negroes in Georgia, 321.

  Williams, George W., orations on "The Footsteps of the Nation,"
      "Early Christianity in Africa," 111;
    first colored graduate from Newton Seminary, 111;
    ordination poem by Rev. Dr. Abbott, 111.

  Wilson, D.A., principal of school at Liberia, 100.

  Wilson, Jacob, on African languages, 67.

  Wilkinson, Gardiner, discovers a Theban tomb with Negro scenes, 15;
    condition of white and black slaves, 16.

  Willson, Capt. John, charged with exciting slaves, 226.

  Windsor, Thomas, master of ship "Seaflower," arrives at Newport,
      R.I., with slaves from Africa, 269.

  Winter, Sir William, a slave-trader, 138.

  Worcester, Mass, representative instructed to vote against slavery,
      220.


  York, Duke of, conveys Delaware to William Penn, 249.

  Yoruba, Africa, Negro kingdom, 31;
    slave trade stopped, 31.


  Zerah, king of Ethiopia, 454.