  Luke Boys,
  Mrs. Boys,
  Robert Halam,
  Joseph Royall,
  John Dods,
  Mrs. Dods,
  Elizabeth Perkinson,
  William Vincent,
  Mrs. Vincent,
  Allexander Bradwaye,
    his wife Bradwaye,
  John Price,
    his wife Price,
  Robert Turner,
  Nathaniell Reeve,
  Serjeant William Sharp,
  Mrs. Sharp,
  Richard Rawse,
  Thomas Sheppy,
  William Clemens,
  Ann Woodley,
  Thomas Harris,
    his wife Harris,
  Margaret Berman,
  Thomas Farmer,
  Hugh Hilton,
  Richard Taylor,
    _uxor_ Taylor,
  Joshua Chard,
  Christopher Browne,
  Thomas Oage,
    _uxor_ Oage,
    infant Oage,
  Henry Coltman,
  Hugh Price,
    _uxor_ Price,
    infant Price,
  Mrs. Coltman,
  Robert Greene,
    _uxor_ Greene,
    infant Greene.

[R] _Neak of Land._--"There is another division of the country into
necks of land, which are the boundaries of the Escheators, viz: the
Northern Neck, between the Patowmeck and Rappahannock rivers.

"The neck between Rappahannock and York rivers, within which Pamunkey
Neck is included.

"The neck between York and James rivers," &c., &c.--Beverly, Book IV.,
chap. ii.

This list being made up at James city this neck might be the one nearest
to that place, and therefore the last one named by Beverly would be the
one referred to; but inasmuch as in this MS. list it follows immediately
after the College land, and in the list of Burgesses for 1629, occupies
the same position, it is not improbable that it refers to the peninsula
opposite Henrico, known on all the maps of the State as Farrar's island,
and which has been made an island in reality by the completion of the
canal begun by the United States army during the late civil war and
afterwards finished by the engineer department of the same, under the
direction of Col. W.P. Craighill. Hening reports Serit Sharpe a Burgess
for this place in 1629, and Serjeant William Sharp is named in the text
as living there in 1626.


_Att West & Sherlow Hundred._[S]

  John Harris,
  Dorothe Harris,
    Infants { Harris,
            { Harris,
  Thomas Floyd,
  Ellias Longe,
  William Nichollas,
  Roger Ratcliffe,         78
  Robert Milver,
  Robert Parttin,
  Margaret Parttin,
    infantes { Parttin,
             { Parttin,
  Henry Benson,
  Nicholas Blackman,
  Nathanell Tattam,
  Mathew Gloster,
  Symon Surgis,
  Nicholas Baley,
  Ann Bayley,
  Eliner Phillips,
  Thomas Paulett,
  Thomas Baugh,
  Thomas Packer,
  Jonas Bayley,
  John Trussell,
  Christopher Beane,
  John Cartter,
  Henry Bagwell,
  Thomas Bagwell,
  Edward Gardiner,
  Richard Biggs,
  Richard Biggs,
  William Biggs, }
  Thomas Biggs,  } Sons
  Richard Biggs, }
  William Askew,
  Henry Carman,
  Andrew Dudley,
  James Gay,
  Anthony Burrows,
  Rebecca Rosse,
  sons { Rosse,
       { Rosse,
  Petters, a maid.

[S] _West & Sherlow Hundred._--Sir Thomas Dale annexed to New Bermuda
"many miles of champion and wood land ground in several hundreds, by the
names of Nether Hundred, Shirley Hundred," &c.--Stith, p. 124-'5; Smith,
General Historie, 1627, p. 111. Hening names Burgesses (1629) from
Shirley Hundred island and Shirley Hundred maine, and among the latter
is the name of John Harris, which appears in the text.--Heming Vol. I.,
p. 138.

The name of Shirley appears on the Fry and Jefferson map only at the
place where the same is now located, opposite Bermuda Hundred, and well
known as the residence of Hill Carter, Esq. A short distance below is an
island not named on that map, but on modern maps as Eppes island, which
we may presume was Shirley island. We do not find the name of West in
the connection except in a paper entitled John Rolfe's relation to the
State of Virginia, written in 1616, in which we learn that West and
Shirley Hundred was about thirty-seven miles above James citie, which
corresponds with the location above named. See Virginia Historical
Register, Vol. I., p. 110.

