 Basil did not
cease to praise and glorify God in his dungeon, and Pegasus repaired
thither to him in hopes, by promises and entreaties, to work him into
compliance: but came back to the proconsul highly offended at the
liberty with which the martyr had reproached him with his apostacy. At
the request of the commissaries, the proconsul ordered him to be again
brought before them, and tormented on the rack with greater cruelty than
before; and afterwards to be loaded with the heaviest irons, and lodged
in the deepest dungeon.

In the mean time Julian set out from Constantinople for Antioch, in
order to prepare for his Persian expedition. From Chalcedon he turned
out of his road to Pessinunte, a town in Galatia, there to offer
sacrifice in a famous temple of Cibele. In that town he condemned a
certain Christian to be beheaded for the faith, and the martyr went to
execution with as much joy as if he had been called to a banquet. When
Julian arrived at Ancyra, St. Basil was presented before him, and the
crafty emperor, putting on an air of compassion, said to him: "I myself
am well skilled in your mysteries; and I can inform you, that Christ, in
whom you place your trust, died under Pilate, and remains among the
dead." The martyr answered: "You are deceived; you have renounced Christ
at a time when he conferred on you the empire. But he will deprive you
of it, together with your life. As you have thrown down his altars, so
will he overturn your throne: and as you have violated his holy law,
which you had so often announced to the people, (when a reader in the
church,) and have trodden it under your feet, your body shall be cast
forth without the honor of a burial, and shall be trampled upon by men."
Julian replied: "I designed to dismiss thee: but thy impudent manner of
rejecting my advice, and uttering reproaches against me, force me to use
thee ill. It is therefore my command, that every day thy skin be torn
off thee in seven different places, till thou hast no more left." He
then gave it in charge to count Frumentinus, the captain of his guards,
to see this barbarous sentence executed. The saint, after having
suffered with wonderful patience the first incisions, desired to speak
to the emperor. {643} Frumentinus would be himself the bearer of this
message to Julian, not doubting but Basil intended to comply and offer
sacrifice. Julian instantly ordered that the confessor should meet him
in the temple of Esculapius. He there pressed him to join him in making
sacrifices. But the martyr replied, that he could never adore blind and
deaf idols. And taking a piece of his flesh which had been cut out of
his body that day, and still hung to it by a bit of skin, he threw it
upon Julian. The emperor went out in great indignation: and count
Frumentinus, fearing his displeasure, studied how to revenge an insult,
for which he seemed responsible to his master. He therefore mounted his
tribunal, and ordered the torments of the martyr to be redoubled; and so
deep were the incisions made in his flesh, that his bowels were exposed
to view, and the spectators wept for compassion. The martyr prayed aloud
all the time, and at evening was carried back to prison. Next morning
Julian set out for Antioch, and would not see Frumentinus. The count
resolved to repair his disgrace, or at least to discharge his resentment
by exerting his rage upon the servant of Christ. But to his thundering
threats Basil answered: "You know how many pieces of flesh have been
torn from my body: yet look on my shoulders and sides; see if any wounds
appear? Know that Jesus Christ this night hath healed me. Send this news
to your master Julian, that he may know the power of God whom he hath
forsaken. He hath overturned his altars, who was himself concealed under
them when he was sought by Constantius to be put to death. But God hath
discovered to me that his tyranny shall be shortly extinguished with his
life." Frumentinus seemed no longer able to contain his rage, and
commanded the saint to be laid upon his belly, and his back to be
pierced with red-hot iron spikes. The martyr expired under these
torments on the 29th of June, in 362. But his name is honored both by
the Latins and Greeks on the 22d of March.

The love of God, which triumphed in the breasts of the martyrs, made
them regard as nothing whatever labors, losses, or torments they
suffered for its sake, according to that of the Canticles: _If a man
shall have given all that he possesses, he will despise it as nothing._
If the sacrifice of worldly honors, goods, friends, and life be required
of such a one, he makes it with joy, saying with the royal prophet,
_What have I desired in heaven, or on earth, besides thee, O God! Thou
art my portion forever._ If he lives deprived of consolation and joy, in
interior desolation and spiritual dryness, he is content to bear his
cross, provided he be united to his God by love, and says, My God and my
all, if I possess you, I have all things in you alone: whatever happens
to me, with the treasure of your love I am rich and sovereignly happy.
This he repeats in poverty, disgraces, afflictions, and persecutions. He
rejoices in them, as by them he is more closely united to his God, gives
the strongest proof of his fidelity to him, and perfect submission to
his divine appointments, and adores the accomplishment of his will. If
it be the property of true love to receive crosses with content and joy,
to sustain great labors, and think them small, or rather not to think of
them at all, as they bear no proportion to the prize, to what we owe to
God, or to what his love deserves: to suffer much, and think all
nothing, and the longest and severest trials short: is it not a mark of
a want of this love, to complain of prayer, fasts, and every Christian
duty? How far is this disposition from the fervor and resolution of all
the saints, and from the heroin courage of the martyrs!

Footnotes:
1. Marcellus wrote a famous book against the Arians, which Eusebius of
Cæsarea and all the Arians condemned, as reviving the exploded heresy
of Sabellius. But Sabellianism was a general slander with which they
aspersed all orthodox pastors. It is indeed true, that St. Hilary, St.
Basil, St. Chrysostom, and Sulpicius Severus charge Marcellus with
that error; but were deceived by the clamors of the Arians. For
Marcellus appealing to pope Julius, and repairing to Rome, was
acquitted, and his book declared orthodox by that pope in 341, and
also by the council of Sardica in 347; as St. Hilary (fragm. 3,
pp. 1308, 1311) and St. Athanasins (Apol. contra Arianos, p. 165)
testify. It was a calumny of the Arians, though believed by
St. Hilary, that St. Athanasius at length abandoned and condemned him.
It is demonstrated by Dom Montfaucon from the works of St. Athanasius,
that he ever defended the innocence of Marcellus, (t. 2 Collect Patr.)
Moreover, Marcellus being informed that St. Basil had suggested to St.
Athanasius certain suspicions of his faith, in 372, towards the end of
his life, sent St. Athanasius his most orthodox confession of faith,
in which he explicitly condemns Sabellianism; which authentic monument
was published by Montfaucon, (t. 2, Collect Patr. p. 55.) If Patavius,
Bull, and others, who censure Marcellus, had seen this confession,
they would have cleared him of the imputation of Sabellianism, and
expounded favorably certain ambiguous expressions which occurred in
his book against the Arises, which is now lost, and was compiled
against a work of Asterius the Sophist, surnamed the advocate of the
Arians.

{644}

ST. PAUL, BISHOP OF NARBONNE, C.

ST. GREGORY of Tours informs us,[1] that he was sent with other
preachers from Rome to plant the faith in Gaul. St. Saturninus of
Thoulouse, and St. Dionysius of Paris, were crowned with martyrdom:
but St. Paul of Narbonne, St. Trophimus of Arles, St. Martial of
Limoges, and St. Gatian of Tours, after having founded those churches,
amidst many dangers, departed in peace. Prudentius says,[2] that the
name of Paul had rendered the city of Narbonne illustrious.

Footnotes:
1.  Hist. Franc. l. 1, c. 30.
2.  Hymn. 4.

ST. LEA. WIDOW.

SHE was a rich Roman lady; after the death of her husband she mortified
her flesh by wearing rough sackcloth, passed whole nights in prayer, and
by humility seemed every one's menial servant. She died in 384, and is
honored on this day in the Roman Martyrology. St. Jerom makes an elegant
comparison between her death and that of Prætextatus, a heathen, who was
that year appointed consul, but snatched away by death at the same time.
See St. Jerom, Ep. 20, (olim 24,) to Marcella, t. 4, p. 51, Ed. Ben.

ST. DEOGRATIAS, BISHOP OF CARTHAGE, C.

GENSERIC, the Arian king of the Vandals, took Carthage in 439, filled
the city with cruelties, and caused Quodvultdeus, the bishop, and many
others, to be put on board an old leaky vessel, who, notwithstanding,
arrived safe at Naples. After a vacancy of fourteen years, in 454, St.
Deogratias was consecrated archbishop. Two years after, Genseric
plundered Rome, and brought innumerable captives from Italy, Sicily,
Sardinia, and Corsica, into Africa, whom the Moors and Vandals shared
among them on the shore, separating without any regard or compassion
weeping wives from their husbands, and children from their parents.
Deogratias sold every thing, even the gold and silver vessels of the
church, to redeem as many as possible; he provided them with lodgings
and beds, and furnished them with all succors, and though in a decrepit
old age, visited those that were sick every day, and often in the night.
Worn out by these fatigues, he died in 457, to the inexpressible grief
of the prisoners, and of his own flock. The ancient calendar of
Carthage, written in the fifth age, commemorates him on the 5th of
January; but the Roman on the 22d of March. See St. Victor Vitensis, l.
1, c. 3.

ST. CATHARINE OF SWEDEN, VIRGIN.

SHE was daughter of Ulpho, prince of Nericia, in Sweden, and of St.
Bridget. The love of God seemed almost to prevent in her the use of her
reason. At seven years of age she was placed in the nunnery of Risburgh,
and educated in piety under the care of the holy abbess of that house.
Being very beautiful, she was, by her father, contracted in marriage to
Egard {645} a young nobleman of great virtue: but the virgin persuaded
him to join with her in making a mutual vow of perpetual chastity. By
her discourses he became desirous only of heavenly graces, and, to draw
them down upon his soul more abundantly, he readily acquiesced in the
proposal. The happy couple, having but one heart and one desire, by a
holy emulation excited each other to prayer, mortification, and works of
charity. After the death of her father, St. Catharine, out of devotion
to the passion of Christ, and to the relies of the martyrs, accompanied
her mother in her pilgrimages and practices of devotion and penance.
After her death at Rome, in 1373, Catherine returned to Sweden, and died
abbess of Vadzstena, or Vatzen,[1] on the 24th of March, in 1381.[2] For
the last twenty-five years of her life she every day purified her soul
by a sacramental confession of her sins. Her name stands in the Roman
Martyrology on the 22d of March. See her life written by Ulpho, a
Brigittine friar, thirty years after her death, with the remarks of
Henschenius.

Footnotes:
1.  The great monastery of our Saviour at Wasten, or Vatzen, in the
    diocese of Lincopen, was first founded by St. Bridget, in 1344; but
    rebuilt in a more convenient situation in 1384, when the nuns and
    friars were introduced with great solemnity by the bishop of
    Lincopen. This is called its foundation in the exact chronicle of
    Sweden, published by Benzelius, Monum. Suec. p. 94.
2.  St. Catharine of Sweden compiled a pious book, entitled, Sielinna
    Troëst, that is, Consolation to the Soul, which fills one hundred
    and sixty-five leaves in folio, in a MS., on vellum, mentioned by
    Starnman, Sur l'Etat des Sciences en Suède, dans les temps reculés.
    The saint modestly says in her preface, that as a bee gathers honey
    out of various flowers, and a physician makes choice of medicinal
    roots for the composition of his remedies, and a virgin makes up a
    garland out of a variety of flowers, so she has collected from the
    holy scriptures and other good books, chosen rules and maxims of
    virtue.


MARCH XXIII.

ST. ALPHONSUS TURIBIUS, ARCHBISHOP OF LIMA,

CONFESSOR.

From his life by F. Cyprian de Herrera, dedicated to pope Clement X.,
and the acts of his canonization.

A.D. 1606.

ST. TORIBIO, or TIIRIBIUS ALPHONSUS MOGROBEJO, was second son to the
lord of Mogrobejo, and born in the kingdom of Leon, on the 16th of
November, in 1538. From his infancy he discovered a strong inclination
to piety; and, in his childhood, it was his delight, at times of
recreation, to erect and adorn altars, and to serve the poor. He
trembled at the very shadow of sin. One day, seeing a poor pedler-woman
angry because she had lost something out of her pack, he most movingly
entreated and exhorted her, that she would not offend God by passion;
and, in order to appease her, gave her the value of her loss, which he
had begged of his mother for that purpose. He was very devout to the
Blessed Virgin, said every day her Office and Rosary, and fasted every
Saturday in her honor. While at school, he usually gave part of his
slender dinner to the poor, and was so much addicted to fasting, that
his superiors were obliged, by strict commands, to compel him to
moderate his austerities. He began his higher studies at Valladolid, but
completed them at Salamanca. He was introduced early to the notice of
king Philip II., honored by him with several dignities, and made
president or chief judge at Granada. This office he discharged during
five years with so much integrity, prudence, and virtue, that the eyes
of the whole kingdom were fixed on him, and his life in the world {646}
was a holy noviceship to the pastoral charge. The pressing necessities
of the infant church of Peru required a prelate who inherited, in a
distinguished manner, the spirit of the apostles; and the archbishopric
of Lima falling vacant, Turibius was unanimously judged the person of
all others the best qualified to be an apostle of so large a country,
and to remedy the scandals which obstructed the conversion of the
infidels. The king readily nominated him to that dignity, and all
parties concerned applauded the choice. Turibius was thunderstruck at
this unexpected news, and had no sooner received the message, but he
cast himself on the ground at the foot of his crucifix, praying with
many tears that God would deliver him from so heavy a burden, which he
thought absolutely above his strength. He wrote the most urgent letters
to the king's council, in which he pleaded his incapacity, and other
impediments, and laid great stress on the canons, which forbid laymen to
be promoted to such dignities in the church. This humility it was that
obtained the succor of heaven by which he performed wonders in the
service of souls. Being compelled by obedience to acquiesce, he at
length testified his submission by falling on his knees and kissing the
ground.

After a suitable preparation, he received the four minor orders on four
successive Sundays, the better to dispose himself for the functions of
each; and after passing through the other orders, he was consecrated
bishop. Immediately after which he set out for Peru, and landed at Lima,
in the year 1581, of his age the forty-third. That diocese is extended
one hundred and thirty leagues along the coast, comprising three cities,
and many towns and villages, with innumerable cottages scattered over
two ridges of the mountains of the Andes, esteemed the highest and the
most rugged in the whole world. Some of the European generals, who first
invaded that country, were men who seemed to measure every thing by
their insatiable avarice and ambition, and had so far lost all
sentiments of humanity towards the poor savages, that they deserved the
name rather of tyrants and plunderers than of conquerors. Civil wars and
dissensions completed the misfortune of that country; and covetousness,
cruelty, treachery, fraud, and debauchery, seemed triumphant. Nor were
the repeated orders of the Spanish court able to redress these evils.
The sight of these disorders moved the good pastor often to tears, but
his prudence and zeal overcame all difficulties, extirpated public
scandals, and made that kingdom a flourishing portion of the Christian
church. Upon his arrival he immediately began a visitation of his vast
diocese: an undertaking of incredible fatigue, and attended with many
dangers. He often crept over the steepest and most rugged mountains,
covered with ice or snow, to visit some poor hut of Indians, and give
them suitable comfort and instruction. He travelled often on foot, and
sometimes barefoot, and by fasting and prayer never ceased to implore
the divine mercy for the salvation of the souls committed to his charge.
He placed everywhere able and zealous pastors, and took care that no one
in the most remote corners of the rocks should be left destitute of the
means of instruction and of the benefit of the sacraments. To settle and
maintain discipline, he appointed diocesan synods to be held every two
years, and provincial synods every seven; and was vigilant and severe in
chastising the least scandal, especially of avarice, in the clergy.
Without respect of persons, he reproved injustice and vice, and made use
of all the means which his authority put into his hands, to check the
insolence of public sinners, and to protect the poor from oppression.
Many of the first conquerors and governors of Peru, before the arrival
of the most virtuous viceroy Francis of Toledo, were men who often
sacrificed every thing to their passions, and for their private ends.
From some of these saint suffered many persecutions, and was {647} often
thwarted by them in the discharge of his duty. But by the arms of
meekness and patience he overcame all affronts and injuries, and with an
invincible constancy he maintained the rights of justice and truth. He
showed that many sinners misconstrued the law of God to make it favor
their passions; but that, as Tertullian observes, "Christ calls himself
the truth, not custom," and will weigh our actions not in the false
balance of the world, but in the true scales of the sanctuary. Thus he
extirpated the most inveterate abuses,[1] and established with so great
fervor the pure maxims of the gospel, as to revive in many the primitive
spirit of Christianity. To extend and perpetuate the advantages of
religion, which by his zeal he had procured, he filled this country with
seminaries, churches, and many hospitals; but would never suffer his own
name to be recorded in any of his munificent charities or foundations.
When he was at Lima, he every day visited several hospitals, comforted
and exhorted the sick, and administered the sacraments. When a
pestilence, though that calamity is seldom known in Peru, raged in some
parts of his diocese, Turibius distributed his own necessaries in
relieving the afflicted: he preached penance, because sins are the cause
of chastisements, and infinitely the worst of evils. He walked in the
processions, bathed in tears, with his eyes always fixed on a crucifix,
and offering himself to God for his flock; fasted, watched, and prayed
for them, without intermission, till God was pleased to remove his
scourge.

Nothing gave the saint so much pleasure as the greatest labors and
dangers, to procure the least spiritual advantage to one soul. Burning
with the most vehement desire of laying down his life for his flock, and
of suffering all things for him who died for us, he feared no dangers.
When he heard that poor Indians wandered in the mountains and deserts,
he sought them out; and to comfort, instruct, or gain one of them, he
often suffered incredible fatigues, and dangers in the wildernesses, and
boldly travelled through the haunts of lions and tigers. He spent seven
years in performing his first visitation: his second employed him four
years, but the third was shorter. He converted innumerable infidels, and
left everywhere monuments of his charity. In travelling, he either
prayed or discoursed on heavenly things. On his arrival at a place, it
was his custom to repair first to the church to pray before the altar.
To catechise the poor, he would sometimes stay two or three days in
places where he had neither bed nor any kind of food. He visited every
part of his vast diocese: and when others suggested to him the dangers
that threatened him from rocks, precipices, marshes, rivers, robbers,
{648} and savages, his answer was that Christ came from heaven to save
man, we ought not therefore to fear dangers for the sake of immortal
glory. He preached and catechised without intermission, having for this
purpose learned, in his old age, all the various languages of the
barbarous nations of that country. Even on his journeys he said mass
every day with wonderful fervor and devotion. He always made a long
meditation before and after it, and usually went to confession every
morning; though they who best knew his interior, testified, that they
were persuaded he had never in his whole life forfeited his baptismal
innocence by any mortal sin. He seemed to have God and the divine honor
alone before his eyes in all his words and actions, so as to give little
or no attention to any thing else; by which means his prayer was
perpetual. He retired in private to that exercise often in the day, and
for a long time together. In it his countenance seemed often to shine
with a divine light. The care with which he studied to disguise and
conceal his great mortifications and works of piety, was the proof of
his sincere humility. His munificence in relieving the poor of every
class, especially those who were too bashful to make their necessities
publicly known, always exhausted his revenues. The decrees of his
provincial councils are monuments of his zeal, piety, learning, and
discretion: they have been ever since esteemed, not only in the new
world, but also in Europe, and at Rome itself, as oracles. The
flourishing state of the church of Peru, the great number of saints and
eminent pastors with which it abounded, and the establishment of
innumerable seminaries of piety and learning, and hospitals for the
poor, were the fruit of his zeal. If he did not originally plant the
faith, he was at least the great propagator of it, and the chief
instrument of God in removing scandals and advancing true piety in that
vast country, which till then had been a land of abominations; while
Francis of Toledo, the great viceroy, first settled the civil government
in peace and tranquillity by salutary laws, which have procured him the
title of the Legislator of Peru. St. Turibius, in the sixty-eighth year
of his age, in 1606, during the visitation of his diocese, fell sick at
Santa, a town one hundred and ten leagues distant from Lima. He foretold
his death, and ordered him to be rewarded who should bring him the first
account from his physician, that his recovery was despaired of. The
ardor of his faith, his hope, his love of his Creator and Redeemer, his
resignation and perfect sacrifice of himself, gathered strength in the
fervent exercises and aspirations which he repeated almost without
ceasing in his illness. By his last will he ordered what he had about
him to be distributed among his servants, and whatever else he otherwise
possessed to be given to the poor. He would be carried to the church,
there to receive the holy viaticum: but received extreme unction in his
sick bed. He often repeated those words of St. Paul: _I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ._ And in his last moments he ordered to
be sung, by his bedside, those of the Psalmist: _I rejoiced in the ibwgs
that were said to me: We shall go into the house of the Lord._ He died
on the 23d of March, repeating those other words of the same prophet:
_Into thy hands I commend my spirit._ His body being translated the year
after to Lima, was found incorrupt, the joints flexible, and the skin
soft. His historian, and the acts of the canonization, mention many sick
restored to their health, and a girl raised to life by him while he was
living: also many miracles wrought through his intercession after his
death. He was beatified by Innocent XI. in 1679,[2] and solemnly
canonized by pope Benedict XIII. in 1726. On the miracles wrought by his
intercession, see Benedict XIV.,[3] and especially the acts of his
canonization.

{649}

A pastor of souls must be careful to animate all his exterior actions
and labors in the service of his neighbor, with the interior spirit of
compunction, humility, zeal, charity, and tender devotion. Without this
he loses the fruit of all the pains he takes, and by them will often
deserve only chastisements in the world to come; so much will his
intention and the affections of his heart be infected with self-love,
and depraved by various imperfections, and secret sinister desires even
in the most holy functions. Therefore, a fervent novitiate, employed in
the exercises of an interior life, ought to be a part of the preparation
for this state; and in the discharge of his duties, a person ought
always to unite contemplation with action, and reserve to himself
sufficient time for conversing with God and his own soul, and taking a
frequent review of his own interior. From his labors he must return
frequently to prayer, and constantly nourish in his soul a spirit of
fervent devotion, which will thus accompany all his exterior actions,
and keep his thoughts and affections always united to God. Those who are
not faithful in thus maintaining and improving in themselves an interior
spirit of piety, and in watching with fear and compunction over the
motions of their own hearts, will generally advance very little the
kingdom of Christ in the souls of others, and are in great danger of
losing their own. This is what St. Bernard feared in his disciple pope
Eugeuius III., whom he conjured with tears never to give himself up
entirely to the care of others, so as not to live also for himself; so
to communicate a spirit of piety to others, as not to suffer it to be
drained in his own heart; to be a basin to hold it, not a pipe for it to
run through.[4] This lesson is applicable, with due proportion, to other
states, especially that of teaching the sciences, in which the exercises
of an interior life are so much the more necessary, as the employment is
more distracting, more tumultuous, and more exposed to the waves of
vanity, jealousy, and other secret petty passions.

Footnotes:
1.  The Indians were infamous for their debaucheries, and became so fond
    of the Spanish wines, after having once tasted them, that to
    purchase a small quantity they would give all their gold, and were
    never sober as long as they had wine to drink. But their crimes,
    which justly provoked the anger of heaven, could not justify the
    cruelty of their European enemies, in whom avarice seemed to have
    extinguished the sentiments both of humanity and religion. The
    missionary priests endeavored in vain to put a stop to the outrages
    of their countrymen; and the Dominicans carried repeated complaints
    against them to the kings of Spain. At their remonstrances,
    Ferdinand, king of Castile, declared the Indians free, and forbade
    the Spaniards to employ them in carrying burdens, or to use a stick
    or whip in chastising them. The emperor, Charles V., was prevailed
    upon to send into America severe orders and regulations in their
    favor, but to very little effect. The officers, who assumed the
    haughty titles of conquerors of Mexico and Peru, would not be
    controlled. Bartholomew de las Casas, a Dominican, and bishop of
    Chiapa, in New Spain, made four fruitless voyages into Castile to
    plead the cause of the poor Indians; he obtained ample rescripts
    from the king, and was constituted by him protector-general of the
    Indians in America. But these expedients proved too weak against men
    that were armed. He therefore resigned his bishopric into the hands
    of the pope, in 1551, and returned into the convent of his order at
    Valhutolid; where he wrote his books, On the Destruction of the
    Indians by the Spaniards, and On the Tyranny of the Spaniards in the
    Indies, both dedicated to king Philip II. The archbishop of Seville,
    and the universities of Salamanca and Alcala, forbade the impression
    of the answers which some wrote to defend the Spanish governors, on
    principles repugnant to the law of nature and of nations. These
    books of las Casas, being translated into French, were scattered
    among the people in the Low Countries, who had taken up arms against
    the Spaniards, and animated them exceedingly in their revolt. But
    the crimes of some ought not to be imputed to a nation: and the same
    country which gave birth to some monsters was most fruitful in
    saints, and produced the most zealous apostles and defenders of the
    Indians. The great principle which las Casas defended in the
    emperor's council, and in his writings, was, that the conquered
    Indians could not, without injustice, be made slaves to the
    Spaniards, which the king's council and the divines agreed to with
    regard to those who had not been taken armed in just wars. See the
    history of the Isle of St. Domingo, by {} Charlevoix.
2.  Bened. XIV. De Beatif. et Canoniz. {} 1. Append. p. 496.
3.  De Servor. Dei Canoniz. Roma. 1728. {}4. Tr. de Miraculis, c. 16, p.
    196.
4.  Tuus esto ubique: concha esto non canalis. S. Bern. l. d. Consid.

SS. VICTORIAN, PROCONSUL OF CARTHAGE,

AND OTHERS, MARTYRS UNDER THE VANDALS.

HUNERIC, the Arian king of the Vandals in Africa, succeeded his father
Genseric in 477. He behaved himself at first with moderation towards the
Catholics, so that they began to hold their assemblies in those places
where they had been prohibited by Genseric: but in 480, he began a
grievous persecution of the clergy and holy virgins, which, in 484,
became general, and occasioned vast numbers of the Catholics to be put
to death. Victorian, a citizen of Adrumetum, one of the principal lords
of the kingdom, had been made by him governor of Carthage with the Roman
title of proconsul. He was the wealthiest subject the king had, who
placed great confidence in him, and he had ever behaved with an
inviolable fidelity. The king, after he had published his cruel edicts,
sent a message to the proconsul in the most obliging terms, promising,
if he would conform to his religion, and execute his orders, to heap on
him the greatest wealth and the highest honors which it was in the power
of a prince to bestow. The proconsul, who amidst the glittering pomp of
the world perfectly understood its emptiness, made on the spot this
generous answer: "Tell the king that I trust in Christ. If his majesty
pleases, he may condemn me to the flames, or to wild beasts, or to any
torments: but I shall never consent to renounce the Catholic church in
which I have been baptized. Even if, there were no other life after
this, I would never be ungrateful and perfidious to God, who hath
granted me the {650} happiness of knowing him, and who hath bestowed on
me his most precious graces." The tyrant became furious at this answer:
nor can the tortures be imagined which he caused the saint to endure.
Victorian suffered them with joy, and amidst them finished his glorious
martyrdom. The Roman Martyrology joins with him on this day four others
who were crowned in the same persecution. Two brothers of the city of
Aquæ-regiæ, in the province of Byzacena, were apprehended for the faith,
and conducted to Tabaia in the same province. They had promised each
other, if possible, to die together; and they begged it of God, as a
favor, that they might both suffer the same torments. The persecutors
hung them in the air with great weights at their feet. One of them,
under the excess of pain, begged to be taken down for a little ease. His
brother, fearing this desire of ease might by degrees move him to deny
his faith, cried out from the rack on which he was hanging: "God forbid,
dear brother, that you should ask such a thing. Is this what we promised
to Jesus Christ? Should not I accuse you at his terrible tribunal? Have
you forgotten what we have sworn upon his body and blood, to suffer
death together for his holy name?" By these words the other was so
wonderfully encouraged that he cried out: "No, no; I ask not to be
released: on the contrary, add new weights, if you please, increase my
tortures, exert all your cruelties till they are exhausted upon me."
They were then burnt with red-hot plates of iron, and tormented so long,
and by so many new engines of torture, that the executioners at last
left them, saying: "Everybody follows their example, no one now embraces
our religion." This they said, chiefly because, notwithstanding they had
been so long and so grievously tormented, there were no scars or bruises
to be seen upon them. Two merchants of Carthage, who both bore the name
of Frumentius, suffered martyrdom about the same time, and are joined
with St. Victorian in the martyrologies. Among many glorious confessors
at that time, one Liberatus, an eminent physician, was sent into
banishment with his wife. He only grieved to see his infant children
torn from him. His wife checked his tears by these generous words:
"Think no more of them, Jesus Christ himself will have care of them, and
protect their souls." While in prison, she was told by the heretics that
her husband had conformed: accordingly, when she met him at the bar
before the judge she upbraided him in open court for having basely
abandoned God: but discovered by his answer that a cheat had been put
upon her, to deceive her into her ruin. Twelve young children, when
dragged away by the persecutors, held their companions by the knees till
they were torn away by violence. They were most cruelly beaten and
scourged every day for a long time; yet by God's grace every one of them
persevered to the end of the persecution firm in the faith. See St.
Victor, De Persec. Vandal. l. 5, n. 4.

ST. EDELWALD,[1] PRIEST, C.

HE was, for his eminent sanctity, honored with the priesthood while he
lived in the monastery of Rippon. Afterwards he led an eremitical life
in the isle of Farne, where he died in 669, about eleven years after St.
Cuthbert. His body was translated to Lindisfarne, afterwards to Durham.
See Bede in vita S. Cuthberti, n. 68.

Footnotes:
1.  Edelwald, or Ethelwald. signifies _noble, potent_.

{651}


MARCH XXIV.

ST. IRENÆUS, BISHOP OF SIRMIUM, M

From the original authentic acts of his trial in Henschenius, Ruinart,
p. 403. Tillemont. t. 4, p. 248. Ceillier, t. 3, p. 497.

A.D. 304.

ST. IRENÆUS, bishop of Sirmium, capital of part of Pannonia, (now
Sirmisch, a village in Hungary, twenty-two leagues from Buda to the
south,) in the persecution of Dioclesian was apprehended and conducted
before Probus, the governor of Pannonia, who said to him: "The divine
laws oblige all men to sacrifice to the gods." Irenæus answered: "Into
hell fire shall be thrown, whoever shall sacrifice to the gods." PROBUS.
"The edicts of the most clement emperors ordain that all sacrifice to
the gods, or suffer according to law." IRENÆUS. "But the law of my God
commands me rather to suffer all torments than to sacrifice to the
gods." PROBU.. "Either sacrifice, or I will put you to the torture."
IRENÆUS. "You cannot do me a greater pleasure; for by that means you
will make the partake of the sufferings of my Saviour." The proconsul
commanded him to be put on the rack; and while he was tortured, he said
to him: "What do you say now, Irenæus? Will you sacrifice?" IRENÆUS. "I
sacrifice to my God, by confessing his holy name, and so have I always
sacrificed to him." All Irenæus's family was in the utmost concern for
him. His mother, his wife, and his children surrounded him. His children
embraced his feet, crying out: "Father, dear father, have pity on
yourself and on us." His wife, dissolved in tears, cast herself about
his neck, and, tenderly embracing him, conjured him to preserve himself
for her, and his innocent children, the pledges of their mutual love.
His mother, with a voice broken with sobs, sent forth lamentable cries
and sighs, which were accompanied with those of their servants,
neighbors, and friends; so that all round the rack on which the martyr
was hanging, nothing was heard but sobs, groans, and lamentations.
Irenæus resisted all these violent assaults, opposing those words of our
Lord: _If any one renounce me before men, I will renounce him before my
Father who is to Heaven_. He made no answer to their pressing
solicitations, but raised his soul above all considerations of flesh and
blood to him who was looking down on his conflict from above, waiting to
crown his victory with immortal glory; and who seemed to cry out to him
from his lofty throne in heaven: "Come, make haste to enjoy me." The
governor said to him: "Will you be insensible to such marks of
tenderness and affection? can you see so many tears shed for you without
being moved? It is not beneath a great courage to be touched with
compassion. Sacrifice, and do not destroy yourself in the flower of your
age." Irenæus said: "It is that I may not destroy myself that I refuse
to sacrifice." The governor sent him to prison, where he remained a long
time, suffering divers torments. At the second time of examination, the
governor, after having pressed him to sacrifice, asked him if he had a
wife, parents, or children, alive. The saint answered all these
questions in the negative. "Who then were those that wept for you at
your first examination?" Irenæus made answer: "Our Lord Jesus Christ
hath said: _He that loveth father or mother, wife or children, brothers
or relations more than me, is not worthy of {652} me_. So, when I lift
up my eyes to contemplate that God whom I adore, and the joys he hath
promised to those who faithfully serve him, I forget that I am a father,
a husband, a son, a master, a friend." Probus said: "But you do not
therefore cease to be so. Sacrifice at least for their sakes." Irenmus
replied: "My children will not lose much by my death; for I leave them
for father that same God whom they adore with me; so let nothing hinder
you from executing the orders of your emperor upon me." PROBUS. "Throw
not yourself away. I cannot avoid condemning you." IRENÆUS. "You cannot
do me a greater favor, or give me a more agreeable pleasure." Then
Probus passed sentence after this manner: "I order that Irenæus, for
disobeying the emperor's commands, be cast into the river."[1] Irenæus
replied: "After so many threats, I expected something extraordinary, and
you content yourself with drowning me. How comes this? You do me an
injury; for you deprive me of the means of showing the world how much
Christians, who have a lively faith, despise death, though attended with
the most cruel torments." Probus, enraged at this, added to the sentence
that he should be first beheaded. Irenæus returned thanks to God as for
a second victory. When arrived on the bridge of Diana, from which he was
to be thrown, stripping off his clothes, and lifting up his hands to
heaven, he prayed thus: "Lord Jesus Christ, who condescendedst to suffer
for the salvation of the world, command the heavens to open, that the
angels may receive the soul of thy servant Irenæus, who suffers for thy
name, and for thy people of the Catholic church of Sirmium." Then, his
head being struck off, he was thrown into the river, on the 25th of
March, on which day his name occurs in the Roman Martyrology. He
suffered in the year 304. He was married before he was ordained bishop;
but lived continent from that time, as the laws of the church required.

The martyrs most perfectly accomplished the precept of renouncing all
things for Christ; but all who desire truly to become his disciples, are
bound to do it in spirit. Many aspire to perfection by austere practices
of exterior mortification and long exercises of devotion; yet make
little progress, and, after many years, remain always subject to many
imperfections and errors in a spiritual life. The reason is, because
they neglected to lay the foundation by renouncing themselves. This
requires constant watchfulness, courageous self-denial, a perfect spirit
of humility, meekness and obedience, and sincere compunction, in which a
soul examines and detects her vices, bewails her past sins and those of
the whole world, sighs at the consideration of its vanity and slavery,
and of her distance from heaven, labors daily to cleanse her mind from
all idle thoughts, and her heart from all sin, all irregular
attachments, and superfluous desires, flies the vain joys of the world,
and often entertains herself on the bloody passion of Christ. If the
affections are thus purified, and this cleanness of heart daily more and
more cultivated, the rest costs very little, and the soul makes quick
progress in the paths of holy love, by the assiduous exercises of
contemplation and prayer, a constant fidelity in all her actions, and
the most fervent and pure attention to the divine will and presence.
Voluntary imperfections and failings, especially if habitual, both blind
and defile the soul, disquiet her, extremely weaken her, and damp the
fervor of her good desires and resolutions. They must therefore be
retrenched with the utmost resolution and vigilance, especially those
which arise from any secret vanity, sensuality, or want of the most
perfect sincerity, candor, and simplicity. An habitual attachment to any
failing, how trifling soever it may appear, how subtle and secret {653}
soever it may be, and under whatever pretences it may be disguised,
exceedingly obstructs the operations of the Holy Ghost, and the effusion
of divine grace in a soul.

Footnotes:
1.  Meaning the Boswethe, which runs through Sirmisch, and falls into
    the sea five leagues lower.

ST. SIMON, AN INFANT, MARTYR AT TRENT.

IN the year 1472, when the Jews of Trent (famous for the last general
council held there) met in their synagogue on Tuesday in Holy Week, to
deliberate on the preparations for the approaching festival of the
Passover, which fell that year on the Thursday following, they came to a
resolution of sacrificing to their inveterate hatred of the Christian
name, some Christian infant on the Friday following, or Good Friday. A
Jewish physician undertook to procure such an infant for the horrid
purpose. And while the Christians were at the office of Tenebræ on
Wednesday evening, he found a child called Simon, about two years old,
whom, by caresses, and by showing him a piece of money, he decoyed from
the door of a house, the master and mistress whereof were gone to
church, and carried him off. On Thursday evening the principal Jews shut
themselves up in a chamber adjoining to their synagogue, and at midnight
began their cruel butchery of this innocent victim. Having stopped his
mouth with an apron, to prevent his crying out, they made several
incisions in his body, gathering his blood in a basin. Some, all this
while, held his arms stretched out in the form of a cross: others held
his legs. The child being half dead, they raised him on his feet, and
while two of them held him by the arms, the rest pierced his body on all
sides with their awls and bodkins. When they saw the child had expired,
they sung round it: "In the same manner did we treat Jesus, the God of
the Christians: thus may our enemies be confounded forever." The
magistrates and parents making strict search after the lost child, the
Jews hid it first in a barn of hay, then in a cellar, and at last threw
it into the river. But God confounded all their endeavors to prevent the
discovery of the fact, which being fully proved upon them, with its
several circumstances, they were put to death: the principal actors in
the tragedy being broke upon the wheel and burnt. The synagogue was
destroyed, and a chapel was erected on the spot where the child was
martyred. God honored this innocent victim with many miracles. The
relics lie in a stately tomb in St. Peter's church at Trent: and his
name occurs in the Roman Martyrology. See the authentic account of
Tiberinus, the physician who inspected the child's body; and the
juridical acts in Surius and the Bollandists, with Henschenius's notes
on this day: also Martenne, Ampl. Collectio Vet. t. 2, p. 1516, and
Bened. XIV. de Canoniz. l. 1, c. 14, p. 105.

ST. WILLIAM OF NORWICH, M.

THIS martyr was another victim of the implacable rage of the Jews
against our holy religion. He suffered in the twelfth year of his age.
Having been not long bound an apprentice to a tanner in Norwich, a
little before Easter, in 1137, the Jews of that city having enticed him
into their houses, seized and gagged him: then they bound, mocked, and
crucified him, in derision of Christ: they also pierced his left side.
On Easter-day they put the body into a sack, and carried it into
Thorp-wood, now a heath, near the gates of the city, there to bury it;
but being discovered, left it hinging on a tree. The body was honored
with miracles, and, in 1144, {654} removed into the churchyard of the
cathedral of the Holy Trinity, by the monks of that abbey; and in 1150,
into the choir. On the place in Thorpwood, where the body of the
martyred child was found, a chapel was built, called St. William in the
wood. Mr. Weever writes, that "the Jews in the principal cities of the
kingdom, did use sometimes to steal away, circumcise, crown with thorns,
whip, torture, and crucify some neighbor's male-child, in mockery and
scorn of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. St. Richard of Pontoise, in
France, was martyred by them in that manner. As also St. Hugh,
(according to Matthew Paris and John Capgrave,) a child crucified at
Lincoln, in 1255." Nevertheless, it is a notorious slander of some
authors, who, from these singular and extraordinary instances, infer
this to have been at any time the custom or maxim of that people. The
English calendars commemorated St. William on the 24th of March. See the
history of his martyrdom and miracles by Thomas of Monmouth, a
contemporary monk; also the Saxon Chronicle of the same age, and
Bloomfield's History of Norfolk.[1]

Footnotes:
1.  Pope Benedict XIV., l. 1, de Canon. c. 14, p. 103, shows that
    children who die after baptism before the use of reason, though
    saints, ought not to be canonized, because they never practised any
    heroic degree of virtue; and because this was never authorized by
    tradition in the church. Martyrs only, or infants, whether baptized
    or not, which were slain out of hatred to the name of Christ, are to
    be accepted, as is clear from the example of the Holy Innocents, who
    are styled martyrs by St. Irenæus, Origen, and other fathers; and
    the most ancient missals and homilies of fathers on their festival,
    prove them to have been honored as such from the primitive ages.
    Hence infants murdered by Jews, out of hatred to Christ, have been
    ranked among the martyrs, as St. Simon of Trent, by the authority of
    the bishop of that city, afterwards confirmed by the decrees of the
    popes Sixtus V. and Gregory XIII.; also St. William of Norwich in
    England, (though this child having attained to the use of reason, is
    rather to be called an adult martyr.) And St. Richard of Pontoise,
    also about twelve years old, murdered in 1182 by certain Jews in the
    reign of Philip Augustus, who for this and other crimes banished the
    Jews out of France, in April, that same year. The body of St.
    Richard was translated to Paris, and enshrined in the parish church
    of the Holy Innocents, where his feast is kept on the 30th of March,
    but at Pontoise on the 25th. The celebrated F. Gaguin has written
    the history of his martyrdom, with an account of several miracles
    wrought at his shrine. His head is still shown in that church; the
    rest of his relics are said to have been carried off by the English,
    when they were masters of Paris.


MARCH XXV.

THE ANNUNCIATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY.

THIS great festival takes its name from the happy tidings brought by the
angel Gabriel to the Blessed Virgin Mary, concerning the incarnation of
the Son of God. It commemorates the most important embassy that was ever
known: an embassy sent by the King of kings, performed by one of the
chief princes of his heavenly court; directed, not to the kings or
emperors of the earth, but to a poor, unknown, retired virgin, who,
being endowed with the most angelic purity of soul and body, being
withal perfectly humble and devoted to God, was greater in his eyes than
all the sceptres in the world could make a universal monarch. Indeed
God, by the choice which he is pleased to make of a poor virgin, for the
accomplishment of the greatest of all mysteries and graces, clearly
demonstrates that earthly diadems, dignities, and treasures are of no
consideration with him; and that perfect humility and sanctity alone
constitute true greatness. God, who is almighty, can do all things by
himself, without making use of the concurrence of creatures Nevertheless
he vouchsafes, in his exterior works, {655} most frequently to use their
co-operation. If he reveals his will and speaks to men, it is by the
intervention of his prophets, and these he then enlightens by the
ministry of angels. Many of the ancient patriarchs were honored by him
with the most sublime commissions. By Moses he delivered his people from
the Egyptian slavery, by him he gave them his law, and he appointed him
mediator in his alliance with them. When the Son of God became man, he
could have taken upon him our nature without the co-operation of any
creature; but was pleased to be born of a woman. In the choice of her
whom he raised to this most sublime of all dignities to which any pure
creature could be exalted, he pitched upon her who, by the riches of his
grace and virtues, was of all others the most holy and the most perfect.
The design of this embassy of the archangel is as extraordinary as the
persons concerned in it. It is to give a Saviour to the world, a victim
of propitiation to the sinner, a model to the just, a son to this
Virgin, remaining still a virgin, and a new nature to the Son of God,
the nature of man, capable of suffering pain and anguish in order to the
satisfaction of God's justice for our transgressions. And the Son of God
being to take a human body formed of her substance, the Holy Ghost, who,
by a power all-divine, was to her in place of a spouse, was not content
to render her body capable of giving life to a Man-God, but likewise
enriched her soul with a fulness of grace, that there might be a sort of
proportion between the cause and the effect, and she the better
qualified to co-operate towards this mystery of sanctity.

The angel begins his address to her with _Hail! full of grace_.[1] This
is not the first time that angels appeared to women. But we find not
that they were ever treated with that respect which the angel Gabriel
shows to Mary. Sarah and Agar were visited by these celestial spirits,
but not with an honor like that wherewith the angel on this occasion
addresses the Blessed Virgin, saying, _Hail! full of grace_. He
considers her as the greatest object among creatures of God's favor,
affection, and complacency. He admires in her those wonderful effects of
the divine liberality, those magnificent gifts and graces, those exalted
virtues, which have placed the very foundation of her spiritual edifice
on the holy mountains,[2] in a degree of perfection surpassing that of
all pure creatures. He admires that perfect gratitude with which she
always received God's grace, and her perfect fidelity in corresponding
with it, and advancing in sanctity by the help thereof, with a
solicitude answerable to her love and gratitude for the preservation and
increase of so inestimable a treasure. _Full of grace_. The first
encomium which St. John gives us of the glory of the Word made flesh is,
that he was _full of grace and truth_.[3] God forbid that we should say
that Mary was full of grace in the same manner as her Son; for he is the
very source and origin of it, _from whose fulness all_ the saints, Mary
not excepted, _have received_[4] whatever degree they possess of grace
and sanctity. St. Luke assures us also, that St. Stephen was full of
grace and the Holy Ghost,[5] but it was a fulness in regard to a less
capacity, and in relation to a lower function. Moreover, to St. Stephen
and other saints, who have received large portions of heavenly grace, we
may say, in those other words of the angel, _You have found favor with
God_; but those very favors, though very great in themselves, were not
to be compared with that which from all eternity was reserved for Mary.
God made the saints the object of his gratuitous election, and he
qualified them with his graces to be the messengers of his Son, the
preachers and witnesses of his gospel; but Mary, was his choice, and was
furnished with his graces to bear the most illustrious, {656} the most
exalted title of honor that heaven could bestow on a pure creature to
conceive of her proper substance the divine Word made man. If then the
grace of God so raises a person in worth and merit, that there is not
any prince on earth who deserves to be compared with a soul that is
dignified with the lowest degree of sanctifying grace; what shall we say
or think of Mary, in whom the fulness of grace was only a preparation to
her maternity? What shall we think of ourselves, (but in an opposite
light,) who wilfully expose this greatest of all treasures on so many
occasions to be lost, whereas we ought wilfully to forego and renounce
all the advantages and pleasures of this world, rather than hazard the
loss of the least degree of it, and be most fervent in our supplications
to God for the gaining, preserving, and increasing so great a treasure:
forasmuch as it is a pledge of God's love, a participation of his
Spirit, and a title to the possession of his heavenly kingdom.

But who can be surprised at those inestimable treasures which God, on
this occasion, with so liberal a hand, bestows on Mary, if he considers
the purport of the following words of the angel to her: _The Lord is
with thee_. He is with her in a manner more intimate, more perfect, and
more divine, than he ever was or will be with any other creature. He is
with her, not only by his essence, by his presence, by his power; for he
is thus with all his creatures: He is with her, not only by his actual
grace touching her heart and enlightening her understanding; he is thus
many times with the sinner: He is with her, not only with his
sanctifying grace, making her agreeable in his sight, and placing her in
the number of his children; he is present in this manner with all the
just: He is with her, not only by a special protection guiding her in
his ways, and leading her securely to the term of salvation; this he
does for the elect: but he is also with her by a substantial and
corporeal presence, residing personally and really in her. In her, and
of her substance, is this day formed his adorable body; in her he
reposes for nine months, with his whole divinity and humanity. It is in
this ineffable manner that he is with Mary, and with none but Mary. O
glorious Virgin, thrice happy Mother, from this source and ocean of all
grace what heavenly blessings in so long a space of time must have
flowed upon you! and what honors must be due to one so nearly allied to
our great Creator! What intercession so prevalent as that of the _Mother
of divine grace!_

The angel concludes his address with these words: _Blessed art thou
among women_.[6] _Blessed_, as being chosen preferably to all of her
sex, to be the glorious instrument, in the hand of God, for removing the
maledictions laid on mankind in punishment of their sins, and in
communicating to them the source of all good. And on this account it
was, that _all_ succeeding _generations_, as she foretold of herself,
_should call her Blessed_;[7] regarding her as the centre in which all
the blessings of the Old and New Testament are drawn together.

Though we are obliged to consider the eminent quality of Mother of God
as the source of all other graces bestowed on the Blessed Virgin, it
must yet be owned it is not the greatest, and that she was happier in
loving Jesus Christ, than in having conceived him and brought him forth.
She is blessed among women and above the rest of creatures, not
precisely on account of her maternity, but because she received a
fulness of grace proportioned to the dignity to which she was chosen. So
that, according to the remark of the holy fathers, she was happier for
her sanctity than for her dignity: for her virtues, than for her
privileges. Among her virtues, that of purity seems particularly
deserving of notice on this solemnity, as the epistle for this festival
{657} records that memorable prophecy of Isaias, _That a Virgin should
conceive and bring forth a son_;[8] the most remarkable of all the signs
God had promised the world for making known the accomplishment of the
mystery of man's redemption. And, indeed, right reason seemed to require
that she, who was to be the mother of God, should be of an integrity
above reproach, and incapable of yielding to any solicitation: it was
highly fit her virginity should be perfectly pure, and removed as far as
possible from the least suspicion of blemish. For this reason, the
moment God had chosen her to be his mother, he exacted from her the most
authentic proofs of an inviolable attachment to purity. Thus, it is not
in a crowd, or in idle conversation, but in a retreat, that the angel
finds her. It is not from the distraction of diversions and
entertainments that he calls her aside to deliver his message: no; she
is alone in her house, with the door shut; "and," as St. Ambrose says,
"he must be an angel that gets entrance there."[9] Hence, according to
the same holy father, it was not the angel's appearance that gave her
trouble, for he will not have it to be doubted but heavenly visions and
a commerce with the blessed spirits had been familiar to her. But what
alarmed her, he says, was the angel's appearing in human form, in the
shape of a young man. What might add to her fright on the occasion, was
his addressing her in the strain of praise, which kind of words flattery
often puts in the mouths of ill-designing men. And how few, alas! are
able to withstand such dangers? But Mary, guarded by her modesty, is in
confusion at expressions of this sort, and dreads the least appearance
of deluding flattery. Such high commendations make her cautious how she
answers, till in silence she has more fully considered of the matter:
_She revolved in her mind_, says St. Luke, _what manner of salutation
this should be_.[10] Ah! what numbers of innocent souls have been
corrupted for want of using the like precautions! Mary is retired, but
how seldom now-a-days are young virgins content to stay at home! Mary is
silent when commended, and answered not a word till she had well
considered what she ought to say: but now it is to be feared that young
women never think so little as when they are entertained with flattery.
Every soothing word is but too apt to slide from the ear to the heart;
and who can tell what multitudes, by their unwary methods, suffer
shipwreck of their modesty, and then of their purity. For how can this
be long-lived after having lost all its guardians? No, it cannot be.
Unless a virgin be assiduous in prayer and spiritual reading, modest in
her dress, prudent and wary in her choice of company, and extremely
careful in the government of her eyes and tongue when she happens to be
in conversation with the other sex, there is but too much reason to
apprehend that either her heart is already betrayed, or in danger of
being vanquished by the next assault of her spiritual enemy. A dread of,
and a speedy flight from all dangerous occasions is the only security of
virtue and innocence. Presumption wants no other tempter. Even Mary,
though confirmed in grace, was only secure by this fear and distrust in
herself.

A second cause why Mary was disturbed at the words of the angel was,
because they contained her praises. Humble souls always tremble and sink
with confusion in their own minds when they hear themselves commended;
because they are deeply penetrated with a sense of their own weakness
and insufficiency, and they consider contempt as their due. They know
that the glory of all gifts belongs solely to God, and they justly fear
lest the poison of praise should insinuate itself into their minds;
being sensible how infinitely dangerous honors and flattery are to
humility. Are {658} these our sentiments? Do we never speak of ourselves
to our own advantage? Do we never artfully praise ourselves, or
willingly lend an ear to what flatterers say to applaud us? Are we
troubled when we hear ourselves praised? What gives trouble but to too
many is, that men give them not what they take to be their right; and
that their praises equal not the notion they have framed of their
merits. The high eulogiums bestowed on Mary by the angel she answers no
otherwise than by a profound silence, by a saintly trouble of mind,
which, with a modest blush, appears in her countenance. The angel, to
calm her disquiets, says to her: _Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found
favor before God_. He then informs her that she is to conceive and bring
forth a son whose name shall be Jesus, who shall be great, and the son
of the Most High, and possessed of the throne of David, her illustrious
ancestor. Mary, who, according to St. Austin,[11] had consecrated her
virginity to God by vow, is not at all weakened by the prospect of such
a dignity, in her resolution of living a virgin: but, on the contrary,
out of a just concern to know how she may comply with the will of God
without prejudice to her vow, neither moved by curiosity, nor doubting
of the miracle or its possibility, she inquires, _How shall this be_?
Nor does she give her consent till the heavenly messenger acquaints her
that it is to be a work of the Holy Ghost, who, in making her fruitful,
will not intrench in the least upon her virginal purity, but cause her
to be a mother, still remaining, as she desires, a pure virgin.

Moreover, had not Mary been deep-rooted in humility, what impression
must not these great promises have made in her heart, at a time
especially when the first transports are so apt to overflow the soul on
the sudden news of an unexpected glory. The world knows, from too
frequent experience, how strongly the promise and expectation of new
dignities raise the spirits, and alter the words, the looks, and the
whole carriage of proud men. But Mary is still the same, or rather much
more lowly and meek in spirit upon the accession of this unparalleled
dignity. She sees no cause to pride herself in her virtues, graces, and
privileges, knowing that the glory of all these are due only to the
divine Author and Bestower of them. In submission, therefore, to God's
will, without any further inquiries, she expresses her assent in these
humble but powerful words: _Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it done
to me according to thy word_. What faith and confidence does her answer
express! What profound humility and perfect obedience! She was saluted
mother of God, yet uses no word of dignity, but styles herself nothing
more than his handmaid, to be commanded and employed by him as he shall
think fittest. The world, as heaven had decreed, was not to have a
Saviour till she had given her consent to the angel's proposal; she
gives it, and behold the power and efficacy of her submissive Fiat. That
moment, the mystery of love and mercy promised to mankind four thousand
years before, foretold by so many prophets, desired by so many saints,
is wrought on earth. That moment, the Word of God is forever united to
humanity: the soul of Jesus Christ, produced from nothing, begins to
enjoy God, and to know all things past, present, and to come: that
moment, God begins to have an adorer, who is infinite, and the world a
mediator, who is omnipotent; and, to the working of this great mystery,
Mary alone is chosen to co-operate by her free assent. The prophets
represent the earth as moved out of its place, and the mountains as
melting away before the very countenance of God looking down upon the
world. Now that he descends in person, who would not expect that the
whole heavens should be moved? But another kind of appearance best
suited his coming on this occasion, which was with {659} the view of
curing our pride by his wonderful humiliations, and thereby repair the
injury the Godhead had suffered from our unjust usurpation; and not to
show forth his grandeur, and display his all-glorious majesty. How far
are the ways of God above those of men! how greatly does divine wisdom
differ from human folly! how does every circumstance in this mystery
confound the pride, the pomp, and the vain titles of worldly grandeur,
and recommend to us the love of silence and sincere humility! Shall the
disciples of Christ have other sentiments?

But what tongue can express the inward feelings and affections which
then filled the glowing heart of the most pure Mother of God? What light
shone in her understanding to penetrate the mysteries and the excess of
the unfathomed goodness of God! what ardors of holy love inflamed her
will! what jubilee filled her soul! Let men redeemed exult and praise,
returning to God their best homages of adoration, thanksgiving, and
love. It is for this duty that the church has appointed this present
festival, which we ought chiefly to consecrate to the contemplation of
this adorable mystery with hymns of love, praise, and thanksgiving. It
was the hope and comfort of all the ancient saints, and the great object
of all their earnest prayers, tears, and sighs. The prophets had a view
to it in all their predictions, this being the principal point in all
the wonderful revelations of God made to his church since the fall of
Adam in Paradise, whom he immediately comforted with a promise and
glimpse of this glorious mercy. Every ordinance in the law which he gave
the Jews was typical, and had either an immediate, or at least an
indirect relation to Christ, and our redemption by him. Among the
numberless religious rites and sacrifices which were prescribed them,
there was not one which did not in some manner represent or allude to
this mystery. How high an idea ought this circumstance to give us of its
incomprehensible greatness, which its nature and wonderful effects and
fruits must enhance beyond the power of words! We are lost in
astonishment when we contemplate this prodigy of omnipotence, and
infinite wisdom and mercy, and adore it in raptures and silence.

Gerson cries out on this mystery: "What ought every heart to say or
think! every religious, every loving and faithful heart? It ought to
rejoice exceedingly in this singular comfort, and to salute you with
Gabriel: _O blessed among women_. On this day is accomplished the great
desire of the holy ancient patriarchs and prophets, who often languished
to hasten it, in their sighs, prayers, and writings, crying out aloud to
_the desire of the eternal hills_. On this day is the Saviour of
mankind, true God and man, conceived in the womb of Mary. This day our
Lady received a name more sublime than can be understood, and the most
noble of all names possible after that of her Son, by which she is
called the Mother of God. On this day the greatest of miracles is
wrought. Hear the wonders of love and mercy on this festival: God is
made man; and man, in the divine person, God: he that is immortal is
become mortal, and the Eternal is born in time. A virgin is a mother, a
woman the mother of God; a creature has conceived her Creator!" St.
Peter Chrysologus expresses the fruits of this mystery as follows: "One
virgin so receives and contains God in the lodging of her breast as to
procure peace for the earth, glory for heaven, salvation for the lost,
life for the dead, an alliance of those on earth with the blessed in
heaven, and the commerce of God with the flesh."[12]

From the example of the Virgin Mary in this mystery, how ardent a love
ought we to conceive of purity and humility! According to St. Gregory of
Nyssa, and St. Jerom,[13] she would rather be the spouse of God in
spirit, by {660} spotless virginity, than his mother in the flesh; and
so acceptable was this her disposition to God, that she deserved
immediately to hear, that she should bring forth the Son of the Most
High, still remaining a most pure virgin: nor would God have otherwise
raised her to this astonishing honor. The Holy Ghost is invited by
purity to dwell in souls, but is chased away by the filth of the
contrary vice. The dreadful havoc which it now-a-days makes among
Christian souls, calls for torrents of tears, and is the source of the
infidelity and universal desolation which spreads on every side.
Humility is the foundation of a spiritual life. By it Mary was prepared
for the extraordinary graces, and all virtues with which she was
enriched, and for the eminent dignity of Mother of God.

St. Austin says, that according to an ancient tradition, this mystery
was completed on the 25th of March.[14] Both eastern and western
churches celebrate it on this day, and have done so at least ever since
the fifth century. This festival is mentioned by pope Gelasius I., in
492. The council of Constantinople, in 692, orders the missa
præsanctificatorum, as on Good-Friday, to be said on all days in Lent,
except Saturdays, Sundays, and the feast of the Annunciation.[15] The
tenth council of Toledo, in 656, calls this solemnity, The festival of
the Mother of God,[16] by way of excellence. To praise the divine
goodness for this incomprehensible mystery of the incarnation, Urban
II., in the council of Clermont, in 1095, ordered the bell to be rung
every day for the triple Angelical Salutation, called Angelus Domini, at
morning, noon, and night. Which practice of devotion several popes have
recommended by indulgences; as John XXII., Calixtus III., Paul III.,
Alexander VII., and Clement X. The late Benedict XIII. has augmented
them to those who at the aforesaid hours shall devoutly recite this
prayer kneeling.

Footnotes:
1.  Luke i. 28.
2.  Ps. lxxxvi.
3.  John 1. 14.
4.  Ibid. 16.
5.  Acts iv. 8.
6.  Luke i. 22.
7.  Ibid. 48.
8.  Isai. vii. 14.
9.  O hospitium solis angelis pervium: S. Amb. in Luc.
10. Luke i. 29.
11. Quid profecto non diceret nisi se virginem ante vovisset. L. de
    Virg. c. 4, t. 6, p. 343.
12. Serm. 146.
13. St. Greg. Nyss. Tr. de Nativ.
14. L. 4. de Trin. c. 5.
15. See Thomasin des Fêtes, p. 229.
16. Festum Sanctæ Virginis Genitricis dies, festivitas matris--nam quod
    festum est matris nisi incarnatio Verbi? Conc. Folêt X.

ST. CAMMIN, ABBOT.

AMONG the most celebrated saints of Ireland, published by Usher, is
placed St. Cammin, who in his youth retired from the noise of the world
into the island of Irish-Kealtair, in the lake of Derg-Derch, or Dergid,
in the confines of Thomond and Galway. Here several disciples resorting
to him, he built a monastery, which, out of veneration for his
extraordinary sanctity, was long very famous among the Irish. The church
of that place still retains, from him, the name of Tempul-Cammin. His
happy death is placed in the Inis-Fallen annals, about the year 653. See
Usher's Antiqu. p. 503.

{661}


MARCH XXVI.

ST. LUDGER, BISHOP OF MUNSTER,

APOSTLE OF SAXONY.

From his life, written by Altfrid, one of his successors, and another
compiled by a monk of Werden, about sixty years after the death of St.
Ludger, of inferior authority to the former, both extant in Mabillon,
Act. Bened. t. 4, p. 489: also a third life in Surius and the
Bollandists, written by the monks of Werden perhaps twenty years after
the latter. See Hist. Littér. Fr. t. 5, p. 660.

A.D. 809.

ST. LUDGER was born in Friseland, about the year 743. His father, who
was a nobleman of the first rank in that country, at the child's own
request, committed him very young to the care of St. Gregory, the
disciple of St. Boniface, and his successor in the government of the see
of Utrecht. Ludger had the happiness to have seen that holy martyr, and
received from him strong impressions of virtue. Gregory educated him in
his monastery, and admiring his progress in learning and piety, gave him
the clerical tonsure. Ludger, desirous of further improvement, passed
over into England, and spent four years and a half under Alcuin, who was
rector of a famous school at York. He was careful to employ his whole
time in the exercises of piety, and the study of the holy scriptures and
fathers. In 773 he returned home, and St. Gregory dying in 776, his
successor, Alberic, compelled our saint to receive the holy order of
priesthood, and employed him for several years in preaching the word of
God in Friseland, where he converted great numbers, both among the
pagans and vicious Christians, founded several monasteries, and built
many churches. This was the state of affairs, when the pagan Saxons,
ravaging the country, obliged him to leave Friseland. Whereupon he
travelled to Rome, to consult pope Adrian II. what course to take, and
what he thought God required of him. He then retired for three years and
a half to Mount Cassino, where he wore the habit of the Order, and
conformed to the practice of the rule during his stay, but made no
religious vows. In 787, Charlemagne overcame the Saxons and conquered
Friseland, and the coast of the Germanic ocean as far as Denmark. Ludger
hearing that by this revolution the mission was again opened, returned
into east Friseland, where he converted the Saxons to the faith; as he
also did the province of Sudergou, now called Westphalia. He founded the
monastery of Werden,[1] in the county of La Mark, twenty-nine miles from
Cologne. His old master Alcuin being come into France, made his merit
known to the emperor Charlemagne. In 802, Hildebald, archbishop of
Cologne, not regarding his strenuous resistance, ordained him bishop of
Mimigardeford, (or ford of the river Mimigard,) a city which afterwards
changed this name for that of Munster, from the great monastery of
regular canons which St. Ludger built there, to serve for his cathedral.
He joined to his diocese five cantons of Friseland, which he had
converted, and also founded the monastery of Helmstad, afterwards called
Lodger-Clooster, or Ludger's cloister, in the duchy of Brunswick.

He was very learned in the holy scriptures, and read daily lectures
thereon to his disciples. He fasted and watched much, and always wore a
hair shirt, but secretly, se that no one knew of it till a little before
his death. {662} He ate some flesh at certain times, chiefly to conform
to others, but always observing a strict temperance. When invited to any
entertainment, his discourse the whole time was on religious subjects,
and he withdrew immediately after. To the poor he was affable and
courteous, but firm and resolute to the proud rich. He exerted an
episcopal vigor against impenitent sinners, and refused all manner of
presents from an incestuous lady, and at length excommunicated her.
Except what was absolutely necessary for his subsistence, he employed
the revenues of his own estate, and those of his bishopric, in
charities. He was accused to the emperor Charlemagne, among other
things, of wasting his income, and neglecting the embellishment of
churches within his jurisdiction. And this prince, who loved to see
churches magnificent, giving ear to the information, ordered him to
appear at court. The morning after his arrival, the emperor's
chamberlain brought him word that his attendance was required. The
saint, being then at his prayers, told the officer that he would follow
him as soon as he had finished them. He was sent for three several times
before he was ready, which the courtiers represented as a contempt of
his majesty; and the emperor, with some emotion, asked him why he had
made him wait so long, though he had sent for him so often. The bishop
answered, that though he had the most profound respect for his majesty,
yet God was infinitely above him; that while we are occupied with him,
it is our duty to forget every thing else; and that in this he judged he
had rather obeyed than neglected his majesty's orders, who, when he was
chosen bishop, had recommended to him ever to prefer the service of God
to that of men. This answer made such an impression on the emperor, in
favor of the saint, that he looked upon it as a complete justification
of his conduct as to every particular that had been laid to his charge:
he accordingly dismissed him with honor, and disgraced his accusers. The
saint took this liberty with a religious prince, that he might condemn
the sloth of many who suffer distractions or earthly trifles to
interrupt their commerce with God; but they who leave prayer for
necessary works of charity or obedience, find God still in the exercises
of those virtues. St. Ludger required so devout an attention at divine
service, that being at prayers one night with his clergy, and one of
them stooping down to mend the fire and hinder it from smoking, the
saint after prayer severely rebuked him for it, and inflicted on him a
penance for some days. St. Ludger was favored with the gift of miracles
and prophecy. He foretold the invasions of the Normans from Denmark and
Norway, and what ravages they would make in the French empire, and this
at a time when there was not the least apprehension of any such thing.
His great zeal inclined him to go and preach the faith to these northern
nations, but the king would not allow of it. His last sickness, though
violent did not hinder him from continuing his functions to the very
last day of his life, which was Passion-Sunday, on which day he preached
very early in the morning, said mass towards nine, and preached again
before night, foretelling withal to those that were about him, that he
should die the following night; and fixing upon a place in his monastery
of Werden where he chose to be interred. He died accordingly on the 26th
of March, at midnight. His relics are still kept at Werden. Joseph, an
Englishman, a disciple of Alcuin, whom he attended into France, wrote,
in sixteen verses, an eulogium of St. Ludger, published by Vossius[2]
and Mabillon, as a specimen of good poetry for that age.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing so much scandalizes the very infidels, or shows the decay of
piety, and loss of all sense of religion among Christians, as their
disrespectful {663} behavior in the house of God and at the time of
prayer. An awful, strict silence, the most profound exterior respect,
and penetrating inward devotion of heart, must essentially accompany our
homages when we present them before the throne of God, in whose presence
the highest seraphims annihilate themselves. This silence we must
observe not only with our tongues, but also with our bodies and all our
limbs, both out of respect to the presence of God and his altar, and
also not to give the least occasion of distraction to others. Prayer is
an action so sublime and supernatural, that the church in her canonical
hours teaches us to begin it by a fervent petition of grace to perform
it well. What an insolence and mockery is it to join with this petition
an open disrespect and a neglect of all necessary precautions against
distractions! We ought never to appear before God, to tender him our
homages or supplications, without trembling, and without being deaf to
all creatures, and shutting all our senses to every object that can
distract our minds from God. In the life of F. Simon Gourdan, a regular
canon of St. Victor's at Paris, who died in the odor of sanctity, in the
year 1729, the eighty-fifth of his age, it is related that king Louis
XIV. came to see him, and to recommend himself to his prayers. The
servant of God made him wait till he had finished his thanksgiving after
mass, which edified that great prince, who said, "he does well; for he
is employed in attending on a much greater king." Though St. Francis of
Sales on the like occasions chose rather to forego or defer his own
private devotions, than not to be ready immediately to wait on others,
in order to give them all the spiritual advice they desired; yet at
prayer at least he and all truly religious persons seemed in some degree
to rival the heavenly spirits in their awe and reverence. Silence at
that holy time, or place, has always been esteemed a thing so sacred,
that when the temple of Solomon was building, God commanded that there
should not be heard so much as the sound of a hamster, or any other
instrument. Even when we come from conversing with God, we ought to
appear all penetrated with the divine presence, and rather as angels
than men. Sanctity, modesty, and the marks of a heavenly spirit, ought
to shine in our exterior, and to inspire others by our very sight with
religious awe and devotion.

Footnotes:
1.  Some have, by mistake, confounded this place with Ferden, or Werden,
    beyond the Weser.
2.  Voss. de histor. lat. l. 2, c. 3.

ST. BRAULIO, BISHOP OF SARAGOSSA, C.

HE was the great assistant of St. Isidore of Seville in settling the
discipline of the church of Spain, and is one of those holy pastors to
whose zeal, learning, and labors it has always professed itself much
indebted. He died in 646, in the twentieth year of his episcopacy. He
has left us two letters to St. Isidore, an eulogium of that saint, and a
catalogue of his works; also a hymn in Iambic verse in honor of St.
Emilian, and the life of that servant of God, who, after living long a
hermit, was called to serve a parish in the diocese of Tarragon, where a
famous monastery now bears his name.

{664}


MARCH XXVII.

ST. JOHN OF EGYPT, HERMIT.

From Rufinus, in the second book of the lives of the fathers; and from
Pallaudius in his Lausiaca; the last had often seen him. Also St. Jerom,
St. Austin, Cassian, &c. See Tillemont, t. 10, p. 9. See also the
Wonders of God in the Wilderness, p. 160.

A.D. 394.

ST. JOHN was born about the year 305, was of a mean extraction, and
brought up to the trade of a carpenter. At twenty-five years of age he
forsook the world, and put himself under the guidance and direction of
an ancient holy anchoret with such an extraordinary humility and
simplicity as struck the venerable old man with admiration; who inured
him to obedience by making him water a dry stick for a whole year as if
it were a live plant, and perform several other things as seemingly
ridiculous, all which he executed with the utmost fidelity. To the
saint's humility and ready obedience, Cassian[1] attributes the
extraordinary gifts he afterwards received from God. He seems to have
lived about twelve years with this old man, till his death, and about
four more in different neighboring monasteries.

Being about forty years of age, he retired alone to the top of a rock of
very difficult ascent, near Lycopolis.[2] His cell he walled up, leaving
only a little window through which he received all necessaries, and
spoke to those who visited him what might be for their spiritual comfort
and edification. During five days in the week he conversed only with
God: but on Saturdays and Sundays all but women had free access to him
for his instructions and spiritual advice. He never ate till after
sunset, and then very sparingly; but never any thing that had been
dressed by fire, not so much as bread. In this manner did he live from
the fortieth or forty-second to the ninetieth year of his age. For the
reception of such as came to him from remote parts, he permitted a kind
of hospital to be built near his cell or grotto, where some of his
disciples took care of them. He was illustrious for miracles, and a
wonderful spirit of prophecy, with the power of discovering to those
that came to see him, their most secret thoughts and hidden sins. And
such was the fame of his predictions, and the lustre of his miracles
which he wrought on the sick, by sending them some oil which he had
blessed, that they drew the admiration of the whole world upon him.

Theodosius the Elder was then emperor, and was attacked by the tyrant
Maximus, become formidable by the success of his arms, having slain the
emperor Gratian in 383, and dethroned Valentinian in 387. The pious
emperor, finding his army much inferior to that of his adversary, caused
this servant of God to be consulted concerning the success of the war
against Maximus. Our saint foretold him that he should be victorious
almost without blood. The emperor, full of confidence in the prediction,
marched into the West, defeated the more numerous armies of Maximus
twice in Pannonia; crossed the Alps, took the tyrant in Aquileia, and
suffered {665} his soldiers to cut off his head. He returned triumphant
to Constantinople, and attributed his victories very much to the prayers
of St. John, who also foretold him the events of his other wars, the
incursions of barbarians, and all that was to befall his empire. Four
years after, in 392, Eugenius, by the assistance of Arbogastes, who had
murdered the emperor Valentinian the Younger, usurped the empire of the
West. Theodosius sent Eutropius the Eunuch into Egypt, with instructions
to bring St. John with him to Constantinople, if it was possible; but
that if he could not prevail with him to undertake the journey, to
consult whether it was God's will that he should march against Eugenius,
or wait his arrival in the East. The man of God excused himself as to
his journey to court, but assured Eutropius that his prince should be
victorious, but not without loss and blood: as also that he would die in
Italy, and leave the empire of the West to his son; all which happened
accordingly. Theodosius marched against Eugenius, and in the first
engagement lost ten thousand men, and was almost defeated: but renewing
the battle on the next day, the 6th of September, in 394, he gained an
entire victory by the miraculous interposition of heaven, as even
Claudian, the heathen poet, acknowledges. Theodosius died in the West,
on the 17th of January, in 395, leaving his two sons emperors, Arcadius
in the East, and Honorius in the West.

This saint restored sight to a senator's wife by some of the oil he had
blessed for healing the sick. It being his inviolable custom never to
admit any woman to speak to him, this gave occasion to a remarkable
incident related by Evagrius, Palladius, and St. Austin in his treatise
of Care for the Dead. A certain general officer in the emperor's service
visiting the saint, conjured him to permit his wife to speak to him; for
she was come to Lycopolis, and had gone through many dangers and
difficulties to enjoy that happiness. The holy man answered, that during
his stricter enclosure for the last forty years since he had shut
himself up in that rock, he had imposed on himself an inviolable rule
not to see or converse with women; so he desired to be excused the
granting her request. The officer returned to Lycopolis very melancholy.
His wife, who was a person of great virtue, was not to be satisfied. The
husband went back to the blessed man, told him that she would die of
grief if he refused her request. The saint said to him: "Go to your
wife, and tell her that she shall see me tonight, without coming hither
or stirring out of her house." This answer he carried to her, and both
were very earnest to know in what manner the saint would perform his
promise. When she was asleep in the night, the man of God appeared to
her in her dream, and said: "Your great faith, woman, obliged me to come
to visit you; but I must admonish you to curb the like desires of seeing
God's servants on earth. Contemplate only their life, and imitate their
actions. As for me, why did you desire to see me? Am I a saint, or a
prophet like God's true servants? I am a sinful and weak man. It is
therefore only in virtue of your faith that I have had recourse to our
Lord, who grants you the cure of the corporal diseases with which you
are afflicted. Live always in the fear of God, apd never forget his
benefits." He added several proper instructions for her conduct, any
disappeared. The woman awaking, described to her husband the person she
had seen in her dream, with all his features, in such a manner as to
leave no room to doubt but it was the blessed man that had appeared to
her. Whereupon he returned the next day to give him thanks for the
satisfaction he had vouchsafed his wife. But the saint on his arrival
prevented him, saying: "I have fulfilled your desire, I have seen your
wife, and satisfied her in all things she had asked: go in peace." The
officer received his benediction, and continued his journey to Seyne.
What the man of God foretold happened to him, as, {666} among other
things, that he should receive particular honors from the emperor.
Besides the authors of the saint's life, St. Austin relates this history
which he received from a nobleman of great integrity and credit, who had
it from the very persons to whom it happened. St. Austin adds, had he
seen St. John, he would have inquired of him, whether he himself really
appeared to this woman, or whether it was an angel in his shape, or
whether the vision only passed in her imagination.[3]

In the year 394, a little before the saint's death, he was visited by
Palladius, afterwards bishop of Helenopolis, who is one of the authors
of his life. Several anchorets of the deserts of Nitria, all strangers,
the principal of whom were Evagrius, Albinus, Ammonius, had a great
desire to see the saint. Palladius, one of this number, being young, set
out first in July, when the flood of the Nile was high. Being arrived at
this mountain, he found the door of his porch shut, and that it would
not be open till the Saturday following. He waited that time in the
lodgings of strangers. On Saturday, at eight o'clock, Palladius entered
the porch, and saw the saint sitting before his window, and giving
advice to those who applied to him for it. Having saluted Palladius by
an interpreter, he asked him of what country he was, and what was his
business, and if he was not of the company or monastery of Evagrius:
Palladius owned he was. In the mean time arrived Alypius, governor of
the province, in great haste. The saint, on the arrival of Alypius,
broke off his discourse with Palladius, who withdrew to make room for
the governor to discourse with the saint. Their conversation was very
long, and Palladius being, weary, murmured within himself against the
venerable old man, as guilty of exception of persons. He was even just
going away, when the saint, knowing his secret thoughts, sent Theodorus,
his interpreter, to him, saying: "Go, bid that brother not to be
impatient: I am going to dismiss the governor, and then will speak to
him." Palladius, astonished that his thoughts should be known to him,
waited with patience. As soon as Alypius was gone, St. John called
Palladius, and said to him: "Why was {sic} you angry, imputing to me in
your mind what I was no way guilty of? To you I can speak at any other
time, and you have many fathers and brethren to comfort and direct you
in the paths of salvation. But this governor being involved in the hurry
of temporal affairs, and being come to receive some wholesome advice
during the short time his affairs will allow him time to breathe in, how
could I give you the preference?" He then told Palladius what passed in
his heart, and his secret temptations to quit his solitude; for which
end the devil represented to him his father's regret for his absence,
and that he might induce his brother and sister to embrace a solitary
life. The holy man bade him despise such suggestions; for they had both
already renounced the world, and his father would yet live seven years.
He foretold him that he should meet with great persecutions and
sufferings, and should be a bishop, but with many afflictions: all which
came to pass, though at that time extremely improbable.

The same year, St. Petronius, with six other monks, made a long journey
to pay St. John a visit. He asked them if any among them was in holy
orders. They said: No. One, however, the youngest in the company, was a
deacon, though this was unknown to the rest. The saint, by divine
instinct, knew this circumstance, and that the deacon had concealed his
orders out of a false humility, not to seem superior to the others, but
their inferior, as he was in age. Therefore, pointing to him, he said:
"This man is a deacon." The other denied it, upon the false persuasion
that to lie with a view to one's own humiliation was no sin. St. John
took him by {667} the hand, and kissing it, said to him: "My son, take
care never to deny the grace you have received from God, lest humility
betray you into a lie. We must never lie, under any pretence of good
whatever, because no untruth can be from God." The deacon received this
rebuke with great respect. After their prayer together, one of the
company begged of the saint to be cured of the tertian ague. He
answered: "You desire to be freed from a sickness which is beneficial to
you. As nitre cleanses the body, so distempers and other chastisements
purify the soul." However, he blessed some oil and gave it to him: he
vomited plentifully after it, and was from that moment perfectly cured.
They returned to their lodgings, where, by his orders, they were treated
with all proper civility, and cordial hospitality. When they went to him
again, he received them with joyfulness in his countenance, which
evidenced the interior spiritual joy of his soul; he bade them sit down,
and asked them whence they came. They said, from Jerusalem. He then made
them a long discourse, in which he first endeavored to show his own
baseness; after which he explained the means by which pride and vanity
are to be banished out of the heart, and all virtues to be acquired. He
related to them the examples of many monks, who, by suffering their
hearts to be secretly corrupted by vanity, at last fell also into
scandalous irregularities; as of one, who, after a most holy and austere
life, by this means fell into fornication, and then by despair into all
manner of disorders: also of another, who, from vanity, fell into a
desire of leaving his solitude; but by a sermon he preached to others,
in a monastery on his road, was mercifully converted, and became an
eminent penitent. The blessed John thus entertained Petronius and his
company for three days, till the hour of None. When they were leaving
him, he gave them his blessing, and said: "Go in peace, my children; and
know that the news of the victory which the religious prince Theodosius
has gained over the tyrant Eugenius, is this day come to Alexandria: but
this excellent emperor will soon end his life by a natural death." Some
days after their leaving him to return home, they were informed he had
departed this life. Having been favored by a foresight of his death, he
would see nobody for the last three days. At the end of this term he
sweetly expired, being on his knees at prayer, towards the close of the
year 394, of the beginning of 395. It might probably be on the 17th of
October, on which day the Copths, or Egyptian Christians, keep his
festival: the Roman and other Latin Martyrologies mark it on the 27th of
March.

       *       *       *       *       *

The solitude which the Holy Ghost recommends, and which the saints
embraced, resembled that of Jesus Christ, being founded in the same
motive or principle, and having the same exercises and employments, and
the same end. Christ was conducted by the Holy Ghost into the desert,
and he there spent his time in prayer and fasting. Woe to those whom
humor or passion leads into solitude, or who consecrate it not to God by
mortification, sighs of penance, and hymns of divine praise. To those
who thus sanctify their desert, or cell, it will be an anticipated
paradise, an abyss of spiritual advantages and comforts, known only to
such as have enjoyed them. _The Lord will change the desert into a place
of delights, and will make the solitude a paradise and a garden worthy
of himself._[4] In it only joy and jubilee shall be seen, nothing shall
be heard but thanksgiving and praise. It is the dwelling of a
terrestrial seraph, whose sole employment is to labor to know, and
correct, all secret disorders of his own soul, to forget the world, and
all objects of vanity which could distract or entangle him; to subdue
his senses, to purify the faculties of his soul, and entertain in his
{668} heart a constant fire of devotion, by occupying it assiduously on
God, Jesus Christ, and heavenly things, and banishing all superfluous
desires and thoughts; lastly, to make daily progress in purity of
conscience, humility, mortification, recollection, and prayer, and to
find all his joy in the most fervent and assiduous adoration, love, and
praise of his sovereign Creator and Redeemer.

Footnotes:
1.  Coll. b. 4, c. 21, p. 81.
2.  A city in the north of Thebais, in Egypt.
3.  S. Aug. l. pro curâ de mortuis, c. 17, p. 294.
4.  Isa. lxiii.

ST. RUPERT, OR ROBERT, C.

BISHOP OF SALTZBOURG.

HE was by birth a Frenchman, and of royal blood; but still more
illustrious for his learning, and the extraordinary virtues he practised
from his youth. He exercised himself is austere fasting, watching, and
other mortifications; was a great lover of chastity and temperance; and
so charitable as always to impoverish himself to enrich the poor. His
reputation drew persons from remote provinces to receive his advice and
instructions. He removed all their doubts and scruples, comforted the
afflicted, cured the sick, and healed the disorders of souls. So
distinguished a merit raised him to the episcopal see of Worms. But that
people, being for the most part idolaters, could not bear the lustre of
such a sanctity, which condemned their irregularities and superstitions.
They beat him with rods, loaded him with all manner of outrages, and
expelled him the city. But God prepared for him another harvest.
Theodon, duke of Bavaria, hearing of his reputation and miracles, sent
messengers to him, earnestly beseeching him to come and preach the
gospel to the Baioarians, or Bavarians. This happened two years after
his expulsion from Worms: during which interval he had made a journey to
Rome. He was received at Ratisbon by Theodon and his court with all
possible distinction, in 697, and found the hearts both of the nobles
and people docile to the word of God. The Christian faith had been
planted in that country two hundred years before, by St. Severinus, the
apostle of Noricum. After his death, heresies and heathenish
superstitions had entirely extinguished the light of the gospel.
Bagintrude, sister of duke Theodon, being a Christian, disposed her
brother and the whole country to receive the faith. Rupert, with the
help of other zealous priests, whom he had brought with him, instructed,
and, after a general fast, baptized, the duke Theodon and the lords and
people of the whole country. God confirmed his preaching by many
miracles. He converted also to Christianity the neighboring nations.
After Ratisbon, the capital, the second chief seat of his labors was
Laureacum, now called Lorch,[1] where he healed several diseases by
prayer, and made many converts. However, it was not Lorch, nor the old
Reginum, thence called Regensbourg, now Ratisbon, the capital of all
those provinces, that was pitched upon to be the seat of the saint's
bishopric, but old Juvavia, then almost in ruins, since rebuilt and
called Saltzbourg. The duke Theodon adorned and enriched it with many
magnificent donations, which enabled St. Rupert to found there several
rich churches and monasteries. After the prince's death, his son
Theodebert, or Diotper, inheriting his zeal and piety, augmented
considerably the revenues of this church. St. Rupert took a journey into
France to procure a new supply of able laborers, and brought back to
Saltzbourg twelve holy missionaries, with his niece St. Erentrude, a
virgin consecrated to God, for whom he built a great monastery, called
Nunberg, of which {669} she was the first abbess.[2] St. Rupert labored
several years in this see, and died happily on Easter-day, which fell
that year on the 27th of March, after he had said mass and preached; on
which day the Roman and other Martyrologies mention him. His principal
festival is kept with the greatest solemnity in Austria and Bavaria on
the 25th of September, the day of one of the translations of his relics,
which are kept in the church under his name in Saltzbourg. Mabillon and
Bulteau, upon no slight grounds, think this saint to have lived a whole
century later than is commonly supposed, and that he founded the church
of Saltzbourg about the year 700. See his life, published by Canisius,
Henschenius, and Mabillon, with the notes of the last-mentioned editor.

Footnotes:
1.  A village on the Danube in the midway between Ratisbon and Vienna,
    the capital of eastern Bavaria, at present Austria.
2.  The bishop of Saltzbourg was, under Charlemagne, made an archbishop
    and metropolitan of Bavaria, Austria, and its hereditary
    territories. He is one of the first ecclesiastical princes of the
    empire, and is elected by the canons of the cathedral, who are all
    of noble extraction.


MARCH XXVIII.

PRISCUS, MALCHUS, AND ALEXANDER, MARTYRS.

From Eus. Hist. b. 7, c. 12, p. 262.

A.D. 260.

THESE eminent Christians, Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, led a retired
holy life in the country near Cæsarea, in Palestine. During the fury of
the persecution under Valerian, they often called to mind the triumphs
of the martyrs, and secretly reproached themselves with cowardice, as
living like soldiers who passed their time in softness and ease, while
their brethren and fellow-warriors bore all the heat of the battle. They
could not long smother these warm sentiments in their breast; but
expressed them to one another. "What," said they, "while the secure gate
of heaven is open, shall we shut it against ourselves? Shall we be so
faint-hearted as not to suffer for the name of Christ, who died for us?
Our brethren invite us by their example: their blood is a loud voice,
which presses us to tread in their steps. Shall we be deaf to a cry
calling us to the combat, and to a glorious victory?" Full of this holy
ardor, they all, with one mind, repaired to Cæsarea, and of their own
accord, by a particular instinct of grace, presented themselves before
the governor, declaring themselves Christians. While all others were
struck with admiration at the sight of their generous courage, the
barbarous judge appeared not able to contain his rage. After having
tried on them all the tortures which he employed on other martyrs, he
condemned them to be exposed to wild beasts. They are honored on this
day in the Roman Martyrology.

       *       *       *       *       *

In consecrating ourselves to the service of God, and to his pure love,
the first and most essential condition is that we do it without reserve,
with an earnest desire of attaining to the perfection of our state, and
a firm resolution of sparing nothing, and being deterred by no
difficulties from pursuing this end with our whole strength; and it must
be our chief care constantly to maintain, and always increase this
desire in our souls. Upon this condition {670} depends all out spiritual
progress. This is more essential in a religious state than the vows
themselves; and it is this which makes the difference betwixt the
fervent and the lukewarm Christian. Many deceive themselves in this
particular, and flatter themselves their resolution of aspiring after
perfection, with all their strength, is sincere, whereas it is very
imperfect. Of this we can best judge by their earnestness to advance in
a spirit of prayer, and in becoming truly spiritual; in crucifying
self-love, overcoming their failings, and cutting off all occasions of
dissipation, and all impediments of their spiritual advancement.
Mortification and prayer, which are the principal means, present usually
the greatest difficulties: but these, as St. Terasa observes, are better
than half vanquished and removed by a firm resolution of not being
discouraged by any obstacles, but of gathering from them fresh vigor and
strength. Patience and fortitude crown in the saints what this fervent
resolution began.

ST. SIXTUS III., POPE.

HE was a priest among the Roman clergy in 418, when pope Zozimus
condemned the Pelagian heretics. Sixtus was the first, after this
sentence, who pronounced publicly anathema against them, to stop their
slander in Africa that he favored their doctrine, as we are assured by
St. Austin and St. Prosper in his chronicle. The former sent him two
congratulatory letters the same year, in which he applauds this
testimony of his zeal, and in the first of these letters professes a
high esteem of a treatise written by him in defence of the grace of God
against its enemies. It was that calumny of the Pelagian heretics that
led Garnier into the mistake that our saint at first favored their
errors. But a change of this kind would not have been buried in silence.
After the death of St. Celestine, Sixtus was chosen pope in 432. He
wrote to Nestorius to endeavor to reclaim him after his condemnation at
Ephesus, in 431: but his heart was hardened, and he stopped his ears
against all wholesome admonitions. The pope had the comfort to see a
happy reconciliation made, by his endeavors, between the Orientals and
St. Cyril: in which he much commended the humility and pacific
dispositions of the latter. He says "that he was charged with the care
and solicitude of all the churches in the world,[1] and that it is
unlawful for any one to abandon the faith of the apostolic Roman church,
in which St. Peter teaches in his successors what he received from
Christ."[2] When Bassus, a nobleman of Rome, had been condemned by the
emperor, and excommunicated by a synod of bishops for raising a grievous
slander against the good pope, the meek servant of Christ visited and
assisted him in person, administered him the viaticum in his last
sickness; and buried him with his own hands. Julian of Eclanum or
Eculanum, the famous Pelagian, earnestly desiring to recover his see,
made great efforts to be admitted to the communion of the church,
pretending that he was become a convert, and used several artifices to
convince our saint that he really was so: but he was too well acquainted
with them to be imposed on. This holy pope died soon after, on the 28th
of March, in 440, having sat in the see near eight years. See his
letters, Anastasius's Pontifical, with the notes of Bianchini, &c.

Footnotes:
1.  Ep. 1, ad Episc. Orient. p. 1236. Ep. decret. t. 1.
2.  Ep. 6, and Joan. Antioch. contra Nestor.

{671}

ST. GONTRAN, KING AND CONFESSOR.

HE was son of king Clotaire, and grandson of Clovis I. and St.
Clotildis. Being the second son, while his brothers Charibert reigned at
Paris, and Sigebert in Austrasia, residing at Metz, he was crowned king
of Orleans and Burgundy in 561, making Challons on the Saone his
capital. When compelled to take up arms against his ambitious brothers
and the Lombards, he made no other use of his victories under the
conduct of a brave general called Mommol, than to give peace to his
dominions. He protected his nephews against the practices of the wicked
dowager queens, Brunehault of Sigebert, and Fredegonde of Chilperic, the
firebrands of France. The putting to death the physicians of the queen,
at her request, on her death-bed, and the divorcing his wife Mercatrude,
are crimes laid to his charge, in which the barbarous manners of his
nation involved him: but these he effaced by tears of repentance. He
governed his kingdom, studying rather to promote the temporal happiness
of others than his own, a stranger to the passions of pride, jealousy,
and ambition, and making piety the only rule of his policy. The
prosperity of his reign, both in peace and war, condemn those who think
that human policy cannot be modelled by the maxims of the gospel,
whereas nothing can render a government more flourishing. He always
treated the pastors of the church with respect and veneration, regarding
them as his fathers, and honoring and consulting them as his masters. He
was the protector of the oppressed, and the tender parent of his
subjects, whom he treated as his children. He poured out his treasures
among them with a holy profusion; especially in the time of a pestilence
and famine. He gave the greatest attention to the care of the sick. He
fasted, prayed, wept, and offered himself to God night and day, as a
victim ready to be sacrificed on the altar of his justice, to avert his
indignation, which he believed he himself had provoked, and drawn down
upon his innocent people. He was a severe punisher of crimes in his
officers and others, and, by many wholesome regulations, restrained the
barbarous licentiousness of his troops, but no man was more ready to
forgive offences against his own person. He contented himself with
imprisoning a man who, through the instigation of queen Fredegonde, had
attempted to stab him, and he spared another assassin sent by the same
wicked woman, because he had taken shelter in a church. With royal
magnificence he built and endowed many churches and monasteries. St.
Gregory of Tours relates many miracles performed by him both before and
after his death, to some of which he was an eye-witness. This good king,
like another penitent David, having spent his life after his conversion,
though on the throne, in the retirement and penance of a recluse, (as
St. Hugh of Cluny says of him, exhorting king Philip I. to imitate his
example,) died on the 28th of March, in 593, in the sixty-eighth year of
his age, having reigned thirty-one and some months. He was buried in the
church of St. Marcellus, which he had founded. The Huguenots scattered
his ashes in the sixteenth century: only his skull escaped their fury,
and is now kept there in a silver case. He is mentioned in the Roman
Martyrology. See St. Gregory of Tours, Fredegarius, and Baillet.

{672}


MARCH XXIX.

SS. JONAS, BARACHISIUS, AND THEIR COMPANIONS,

MARTYRS.

From their genuine acts compiled by Esalas, a noble Armenian knight in
the troops of king Sapor, an eye witness; published in the original
Chaldaic, by Stephen Assemani, Act. Mart. Orient. t. 1, p. 211. They
were much adulterated by the Greeks in Metaphrastes. Ruinart and
Tillemont think Sapor raised no persecution before his fortieth year:
but Assemani proves from these acts, and several other monuments, a
persecution in his eighteenth year. See Præf. Gen. and p. 214, app.

A.D. 327.

KING SAPOR, in the eighteenth year of his reign, raised a bloody
persecution against the Christians, and demolished their churches and
monasteries. Jonas and Barachisius, two brothers of the city Beth-Asa,
hearing that several Christians lay under sentence of death at Hubaham,
went thither to encourage and serve them. Nine of that number received
the crown of martyrdom. After their execution, Jonas and Barachisius
were apprehended for having exhorted them to die. The president mildly
entreated the two brothers to obey the king of kings, meaning the king
of Persia, and to worship the sun, moon, fire, and water. Their answer
was, that it was more reasonable to obey the immortal King of heaven and
earth than a mortal prince. The Magians were much offended to hear their
king called mortal. By their advice the martyrs were separated, and
Barachisius was cast into a very narrow close dungeon. Jonas they
detained with them, endeavoring to persuade him to sacrifice to fire,
the sun, and water. The prince of the Magians, seeing him inflexible,
caused him to be laid fiat on his belly with a stake under his navel,
and to be beaten both with knotty clubs and with rods. The martyr all
the time continued in prayer, saying: "I thank you, O God of our father
Abraham. Enable me, I beseech you, to offer to you acceptable
holocausts. _One thing I have asked of the Lord: this will I seek
after_.[1] The sun, moon, fire, and water I renounce: I believe and
confess the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." The judge ordered him next to
be set in a frozen pond, with a cord tied to his foot. After supper, and
a short nap, he sent for Barachisius, and told him his brother had
sacrificed. The martyr said it was impossible that he should have paid
divine honors to fire, a vile creature, and spoke much on the immensity
and power of God, and with such, eloquence and force that the Magians
were astonished to hear him, and said one to another, that if he were
permitted to speak in public, he would draw over many from their
religion. Whereupon they concluded for the future to hold his
interrogatories in the night. In the mean time they caused two red-hot
iron plates, and two red-hot hammers, to be applied under each arm, and
said to him: "If you shake off either of these, by the king's fortune,
you deny Christ." He meekly replied: "I fear not your fire; nor shall I
throw off your instruments of torture. I beg you to try without delay
all your torments on me. He who is engaged in combat for God is full of
courage." They ordered melted lead to be dropped into his nostrils and
eyes; and that he should then be carried to prison, and there hung up by
one foot. Jonas, after this, being brought out of his pool, the Magians
said to him: "How do you find yourself this morning? We imagine you
passed the {673} last night out very uncomfortably." "No," replied
Jonas; "from the day I came into the world, I never remember a night
more sweet and agreeable: for I was wonderfully refreshed by the
remembrance of Christ's sufferings." The Magians said: "Your companion
hath renounced." The martyr, interrupting them, answered: "I know that
he hath long ago renounced the devil and his angels." The Magians urged:
"Take care lest you perish, abandoned both by God and man." Jonas
replied: "If you are really wise, as you boast, judge if it be not
better to sow the corn than to keep it hoarded up. Our life is a seed
sown to rise again in the world to come, when it will be renewed by
Christ in immortal light." The Magians said: "Your books have drawn many
aside." Jonas answered: "They have indeed drawn many from worldly
pleasures. When a servant of Christ is in his sufferings inebriated with
love from the passion of his Lord, he forgets the transitory state of
this short life, its riches, estates, gold, and honors; regardless of
kings and princes, lords and noblemen, where an eternity is at stake, he
desires nothing but the sight of the only true King, whose empire is
everlasting, and whose power reaches to all ages." The judges commanded
all his fingers and toes to be cut off, joint by joint, and scattered
about. Then they said to him: "Now wait the harvest to reap other hands
from this seed." To whom he said: "Other hands I do not ask. God is
present, who first framed me, and who will give me new strength." After
this, the skin was torn off the martyr's head, his tongue was cut out,
and he was thrown into a vessel of boiling pitch; but the pitch by a
sudden ebullition running over, the servant of God was not hurt by it.
The judges next ordered him to be squeezed in a wooden press till his
veins, sinews, and fibres burst. Lastly, his body was sawn with an iron
saw, and, by pieces, thrown into a dry cistern. Guards were appointed to
watch the sacred relics, lest Christians should steal them away. The
judges then called upon Barachisius to spare his own body. To whom he
said: "This body I did not frame, neither will I destroy it. God its
maker will again restore it and will judge you and your king."
Hormisdatscirus, turning to Maharnarsces, said: "By our delays we
affront the king. These men regard neither words nor torments." They
therefore agreed that he should be beaten with sharp-pointed rushes;
then that splinters of reeds should be applied to his body, and by cords
strait drawn and pulled, should be pressed deep into his flesh, and that
in this condition his body, pierced all over with sharp spikes, armed
like a porcupine, should be rolled on the ground. After these tortures,
he was put into the screw or press, and boiling pitch and brimstone were
poured into his mouth. By this last torment he obtained a crown equal to
that of his brother. Under their most exquisite tortures they thought
they bought heaven too cheap. Upon the news of their death, Abtusciatus,
an old friend, came and purchased their bodies for five hundred drachms
and three silk garments, binding himself also by oath never to divulge
the sale. The acts are closed by these words: "This book was written
from the mouths of witnesses, and contains the acts of the saints,
Jonas, Barachisius, and others, martyrs of Christ, who by his succor
fought, triumphed, and were crowned, in whose prayers we beg place may
be found, by Esaias, son of Adabus of Arzun, in Armenia, of the troop of
royal horsemen, who was present at their interrogatories and tortures,
and who wrote the history of their conflicts." They were crowned on the
29th of the moon of December. This was the 24th of that month, in the
year of Christ 327, of Sopar II. the 18th. The Roman Martyrology
mentions them on the 29th of March.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those powerful motives which supported the martyrs under the sharpest
{674} torments, ought to inspire us with patience, resignation, and holy
joy, under sickness and all crosses or trials. These are the times of
the greatest spiritual harvest, by the exercise of the most perfect
virtues. For nothing is more heroic in the practice of Christian virtue,
nothing more precious in the sight of God, than the sacrifice of
patience, submission, constant fidelity and charity in a state of
suffering. Under sickness we are too apt eagerly to desire health, that
we may be able to do something for God, and to discharge the obligations
of our profession, as we persuade ourselves. This is a mere invention of
self-love, which is impatient under the weight of humiliation. Nothing,
indeed, is more severe to nature than such a state of death, and there
is nothing which it is not desirous of doing, to recover that active
life, which carries an air of importance by making an appearance in the
tumultuous scene of the world. But how much does the soul generally lose
by such an exchange! Ah! did we but truly know how great are the
spiritual advantages and riches, and how great the glory of patience
founded upon motives of true charity, and how precious the victories and
triumphs are which it gains over self-love, we should rejoice too much
in a state of suffering and humiliation ever to entertain any inordinate
desires of changing it. We should only ask for health in sickness under
this condition, if it be more expedient for God's honor and our
spiritual advancement. With St. Paul, we should find a joy and delight
in a state of privation and suffering, in which we enter into a true
sense of our absolute weakness, feel that we are nothing, and have no
reliance but on God alone.

Footnotes:
1.  Psa. xxvi 4.

SS. ARMOGASTES, ARCHINIMUS, AND SATURUS,

MARTYRS.

GENSERIC, the Arian king of the Vandals, to Africa, having, on his
return out of Italy, in 457, enacted new penal laws, and severer than
any he had till then put in force against Catholics, count Armogastes
was on that occasion deprived of his honors and dignities at court, and
most cruelly tortured. But no sooner had the jailers bound him with
cords, but they broke of themselves, as the martyr lifted up his eyes to
heaven; and this happened several times. And though they afterwards hung
him up by one foot with his head downwards for a considerable time, the
saint was no more affected by this torment than if he had lain all the
while at his ease on a feather-bed. Theodoric, the king's son, thereupon
ordered his head to be struck off: but one of his Arian priests diverted
him from it, advising him to take other measures with him to prevent his
being looked upon as a martyr by those of his party, which would be of
disservice to the opposite cause. He was therefore sent into Byzacena to
work in the mines; and some time after, for his greater disgrace, he was
removed thence into the neighborhood of Carthage, and employed in
keeping cows. But he looked upon it as his glory to be dishonored before
men in the cause of God. It was not long before he had a revelation that
his end drew near. So having foretold the time of his death, and given
orders to a devout Christian about the place where he desired to be
interred, the holy confessor, a few days after, went to receive the
rewards of those that suffer in the cause of truth.

Archinimus, of the city Mascula, in Numidia, resisted all the artifices
which the king could use to overcome his faith, and was condemned to be
beheaded, but was reprieved while he stood under the axe. Satur, or
Saturus, was master of the household to Huneric, by whom he was
threatened to be deprived of his estate, goods, slaves, wife, and
children for his faith. {675} His own wife omitted nothing in her power
to prevail with him to purchase his pardon at the expense of his
conscience. But he courageously answered her in the words of Job: "_You
have spoken like one of the foolish women_.[1] If you loved me, you
would give me different advice, and not push me on to a second death.
Let them do their worst: I will always remember our Lord's words: _If
any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, his wife and
children, his brethren and sisters, and his own life also, he cannot be
my disciple_."[2] He suffered many torments, was stripped of all his
substance, forbid ever to appear in public, and reduced to great
distress. But God enriched him with his graces, and called him to
himself. See St. Victor Vitensis, Hist. Persec. Vandal, l. 1, n. 14.

Footnotes:
1.  Job ii. 9.
2.  Luke xiv. 26.

ST. EUSTASIUS, OR EUSTACHIUS,

ABBOT OF LUXEU,

SUCCEEDED his master St. Columban in that charge, in 611. He sanctified
himself by humility, continual prayer, watching, and fasting; was the
spiritual father of six hundred monks, and of many holy bishops and
saints, and died in 625. He is named in the Martyrologies of Ado, and in
the Roman. See his life by Jonas, his colleague, in the Bollandists, and
in Mabillon.

ST. GUNDLEUS, CONFESSOR.

THIS saint, who was formerly honored with great devotion in Wales, was
son to the king of the Dimetians in South-Wales. After the death of his
father, though the eldest son, he divided the kingdom with his six
brothers who nevertheless respected and obeyed him as if he had been
their sovereign. He married Gladusa, daughter of Braghan, prince of that
country, which is called from him Brecknockshire, and was father of St.
Canoe and St. Keyna. St. Gundleus had by her the great St. Cadoc, who
afterwards founded the famous monastery of Llancarvan, three miles from
Cowbridge, in Glamorganshire. Gundleus lived so as to have always in
view the heavenly kingdom for which we are created by God. To secure
this, he retired wholly from the world long before his death, and passed
his time in a solitary little dwelling near a church which he had built.
His clothing was sackcloth, his food barley-bread, upon which he usually
strewed ashes, and his drink was water. Prayer and contemplation were
his constant occupation, to which he rose at midnight, and he subsisted
by the labor of his hands: thus he lived many years. Some days before
his death he sent for St. Dubritius and his son St. Cadoc, and by their
assistance, and the holy rites of the church, prepared himself for his
passage to eternity. He departed to our Lord towards the end of the
fifth century, and was glorified by miracles. See his life in Capgrave
and Henschenius, from the collection of John of Tinmouth. See also
bishop Usher.

ST. MARK, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.

SOME Greeks rank among the saints on this day, Mark, bishop of Arethusa,
in Syria, in the fourth age. When Constantius put to death his uncle,
{676} Julius Constantius, brother of Constantine the Great, with his
eldest son; the two younger, Gallus and Julian, narrowly escaped the
sword. In that danger Mark concealed Julian, and secretly supplied him
with necessaries for his subsistence. When Julian became emperor, he
commanded that the temples which had been demolished by Christians,
during the two preceding reigns, should be rebuilt at their expense.
Mark had, by the authority of Constantius, demolished a very magnificent
temple which was held in great veneration by the idolaters: he had also
built a church, and converted a great number of infidels. Authorized by
the law of Julian, the heathens of Arethusa, when they saw themselves
uppermost, fell on the Christians; and Mark, finding that they were
ready to show their resentment against him in particular, which they had
long concealed, he at first, pursuant to the gospel precept, betook
himself to flight to escape their fury. But understanding that they had
apprehended some of his flock instead of him, he returned and delivered
himself up to the persecutors, to animate others in the same cause by
his example and instructions. They seized him soon after his return,
dragged him through the streets by the hair, or any part they could lay
hold of, without the least compassion for his age, or regard for his
virtue and learning. Having stripped him, and scourged him all over his
body, joining ignominy and insults with cruelty, they threw him into the
stinking public jakes. Having taken him from thence, they left him to
the children, ordering them to prick and pierce him, without mercy, with
their writing-styles, or steel pencils. They bound his legs with cords
so tight as to cut and bruise his flesh to the very bone; they wrung off
his ears with small strong threads; and in this maimed, bloody
condition, they pushed him from one to another. After this they rubbed
him over with honey and fat broth; and shutting him up in a kind of
cage, hung him up in the air where the sun was most scorching, at
noonday, in the midst of summer, in order to draw the wasps and gnats
upon him, whose stings are exceeding sharp and piercing in those hot
countries. He was so calm in the midst of his sufferings, that, though
so sorely wounded and covered with flies and wasps, he bantered them as
he hung in the air; telling them, that while they were grovelling on the
earth, he was raised by them towards heaven. They frequently solicited
him to rebuild their temple, but though they reduced their demands by
degrees to a trifling sum, he constantly answered, that it would be an
impiety to give them one farthing towards such a work. This indeed would
be to concur to idolatrous worship; but his demolishing the temple would
have been against the order of law and justice, had he done it without
public authority. At length the fury of the people was turned into
admiration of his patience, and they set him at liberty; and several of
them afterwards begged of him to instruct them in the principles of a
religion which was capable of inspiring such a resolution. Having spent
the remainder of his life in the faithful discharge of the duties of his
station, he died in peace under Jovian or Valens. He is not named in the
Roman Martyrology, nor venerated by the church among the saints. He had
been long engaged in the errors and intrigues of the Semi-Arians; but
the encomiums given him by St. Gregory Nazianzen, Theodoret, and
Sozomen, when they relate his sufferings, show that towards the end of
the reign of Constantius, he joined in the orthodox communion.

{677}


MARCH XXX.

ST. JOHN CLIMACUS, ABBOT.

From his life written by Daniel, a monk of Raithu, soon after his death,
and from his own works. See Bulteau, Hist Monast. d'Orient, and
d'Andilly, or rather his nephew, Le Maître, in his life prefixed to the
French translation of his works. See also Jos. Assemani, in Cal. Univ.
ad 30 Martii, t. 6, p. 213.

A.D. 605.

ST. JOHN, generally distinguished by the appellation of Climacus, from
his excellent book entitled Climax, or the Ladder to Perfection, was
born about the year 525, probably in Palestine. By his extraordinary
progress in the arts and sciences, he obtained very young the surname of
the Scholastic. But at sixteen years of age he renounced all the
advantages which the world promised him, to dedicate himself to God in a
religious state, in 547. He retired to Mount Sinai, which, from the time
of the disciples of St. Antony and St. Hilarion, had been always peopled
by holy men, who, in imitation of Moses, when he received the law on
that mountain, lived in the perpetual contemplation of heavenly things.
Our novice, fearing the danger of dissipation and relaxation, to which
numerous communities are generally more exposed than others, chose not
to live in the great monastery on the summit, but in a hermitage on the
descent of the mountain, under the discipline of Martyrius, a holy
ancient anchoret. By silence, he curbed the insolent itch of talking
about every thing, an ordinary vice in learned men, but usually a mark
of pride and self-sufficiency. By perfect humility and obedience, he
banished the dangerous desire of self-complacency in his actions. He
never contradicted, never disputed with any one. So perfect was his
submission, that he seemed to have no self-will. He undertook to sail
through the deep sea of this mortal life securely, under the direction
of a prudent guide, and shunned those rocks which he could not have
escaped, had he presumed to steer alone, as he tells us.[1] From the
visible mountain he raised his heart, without interruption, in all his
actions, to God, who is invisible; and, attentive to all the motions of
his grace, studied only to do his will. Four years he spent in the trial
of his own strength, and in learning the obligations of his state,
before he made his religious profession, which was in the twentieth year
of his age. In his writings, he severely condemns engagements made by
persons too young, or before a sufficient probation. By fervent prayer
and fasting he prepared himself for the solemn consecration of himself
to God, that the most intense fervor might make his holocaust the more
perfect: and from that moment he seemed to be renewed in spirit; and his
master admired the strides with which, like a mighty giant, the young
disciple advanced, daily more and more, towards God by self-denial,
obedience, humility, and the uninterrupted exercises of divine love and
prayer.

In the year 560, and the thirty-fifth of his age, he lost Martyrius by
death, having then spent nineteen years in that place in penance and
holy contemplation. By the advice of a prudent director, he then
embraced an eremitical life in a plain called Thole, near the foot of
Mount Sinai. His cell was five miles from the church, probably the same
which had been built a little {678} before, by order of the emperor
Justinian, for the use of the monks, at the bottom of this mountain, in
honor of the Blessed Virgin, as Procopius mentions.[2] Thither he went
every Saturday and Sunday to assist, with all the other anchorets and
monks of that desert, at the holy office and at the celebration of the
divine mysteries, when they all communicated. His diet was very sparing,
though, to shun ostentation and the danger of vain-glory, he ate of
every thing that was allowed among the monks of Egypt, who universally
abstained from flesh, fish, &c. Prayer was his principal employment; and
he practised what he earnestly recommends to all Christians, that in all
their actions, thoughts, and words, they should keep themselves with
great fervor in the presence of God, and direct all they do to his holy
will.[3] By habitual contemplation he acquired an extraordinary purity
of heart, and such a facility of lovingly beholding God in all his
works, that this practice seemed in him a second nature. Thus he
accompanied his studies with perpetual prayer. He assiduously read the
holy scriptures, and fathers, and was one of the most learned doctors of
the church. But, to preserve the treasure of humility, he concealed, as
much as possible, both his natural and acquired talents, and the
extraordinary graces with which the Holy Ghost enriched his soul. By
this secrecy he fled from the danger of vain-glory, which, like a leech,
sticks to our best actions, and sucking from them its nourishment, robs
us of their fruit. As if this cell had not been sufficiently remote from
the eyes of men, St. John frequently retired into a neighboring cavern,
which he had made in the rock, where no one could come to disturb his
devotions, or interrupt his tears. So ardent were his charity and
compunction, that his eyes seemed two fountains, which scarce ever
ceased to flow; and his continual sighs and groans to heaven, under the
weight of the miseries inseparable from his moral pilgrimage, were not
to be equalled by the vehemency of the cries of those who suffer from
knives and fire. Overcome by importunities, he admitted a holy anchoret
named Moyses to live with him as his disciple.

God bestowed on St. John an extraordinary grace of healing the spiritual
disorders of souls. Among others, a monk called Isaac, was brought
almost to the brink of despair by most violent temptations of the flesh.
He addressed himself to St. John; who perceived by his tears how much he
underwent from that conflict and struggle which he felt within himself.
The servant of God commended his faith, and said: "My son, let us have
recourse to God by prayer." They accordingly prostrated themselves
together on the ground in fervent supplication for a deliverance, and
from that time the infernal serpent left Isaac to peace. Many others
resorted to St. John for spiritual advice: but the devil excited some to
jealousy, who censured him as one who, out of vanity, lost much time in
unprofitable discourse. The saint took this accusation, which was a mere
calumny, in good part, and as a charitable admonition; he therefore
imposed on himself a rigorous silence for near a twelvemonth. This his
humility and modesty so much astonished his calumniators, that they
joined the rest of the monks in beseeching him to reassume his former
function of giving charitable advice to all that resorted to him for it,
and not to bury that talent of science which he had received for the
benefit of many. He who knew not what it was to contradict others, with
the same humility and deference again opened his mouth to instruct his
neighbor in the rules of perfect virtue: in which office, such was the
reputation of his wisdom and experience, that he was regarded as another
Moses in that holy place.

St. John was now seventy-five years old, and had spent forty of them in
{679} his hermitage, when, in the year six hundred, he was unanimously
chosen abbot of Mount Sinai, and superior-general of all the monks and
hermits in that country. Soon after he was raised to this dignity, the
people of Palestine and Arabia, in the time of a great drought and
famine, made their application to him as to another Elias, begging him
to intercede with God in their behalf. The saint failed not with great
earnestness to recommend their distress to the Father of mercies, and
his prayer was immediately recompensed with abundant rains. St. Gregory
the Great., who then sat in St. Peter's chair, wrote to our holy
abbot,[4] recommending himself to his prayers, and sent him beds, with
other furniture and money, for his hospital, for the use of pilgrims
near Mount Sinai. John, who had used his utmost endeavors to decline the
pastoral charge, when he saw it laid upon him, neglected no means which
might promote the sanctification of all those who were entrusted to his
care. That posterity might receive some share in the benefit of his holy
instructions, John, the learned and virtuous abbot of Raithu, a
monastery-situate towards the Red Sea, entreated him by that obedience
he had ever practised, even with regard to his inferiors, that he would
draw up the most necessary rules by which fervent souls might arrive at
Christian perfection. The saint answered him, that nothing but extreme
humility could have moved him to write to so miserable a sinner,
destitute of every sort of virtue; but that he received his commands
with respect, though far above his strength, never considering his own
insufficiency. Wherefore, apprehensive of falling into death by
disobedience, he took up his pen in haste, with great eagerness mixed
with fear, and set himself to draw some imperfect outlines as an
unskilful painter, leaving them to receive from him, as a great master,
the finishing strokes. This produced the excellent work which he called
Climax, or the ladder of religious perfection. This book being written
in sentences, almost in the manner of aphorisms, abounds more in sense
than words. A certain majestic simplicity, an inexpressible unction and
spirit of humility, joined with conciseness and perspicuity, very much
enhance the value of this performance: but its chief merit consists in
the sublime sentiments, and perfect description of all Christian
virtues, which it contains. The author confirms his precepts by several
edifying examples, as of obedience and penance.[5] In describing a
monastery of three hundred and thirty monks, which he had visited near
Alexandria in Egypt, he mentions one of the principal citizens of that
city, named Isidore, who, petitioning to be admitted into the house,
said to the abbot: "As iron is in the hands of the smith, so am I in
your hands." The abbot ordered him to remain without the gate, and to
prostrate himself at the feet of everyone that passed by, begging their
prayers for his soul struck with a leprosy. Thus he passed seven years
in profound humility and patience. He told St. John, that during the
first year he always considered himself as a slave condemned for his
sins, and sustained violent conflicts. The second year he passed in
tranquillity and confidence; and the third with relish and pleasure in
his humiliations. So great was his virtue, that the abbot determined to
present him to the bishop in order to be promoted to the priesthood, but
the humility of the holy penitent prevented the execution of that
design; for having begged at least a respite, he died within ten days.
St. John could not help admiring the cook of this numerous community,
who seemed always recollected, and generally bathed in tears amidst his
continual occupation, and asked him by what means he nourished so
perfect a spirit of compunction, in the midst of such a dissipating
laborious employment. He said, that serving the monks, he represented to
himself that he was serving not men, but God in his servants {680} and
that the fire he always had before his eyes, reminded him of that fire
which will burn souls for all eternity. The moving description which our
author gives of the monastery of penitents called the Prison, above a
mile from the former, hath been already abridged in our language. John
the Sabaite told our saint, as of a third person, that seeing himself
respected in his monastery, he considered that this was not the way to
satisfy for his sins. Wherefore, with the leave of his abbot, he
repaired to a severe monastery in Pontus, and after three years saw in a
dream a schedule of his debts, to the amount in appearance of one
hundred pounds of gold, of which only ten were cancelled. He therefore
repeated often to himself: "Poor Antiochus, thou hast still great debt
to satisfy." After passing over thirteen years in contempt and the most
fervent practices of penance, he deserved to see in a vision his whole
debt blotted out. Another monk, in a grievous fit of illness, fell into
a trance, in which he lay as if he had been dead for the space of an
hour: but recovering, he shut himself up in his cell, and lived a
recluse twelve years, almost continually weeping, in the perpetual
meditation of death. When he was near death, his brethren could only
extort from him these words of edification: "He who hath death always
before his eyes, will never sin." John, abbot of Raithu, explained this
book of our saint by judicious comments, which are also extant. We have
likewise a letter of St. John Climacus to the same person, concerning
the duties of a pastor, in which he exhorts him in correcting others to
temper severity with mildness, and encourages him zealously to fulfil
the obligations of his charge; for nothing is greater or more acceptable
to God than to offer him the sacrifice of rational souls sanctified by
penance and charity.

St. John sighed continually under the weight of his dignity, during the
four years that he governed the monks of Mount Sinai: and as he had
taken upon him that burden with fear and reluctance, he with joy found
means to resign the same a little before his death. Heavenly
contemplation, and the continual exercise of divine love and praise,
were his delight and comfort in his earthly pilgrimage: and in this
imitation of the functions of the blessed spirits in heaven he placeth
the essence of the monastic state.[6] In his excellent maxims concerning
the gift of holy tears, the fruit of charity,[7] we seem to behold a
lively portraiture of his most pure soul. He died in his hermitage on
the 30th day of March, in 605, being fourscore years old. His spiritual
son George, who had succeeded him in the abbacy, earnestly begged of God
that he might not be separated from his dear master and guide, and
followed him by a happy death within a few days. On several Greek
commentaries on St. John Climacus's ladder, see Montfaucon, Biblioth.
Coisliana, pp. 305, 306.

       *       *       *       *       *

St. John Climacus, speaking of the excellence and the effects of
charity, does it with a feeling and energy worthy of such a subject. "A
mother," says he,[8] "feels less pleasure when she folds within her arms
the dear infant whom she nourishes with her own milk, than the true
child of charity does, when united, as he incessantly is, to his God,
and folded as if were in the arms of his heavenly Father.[9]--Charity
operates in some persons so as to carry them almost entirely out of
themselves. It illuminates others, and fills them with such sentiments
of joy, that they cannot help crying out: _The Lord is my helper and my
protector: in him hath my heart confided, and I have been helped. And my
flesh hath flourished again, and with my will I will give praise to
him_.[10] This joy which they feel in their hearts, is reflected on
their countenances; and when once God has united, or, as we may say,
{681} incorporated them with his charity, he displays in their exterior,
as in the reflection of a mirror, the brightness and serenity of their
souls: even as Moses, being honored with a sight of God, was encompassed
round by his glory." St. John Climacus composed the following prayer to
obtain the gift of charity: "My God, I pretend to nothing upon this
earth, except to be so firmly united to you by prayer, that to be
separated from you may be impossible: let others desire riches and
glory; for my part, I desire but one thing, and that is, to be
inseparably united to you, and to place in you alone all my hopes of
happiness and repose."

Footnotes:
1.  Gr. l.
2.  Procop. l. 5 de ædif. Justin.
3.  S. Jo. Clim. gr. 27, n. 67.
4.  St. Greg. l. 11; Ep. 1, l. 12; Ep. 16, t. 2, p. 1091.
5.  Gr. 4 and 5.
6.  Gr. 1.
7.  Gr. 7, 27, 30.
8.  Grad. 30, n. 12.
9.  Gr {} n. 14.
10. Ps. xxvii.

S. ZOZIMUS, BISHOP OF SYRACUSE,

WAS successor to the holy bishop Peter; and faithfully discharged all
the duties of a worthy pastor until his death, which happened in 660.
His, name is mentioned in the Roman and Sicilian Martyrologies. See the
Bollandists and Baillet.

ST. REGULUS, OR RIEUL,

WHO having converted the country of Senlis to the faith, about the same
time that St. Dionysius preached in France, was made first bishop of
Senlis, and died in peace in the midst of his flock. See the Bollandists
and Tillem. t. 4, p. 719.


MARCH XXXI.

SAINT BENJAMIN, DEACON, M.

From Theodoret, Hist. Eccles. l. 5, c. 39, &c.

A.D. 429.

ISDEGERDES, son of Sapor III., put a stop to the crael persecutions
against the Christians in Persia, which had been begun by Sapor II., and
the Church had enjoyed twelve years' peace in that kingdom, when, in
420, it was disturbed by the indiscreet zeal of one Abdas, a Christian
bishop, who burned down the Pyræum, or temple of fire, the great
divinity of the Persians. King Isdegerdes threatened to demolish all the
churches of the Christians, unless he would rebuild it. Abdas had done
ill in destroying the temple, but did well in refusing to rebuild it;
for nothing can make it lawful to contribute to any act of idolatry, or
to the building a temple, as Theodoret observes. Isdegerdes therefore
demolished all the Christian churches in Persia, put to death Abdas, and
raised a general persecution against the Church, which continued forty
years with great fury. Isdegerdes died the year following, in 421. But
his son and successor, Varanes, carried on the persecution with greater
inhumanity. The very description which Theodoret, a contemporary writer,
and one that lived in the neighborhood gives of the cruelties he
exercised on the Christians, strikes us with {682} horror: some were
flayed alive in different parts of the body, and suffered all kinds of
torture that could be invented: others, being stuck all over with sharp
reeds, were hauled and rolled about in that condition; others were
tormented divers other ways, such as nothing but the most hellish malice
was capable of suggesting. Among these glorious champions of Christ was
St. Benjamin, a deacon. The tyrant caused him to be beaten and
imprisoned. He had lain a year in the dungeon, when an ambassador from
the emperor obtained his enlargement, on condition he should never speak
to any of the courtiers about religion. The ambassador passed his word
in his behalf that he would not: but Benjamin, who was a minister of the
gospel, declared that he could not detain the truth in captivity,
conscious to himself of the condemnation of the slothful servant for
having hid his talent. He therefore neglected no opportunity of
announcing Christ. The king, being informed that he still preached the
faith in his kingdom, ordered him to be apprehended; but the martyr made
no other reply to his threats than by putting this question to the king:
What opinion he would have of any of his subjects who should renounce
his allegiance to him, and join in war against him. The enraged tyrant
caused reeds to be run in between the nails and the flesh both of his
hands and feet, and the same to be thrust into other most tender parts,
and drawn out again, and this to be frequently repeated with violence.
He lastly ordered a knotty stake to be thrust into his bowels to rend
and tear them, in which torment he expired in the year 424. The Roman
Martyrology places his name on the 31st of March.

       *       *       *       *       *

St. Ephrem, considering the heroic constancy of the martyrs, makes on
them the following pious reflections: "The wisdom of philosophers, and
the eloquence of the greatest orators, are dumb through amazement, when
they contemplate the wonderful spectacle and glorious actions of the
martyrs: the tyrants and judges were not able to express their
astonishment when they beheld the faith, the constancy, and the
cheerfulness of these holy champions. What excuse shall we have in the
dreadful day of judgment, if we who have never been exposed to any cruel
persecutions, or to the violence of such torments, shall have neglected
the love of God and the care of a spiritual life? No temptations, no
torments, were able to draw them from that love which they bore to God:
but we, living in rest and delights, refuse to love our most merciful
and gracious Lord. What shall we do in that day of terror, when the
martyrs of Christ, standing with confidence near his throne, shall show
the marks of their wounds? What shall we then show? Shall we present a
lively faith? true charity towards God? a perfect disengagement of our
affections from earthly things? souls freed from the tyranny of the
passions? silence and recollection? meekness? alms-deeds? prayers poured
forth with clean hearts? compunction, watchings, tears? Happy shall he
be whom such good works shall attend. He will be the partner of the
martyrs, and, supported by the treasure of these virtues, shall appear
with equal confidence before Christ and his angels. We entreat you, O
most holy martyrs, who cheerfully suffered most cruel torments for God
our Saviour and his love, on which account you are now most intimately
and familiarly united to him, that you pray to the Lord for us miserable
sinners, covered with filth, that he infuse into us the grace of Christ,
that it may enlighten our souls that we may love him, &c."[1]

Footnotes:
1.  St. Ephrem. Hom. In SS. Martyres. t. 3. Op. Gr. et Lat. p. 251. ed
    Vatic. an. 1746.

{683}

ST. ACACIUS, OR ACHATES, BISHOP OF ANTIOCH IN ASIA MINOR, C.

ST. ACACIUS was bishop of Antioch, probably the town of that name in
Phrygia, where the Marcionites were numerous. He was surnamed
Agathangel, or Good-angel, and extremely respected by the people for his
sanctity. It was owing to his zeal that not one of his flock renounced
Christ by sacrificing to idols during the persecution of Decius, a
weakness which several of the Marcionite heretics had betrayed. Our
saint himself made a glorious confession of his faith; of which the
following relation, transcribed from the public register, is a voucher.

Martian, a man of consular dignity, arriving at Antioch, a small town of
his government, ordered the bishop to be brought before him. His name
was Acacius, and he was styled the buckler and refuge of that country
for his universal charity and episcopal zeal. Martian said to him: "As
you have the happiness to live under the Roman laws, you are bound to
love and honor our princes, who are our protectors." Acacius answered:
"Of all the subjects of the empire, none love and honor the emperor more
than the Christians. We pray without intermission for his person, and
that it may please God to grant him long life, prosperity, success, and
all benedictions; that he may be endowed by him with the spirit of
justice and wisdom to govern his people; that his reign be auspicious,
and prosperous, blessed with joy, peace, and plenty, throughout all the
provinces that obey him." MARTIAN.-"All this I commend; but that the
emperor may be the better convinced of your submission and fidelity,
come now and offer him a sacrifice with me." ACACIUS.-"I have already
told you that I pray to the great and true God for the emperor; but he
ought not to require a sacrifice from us, nor is there any due to him or
to any man whatsoever." MARTIAN.-"Tell us what God you adore, that we
may also pay him our offerings and homages." ACACIUS.-"I wish from my
heart you did but know him to your advantage." MARTIAN.-"Tell me his
name." ACACIUS.-"He is called the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob." MARTIAN.-"Are these the names of gods?" ACACIUS.-"By no means,
but of men to whom the true God spoke; he is the only God, and he alone
is to be adored, feared, and loved." MARTIAN.-"What is this God?"
ACACIUS.-"He is the most high Adonia, who is seated above the cherubims
and seraphims." MARTIAN.-"What is a seraph?" ACACIUS.-"A ministering
spirit of the most high God, and one of the principal lords of the
heavenly court." MARTIAN.-"What chimeras are these? Lay aside these
whims of invisible beings, and adore such gods as you can see."
ACACIUS.-"Tell me who are those gods to whom you would have me
sacrifice?" MARTIAN.-"Apollo, the saviour of men, who preserves us from
pestilence and famine, who enlightens, preserves, and governs the
universe." ACACIUS.-"Do you mean that wretch that could not preserve his
own life: who, being in love with a young woman, (Daphne,) ran about
distracted in pursuit of her, not knowing that he was never to possess
the object of his desires? It is therefore evident that he could not
foresee things to come, since he was in the dark as to his own fate: and
as clear that he could be no god, who was thus cheated by a creature.
All know likewise that he had a base passion for Hyacinth, a beautiful
boy, and was so awkward as to break the head of that minion, the fond
object of his criminal passion, with a quoit. Is not he also that god
who, with Neptune, turned mason, hired himself to a king, (Laomedon of
Troy,) and built the walls of a city? Would you {684} oblige me to
sacrifice to such a divinity, or to Esculapius, thunderstruck by
Jupiter? or to Venus, whose life was infamous, and to a hundred such
monsters, to whom you offer sacrifice? No, though my life itself
depended on it, ought I to pay divine honors to those whom I should
blush to imitate, and of whom I can entertain no other sentiments than
those of contempt and execration? You adore gods, the imitators of whom
you yourselves would punish." MARTIAN.-"It is usual for you Christians
to raise several calumnies against our gods; for which reason I command
you to come now with me to a banquet in honor of Jupiter and Juno, and
acknowledge and perform what is due to their majesty." ACACIUS.-"How can
I sacrifice to a man whose sepulchre is unquestionably in Crete? What!
Is he risen again?" MARTIAN.-"You must either sacrifice or die."
ACACIUS.-"This is the custom of the Dalmatian robbers; when they have
taken a passenger in a narrow way, they leave him no other choice but to
surrender his money or his life. But, for my part, I declare to you that
I fear nothing that you call do to me. The laws punish adulterers,
thieves, and murderers. Were I guilty of any of those things, I should
be the first man to condemn myself. But if my whole crime be the adoring
of the true God, and I am on this account to be put to death, it is no
longer a law but an injustice." MARTIAN.-"I have no order to judge but
to counsel you to obey. If you refuse, I know how to force you to a
compliance." ACACIUS.-"I have a law which I will obey: this commands me
not to renounce my God. If you think yourself bound to execute the
orders of a man who in a little time hence must leave the world, and his
body become the food of worms, much more strictly am I bound to obey the
omnipotent God, who is infinite and eternal, and who hath declared,
_Whoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father_."
MARTIAN.-"You now mention the error of your sect which I have long
desired to be informed of: you say then that God hath a son?"
ACACIUS.-"Doubtless he hath one." MARTIAN.-"Who is this son of God?"
ACACIUS.-"The Word of truth and grace." MARTIAN.-"Is that his name?"
ACACIUS.-"You did not ask me his name, but what he is." MARTIAN.-"What
then is his name?" ACACIUS.-"Jesus Christ." Martian having inquired of
the saint by what woman God had this son, he replied, that the divine
generation of the Word is of a different nature from human generation,
and proved it from the language the royal prophet makes use of in the
forty-fourth psalm. MARTIAN.-"Is God then corporeal?" ACACIUS.-"He is
known only to himself. We cannot describe him; he is invisible to us in
this mortal state, but we are sufficiently acquainted with his
perfections to confess and adore him." MARTIAN.-"If God hath no body,
how can he have a heart or mind?" ACACIUS.-"Wisdom hath no dependence or
connection with an organized body. What hath body to do with
understanding?" He then pressed him to sacrifice from the example of the
Cataphrygians, or Montanists, and engage all under his care to do the
same. Acacius replied: "It is not me these people obey, but God. Let
them hear me when I advise them to what is right; but let them despise
me, if I offer them the contrary and endeavor to pervert them."
MARTIAN.-"Give me all their names." ACACIUS.-"They are written in
heaven, in God's invisible registers." MARTIAN.-"Where are the
magicians, your companions, and the teachers of this cunningly devised
error?" by which he probably meant the priests. ACACIUS.-"No one in the
world abhors magic more than we Christians." MARTIAN.-"Magic is the new
religion which you introduce." ACACIUS.-"We destroy those gods whom you
fear, though you made them yourselves. We, on the contrary, fear not him
whom we have made with our hands, but him who created us, and who is the
Lord and Master of all nature: who {685} loved us as our good father,
and redeemed us from death and hell as the careful and affectionate
shepherd of our souls." MARTIAN.-"Give the names I require, if you would
avoid the torture." ACACIUS.-"I am before the tribunal, and do you ask
me my name, and, not satisfied with that, you must also know those of
the other ministers? Do you hope to conquer many; you, whom I alone am
able thus to confound? If you desire to know our names, mine is Acacius.
If you would know more, they call me Agathangelus, and my two companions
are Piso, bishop of the Trojans, and Menander, a priest. Do now what you
please." MARTIAN.-"You shall remain in prison till the emperor is
acquainted with what has passed on this subject, and sends his orders
concerning you."

The emperor Decius having read the interrogatory, recompensed Martian by
making him governor of Pamphilia, but admired so much the prudence and
constancy of Acacius, that he ordered him to be discharged, and suffered
him to profess the Christian religion.

This his glorious confession is dated on the 29th of March, and happened
under Decius in 250, or 251. How long St. Acacius survived does not
appear. The Greeks, Egyptians, and other oriental churches, honor his
name on the 31st of March; though his name occurs not in the Roman
Martyrology. See his authentic acts in Ruinart, p. 152; Tillemont, t. 2,
p. 357; Fleury, t. 2; Ceillier, t. 3, p. 560.

ST. GUY, C.

HE is called by the Germans Witen, and was forty years abbot of Pomposa,
in the dutchy of Ferrara, in Italy, a man eminent in all virtues,
especially patience, the love of solitude, and prayer. He died in 1046.
The emperor, Henry III., caused his relics to be translated to Spire,
which city honors him as its principal patron. See his life, by a
disciple, in the Acta Sanctorium of Henschenius, and another, shorter,
of the same age.

END OF VOLUME ONE.