  Hard-Tack. Fromage.

  VINS.

  Ragmuff blanc. Penobscot mousseux.
  Thé. Chocolat de Bogotá.
  Petit verre de Cognac.

At that time I had a temporary quarrel with the frantic nineteenth
century's best friend, tobacco,--and Iglesias, being totally at peace
with himself and the world, never needs anodynes. Cancut, therefore, was
the only cloud-blower.

We two solaced ourselves with scorning civilization from our
vantage-ground. We were beyond fences, away from the clash of
town-clocks, the clink of town-dollars, the hiss of town-scandals. As
soon as one is fairly in camp and has begun to eat with his fingers,
he is free. He and truth are at the bottom of a well,--a hollow,
fire-lighted cylinder of forest. While the manly man of the woods is
breathing Nature like an Amreeta draught, is it anything less than the
_summum bonum_?

"Yet some call American life dull."

"Ay, to dullards!" ejaculated Iglesias.

Moose were said to haunt these regions. Toward midnight our would-be
moose-hunter paddled about up and down, seeking them and finding not.
The waters were too high. Lily-pads were drowned. There were no moose
looming duskily in the shallows, to be done to death at their banquet.
They were up in the pathless woods, browsing on leaves and deappetizing
with bitter bark. Starlight paddling over reflected stars was
enchanting, but somniferous. We gave up our vain quest and glided softly
home,--already we called it home,--toward the faint embers of our fire.
Then all slept, as only wood-men sleep, save when for moments Cancut's
trumpet-tones sounded alarums, and we others awoke to punch and batter
the snorer into silence.

In due time, bird and cricket whistled and chirped the reveille. We
sprang from our lair. We dipped in the river and let its gentle friction
polish us more luxuriously than ever did any hair-gloved polisher of
an Oriental bath. Our joints crackled for themselves as we beat the
current. From bath like this comes no unmanly kief, no sensuous,
slumberous, dreamy indifference, but a nervous, intent, keen, joyous
activity. A day of deeds is before us, and we would be doing.

When we issue from the Penobscot, from our baptism into a new life, we
need no valet for elaborate toilet. Attire is simple, when the woods are
the tiring-room.

When we had taken off the water and put on our clothes, we
simultaneously thought of breakfast. Like a circle of wolves around the
bones of a banquet, the embers of our fire were watching each other over
the ashes; we had but to knock their heads together and fiery fighting
began. The skirmish of the brands boiled our coffee and fried our pork,
and we embarked and shoved off. A thin blue smoke, floating upward, for
an hour or two, marked our bivouac; soon this had gone out, and the
banks and braes of Ragmuff were lonely as if never a biped had trodden
them. Nature drops back to solitude as easily as man to peace;--how
little this fair globe would miss mankind!

The Penobscot was all asteam with morning mist. It was blinding the sun
with a matinal oblation of incense. A crew of the profane should not
interfere with such act of worship. Sacrilege is perilous, whoever be
the God. We were instantly punished for irreverence. The first "rips"
came up-stream under cover of the mist, and took us by surprise. As we
were paddling along gently, we suddenly found ourselves in the midst of
a boiling rapid. Gnashing rocks, with cruel foam upon their lips, sprang
out of the obscure, eager to tear us. Great jaws of ugly blackness
snapped about us as if we were introduced into a coterie of crocodiles.
Symplegades clanged together behind; mighty gulfs, below seducing bends
of smooth water, awaited us before. We were in for it. We spun, whizzed,
dashed, leaped, "cavorted;" we did whatever a birch running the gantlet
of whirlpools and breakers may do, except the fatal finality of a
somerset. That we escaped, and only escaped. We had been only reckless,
not audacious; and therefore peril, not punishment, befell us. The rocks
smote our frail shallop; they did not crush it. Foam and spray dashed in
our faces; solid fluid below the crest did not overwhelm us. There we
were, presently, in water tumultuous, but not frantic. There we were,
three men floating in a birch, not floundering in a maelstrom,--on the
water, not under it,--sprinkled, not drowned,--and in a wild wonder how
we got into it and how we got out of it.

Cancut's paddle guided us through. Unwieldy he may have been in person,
but he could wield his weapon well. And so, by luck and skill, we were
not drowned in the magnificent uproar of the rapid. Success, that
strange stirabout of Providence, accident, and courage, were ours. But
when we came to the next cascading bit, though the mist had now lifted,
we lightened the canoe by two men's avoir-dupois, that it might dance,
and not blunder heavily, might seek the safe shallows, away from the
dangerous bursts of mid-current, and choose passages where Cancut, with
the setting-pole, could let it gently down. So Iglesias and I plunged
through the labyrinthine woods, the stream along.

Not long after our little episode of buffeting, we shot out again upon
smooth water, and soon, for it is never smooth but it is smoothest, upon
a lake, Chesuncook.


CHAPTER IX.

CHESUNCOOK.


Chesuncook is a "bulge" of the Penobscot: so much for its topography. It
is deep in the woods, except that some miles from its opening there is
a lumbering-station, with house and barns. In the wilderness, man makes
for man by a necessity of human instinct. We made for the log-houses.
We found there an ex-barkeeper of a certain well-known New-York cockney
coffee-house, promoted into a frontiersman, but mindful still of
flesh-pots. Poor fellow, he was still prouder that he had once tossed
the foaming cocktail than that he could now fell the forest-monarch.
Mixed drinks were dearer to him than pure air. When we entered the long,
low log-cabin, he was boiling doughnuts, as was to be expected. In
certain regions of America every cook who is not baking pork and beans
is boiling doughnuts, just as in certain other gastronomic quarters
_frijoles_ alternate with _tortillas_.

Doughnuts, like peaches, must be eaten with the dew upon them. Caught as
they come bobbing up in the bubbling pot, I will not say that they are
despicable. Woodsmen and canoemen, competent to pork and beans, can
master also the alternative. The ex-barkeeper was generous with these
brown and glistening langrage-shot, and aimed volley after volley at our
mouths. Nor was he content with giving us our personal fill; into every
crevice of our firkin he packed a pellet of future indigestion. Besides
this result of foraging, we took the hint from a visible cow that milk
might be had. Of this also the ex-barkeeper served us out galore,
sighing that it was not the punch of his metropolitan days. We put our
milk in our tea-pot, and thus, with all the ravages of the past made
good, we launched again upon Chesuncook.

Chesuncook, according to its quality of lake, had no aid to give us with
current. Paddling all a hot August mid-day over slothful water would
be tame, day-laborer's work. But there was a breeze. Good! Come, kind
Zephyr, fill our red blanket-sail! Cancut's blanket in the bow became a
substitute for Cancut's paddle in the stern. We swept along before the
wind, unsteadily, over Lake Chesuncook, at sea in a bowl,--"rolled to
starboard, rolled to larboard," in our keelless craft. Zephyr only
followed us, mild as he was strong, and strong as he was mild. Had he
been puffy, it would have been all over with us. But the breeze only
sang about our way, and shook the water out of sunny calm. Katahdin to
the North, a fair blue pyramid, lifted higher and stooped forward
more imminent, yet still so many leagues away that his features were
undefined, and the gray of his scalp undistinguishable from the green of
his beard of forest. Every mile, however, as we slid drowsily over the
hot lake, proved more and more that we were not befooled,--Iglesias by
memory, and I by anticipation. Katahdin lost nothing by approach, as
some of the grandees do: as it grew bigger, it grew better.

Twenty miles, or so, of Chesuncook, of sun-cooked Chesuncook, we
traversed by the aid of our blanket-sail, pleasantly wafted by the
unboisterous breeze. Undrowned, unducked, as safe from the perils of the
broad lake as we had come out of the defiles of the rapids, we landed at
the carry below the dam at the lake's outlet.

The skin of many a slaughtered varmint was nailed on its shingle, and
the landing-place was carpeted with the fur. Doughnuts, ex-barkeepers,
and civilization at one end of the lake, and here were muskrat-skins,
trappers, and the primeval. Two hunters of moose, in default of their
fern-horned, blubber-lipped game, had condescended to muskrat, and were
making the lower end of Chesuncook fragrant with muskiness.

It is surprising how hospitable and comrade a creature is man. The
trappers of muskrats were charmingly brotherly. They guided us across
the carry; they would not hear of our being porters. "Pluck the
superabundant huckleberry," said they, "while we, suspending your firkin
and your traps upon the setting-pole, tote them, as the spies of Joshua
toted the grape-clusters of the Promised Land."

Cancut, for his share, carried the canoe. He wore it upon his head and
shoulders. Tough work he found it, toiling through the underwood, and
poking his way like an elongated and mobile mushroom through the thick
shrubbery. Ever and anon, as Iglesias and I paused, we would be aware of
the canoe thrusting itself above our heads in the covert, and a voice
would come from an unseen head under its shell,--"It's soul-breaking,
carrying is!"

The portage was short. We emerged from the birchen grove upon the river,
below a brilliant cascading rapid. The water came flashing gloriously
forward, a far other element than the tame, flat stuff we had drifted
slowly over all the dullish hours. Water on the go is nobler than water
on the stand; recklessness may be as fatal as stagnation, but it is more
heroic.

Presently, over the edge, where the foam and spray were springing up
into sunshine, our canoe suddenly appeared, and had hardly appeared,
when, as if by one leap, it had passed the rapid, and was gliding in the
stiller current at our feet. One of the muskrateers had relieved Cancut
of his head-piece, and shot the lower rush of water. We again embarked,
and, guided by the trappers in their own canoe, paddled out upon Lake
Pepogenus.


LOUIS LEBEAU'S CONVERSION.


  Yesterday, while I moved with the languid crowd on the Riva,
  Musing with idle eyes on the wide lagoons and the islands,
  And on the dim-seen seaward glimmering sails in the distance,
  Where the azure haze, like a vision of Indian-Summer,
  Haunted the dreamy sky of the soft Venetian December,--
  While I moved unwilled in the mellow warmth of the weather,
  Breathing air that was full of Old-World sadness and beauty,
  Into my thought came this story of free, wild life in Ohio,
  When the land was new, and yet by the Beautiful River
  Dwelt the pioneers and Indian hunters and boatmen.

  Pealed from the campanile, responding from island to island,
  Bells of that ancient faith whose incense and solemn devotions
  Rise from a hundred shrines in the broken heart of the city;
  But in my reverie heard I only the passionate voices
  Of the people that sang in the virgin heart of the forest.
  Autumn was in the land, and the trees were golden and crimson,
  And from the luminous boughs of the over-elms and the maples
  Tender and beautiful fell the light in the worshippers' faces,
  Softer than lights that stream through the saints on the windows of
    churches,
  While the balsamy breath of the hemlocks and pines by the river
  Stole on the winds through the woodland aisles like the breath of a
    censer.
  Loud the people sang old camp-meeting anthems that quaver
  Quaintly yet from lips forgetful of lips that have kissed them:
  Loud they sang the songs of the Sacrifice and Atonement,
  And of the end of the world, and the infinite terrors of Judgment;
  Songs of ineffable sorrow, and wailing compassionate warning
  For the generations that hardened their hearts to their Saviour;
  Songs of exultant rapture for them that confessed Him and followed,
  Bearing His burden and yoke, enduring and entering with Him
  Into the rest of His saints, and the endless reward of the blessed.
  Loud the people sang: but through the sound of their singing
  Brake inarticulate cries and moans and sobs from the mourners,
  As the glory of God, that smote the apostle of Tarsus,
  Smote them and strewed them to earth like leaves in the breath of the
     whirlwind.

  Hushed at last was the sound of the lamentation and singing;
  But from the distant hill the throbbing drum of the pheasant
  Shook with its heavy pulses the depths of the listening silence,
  When from his place arose a white-haired exhorter and faltered:
  "Brethren and sisters in Jesus! the Lord hath heard our petitions,
  And the hearts of His servants are awed and melted within them,--
  Even the hearts of the wicked are touched by His infinite mercy.
  All my days in this vale of tears the Lord hath been with me,
  He hath been good to me, He hath granted me trials and patience;
  But this hour hath crowned my knowledge of Him and His goodness.
  Truly, but that it is well this day for me to be with you,
  Now might I say to the Lord,--'I know Thee, my God, in all fulness;
  Now let Thy servant depart in peace to the rest Thou hast promised!'"

  Faltered and ceased. And now the wild and jubilant music
  Of the singing burst from the solemn profound of the silence,
  Surged in triumph and fell, and ebbed again into silence.

  Then from the group of the preachers arose the greatest among them,--
  He whose days were given in youth to the praise of the Saviour,--
  He whose lips seemed touched like the prophet's of old from the altar,
  So that his words were flame, and burned to the hearts of his hearers,
  Quickening the dead among them, reviving the cold and the doubting.
  There he charged them pray, and rest not from prayer while a sinner
  In the sound of their voices denied the Friend of the sinner:
  "Pray till the night shall fall,--till the stars are faint in the
    morning,--
  Yea, till the sun himself be faint in that glory and brightness,
  In that light which shall dawn in mercy for penitent sinners."
  Kneeling, he led them in prayer, and the quick and sobbing responses
  Spake how their souls were moved with the might and the grace of the
    Spirit.
  Then while the converts recounted how God had chastened and saved
    them,--
  Children whose golden locks yet shone with the lingering effulgence
  Of the touches of Him who blessed little children forever,--
  Old men whose yearning eyes were dimmed with the far-streaming
    brightness
  Seen through the opening gates in the heart of the heavenly city,--
  Stealthily through the harking woods the lengthening shadows
  Chased the wild things to their nests, and the twilight died into
    darkness.

  Now the four great pyres that were placed there to light the encampment,
  High on platforms raised above the people, were kindled.
  Flaming aloof, as if from the pillar by night in the Desert,
  Fell their crimson light on the lifted orbs of the preachers,
  On the withered brows of the old men, and Israel's mothers,
  On the bloom of youth, and the earnest devotion of manhood,
  On the anguish and hope in the tearful eyes of the mourners.
  Flaming aloof, it stirred the sleep of the luminous maples
  With warm summer-dreams, and faint, luxurious languor.
  Near the four great pyres the people closed in a circle,
  In their midst the mourners, and, praying with them, the exhorters,
  And on the skirts of the circle the unrepentant and scorners,--
  Ever fewer and sadder, and drawn to the place of the mourners,
  One after one, by the prayers and tears of the brethren and sisters,
  And by the Spirit of God, that was mightily striving within them,
  Till at the last alone stood Louis Lebeau, unconverted.

  Louis Lebeau, the boatman, the trapper, the hunter, the fighter,
  From the unlucky French of Gallipolis he descended,
  Heir to Old-World want and New-World love of adventure.
  Vague was the life he led, and vague and grotesque were the rumors
  Wherethrough he loomed on the people, the hero of mythical hearsay,--
  Quick of hand and of heart, _insouciant_, generous, Western,--
  Taking the thought of the young in secret love and in envy.
  Not less the elders shook their heads and held him for outcast,
  Reprobate, roving, ungodly, infidel, worse than a Papist,
  With his whispered fame of lawless exploits at St. Louis,
  Wild affrays and loves with the half-breeds out on the Osage,
  Brawls at New-Orleans, and all the towns on the rivers,
  All the godless towns of the many-ruffianed rivers.
  Only she that loved him the best of all, in her loving,
  Knew him the best of all, and other than that of the rumors.
  Daily she prayed for him, with conscious and tender effusion,
  That the Lord would convert him. But when her father forbade him
  Unto her thought, she denied him, and likewise held him for outcast,
  Turned her eyes when they met, and would not speak, though her heart
    broke.

  Bitter and brief his logic that reasoned from wrong unto error:
  "This is their praying and singing," he said, "that makes you reject
    me,--
  You that were kind to me once. But I think my fathers' religion,
  With a light heart in the breast, and a friendly priest to absolve one,
  Better than all these conversions that only bewilder and vex me,
  And that have made man so hard and woman fickle and cruel.
  Well, then, pray for my soul, since you would not have spoken to save
    me,--
  Yes,--for I go from these saints to my brethren and sisters, the
    sinners."
  Spake and went, while her faint lips fashioned unuttered entreaties,--
  Went, and came again in a year at the time of the meeting,
  Haggard and wan of face, and wasted with passion and sorrow.
  Dead in his eyes was the careless smile of old, and its phantom
  Haunted his lips in a sneer of restless incredulous mocking.
  Day by day he came to the outer skirts of the circle,
  Dwelling on her, where she knelt by the white-haired exhorter, her
    father,
  With his hollow looks, and never moved from his silence.

  Now, where he stood alone, the last of impenitent sinners,
  Weeping, old friends and comrades came to him out of the circle,
  And with their tears besought him to hear what the Lord had done for
    them.
  Ever he shook them off, not roughly, nor smiled at their transports.
  Then the preachers spake and painted the terrors of Judgment,
  And of the bottomless pit, and the flames of hell everlasting.
  Still and dark he stood, and neither listened nor heeded:
  But when the fervent voice of the while-haired exhorter was lifted,
  Fell his brows in a scowl of fierce and scornful rejection.
  "Lord, let this soul be saved!" cried the fervent voice of the old man;
  "For that the shepherd rejoiceth more truly for one that hath wandered,
  And hath been found again, than for all the others that strayed not."

  Out of the midst of the people, a woman old and decrepit,
  Tremulous through the light, and tremulous into the shadow,
  Wavered toward him with slow, uncertain paces of palsy,
  Laid her quivering hand on his arm and brokenly prayed him:
  "Louis Lebeau, I closed in death the eyes of your mother.
  On my breast she died, in prayer for her fatherless children,
  That they might know the Lord, and follow Him always, and serve Him.
  Oh, I conjure you, my son, by the name of your mother in glory,
  Scorn not the grace of the Lord!" As when a summer-noon's tempest
  Breaks in one swift gush of rain, then ceases and gathers
  Darker and gloomier yet on the lowering front of the heavens,
  So brake his mood in tears, as he soothed her, and stilled her
    entreaties,
  And so he turned again with his clouded looks to the people.

  Vibrated then from the hush the accents of mournfullest pity,--
  His who was gifted in speech, and the glow of the fires illumined
  All his pallid aspect with sudden and marvellous splendor:
  "Louis Lebeau," he spake, "I have known you and loved you from
    childhood;
  Still, when the others blamed you, I took your part, for I knew you.
  Louis Lebeau, my brother, I thought to meet you in heaven,
  Hand in hand with her who is gone to heaven before us,
  Brothers through her dear love! I trusted to greet you and lead you
  Up from the brink of the River unto the gates of the City.
  Lo! my years shall be few on the earth. Oh, my brother,
  If I should die before you had known the mercy of Jesus,
  Yea, I think it would sadden the hope of glory within me!"

  Neither yet had the will of the sinner yielded an answer;
  But from his lips there broke a cry of unspeakable anguish,
  Wild and fierce and shrill, as if some demon within him
  Rent his soul with the ultimate pangs of fiendish possession,
  And with the outstretched arms of bewildered imploring toward them,
  Death-white unto the people he turned his face from the darkness.

  Out of the sedge by the creek a flight of clamorous killdees
  Rose from their timorous sleep with piercing and iterant challenge,
  Wheeled in the starlight and fled away into distance and silence.
  White on the other hand lay the tents, and beyond them glided the river,
  Where the broadhorn[A] drifted slow at the will of the current,
  And where the boatman listened, and knew not how, as he listened,
  Something touched through the years the old lost hopes of his
    childhood,--
  Only his sense was filled with low monotonous murmurs,
  As of a faint-heard prayer, that was chorused with deeper responses.

  [Footnote A: The old-fashioned flat-boats were so called.]

  Not with the rest was lifted her voice in the fervent responses,
  But in her soul she prayed to Him that heareth in secret,
  Asking for light and for strength to learn His will and to do it:
  "Oh, make me clear to know, if the hope that rises within me
  Be not part of a love unmeet for me here, and forbidden!
  So, if it be not that, make me strong for the evil entreaty
  Of the days that shall bring me question of self and reproaches,
  When the unrighteous shall mock, and my brethren and sisters shall
    doubt me!
  Make me worthy to know Thy will, my Saviour, and do it!"
  In her pain she prayed, and at last, through her mute adoration,
  Rapt from all mortal presence, and in her rapture uplifted,
  Glorified she rose, and stood in the midst of the people,
  Looking on all with the still, unseeing eyes of devotion,
  Vague, and tender, and sweet, as the eyes of the dead, when we dream
    them
  Living and looking on us, but they cannot speak, and we cannot:
  Knowing only the peril that threatened his soul's unrepentance,
  Knowing only the fear and error and wrong that withheld him,
  Thinking, "In doubt of me, his soul had perished forever!"
  Touched with no feeble shame, but trusting her power to save him,
  Through the circle she passed, and straight to the side of her lover,--
  Took his hand in her own, and mutely implored him an instant,
  Answering, giving, forgiving, confessing, beseeching him all things,--
  Drew him then with her, and passed once more through the circle
  Unto her place, and knelt with him there by the side of her father,
  Trembling as women tremble who greatly venture and triumph,--
  But in her innocent breast was the saint's sublime exultation.

  So was Louis converted; and though the lips of the scorner
  Spared not in after-years the subtle taunt and derision,
  (What time, meeker grown, his heart held his hand from its answer,)
  Not the less lofty and pure her love and her faith that had saved him,
  Not the less now discerned was her inspiration from heaven
  By the people, that rose, and embracing, and weeping together,
  Poured forth their jubilant songs of victory and of thanksgiving,
  Till from the embers leaped the dying flame to behold them,
  And the hills of the river were filled with reverberant echoes,--
  Echoes that out of the years and the distance stole to me hither,
  While I moved unwilled in the mellow warmth of the weather,--
  Echoes that mingled and fainted and fell with the fluttering murmurs
  In the hearts of the hushing bells, as from island to island
  Swooned the sound on the wide lagoons into palpitant silence.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE DEVELOPMENT AND OVERTHROW OF THE RUSSIAN SERF-SYSTEM.


Close upon the end of the fifteenth century, the Muscovite ideas
of Right were subjected to the strong mind of Ivan the Great, and
compressed into a code.

Therein were embodied the best processes known to his land and time: for
discovering crime, torture and trial by battle; for punishing crime, the
knout and death.

But hidden in this tough mass was one law of greater import than all
others. Thereby were all peasants forbidden to leave the lands they
were then tilling, except during the eight days before and after Saint
George's day. This provision sprang from Ivan's highest views of justice
and broadest views of political economy; the nobles received it with
plaudits, which have found echoes even in these days;[A] the peasants
received it with no murmurs which History has found any trouble in
drowning.

[Footnote A: See Gerebtzoff, _Histoire de la Civilisation en Russie_.]

Just one hundred years later, there sat upon the Muscovite throne, as
_nominal_ Tzar, the weakling Feodor I.; but behind the throne stood, as
_real_ Tzar, hard, strong Boris Godounoff.

Looking forward to Feodor's death, Boris makes ready to mount the
throne; and he sees--what all other "Mayors of the Palace," climbing
into the places of _fainéant_ kings, have seen--that he must link to
his fortunes the fortunes of some strong body in the nation; he breaks,
however, from the general rule among usurpers,--bribing the Church,--and
determines to bribe the nobility.

The greatest grief of the Muscovite nobles seemed to be that the
peasants could escape from their oppression by the emigration allowed at
Saint George's day.

Boris saw his opportunity: he cut off the privilege of Saint George's
day; the peasant was fixed to the soil forever. No Russian law ever
_directly_ enslaved the peasantry,[B] but, through this decree of Boris,
the lord who owned the soil came to own the peasants upon it, just as he
owned its immovable boulders and ledges.

[Footnote B: Haxthausen.]

To this the peasants submitted, but over this wrong History has not
been able to drown their sighs; their proverbs and ballads make Saint
George's day representative of all ill-luck and disappointment.

A few years later, Boris made another bid for oligarchic favor. He
issued a rigorous fugitive-serf law, and even wrenched liberty from
certain free peasants who had entered service for wages before his
edicts. This completed the work, and Russia, which never had the
benefits of feudalism, had now fastened upon her feudalism's worst
curse,--a serf-caste bound to the glebe.

The great waves of wrong which bore serfage into Russia seem to have
moved with a kind of tidal regularity, and the distance between their
crests in those earlier times appears to have been just a hundred
years,--for, again, at the end of the next century, surge over the
nation the ideas of Peter the Great.

The great good things done by Peter the world knows by heart. The world
knows well how he tore his way out of the fetichism of his time,--how,
despite ignorance and unreason, he dragged his nation after him,--how he
dowered the nation with things and thoughts which transformed it from a
petty Asiatic horde to a great European power.

And the praise due to this work can never be diminished. Time shall
but increase it; for the world has yet to learn most of the wonderful
details of his activity. We were present a few years since, when one of
those lesser triumphs of his genius was first unfolded.

It was in that room at the Hermitage--adjoining the Winter Palace--set
apart for the relics of Peter. Our companions were two men noted as
leaders in American industry,--one famed as an inventor, the other famed
as a champion of inventors' rights.

Suddenly from the inventor,[C] pulling over some old dust-covered
machines in a corner, came loud cries of surprise. The cries were
natural indeed. In that heap of rubbish he had found a lathe for turning
irregular forms, and a screw-cutting engine once used by Peter himself:
specimens of his unfinished work were still in them. They had lain there
unheeded a hundred and fifty years; their principle had died with Peter
and his workmen; and not many years since, they were reinvented in
America, and gave their inventors fame and fortune. At the late Paris
Universal Exposition crowds flocked about an American lathe for copying
statuary; and that lathe was, in principle, identical with this old,
forgotten machine of Peter's.

[Footnote C: The late Samuel Colt.]

Yet, though Peter fought so well, and thought so well, he made some
mistakes which hang to this day over his country as bitter curses. For
in all his plan and work to advance the mass of men was one supreme
lack,--lack of any account of the worth and right of the individual man.

Lesser examples of this are seen in his grim jest at Westminster
Hall,--"What use of so many lawyers? I have but two lawyers in Russia,
and one of those I mean to hang as soon as I return;"--or when, at
Berlin, having been shown a new gibbet, he ordered one of his
servants to be hanged in order to test it;--or, in his reviews and
parade-fights, when he ordered his men to use ball, and to take the
buttons off their bayonets.

Greater examples are seen in his Battle of Narva, when he threw away an
army to learn his opponent's game,--in his building of St. Petersburg,
where, in draining marshes, he sacrificed a hundred thousand men the
first year.

But the greatest proof of this great lack was shown in his dealings with
the serf-system.

Serfage was already recognized in Peter's time as an evil. Peter himself
once stormed forth in protestations and invectives against what he
stigmatized as "selling men like beasts,--separating parents from
children, husbands from wives,--which takes place nowhere else in the
world, and which causes many tears to flow." He declared that a law
should be made against it. Yet it was by his misguided hand that serfage
was compacted into its final black mass of foulness.

For Peter saw other nations spinning and weaving, and he determined that
Russia should at once spin and weave; he saw other nations forging
iron, and he determined that Russia should at once forge iron. He never
stopped to consider that what might cost little in other lands, as a
natural growth, might cost far too much in Russia, as a forced growth.

In lack, then, of quick brain and sturdy spine and strong arm of paid
workmen, he forced into his manufactories the flaccid muscle of serfs.
These, thus lifted from the earth, lost even the little force in the
State they before had; great bodies of serfs thus became slaves; worse
than that, the idea of a serf developed toward the idea of a slave.[D]

[Footnote D: Haxthausen, _Études sur la Situation Intérieure_, etc., _de
la Russie._]

And Peter, misguided, dealt one blow more. Cold-blooded officials were
set at taking the census. These adopted easy classifications; free
peasants, serfs, and slaves were often huddled into the lists under
a single denomination. So serfage became still more difficult to be
distinguished from slavery.[E]

[Footnote E: Gurowski,--also Wolowski in _Revue des Deux Mondes_.]

As this base of hideous wrong was thus widened and deepened, the
nobles built higher and stronger their superstructure of arrogance and
pretension. Not many years after Peter's death, they so over-awed the
Empress Anne that she thrust into the codes of the Empire statutes which
allowed the nobles to sell serfs apart from the soil. So did serfage
bloom _fully_ into slavery.

But in the latter half of the eighteenth century Russia gained a ruler
from whom the world came to expect much.

To mount the throne, Catharine II. had murdered her husband; to keep the
throne, she had murdered two claimants whose title was better than
her own. She then became, with her agents in these horrors, a second
Messalina.

To set herself right in the eyes of Europe, she paid eager court to
that hierarchy of skepticism which in that age made or marred European
reputations. She flattered the fierce Deists by owning fealty to "_Le
Roi Voltaire_;" she flattered the mild Deists by calling in La Harpe
as the tutor of her grandson; she flattered the Atheists by calling in
Diderot as a tutor for herself.

Her murders and orgies were soon forgotten in the new hopes for Russian
regeneration. Her dealings with Russia strengthened these hopes. The
official style required that all persons presenting petitions should
subscribe themselves "Your Majesty's humble serf." This formula she
abolished, and boasted that she had cast out the word serf from the
Russian language. Poets and philosophers echoed this boast over Europe,
--and the serfs waited.

The great Empress spurred hope by another movement. She proposed to
an academy the question of serf-emancipation as a subject for their
prize-essay. The essay was written and crowned. It was filled with
beautiful things about liberty, practical things about moderation,
flattering things about "the Great Catharine,"--and the serfs waited.

Again she aroused hope. It was given out that her most intense delight
came from the sight of happy serfs and prosperous villages. Accordingly,
in her journey to the Crimea, Potemkin squandered millions on millions
in rearing pasteboard villages,--in dragging forth thousands of wretched
peasants to fill them,--in costuming them to look thrifty,--in training
them to look happy. Catharine was rejoiced,--Europe sang paeans,--the
serfs waited.[F]

[Footnote F: For further growth of the sentimental fashion thus set, see
_Memoirs of the Princess Daschkaw_, Vol. I. p. 383.]

She seemed to go farther: she issued a decree prohibiting the
enslavement of serfs. But, unfortunately, the palace-intrigues, and the
correspondence with the philosophers, and the destruction of Polish
nationality left her no time to see the edict carried out. But Europe
applauded,--and the serfs waited.

Two years after this came a deed which put an end to all this
uncertainty. An edict was prepared, ordering the peasants of Little
Russia to remain forever on the estates where the day of publication
should find them. This was vile; but what followed was diabolic.
Court-pets were let into the secret. These, by good promises, enticed
hosts of peasants to their estates. The edict was now sprung;--in an
hour the courtiers were made rich, the peasants were made serfs, and
Catharine II. was made infamous forever.

So, about a century after Peter, there rolled over Russia a wave of
wrong which not only drowned honor in the nobility, but drowned hope in
the people.

As Russia entered the nineteenth century, the hearts of earnest men must
have sunk within them. For Paul I., Catharine's son and successor, was
infinitely more despotic than Catharine, and infinitely less restrained
by public opinion. He had been born with savage instincts, and educated
into ferocity. Tyranny was written on his features, in his childhood. If
he remained in Russia, his mother sneered and showed hatred to him; if
he journeyed in Western Europe, crowds gathered about his coach to jeer
at his ugliness. Most of those who have seen Gillray's caricature
of him, issued in the height of English spite at Paul's homage to
Bonaparte, have thought it hideously overdrawn; but those who have seen
the portrait of Paul in the Cadet-Corps at St. Petersburg know well
that Gillray did not exaggerate Paul's ugliness, for he could not.

And Paul's face was but a mirror of his character. Tyranny was wrought
into his every fibre. He insisted on an Oriental homage. As his carriage
whirled by, it was held the duty of all others in carriages to stop,
descend into the mud, and bow themselves. Himself threw his despotism
into this formula,--"Know, Sir Ambassador, that in Russia there is
no one noble or powerful except the man to whom I speak, and while I
speak."

And yet, within that hideous mass glowed some sparks of reverence
for right. When the nobles tried to get Paul's assent to more open
arrangements for selling serfs apart from the soil, he utterly refused;
and when they overtasked their human chattels, Paul made a law that no
serf should be required to give more than three days in the week to the
tillage of his master's domain.

But, within five years after his accession, Paul had developed into such
a ravenous wild-beast that it became necessary to murder him. This duty
done, there came a change in the spirit of Russian sovereignty as from
March to May; but, sadly for humanity, there came, at the same time, a
change in the spirit of European politics as from May to March.

For, although the new Tzar, Alexander I., was mild and liberal, the
storm of French ideas and armies had generally destroyed in monarchs'
minds any poor germs of philanthropy which had ever found lodgment
there. Still Alexander breasted this storm,--found time to plan for
his serfs, and in 1803 put his hand to the work of helping them toward
freedom. His first edict was for the creation of the class of "free
laborers." By this, masters and serfs were encouraged to enter into
an arrangement which was to put the serf into immediate possession
of himself, of a homestead, and of a few acres,--giving him time to
indemnify his master by a series of payments. Alexander threw his heart
into this scheme; in his kindliness he supposed that the pretended
willingness of the nobles meant something; but the serf-owning caste,
without openly opposing, twisted up bad consequences with good, braided
impossibilities into possibilities: the whole plan became a tangle, and
was thrown aside.

The Tzar now sought to foster other good efforts, especially those made
by some earnest nobles to free their serfs by will. But this plan, also,
the serf-owning caste entangled and thwarted.

At last, the storm of war set in with such fury that all internal
reforms must be lost sight of. Russia had to make ready for those
campaigns in which Napoleon gained every battle. Then came that peaceful
meeting on the raft at Tilsit,--worse for Russia than any warlike
meeting; for thereby Napoleon seduced Alexander, for years, from plans
of bettering his Empire into dreams of extending it.

Coming out of these dreams, Alexander had to deal with such realities
as the burning of Moscow, the Battle of Leipsic, and the occupation of
France; yet, in the midst of those fearful times,--when the grapple of
the Emperors was at the fiercest,--in the very year of the burning of
Moscow,--Alexander rose in calm statesmanship, and admitted Bessarabia
into the Empire under a proviso which excluded serfage forever.

Hardly was the great European tragedy ended, when Alexander again turned
sorrowfully toward the wronged millions of his Empire. He found that
progress in civilization had but made the condition of the serfs worse.
The newly ennobled _parvenus_ were worse than the old _boyars_; they
hugged the serf-system more lovingly and the serfs more hatefully.[G]

[Footnote G: For proofs of this see Haxthausen.]

The sight of these wrongs roused him. He seized a cross, and swore upon
it that the serf-system should be abolished.

Straightway a great and good plan was prepared. Its main features were,
a period of transition from serfage to personal liberty, extending
through twelve or fourteen years,--the arrival of the serf at personal
freedom, with ownership of his cabin and the bit of land attached to
it,--the gradual reimbursement of masters by serfs,--and after this
advance to _personal_ liberty, an advance by easy steps to a sort of
_political_ liberty.

Favorable as was this plan to the serf-owners, they attacked it in
various ways; but they could not kill it utterly. Esthonia, Livonia, and
Courland became free.

Having failed to arrest the growth of freedom, the serf-holding caste
made every effort to blast the good fruits of freedom. In Courland they
were thwarted; in Esthonia and Livonia they succeeded during many years;
but the eternal laws were too strong for them, and the fruitage of
liberty has grown richer and better.

After these good efforts, Alexander stopped, discouraged. A few
patriotic nobles stood apart from their caste, and strengthened his
hands, as Lafayette and Liancourt strengthened Louis XVI.; they even
drew up a plan of voluntary emancipation, formed an association for the
purpose, gained many signatures; but the great weight of that besotted
serf-owning caste was thrown against them, and all came to nought.
Alexander was at last walled in from the great object of his ambition.
Pretended theologians built, between him and emancipation, walls of
Scriptural interpretation,[H]--pretended philosophers built walls of
false political economy,--pretended statesmen built walls of sham
common-sense.

[Footnote H: Gurowski says that they used brilliantly "Cursed be
Canaan," etc.]

If the Tzar could but have mustered courage to _cut_ the knot! Alas for
Russia and for him, he wasted himself in efforts to _untie_ it. His
heart sickened at it; he welcomed death, which alone could remove him
from it.

Alexander's successor, Nicholas I., had been known before his accession
as a mere martinet, a good colonel for parade-days, wonderful in
detecting soiled uniforms, terrible in administering petty punishments.
It seems like the story of stupid Brutus over again. Altered
circumstances made a new man of him; and few things are more strange
than the change wrought in his whole bearing and look by that week of
agony and energy in climbing his brother's throne. The portraits of
Nicholas the Grand Duke and Nicholas the Autocrat seem portraits of two
different persons. The first face is averted, suspicious, harsh, with
little meaning and less grandeur; the second is direct, commanding, not
unkind, every feature telling of will to crush opposition, every line
marking sense of Russian supremacy.

The great article of Nicholas's creed was a complete, downright faith in
Despotism, and in himself as Despotism's apostle.

Hence he hated, above all things, a limited monarchy. He told De Custine
that a pure monarchy or pure republic he could understand; but that
anything between these he could _not_ understand. Of his former rule of
Poland, as constitutional monarch, he spoke with loathing.

Of this hate which Nicholas felt for liberal forms of government there
yet remain monuments in the great museum of the Kremlin.

That museum holds an immense number of interesting things, and masses
of jewels and plate which make all other European collections mean. The
visitor wanders among clumps of diamonds, and sacks of pearls, and a
nauseating wealth of rubies and sapphires and emeralds. There rise row
after row of jewelled scymitars, and vases and salvers of gold, and old
saddles studded with diamonds, and with stirrups of gold,--presents of
frightened Asiatic satraps or fawning European allies.

There, too, are the crowns of Muscovy, of Russia, of Kazan, of
Astrachan, of Siberia, of the Crimea, and, pity to say it, of Poland.
And next this is an index of despotic hate,--for the Polish sceptre is
broken and flung aside.

Near this stands the full-length portrait of the first Alexander; and at
his feet are grouped captured flags of Hungary and Poland,--some with
blood-marks still upon them.

But below all,--far beneath the feet of the Emperor,--in dust
and ignominy and on the floor, is flung the very Constitution of
Poland--parchment for parchment, ink for ink, good promise for good
promise--which Alexander gave with so many smiles, and which Nicholas
took away with so much bloodshed.

And not far from this monument of the deathless hate Nicholas bore that
liberty he had stung to death stands a monument of his admiration for
straightforward tyranny, even in the most dreaded enemy his house ever
knew. Standing there is a statue in the purest of marble,--the only
statue in those vast halls. It has the place of honor. It looks proudly
over all that glory, and keeps ward over all that treasure; and that
statue, in full majesty of imperial robes and bees and diadem and face,
is of the first Napoleon. Admiration of his tyrannic will has at last
made him peaceful sovereign of the Kremlin.

This spirit of absolutism took its most offensive form in Nicholas's
attitude toward Europe. He was the very incarnation of reaction against
revolution, and he became the demigod of that horde of petty despots who
infest Central Europe.

Whenever, then, any tyrant's lie was to be baptized, he stood its
godfather; whenever any God's truth was to be crucified, he led on
those who passed by reviling and wagging their heads. Whenever these
oppressors revived some old feudal wrong, Nicholas backed them in the
name of Religion; whenever their nations struggled to preserve some
great right, Nicholas crushed them in the name of Law and Order. With
these pauper princes his children intermarried, and he fed them with his
crumbs, and clothed them with scraps of his purple. The visitor can
see to-day, in every one of their dwarf palaces, some of his malachite
vases, or porcelain bowls, or porphyry columns.

But the _people_ of Western Europe distrusted him as much as their
rulers worshipped; and some of these same presents to their rulers have
become trifle-monuments of no mean value in showing that popular idea
of Russian policy. Foremost among these stand those two bronze masses
of statuary in front of the Royal Palace at Berlin,--representing fiery
horses restrained by strong men. Pompous inscriptions proclaim these
presents from Nicholas; but the people, knowing the man and his
measures, have fastened forever upon one of these curbed steeds the name
of "Progress Checked," and on the other, "Retrogression Encouraged."

And the people were right. Whether sending presents to gladden his
Prussian pupil, or sending armies to crush Hungary, or sending sneering
messages to plague Louis Philippe, he remained proud in his apostolate
of Absolutism.

This pride Nicholas never relaxed. A few days before his self-will
brought him to his death-bed, we saw him ride through the St. Petersburg
streets with no pomp and no attendants, yet in as great pride as ever
Despotism gave a man. At his approach, nobles uncovered and looked
docile, soldiers faced about and became statues, long-bearded peasants
bowed to the ground with the air of men on whose vision a miracle
flashes. For there was one who could make or mar all fortunes,--the
absolute owner of street and houses and passers-by,--one who owned the
patent and dispensed the right to tread that soil, to breathe that air,
to be glorified in that sunlight and amid those snow-crystals. And he
looked it all. Though at that moment his army was entrapped by military
stratagem, and he himself was entrapped by diplomatic stratagem, that
face and form were proud as ever and confident as ever.

There was, in this attitude toward Europe,--in this standing forth
as the representative man of Absolutism, and breasting the nineteenth
century,--something of greatness; but in his attitude toward Russia this
greatness was wretchedly diminished.

For, as Alexander I. was a good man enticed out of goodness by the baits
of Napoleon, Nicholas was a great man scared out of greatness by the
ever-recurring phantom of the French Revolution.

In those first days of his reign, when he enforced loyalty with
grape-shot and halter, Nicholas dared much and stood firm; but his
character soon showed another side.

Fearless as he was before bright bayonets, he was an utter coward before
bright ideas. He laughed at the flash of cannon, but he trembled at the
flash of a new living thought. Whenever, then, he attempted a great
thing for his nation, he was sure to be scared back from its completion
by fear of revolution. And so, to-day, he who looks through Russia for
Nicholas's works finds a number of great things he has done, but each is
single, insulated,--not preceded logically, not followed effectively.

Take, as an example of this, his railway-building.

His own pride and Russian interest demanded railways. He scanned the
world with that keen eye of his,--saw that American energy was the best
supplement to Russian capital; his will darted quickly, struck afar, and
Americans came to build his road from St. Petersburg to Moscow.

Nothing can be more complete. It is an "air-line" road, and so perfect
that the traveller finds few places where the rails do not meet on
either side of him in the horizon. The track is double,--the rails very
heavy and admirably ballasted,--station-houses and engine-houses are
splendid in build, perfect in arrangement, and surrounded by neat
gardens. The whole work is worthy of the Pyramid-builders. The
traveller is whirled by culverts, abutments, and walls of dressed
granite,--through cuttings where the earth on either side is carefully
paved or turfed to the summit. Ranges of Greek columns are reared as
crossings in the midst of broad marshes,--lions' heads in bronzed iron
stare out upon vast wastes where never rose even the smoke from a serf's
kennel.

All this seems good; and a ride of four hundred miles through such
glories rarely fails to set the traveller at chanting the praises of the
Emperor who conceived them. But when the traveller notes that complete
isolation of the work from all conditions necessary to its success, his
praises grow fainter. He sees that Nicholas held back from continuing
the road to Odessa, though half the money spent in making the road an
Imperial plaything would have built a good, solid extension to that
most important seaport; he sees that Nicholas dared not untie
police-regulations, and that commerce is wretchedly meagre. Contrary to
what would obtain under a free system, this great public work found the
country wretched and left it wretched. The traveller flies by no ranges
of trim palings and tidy cottages; he sees the same dingy groups of huts
here as elsewhere,--the same cultivation looking for no morrow,--the
same tokens that the laborer is _not_ thought worthy of his hire.

This same tendency to great single works, this same fear of great
connected systems, this same timid isolation of great creations from
principles essential to their growth is seen, too, in Nicholas's
church-building.

Foremost of all the edifices on which Nicholas lavished the wealth of
the Empire stands the Isak Church in St. Petersburg. It is one of the
largest, and certainly the richest, cathedral in Christendom. All is
polished pink granite and marble and bronze. On all sides are double
rows of Titanic columns,--each a single block of polished granite with
bronze capital. Colossal masses of bronze statuary are grouped over each
front; high above the roof and surrounding the great drums of the domes
are lines of giant columns in granite bearing giant statues in bronze;
and crowning all rises the vast central dome, flanked by its four
smaller domes, all heavily plated with gold.

The church within is one gorgeous mass of precious marbles and mosaics
and silver and gold and jewels. On the tabernacle of the altar, in
gold and malachite, on the screen of the altar, with its pilasters of
_lapis-lazuli_ and its range of malachite columns fifty feet high, were
lavished millions on millions. Bulging from the ceilings are massy
bosses of Siberian porphyry and jasper. To decorate the walls with
unfading pictures, Nicholas founded an establishment for mosaic work,
where sixty pictures were commanded, each demanding, after all artistic
labor, the mechanical labor of two men for four years.

Yet this vast work is not so striking a monument of Nicholas's luxury as
of his timidity.

For this cathedral and some others almost as grand were, in part, at
least, results of the deep wish of Nicholas to wean his people from
their semi-idolatrous love for dark, confined, filthy sanctuaries, like
those of Moscow; but here, again, is a timid purpose and half-result;
Nicholas dared set no adequate enginery working at the popular religious
training or moral training. There had been such an organization,--the
Russian Bible Society,--favored by the first Alexander; but Nicholas
swept it away at one pen-stroke. Evidently, he feared lest Scriptural
denunciations of certain sins in ancient politics might be popularly
interpreted against certain sins in modern politics.

It was this same vague fear at revolutionary remembrance which thwarted
Nicholas in all his battling against official corruption.

The corruption-system in Russia is old, organized, and respectable.
Stories told of Russian bribes and thefts exceed belief only until one
has been on the ground.

Nicholas began well. He made an Imperial progress to Odessa,--was
welcomed in the morning by the Governor in full pomp and robes and
flow of smooth words; and at noon the same Governor was working in the
streets, with ball and chain, as a convict.

But against such a chronic moral evil no government is so weak as your
so-called "_strong_" government. Nicholas set out one day for the
Cronstadt arsenals, to look into the accounts there; but before he
reached them, stores, storehouses, and account-books were in ashes.

So, at last, Nicholas folded his arms and wrestled no more. For, apart
from the trouble, there came ever in his dealings with thieves that
old timid thought of his, that, if he examined too closely their
thief-tenure, they might examine too closely his despot-tenure.

We have shown this vague fear in Nicholas's mind, thus at length and in
different workings, because thereby alone can be grasped the master-key
to his dealings with the serf-system.

Toward his toiling millions Nicholas always showed sympathy. Let news
of a single wrong to a serf get through the hedges about the Russian
majesty, and woe to the guilty master! Many of these wrongs came
to Nicholas's notice; and he came to hate the system, and tried to
undermine it.

Opposition met him, of course,--not so much the ponderous laziness of
Peter's time as an opposition polite and elastic, which never ranted and
never stood up,--for then Nicholas would have throttled it and stamped
upon it. But it did its best to entangle his reason and thwart his
action.

He was told that the serfs were well fed, well housed, well clothed,
well provided with religion,--were contented, and had no wish to leave
their owners.

Now Nicholas was not strong at spinning sham reason nor subtle at
weaving false conscience; but, to his mind, the very fact that the
system had so degraded a man that he could laugh and dance and sing,
while other men took his wages and wife and homestead, was the crowning
argument _against_ the system.

Then the political economists beset him, proving that without forced
labor Russia must sink into sloth and poverty.[I]

[Footnote I: For choice specimens of these reasonings, see Von Erman,
_Archiv für Wissenschaftliche Kunde von Russland_.]

Yet all this could not shut out from Nicholas's sight the great black
_fact_ in the case. He saw, and winced as he saw, that, while other
European nations, even under despots, were comparatively active and
energetic, his own people were sluggish and stagnant,--that, although
great thoughts and great acts were towering in the West, there were in
Russia, after all his galvanizing, no great authors, or scholars, or
builders, or inventors, but only those two main products of Russian
civilization,--dissolute lords and abject serfs.

But what to do? Nicholas tried to help his Empire by setting right any
individual wrongs whose reports broke their way to him.

Nearly twenty years went by in this timid dropping of grains of salt
into a putrid sea.

But at last, in 1842, Nicholas issued his ukase creating the class of
"contracting peasants." Masters and serfs were empowered to enter into
contracts,--the serf receiving freedom, the master receiving payment in
instalments.

It was a moderate innovation, _very_ moderate,--nothing more than the
first failure of the first Alexander. Yet, even here, that old timidity
of Nicholas nearly spoiled what little good was hidden in the ukase.
Notice after notice was given to the serf-owners that they were not to
be molested, that no emancipation was contemplated, and that the ukase
"contained nothing new."

The result was as feeble as the policy. A few serfs were emancipated,
and Nicholas halted. The revolutions of 1848 increased his fear of
innovation; and, finally, the war in the Crimea took from him the power
of innovation.

The great man died. We saw his cold, dead face, in the midst of crowns
and crosses,--very pale then, very powerless then. One might stare at
him then, as at a serf's corpse; for he who had scared Europe during
thirty years lay before us that day as a poor lump of chilled brain and
withered muscle.

And we stood by, when, amid chanting, and flare of torches, and roll of
cannon, his sons wrapped him in his shroud of gold-thread, and lowered
him into the tomb of his fathers.

But there was shown in those days far greater tribute than the prayers
of bishops or the reverence of ambassadors. Massed about the Winter
Palace, and the Fortress of Peter and Paul, stood thousands on thousands
who, in far-distant serf-huts, had put on their best, had toiled wearily
to the capital, to give their last mute thanks to one who for years had
stood between their welfare and their owners' greed. Sad that he had not
done more. Yet they knew that he had _wished_ their freedom,--that he
had loathed their wrongs: for _that_ came up the tribute of millions.

The new Emperor, Alexander II., had never been hoped for as one who
could light the nation from his brain: the only hope was that he might
warm the nation, somewhat, from his heart. He was said to be of a weak,
silken fibre. The strength of the family was said to be concentrated in
his younger brother Constantine.

But soon came a day when the young Tzar revealed to Europe not merely
kindliness, but strength.

While his father's corpse was yet lying within his palace, he received
the diplomatic body. As the Emperor entered the audience-room, he seemed
feeble indeed for such a crisis. That fearful legacy of war seemed to
weigh upon his heart; marks of plenteous tears were upon his face;
Nesselrode, though old and bent and shrunk in stature, seemed stronger
than his young master.

But, as he began his speech, it was seen that a strong man had mounted
the throne.

With earnestness he declared that he sorrowed over the existing
war,--but that, if the Holy Alliance had been broken, it was not through
the fault of Russia. With bitterness he turned toward the Austrian
Minister, Esterhazy, and hinted at Russian services in 1848 and Austrian
ingratitude. Calmly, then, not as one who spoke a part, but as one who
announced a determination, he declared,--"I am anxious for peace; but if
the terms at the approaching congress are incompatible with the honor of
my nation, I will put myself at the head of my faithful Russia and die
sooner than yield."[J]

[Footnote J: This sketch is given from notes taken at the audience.]

Strong as Alexander showed himself by these words, he showed himself
stronger by acts. A policy properly mingling firmness and conciliation
brought peace to Europe, and showed him equal to his father; a policy
mingling love of liberty with love of order brought the dawn of
prosperity to Russia, and showed him the superior of his father.

The reforms now begun were not stinted, as of old, but free and hearty.
In rapid succession were swept away restrictions on telegraphic
communication,--on printing,--on the use of the Imperial Library,--on
strangers entering the country,--on Russians leaving the country. A
policy in public works was adopted which made Nicholas's greatest
efforts seem petty: a vast net-work of railways was commenced. A policy
in commercial dealings with Western Europe was adopted, in which
Alexander, though not apparently so imposing as Nicholas, was really far
greater: he dared advance toward freedom of trade.

But soon rose again that great problem of old,--that problem ever
rising to meet a new Autocrat, and, at each appearance, more dire than
before,--the serf-question.

The serfs in private hands now numbered more than twenty millions; above
them stood more than a hundred thousand owners.

The princely strength of the largest owners was best represented by a
few men possessing over a hundred thousand serfs each, and, above all,
by Count Scheremetieff, who boasted three hundred thousand. The luxury
of the large owners was best represented by about four thousand men
possessing more than a thousand serfs each. The pinching propensities
of the small owners were best represented by nearly fifty thousand men
possessing less than twenty serfs each.[K]

[Footnote K: Gerebtzoff, _Histoire de la Civilisation en
Russie_,--Wolowski, in _Revue des Deux Mondes_,--and Tegoborski,
_Commentaries on the Productive Forces of Russia_, Vol. I. p. 221.]

The serfs might be divided into two great classes. The first comprised
those working under the old, or _corvée_, system,--giving, generally,
three days in the week to the tillage of the owner's domain; the second
comprised those working under the new, or _obrok_, system,--receiving
a payment fixed by the owner and assessed by the community to which the
serfs belonged.

The character of the serfs has been moulded by the serf-system.

They have a simple shrewdness, which, under a better system, had made
them enterprising; but this quality has degenerated into cunning and
cheatery,--the weapons which the hopelessly oppressed always use.

They have a reverence for things sacred, which, under a better system,
might have given the nation a strengthening religion; but they now stand
among the most religious peoples on earth, and among the least moral. To
the besmutted picture of Our Lady of Kazan they are ever ready to burn
wax and oil; to Truth and Justice they constantly omit the tribute of
mere common honesty. They keep the Church fasts like saints; they keep
the Church feasts like satyrs.

They have a curiosity, which, under a better system, had made them
inventive; but their plough in common use is behind the plough described
by Virgil.

They have a love of gain, which, under a better system, had made them
hard-working; but it takes ten serfs to do languidly and poorly what
two free men in America do quickly and well.

They are naturally a kind people; but let one example show how serfage
can transmute kindness.

It is a rule well known in Russia, that, when an accident occurs,
interference is to be left to the police. Hence you shall see a man
lying in a fit, and the bystanders giving no aid, but waiting for the
authorities.

Some years since, as all the world remembers, a theatre took fire in St.
Petersburg, and crowds of people were burned or stifled. The whole story
is not so well known. That theatre was but a great temporary wooden
shed,--such as is run up every year at the holidays, in the public
squares. When the fire burst forth, crowds of peasants hurried to the
spot; but though they heard the shrieks of the dying,--separated from
them only by a thin planking,--only one man, in all that multitude,
dared cut through and rescue some of the sufferers.

The serfs, when standing for great ideas, will die rather than yield.
The first Napoleon learned this at Eylau,--the third Napoleon learned
it at Sevastopol; yet in daily life they are slavish beyond belief. On
a certain day in the year 1855, the most embarrassed man in all the
Russias was, doubtless, our excellent American Minister. The
serf-coachman employed at wages was called up to receive his discharge for
drunkenness. Coming into the presence of a sound-hearted American
democrat, who had never dreamed of one mortal kneeling to another, Ivan
throws himself on his knees, presses his forehead to the Minister's
feet, fawns like a tamed beast, and refuses to move until the Minister
relieves himself from this nightmare of servility by a full pardon.

The whole working of the system has been fearful.

Time after time, we have entered the serf field and serf hut,--have
seen the simple round of serf toils and sports,--have heard the simple
chronicles of serf joys and sorrows. But whether his livery were filthy
sheepskin or gold-laced caftan,--whether he lay on carpets at the door
of his master, or in filth on the floor of his cabin,--whether he gave
us cold, stupid stories of his wrongs, or flippant details of his
joys,--whether he blessed his master or cursed him,--we have wondered at
the power which a serf-system has to degrade and imbrute the image of
God.

But astonishment was increased a thousand fold at study of the reflex
influence for evil upon the serf-owners themselves,--upon the whole
free community,--upon the very soil of the whole country.

On all those broad plains of Russia, on the daily life of that
serf-owning aristocracy, on the whole class which is neither of serfs
nor serf-owners, the curse of God is written in letters so big and so
black that all mankind may read them.

Farms are untilled, enterprise deadened, invention crippled,
education neglected; life is of little value; labor is the badge of
servility,--laziness the very badge and passport of gentility.

Despite the most specious half-measures,--despite all efforts to
galvanize it, to coax life into it, to sting life into it, the nation
has remained stagnant. Not one traveller who does not know that the
evils brought on that land by the despotism of the Autocrat are as
nothing compared to that dark net-work of curses spread over it by a
serf-owning aristocracy.

Into the conflict with this evil Alexander II. entered manfully.

Having been two years upon the throne, having made a plan, having
stirred some thought through certain authorized journals, he inspires
the nobility in three of the northwestern provinces to memorialize him
in regard to emancipation.

Straightway an answer is sent, conveying the outlines of the Emperor's
plan. The period of transition from serfage to freedom is set at twelve
years; at the end of that time the serf is to be fully free, and
possessor of his cabin, with an adjoining piece of land. The provincial
nobles are convoked to fill out these outlines with details as to the
working out by the serfs of a fair indemnity to their masters.

The whole world is stirred; but that province in which the Tzar hoped
most eagerly for a movement to meet him--the province where beats the
old Muscovite heart, Moscow--is stirred least of all. Every earnest
throb seems stifled there by that strong aristocracy.

Yet Moscow moves at last. Some nobles who have not yet arrived at the
callous period, some Professors in the University who have not yet
arrived at the heavy period, breathe life into the mass, drag on the
timid, fight off the malignant.

The movement has soon a force which the retrograde party at Moscow dare
not openly resist. So they send answers to St. Petersburg apparently
favorable; but wrapped in their phrases are hints of difficulties,
reservations, impossibilities.

All this studied suggestion of difficulties profits the reactionists
nothing. They are immediately informed that the Imperial mind is made
up,--that the business of the Muscovite nobility is now to arrange that
the serf be freed in twelve years, and put in possession of homestead
and inclosure.

The next movement of the retrograde party is to _misunderstand_
everything. The plainest things are found to need a world of
debate,--the simplest things become entangled,--the noble assemblies
play solemnly a ludicrous game at cross-purposes.

Straightway comes a notice from the Emperor, which, stripped of official
verbiage, says that they _must_ understand. This sets all in motion
again. Imperial notices are sent to province after province, explanatory
documents are issued, good men and strong are set to talk and work.

The nobility of Moscow now make another move. To scare back the
advancing forces of emancipation, they elect as provincial leaders three
nobles bearing the greatest names of old Russia, and haters of the new
ideas.

To defeat these comes a miracle.

There stands forth a successor of Saint Gregory and Saint Bavon,--one
who accepts that deep mediaeval thought, that, when God advances
great ideas, the Church must marshal them, or go under,--Philarete,
Metropolitan of Moscow. The Church, as represented in him, is no longer
scholastic,--it is become apostolic. He upholds emancipation,--condemns
its foes; his earnest eloquence carries all.

The work having progressed unevenly,--nobles in different governments
differing in plan and aim,--an assembly of delegates is brought together
at St Petersburg to combine and perfect a resultant plan under the eye
of the Emperor.

The Grand Council of the Empire, too, is set at the work. It is a most
unpromising body,--yet the Emperor's will stirs it.

The opposition now make the most brilliant stroke of their campaign.
Just as James II. of England prated toleration and planned the
enslavement of all thought, so now the bigoted plotters against
emancipation begin to prate of Constitutional Liberty.

Had they been fighting Nicholas, this would doubtless have accomplished
its purpose. He would have become furious, and in his fury would have
wrecked reform. But Alexander bears right on. It is even hinted that
visions of a constitutional monarchy please him.

But then come tests of Alexander's strength far more trying. Masses of
peasants, hearing vague news of emancipation,--learning, doubtless, from
their masters' own spiteful lips that the Emperor is endeavoring to tear
away property in serfs,--take the masters at their word, and determine
to help the Emperor. They rise in insurrection.

To the bigoted serf-owners this is a godsend. They parade it in all
lights; therewith they throw life into all the old commonplaces on the
French Revolution; timid men of good intentions begin to waver. The Tzar
will surely now be scared back.

Not so. Alexander now hurls his greatest weapon, and stuns reaction in a
moment. He frees all the serfs on the Imperial estates without reserve.
Now it is seen that he is in earnest; the opponents are disheartened;
once more the plan moves and drags them on.

But there came other things to dishearten the Emperor; and not least of
these was the attitude of those who moulded popular thought in England.

Be it said here to the credit of France, that from her came constant
encouragement in the great work. Wolowski, Mazade, and other
true-hearted men sent forth from leading reviews and journals words of
sympathy, words of help, words of cheer.

Not so England. Just as, in the French Revolution of 1789, while yet
that Revolution was noble and good, while yet Lafayette and Bailly held
it, leaders in English thought who had quickened the opinions which
had caused the Revolution sent malignant prophecies and prompted foul
blows,--just as, in this our own struggle, leaders in English thought
who have helped create the opinion which has brought on this struggle
now deal treacherously with us,--so, in this battle of Alexander against
a foul wrong, they seized this time of all times to show all the
wrongs and absurdities of which Russia ever had been or ever might be
guilty,--criticized, carped, sent plentifully haughty advice, depressing
sympathy, malignant prophecy.

Review-articles, based on no real knowledge of Russia, announced desire
for serf-emancipation,--and then, in the modern English way, with
plentiful pyrotechnics of antithesis and paradox, threw a gloomy light
into the skilfully pictured depths of Imperial despotism, official
corruption, and national bankruptcy.

They revived Old-World objections, which, to one acquainted with the
most every-day workings of serfage, were ridiculous.

It was said, that, if the serfs lost the protection of their owners,
they might fall a prey to rapacious officials. As well might it
have been argued that a mother should never loose her son from her
apron-strings.

It was said that "serfism excludes pauperism,"--that, if the serf owes
work to his owner in the prime of life, the owner owes support to his
serf in the decline of life. No lie could be more absurd to one who had
seen Russian life. We were first greeted, on entering Russia, by a
beggar who knelt in the mud; at Kovno eighteen beggars besieged the
coach,--and Kovno was hardly worse than scores of other towns; within a
day's ride of St. Petersburg a woman begged piteously for means to keep
soul and body together, and finished the refutation of that sonorous
English theory,--for she had been discharged from her master's service
in the metropolis as too feeble, and had been sent back to his domain,
afar in the country, on foot and without money.

It was said that freed peasants would not work. But, despite volleys
of predictions that they _would_ not work if freed, despite volleys of
assertions that they _could_ not work if freed, the peasants, when set
free, and not crushed by regulations, have sprung to their work with an
earnestness, and continued it with a vigor, at which the philosophers
of the old system stand aghast. The freed peasants of Wologda compare
favorably with any in Europe.

And when the old tirades had grown stale, English writers drew copiously
from a new source,--from "La Vérité sur la Russie,"--pleasingly
indifferent to the fact that the author's praise in a previous work had
notoriously been a thing of bargain and sale, and that there was in full
process of development a train of facts which led the Parisian courts to
find him guilty of demanding in one case a "blackmail" of fifty thousand
roubles.[L]

[Footnote L: _Procès en Diffamation du Prince Simon Worontzoff contre le
Prince Pierre Dolgornokow_. Leipzig, 1862]

All this argument outside the Empire helped the foes of emancipation
inside the Empire.

But the Emperor met the whole body of his opponents with an argument
overwhelming. On the 5th of March, 1861, he issued his manifesto making
the serfs FREE. He had struggled long to make some satisfactory previous
arrangement; his motto now became, Emancipation first, Arrangement
afterward. Thus was the _result_ of the great struggle decided; but,
to this day, the after-arrangement remains undecided. The Tzar offers
gradual indemnity; the nobles seem to prefer fire and blood. Alexander
stands firm; the last declaration brought across the water was that he
would persist in reforms.

But, whatever the after-process, THE SERFS ARE FREE.

The career before Russia is hopeful indeed; emancipation of her serfs
has set her fully in that career. The vast mass of her inhabitants are
of a noble breed, combining the sound mind of the Indo-Germanic races
with the tough muscle of the northern plateaus of Asia. In no other
country on earth is there such unity in language, in degree of
cultivation, and in basis of ideas. Absolutely the same dialect is
spoken by lord and peasant, in capital and in province.

And, to an American thinker, more hopeful still for Russia is the
patriarchal democratic system,--spreading a primary political education
through the whole mass. Leaders of their hamlets and communities
are voted for; bodies of peasants settle the partition of land and
assessments in public meetings; discussions are held; votes are taken;
and though Tzar's right and nobles' right are considered far above
people's right, yet this rude democratic schooling is sure to keep
bright in the people some sparks of manliness and some glow of free
thought.

In view, too, of many words and acts of the present Emperor, it is
not too much to hope, that, ere many years, Russia will become a
constitutional monarchy.

So shall Russia be made a power before which all other European powers
shall be pigmies.

Before the close of the year in which we now stand, there is to be
celebrated at Nijnii-Novogorod the thousandth anniversary of the
founding of Russia. Then is to rise above the domes and spires of that
famed old capital a monument to the heroes of Russian civilization.

Let the sculptor group about its base Rurik and his followers, who in
rude might hewed out strongholds for the coming nation. Let goodly
place be given to Minime and Pojarski, who drove forth barbarian
invaders,--goodly place also to Platov and Kutusov, who drove forth
civilized invaders. Let there be high-placed niches for Ivan the Great,
who developed order,--for Peter the Great, who developed physical
strength,--for Derjavine and Karamsin, who developed moral and mental
strength. Let Philarete of Moscow stand forth as he stood confronting
with Christ's gospel the traffickers in flesh and blood. In loving care
let there be wrought the face and form of Alexander the First,--the
Kindly.

But, crowning all, let there lord it a noble statue to the greatest of
Russian benefactors in all these thousand years,--to the Warrior who
restored peace,--to the Monarch who had faith in God's will to make
order, and in man's will to keep order,--to the Christian Patriot who
made forty millions of serfs forty millions of _men_,--to Alexander the
Second,--ALEXANDER THE EARNEST.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. AXTELL.

PART IV.


I said that the afternoon sunlight poured its rain into the church-yard.
It was four of the clock when Aaron left me.

The dream that I had received impression of still dwelt in active
remembrance, and a little fringe from the greater glory mine eyes had
seen went trailing in flows of light along the edge of earth, as if
saying unto it, "Arise and behold what I am!"

One child habiting earth dared to lift eyes into the awful arch of air,
wherein are laid the foundation-stones of the crystalline wall, and,
beholding drops of Infinite Love, garnered one, and, walking forth with
it in her heart, went into the church-yard,--a regret arising that the
graves that held the columns fallen from the family-corridor had found
so little of place within affection's realm. The regret, growing into
resolution, hastened her steps, that went unto the place devoted to
the dead Percivals. It was in a corner,--the corner wherein grew the
pine-tree of the hills.

"A peaceful spot of earth," I thought, as I went into the hedged
inclosure, and shut myself in with the gleaming marble, and the
low-hanging evergreens that waved their green arms to ward ill away from
those they had grown up among. "It is long since the ground has been
broken here," I thought,--"so long!" And I looked upon a monumental
stone to find there recorded the latest date of death. It was eighteen
hundred and forty-four,--my mother's,--and I looked about and sought
her grave. The grass seemed crispy and dry. I sat down by this grave. I
leaned over it, and looked into the tangled net-work of dead fibres held
fast by some link of the past to living roots underneath. I plucked some
of them, and in idlest of fancies looked closely to see if deeds or
thoughts of a summer gone had been left upon them. "No! I've had enough
of fancies for one day; I'll have no more to-night," I thought; and I
wished for something to do. I longed for action whereon to imprint my
new impress of resolution. It came in a guise I had not calculated upon.

"It's very wrong of you to sit upon that damp ground, Miss Percival."

The words evidently were addressed to me, sitting hidden in among the
evergreens. I looked up and answered,--

"It is not damp, Mr. Axtell."

He was leaning upon the iron railing outside of the hedge.

"Will you come away from that cold, damp place?" he went on.

"I'm not ready to leave yet," I said, and never moved. I asked,--

"How is your sister since morning?"

I thought him offended. He made no reply,--only walked away and went
into the church close by.

"One can never know the next mood that one of these Axtells will take,"
I said to myself, in the stillness that followed his going. "He might
have answered me, at least." Then I reproached Anna Percival for
cherishing uncharity towards tried humanity. There's a way appointed
for escape, I know, and I sought it, burying my face in my hands, and
leaning over the stillness of my mother's heart. I heard steps drawing
near. Looking up, I saw Mr. Axtell entering the inclosure. He had
brought one of the church pew-cushions.

"Will you rise?" he asked.

He did not bring the cushion to where I was; he carried it around and
spread it in a vacant spot between two graves, the place left beside
my mother for my precious father's white hairs to be laid in. Having
deposited it there, he looked at me, evidently expecting that I would
avail myself of his kindness. I wanted to refuse. I felt perfectly
comfortable where I was. I should have done so, had not my intention
been intercepted by a shaft of expression that crossed my vein of
humor unexpectedly. It was only a look from out of his eyes. They were
absolutely colorless,--not white, not black, but a strange mingling of
all hues made them everything to my view,--and yet so full of coloring
that no one ray came shining out and said, "I'm blue, or black, or
gray;" but something said, if not the mandate of color, "Obey!"

I did.

"Sacrilege!" I said. "It is a place for worship."

"Whose grave is this?" Mr. Axtell asked, as he bent down and laid his
hand upon the sod. It was upon the one next beyond my mother's; between
the two it was that he had placed the cushion.

"The head-stone is just there. You can read, can you not?" I asked, with
a spice of malice, because for the second time this barbaric gentleman
had commanded me to obey.

He lifted himself up, leaned against the towering family-monument, and
slowly said,--

"Miss Percival, it is very hard for an Axtell to forgive."

I thought of the face in the Upper Country, and asked,--

"Why?"

"Because the Creator has almost deprived them of forgiving power. Don't
tempt one of them to sin by giving occasion for the exercise of that
wherein they mourn at being deficient."

I pulled dead grassy fibres again, and said nothing.

The second time he bent to the mound of earth, and said,--

"Please tell me now, Miss Anna, whose grave this is;" and there were
tears in his eyes that made them for the moment grandly brown.

"Truly, Mr. Axtell, I do not know. I've been so busy with the living that
I've not thought much of this place. It long since all these died, you
know;" and I looked about upon the little village closed in by the iron
railing. "I do not know that I can tell you one, save my mother's, here.
I remember her; the others I cannot."

I arose to walk around to the headstone and see.

"No," he said. "Will you listen to me a little while?"

"If you'll sing for me."

"Sing for you?"--and there was a world of reproach in his meaning. "Is
this a place for songs? or am I a man to sing?"

"Why not, Mr. Axtell? Aaron told me that you could sing, if you would;
he has heard you."

"I will sing for you," he said, "if, after I am done, you choose to hear
the song I sing."

I thought again of Miss Lettie, and put the question, once unheeded,
concerning her.

"She is better. Your sister is a charming nurse."

A long quiet ensued; in it came the memory of Dr. Eaton's interest in
the young girl's face.

"Is Mr. Axtell an artist?" I asked, after the silence.

"Mr. Axtell is a church-sexton," was the response.

"Cannot he be both sexton and artist?"

"How can he?"

"You have a strange way of telling me that I ought not to question you,"
I said, vexed at his non-committal words and manner.

He changed the subject widely, when next he spoke.

"Have you the letter that you picked up last night?" he asked.

"Yes, Mr. Axtell."

"Give it to me, please."

"Did Miss Lettie commission you to ask?"

"She did not."

"Then I cannot give it to you."

"Cannot give me my sister's letter?"

"It was to _me_ that it was intrusted."

"And you are afraid to trust me with it?"

"I am afraid to break the trust reposed in myself."

Again the black roll of silent thunder gloomed on his brow; as once his
sister's eyes had been, his now were coruscant.

"Do you refuse to give it to me?" he demanded.

"I do," I said, "now, and until Miss Lettie says, 'Give.'"

"You've learned the contents, I presume," he said, with untold sarcasm.
"Woman's curiosity digs deeply, when once aroused."

"You've been taught of woman in a sad school, I fear. I'll forgive the
faults of your education, Mr. Axtell. Have you any more remarks to me?
I'm waiting."

"Do you know the contents of the letter that made Lettie so anxious?"

"You accused me before questioning formerly, or I should have given you
truth. I have no knowledge of what is in the letter."

He had resumed his former position, leaning against the monument, where
I had mine. He changed it now, drawing nearer for an instant, then went
to the side of the grave that he had asked me concerning, kneeled there,
laid two hands above it, and said,--

"Letty was right, Miss Anna. God has made you well,--made you after the
similitude of her who sleeps underneath this sod. Will you forgive my
rudeness?"

And he looked down as I had done, ere he came, into the tangled, matted
fibres, then out into the great all-where of air, as if some mysterious
presence encompassed him.

Very lowly I said,--

"Forgiveness is of God;" and I remembered the vision that came in my
dream. The little voice that steals into hearts crowded with emotions,
and tells tiny nerves of wish which way to fly, went whispering through
the niches of my mind, "Tell the dream."

Mr. Axtell went back to his monumental resting-place. I said,--

"I have had a wonderful dream to-day;" and I began to tell the opening
thereof.

The first sentence was not told when I stopped, suddenly. I could not go
on. He asked me, "Why?" I only re-uttered what I felt, that I could not
tell it.

"Oh! I have had a dream," he said,--"one that for eighteen years has
been hung above my days and woven into my nights,--a great, hopeless
woof of doom. I have tried to broider it with gold, I have tried to hang
silver-bells upon the drooping corners thereof. I have tried to fold it
about me and wear it, as other men wear sorrows, for the sun of heaven
and the warmth of society to draw the wrinkled creases out. I have
striven to fold it up, and lay it by in the arbor-vitae chest of memory,
with myrrh and camphor, but it will not be exorcised. No, no! it hangs
firm as granite, stiff as the axis of the sun, unapproachable as the
aurora of the North. Miss Percival, could you wear such a vestment in
the march of life?"

"Your dream is too mystical; will you tell me what it has done for you?
As yet, I only know what you have not done with it."

"What it has done for me?"--and he went slowly on, thinking half aloud,
as if the idea were occurring for the first time.

"It touched me one soft summer day, before the earth became mildewed and
famine-stricken. I was a proud, wilful Axtell boy; all the family traits
were written with a white-hot pen on me. My will, my great high will,
went ringing chimes of what I would do through the house where I was
born, where my mother has just died, and I swung this right arm forth
into the air of existence, and said, 'I will do what I will; men shall
say I am a master in the land.'

"My father sent me away from home for education. I walked with intrepid
mind through the course where others halted, weary, overladen, unfit for
burden.

"To gain the valedictory oration was one goal that I had said I would
attain to. I did. That was nineteen years ago. I came home in the soft,
hot, August-time. It was the close of the month. The moon was at its
highest flood of light. I was at the highest tide of will-might. That
night, if any one had told me I could not do that which I had a wish to
accomplish, I would have made my desire triumphant, or death would have
been my only conqueror. Oh! it is dreadful to have such a nature handed
down from the dark past, and thrust into one's life, to be battled with,
to be hewn down at last, unless the lightning of God's wrath cleaves
into the spirit and wakes up the volcano, which forever after emits only
fire and sulphur. There's yet one way more, after the lightning-stroke
comes,--something unutterable, something that canopies the soul with
doom, and forever the spirit tries to raise its wings and fly away, but
every uplifting strikes fire, until, singed, scorched, burnt, wings grow
useless, and droop down, never more to be uplifted."

Mr. Axtell drooped his arms, as if typical of the wings he had
described. Borne away by the excitement of his words, he stood straight
up against the far-away sky, with the verdure of Norway-evergreens
soothingly waving their green around him. There was a magnificence of
mien in the man, that made my spirit say--

"The Deity made that man for great deeds."

He glanced down at the grave once more, and resumed:--

"I came home that August night. The prairie of Time rolled out limitless
before my imagination. I built pyramids of fame; I laid the foundation
of Babel once more, in my heart,--for I said, 'My name shall touch the
stars,--my name! Abraham Axtell!' It is only written in earth, ground to
powder, to-day."

"An atom of earth's powder may be a star to eyes vast enough to see the
fulness that dwells therein, until to angelic vision our planet stands
out a universe of starry suns, each particle of dust luminous with
eternities of limitless space between," I said, as he, pausing, stooped,
and stirred the crisp grass, to outline his name there.

"All things are possible," he murmured, "but the rending of my mantle of
doom."

He looked from the tracing of his name to the west.

"The sun is going down once more," he said, and bowed his head, as one
does, waiting for pastoral benediction. His eyes were fixed now, as I
had seen his sister's held, but his lips poured out words.

"The moonlight sheened the earth, hot and heavy and still, that night.
My father, mother, and Lettie were in the home where you have seen
sorrow come. Up from the sea came the low, hollow boom of surges rising
over the crust of land.

"'To the sea, to the sea, let us go!' I cried; 'it is the very night to
tread the hall of moonbeams that leads to palace of pearls!'

"My mother was weary; she would have stayed at home, but I was her pearl
of price; she forgot herself. You know the stream that comes down from
the mountain and empties into the ocean. It was in that stream that
my boat floated, and a long walk away. Lettie left us. Just after we
started, I missed her, and asked where she had gone.

"'You'll see soon,' replied my mother; and even as I looked back, I
saw Lettie following, with a shadow other than her own falling on the
midsummer grass. She did not hasten; she did not seek to come up with
us. My mother was walking beside me.

"Thus we came to the river, at the place where it wanders out into the
ocean. I saw my boat, my River-Ribbon, floating its cable-length, but
never more, and undulating to the throbs of tide that pulsated along
the blue vein of water, heralding the motion of the heart outside. We
stopped there. The moon was set in the firmament high and fast, as when
it was made to rule the night. The hall of light, lit up along the
twinkling way of waters, looked shining and beckoning in its wavy ways
of grace, a very home for the restless spirit. I wanted to thread its
labyrinth of sparkles; I wanted to cool my wings of desire in its
phosphorescent dew. I said,--

"'I am going out upon the sea.'

"My mother seemed troubled.

"' Abraham, the boat is unsafe; the water comes through. See! it is half
full now'; and she pointed to where it lay in the stream, lined with a
mimic portraiture of the endless corridor of moonlight that went playing
across the bit of water it held.

"'This is childish, this is folly,' I thought, 'to be stayed on such a
_spirit_ mission by a few cups of water in a boat! What shall I ever
accomplish in life, if I yield thus?--and without waiting to more than
half hear, certainly not to obey, my father's stern 'Stay on shore,
Abraham,' I went down the bank, stepped into a bit of a bark, and pushed
it into the stream, where my boat was now rocking on the strengthened
flow of ocean's rise.

"I came to the boat, bailed out the water with a tin cup that lay
floating inside, and calling back to land, 'Go home without me; do
not wait,' I took the oars, and in my River-Ribbon, set free from its
anchorage, I commenced rowing against the tide. I looked back to the
bank I was fast leaving. I saw figures standing there.

"'They'll go home soon,' I said, and I turned my eyes steadfastly toward
the sheeny track, all crimpled and curled with fibrous net-work, and
rowed on.

"It was a glorious night,--a night when one toss of a mermaid's hair,
made visible above the waters, as she flew along the track I was
pursuing, would have been worth a life of rowing against this incoming
tide.

"You have never tried to row, Miss Anna. You don't know how hard it is
to push a boat out of a river when the sea sends up full veins to course
the strong arms she reaches up into the land."

For one moment, as he addressed me, his eyes lost their rapt look; they
went back to it, and he to his story.

"I saw the fin of a shark dancing in the waves. Sharks were nothing
for me. I did not look down into my boat. No, men never do; they look
_beyond where they are_. They're a sorry race, Miss Anna.

"The shark went down after some bit of prey more delicious than I. My
will would have been hard for him to manage. I forgot the shark. I
forgot the figures standing, waiting on the shore that I had left, ere
Lettie and the shadow that walked with her, whatever it was, had come to
it. I forgot everything but the phosphorescent dew that would cool my
spirit, athirst for what I knew not, ravenous for refreshment, searching
for manna where it never grew. The plaudits of yesterday were ringing in
my ears, the wavelets danced to their music, my oars kept time to the
vanity measure of my beating mind. Still I was not content. I wanted
something more. A faded flower, an althea-bud, was still pendent from my
coat. I had taken it out from the mass of flowers with which I had been
honored. I noticed it now. The moon dewed it over with its yellowness.
'An offering to the sea-nymphs!' I said, and I cast it forth into the
wide field. It did not go down, as I had fancied it would. No, it went
on, whither the movement of the ceaseless dance of motion carried it. I
leaned upon my oars and watched it until it went out of the illuminated
track. I was now in the bay, outside the river. I looked once more
shoreward. I had threaded the curve of the stream, and could not see
around the point. No living human thing was in sight. I was alone with
Nature in the night, when she looks down glories, and spreads out fields
where we long to walk, and our footsteps are fast in clay. I was not far
from shore; it lay dark behind me; it was only before that I could see.
As I paused in my rowing to watch the althea-bud set afloat, I heard a
tiny splash in the waters.

"'A school of fish flashing up a moment,' I thought, and did not further
heed it."

The man looked as if he were now out at sea. He turned his head the
least bit: the effect against the sky was fine. He had an attitude of
watching and listening.

"I saw an object before me moving on the waters. I looked down. The
water was rising in my own boat. I could not heed it just now.

"'In a moment,' I thought, 'I would stop to bail it out.'

"It was a boat that I saw. It moved on so swiftly,--the chime of the
oars, tiny oars they were, was so sweetly, softly musical, the very
drippling drops fell so like globules of silver, that I forgot my
mission. I held my oars and waited. At last--how long it seemed!--I saw
the boat come into the bridge of light. I saw fair, golden hair let
loose to the sea-breezes that began to blow. I saw two hands striving
with the oars. I saw the owner of the hair and of the hands, a young
girl, sitting in that boat, coming right across the way where I ought
to be going. "'Does she mean to stay me?' I said, and even then my will
rose up.

"I bent to the oars; but whilst I had watched her, my boat had been
rapidly filling. I was forced to stay. My feet were already in the
waves. Right across my pathway she came, close up to my filling boat.

"Her eyes were in the shadow, the moon being behind, but her voice rang
out these words:--

"'Mr. Axtell, you're committing a great sin. You're putting your own
life in peril. You're killing your mother. I have come to stay you. Will
you come on shore?'

"I only looked at her. When I found voice, it was to ask,--

"'Who are you?'

"'Who I am doesn't matter now. Drowning men mustn't ask questions'; and,
putting one oar within my boat, now more than half filled, she drew her
own to its side, and said,--"'Come in.'

"'Conquered by a woman,' I thought. 'Never!'--and I began to search for
the cup, that I might give back to the sea its intruding contents.

"I had left it in the other boat.

"'Conquered by thine own sin,' said the young girl, still holding fast
to my boat.

"'Not so easily, fairy, or whoe'er thou art,' I said; for I saw that her
boat was well furnished with both bailing-bowl and sponge, and I reached
out for them, saying, 'I'm going on the track, farther out.'

"She divined my intent, and quick as was my thought were her two hands;
she cast both bowl and sponge into the sea.

"'Mr. Axtell,' she said; 'there's a power in the world greater than your
own. The sooner you yield, the less you'll feel the thorns. Your mother,
on the shore, is suffering agonies for you. Will you come into this
boat, now?'

"The boats had floated around a little, and had changed places. I looked
into her eyes; there was nothing there that said, 'I'm trying to conquer
you.' There was something in them that I had never seen made visible on
earth before,--something radiant, with a might of right, that made me
yield. She saw that I was coming. I lifted my feet out of the inches of
water that had nearly filled it, put my oars across her tiny boat, and,
leaving my own River-Ribbon to its fate, I entered that wherein my
preserver had come out. I took the oars from her passive hands; she went
to the front of the boat and left me master of the small ship. I turned
its prow homeward. My preserver sat motionless, her eyes in the moon,
for aught of notice she took of me. I was going toward the river; she
bade me keep to the bay-shore, at the right. I obeyed. No more words
were spoken until we were almost to land. I saw a little bulb afloat.
The boat went near. I put out my oar and drew it in. It was the
althea-bud that I had offered to the sea-nymphs.

"'The mermaids refuse my offering,' I said; 'will you accept it?'--and
I handed it, dripping with salt-water, to the fairy who sat so silently
before me.

"She took it, pointed to a little sheltered cove between two outstanding
ledges of rock, and said,--

"'This is boatie's home,--see if you can guide her safely in.'

"The keel grated on the gravelly beach, the boat struck home. The young
girl did not wait for me, she landed first, and, handing me a tiny key,
said,--

"'Draw my boat up out of reach of the tide, make it fast, please,'--and
she sped away into the dreamy darkness of the land, whose shadows the
moon did not yet reach, leaving me alone on the shore.

"I obeyed her orders implicitly, and then followed. It was not far from
this sheltered cove that I met those with whom I had come. My mother was
sitting upon one of the sea-shore rocks, passive, but stony. The young
girl had just been speaking to her, she must have been saying that 'I
was come back,' but my mother had not heeded. It was only in sight that
her reason came, but, oh! such a deluge of gladness came to her when she
saw me!

"'I was dying,' she said; 'you've come back to save me, Abraham.'

"My father did not speak then, he lifted my mother from off the stone,
and together we three walked home. Lettie lingered, the shadow with her.
Was that the young girl? I could not quite discern."

Mr. Axtell stopped in his narration, walked out of the village of Dead
Percivals, and to his mother's new-made grave. He came back soon.

"Miss Percival," he said, "two days ago you said, 'it was the strangest
thing that ever you saw man do, to dig his mother's grave.' It was a
work begun long ago; the first stroke was that August night; it is
nearly nineteen years ago. What do you think of it now?"

"As I thought then, Mr. Axtell."

He stood near me now. He went on.

"That young girl saved my life that night, Miss Percival. Ere we reached
home, a violent, sudden thunder-storm came down, with wind and rain, and
terrible strokes of lightning. We took shelter in another house than
home. Lettie and my preserver followed."

Another long pause came, a gathering together of the forces of his
nature, typical of the still hotness of the August night of which he
spoke, and after the ominous rest he emitted ponderous words. They came
like crackles of rattling electricity. I could taste it.

"Miss Percival, look at me one moment."

I obeyed.

"Do I look like a murderer?"

"I don't know."

"Don't turn your eyes away; do you know what certain words in this world
mean?"

"Signal one, and I will answer."

He looked so leonic that I felt the least bit in the world like running
away, but decided to stay, as he was just within my pathway of escape.

"Do you know what it is, what it means, when a human soul calls out from
its highest heights to another mortal, 'Thou art mine'?"

I do not think he expected an answer, but I answered a round, full,
truthful, "No."

"Then let it be the theme of thanksgiving," he said. "That fair young
girl is here now. I feel her sacred presence. She does not save me from
my imperious will.

"Do you know, Miss Percival," he suddenly resumed, "do you know that you
are here with Abraham Axtell, a man who has destroyed two lives: one
slowly, surely, through years of suffering; the other, oh! the other--by
a flash from God's wrath, and for eighteen years my soul has cried out
to her, 'Thou art mine,' and yet there is no response on earth, there
can be none? Would you know the name of my preserver that night,
come,"--and, bending down, he offered his hand to assist me in rising.

I had no faith in this man's murderousness, whatever he might have done.
He led me around to the head-stone of the grave which he had asked my
knowledge of. Before I could see, he passed his hand across my eyes: how
cold it was!

"When you see the name recorded here," he said, "you will know who saved
me that August night, whom my terrible will destroyed, drinking her
young life up in one fell cup."

His hand was withdrawn for one moment; my sight was blinded with the
cold pressure on my eyes; then I read,--

  MARY,
  DAUGHTER OF
  JULIUS AND MARY PERCIVAL,

  DIED
  AUGUST 30th, 1843,
  AGED
  17 YEARS.

"My sister," I said

"Your sister, whom I killed."

"Ere I was old enough to know her."

"Have you one drop of mercy for him who destroyed your sister?" he
asked,--and his haughty will was suffused in pleading.

I thought of the third figure in the celestial picture, as it gazed upon
the outstretched hand, and I said,--

"God hath not made me your judge; why should I refuse mercy?"

A flash of intuition came. The young girl, whose portrait was in the
house of the Axtells, whose face had been next my mother's, who asked me
to do something for her on the earth,--could they all be manifestations
of Mary?

"Who painted the portrait in your house?" I asked.

"My will," he said; "I am no artist."

"Is it like Mary?"

"Yes."

"Then I have this day seen her."

He looked up, great tears falling from his eyes, and asked,--

"Where?"

I took him to the gallery of the clouds, and showed him my vision, and
repeated the words spoken to me up there, the words for him only,--the
others were full of mystery still. He held seemingly no part therein.

"Will a murderer's prayer add one ray of joy to the angel who has come
out on the sea to save me,--me, twice saved, oh! why?"--and Mr. Axtell
laid his hand upon my head in blessing.

"Twice saved," I said, "that the third salvation may be Christ's."

Solemnly came the "Amen" from his lips, tremulous as the bridge of light
he had once passed over.

"Good-bye, Mr. Axtell; I shall fulfil Mary's wish for you, if you will
let me;" and I offered him my hand for this second parting: the first
had been when he went out alone to his mother's burial.

He looked at it, as he then had done, uncomprehending, and said only,--

"Will I let you?"

He gathered up the cushion, and carried it to the church. I closed the
gate that shut in this silent city, and went to the parsonage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun had gone down,--the night was coming on. I found Aaron pacing
the verandah with impatient steps. He asked where I had been. I told
him.

"It is very well that you are going so soon," he said,--"you are getting
decidedly ghostly. Will you take a walk with me?"

I was thankful for the occasion. As might have been expected, Aaron
chose the way that led to the solemn old house. I was amused.

"Where are you going?" I questioned.

"To inquire after our early-morning patient," he said.

"And not to see Mrs. Aaron Wilton?"

Aaron looked the least mite retributive, as he said,--

"Anna, there are mysteries in life."

"As, why Aaron was chosen before Moses," I could not help suggesting.
Sophie had had an opportunity of being Mrs. Moses, instead of Mrs.
Aaron.

"Sophie's wise; you are not, Anna, I fear."

"Your fear may be the beginning of my wisdom, Aaron: I hope so."

With the exception of a return to the subject on which Aaron had
questioned me at breakfast, and on which he elicited no further
information from me, nothing of interest occurred until we were within
the place that held Sophie's pearly self.

She had been a shower of sunshine, letting fall gold and silver drops
through all the house. I saw them, heard their sweet glade-like music
rippling everywhere, the moment that I went in.

Mr. Axtell was pacing the hall in the evening twilight, and the little
of lamp-lustre that was shed into it.

He looked passively calm, heroically enduring, as we went past him. From
his eyes came scintillations of a joy whose root is not in our planet.

He simply said,--

"Mrs. Wilton is with my sister; she will be glad to see you."

We went on. Sophie had made a very nest of repose in the sick-room. Miss
Axtell looked so comfortable, so untired of life, so changed from the
first glimpse I had had of her, when I thought her face might be such as
would be found under Dead-Sea waves. There was no more of the anxious
unrest. She spoke to Mr. Wilton, thanking him for the "good gift," she
named Sophie, that he had lent to her.

Miss Lettie called me to her. She wished to say something to me only. I
bent my head to listen.

"I am ill," she said,--"better just now, but I feel that it will be
weeks before I shall leave this place; it is good for me to be here, but
this troubles me,--I don't like to think that I must take care of it;
will you guard it sacredly for me?--and the letter of last night, add it
to the others."

She gave me a small package, carefully closed, and I saw that it was
sealed.

From her manner, I fancied it was to be known to me alone, and,
concealing it, I said,--

"I will keep it securely for you."

Sophie came playfully up, and said,--

"Now, Anna, I'm empress here; no secret negotiations to overthrow my
power."

"I'm just going to say good-bye to Miss Axtell," I said, "for I am going
home to-morrow;" and I told her of the letter from father, that I had
received.

Sophie got up a charming storm of regret and wrath, neither at my father
for sending for me, nor at myself for going, but for the mysterious
third personality that created the need for my departure.

Miss Lettie seemed to regret my coming absence still more than Sophie.

"I wanted you so much," she said; "if I had only had you long ago, life
would have been changed," she whispered again, as Sophie turned to
listen to some pretty nonsense that the grave minister poured into her
ears through those windings of softly purplish hair.

"Will you make me one promise, only one?" said Miss Axtell.

I hesitated,--for promises are my religious fear, I do not like to
make promises. They are like mile-stones to a thunder-storm. They note
distances when the spirit is anxious only to cycle time and space.

She looked so earnest, so persuasive, that I yielded, and said that
"consistency should be my only requirement."

"It is not so immensely inconsistent, my Anemone; it is only that I want
you to come back again. Two weeks will satisfy your father. Will you
come to me on the twenty-fifth of March?"

"What for?" with my awkward persistency in questioning, I asked.

"Why, because I want to see you,--I wish you to write a letter for
me,--and more than all, I want an advocate."

I, smiling at the triplet of occasions, promised to come, if consistent.

Sophie was going home. She came up to drop a few last cheery words, to
fall into the coming hours of night.

"You see how you've spoiled me by kindness, Mrs. Wilton," Miss Lettie
said. "I presume still further: I would like to see old Chloe; it is a
long, long time since I've seen her. Would you let her come?" Sophie
said that "it would renew Chloe's youth; she certainly would send her."

Good-byes were spoken, and we went down. Mr. Axtell was still treading
the hall below. He thanked Sophie for her kindness to Miss Lettie, shook
hands genially with Aaron, looked at me, and we were gone.

I carried Miss Lettie's message to Chloe. She lifted up those great
African orbs of hers as she might have done to the Mountains of the Moon
in her native land.

"Now the heavens be praised!" said the honest soul,--"what for can that
icy lady want to see old Chloe?"

I had carried the message under cover of one from my own heart. I knew
that Chloe had lived with my mother until she died. I knew that she must
know something regarding Mary, my sister, to whom, in all my life, I had
scarcely given one thought, who died ere I was wise enough to know her.
And so I began by asking,--

"Am I like my sister who died, Chloe?"

She brought back her eyes from gazing upon the lunar mountains.

"I don't know's you are 'xactly; but somehow you _did_ look like her,
up-stairs to-day, when you had them white things tied on your head."

"Were you here when she died?" I asked.

"Oh, yes!"--old Chloe closed her eyes,--"it is one of the blessed things
Chloe's Lord will let her 'member, up there;" and Chloe wiped her eyes,
_in memoriam_.

"I don't remember her," I said.

"No, how should you? you were wee little then."

"What made her die, Chloe?"

"I reckon 't was because the angels wanted her more 'n me, Miss Anna."

"Was she sick, Chloe?"

"How queer you questions, Miss Anna! Of course she was sick; she drooped
in the August heat; they didn't think she was very sick; the master gave
her some medicine one night, and left her sleeping, quiet as a lamb, and
before morning came she went to heaven."

"Who was the master, Chloe?"

"Why, you _is_ getting stupid-like, child! Honey darling, don't you
know that Master Percival, your father, was my master ever so many
years?"--and she began notating them upon her fingers.

I interrupted the mathematical calculation by telling Chloe that three
people were waiting for their tea.

"Two of 'em is my dear childers," said Chloe,--who never would accept
Aaron, even with all his goodness, into her heart; and she moved about
with accelerated velocity in her daily orbit.

What could Mr. Axtell have meant by saying that he had killed Mary,
who, Chloe had assured me, died peaceably in her father's house? After
disturbing the equilibrium of thought-realm, and nearly giving my mind a
new axis of revolution, I decided to think no more of it. I could
not, would not, believe that Abraham Axtell had gone up any Moriah of
sacrifice, and been permitted to let fall the knife upon his victim. His
life must have been a dream, an illusion; he only wanted awakening to
existence. And the memory of my Sabbath-morning's vision dwelt with me,
and the voice that speaketh, filling the soul "as a sea-shell is with
murmuring," said, "Your finger will awaken him." And I looked down at
my two passive hands, and asked, "Which one of them?" And the murmuring
voice startled me with the answer, "Two are required,--one of
reconciliation, the other of forgiveness." Whereupon I lifted up the ten
that Nature gave, and said, "Take them all, if need be."----

"Tea is ready," said Aaron, peeping in, his face alive with satisfied
muscles, playing too merry a tune of joy, I thought, for a grave
minister.

"Sophie's a magician," I thought for the thousandth time, as, for the
millionth, Aaron looked at her sitting so demurely regal at his spread
table.

"What would these two good people say," I asked myself, in thinking,
"if they knew all that I have learned in my visit, not yet a week
long?"--and I ran up and down in the scale of semibreves and minims that
I had heard, with the one long, sweet trill transfusing life on earth
into heavenly existence, and I felt very wingy, very much as if I could
take up the tower, standing high and square out there, and carry it,
"like Loretto's chapel, through the air to the green land," where my
spirit would go singing evermore. I could not tell what my joy was like:
not unto anything that I had seen upon the earth; under the earth I had
not yet been; only once above it, and they were calmly celestial there.
I was turbulently joyous, and so I winged a little while around Sophie
and Aaron, hummed a good-night in Chloe's ears, and found that the canny
soul was luxuriating in the idea that the icy lady was to be thawed into
the acceptance of sundry confections which she was basketing to carry
with her when I went out.

"Call me early," I said; "you know I leave at seven o'clock."

"I shall be up ever so early, Miss Anna; never fear for Chloe's sleeping
late to-morrow in the morning; you get ever so much,--'nuff for Chloe
and you too; good-night, honey!"--and Chloe went on her mission, whilst
Aloes and Honey went up-stairs, past Aaron's study, and into a room
where the mysterious art of packing must be practised for a little.

I thought of the "breadths of silver and skirts of gold" that I had seen
the Day pack away; and, inspired with the thought, fell to folding less
amberous raiment, until, my duty done, I pressed the cover down, and
locked my treasures in, for the journey of the morrow. Then I took out
my sacred gift to guard, and, laying it before me, looked at it. It was
of dimensions scarcely larger than the moon,--that is, extremely variant
and uncertain: to one, a planet, larger than Jupiter, moons and all; to
another, scarcely more than a bridal ring. So my packet was of uncertain
size: _undoubtedly_ the tower was packed away in it, Herbert too,--and I
couldn't help agreeing with my thought, and confessing that this was a
better form for conveyance than that I so lately had planned; so I put
it safely away, with myself, until the day should come. The day-star had
arisen in my heart. Would it ever go down? Not whilst He who holdeth the
earth in the hollow of His hand hath me there too. Reaching out, once
more, for the strong protective fibres that had so blessed me, I
wandered forth with it into the land whose mural heights are onychites
and mocha-stones of mossy mystery.

How long I might have lingered there I know not,--so delicious was the
fragrance and so fair the flowers,--had not Chloe's voice broken the
mocha-stones, scattering the mosses like autumn-leaves.

"Honey, I thought I'd waken ye,--the day is just cracking," said Chloe,
at the door, and she asked me to open it one moment.

When I had done so, there she stood, just as I had seen her when I bade
her good-night,--save that her basket was void of contents.

"Master Abraham didn't know you was going home," Chloe said, "or he'd
have told you good-bye; and I guesses he sent what he didn't tell, for
he asked me to give you this."

When Chloe was gone, I opened the small package. It was a pretty casket,
made of the margarite of the sea. Within it lay a faded, fallen,
fragmentary thing. At first, I knew not what it could be. It was the
althea-bud that grew in the summer-time of eighteen years ago, that
had been Mary's,--and my heart beat fast as I looked upon the silent
voicefulness that spake up to me, and said, "To you, who have restored
him to himself, he offers the same tribute;" and I lifted up the
iridescent, flashing cradle of margarite, and reverently touched
the ashes of althea it held with my lips. Afterwards they were
salt,--whether with the saltness of the sea the bud had been baptized
in, or of the tears that I let fall, I knew not.

I folded up my good-bye from Mr. Axtell in the same precious package
that was his sister's, and, side by side, the two journeyed on with me.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was seven of the clock on Monday morning when she who said the
naughty words, and the grave minister, came out to say farewell to me.
The day's great round was nearly done ere I met my father's flowery
welcome.

"My Myrtle-Vine, I knew you'd come," said Dr. Percival; and his long
gray hair floated out to reach me in, and his eyes, wherein all love
burned iridescent, drew me toward his heart.

My father put his arms around me, and said the sweetest words of welcome
that ever are spoken.

"How I've missed you, Anna!" as he drew me toward his large arm-chair,
and folded me, his latest child, to his heart.

As thus we were sitting in the silence of the heart that needs no
language, little Jeffy, my ebony-beauty boy, darted his black head
in, and reposing it for one instant against the scarcely lighter-hued
mahogany of the door, jingled out, in shells of sound,--

"He's mighty fur'ous. It's real fun. I guess you'd better come right up,
Dr. Percival;" and the ebon head darted off, without one word for me.

Why was it that this little omission of Jeffy's, the African boy, should
create a vacancy? Oh! it is because Nature made me so exacting. I wanted
everybody to welcome me.

I lifted my head from my father's shoulder, and asked, in some dismay,--

"What is it, father?"

"I've gotten myself in trouble, Anna. I've let chaos into my house. I
wanted you to help me."

"What is it? what has happened?" I hastened to inquire.

"Only a hospital patient that I was foolish enough to bring away. I
heartily wish that he was back again," said my father; and he put me
from him to go, in obedience to the summons.

I was about to follow him, but he waved me back as I went into the hall,
and he went on. I heard the ring of a low, frenzied laugh, as I began
unwrapping from my journey. My casket of treasures I had committed to
bands for keeping. Now I laid it down, and, folding up my protective
robes, I had just gone to try my father's easy-chair, alone, when
Jeffy's ebon head struck in again.

"I didn't see ye afore, Miss Anna. I'so mighty glad you've come;" and
Jeffy atoned for his former omission by his present joy.

"How is he?" I questioned Jeffy, as if I knew all the antecedents of the
case perfectly.

"Oh, he's jolly to-night. I think Master Percival might have let me stay
to see the fun;" and Jeffy's eyes rolled to and fro in their orbits, as
if anxious to strike against some wandering comet.

"Is tea over?" I asked.

"No, miss. Master said he'd wait for you. I'll go and tell that you're
here;" and Jeffy took himself off, eager for action.

He was not long gone.

"It's all ready, waiting a bit for master. He can't come down just this
minute," said Jeffy. "Look a here, Miss Anna,--isn't it vastly funny
master's bringing a crazy man here? They say down in the kitchen, that
as how it wouldn't 'a' been, if you'd been home. It's real good, though.
It's the splendidest thing that's happened. Wait till you see him
perform. Ask him to sing. It's frolicky to hear him."

The boy went on, and I did not stop him. I was as anxious for
information as he to impart it. When he paused for breath, in the width
of detail that he furnished, I asked,--

"When was this stranger brought here?"

"Three days ago, Miss Anna, I hope he'll stay forever and ever;" and
Jeffy darted off at a mellifluous sound that dropped down from above.

"There! he has thrown the poker at the mirror again, I do believe," said
another voice in the hall, and I recognized the housekeeper.

Staid Mrs. Ordilinier came in to greet me, with the uniform greeting of
her lifetime. I verily believe that she has but one way of receiving.
Electricity and bread-and-butter would meet the same recognitory
reception.

"Did you hear that noise, Miss Anna?" she said, as another sound came,
that was vastly like the shivering of glass.

"What was it, Mrs. Ordilinier?"

I gave her the question to gain information. I sought it,--but she, not
disposed to gratify me at the moment, slowly ascended to ascertain the
state of mirrors above. She met my father's silver hairs coming down. He
did not say one word to her. He met me in the hall, took me back to the
room, and, reseating me in my olden place, put his hand upon my head,
and said,--

"This must help me, Anna."

"It will, papa; what is it?"

"I've a crazy man up-stairs. He can't do very much harm, for he is badly
injured."

"How?" I asked.

"Railroad accident. Four days ago, locomotive and two passenger-cars off
the track, down forty feet upon the rocks and stones, and all there was
of a river," my father replied, with evident regret that the company had
been so unfortunate, as well as his individual self.

"Who is it?" was my next question.

"Don't know, darling; haven't the least idea. He has the softest brown,
curling hair of his own, with a wig over it. Can't find out his name, or
anything about him. I like him, though, Anna. He's like somebody! used
to know. I brought him here from the hospital, several days ago, but he
hasn't given me much peace since, and the people down below think I'm as
crazy as he; but I cannot help it; I will not turn him out now."

"Of course you wouldn't, father. We'll manage him superbly. I'll chain
him for you."

My father rose up, comforted by my words, and said "it was time for
tea." We went down. I was the Sophie of Aaron's home, at my father's
table.

"Papa," I said, as if introducing the most ordinary topic of
conversation, "what was the occasion of sister Mary's death? She was
only seventeen. How young to die!"

My father sighed, and said,--

"Yes, it was young. She had fever, Anna. One of those long, low fevers
that mislead one. I did not think she would die."

"Was Mary engaged to be married, father?"

Dr. Percival looked up at his daughter Anna with the look that says,
"You're growing old," although she was twenty-three, and never had gone
so far in life as his eldest daughter at seventeen.

"She was, Anna."

"To whom, father?"

"Perhaps you've seen him, Anna. I hear that he is come home. His name is
Axtell,--Abraham Axtell."

I told my father of the first words,--where we had found him, tolling
the bell,--and of his mother's death, and his sister's illness.

"Incomprehensible people!" was my father's sole ejaculation, as he went
to look after the deranged patient.

I occupied myself for an hour in picking up the reins of government that
I had thrown down when I went to Redleaf. Looking into "our room,"
and not finding father there, I went on, up to my own room. A warm,
welcoming fire burned within the grate. I thought, "How good father is
to think for me!" and with the thought there entered in another. It came
in the sudden consciousness that the room was prepared for some one else
than me. I glanced about it, and saw the strange, wild man, with eyes
all aglow, looking at me from out the depths of my wonted place of rest.
No one else was in the room. I turned around to leave, but, dropping my
precious box of margarite, I stooped to pick it up.

"It is a good harbor to sail into. I'm content," said the voice from the
corner, before I could escape.

I met father coming in.

"Why, how is this?" he said to me.

"You didn't tell me you had given up my room," I said.

"Didn't I? Well, I forgot. We couldn't take him higher."

"Is he so much hurt?" I asked.

"Three broken bones," my father replied. "It will be weeks, it may be
months, before he will be well;" and he sighed hopelessly at the good
deed, which, being done, pressed so heavily. "Don't look so sadly about
it, Myrtle-Vine," he added; "take my room, if you like."

"That was not my thought," I said. "I do not mind the change of room."

The visit to Redleaf, which I had made to dawn in my horizon, was
eclipsed by three broken bones, that suddenly undermined the arch of
consistency.

Soothingly came the words that were spoken unto me. My father was
all-willing to relinquish his cherished room,--his for sixteen years,
and opening into that mysterious other room,--to give it up to me, his
Myrtle-Vine; and a momentary pang that any interest in existence should
be, except as circling around him, flew across the future, "the science
whereof is to man but what the shadow of the wind might be,"--and I
looked up into his eyes, and, twining his long white hair around my
fingers, for a moment felt that forever and forever he should be the
supreme object of earthly devotion. In my wish to evince the sentiment
in action, I requested permission to assist in the care of the hospital
patient.

"Oh, no, Anna! he is too wild now. When the excitement of the fever is
gone, then will be your time."

Another of those many-toned, circling peals of laughter came from my
room. My father went in. I went past the place that mortal eyes were not
permitted to fathom, and, for the first time in my life, was curious to
know its contents, and why I had never seen the interior thereof, I had
grown up with the mystery, until I had accepted it, unquestioning, as a
thing not for my view, and therefore out of recognition. It was as far
away from me as the open sea of the North, and might contain the mortal
remains of all the navigators of Hope that ever had wandered into the
sea of Time for him who so holily guarded it.

"One far-away Indian-summery day, four years agone," "while yet the day
was young," Dr. Percival, my father, had led an azure-eyed maiden in
through the mysterious entrance, and shown unto her the veiled temple,
its altar and its shrine, and she had come thence with the dew of
feeling in her eyes and a purple haze around her brow, which she has
worn there until it has tangled its pansy-web into an abiding-place,
unto such time as the light is shut out forever, or the waves from the
silver sea curl their mist up thither. I had much marvel then concerning
the hidden mysteries; but Sophie so soon thereafter spake the naughty "I
will," that the silent room forgot to speak to me. I have never heard
sound thence since that morning-time.

"Why does not my father take me in? Am I not his child, even as Sophie?"

I asked these questions of Anna Percival, the while she stood at an
upper window, and looked out over New York's surging lines of life.
The roar of rolling wheels came muffled by distance and the shore of
dwelling-places over which I looked. I counted the church-spires that
threaded the vault of night a little of the upward way. How angels, that
have lived forever in heaven, and souls just free from material things,
must reach down to touch these towering masts, that tell which way the
sails of spirit bend! These city churches, dedicated with solemn service
unto the worship of the great I AM, the Lord God of Adam, the Jehovah
Jireh of Israelites, the Holy Redeemer of Christians,--may the Lord of
heaven and earth bless them _every one_! I looked forth upon them with
tears. There never comes a time, in the busiest hurry of human ways,
that I do not sprinkle a drop of love upon the steps as I pass,--that I
do not wind a tendril of holy feeling up to height of tower or summit of
spire for the great winds to waft onward and upward. God pity the heart
that does not involuntary reverence to God's templed places, made sacred
a thousand fold by every penitential tear, by every throb of devotion,
by every aspiration after the divine existence, from which let down a
little while, we wander, for what we know not! God doth not tell, save
that it is to "love first Him, Sole and Individual," and then the
fragments, the crumbs of Divinity that dwell in Man.

I had not lighted the gas. The street-lamps sent up their rays, making
the room semi-lucent. I took out my tower-key. What matter, if I held
the cold iron thereof to my lips awhile? there was no frost in the March
air then. I sent my restless fingers in and out of the wards, prisoning
them often therein. As thus I stood, with cheek pressed against the
windowpane, looking out upon the city, set into a rim of darkness, from
out of which it flashed its million rays, papa came up.

"I didn't say good-night," he said, coming in, and to the window where
I was. "But how is this, Anna? what has happened to my child? "--and he
pointed to shining drops that glistened on the window-glass.

They must have come from my eyes; I could not deny their authorship, and
so I confessed to tears of gladness at seeing him once more.

He looked fondly down at me through the dim light. I asked him after the
tenant of my premises. He shook his head as one does in great doubt,
said "life was uncertain," and repeated several other axioms, that were
quite apart from his original style, and excessively annoying to me.

"Papa," I said, "why not tell me truly? will this man recover?"

"'Man proposes, God disposes,' my child," he said.

"I don't dispute the general truth," I replied,--"but, particularly, is
this man's life in danger?"

He began to quote somebody's psalm or hymn about "fitful fevers and
fleeting shadows."

My father has a fine, rich, variant power of sound with which to charm
such as have ears to hear, and Anna Percival has been so endowed.
Therefore she listened and waited to the end. When it came, she looked
up into her father's face and said,--

"Papa, I am not a child, to be coaxed into forgetfulness; why will you
not trust me? I am older than Sophie was when you took her in where I
have not been; why will you not make me your friend?"--and some sudden
collision of watery powers among the window-drops, whether from
accretion or otherwise, sent a glistening rivulet down to the barrier of
the sash.

Papa folded his arms, and looked at me. I could not bear to be thus shut
out. I said so.

"Could you bear to be shut in?" he thought, and asked it.

"I think I could. I could bear anything that you gave me; I could keep
anything that you intrusted to my keeping."

Papa looked at me as one does at a cherished vine the outermost edges of
which are just frost-touched; then he folded me to his heart. I felt the
throbbings thereof, and mine began to regret that I had intruded into
the vestibule of his sacred temple; but a certain something went
whispering within me, "You can feed the sacred fire," and I whispered to
the whispering voice, and to my father's ear,--

"You'll take me in, won't you?"

"Come," was the only spoken word.

The room was not cheery; he felt it, and said,--

"You see what the effect is when my Myrtle-Vine is off my walls;" and he
tossed aside books and papers that had evidently been astray for days,
and lay now in his way.

Papa took a key (he wears it too, it seems: that is even more than I do
with my tower's) from a tiny chain of gold about his neck, and unlocked
the door connecting this silent room with his own. He went in, leaving
me outside. He lighted a candle and left it burning there. He came, took
my hand, and, with the leading whereby we guide a child, conducted me in
thither. Then he went out and left me standing, bewildered, there.

I had anticipated something wonderful. What was here? It was a silent
room. The carpet had a river-pattern meandering over its dark-blue
ground: it must have been years since a broom went over it. Strange
medley of furniture was here. I looked upon the walls. Pictures that
must have come from another race and generation hung there. There were
many of them. One side of the room held one only. It was a portrait. I
remembered the original in life. "My mother," I exclaimed. In the room's
centre, surrounded by various articles, was the very boat that I knew
Mary Percival had guided out to sea to save Abraham Axtell. Two tiny
oars lay across it. The paint was faded; the seams were open; it would
hold water no longer. A sense of worship filled me. I looked up at the
portrait. My mother smiled: or was it my fancy? Fancy undoubtedly; but
fancies give comfort sometimes. I looked again at the boat. On its
stern, in small, golden letters, was the name, "Blessing of the Bay,"
the very name given to the first boat built after the Mayflower's keel
touched America's shore. "The name was a good omen," I thought. An
armchair stood before the portrait. A shawl was spread over it. I lifted
up the fringe to see what the shawl covered. Papa had come in.

"Don't do that, Anna," he said.

"Is it any harm, papa?"

"Your mother died sitting in that chair; her hands spread the shawl over
it; it was the last work they did, Anna; it has never since been taken
off."

I dropped the fringe; my touch seemed sacrilegious.

Near the chair was a small cabinet; it looked like an altar, or would
have done so, had my father been a devotee to any religion requiring
visible sacrifice. He opened it.

"Come hither, Anna,"--and I went.

Long, luxuriant bands of softly purplish hair lay within, upon the place
of sacrifice.

"Sophie's is like this," I said.

"And Sophie wears one like unto this," said my father; and he took up
a circlet of shining gold that lay among the tresses. "Sophie's
marriage-ring was hallowed unto her. I gave it the morning she went out
from me." He uttered these words with slow reverence of voice.

Why did self come up?

"You gave Sophie _our_ mother's marriage-ring," I said, "and I"--

"Shall wear this," said my father. "I laid it here, with hers;" and he
gently lifted the sacred hair, and, freeing the ring, put it upon my
finger.

"This is not my marriage-day," I said. "Papa, I don't want it. Besides,
gentlemen don't wear marriage-rings: how came you to?"

"Perhaps I have not worn this one; but will you wear it to please me?"

"Why will it please you? It is not symbolical, is it?"

"It makes you doubly mine," he said; and he led me back to outside life,
with this strange sort of marriage-ring circling with its planet weight
around my finger.

Did my father mean to keep me forever? And with the question came an
answer that left sweet contentment in its pathway; it accorded with the
intent of my heart.

"Father, have you made me your friend?" I asked, in the room that was
terribly tossed, as I restored to place chairs that seemed to have been
in a deplorably long dance, and to have forgotten their home at its
close.

"You wear my ring, you have come into my orbit," he answered.

"That being true, I am as much interested in the flying comet in there
as you are,--for if it strikes you, it hurts me;" and I waited his
answer.

After a moment of pause, it came.

"My poor patient is very ill; his life will burn out, if the fever is
not stayed;" and as the frenzied laugh reached us, Dr. Percival forgot
my presence; he passed his hand slowly across his brow, as if to retouch
memory, and then taking down a volume, he began to read. I waited long.
At last he closed the book suddenly, said to himself, "I'll try it," and
in half a moment my father's white hairs were separated from me by the
impassable barrier of the sick-room.

I waited; he did not come. The chairs were not the only articles that
had lost the commodity of order in my absence. I went to the table upon
which were kept the papers, etc., that lingered there a little while,
and then were thought no longer of. Idly I turned them over. What a
chaos on a small scale! all the elements of literature were represented.
I listened for coming footsteps; none came. "I may as well arrange this
table," I thought, "as wait for the morrow;" and I made a beginning by
sweeping the chaos at once upon the carpet. Then slowly I began picking
them up, one by one, and appointing them stations. My task was nearly
done, when, in turning over some magazines, I came upon a pile of papers
that had been laid between the leaves of one, and ere I was aware of
their presence, they slid down and scattered. I remember having felt
a little surprise that my father should have left them there, but I
hastened to gather them together. The last one of the number, I noticed,
was torn; it had a foreign look. "Father has some new correspondent," I
thought, as I looked at the number of mail-marks upon it. "He doesn't
think much of it, though, or it would have received better treatment;"
and I took a second look at it. A something in the feel of the paper
seemed familiar. "It is good for nothing," I said aloud, and I tossed
it toward the grate, put the pile of papers where I had found them,
surveyed my work with satisfaction, and stood thinking whether or not I
should wait to see my father again--it was more than an hour since
he went up--to say good-night to me. "I will wait a half-hour; if he
doesn't come then, I'll go," I said to the housekeeper, who came to see
that all was right for the night, and to remind me that Redleaf had not
proved very advantageous to my complexion, and to recommend early hours
as a restorative.

In accordance with my promise, I drew a chair forward, placed my feet
upon the fender, and began to study the dying embers that were slowly
falling through the grate-bars. One, larger than usual, burned its way
down. It lighted up, for an instant, the bit of paper, that had not
fallen into the coals. Strange fancy it was that led me to imagine
that I saw a capital A, followed immediately by that unknown quantity
represented by x. I made an effort to gain it, scorched my face, and
burned my fingers; for I touched the grate, in rescuing that which I had
cast into the place of burning.

"This bit of paper, found in New York, had once been integral with that
I had found within the church-yard tower in Redleaf," some inner
voice assured me. "Yes, it is a part of it," I said, for I distinctly
remembered the fragment whose possession I had so rejoiced over. Some
one had written a letter to Miss Axtell; the envelope was torn,--one
part there, another here. The letter itself I had found in the gloom of
the passage-way; for it Miss Axtell had gone out to search, ill, and in
the night; what must its contents have been, to have been worthy of such
effort?--and for the time I quite forgot to connect this man, ill in my
father's house, with the Herbert whose far-out-at-sea voice I had heard
winding up at me through the very death-darkness of the tower. Suddenly
the consciousness scintillated in my soul, and wonderful it was; but the
picture of my dream came in with it, and I said again, "I am ready for
the work which is given me to do," and I waited for its coming till
I grew very weary, holding this fragment of envelope fast, as a ship
clings to its anchor in mild seas. I ventured to knock at the entrance
of my own room. All was silent within. I tried the second time. There
came no answer. I dared not venture on the conquering third.

       *       *       *       *       *


AT SYRACUSE.


  All day my mule with patient tread
  Had moved along the plain,
  Now o'er the lava's ashen bed,
  Now through the sprouting grain,
  Across the torrent's rocky lair,
  Beneath the aloe-hedge,
  Where yellow broom makes sweet the air,
  And waves the purple sedge.

  Lone were the hills, save where supine
  The dozing goatherd lay,
  Or, at a rude and broken shrine,
  The peasant knelt to pray;
  Or where athwart the distant blue
  Thin saffron clouds ascend,
  As Carbonari, hid from view,
  Their smouldering embers tend.

  Luxuriant vale or sterile reach,
  A mountain temple-crowned
  Or inland curve of glistening beach,
  The changeful scene surround;
  While scarlet poppies burning near,
  And citrons' emerald gleam,
  Make barren intervals appear
  Dim lapses of a dream.

  How meekly o'er the meadows gay
  The azure flax-blooms spread!
  What fragrance on the breeze of May
  The almond-blossoms shed!
  Wide-branching fig-trees deck the fields
  Or round the quarries cling,
  And cactus-stalks, with thorny shields,
  In wild contortions spring.

  Here groves of cork dusk shadows throw,
  There vine-leaves lightsome sway,
  While chestnut-plumes serenely glow
  Above the olives gray;
  Tall pines upon the sloping meads
  Their sylvan domes uprear,
  And rankly the papyrus-reeds
  Low cluster in the mere.

  And Syracuse with pensive mien,
  In solitary pride,
  Like an untamed, but throneless queen,
  Crouched by the lucent tide;
  With honeyed thyme still Hybla teemed,
  Its scent each zephyr bore,
  And Arethusa's fountain gleamed
  Pellucid as of yore.

  Methought, upstarting from his bath,
  Old Archimedes cried,
  "Eureka!" in my silent path,
  Whose echoes long replied;
  That Pythias, in the sunset-glow,
  Rushed by to Damon's arms,
  While from the Tyrant's Cave below
  Moaned impotent alarms.

  And where upon a sculptured stone
  The ruined arch beside,
  A hoary, bronzed, and wrinkled crone
  The twirling distaff plied,--
  Love with exalted Reason fraught
  In Plato's accents came,
  And Truth by Paul sublimely taught
  Relumed her virgin flame.

  The ancient sepulchres that rose
  Along the voiceless street
  Time's myriad vistas seemed to close
  And bid life's waves retreat,--
  As if intrusive footsteps stole
  Beyond their mortal sphere,
  And felt the awed and eager soul
  Immortal comrades near.

  The moss-grown ramparts loom in sight
  Like warders of the deep,
  Where, flushed with evening's amber light,
  The havened waters sleep;
  Unfurrowed by a Roman keel
  Or Carthaginian oar,
  The speared and burnished galleys now
  Their slumber break no more.

  But when the distant convent-bell,
  Ere Day's last smiles depart,
  With mellow cadence pleading fell
  Upon my brooding heart,--
  And Memory's phantoms thick and fast
  Their fond illusions bred,
  From peerless spirits of the past,
  And wrecks of ages fled,--

  Joy broke the spell; an emblem blest
  That lonely harbor cheered:
  As if to greet her pilgrim guest,
  My country's flag appeared!
  Its radiant folds auroral streamed
  Amid that haunted air,
  And every star prophetic beamed
  With Freedom's triumph there!

       *       *       *       *       *


METHODS OF STUDY IN NATURAL HISTORY.


All important changes in the social and political condition of man,
whether brought about by violent convulsions or effected gradually, are
at once recognized as eras in the history of humanity. But on the broad
high-road of civilization along which men are ever marching, they pass
by unnoticed the landmarks of intellectual progress, unless they chance
to have some direct bearing on what is called the practical side of
life. Such an era marked the early part of our own century; and though
at the time a thousand events seemed more full-freighted for the world
than the discovery of some old bones at the quarry of Montmartre, and
though many a man seemed greater in the estimation of the hour than the
professor at the Jardin des Plantes who strove to reconstruct these
fragments, yet the story that they told lighted up all the past, and
showed its true connection with the present. Cuvier, as one sees him in
a retrospective glance at the wonderful period in which he lived, and
which brought to the surface all its greatest elements,--one among a
throng of exceptional men, generals, soldiers, statesmen, as well as
men of commanding intellect in literary and scientific pursuits,--seems
always standing at the meeting-point between the past and present. His
gaze is ever fixed upon the path along which Creation has moved, and, as
he travels back, recovering step by step the road that has been lost to
man in apparently impenetrable darkness and mystery, the light brightens
and broadens before him, and seems to tempt him on into the dim regions
where the great mystery of Creation lies hidden.

Before the year 1800, men had never suspected that their home had been
tenanted in past times by a set of beings totally different from those
that inhabit it now; still farther was it from their thought to imagine
that creation after creation had followed each other in successive ages,
every one stamped with a character peculiarly its own. It was Cuvier
who, aroused to new labors by the hint he received from the bones
unearthed at Montmartre, to which all his vast knowledge of living
animals gave him no clue, established by means of most laborious
investigations the astounding conclusion, that, prior to the existence
of the animals and plants now living, this globe had been the theatre of
another set of beings, every trace of whom had vanished from the face of
the earth. To his alert and active intellect and powerful imagination a
word spoken out of the past was pregnant with meaning; and when he had
once convinced himself that he had found a single animal that had no
counterpart among living beings, it gave him the key to many mysteries.

It may be doubted whether men's eyes are ever opened to truths which,
though new to them, are old to God, till the time has come when they
can apprehend their meaning and turn them to good account. It certainly
seems, that, when such a revelation has once been made, light pours in
upon it from every side; and this is especially true of the case in
point. The existence of a past creation once suggested, confirmation
was found in a thousand facts overlooked before. The solid crust of the
earth gave up its dead, and from the snows of Siberia, from the soil of
Italy, from caves of Central Europe, from mines, from the rent sides of
mountains and from their highest peaks, from the coral beds of ancient
oceans, the varied animals that had possessed the earth ages before man
was created spoke to us of the past.

No sooner were these facts established, than the relation between the
extinct world and the world of to-day became the subject of extensive
researches and comparisons; innumerable theories were started to account
for the differences, and to determine the periods and manner of the
change. It is not my intention to enter now at any length upon the
subject of geological succession, though I hope to return to it
hereafter in a series of papers upon that and kindred topics; but I
allude to it here, before presenting some views upon the maintenance of
organic types as they exist in our own period, for the following reason.
Since it has been shown that from the beginning of Creation till the
present time the physical history of the world has been divided into
a succession of distinct periods, each one accompanied by its
characteristic animals and plants, so that our own epoch is only the
closing one in the long procession of the ages, naturalists have been
constantly striving to find the connecting link between them all, and to
prove that each such creation has been a normal and natural growth
out of the preceding one. With this aim they have tried to adapt the
phenomena of reproduction among animals to the problem of creation, and
to make the beginning of life in the individual solve that great mystery
of the beginning of life in the world. In other words, they have
endeavored to show that the fact of successive generations is analogous
to that of successive creations, and that the processes by which
animals, once created, are maintained unchanged during the period to
which they belong will account also for their primitive existence.

I wish, at the outset, to forestall any such misapplication of the facts
I am about to state, and to impress upon my readers the difference
between these two subjects of inquiry,--since it by no means follows,
that, because individuals are endowed with the power of reproducing and
perpetuating their kind, they are in any sense self-originating. Still
less probable does this appear, when we consider, that, since man has
existed upon the earth, no appreciable change has taken place in the
animal or vegetable world; and so far as our knowledge goes, this would
seem to be equally true of all the periods preceding ours, each one
maintaining unbroken to its close the organic character impressed upon
it at the beginning.

The question I propose to consider here is simply the mode by which
organic types are preserved as they exist at present. Every one has
a summary answer to this question in the statement, that all these
short-lived individuals reproduce themselves, and thus maintain their
kinds. But the modes of reproduction are so varied, the changes some
animals undergo during their growth so extraordinary, the phenomena
accompanying these changes so startling, that, in the pursuit of the
subject, a new and independent science--that of Embryology--has grown
up, of the utmost importance in the present state of our knowledge.

The prevalent ideas respecting the reproduction of animals are made
up from the daily observation of those immediately about us in the
barn-yard and the farm. But the phenomena here are comparatively simple,
and easily traced. The moment we extend our observations beyond our
cattle and fowls, and enter upon a wider field of investigation, we are
met by the most startling facts. Not the least baffling of these are
the disproportionate numbers of males and females in certain kinds
of animals, their unequal development, as well as the extraordinary
difference between the sexes among certain species, so that they seem as
distinct from each other as if they belonged to separate groups of the
Animal Kingdom. We have close at hand one of the most striking instances
of disproportionate numbers in the household of the Bee, with its one
fertile female charged with the perpetuation of the whole community,
while her innumerable sterile sisterhood, amid a few hundred drones,
work for its support in other ways. Another most interesting chapter
connected with the maintenance of animals is found in the various ways
and different degrees of care with which they provide for their progeny:
some having fulfilled their whole duty toward their offspring when they
have given them birth; others seeking hiding-places for the eggs they
have laid, and watching with a certain care over their development;
others feeding their young till they can provide for themselves, and
building nests, or burrowing holes in the ground, or constructing earth
mounds for their shelter.

But, whatever be the difference in the outward appearance or the habits
of animals, one thing is common to them all without exception: at some
period of their lives they produce eggs, which, being fertilized, give
rise to beings of the same kind as the parent. This mode of generation
is universal, and is based upon that harmonious antagonism between the
sexes, that contrast between the male and the female element, that at
once divides and unites the whole Animal Kingdom. And although this
exchange of influence is not kept up by an equality of numeric
relations,--since not only are the sexes very unequally divided in some
kinds of animals, but the male and female elements are even combined
in certain types, so that the individuals are uniformly
hermaphrodites,--yet I firmly believe that this numerical distribution,
however unequal it may seem to us, is not without its ordained accuracy
and balance. He who has assigned its place to every leaf in the thickest
forest, according to an arithmetical law which prescribes to each its
allotted share of room on the branch where it grows, will not have
distributed animal life with less care.

But although reproduction by eggs is common to all animals, it is only
one among several modes of multiplication. We have seen that certain
animals, besides the ordinary process of generation, also increase their
number naturally and constantly by self-division, so that out of one
individual many individuals may arise by a natural breaking up of
the whole body into distinct surviving parts. This process of normal
self-division may take place at all periods of life: it may form an
early phase of metamorphosis, as in the Hydroid of our common Aurelia,
described in the last article; or it may even take place before the
young is formed in the egg. In such a case, the egg itself divides into
a number of portions: two, four, eight, or even twelve and sixteen
individuals being normally developed from every egg, in consequence of
this singular process of segmentation of the yolk,--which takes place,
indeed, in all eggs, but in those which produce but one individual is
only a stage in the natural growth of the yolk during its transformation
into a young embryo. As the facts here alluded to are not very familiar
even to professional naturalists, I may be permitted to describe them
more in detail.

No one who has often walked across a sand-beach in summer can have
failed to remark what the children call "sand saucers." The name is not
a bad one, with the exception that the saucer lacks a bottom; but the
form of these circular bands of sand is certainly very like a saucer
with the bottom knocked out. Hold one of them against the light and you
will see that it is composed of countless transparent spheres, each of
the size of a small pin's head. These are the eggs of our common Natica
or Sea-Snail. Any one who remembers the outline of this shell will
easily understand the process by which its eggs are left lying on the
beach in the form I have described. They are laid in the shape of a
broad, short ribbon, pressed between the mantle and the shell, and,
passing out, cover the outside of the shell, over which they are rolled
up, with a kind of glutinous envelope,--for the eggs are held together
by a soft glutinous substance. Thus surrounded, the shell, by its
natural movements along the beach, soon collects the sand upon it, the
particles of which in contact with the glutinous substance of the eggs
quickly forms a cement that binds the whole together in a kind of paste.
When consolidated, it drops off from the shell, having taken the mould
of its form, as it were, and retaining the curve which distinguishes the
outline of the Natica. Although these saucers look perfectly round, it
will be found that the edges are not soldered together, but are simply
lapped one over the other. Every one of the thousand little spheres
crowded into such a circle of sand contains an egg. If we follow the
development of these eggs, we shall presently find that each one divides
into two halves, these again dividing to make four portions, then the
four breaking up into eight, and so on, till we may have the yolks
divided into no less than sixteen distinct parts. Thus far this process
of segmentation is similar to that of the egg in other animals; but, as
we shall see hereafter, it seems usually to result only in a change in
the quality of its substance, for the portions coalesce again to form
one mass, from which a new individual is finally sketched out, at first
as a simple embryo, and gradually undergoing all the changes peculiar to
its kind, till a new-born animal escapes from the egg. But in the case
of the Natica this regular segmentation changes its character, and at a
certain period, in a more or less advanced stage of the segmentation,
according to the species, each portion of the yolk assumes an
individuality of its own, and, instead of uniting again with the rest,
begins to subdivide for itself. In our _Natica heros_, for instance, the
common large gray Sea-Snail of our coast, this change takes place when
the yolk has subdivided into eight parts. At that time each portion
begins a life of its own, not reuniting with its seven twin portions; so
that in the end, instead of a single embryo growing out of this yolk,
we have eight embryos arising from a single yolk, each one of which
undergoes a series of developments similar in all respects to that by
which a single embryo is formed from each egg in other animals. We have
other Naticas in which the normal number is twelve, others again in
which no less than sixteen individuals arise from one yolk. But this
process of segmentation, though in these animals it leads to such a
multiplication of individuals, is exactly the same as that discovered
by K.E. von Baer in the egg of the Frog, and described and figured by
Professor Bischof in the egg of the Rabbit, the Dog, the Guinea-Pig,
and the Deer, while other embryologists have traced the same process in
Birds, Reptiles, and Fishes, as well as in a variety of Articulates,
Mollusks, and Radiates.

Multiplication by division occurs also normally in adult animals that
have completed their growth. This is especially frequent among Worms;
and strange to say, there are species in this Class which never lay eggs
before they have already multiplied themselves by self-division.

Another mode of increase is that by budding, as in the Corals and many
other Radiates. The most common instance of budding we do not, however,
generally associate with this mode of multiplication in the Animal
Kingdom, because we are so little accustomed to compare and generalize
upon phenomena that we do not see to be directly connected with one
another. I allude here to the budding of trees, which year after year
enlarge by the addition of new individuals arising from buds. I trust
that the usual acceptation of the word _individual_, used in science
simply to designate singleness of existence, will not obscure a correct
appreciation of the true relation of buds to their parents and to the
beings arising from them. These buds have the same organic significance,
whether they drop from the parent stock to become distinct individuals
in the common acceptation of the term, or remain connected with
the parent stock, as in Corals and in trees, thus forming growing
communities of combined individuals. Nor will it matter much in
connection with the subject under discussion, whether these buds start
from the surface of an animal or sprout in its interior, to be cast off
in due time. Neither is the inequality of buds, varying more or less
among themselves, any sound reason for overlooking their essential
identity of structure. We have seen instances of this among Acalephs,
and it is still more apparent among trees which produce simultaneously
leaf and flower-buds, and even separate male and female flower-buds, as
is the case with our Hazels, Oaks, etc.

It is not, however, my purpose here to describe the various modes of
reproduction and multiplication among animals and plants, nor to discuss
the merits of the different opinions respecting their numeric increase,
according to which some persons hold that all types originated from a
few primitive individuals, while others believe that the very numbers
now in existence are part of the primitive plan, and essential to the
harmonious relations existing between the animal and vegetable world. I
would only attempt to show that in the plan of Creation the maintenance
of types has been secured through a variety of means, but under such
limitations, that, within a narrow range of individual differences, all
representatives of one kind of animals agree with one another, whether
derived from eggs, or produced by natural division, or by budding; and
that the constancy of these normal processes of reproduction, as well as
the uniformity of their results, precludes the idea that the specific
differences among animals have been produced by the very means that
secure their permanence of type. The statement itself implies a
contradiction, for it tells us that the same influences prevent and
produce change in the condition of the Animal Kingdom. Facts are all
against it; there is not a fact known to science by which any single
being, in the natural process of reproduction and multiplication, has
diverged from the course natural to its kind, or in which a single kind
has been transformed into any other. But this once established, and
setting aside the idea that Embryology is to explain to us the origin as
well as the maintenance of life, it yet has most important lessons for
us, and the field it covers is constantly enlarging as the study
is pursued. The first and most important result of the science of
Embryology was one for which the scientific world was wholly unprepared.
Down to our own century, nothing could have been farther from the
conception of anatomists and physiologists than the fact now generally
admitted, that all animals, without exception, arise from eggs. Though
Linnaeus had already expressed this great truth in the sentence so often
quoted,--"Omne vivum ex ovo,"--yet he was not himself aware of the
significance of his own statement, for the existence of the Mammalian
egg was not then dreamed of. Since then the discoveries of von Baer and
others have shown not only that the egg is common to all living beings
without exception, from the lowest Radiate to the highest Vertebrate,
but that its structure is at first identical in all, composed of the
same primitive elements and undergoing exactly the same process of
growth up to the time when it assumes the special character peculiar
to its kind. This is unquestionably one of the most comprehensive
generalizations of modern times.

In common parlance, we understand by an egg something of the nature of a
hen's egg, a mass of yolk surrounded with white and inclosed in a shell.
But to the naturalist, the envelopes of the egg, which vary greatly in
different animals, are mere accessories, while the true egg, or, as it
is called, the ovarian egg, with which the life of every living being
begins, is a minute sphere, uniform in appearance throughout the Animal
Kingdom, though its intimate structure is hardly to be reached even with
the highest powers of the microscope. Some account of the earlier stages
of growth in the egg may not be uninteresting to my readers. I will
take the egg of the Turtle as an illustration, since that has been the
subject of my own especial study; but, as I do not intend to carry my
remarks beyond the period during which the history of all vertebrate
eggs is the same, they may be considered of more general application.

It is well known that all organic structures, whether animal or
vegetable, are composed of cells. These cells consist of an outside bag
inclosing an inner sac, and within that sac there is a dot. The outer
bag is filled with semi-transparent fluid, the inner one with a
perfectly transparent fluid, while the dot is dark and distinct. In the
language of our science, the outer envelope is called the Ectoblast, the
inner sac the Mesoblast, and the dot the Entoblast. Although they are
peculiarly modified to suit the different organs, these cells never lose
this peculiar structure; it may be traced even in the long drawn-out
cells of the flesh, which are like mere threads, but yet have their
outer and inner sac and their dot,--at least while forming.

In the Turtle the ovary is made up of such cells, spherical at first,
but becoming hexagonal under pressure, when they are more closely packed
together. Between these ovarian cells the egg originates, and is at
first a mere granule, so minute, that, when placed under a very high
magnifying power, it is but just visible. This is the incipient egg,
and at this stage it differs from the surrounding cells only in being
somewhat darker, like a drop of oil, and opaque, instead of transparent
and clear like the surrounding cells. Under the microscope it is found
to be composed of two substances only: namely, oil and albumen. It
increases gradually, and when it has reached a size at which it requires
to be magnified one thousand times in order to be distinctly visible,
the outside assumes the aspect of a membrane thicker than the interior
and forming a coating around it. This is owing not to an addition from
outside, but to a change in the consistency of the substance at the
surface, which becomes more closely united, more compact, than the
loose mass in the centre. Presently we perceive a bright, luminous,
transparent spot on the upper side of the egg, near the wall or outer
membrane. This is produced by a concentration of the albumen, which
now separates from the oil and collects at the upper side of the egg,
forming this light spot, called by naturalists the Purkinjean vesicle,
after its discoverer, Purkinje. When this albuminous spot becomes
somewhat larger, there arises a little dot in the centre,--the germinal
dot, as it is called. And now we have a perfect cell-structure,
differing from an ordinary cell only in having the inner sac, inclosing
the dot, on the side, instead of in the centre. The outer membrane
corresponds to the Ectoblast, or outer cell sac, the Purkinjean vesicle
to the Mesoblast, or inner cell sac, while the dot in the centre answers
to the Entoblast. When the Purkinjean vesicle has completed its growth,
it bursts and disappears; but the mass contained in it remains in the
same region, and retains the same character, though no longer inclosed
as before.

At a later stage of the investigation, we see why the Purkinjean
vesicle, or inner sac of the egg, is placed on the side, instead of
being at the centre, as in the cell. It arises on that side along which
the axis of the little Turtle is to lie,--the opposite side being that
corresponding to the lower part of the body. Thus the lighter, more
delicate part of the substance of the egg is collected where the upper
cavity of the animal, inclosing the nervous system and brain, is to
be, while the heavy oily part remains beneath, where the lower cavity,
inclosing all the organs of mere material animal existence, is
afterwards developed. In other words, when the egg is a mere mass of
oil and albumen, not indicating as yet in any way the character of the
future animal, and discernible only by the microscope, the distinction
is indicated between the brains and the senses, between the organs of
instinct and sensation and those of mere animal functions. At that stage
of its existence, however, when the egg consists of an outer sac, an
inner sac, and a dot, its resemblance to a cell is unmistakable; and,
in fact, an egg, when forming, is nothing but a single cell. This
comparison is important, because there are both animals and plants
which, during their whole existence, consist of a single organic cell,
while others are made up of countless millions of such cells. Between
these two extremes we have all degrees, from the innumerable cells that
build up the body of the highest Vertebrate to the single-celled Worm,
and from the myriad cells of the Oak to the single-celled Alga.

But while we recognize the identity of cell-structure and egg-structure
at this point in the history of the egg, we must not forget the great
distinction between them,--namely, that, while the cells remain
component parts of the whole body, the egg separates itself and assumes
a distinct individual existence. Even now, while still microscopically
small, its individuality begins; other substances collect around it, are
absorbed into it, nourish it, serve it. Every being is a centre about
which many other things cluster and converge, and which has the power to
assimilate to itself the necessary elements of its life. Every egg is
already such a centre, differing from the cells that surround it by
no material elements, but by the principle of life in which its
individuality consists, which is to make it a new being, instead of a
fellow-cell with those that build up the body of the parent animal and
remain component parts of it. This intangible something is the subtile
element that eludes our closest analysis; it is the germ of the
immaterial principle according to which the new being is to develop. The
physical germ we see; the spiritual germ we cannot see, though we may
trace its action on the material elements through which it is expressed.

The first change in the yolk, after the formation of the Purkinjean
vesicle, is the appearance of minute dots near the wall at the side
opposite the vesicle. These increase in number and size, but remain
always on that half of the yolk, leaving the other half of the globe
clear. One can hardly conceive the beauty of the egg as seen through the
microscope at this period of its growth, when the whole yolk is divided,
with the dark granules on one side, while the other side, where the
transparent halo of the vesicle is seen, is brilliant with light. With
the growth of the egg these granules enlarge, become more distinct, and
under the microscope some of them appear to be hollow. They are not
round in form, but rather irregular, and under the effect of light they
are exceedingly brilliant. Presently, instead of being scattered equally
over the space they occupy, they form clusters,--constellations, as it
were,--and between these clusters are clear spaces, produced by the
separation of the albumen from the oil.

At this period of its growth there is a wonderful resemblance between
the appearance of the egg, as seen under the microscope, and
the firmament with the celestial bodies. The little clusters or
constellations are unequally divided: here and there they are two and
two like double stars, or sometimes in threes or fives, or in sevens,
recalling the Pleiades, and the clear albuminous tracks between are like
the empty spaces separating the stars.

This is no fanciful simile: it is simply true that such is the actual
appearance of the yolk at this time; and the idea cannot but suggest
itself to the mind, that the thoughts which have been at work in the
universe are collected and repeated here within this little egg, which
offers us a miniature diagram of the firmament. This is one of the first
changes of the yolk, ending by forming regular clusters with a sort
of net-work of albumen between, and then this phase of the growth is
complete.

Now the clusters of the yolk separate, and next the albumen in its turn
concentrates into clusters, and the dark bodies, which have been till
now the striking points, give way to the lighter spheres of albumen
between which the clusters are scattered. Presently the whole becomes
redissolved: these stages of the growth being completed, this little
system of worlds is melted, as it were: but while it undergoes this
process, the albuminous spheres, after being dissolved, arrange
themselves in concentric rings, alternating with rings of granules,
around the Purkinjean vesicle. At this time we are again reminded of
Saturn and its rings, which seems to have its counterpart here. These
rings disappear, and now once more out of the yolk mass loom up little
dots as minute as before; but they are round instead of angular, and
those nearest the Purkinjean vesicle are smaller and clearer, containing
less of oil than the larger and darker ones on the opposite side. From
this time the yolk begins to take its color, the oily cells assuming a
yellow tint, while the albuminous cells near the vesicle become whiter.

Up to this period the processes in the different cells seem to have been
controlled by the different character of the substance of each; but now
it would seem that the changes become more independent of physical or
material influences, for each kind of cell undergoes the same process.
They all assume the ordinary cell character, with outer and inner
sac,--the inner sac forming on the side, like the Purkinjean vesicle
itself; but it does not retain this position, for, as soon as its wall
is formed and it becomes a distinct body, it floats away from the side
and takes its place in the centre. Next there arise within it a number
of little bodies crystalline in form, and which actually are wax or oil
crystals. They increase with great rapidity, the inner sac or mesoblast
becoming sometimes so crowded with them, that its shape is affected by
the protrusion of their angles. This process goes on till all the cells
are so filled by the mesoblast, with its myriad brood of cells, that
the outer sac or ectoblast becomes a mere halo around it. Then every
mesoblast contracts; the contraction deepens, till it is divided across
in both directions, separating thus into four parts, then into eight,
then into sixteen, and so on, till every cell is crowded with hundreds
of minute mesoblasts, each containing the indication of a central dot or
entoblast. At this period every yolk cell is itself like a whole yolk;
for each cell is as full of lesser cells as the yolk-bag itself.

When the mesoblast has become thus infinitely subdivided into hundreds
of minute spheres, the ectoblast bursts, and the new generations of
cells thus set free collect in that part of the egg where the embryonic
disk is to arise. This process of segmentation continues to go on
downward till the whole yolk is taken in. These myriad cells are in
fact the component parts of the little Turtle that is to be. They will
undergo certain modifications, to become flesh-cells, blood-cells,
brain-cells, and so on, adapting themselves to the different organs they
are to build up; but they have as much their definite and appointed
share in the formation of the body now as at any later stage of its
existence.

We are so accustomed to see life maintained through a variety of
complicated organs that we are apt to think this the only way in which
it can be manifested; and considering how closely life and the organs
through which it is expressed are united, it is natural that we should
believe them inseparably connected. But embryological investigations
have shown us that in the commencement none of these organs are formed,
and yet that the principle of life is active, and that even after they
exist, they cannot act, inclosed as they are. In the little Chicken, for
instance, before it is hatched, the lungs cannot breathe, for they
are surrounded by fluid, the senses are inactive, for they receive no
impressions from without, and all those functions establishing its
relations with the external world lie dormant, for as yet they are not
needed. But they are there, though, as we have seen in the Turtle's egg,
they were not there at the beginning. How, then, are they formed? We may
answer, that the first function of every organ is to make itself. The
building material is, as it were, provided by the process which divides
the yolk into innumerable cells, and by the gradual assimilation and
modification of this material the organs arise. Before the lungs
breathe, they make themselves; before the stomach digests, it makes
itself; before the organs of the senses act, they make themselves;
before the brain thinks, it makes itself; in a word, before the whole
system works, it makes itself; its first office is self-structure.

At the period described above, however, when the new generations of
cells are just set free and have taken their place in the region where
the new being is to develop, nothing is to be seen of the animal whose
life is beginning there, except the filmy disk lying on the surface of
the yolk. Next come the layers of white or albumen around the egg, and
last the shell which is formed from the lime in the albumen. There is
always more or less of lime in albumen, and the hardening of the last
layer of white into shell is owing only to the greater proportion of
lime in its substance. In the layer next to the shell there is enough of
lime to consolidate it slightly, and it forms a membrane; but the white,
the membrane, and the shell have all the same quality, except that the
proportion of lime is more or less in the different layers.

But, as I have said, the various envelopes of eggs, the presence or
absence of a shell, and the absolute size of the egg, are accessory
features, belonging not to the egg as egg, but to the special kind of
being from which the egg has arisen and into which it is to develop.
What is common to all eggs and essential to them all is that which
corresponds to the yolk in the bird's egg. But their later mode of
development, the degree of perfection acquired by the egg and germ
before being laid, the term required for the germ to come to maturity,
as well as the frequency and regularity of the broods, are all features
varying with the different kinds of animals. There are those that lay
eggs once a year at a particular season and then die; so that their
existence may be compared to that of annual plants, undergoing their
natural growth in a season, to exist during the remainder of the year
only in the form of an egg or seed. The majority of Insects belong to
this category, as do also our large Jelly-Fishes; many others have a
slow growth, extending over several years, during which they reach their
maturity, and for a longer or shorter time produce broods at fixed
intervals; while others, again, reach their mature state very rapidly,
and produce a number of successive generations in a comparatively short
time, it may be in a single season.

I do not intend to enter upon the chapter of special differences of
development among animals, for in this article I have aimed only to show
that the egg lives, that it is itself the young animal, and that
the vital principle is active in it from the earliest period of its
existence. But I would say to all young students of Embryology that
their next aim should be to study those intermediate phases in the life
of a young animal, when, having already acquired independent existence,
it has not yet reached the condition of the adult. Here lies an
inexhaustible mine of valuable information unappropriated, from which,
as my limited experience has already taught me, may be gathered the
evidence for the solution of the most perplexing problems of our
science. Here we shall find the true tests by which to determine the
various kinds and different degrees of affinity which animals now living
bear not only to one another, but also to those that have preceded them
in past times. Here we shall find, not a material connection by which
blind laws of matter have evolved the whole creation out of a single
germ, but the clue to that intellectual conception which spans the whole
series of the geological ages and is perfectly consistent in all its
parts. In this sense the present will indeed explain the past, and the
young naturalist is happy who enters upon his life of investigation now,
when the problems that were dark to all his predecessors have received
new light from the sciences of Palaeontology and Embryology.

       *       *       *       *       *


BLIND TOM.


  Only a germ in a withered flower,
  That the rain will bring out--sometime.

Sometime in the year 1850, a tobacco-planter in Southern Georgia
(Perry H. Oliver by name) bought a likely negro woman with some other
field-hands. She was stout, tough-muscled, willing, promised to be a
remunerative servant; her baby, however, a boy a few months old, was
only thrown in as a makeweight to the bargain, or rather because Mr.
Oliver would not consent to separate mother and child. Charity only
could have induced him to take the picaninny, in fact, for he was but
a lump of black flesh, born blind, and with the vacant grin of idiocy,
they thought, already stamped on his face. The two slaves were
purchased, I believe, from a trader: it has been impossible, therefore,
for me to ascertain where Tom was born, or when. Georgia field-hands
are not accurate as Jews in preserving their genealogy; _they_ do
not anticipate a Messiah. A white man, you know, has that vague hope
unconsciously latent in him, that he is, or shall give birth to, the
great man of his race, a helper, a provider for the world's hunger: so
he grows jealous with his blood; the dead grandfather may have presaged
the possible son; besides, it is a debt he owes to this coming Saul to
tell him whence he came. There are some classes, free and slave, out of
whom society has crushed this hope: they have no clan, no family-names
among them, therefore. This idiot-boy, chosen by God to be anointed with
the holy chrism, is only "Tom,"--"Blind Tom," they call him in all the
Southern States, with a kind cadence always, being proud and fond
of him; and yet--nothing but Tom? That is pitiful. Just a
mushroom-growth,--unkinned, unexpected, not hoped for, for generations,
owning no name to purify and honor and give away when he is dead. His
mother, at work to-day in the Oliver plantations, can never comprehend
why her boy is famous; this gift of God to him means nothing to her.
Nothing to him, either, which is saddest of all; he is unconscious,
wears his crown as an idiot might. Whose fault is that? Deeper than
slavery the evil lies.

Mr. Oliver did his duty well to the boy, being an observant and
thoroughly kind master. The plantation was large, heartsome, faced the
sun, swarmed with little black urchins, with plenty to eat, and nothing
to do.

All that Tom required, as he fattened out of baby- into boyhood, was
room in which to be warm, on the grass-patch, or by the kitchen-fires,
to be stupid, flabby, sleepy,--kicked and petted alternately by the
other hands. He had a habit of crawling up on the porches and verandas
of the mansion and squatting there in the sun, waiting for a kind word
or touch from those who went in and out. He seldom failed to receive it.
Southerners know nothing of the physical shiver of aversion with which
even the Abolitionists of the North touch the negro: so Tom, through his
very helplessness, came to be a sort of pet in the family, a playmate,
occasionally, of Mr. Oliver's own infant children. The boy, creeping
about day after day in the hot light, was as repugnant an object as the
lizards in the neighboring swamp, and promised to be of as little use to
his master. He was of the lowest negro type, from which only field-hands
can be made,--coal-black, with protruding heels, the ape-jaw,
blubber-lips constantly open, the sightless eyes closed, and the head
thrown far back on the shoulders, lying on the back, in fact, a habit
which he still retains, and which adds to the imbecile character of
the face. Until he was seven years of age, Tom was regarded on the
plantation as an idiot, not unjustly; for at the present time his
judgment and reason rank but as those of a child four years old. He
showed a dog-like affection for some members of the household,--a son
of Mr. Oliver's especially,--and a keen, nervous sensitiveness to the
slightest blame or praise from them,--possessed, too, a low animal
irritability of temper, giving way to inarticulate yelps of passion when
provoked. That is all, so far; we find no other outgrowth of intellect
or soul from the boy: just the same record as that of thousands of
imbecile negro-children. Generations of heathendom and slavery have
dredged the inherited brains and temperaments of such children tolerably
clean of all traces of power or purity,--palsied the brain, brutalized
the nature. Tom apparently fared no better than his fellows.

It was not until 1857 that those phenomenal powers latent in the boy
were suddenly developed, which stamped him the anomaly he is to-day.

One night, sometime in the summer of that year, Mr. Oliver's family were
wakened by the sound of music in the drawing-room: not only the simple
airs, but the most difficult exercises usually played by his daughters,
were repeated again and again, the touch of the musician being timid,
but singularly true and delicate. Going down, they found Tom, who had
been left asleep in the hall, seated at the piano in an ecstasy of
delight, breaking out at the end of each successful fugue into shouts of
laughter, kicking his heels and clapping his hands. This was the first
time he had touched the piano.

Naturally, Tom became a nine-days' wonder on the plantation. He was
brought in as an after-dinner's amusement; visitors asked for him as the
show of the place. There was hardly a conception, however, in the minds
of those who heard him, of how deep the cause for wonder lay. The
planters' wives and daughters of the neighborhood were not people
who would be apt to comprehend music as a science, or to use it as a
language; they only saw in the little negro, therefore, a remarkable
facility for repeating the airs they drummed on their pianos,--in a
different manner from theirs, it is true,--which bewildered them. They
noticed, too, that, however the child's fingers fell on the keys,
cadences followed, broken, wandering, yet of startling beauty and
pathos. The house-servants, looking in through the open doors at the
little black figure perched up before the instrument, while unknown,
wild harmony drifted through the evening air, had a better conception
of him. He was possessed; some ghost spoke through him: which is a fair
enough definition of genius for a Georgian slave to offer.

Mr. Oliver, as we said, was indulgent. Tom was allowed to have constant
access to the piano; in truth, he could not live without it; when
deprived of music now, actual physical debility followed: the gnawing
Something had found its food at last. No attempt was made, however, to
give him any scientific musical teaching; nor--I wish it distinctly
borne in mind--has he ever at any time received such instruction.

The planter began to wonder what kind of a creature this was which he
had bought, flesh and soul. In what part of the unsightly baby-carcass
had been stowed away these old airs, forgotten by every one else,
and some of them never heard by the child but once, but which he now
reproduced, every note intact, and with whatever quirk or quiddity of
style belonged to the person who originally had sung or played them?
Stranger still the harmonies which he had never heard, had learned from
no man. The sluggish breath of the old house, being enchanted, grew into
quaint and delicate whims of music, never the same, changing every day.
Never glad: uncertain, sad minors always, vexing the content of the
hearer,--one inarticulate, unanswered question of pain in all, making
them one. Even the vulgarest listener was troubled, hardly knowing
why,--how sorry Tom's music was!

At last the time came when the door was to be opened, when some
listener, not vulgar, recognizing the child as God made him, induced his
master to remove him from the plantation. Something ought to be done for
him; the world ought not to be cheated of this pleasure; besides--the
money that could be made! So Mr. Oliver, with a kindly feeling for Tom,
proud, too, of this agreeable monster which his plantation had grown,
and sensible that it was a more fruitful source of revenue than
tobacco-fields, set out with the boy, literally to seek their fortune.

The first exhibition of him was given, I think, in Savannah, Georgia;
thence he was taken to Charleston, Richmond, to all the principal cities
and towns in the Southern States.

This was in 1858. From that time until the present Tom has lived
constantly an open life, petted, feted, his real talent befogged by
exaggeration, and so pampered and coddled that one might suppose the
only purpose was to corrupt and wear it out. For these reasons this
statement is purposely guarded, restricted to plain, known facts.

No sooner had Tom been brought before the public than the pretensions
put forward by his master commanded the scrutiny of both scientific
and musical skeptics. His capacities were subjected to rigorous tests.
Fortunately for the boy: for, so tried,--harshly, it is true, yet
skilfully,--they not only bore the trial, but acknowledged the touch
as skilful; every day new powers were developed, until he reached his
limit, beyond which it is not probable he will ever pass. That limit,
however, establishes him as an anomaly in musical science.

Physically, and in animal temperament, this negro ranks next to the
lowest Guinea type: with strong appetites and gross bodily health,
except in one particular, which will be mentioned hereafter. In the
every-day apparent intellect, in reason or judgment, he is but one
degree above an idiot,--incapable of comprehending the simplest
conversation on ordinary topics, amused or enraged with trifles such
as would affect a child of three years old. On the other side, his
affections are alive, even vehement, delicate in their instinct as a
dog's or an infant's; he will detect the step of any one dear to him in
a crowd, and burst into tears, if not kindly spoken to.

His memory is so accurate that he can repeat, without the loss of a
syllable, a discourse of fifteen minutes in length, of which he does
not understand a word. Songs, too, in French or German, after a single
hearing, he renders not only literally in words, but in notes, style,
and expression. His voice, however, is discordant, and of small compass.

In music, this boy of twelve years, born blind, utterly ignorant of a
note, ignorant of every phase of so-called musical science, interprets
severely classical composers with a clearness of conception in which
he excels, and a skill in mechanism equal to that of our second-rate
artists. His concerts usually include any themes selected by the
audience from the higher grades of Italian or German opera. His
comprehension of the meaning of music, as a prophetic or historical
voice which few souls utter and fewer understand, is clear and vivid: he
renders it thus, with whatever mastery of the mere material part he may
possess, fingering, dramatic effects, etc.: these are but means to him,
not an end, as with most artists. One could fancy that Tom was never
traitor to the intent or soul of the theme. What God or the Devil meant
to say by this or that harmony, what the soul of one man cried aloud to
another in it, this boy knows, and is to that a faithful witness. His
deaf, uninstructed soul has never been tampered with by art-critics who
know the body well enough of music, but nothing of the living creature
within. The world is full of these vulgar souls that palter with eternal
Nature and the eternal Arts, blind to the Word who dwells among us
therein. Tom, or the daemon in Tom, was not one of them.

With regard to his command of the instrument, two points have been
especially noted by musicians: the unusual frequency of occurrence of
_tours de force_ in his playing, and the scientific precision of his
manner of touch. For example, in a progression of augmented chords, his
mode of fingering is invariably that of the schools, not that which
would seem most natural to a blind child never taught to place a finger.
Even when seated with his back to the piano, and made to play in that
position, (a favorite feat in his concerts,) the touch is always
scientifically accurate.

The peculiar power which Tom possesses, however, is one which requires
no scientific knowledge of music in his audiences to appreciate.
Placed at the instrument with any musician, he plays a perfect bass
accompaniment to the treble of music _heard for the first time as
he plays_. Then taking the seat vacated by the other performer, he
instantly gives the entire piece, intact in brilliancy and symmetry, not
a note lost or misplaced. The selections of music by which this power
of Tom's was tested, two years ago, were sometimes fourteen and sixteen
pages in length; on one occasion, at an exhibition at the White House,
after a long concert, he was tried with two pieces,--one thirteen, the
other twenty pages long, and was successful.

We know of no parallel case to this in musical history. Grimm tells us,
as one of the most remarkable manifestations of Mozart's infant genius,
that at the age of nine he was required to give an accompaniment to an
aria which he had never heard before, and without notes. There were
false accords in the first attempt, he acknowledges; but the second was
pure. When the music to which Tom plays _secondo_ is strictly classical,
he sometimes balks for an instant in passages; to do otherwise would
argue a creative power equal to that of the master composers; but when
any chordant harmony runs through it, (on which the glowing negro soul
can seize, you know,) there are no "false accords," as with the infant
Mozart. I wish to draw especial attention to this power of the boy, not
only because it is, so far as I know, unmatched in the development of
any musical talent, but because, considered in the context of his
entire intellectual structure, it involves a curious problem. The mere
repetition of music heard but once, even when, as in Tom's case, it
is given with such incredible fidelity, and after the lapse of years,
demands only a command of mechanical skill, and an abnormal condition of
the power of memory; but to play _secondo_ to music never heard or seen
implies the comprehension of the full drift of the symphony in its
current,--a capacity to create, in short. Yet such attempts as Tom has
made to dictate music for publication do not sustain any such inference.
They are only a few light marches, gallops, etc., simple and plaintive
enough, but with easily detected traces of remembered harmonies: very
different from the strange, weird improvisations of every day. One would
fancy that the mere attempt to bring this mysterious genius within him
in bodily presence before the outer world woke, too, the idiotic nature
to utter its reproachful, unable cry. Nor is this the only bar by which
poor Tom's soul is put in mind of its foul bestial prison. After any
too prolonged effort, such as those I have alluded to, his whole bodily
frame gives way, and a complete exhaustion of the brain follows,
accompanied with epileptic spasms. The trial at the White House,
mentioned before, was successful, but was followed by days of illness.

Being a slave, Tom never was taken into a Free State; for the same
reason his master refused advantageous offers from European managers.
The highest points North at which his concerts were given were Baltimore
and the upper Virginia towns. I heard him sometime in 1860. He remained
a week or two in the town, playing every night.

The concerts were unique enough. They were given in a great barn of
a room, gaudy with hot, soot-stained frescoes, chandeliers, walls
splotched with gilt. The audience was large, always; such as a
provincial town affords: not the purest bench of musical criticism
before which to bring poor Tom. Beaux and belles, siftings of old
country families, whose grandfathers trapped and traded and married with
the Indians,--the savage thickening of whose blood told itself in high
cheekbones, flashing jewelry, champagne-bibbing, a comprehension of
the tom-tom music of schottisches and polkas; money-made men and their
wives, cooped up by respectability, taking concerts when they were given
in town, taking the White Sulphur or Cape May in summer, taking beef for
dinner, taking the pork-trade in winter,--_toute la vie en programme_;
the _débris_ of a town, the roughs, the boys, school-children,--Tom was
nearly as well worth a quarter as the negro-minstrels; here and there
a pair of reserved, homesick eyes, a peculiar, reticent face, some
whey-skinned ward-teacher's, perhaps, or some German cobbler's, but
hints of a hungry soul, to whom Beethoven and Mendelssohn knew how
to preach an unerring gospel. The stage was broad, planked, with a
drop-curtain behind,--the Doge marrying the sea, I believe; in front, a
piano and chair.

Presently, Mr. Oliver, a well-natured looking man, (one thought of
that,) came forward, leading and coaxing along a little black boy,
dressed in white linen, somewhat fat and stubborn in build. Tom was
not in a good humor that night; the evening before had refused to play
altogether; so his master perspired anxiously before he could get him
placed in rule before the audience, and repeat his own little speech,
which sounded like a Georgia after-dinner gossip. The boy's head, as
I said, rested on his back, his mouth wide open constantly; his great
blubber lips and shining teeth, therefore, were all you saw when
he faced you. He required to be petted and bought like any other
weak-minded child. The concert was a mixture of music, whining, coaxing,
and promised candy and cake.

He seated himself at last before the piano, a full half-yard distant,
stretching out his arms full-length, like an ape clawing for
food,--his feet, when not on the pedals, squirming and twisting
incessantly,--answering some joke of his master's with a loud "Yha!
yha!" Nothing indexes the brain like the laugh; this was idiotic.

"Now, Tom, boy, something we like from Verdi."

The head fell farther back, the claws began to work, and those of his
harmonies which you would have chosen as the purest exponents of passion
began to float through the room. Selections from Weber, Beethoven, and
others whom I have forgotten, followed. At the close of each piece,
Tom, without waiting for the audience, would himself applaud violently,
kicking, pounding his hands together, turning always to his master
for the approving pat on the head. Songs, recitations such as I have
described, filled up the first part of the evening; then a musician from
the audience went upon the stage to put the boy's powers to the final
test. Songs and intricate symphonies were given, which it was most
improbable the boy could ever have heard; he remained standing,
utterly motionless, until they were finished, and for a moment or two
after,--then, seating himself, gave them without the break of a
note. Others followed, more difficult, in which he played the bass
accompaniment in the manner I have described, repeating instantly the
treble. The child looked dull, wearied, during this part of the trial,
and his master, perceiving it, announced the exhibition closed, when the
musician (who was a citizen of the town, by-the-way) drew out a
thick roll of score, which he explained to be a Fantasia of his own
composition, never published.

"_This_ it was impossible the boy could have heard; there could be no
trick of memory in this; and on this trial," triumphantly, "Tom would
fail."

The manuscript was some fourteen pages long,--variations on an inanimate
theme. Mr. Oliver refused to submit the boy's brain to so cruel a test;
some of the audience, even, interfered; but the musician insisted, and
took his place. Tom sat beside him,--his head rolling nervously from
side to side,--struck the opening cadence, and then, from the first note
to the last, gave the _secondo_ triumphantly. Jumping up, he fairly
shoved the man from his seat, and proceeded to play the treble with more
brilliancy and power than its composer. When he struck the last octave,
he sprang up, yelling with delight:--

"Um's got him, Massa! um's got him!" cheering and rolling about the
stage.

The cheers of the audience--for the boys especially did not wait to
clap--excited him the more. It was an hour before his master could quiet
his hysteric agitation.

That feature of the concerts which was the most painful I have not
touched upon: the moments when his master was talking, and Tom was left
to himself,--when a weary despair seemed to settle down on the distorted
face, and the stubby little black fingers, wandering over the keys,
spoke for Tom's own caged soul within. Never, by any chance, a merry,
childish laugh of music in the broken cadences; tender or wild, a
defiant outcry, a tired sigh breaking down into silence. Whatever
wearied voice it took, the same bitter, hopeless soul spoke through all:
"Bless me, even me, also, O my Father!" A something that took all the
pain and pathos of the world into its weak, pitiful cry.

Some beautiful caged spirit, one could not but know, struggled for
breath under that brutal form and idiotic brain. I wonder when it will
be free. Not in this life: the bars are too heavy.

You cannot help Tom, either; all the war is between you. He was in
Richmond in May. But (do you hate the moral to a story?) in your own
kitchen, in your own back-alley, there are spirits as beautiful, caged
in forms as bestial, that you _could_ set free, if you pleased. Don't
call it bad taste in me to speak for them. You know they are more to be
pitied than Tom,--for they are dumb.


KINDERGARTEN--WHAT IS IT?


What is a Kindergarten? I will reply by negatives. It is not
the old-fashioned infant-school. That was a narrow institution,
comparatively; the object being (I do not speak of Pestalozzi's own,
but that which we have had in this country and in England) to take
the children of poor laborers, and keep them out of the fire and the
streets, while their mothers went to their necessary labor. Very good
things, indeed, in their way. Their principle of discipline was to
circumvent the wills of children, in every way that would enable their
teachers to keep them within bounds, and quiet. It was certainly better
that they should learn to sing _by rote_ the Creed and the "definitions"
of scientific terms, and such like, than to learn the profanity and
obscenity of the streets, which was the alternative. But no mother who
wished for anything which might be called the _development_ of her child
would think of putting it into an infant-school, especially if she lived
in the country, amid

  "the mighty sum
  Of things forever speaking,"

where any "old grey stone" would altogether surpass, as a stand-point,
the bench of the highest class of an infant-school. In short, they
did not state the problem of infant culture with any breadth, and
accomplished nothing of general interest on the subject.

Neither is the primary public school a Kindergarten, though it is
but justice to the capabilities of that praiseworthy institution, so
important in default of a better, to say that in one of them, at the
North End of Boston, an enterprising and genial teacher has introduced
one feature of Froebel's plan. She has actually given to each of her
little children a box of playthings, wherewith to amuse itself
according to its own sweet will, at all times when not under direct
instruction,--necessarily, in her case, on condition of its being
perfectly quiet; and this one thing makes this primary school the best
one in Boston, both as respects the attainments of the scholars and
their good behavior.

_Kindergarten_ means a garden of children, and Froebel, the inventor of
it, or rather, as he would prefer to express it, _the discoverer of the
method of Nature_, meant to symbolize by the name the spirit and plan
of treatment. How does the gardener treat his plants? He studies their
individual natures, and puts them into such circumstances of soil and
atmosphere as enable them to grow, flower, and bring forth fruit,--also
to renew their manifestation year after year. He does not expect to
succeed unless he learns all their wants, and the circumstances in which
these wants will be supplied, and all their possibilities of beauty and
use, and the means of giving them opportunity to be perfected. On the
other hand, while he knows that they must not be forced against their
individual natures, he does not leave them to grow wild, but prunes
redundancies, removes destructive worms and bugs from their leaves and
stems, and weeds from their vicinity,--carefully watching to learn what
peculiar insects affect what particular plants, and how the former can
be destroyed without injuring the vitality of the latter. After all the
most careful gardener can do, he knows that the form of the plant is
predetermined in the germ or seed, and that the inward tendency must
concur with a multitude of influences, the most powerful and subtile of
which is removed in place ninety-five millions of miles away.

In the Kindergarten _children_ are treated on an analogous plan. It
presupposes gardeners of the mind, who are quite aware that they have as
little power to override the characteristic individuality of a child, or
to predetermine this characteristic, as the gardener of plants to say
that a lily shall be a rose. But notwithstanding this limitation on
one side, and the necessity for concurrence of the Spirit on the
other,--which is more independent of our modification than the remote
sun,--yet they must feel responsible, after all, for the perfection of
the development, in so far as removing every impediment, preserving
every condition, and pruning every redundance.

This analogy of education to the gardener's art is so striking, both as
regards what we can and what we cannot do, that Froebel has put every
educator into a most suggestive Normal School, by the very word which he
has given to his seminary,--Kindergarten.

If every school-teacher in the land had a garden of flowers and fruits
to cultivate, it could hardly fail that he would learn to be wise in his
vocation. For suitable preparation, the first, second, and third thing
is, to

  "Come forth into the light of things,
  Let Nature be your teacher."

The "new education," as the French call it, begins with children in the
mother's arms. Froebel had the nurses bring to his establishment, in
Hamburg, children who could not talk, who were not more than three
months old, and trained the nurses to work on his principles and by his
methods. This will hardly be done in this country, at least at present;
but to supply the place of such a class, a lady of Boston has prepared
and published, under copyright, Froebel's First Gift, consisting of six
soft balls of the three primary and the three secondary colors, which
are sold in a box, with a little manual for mothers, in which the true
principle and plan of tending babies, so as not to rasp their nerves,
but to amuse without wearying them, is very happily suggested. There
is no mother or nurse who would not be assisted by this little manual
essentially. As it says in the beginning,--"Tending babies is an art,
and every art is founded on a science of observations; for love is not
wisdom, but love must act _according to wisdom_ in order to succeed.
Mothers and nurses, however tender and kind-hearted, may, and oftenest
do, weary and vex the nerves of children, in well-meant efforts to amuse
them, and weary themselves the while. Froebel's exercises, founded on
the observations of an intelligent sensibility, are intended to amuse
without wearying, to educate without vexing."

Froebel's Second Gift for children, adapted to the age from one to two
or three years, with another little book of directions, has also been
published by the same lady, and is perhaps a still greater boon to every
nursery; for this is the age when many a child's temper is ruined,
and the inclination of the twig wrongly bent, through sheer _want of
resource and idea_, on the part of nurses and mothers.

But it is to the next age--from three years old and upwards--that the
Kindergarten becomes the desideratum, if not a necessity. The isolated
home, made into a flower-vase by the application of the principles set
forth in the Gifts[A] above mentioned, may do for babies. But every
mother and nurse knows how hard it is to meet the demands of a child
too young to be taught to read, but whose opening intelligence and
irrepressible bodily activity are so hard to be met by an adult, however
genial and active. Children generally take the temper of their whole
lives from this period of their existence. Then "the twig is bent,"
either towards that habit of self-defence which is an ever-renewing
cause of selfishness, or to the sun of love-in-exercise, which is the
exhaustless source of goodness and beauty.

[Footnote A: These Gifts, the private enterprise of an invalid lady, the
same who first brought the subject of Kindergartens so favorably before
the public in the _Christian Examiner_ for November, 1858, can be
procured at the Kindergarten, 15 Pinckney Street, Boston.]

The indispensable thing now is a sufficient society of children. It is
only in the society of equals that the social instinct can be gratified,
and come into equilibrium with the instinct of self-preservation.
Self-love, and love of others, are equally natural; and before reason
is developed, and the proper spiritual life begins, sweet and beautiful
childhood may bloom out and imparadise our mortal life. Let us only give
the social instinct of children its fair chance. For this purpose, a few
will not do. The children of one family are not enough, and do not
come along fast enough. A large company should be gathered out of many
families. It will be found that the little things are at once taken out
of themselves, and become interested in each other. In the variety,
affinities develop themselves very prettily, and the rough points of
rampant individualities wear off. We have seen a highly gifted child,
who, at home, was--to use a vulgar, but expressive word--pesky and
odious, with the exacting demands of a powerful, but untrained mind and
heart, become "sweet as roses" spontaneously, amidst the rebound of
a large, well-ordered, and carefully watched child-society. Anxious
mothers have brought us children, with a thousand deprecations and
explanations of their characters, as if they thought we were going to
find them little monsters, which their motherly hearts were persuaded
they were not, though they behaved like little sanchos at home,--and,
behold, they were as harmonious, from the very beginning, as if they had
undergone the subduing influence of a lifetime. We are quite sure that
children begin with loving others quite as intensely as they love
themselves,--forgetting themselves in their love of others,--if they
only have as fair a chance of being benevolent and self-sacrificing as
of being selfish. Sympathy is as much a natural instinct as self-love,
and no more or less innocent, in a moral point of view. Either principle
alone makes an ugly and depraved form of natural character. Balanced,
they give the element of happiness, and the conditions of spiritual
goodness and truth,--making children fit temples for the Holy Ghost to
dwell in.

A Kindergarten, then, is children in society,--a commonwealth or
republic of children,--whose laws are all part and parcel of the
Higher Law alone. It may be contrasted, in every particular, with the
old-fashioned school, which is an absolute monarchy, where the children
are subjected to a lower expediency, having for its prime end quietness,
or such order as has "reigned in Warsaw" since 1831.

But let us not be misunderstood. We are not of those who think that
children, in any condition whatever, will inevitably develop into beauty
and goodness. Human nature tends to revolve in a vicious circle, around
the individuality; and children must have over them, in the person of
a wise and careful teacher, a power which shall deal with them as God
deals with the mature, presenting the claims of sympathy and truth
whenever they presumptuously or unconsciously fall into selfishness. We
have the best conditions of moral culture in a company large enough for
the exacting disposition of the solitary child to be balanced by the
claims made by others on the common stock of enjoyment,--there being
a reasonable oversight of older persons, wide-awake to anticipate,
prevent, and adjust the rival pretensions which must always arise where
there are finite beings with infinite desires, while Reason, whose
proper object is God, is yet undeveloped.

Let the teacher always take for granted that the law of love is quick
within, whatever are appearances, and the better self will generally
respond. In proportion as the child is young and unsophisticated, will
be the certainty of the response to a teacher of simple faith:

  "There are who ask not if thine eye
  Be on them,--who, in love and truth,
  Where no misgiving is, rely
  Upon the genial sense of youth.

  "And blest are they who in the main
  This faith even now do entertain,
  Live in the spirit of this creed,
  Yet find another strength, according to their
  need."

Such are the natural Kindergartners, who prevent disorder by employing
and entertaining children, so that they are kept in an accommodating and
loving mood by never being thrown on self-defence,--and when selfishness
is aroused, who check it by an appeal to sympathy, or Conscience, which
is the presentiment of reason, a fore-feeling of moral order, for whose
culture material order is indispensable.

But order must be kept by the child, not only unconsciously, but
intentionally. Order is the child of reason, and in turn cultivates the
intellectual principle. To bring out order on the physical plane, the
Kindergarten makes it a serious purpose to organize _romping_, and set
it to music, which cultivates the physical nature also. Romping is the
ecstasy of the body, and we shall find that in proportion as children
tend to be violent they are vigorous in body. There is always morbid
weakness of some kind where there is no instinct for hard play; and it
begins to be the common sense that energetic physical activity must
not be repressed, but favored. Some plan of play prevents the little
creatures from hurting each other, and fancy naturally furnishes the
plan,--the mind unfolding itself in fancies, which are easily quickened
and led in harmless directions by an adult of any resource. Those who
have not imagination themselves must seek the aid of the Kindergarten
guides, where will be found arranged to music the labors of the peasant,
and cooper, and sawyer, the wind-mill, the watermill, the weather-vane,
the clock, the pigeon-house, the hares, the bees, and the cuckoo.
Children delight to personate animals, and a fine genius could not
better employ itself than in inventing a great many more plays, setting
them to rhythmical words, describing what is to be done. Every variety
of bodily exercise might be made and kept within the bounds of order and
beauty by plays involving the motions of different animals and machines
of industry. Kindergarten plays are easy intellectual exercises; for
to do anything whatever with a thought beforehand develops the mind
or quickens the intelligence; and thought of this kind does not try
intellect, or check physical development, which last must never be
sacrificed in the process of education.

There are enough instances of marvellous acquisition in infancy to show
that imbibing with the mind is as natural as with the body, if suitable
beverage is put to the lips; but in most cases the mind's power is
balanced by instincts of body, which should have priority, if they
cannot certainly be in full harmony. The mind can afford to wait for the
maturing of the body, for it survives the body; while the body cannot
afford to wait for the mind, but is irretrievably stunted, if the
nervous energy is not free to stimulate its special organs at least
equally with those of the mind.

It is not, however, necessary to sacrifice the culture of either mind or
body, but to harmonize them. They can and ought to grow together. They
mutually help each other.

Doctor Dio Lewis's "Free Exercises" are also suitable to the
Kindergarten, and may be taken in short lessons of a quarter of an hour,
or even of ten minutes. Children are fond of precision also, and it will
be found that they like the teaching best, when they are made to do the
exercises exactly right, and in perfect time to the music.

But the regular gymnastics and the romping plays must be alternated with
quiet employments, of course, but still active. They will sing at their
plays by rote; and also should be taught other songs by rote. But there
can be introduced a regular drill on the scale, which should never last
more than ten minutes at a time. This, if well managed, will cultivate
their ears and voices, so that in the course of a year they will become
very expert in telling any note struck, if not in striking it. The ear
is cultivated sooner than the voice, and they may be taught to name the
octave as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and their imaginations impressed by
drawing a ladder of eight rounds on the blackboard, to signify that the
voice rises by regular gradation. This will fix their attention, and
their interest will not flag, if the teacher has any tact.

Slates and pencils are indispensable in a Kindergarten from the first.
One side of a slate can be ruled with a sharp point in small squares,
and if their fancy is interested by telling them to make a fish-net,
they will carefully make their pencils follow these lines,--which makes
a first exercise in drawing. Their little fingers are so unmanageable
that at first they will not be able to make straight lines even with
this help. For variety, little patterns can be given them, drawn on
the blackboard, (or on paper similarly ruled,) of picture-frames and
patterns for carpets. When they can make squares well, they can be
shown how to cross them with diagonals, and make circles inside of the
squares, and outside of them, and encouraged to draw on the other side
of the slate, from their own fancy, or from objects. Entire sympathy and
no destructive criticism should meet every effort. Self-confidence is
the first requisite for success. If they think they have had success, it
is indispensable that it should be echoed from without. Of course there
will be poor perspective; and even Schmidt's method of perspective
cannot be introduced to very young children. A natural talent for
perspective sometimes shows itself, which by-and-by can be perfected by
Schmidt's method.[B]

[Footnote B: See _Common School Journal_ for 1842-3.]

But little children will not draw long at a time. Nice manipulation,
which is important, can be taught, and the eye for form cultivated, by
drawing for them birds and letting them prick the lines. It will enchant
them to have something pretty to carry home now and then. Perforated
board can also be used to teach them the use of a needle and thread.
They will like to make the outlines of ships and steamboats, birds,
etc., which can be drawn for them with a lead pencil on the board by the
teachers. Weaving strips of colored card-board into papers cut for them
is another enchanting amusement, and can be made subservient to teaching
them the harmonies of colors. In the latter part of the season, when
they have an accumulation of pricked birds, or have learned to draw
them, they can be allowed colors to paint them in a rough manner. It is,
perhaps, worth while to say, that, in teaching children to draw on
their slates, it is better for the teacher to draw at the moment on the
blackboard than to give them patterns of birds, utensils, etc., because
then the children will see how to begin and proceed, and are not
discouraged by the mechanical perfection of their model.

Drawing ought always rather to precede reading and writing, as the
minute appreciation of forms is the proper preparation for these. But
reading and writing may come into Kindergarten exercises at once, if
reading is taught by the phonic method, (which saves all perplexity to
the child's brain,) and accompanied by printing on the slate. It then
alternates with other things, as one of the amusements. We will describe
how we have seen it taught. The class sat before a blackboard, with
slates and pencils. The teacher said, "Now let us make all the sounds
that we can with the lips: First, put the lips gently together and sound
m," (not _em_,)--which they all did. Then she said,--"Now let us draw
it on the blackboard,--three short straight marks by the side of each
other, and join them on the top,--that is m. What is it?" They sounded
m, and made three marks and joined them on the top, with more or less
success. The teacher said,--"Now put your lips close together and say
p." (This is mute and to be whispered). They all imitated the motion
made. She said,--"Now let us write it; one straight mark, then the
upper lip puffed out at the top." M and p, to be written and
distinguished, are perhaps enough for one lesson, which should not reach
half an hour in length. At the next lesson these were repeated again.
Then the teacher said,--"Now put your lips together and make the same
motion as you did to say p; but make a little more sound, and it will be
b" (which is sonorous). "You must write it differently from p;--you must
make a short mark and put the _under_ lip on." "Now put your teeth on
your under lip and say f." (She gave the power.) "You must write it by
making a short straight mark make a bow, and then cross it with a little
mark across the middle." "Now fix your lips in the same manner and sound
a little, and you will make v. Write it by making two little marks meet
at the bottom."

This last letter was made a separate lesson of, and the other lessons
were reviewed. The teacher then said,--"Now you have learned some
letters,--all the lip--letters,"--making them over, and asking what each
was. She afterwards added w,--giving its power and form, and put it with
the lip-letters. At the next lesson they were told to make the letters
with their lips, and she wrote them down on the board, and then said,--
"Now we will make some tooth-letters. Put your teeth together and say
t." (She gave the power, and showed them how to write it.) "Now put your
teeth together and make a sound and it will be d." "That is written just
like b, only we put the lip behind." "Now put your teeth together and
hiss, and then make this little crooked snake (s). Then fix your teeth
in the same manner and buzz like a bee. You write z pointed this way."
"Now put your teeth together and say j, written with a dot." At the
next lessons the throat-letters were given; first the hard guttural
was sounded, and they were told three ways to write it, c, k, q,
distinguished as _round_, _high_, and _with a tail_. C was not sounded
_see_, but _ke_ (ke, ka, ku). Another lesson gave them the soft guttural
g, but did not sound it _jee_; and the aspirate, but did not call it
_aitch_.

Another lesson gave the vowels, (or voice-letters, as she called them,)
and it was made lively by her writing afterwards all of them in one
word, _mieaou_, and calling it the cat's song. It took from a week
to ten days to teach these letters, one lesson a day of about twenty
minutes. Then came words: mamma, papa, puss, pussy, etc. The vowels were
always sounded as in Italian, and i and y distinguished as _with the
dot_ and _with a tail_. At first only one word was the lesson, and the
letters were reviewed in their divisions of lip-letters, throat-letters,
tooth-letters, voice-letters. The latter were sounded the Italian way,
as in the words _a_rm, _e_gg, _i_nk, _o_ak, and Per_u_. This teacher had
Miss Peabody's "First Nursery Reading-Book," and when she had taught the
class to make all the words on the first page of it, she gave each of
the children the book and told them to find first one word and then
another. It was a great pleasure to them to be told that now they could
read. They were encouraged to copy the words out of the book upon their
slates.

The "First Nursery Reading-Book" has in it _no_ words that have
exceptions in their spelling to the sounds given to the children as
the powers of the letters. Nor has it any diphthong or combinations of
letters, such as oi, ou, ch, sh, th. After they could read it at sight,
they were told that all words were not so regular, and their attention
was called to the initial sounds of thin, shin, and chin, and to the
proper diphthongs, ou, oi, and au, and they wrote words considering
these as additional characters. Then "Mother Goose" was put into their
hands, and they were made to read by rote the songs they already knew
by heart, and to copy them. It was a great entertainment to find the
_queer_ words, and these were made the nucleus of groups of similar
words which were written on the blackboard and copied on their slates.

We have thought it worth while to give in detail this method of teaching
to read, because it is the most entertaining to children to be taught
so, and because many successful instances of the pursual of this plan
have come under our observation; and one advantage of it has been,
that the children so taught, though never going through the common
spelling-lessons, have uniformly exhibited a rare exactness in
orthography.

In going through this process, the children learn to print very nicely,
and generally can do so sooner than they can read. It is a small matter
afterwards to teach them to turn the print into script. They should be
taught to write with the lead pencil before the pen, whose use need not
come into the Kindergarten.

But we must not omit one of the most important exercises for children
in the Kindergarten,--that of block-building. Froebel has four Gifts of
blocks. Ronge's "Kindergarten Guide" has pages of royal octavo filled
with engraved forms that can be made by variously laying eight little
cubes and sixteen little planes two inches long, one inch broad, and
one-half an inch thick. Chairs, tables, stables, sofas, garden-seats,
and innumerable forms of symmetry, make an immense resource for
children, who also should be led to invent other forms and imitate other
objects. So quick are the fancies of children, that the blocks will
serve also as symbols of everything in Nature and imagination. We have
seen an ingenious teacher assemble a class of children around her large
table, to each of whom she had given the blocks. The first thing was to
count them, a great process of arithmetic to most of them. Then she made
something and explained it. It was perhaps a light-house,--and some
blocks would represent rocks near it to be avoided, and ships sailing in
the ocean; or perhaps it was a hen-coop, with chickens inside, and a fox
prowling about outside, and a boy who was going to catch the fox and
save the fowls. Then she told each child to make something, and when it
was done hold up a hand. The first one she asked to explain, and then
went round the class. If one began to speak before another had ended,
she would hold up her finger and say,--"It is not your turn." In the
course of the winter, she taught, over these blocks, a great deal about
the habits of animals. She studied natural history in order to be
perfectly accurate in her symbolic representation of the habitation of
each animal, and their enemies were also represented by blocks. The
children imitated these; and when they drew upon their imaginations for
facts, and made fantastic creations, she would say,--"Those, I think,
were Fairy hens" (or whatever); for it was her principle to accept
everything, and thus tempt out their invention. The great value of this
exercise is to get them into the habit of representing something they
have thought by an outward symbol. The explanations they are always
eager to give teach them to express themselves in words. Full scope is
given to invention, whether in the direction of possibilities or of the
impossibilities in which children's imaginations revel,--in either case
the child being trained to the habit of embodiment of its thought.

Froebel thought it very desirable to have a garden where the children
could cultivate flowers. He had one which he divided into lots for the
several children, reserving a portion for his own share in which they
could assist him. He thought it the happiest mode of calling their
attention to the invisible God, whose power must be waited upon, after
the conditions for growth are carefully arranged according to _laws_
which they were to observe. Where a garden is impossible, a flowerpot
with a plant in it for each child to take care of would do very well.

But the best way to cultivate a sense of the presence of God is to draw
the attention to the conscience, which is very active in children, and
which seems to them (as we all can testify from our own remembrance)
another than themselves, and yet themselves. We have heard a person say,
that in her childhood she was puzzled to know which was herself, the
voice of her inclination or of her conscience, for they were palpably
two, and what a joyous thing it was when she was first convinced that
one was the Spirit of God, whom unlucky teaching had previously embodied
in a form of terror on a distant judgment-seat. Children are consecrated
as soon as they get the spiritual idea, and it may be so presented that
it shall make them happy as well as true. But the adult who enters into
such conversation with a child must be careful not to shock and profane,
instead of nurturing the soul. It is possible to avoid both discouraging
and flattering views, and to give the most tender and elevating
associations.

But children require not only an alternation of physical and mental
amusements, but some instruction to be passively received. They delight
in stories, and a wise teacher can make this subservient to the highest
uses by reading beautiful creations of the imagination. Not only such
household-stories as "Sanford and Merton," Mrs. Farrar's "Robinson
Crusoe," and Salzmann's "Elements of Morality," but symbolization like
the heroes of Asgard, the legends of the Middle Ages, classic and
chivalric tales, the legend of Saint George, and "Pilgrim's Progress,"
can in the mouth of a skilful reader be made subservient to moral
culture. The reading sessions should not exceed ten or fifteen minutes.

Anything of the nature of scientific teaching should be done by
presenting _objects_ for examination and investigation.[C] Flowers and
insects, shells, etc., are easily handled. The observations should be
drawn out of the children, not made to them, except as corrections of
their mistakes. Experiments with the prism, and in crystallization
and transformation, are useful and desirable to awaken taste for
the sciences of Nature. In short, the Kindergarten should give the
beginnings of everything. "What is well begun is half done."

[Footnote C: Calkin's _Object Lessons_ will give hints.]

We must say a word about the locality and circumstances of a
Kindergarten. There is published in Lausanne, France, a newspaper
devoted to the interests of this mode of education, in whose early
numbers is described a Kindergarten; which seems to be of the nature of
a boarding-school, or, at least, the children are there all day. Each
child has a garden, and there is one besides where they work in common.
There are accommodations for keeping animals, and miniature tools to do
mechanical labor of various kinds. In short, it is a child's world. But
in this country, especially in New England, parents would not consent
to be so much separated from their children, and a few hours of
Kindergarten in the early part of the day will serve an excellent
purpose,--using up the effervescent activity of children, who may
healthily be left to themselves the rest of the time, to play or rest,
comparatively unwatched.

Two rooms are indispensable, if there is any variety of age. It is
desirable that one should be sequestrated to the quiet employments. A
pianoforte is desirable, to lead the singing, and accompany the plays,
gymnastics, frequent marchings, and dancing, when that is taught,--which
it should be. But a hand-organ which plays fourteen tunes will help to
supply the want of a piano, and a guitar in the hands of a ready teacher
will do better than nothing.

Sometimes a genial mother and daughters might have a Kindergarten, and
devote themselves and the house to it, especially if they live in one
of our beautiful country-towns or cities. The habit, in the city of New
York, of sending children to school in an omnibus, hired to go round the
city and pick them up, suggests the possibility of a Kindergarten in one
of those beautiful residences up in town, where there is a garden before
or behind the house. It is impossible to keep Kindergarten _by the
way_. It must be the main business of those who undertake it; for it is
necessary that every individual child should be borne, as it were, on
the heart of the _garteners_, in order that it be _inspired_ with order,
truth, and goodness. To develop a child from within outwards, we must
plunge ourselves into its peculiarity of imagination and feeling. No
one person could possibly endure such absorption, of life in labor
unrelieved, and consequently two or three should unite in the
undertaking in order to be able to relieve each other from the enormous
strain on life. The compensations are, however, great. The charm of the
various individuality, and of the refreshing presence of conscience yet
unprofaned, is greater than can be found elsewhere in this work-day
world. Those were not idle words which came from the lips of Wisdom
Incarnate:--"Their angels do always behold the face of my Father": "Of
such is the kingdom of heaven."


A PICTURE.

[AFTER WITHER.]


  Sweet child, I prithee stand,
  While I try my novel hand
  At a portrait of thy face,
  With its simple childish grace.

  Cheeks as soft and finely hued
  As the fleecy cloud imbued
  With the roseate tint of morn
  Ere the golden sun is born:--
  Lips that like a rose-hedge curl,
  Guarding well the gates of pearl,
 --What care I for pearly gate?
  By the rose-hedge will I wait:--
  Chin that rounds with outline fine,
  Melting off in hazy line;
  As in misty summer noon,
  Or beneath the harvest moon,
  Curves the smooth and sandy shore,
  Flowing off in dimness hoar:--
  Eyes that roam like timid deer
  Sheltered by a thicket near,
  Peeping out between the boughs,
  Or that, trusting, safely browse:--
  Arched o'er all the forehead pure,
  Giving us the prescience sure
  Of an ever-growing light;
  As in deepening summer night,
  Over fields to ripen soon
  Hangs the silver crescent moon.

       *       *       *       *       *


TWO AND ONE.


I.


The winter sun streamed pleasantly into the room. On the tables lay the
mother's work of the morning,--the neatly folded clothes she had just
been ironing. A window was opened a little way to let some air into the
room too closely heated by the brisk fire. The air fanned the leaves of
the ivy-plant that stood in the window, and of the primrose which
seemed ready to open in the warm sun. Above, there hung a cage, and a
canary-bird shouted out now and then its pleasure at the sunny day, with
a half-dream perhaps of a tropical climate in the tropical air with
which the coal-fire filled the room. Mrs. Schroder leaned back in her
old-fashioned rocking-chair, and folded her hands, one over the other,
ready to rest after her morning's labor. She was willing to take the
repose won by her work; indeed, this was the only way she had managed to
preserve her strength for all the work it was necessary for her to do.
She had been conscious that her powers had answered for just so much and
no more, and she had never been able to make further demands upon them.

When years before she was left a widow, with two sons to support and
educate, all her friends and neighbors prophesied that her health would
prove unequal to either work, and agreed that it was very fortunate that
she had a rich relation or two to help her. But, unfortunately, the rich
relations preferred helping only in their own way. One uncle agreed to
send the older boy to his father's relations in Germany, while the other
wished to take the younger with him to his home in the South; and an
aunt-in-law promised Mrs. Schroder work enough as seamstress to support
herself.

It is singular how hard it is, for those who have large means and
resources, to understand how to supply the little wants and needs of
those less fortunate. The smallest stream in the mountains will find its
way through some little channel, over rocks, or slowly through quiet
meadows, into the great rivers, and finally feeds the deep sea, which
is very thankless, and thinks little of restoring what is so prodigally
poured into it. It only knows how to sway up with its grand tide upon
the broad beaches, or to wrestle with turreted rocks, or, for some
miles, perhaps, up the great rivers, it is willing to leave some flavor
of its salt strength. So it is that we little ones, to the last, pour
out our little stores into the great seas of wealth,--and the Neptunes,
the gods of riches, scarcely know how to return us our due, if they
would.

When Mrs. Schroder, then, refused these kindly offers, because she knew
that her husband had wished his boys should be brought up together and
in America, and because she could not separate them from each other or
from herself, the relations thought best to leave her to her own will,
and drew back, feeling that they had done their part for humanity and
kinship. Now and then Mrs. Schroder received a present of a worn
shawl or a bonnet out of date, and one New Year there came inclosed a
dollar-bill apiece for the boys. Ernest threw his into the fire before
his mother could stop him, while Harry said he would spend his for the
very meanest thing he could think of; and that very night he bought some
sausages with it, to satisfy, as he said, only their lowest wants.

Mrs. Schroder succeeded in carrying out her will, in spite of prophecy.
Her very delicacy of body led her to husband her strength, while the
boys very early learned that they must help their mother to get through
her day's work. Her feebleness of health helped her, too, in another
way,--by stopping their boy-quarrels.

"Boys, don't wrangle so! If you knew how it makes my head ache!"

When these words came from the mother resting in her chair, the quarrel
ceased suddenly. It ended without settlement, to be sure, which is the
best way of finishing up quarrels. There are always seeds of new wars
sown in treaties of peace. Austria is not content with her share of
Poland, and Russia privately determines upon another bite of Turkey.
John thinks it very unjust that he must give up his ball to Tom, and
resolves to have the matter out when they get down into the street;
while Tom, equally dissatisfied, feels that he has been treated like a
baby, and despises the umpire for the partial decision.

These two boys, indeed, had their perpetual quarrel. Harry, the older,
always got on in the world. He had a strong arm, a jolly face, and a
solid opinion of himself that made its way without his asking for it.
Ernest, on the other hand, was obliged to be constantly dependent on his
brother for defence, for his position with other boys at school,--as he
grew up, for his position in life, even. Harry was the favorite always.
The schoolmaster--or teacher, as we call him nowadays--liked Harry best,
although he was always in scrapes, and often behindhand in his studies,
while Ernest was punctual, quiet, and always knew his lessons, though
his eyes looked dreamily through his books rather than into them.

Harry had great respect for Ernest's talent, made way for it, would
willingly work for him. Ernest accepted these benefits: he could not
help it, they were so generously offered. But the consciousness that
he could not live without them weighed him down and made him moody. He
alternately reproached himself for his ingratitude, and his brother for
his favors. Sometimes he called himself a slave for being willing to
accept them; at other times he would blame himself as a tyrant for
making such demands upon an elder brother.

As Mrs. Schroder leaned back in her chair after her morning's labor,
the door opened, and a young girl came into the room. She had a fresh,
bright face, a brown complexion, a full, round figure. She came in
quickly, nodded cheerily to Mrs. Schroder, and knelt down in front of
the fire to warm her hands.

"I did want to come in this morning," she said,--"the very last day! I
should have liked to help you about Ernest's things. But Aunt Martha
must needs have a supernumerary wash, and I have just come in from
hanging the last of the clothes upon the line."

"It is very good of you, Violet," answered Mrs. Schroder, "but I was
glad to-day to have plenty to do. It is the thinking that troubles me.
My boys are grown up into men, and Ernest is going! It is our first
parting. To-day I would rather work than think."

Violet was the young girl's name. A stranger might think that the name
did not suit her. In her manner was nothing of the shrinking nature that
is a characteristic of the violet. Timidity and reserve she probably did
have somewhere in her heart,--as all women do,--but it had never been
her part to play them out. She had all her life been called upon to show
only energy, activity, and self-reliance. She was an only child, and
had been obliged to be son and daughter, brother and sister in one. Her
father was the owner of the house in which were the rooms occupied by
Mrs. Schroder and her sons. The little shop on the lower floor was his
place of business. He was a watchmaker, had a few clocks on the shelves
of his small establishment, and a limited display of jewelry in the
window, together with a supply of watch-keys, and minute-hands and
hour-hands for decayed watches. For though his sign proclaimed him a
watchmaker, his occupation perforce was rather that of repairing and
cleaning watches and clocks than in the higher branch of creation.

Violet's childhood was happy enough. She was left in unrestrained
liberty outside of the little back-parlor, where her Aunt Martha
held sway. Out of school-hours, her joy and delight were to join the
school-boys in their wildest plays. She climbed fences, raced up and
down alley-ways, stormed inoffensive door-yards, chased wandering
cats with the best of them. She was a favorite champion among the
boys,--placed at difficult points of espionage, whether it were over
beast, man, woman, or boy. She was proud of mounting some imaginary
rampart, or defending some dangerous position. Sometimes a taunt was
hurled from the enemy upon her allies for associating with a "girl;" but
it always received a contemptuous answer,--"You'd better look out, she
could lick any one of you!" And at the reply, Violet would look down
from her post on the picketed fence, shake her long curls triumphantly,
and climb to some place inaccessible to the enemy, to show how useful
her agility could be to her own party.

The time of sorrow came at twilight, when the boys separated for their
homes,--when Harry and Ernest clattered up to their mother's rooms. They
could be boys still. They might throw open the house-doors with a
shout and halloo, and fling away caps and boots with no more than an
uncared-for reprimand. But Violet must go noiselessly through the dark
entry, and, as she turned to close the door that let her into the
parlor, she was greeted by Aunt Martha's "Now do shut the door quietly!"
As she lowered the latch without any sound, she would say to herself,
"Why is it that boys must have all the fun, and girls all the work?"
She felt as if she shut out liberty and put on chains. Her work began
then,--to lay the tea-table, to fetch and carry as Aunt Martha ordered.
All this was pleasanter than the quiet evening that followed, because
she liked the occupation and motion. But to be quiet the whole evening,
that was a trial! After the tea-things were cleared away, she would
sit awhile by the stove, imagining all sorts of excitements in the
combustion within; but she could not keep still long without letting a
clatter of shovel and tongs, or some vigorous blows of the poker, show
what a glorious drum she thought the stove would make. Or if Aunt Martha
suggested her unloved and neglected dolls, she would retire to the
corner with them inevitably to come back in disgrace. Either the large
wooden-headed doll came noisily down from the high-backed chair, where
she had been placed as the Maid of Saragossa, or a suspicious smell of
burning arose, when Joan of Arc really did take fire from the candle on
her imaginary funeral-pile. Knitting was no more of a sedative, though
for many years it had stilled Aunt Martha's nerves. It was singular how
the cat contrived always to get hold of Violet's ball of yarn and keep
it, in spite of Violet's activity and the jolly chase she had for it all
round the room, over chairs and under tables. Even her father, during
these long evenings, often looked up over his round spectacles, through
which he was perusing a volume of the "Encyclopedia," to wonder if
Violet could never be quiet.

As she grew up, there was activity enough in her life, through which her
temperament could let off its steam: a large house to be cared for and
kept in order, some of the lodgers to be waited upon, and Aunt Martha,
with her failing strength, more exacting than ever. Her evenings now
were her happy times, for she frequently spent them in Mrs. Schroder's
room. One of the economies in the Schroders' life was that their
pleasures were so cheap. What with Harry's genial gayety and Ernest's
spiritual humor, and the gayety and humor of the friends that loved
them, they did not have to pay for their hilarity on the stage. There
were quiet evenings and noisy ones, and Violet liked them both. She
liked to study languages with Ernest; she liked the books from the
City Library that they read aloud,--romances that were taken for
Mrs. Schroder's pleasure, Ruskins which Ernest enjoyed, and Harry's
favorites, which, to tell the truth, were few. He begged to be made the
reader,--otherwise, he confessed, he was in danger of falling asleep.

Violet had grown up into a woman, and the boys had become men; and now
she was kneeling in front of Mrs. Schroder's fire.

"Ernest's last day at home," she said, dreamily. "Oh, now I begin to
pity Harry!"

"To pity Harry?" said Mrs. Schroder. "Yes, indeed! But it is Ernest that
I think of most. He is going away among strangers. He depends upon Harry
far more than Harry depends upon him."

"It is just that," said Violet. "Harry has always been the one to give.
But it will be changed now, when Ernest comes home. You see, he will be
great then. He has been dependent upon us, all along, because genius
must move so slowly at first; but when he comes back, he will be above
us, and, oh! how shall we know where to find him?"

"You do not mean that my boy will look down upon his mother?" said Mrs.
Schroder, raising herself in her chair.

"Look down upon us?" cried Violet. "Oh, no! it is only the little that
do that, that they may appear to be high. The truly great never look
down. They are kneeling already, and they look up. If they only would
look down upon us! But it is the old story: the body can do for a while
without the spirit, can make its way in the world for a little, and
meantime the spirit is dependent upon the body. Of course it could not
live without the body,--what we call life. But by-and-by spirit must
assert itself, and find its wings. And where, oh, where, will it rise
to? Above us,--above us all!"

"How strangely you talk!" said Mrs. Schroder, looking into Violet's
face. "What has this to do with poor Ernest?"

"I was thinking of poor Harry," said Violet. "All this time he has been
working for Ernest. Harry has earned the money with which Ernest goes
abroad,--which he has lived upon all these years,--not only his daily
bread, but what his talent, his genius, whatever it is, has fed itself
with. Ernest is too unpractical to have been able even to feed himself!"

"And he knows it, my poor Ernest!" said Mrs. Schroder. "This is why
he should be pitied. It is hard for a generous nature to owe all to
another. It has weighed Ernest down; it has embittered the love of the
two brothers."

"But it is more bitter for Harry," persisted Violet. "All this time
Ernest could think of the grand return he could bring when his time
should come. But Harry! He brings the clay out of which Ernest moulds
the statue; but the spirit that Ernest breathes into the form,--will
Harry understand it or appreciate it? The body is very reverent of the
soul. But I think the spirit is not grateful enough to the body. There
comes a time when it says to it, 'I can do without thee!' and spurns the
kind comrade which has helped it on so far. Yet it could not have done
without the joy of color and form, of sight and hearing, that the body
has helped it to."

"You do not mean that Ernest will ever spurn Harry?--they are brothers!"
said poor Mrs. Schroder.

Violet looked round and saw the troubled expression in Mrs. Schroder's
face, and laughed as she laid her head caressingly in her friend's lap.

"I have frightened you with my talk," she said. "I believe the hot air
in the room bewildered my senses and set me dreaming. Yes, Harry and
Ernest are brothers, and I believe they will always work together and
for each other. I have no business with forebodings, this laughing,
sunny day. The March sun is melting the icicles, and they came
clattering down upon me, as I was in the yard, with a happy, twinkling,
childish laugh. There are spring sounds all about, water melting and
dripping everywhere, full of joy. I am the last person, dear mother
Schroder, to make you feel sad."

Violet got up quickly, and busied herself about the room: filled the
canary's cup with water, drew out the table, and made all the usual
preparations necessary for dinner, talking all the time gayly, till she
had dispersed all the clouds on Mrs. Schroder's brow, and then turned to
go away.

"You will stay and see Harry and Ernest?" asked Mrs. Schroder. "They
have gone to make the last arrangements."

"Not now," said Violet. "They will like to be alone with you. I will see
Ernest to bid him good-bye."


II.


Two years passed away. At the end of this time Mrs. Schroder died. They
had passed on, as years go, slowly and quickly. Sometimes, as a carriage
takes us through narrow city-streets, and we look in at the windows we
are passing, we wonder at the close life that is going on behind them,
and we say to ourselves, "How slow the life must be within those
confined walls!" At other times, when our own life is cramped or jarred
by circumstances, we look with envy on the happy family-circles we see
smiling within, and have a fancy that the roses have fallen to others,
and we only have the thorns. There are full years, and there are years
of famine, just as there come moments to all that seem like a life-time,
and lives that hurry themselves away in a passing of the pendulum. It is
of no use to shake the hour-glass; yet, when we are counting upon time,
the sands hurry down like snow-flakes.

It was true, as Violet had foreboded, that Harry missed Ernest. He went
heavily about his work, and the house seemed silent without him. Harry
confessed this sadly to Violet, when his brother had been gone about a
year. They had heard from Ernest in Florence, that he was getting on
well. He had found occupation in the workshop of a famous sculptor, and
had time besides to carry out some of his own designs.

"He writes me," said Harry, "that he will be able now to support
himself, and that he does not need my help. Do you know, Violet, that
takes the life out of me? I feel as if I had nothing to work for. I
always felt a pride in working for Ernest, because I thought he was
fitted for something better. Violet, it saddens me to think he can do
without me. I go to my daily work; I lift my hammer and let it fall; but
it is all mechanically; there is no vital force in the blow. It is hard
to live without him."

"This is what I was afraid of," said Violet. "I was afraid he would
think he could do without us. But he cannot do without you."

"Say that he cannot do without _us_" said Harry; "for he needs you, as I
need you, and the question is, with which the need is greater."

Violet turned red and pale, and said,--

"We cannot answer that question yet."

After Mrs. Schroder died, it was sad enough in the old rooms. In the
daytime, when Harry was away at his work, Violet would go up-stairs and
put all things in order, and make them look as nearly as possible as
they did when the mother was there. Harry came to pass his evenings with
Violet.

A few days after his mother's death, he said to Violet,--

"Is it not time for you to tell me that it is I who need you more than
Ernest? He writes very happily now. He is succeeding; he has an order
for his statue. He writes and thinks of nothing else but what he will
create,--of the ideas that have been waiting for an expression. I am a
carpenter still, I shall never be more, and my work will always be less
and lower than my love. Could you be satisfied with him? He has attained
now, Ernest has, what he was looking for; and have I not a right to my
reward?"

The tears tumbled from Violet's eyes.

"Dear, noble Harry! I am not ready for you yet. I do believe he is above
us both, and satisfied to be above us both; but I am not ready yet."

A day or two afterwards, Harry brought Violet a letter from Italy. It
was from an artist friend of Ernest's, whose wife and mother had kindly
received him into their home. Carlo wrote now that Ernest had been taken
very ill. They thought him recovering, but he was still very low, and
his mind depressed, and he continued scarcely conscious of those around
him. He talked wildly, and begged that his home friends would come to
him; and though his new Italian friends promised him all that kindness
could give, Carlo wrote to ask if it were not possible for his brother
or his mother to come out. He had been working very hard, was just
finishing an order that had occupied him the last year, and he had
overtasked his mind as well as his body.

"You will go to him!" exclaimed Violet, when she had read the letter.

"If nothing better can be done," answered Harry. "Only yesterday I made
a contract for work with a hard master. It would be difficult to break
it; but I will do it gladly, if there is nothing better to be done."

"You mean that you would like to have me go to Ernest," said Violet.

"Will you go?" asked Harry. "That will be the very best thing."

Aunt Martha broke in here. She had been sitting quietly at the other
side of the table, as usual, apparently engrossed with her knitting.

"You do not mean to send Violet to Italy, and to take care of Ernest?"
she exclaimed. "What are you thinking of? I would never consent to
Violet's going alone; it would not be proper."

Violet grew crimson at the reproof. She was standing beneath the light,
and turned away her head.

"Not if I were Harry's betrothed?" she asked.

Aunt Martha looked up quickly. She saw the glad, relieved expression of
Harry's face.

"If you are engaged to Harry, that is different, indeed!" she said.

It did make a difference in Aunt Martha's thoughts. In the first place,
it gave her pleasure. Harry was well-to-do in, the world. He would make
a good husband for Violet, and a kindly one. She liked him better than
she did Ernest. She had supposed Violet would marry one or other of the
boys, and, "just because things went at cross-grain in the world," she
had always supposed Violet would prefer Ernest. She had never liked him
herself. He was always spinning cobwebs in his brain; she never could
understand a word of his talk. She did not believe he would live, and
then Violet would be left a poor widow, as his mother had been left when
her Hermann died. She remembered all about that. Ernest's absence had
encouraged her with regard to Harry; but two years had passed, and it
seemed to her the two were no nearer an engagement.

But now it was settled; and if this foolish plan of Violet's going to
Italy had brought it about, the plan itself wore a different color.

Aunt Martha said no more of the impropriety. She reserved her
complainings for the subject of the trouble of getting Violet ready, all
of a sudden, for such a voyage.

Little trouble fell to Aunt Martha's share. Violet went about it gladly.
She advised directly with a friend who could tell her from experience
exactly how little she would want, while Harry completed all the
business arrangements. The activity, the adventure of it, suited
Violet's old tastes. She had no dread of a solitary voyage, of passing
through countries whose languages she could not speak. Though burdened
with anxiety for Ernest and for Harry, she went away with a glad heart.
Unconsciously to herself, she reversed her old exclamation, saying to
herself,--

"The men, indeed, should not have all the work, and the women all the
play!"

The journey was in fact easily accomplished. At another time Violet's
thoughts would have been occupied with the scenes she passed through.
Now she travelled as a devotee travels heavenward, making a monastery of
the world, and convent-walls out of rays from Paradise. She thought
only of the end of her journey; and everything touched her through the
throbbings of her heart. On shipboard, she was busy with the poor old
sick father whom his children were carrying home to his native land. In
passing through Paris, she used all her time in helping a sister to find
a brother; because her energy was always helpful. In travelling across
France, she looked at her companions, asking herself to what home they
were going, what friends they were bound to meet. From Marseilles to
Leghorn, she was the only one of the women-passengers who was not sick;
and she was called upon for help in different languages, which she could
understand only through the teachings of her heart.

It was this same teacher that led her to understand Ernest's friends in
Florence, when she had found them, and that led them to understand her.
Ernest was in much the same state as when they wrote. He was growing
stronger, but his mind seemed to wander.

"And do you know, dear lady," said Monica, Carlo's mother, "that we fear
he has been starving,--starving, too, when we, his friends, had plenty,
and would have been glad to give him? He was to have been paid for his
work when he had finished it; and he had given up his other work for his
master, that be might complete his own statue. Oh, you should see that!
He is putting it into the marble,--or taking it out, rather, for it has
life almost, and springs from the stone."

"But Ernest?" asked Violet.

"Well, then, just for want of money, he was starving,--so the doctor
says, now. I suppose he was too proud to write home for money, and his
wages had stopped. And he was too proud to eat our bread. That was hard
of him. Just the poor food that we have, to think he should have been
too proud to let us give it him!--that was not kind."

Ernest did not recognize Violet at first, but she took her place in the
daily care of him. Monica begged that she would prepare food for him
such as he had been used to have at home. She was very sure that would
cure him. It would be almost as good for him as his native air. She
was very glad a woman had come to take care of him. "His brother's
betrothed,--a sister,--she would bring him back to life as no one else
could."

Violet did bring him back to life. Ernest had become so accustomed to
her presence in his half-conscious state, that he never showed surprise
at finding her there. He hardly showed pleasure; only in her absence his
feverish restlessness returned; in her presence he was quiet.

He grew strong enough to come out into the air to walk a little.

"I must go to work soon," he said one day. "Monsieur will be coming for
his Psyche."

"Your Psyche! I have not seen it!" exclaimed Violet. "I have not dared
to raise the covering."

They went in to look at it. Violet stood silent before it. Yes, as
Monica had said, it was ready to spring from the marble. It seemed
almost too spiritual for form, it scarcely needed the wings for flight,
it was ethereal already,--marble only so long as it remained unfinished.

At last Violet spoke.

"Do not let it go! Do not finish it; it will leave the marble then, I
know! Oh, Ernest, you have seen the spirit, and the spirit only! Could
not you hold it to earth more closely than that? It was too bold a
thought of you to try to mould the spirit alone. Is not the body
precious, too? Why wilt you be so careless of that?"

"If the body would care for me," said Ernest, "I would care for the
body. Indeed, this work shows that I have cared for the body," he went
on. "One of these days, I shall receive money for my work; I have
already sold my Psyche. One lives on money, you know. But it is but a
poor battle,--the battle of life. I shall finish my Psyche, give it to
the man who buys it, and then"----

"And then you will come home, come home to us!" said Violet; "and we
will take care of you. You shall not miss your Psyche!"

"And then," continued Ernest, shaking his head, "then I shall go into
Sicily. I shall help Garibaldi. I shall join the Italian cause."

"Garibaldi! The cause!" exclaimed Violet. "Are you not ashamed to plead
it? You know you would go then not for others, but to throw away your
own life! You are tired of living, and you seek that way to rid yourself
of life! Confess it at once!"

"Very well, then," answered Ernest, "it is so."

"Then do not sully a good cause with a traitor's help," said Violet,
"nor take its noble name. The life you offer would be worth no more than
a spent ball. You have been a coward in your own fight, and Garibaldi
does not--nor does Italy--want a coward in his ranks. Oh, Ernest,
forgive me my hard words! but it is our life that you are spending so
freely, it is our blood that you want to pour out! If you cannot live
for yourself, for me, will you not live for Harry's sake?"

"For you, for you, Heart's-Ease!" exclaimed Ernest, calling Violet by
one of her old childish names, "But Harry lives for you, and you for
him; and God knows there is no life left for me. But you are right: I am
a coward and a bungler, because I can create no life. I give myself to
you and him."

Violet stood long before the statue of Psyche, cold as the marble, with
hot fires raging within.

"He loves me, loves me as Harry does! His love is deeper,
perhaps,--higher, perhaps. He was not above me,--he lifted me above
himself, looked up to me! He dies for me!"

Presently she found Ernest.

"Ernest, you say you will do as we wish. I must go home directly, and
without you. I shall take a vessel from Leghorn. Harry and I planned my
going home that way. It is less expensive, more direct; and I confess I
do not feel so strong about going home alone as I did in coming. My head
is full of thoughts, and I could not take care of myself; but I would
rather go alone. You will stay here, and we will write to you, or Harry
will come for you. But you must take care of yourself; you must not
starve yourself."

Her Italian friends accompanied her to the vessel and bade her good-bye,
Ernest was with them. She wrote to Harry the day she sailed. The vessel
looked comfortable enough; it was well-laden, and in its hold was the
marble statue of a great man,--great in worth as well as in weight.

A few weeks after Violet left, Harry appeared in Florence. He had just
missed her letter.

"I came to bring you both home," he said. "I finished my contract
successfully, and gave myself this little vacation."

Harry was dismayed to find that Violet was gone.

"But we will return directly, and arrive in time, perhaps, to greet her
as she gets home."

Monica urged,--

"But you must not keep him long. See how much he has done in Italy! You
will see he must come back again."

"Monsieur" had been for his statue, and was to send for it the next day,
more than satisfied with it.

Harry was astonished.

"Five hundred dollars! It would take me long enough to work that out!
Ah, Ernest, your hammering is worth more than mine!"

Harry's surprise was not merely for the money earned. When he saw the
white marble figure, which brought into the poor room where it stood
grandeur and riches and life and grace, he wondered still more.

"I see now," he said. "You spent your life on this. No wonder you were
starving when your spirit was putting itself into this mould!"

Harry was in a hurry to return. Ernest's little affairs were quickly
settled. Harry was surprised to find Italian life was so like home life
in this one thing: he had been treated so kindly, just as he would have
been in his own home,--just as Mrs. Schroder, and even Aunt Martha,
would have treated a poor Italian stranger who had sought a lodging in
their house; they had welcomed Harry with the same warmth and feeling
with which they had all along cared for Ernest. This was something that
Harry knew how to translate.

"When we were boys," he said to Ernest, as they set out to return, "and
you used to talk about Europe, we little thought I should travel into it
so carelessly as I did when I came here. I crossed it much as a pair of
compasses would on the map: my only points of rest were the home I left
and the one I was reaching for."

Much in the same way they passed through it again. Harry spoke of
and observed outward things, but everything showed that it was but a
superficial observation. His thoughts were with Violet.

"'The Nereïd!' are you very sure the Nereïd is a sound vessel?" he often
asked.

"What should I know of the Nereïd?" at last answered Ernest,
impatiently.

"I believe you don't care a rush for Violet!" cried Harry. "You can have
dreams instead! Your Psyche, your winged angels and all your visions,
they suffice you. While for me,--I tell you, Ernest, she is my flesh and
blood, my meat and drink. To think of her alone on that ocean drives me
wild; that inexorable sea haunts me night and day." He turned to look at
Ernest, and saw him pale and livid.

"God forgive me!" he said. "I know you love her, too! But it is our old
quarrel; we cannot understand each other, yet cannot live either of us
without the other. Yet I am glad to quarrel even in the old way. That is
pleasant, after all, is it not?"

They had a long, stormy voyage home; and a delay in crossing France had
made them miss the steamer they hoped to take. At each delay, Ernest
grew more silent, sadder, his face darker, his features thinner and more
sharpened. Harry was wild in his impatience, and angry, but more and
more thoughtful and careful for Ernest.

At last they reached the harbor. A friend met them who had been warned
of their arrival by telegraph from Halifax. He met them to tell them of
ill news; they would rather hear it from him.

The Nereïd was lost,--lost just outside the Bay,--the vessel, the crew,
all the passengers,--in a fearful storm of a week ago, the very storm
that had delayed their own passage.

"Let us go home," said Harry. "Where is it?" asked Ernest. "Why were we
not lost in the same storm?" cried Harry. "How could we pass quietly
along the very place?"

The brothers went home into the old room. Kindly hands had been caring
for it,--had tried to place all things in their accustomed order. Even
the canary had come back from Aunt Martha's parlor.

There was a letter on the table. Harry saw that only. It was Violet's
letter, which she wrote on leaving Leghorn. He tore it from its
cover,--then gave it, opened, to Ernest.

"You must read it for me,--I cannot!" and he hurried into an inner room.

Ernest held the letter helplessly and looked round. For him there was
a double desolation in the room. The books stood untouched upon the
shelves; his mother's work-basket was laid aside. Suddenly there came
back to him the memory of that last day at home,--the joyous spring-day
in March,--which was so full of gay sounds. The clatter of the dropping
ice, the happy laugh of the water breaking into freedom, the song of the
canary, now hushed by the presence of strangers,--the thoughts of these
made gay even that moment of parting. And with them came the image of
the dear mother and of the warm-hearted Violet. Oh, the parting was
happier than the return! Now there was silence in the room, and
absence,--such unuse about all things,--such a terrible stillness! He
longed for a voice, for a sound, for words.

In his hands were words, her own, her last words. Half unconsciously he
read through the letter, as if unwillingly too, because it might not
belong to him. Yet they were her words, and for him.

"DEAR HARRY,--

"Do you know that I love him?--that I love Ernest? I ought to have known
it, just because I did not know how to confess it to myself or you. I
thought he was above us both; and when I pitied myself that he could not
love me, I pitied you, and my pity, perhaps, I mistook for love of you.
Perhaps I mistook it, for I know not but I was conscious all the time of
loving him. I learned the truth when I stood by the side of his Psyche,
and saw, that, though she hovered from the marble, though he had won
fame and success, he was unsatisfied still. It is true, he must always
remain unsatisfied, because it is his genius that thirsts, and it is my
ideal that he loves, not me. But he is dying; he asks for me. You never
could refuse him what he asked. You will give me to him? If you were not
so generous and noble-hearted, I could not ask you both for your pardon
and your pity. But you are both, and will do with me as you will.

"Your

"VIOLET."

As Ernest finished reading, as he was fully comprehending the meaning of
the words which at first had struck him idly, Harry opened the door and
came in. Ernest could not look up at first. He thought, perhaps, he was
about to darken the sorrow already heavy enough upon his brother.

But when Harry spoke and Ernest looked into his face, he saw there the
usual clear, strong expression.

"I am going to tell you, Ernest, what I should have said before,--what I
went to Florence to tell you.

"After Violet left, the whole truth began to come upon me. She loved
you; I had no right to her. She pitied me; that was why she clung to
me. You know I cannot think quickly. It was long before it all came out
clearly; but when it did come, I was anxious to act directly. I had
finished my work; I went to tell you that Violet was yours; she should
stay with you in that warm Italian sir that you liked so much; she
should bring you back to life. But I was too late. I know not if it is
my failure that has brought about this sorrow, or if God has taken it
into His own hands. I only know that she was yours living, she is yours
now. I must tell you that in the first moment of that terrible shock of
the loss, there came a wicked, selfish gleam of gladness that I had not
given her up to you. But I have wiped that out with my tears, and I can
tell you without shame that is yours, that I have given her to you."

"We can both love her now," said Ernest.

"If she were living, she might have separated us," said Harry; "but
since God has taken her, she makes us one."

And the brothers read together Violet's letter.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEW ATLANTIC CABLE.


When the indefatigable Cyrus told our people, five years ago, that he
was going to lay a telegraph-cable in the bed of the ocean between
America and Europe, and place New York and London in instantaneous
communication, our wide-awake and enterprising fellow-citizens said very
coolly that they should like to see him do it!--a phrase intended to
convey the idea that in their opinion he had promised a great deal more
than he could perform. But Cyrus was as good as his word. The cable was
laid, and worked for the space of three weeks, conveying between the Old
and New World four hundred messages of all sorts, and some of them of
the greatest importance. Four years have elapsed since the fulfilment
of that promise, and now Mr. Field comes again before the public and
announces that a new Atlantic cable is going to be laid down, which
is not only going to work, but is to be a permanent success; and this
promise will likewise be fulfilled. You may shrug your shoulders, my
friend, and look incredulous, but I assure you the grand idea will be
realized, and speedily. I have been heretofore as incredulous as any
one; but having examined the evidence in its favor, I am fully convinced
not only of the feasibility of laying a cable, and of the certainty
of its practical operation when laid, but of its complete
indestructibility. If you will accompany me through the following
pages, my doubting friend, I will convince you of the correctness of my
conclusions.

When the fact of the successful laying of the old Atlantic cable was
known, there was no class of people in this country more surprised at
the result than the electricians, engineers, and practical telegraphers.
Meeting a friend of mine, an electrician, and who, by the way, is also
a great mathematician, and, like all of his class, inclined to be very
exact in his statements, I exclaimed, in all the warmth and exuberance
of feeling engendered by so great an event,--

"Isn't it glorious, this idea of being able to send our lightning across
the ocean, and to talk with London and Paris as readily as we do with
New York and New Orleans?"

"It is, indeed," responded my friend, with equal enthusiasm; "my hopes
are more than realized by this wonderful achievement."

"Hopes realized!" exclaimed I. "Why, I didn't consider there was one
chance in a thousand of success,--did you?"

"Why, yes," replied my exact mathematical friend; "I didn't think the
chances so much against the success of the enterprise as that. From the
deductions which I drew from a very careful examination of all the facts
I could obtain, I concluded that the chances of absolute failure were
about ninety-seven and a half per cent.!"

For many of the facts contained in this article I am indebted to the
very clear and able address delivered by Mr. Cyrus W. Field before the
American Geographical and Statistical Society, at Clinton Hall, New
York, in May last, upon the prospects of the Atlantic telegraph.

At the start, of course, every one was very ignorant of the work to be
done in establishing a telegraph across the ocean. Submarine telegraphy
was in its infancy, and aërial telegraphy had scarcely outgrown its
swaddling-clothes. We had to grope our way in the dark. It was only by
repeated experiments and repeated failures that we were able to find out
all the conditions of success.

The Atlantic telegraph, it is said by some, was a failure. Well, if it
were so, replies Mr. Field, I should say (as is said of many a man, that
he did more by his death than by his life) that even in its failure it
has been of immense benefit to the science of the world, for it has been
the great experimenting cable. No electrician ever had so long a line to
work upon before; and hence the science of submarine telegraphy never
made such rapid progress as after that great experiment. In fact, all
cables that have since been laid, where the managers availed themselves
of the knowledge and experience obtained by the Atlantic cable, have
been perfectly successful. All these triumphs over the sea are greatly
indebted to the bold attempt to cross the Atlantic made four years ago.

The first Atlantic cable, therefore, has accomplished a great work in
deep-sea telegraphy, a branch of the art but little known before. In one
sense it was a failure. In another it was a brilliant success. Despite
every disadvantage, it was laid across the ocean; it was stretched from
shore to shore; and for three weeks it continued to operate,--a time
long enough to settle forever the scientific question whether it was
possible to communicate between two continents so far apart. This was
the work of the first Atlantic telegraph; and if it lies silent at the
bottom of the ocean till the destruction of the globe, it has done
enough for the science of the world and the benefit of mankind to
entitle it to be held in honored and blessed memory.

Now, as to the prospect of success in another attempt to lay a telegraph
across the ocean. The most erroneous opinions prevail as to the
difficulties of laying submarine telegraphs in general, and securing
them against injury. It is commonly supposed that the number of failures
is much greater than of successes; whereas the fact is, that the later
attempts, where made with proper care, have been almost uniformly
successful. In proof of this I will refer to the printed "List of all
the Submarine Telegraph-Cables manufactured and laid down by Messrs.
Glass, Elliot, & Co., of London," from which it appears that within the
space of eight years, from 1854 to 1862, they have manufactured and laid
down twenty-five different cables, among which are included three of
the longest lines connecting England with the Continent,--namely, from
England to Holland, 140 miles, to Hanover, 280 miles, and to Denmark,
368 miles,--and the principal lines in the Mediterranean,--as from Italy
to Corsica and thence to Toulon, from Malta to Sicily, and from Corfu to
Otranto, and besides these, the two chief of all, that from France to
Algiers, 520 miles, laid in 1860, and the other, laid only last year,
from Malta to Alexandria, 1,535 miles! All together the lines laid by
these manufacturers comprise a total of 3,739 miles; and though some
have been lying at the bottom of the sea and working for eight years,
each one of them is at this hour in as perfect condition as on the day
it was laid down, with the exception of the two short lines laid in
shallow water along the shore between Liverpool and Holyhead, 25 miles,
and from Prince Edward's Island to New Brunswick, 11 miles; the latter
of which was broken by a ship's anchor, and the former by the anchor
of the Royal Charter during the gale in which she was wrecked, both of
which can be easily repaired.

Where failures have occurred in submarine telegraphs, the causes are now
well understood and easily to be avoided. Thus with the first Atlantic
cable, its defects have all been carefully investigated by scientific
men, and may be easily guarded against. When this cable was in process
of manufacture in the factory of Messrs. Glass, Elliot, & Co., in
Greenwich, near London, it was coiled in four large vats, and there
left exposed, day after day, to the heat of a summer sun, which was
intensified by the tarred coating of the cable to one hundred and twenty
degrees. This went on, day after day, with the knowledge of the engineer
and electrician of the company, although the directors had given
explicit orders that sheds should be erected over the vats to prevent
the possibility of such an occurrence. As might have been foreseen, the
gutta-percha was melted, so that the conductor which it was desired to
insulate was so twisted by the coils that it was left quite bare in
numberless places, thus weakening, and eventually, when the cable
was submerged, destroying the insulation. The injury was partially
discovered before the cable was taken out of the factory at Greenwich,
and a length of about thirty miles was cut out and condemned. This,
however, did not wholly remedy the difficulty, for the defective
insulation became frequently and painfully apparent while the cable was
being submerged. Still further evidence of its imperfect condition was
afforded when it came to be cut up for charms and trinkets.

The first cable was, to a great extent, an experiment,--a leap in
the dark. Its material and construction were as good as the state of
knowledge at that time provided, and in many respects not unsuitable;
but the company could not avail itself, at that time, of the instruments
or apparatus for testing its conducting power and insulation, in the
manner since pointed out by experience. The effects of temperature,
as we have seen, were not provided for. The vast differences in the
conducting power of copper were discovered only by means of that cable,
when made. The mathematical law whereby the proportions of insulation to
conduction are determined had not been fully investigated; and it was
even argued by some of the pretended electricians in the employ of the
company, that, the smaller the conductor, the more rapidly the current
could pass through it. No mode of protecting the external sheath from
oxidation had then been discovered; and the kind of machinery necessary
for submerging cables in deep water could only be theoretically assumed.

Looking back to that period, and granting that there was too much haste
in the preparations, and that other mistakes were committed which could
now be foreseen and avoided, it is not too much to say, that, if that
cable could be laid and worked, as was done, after one failure in 1857,
and the consequent uncoiling and storage of it in an exposed situation,
and after three attempts in 1858, under the most fearful circumstances
as to weather, it would be an easy task to lay a cable constructed and
submerged by the light of present experience.

[Illustration: The Cable laid in 1858.]

[Illustration: The proposed New Cable.]

The above cuts, representing sections of the cable laid in 1858 and the
proposed new cable, will serve to show the difference between the two,
and the immense superiority of the latter over the former. In the old
Atlantic cable the copper conducting-wire weighed but ninety-three
pounds to the mile, while in the new cable it weighs five hundred and
ten pounds to the mile, _or more than five times as much_. Now the size,
or diameter, of a telegraphic conductor is just as important an item, in
determining the strength of current which can be maintained upon it with
a given amount of battery-force, as the length of the conductor. To
produce the effects by which the messages are expressed at the end of
a telegraphic wire or cable, it is necessary that the electric current
should have a certain intensity or strength. Now the intensity of the
current transmitted by a given voltaic battery along a given line of
wire will decrease, other things being the same, in the same proportion
as the length of the wire increases. Thus, if the wire be continued for
ten miles, the current will have twice the intensity which it would
have, if the wire had been extended to a distance of twenty miles. It is
evident, therefore, that the wire may be continued to such a length that
the current will no longer have sufficient intensity to produce at the
station to which the despatch is transmitted those effects by which the
language of the despatch is signified. _But the intensity of the current
transmitted by a given voltaic battery upon a wire of given length will
be increased in the same proportion as the area of the section of the
wire is augmented_. Thus, if the diameter of the wire be doubled, the
area of its section being increased in a fourfold proportion, the
intensity of the current transmitted along the wire will be increased in
the same ratio. The intensity of the current may also be augmented by
increasing the number of pairs of the generating plates or cylinders
composing the galvanic battery.

All electrical terms are arbitrary, and necessarily unintelligible
to the general reader. I shall, therefore, use them as sparingly as
possible, and endeavor to make myself clearly understood by explaining
those which I do use.

All telegraphic conductors offer a certain resistance to the passage of
an electric current, and the amount of this resistance is proportional
to the length of the conductor, and inversely to its size. In order to
overcome this resistance, it is necessary to increase the number of
the cells in the battery, and thus obtain a fluid of greater force or
intensity.

On aërial telegraph-lines this increase in the intensity of the battery
occasions no particular inconvenience, other than by tending to the more
rapid destruction of the small copper coils, or helices, employed;
but upon submarine lines it has the effect of increasing the static
electricity, or electricity of tension, which accumulates along the
surface of the gutta-percha covering of the conducting-wire, in the same
manner as static electricity accumulates on the surface of glass, or of
a stick of sealing-wax, by rubbing it with a piece of cloth. The use of
submarine or of subterranean conductors occasions, from the above cause,
a small retardation in the velocity of the transmitted electricity. This
retardation is not due to the length of the path which the electric
current has to traverse, since it does not take place with a conductor,
equally long, insulated in the air; but it arises from a static
reaction, caused by the passage of an intense current through a
conductor well insulated, but surrounded outside its insulating coating
by a conducting body, such as sea-water or moist ground, or even by the
metallic envelope of iron wires placed in communication with the ground.
When this conductor is presented to one of the poles of a battery, the
other pole of which communicates with the ground, it becomes charged
with static electricity, like the coating of a Leyden-jar,--electricity
which is capable of giving rise to a discharge-current, even after the
voltaic current has ceased to be transmitted. Volta showed in one of his
beautiful experiments, that, in putting one of the ends of his pile
in communication with the earth, and the other with a non-insulated
Leyden-jar, the jar was charged in an instant of time to a degree
proportional to the force of the pile. At the same time an instantaneous
current was observed in the conductor between the pile and the jar,
which had all the properties of an ordinary current. Now it is evident
that the subaqueous wire with its insulating covering may be assimilated
exactly to an immense Leyden-jar. The glass of the jar represents the
gutta-percha; the internal coating is the surface of the copper wire;
the external coating is the surrounding metallic envelope and water. To
form an idea of the capacity of this new kind of battery, we have only
to remember that the surface of the wire is equal to fourteen square
yards per mile. Bringing such a wire into communication by one of its
ends with a battery, of which the opposite pole is in contact with the
earth, whilst the other extremity of the wire is insulated, must cause
the wire to take a charge of the same character and tension as that of
the pole of the battery touched by it.

These currents of static induction are proportional in intensity to
the force of the battery and the length of the wire, whilst an inverse
relation is true as regards the length of the conductor with the
ordinary voltaic current.

Professor Wheatstone proved, by actual experiment, that a continuous
current may be maintained in the circuit of the long wire of an
electric cable, of which one of the ends is insulated, whilst the other
communicates with one of the poles of a battery, whose other pole is
connected with the ground. This current he considers due to the uniform
and continual dispersion of the statical electricity with which the wire
is charged along its whole length.

It was mainly owing to the retardation from this cause that
communication through the Atlantic cable was so exceedingly slow and
difficult.

I will now endeavor to show why the new cable will not be liable to this
difficulty, to anything like the same extent.

I have alluded to the resistance offered by the conductor of a
telegraph-cable to the passage of an electric current, and to the
retardation of this current by static induction. The terms _retardation_
and _resistance_ are not considered technically synonymous, but are
intended, as electrical terms, to designate two very different forces.
The resistance of a wire, as we have seen above, is proportional to its
length, and inversely to its diameter. It is overcome by increasing the
number of cells in the battery, or, in other words, by increasing the
intensity or force of the current. The retardation in a telegraphic
cable, on the contrary, is proportional to the length of the
conducting-wire and the intensity of the battery. In the former case, by
increasing the electrical force you overcome the resistance; while
in the latter, by augmenting the electrical force you increase the
retardation.

From the foregoing law it will be seen that there are two ways of
lessening the resistance upon telegraphic conductors,--one by reducing
the length, and the other by increasing the area of the section of the
conducting-wire. Now, as already remarked, the copper conducting-wire in
the old cable weighed but ninety-three pounds to the mile, while in the
new cable it weighs five hundred and ten pounds to the mile, or more
than five times as much. If, then, by comparison, we estimate the
resistance in the old Atlantic cable to have been equal to two
thousand miles of ordinary telegraph-wire, the increased size of the
conducting-wire of the new cable reduces the resistance to one-fifth
that distance, or four hundred miles. And while it required two hundred
cells of battery to produce intensity sufficient to work over the two
thousand miles of resistance in the old cable, it will require but
one-fifth as much, or forty cells, to overcome the four hundred miles
of resistance in the new cable. The retardation which resulted from
the intense current generated by two hundred cells will be also
proportionately reduced in the comparatively small battery of forty
cells. Thus we perceive, that, while the length of the cable is,
electrically and practically, reduced to one-fifth of its former length,
the retardation of the current is also decreased in the same proportion.
Therefore, if, with the old cable, three words per minute could be
transmitted, with the new cable we shall be able to transmit five times
as many, or fifteen words per minute. This is not equal to our Morse
system on the land-lines, which will signal at the rate of thirty-five
words per minute, still less to the printing system, which can signal at
the rate of fifty words per minute; but, even at this rate, the
cable would be enabled to transmit in twenty-four hours one thousand
despatches containing an average of twenty words apiece. Mr. Field,
however, claims for the cable a speed of only twelve words per minute,
which would reduce the number of despatches of twenty words each
that could be transmitted in twenty-four hours to eight hundred and
sixty-four. We will suppose, however, that the cable transmits only five
hundred telegrams per day; this number, at ten dollars per message,
would give an income of five thousand dollars per diem, or one million
five hundred and sixty-five thousand dollars per annum. Quite a handsome
revenue on an outlay of about one million of dollars!

The only instrument which could be used successfully in signalling
through the old cable was one of peculiar construction, called the
Marine Galvanometer. In this instrument, momentum and inertia are almost
wholly avoided by the use of a needle weighing only one and a half
grains, combined with a mirror reflecting a ray of light, which
indicates deflections with great accuracy. By this means a gradually
increasing or decreasing current is at each instant indicated at its
due strength. Thus, when this galvanometer is placed as the
receiving-instrument at the end of a long submarine cable, the movement
of the spot of light, consequent on the completion of a circuit through
the battery, cable, and earth, can be so observed as to furnish a curve
representing very accurately the arrival of an electric current. Lines
representing successive signals at various speeds can also be obtained,
and, by means of a metronome, dots and dashes can be sent with nearly
perfect regularity by an ordinary Morse key, and the corresponding
changes in the current at the receiving end of the cable accurately
observed.

A system of arbitrary characters, similar to those used upon the Morse
telegraph, was employed, and the letter to be indicated was determined
by the number of oscillations of the needle, as well as by the length of
time during which the needle remained in one place. The operator, who
watched the reflection of the deflected needle in the mirror, held a key
in his hand communicating with a local instrument in the office, which
he pressed down or raised, according to the deflection of the needle;
and another operator deciphered the characters thus produced upon the
paper. This mode of telegraphing was, of necessity, very slow, and it
will not surprise the reader that the fastest rate of speed over the
cable did not exceed three words per minute. Still, had the old cable
continued in operation a few months longer, experience and practice
would have enabled the operator to transmit and receive with very much
greater facility. On our land-lines, operators of long experience
acquire a dexterity which enables them not only to transmit and receive
telegrams with wonderful rapidity, but to work the instruments during
storms, when those of less experience would be unable to receive a dot.
There is no occupation in which skill and experience are more necessary
to success than in that of telegraphing, and at the time the Atlantic
cable was laid no experience had been obtained upon similar lines, or
with the instruments employed. Now, however, the company can avail
itself of experienced operators from lines of nearly equal length, and
who will require no time for experimenting, but may commence operations
as soon as the two ends of the cable are landed upon the shores of
Europe and America.

In the old cable the copper wire was covered but three times with
gutta-percha, while in the new it is covered four times with the purest
gutta-percha and four times with Chatterton's patent compound, by which
the cable is rendered absolutely impenetrable to water. The old cable
was covered with eighteen strands of small iron wire, which, as they had
no other covering, were directly exposed to the action of the water. The
new is covered with thirteen strands, each strand consisting of three
wires of the best quality, and covered with gutta-percha, to render it
indestructible in salt water. By this new construction, it has double
the strength of the old cable, at the same time that it is lighter in
the water, a very important matter in laying it across the ocean.

The risk of loss in laying the new cable would be very much diminished
by the fact that it would be of such strength, that, even if broken, it
could be recovered, as has been done in the Mediterranean; and besides,
the principal and most expensive materials, copper and gutta-percha,
being indestructible, would have at all times a market value.

Other routes to Europe have been proposed, and have been at times quite
popular, the most feasible of which are those _viâ_ Behring's Straits,
or the Aleutian Islands, and _viâ_ Labrador, Greenland, Iceland, and the
Faroe Isles.

To the route _viâ_ Behring's Straits there are several grave objections.
The distance from New York to London by a route crossing the three
continents of America, Asia, and Europe, is about eighteen thousand
miles, or more than nine times as great as that from Newfoundland to
Ireland. Of course, the mere cost of constructing a continuous telegraph
three-quarters of the distance around the globe, and of maintaining
the hundreds of stations that would be necessary over such a length
of land-lines, would be enormous. But even that is not the chief
difficulty. A line which should traverse the whole breadth of Siberia
would encounter wellnigh insuperable obstacles in the country itself, as
it would have to pass over mountains and across deserts; while, as it
turned north to Kamtschatka, it would come into a region of frightful
cold, where winter reigns the greater part of the year. Of this whole
country a large part is not only utterly uncivilized, but uninhabited,
and portions which are occupied are held by savage and warlike tribes.

Of the Greenland route, Doctor Hayes, the well-known Arctic traveller,
expresses himself in the most decided manner, that it is wholly
impracticable. He says it must be obvious that the ice which hugs
the Greenland coast will prevent a cable, if laid, from remaining in
continuity for any length of time. Doctor Wallich, naturalist attached
to Sir Leopold McClintock's expedition to survey the Northern route,
considers it impracticable on account of the volcanic nature of the
bottom of the sea near Iceland, and the ridges of rock and the immense
icebergs near Greenland.

The main argument in favor of this route, in preference to the more
direct one across the Atlantic, is, that it would be impossible to work
in one continuous circuit a line so long as that from Newfoundland to
Ireland. This would seem to be answered sufficiently by the success of
the old Atlantic cable. But it is alleged that it worked slowly and with
difficulty, which is true, and hence it is thought that the distance
would be at least a very great obstacle. But we have shown, that,
practically, by the increased size of the conducting-wire, the new cable
has been reduced in length four-fifths, and will work five times as fast
as the old one. The cable extending from Malta to Alexandria is fifteen
hundred and thirty-five miles long, and the whole of this line can be
worked through without relay or repetition in a satisfactory manner, as
regards both its scientific and commercial results, and with remarkably
low battery-power. The Gutta-Percha Company, which made the core of this
cable, says that a suitably made and insulated telegraph-conductor, laid
intact between Ireland and Newfoundland, can be worked efficiently, both
in a commercial and scientific sense, and they are prepared to guaranty
the efficient and satisfactory working of a line of the length of
the Atlantic cable as manufactured by themselves, and submerged and
maintained in that state.

It can be shown by the testimony and experience of those most eminent in
the science and practice of oceanic telegraphy, that neither length of
distance, within the limits with which the Atlantic Company has to
deal, nor depth of water, is any insuperable impediment to efficient
communication by such improved conductors of electricity as are now
proposed to be laid down. All those who are best able to form a sound
opinion, from long-continued experimental researches on this particular
point, are willing to pledge their judgment, that, on such a length of
line as that between Ireland and Newfoundland, and with such a cable and
such improved instruments as are now at command, not less than twelve
words per minute could be transmitted from shore to shore, and that this
may be done with greatly diminished battery-power as compared with that
formerly used.

I think I have shown by facts, and not theory merely, that the Atlantic
cable can and will be successfully laid down and worked, thus supplying
the long-needed link between the three hundred thousand miles of
electric telegraph already in operation on the opposite shores of the
Atlantic.

There are many of our people who are inclined to look coldly upon this
enterprise, from a conviction that it would give Great Britain an undue
advantage over us in case war should occur between the two countries,
and I confess to having entertained the same views; but the case is so
well put by Mr. Field, in his address before the American Geographical
Society, as, in my judgment, to relieve every apprehension upon this
point.

The relative geographical position of the two countries cannot be
changed. It so happens, that the two points on the opposite sides of
the Atlantic nearest to each other, and which are therefore the natural
termini of an ocean telegraph, are both in British territory. Of
course, the Government which holds both ends can control the use of the
telegraph, or stop it altogether. It has the power, and the only check
upon the abuse of that power must be by a treaty, made beforehand. Shall
we refuse to aid in constructing the line, for fear that England, in
the exasperation of a war, would disregard any treaty stipulations in
reference to its use? Then we throw away our only security. For, suppose
a war to break out to-morrow, the first step of England would be to lay
a cable herself, for her own sole and exclusive benefit. Then she
would not only have the control, but would be unrestrained by any
treaty-obligations binding her to respect the neutrality of the
telegraph. We should then find this great medium of communication
between the two hemispheres, which we might have made, if not an ally,
at least a neutral, turned into a powerful antagonist.

Would it not, therefore, be better that such a line of telegraph should
be constructed by the joint efforts of both countries, and be guarded
by treaty-stipulations, so that it might be placed, as far as possible,
under the protection of the faith of nations, and of the honor of the
civilized world?

Mr. Field says, that, in the negotiations on this subject, Great Britain
has never shown the slightest wish to take advantage of its geographical
position to exact special privileges, or a desire to appropriate any
advantages which it was not willing to concede equally to the United
States.

Should not the Atlantic telegraph, if laid down under the conditions
proposed by the Company, instead of being a cause of apprehension, in
case of war, be rather looked upon with favor, as tending to lessen
the risk of war between the United States and all European countries,
affording, as it would, facilities for the prompt interchange of notes
between the Government of the United States and those of the various
nations on the other side of the Atlantic, whenever any misunderstanding
should unhappily arise?

Let us, then, throw aside all feeling of apprehension from this cause,
and be prepared to hail, with the same enthusiasm we experienced in 1858
at the laying of the old, the completion of the new Atlantic cable.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CABALISTIC WORDS.


[Since the following poem was written, we have had from the President
the pledge that the "cabalistic words" shall be uttered by him on the
first of January, 1863, unless the rebellion is abandoned before that
time. Thanks and honor to the President for the promise! But we shall
not look for the magical operation of the words till they are uttered
without reservation or qualification.]

  Hear, O Commander of the Faithful, hear
  A legend trite to many a childish ear;
  But scorn it not, nor let its teaching fail,
  Although familiar as a nursery tale.

  Cassim the Covetous, whose god was gold,
  Once, by strange chance, found riches manifold
  Hid in a rocky cavern, where a band
  Of robbers who were ravaging the land
  Kept their bright spoils. Cassim had learnt the spell
  By which the dazzling heaps were guarded well.
  Two cabalistic words he speaks, and, lo!
  The door flies open: what a golden glow!
  He enters,--speaks the words of power once more,
  And swift upon him clangs the ponderous door.
  Croesus! what joy to eyes that know their worth!
  Huge bags of gold and diamonds on the earth!
  Here piles of ingots, there a glistening heap
  Of coins that all their minted lustre keep.
  Cassim is ravished at the wondrous sight,
  And rubs his hands with ever new delight;
  Absorbed in gazing, lets the hours go by,
  Nor can enough indulge his gloating eye.
  He chooses what he can to bear away,
  And then reluctant seeks the outer day.

  The words,--what _are_ they,--those that ope the door?
  He falters,--loses all so plain before;--
  Tries this word,--that,--in vain!--he cannot speak
  The magic sentence;--he grows faint and weak,--
  Spurns the base gold, cause of his wild despair;--
  What if the thieves should come and find him there?--
  Hark! they are coming!--yes, they come!--they shout
  The precious words;--ah, now they end his doubt!--
  Too late he hears; in vain he tries to fly;
  Trembling he sinks upon his knees--to die!

  Commander of the Faithful! dark the strait
  Thy people stand in, in this hour of fate;
  Thick walls of gloom and doubt have shut them in;
  They grope beneath the ban of one great sin.
  Yet there are two short words whose potent spell
  Shall burst with thunder-crash these gates of hell,
  Open a vista to celestial light,
  Lead us to peace through the eternal Right.
  Oh, speak those words, those saving words of power,
  In this most pregnant, this supremest hour,--
  Words writ in martyr blood, as all may see!--
  Commander of the Faithful, say, BE FREE!

       *       *       *       *       *


CONVERSATIONAL OPINIONS OF THE LEADERS OF SECESSION.

A MONOGRAPH.


The causes of the present Rebellion, the personal history of its
leaders, and the incidents immediately preceding the breaking out of the
conspiracy, will ever remain objects of chief interest to the historian
of the present period of the Republic. Influenced by a desire to obtain
unimpeachable information upon these topics from unprejudiced sources,
the writer of the following article, then a student at Yale College,
availed himself of the vacation in December, 1860, and January, 1861, to
visit the National capital, and while there to improve the reasonably
ready access with which most public men are approached, whenever the
object is either to give or to receive information, for the purpose of
studying a period then promising to exceed in importance anything in the
past history of the nation. It has been suggested to the writer, that
certain interviews, such as younger men, when collegians, were then
allowed with the frank Southern leaders, and which he has occasionally
sketched in conversation, have had the seal of privacy removed by the
tide of events, and should now be described for the public, as aiding to
unmask, from unquestionable authority, the real causes and origin of
the Rebellion, and contributing something, perhaps, to sustain public
sentiment in the defence of the nation against a conspiracy which the
statements of these Southern apologists themselves prove to have been
conceived in the most reckless disregard of honor and law, and which, if
successful, will give birth to a neighboring nation actuated by the same
spirit.

The more important interviews alluded to were with the Honorable Robert
Toombs, the Honorable R.M.T. Hunter, and the Honorable Jefferson Davis,
at that time prominent members, as is well known, of the United
States Senate, from the States respectively of Georgia, Virginia, and
Mississippi. The communications of the Senators are proved to have been
sincere by their subsequent speeches and by public events. The writer
is by no means insensible to the breach of privilege, of which, under
ordinary circumstances, notwithstanding the unfolding of events, he
would be guilty, in detailing in print private conversations; but he
believes that the public will sustain the propriety of the present
revelations, now that the persons chiefly concerned have become enemies
of the nation and of mankind.

Not, as he may possibly be accused, with the purpose of adding a
syllable of unnecessary length to the narrative, but for the sake of
vividness in presenting the idea of the _personnel_ of the Southern
leaders, soon to be known only as historical characters, and of
scrupulous accuracy in representing their sentiments, to which, in this
case, a notice of time, place, and manner seems as necessary as that of
matter, the writer has taken not a little pains, through all the usual
means, to remember, and will endeavor to state, the conversations,
always with logical, and nearly always, he believes, with verbal
accuracy, in order that the conclusions to be drawn from them by the
reader may have the better support.

It is well known that public men in Washington, out of business hours,
are visited without formal introduction or letters, especially upon
their reception-days, and that the privilege of a single interview
implies no distinction to the visitor. The urbanity and frankness with
which proper approaches are met, especially by the Southern leaders, are
also well known. Young men, with unprejudiced minds, upon whom public
characters are always anxious to impress the stamp of their own
principles, are perhaps received with quite as much frankness as others.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first interview sought was with Mr. Toombs, the most daring and
ingenuous, and perhaps the most gifted in eloquence of the Southern
leaders, whose house, at that time, was a lofty building upon F Street,
only two doors from the residence of Mr. Seward. A negro servant, who,
with all the blackness of a native African, yet with thin lips and
almost the regular features of a Caucasian, appeared to the writer to be
possibly the descendant of one of the superior, princely African tribes,
showed the way to an unoccupied parlor. The room was luxuriously
furnished with evidences of wealth and taste: a magnificent pianoforte,
several well-chosen paintings, and a marble bust of some public
character standing upon a high pedestal of the same material in the
corner, attracting particular attention, and a pleasant fire in the open
grate making the December evening social. A step presently heard in the
hall, elastic, buoyant, and vigorous, was altogether too characteristic
of Mr. Toombs's portly, muscular, confident, and somewhat dashing
figure, to be mistaken for any other than his own. Mr. Toombs appeared
to be now about forty-five years of age, but carried in his whole mien
the elastic vigor, and irresistible self-reliance, frankness, decision,
and sociality of character, which mark his oratory and his public
career. His good-evening, and inquiry concerning the college named on
the card of the writer, were in a tone that at once placed his visitor
at ease.

"Your first visit to Washington, Mr. ----?"

"Yes, Sir. Like others, I have been attracted by the political crisis,
and the purpose of studying it from unprejudiced sources."

"Crisis? Oh, _that's past_."

The writer will not soon forget the tone of perfect confidence and
_nonchalance_ with which this was uttered. The time was the last week of
December, 1860.

"You are confident, then, Sir, that fifteen States will secede?"

"Secede? Certainly,--they _must_ secede. You Northerners,--you are from
a Northern college, I believe,"--referring to the writer's card,--"you
Northerners wish to make a new Constitution, or rather to give such an
interpretation to the old one as to make it virtually a new document.
How can society be kept together, if men will not keep their compacts?
Our fathers provided, in adopting their Constitution, for the protection
of their property. But here are four billions of the property of the
South which you propose to outlaw from the common Territories. You say
to us, by your elected President, by your House of Representatives, by
your Senate, by your Supreme Court, in short, by every means through
which one party can speak to another, that these four billions of
property, representing the toil of the head and hand of the South for
the last two hundred years, shall not be respected in the Territories as
your property is respected there. And this property, too, is property
which you tax and which you allow to be represented; but yet you will
not protect it. How can we remain? We should be happy to remain, if you
would treat us as equals; but you tax us, and will not protect us.
We will resist. D--n it,"--this and other striking expressions are
precisely Mr. Toombs's language,--"we will meet you on the border with
the bayonet. Society cannot be kept together, unless men will keep their
compacts."

This was said without the intonation of fierceness or malignity, but
with great decision and the vigor of high spirit.

It was taking, of course, with considerable emphasis, a side in a
famous Constitutional question, familiar to all readers of American
Congressional Debates, once supported by Mr. Calhoun, and rather
strangely, too, with that philosophical leader, confusing the absurdly
asserted State right of seceding at will with the undoubted right,
when there exists no peaceful remedy, of seceding from intolerable
oppression: an entire position which Mr. Webster especially, and
subsequent statesmen, in arguments elucidating the nature and powers of
the General Government, to say nothing of the respect due to a moral
sentiment concerning slavery, which, permeating more than a majority
of the people, has the force, when properly expressed, wherever the
Constitution has jurisdiction, of supreme law, are thought by most men,
once and forever, to have satisfactorily answered. It was a complaint,
certainly, which the South had had ever since the Constitution was
formed, and which could with no plausibility be brought forward as a
justification of war, while there existed a Constitutional tribunal for
adjusting difficulties of Constitutional interpretation. Yet, as it
was almost universally asserted, of course, by the Northern partisan
presses, and by Northern Congressmen, that the Rebellion was utterly
causeless, and as the writer was therefore exceedingly anxious to
obtain, concerning their grievances, the latest opinions of the Southern
leaders, as stated by themselves, he ventured to propose, in a pause of
Mr. Toombs's somewhat rapid rhetoric, a question which, at that moment,
seemed of central importance to the candid philosophical inquirer into
the moving forces of the times:--

"Are we, then, Sir, to consider Mr. Calhoun's old complaint--the
non-recognition of slave-property under the Federal Constitution--as
constituting now the _chief grievance_ of the South?"

"Undoubtedly," was Mr. Toombs's instant reply, "_it all turns on that.
What you tax you must protect_."

This is the very strongest argument of the Southern side. But the
alleged slave-property is protected, though only under municipal law, by
the Constitution. To protect it elsewhere is against its whole spirit,
and, in the present state of public sentiment, against its very letter.
Originally, as is well known, it was not proposed to protect at all,
_under the General Government_, property so monstrous, except as it
became necessary as a compromise, in order to secure a union. But the
provision of the Constitution that the slave-trade should be abolished,
the absolute power given to Congress to make all laws for the
Territories, the spirit of the preamble, the principles of the
Declaration, indeed, the whole history of the origin and adoption of the
fundamental law, prove that its principle and its expectation were, if
not absolutely to place slavery in the States in process of extinction,
at least never to recognize it except indirectly and remotely
under municipal law, not even by admitting the word _slave_ to its
phraseology.

"Even in the Northern States themselves, to say nothing of the
Territories, I am not safe with my property. I can travel through
France or England and be safe; but if I happen to lose my servant up in
_Vairmount_,"--Mr. Toombs pronounced the word with a somewhat marked
accent of derision,--"and undertake to recover him, I get jugged.
Besides, your Northern statesmen are far from being honest. Here is
Billy Seward, for instance,"--with a gesture toward his neighbor's
house,--"who says slavery is contrary to the Higher Law, and that he is
bound as a Christian to obey the Higher Law; but yet he takes an oath to
uphold the Constitution, which protects slavery. This inconsistency runs
through most of the Northern platforms. How can we live with such
men? They will not be true even to a compact which they themselves
acknowledge."

"You would think, then, Wendell Phillips, for instance, more consistent
in his political opinions than Mr. Seward?"

"Certainly. I can understand his position. 'Slavery,' he says, 'is
wrong. The Constitution protects slavery; therefore I will have nothing
to do with the Constitution, and cannot become a citizen.' This is
logical and consistent. I can respect such a position as that."

Here Mr. Toombs--ejecting, as perhaps the writer ought not to relate, a
competent mass of tobacco-saliva into the blazing coal--paused somewhat
reflectively, perhaps unpleasantly revolving certain possible indirect
influences of the position he had characterized.

"Upon which side, Sir, do you think there is usually the most
misunderstanding,--on the part of the North concerning the South? or on
the part of the South concerning the North?"

"Oh, by all odds," he replied, instantly, "we understand you best. We
send fifty thousand travellers, more or less, North every summer to
your watering-places. Hot down in Mobile,"--his style taking somewhat
unpleasantly the intonation as well as the negligence of the
bar-room,--"can't live in Mobile in the summer. Then your papers
circulate more among us than ours among you. Our daughters are educated
at Northern boarding-schools, our sons at Northern colleges: both my
colleague and myself were educated at Northern colleges. For these
reasons, by all odds, we have a better opportunity for understanding you
than you have for understanding us."

"In case of general secession and war," the writer ventured next to
inquire, "would there probably, in your opinion, be danger of a slave
insurrection?"

"None at all. Certainly far less than of 'Bread or Blood' riots at the
North."

The writer was surprised to find, notwithstanding Mr. Toombs's eulogy of
Southern opportunities, his understanding of the North so imperfect, and
still more surprised at the political and social principles involved in
the spirit of what followed.

"Your poor population can hold ward-meetings, and can vote. But _we_
know better how to take care of ours. They are in the fields, and
under the eye of their overseers. There can be little danger of an
insurrection under our system."

The subject and the manner of the man, in spite of his better qualities,
were becoming painful, and the writer ventured only one more remark.

"An ugly time, certainly, if war comes between North and South."

"Ugly time? _Oh, no!_"

The writer will never forget the tone of utter carelessness and
_nonchalance_ with which the last round-toned exclamation was uttered.

"Oh, no! War is nothing. Never more than a tenth part of the adult
population of a country in the field. We have four million voters. Say
a tenth of them, or four hundred thousand men, are in the field on both
sides. A tenth of them would be killed or die of camp diseases. But
_they_ would die, _any way_. War is nothing."

The tone perfectly proved this belief, not badinage.

"Some property would be destroyed, towns injured, fences overturned, and
the Devil raised generally; but then all that would have a good effect.
Only yaller-covered-literature men and editors make a noise about war.
Wars are to history what storms are to the atmosphere,--purifiers. We
shall meet, as we ought, whoever invades our rights, with the bayonet.
We are the gentlemen of this land, and gentlemen always make revolutions
in history."

This was said in the tone of an injured, but haughty man, with perfect
intellectual poise and earnestness, yet with a fervor of feeling that
brought the speaker erect in his chair.

The significance of the last remarks, which the writer can make oath he
has preserved _verbatim_, being somewhat calculated to draw on a debate,
of course wholly unfitted to the time and place, the writer, apologizing
for having taken so much time at a formal interview, and receiving, of
course, a most courteous invitation to renew the call, found himself,
after but twenty minutes' conversation, on the street, in the lonely
December evening, with a mind full of reflections.

The utter recklessness concerning life and property with which the
splendid intellect, under the lead of the ungovernable passions of this
man, was plunging the nation into a civil war of which no one could
foresee the end, was the thought uppermost. Certainly, the abstract
manliness of asserting rights supposed to be infringed it was in itself
impossible not to respect. But the man seemed to love war for its own
sake, as pugnacious schoolboys love sham-fights, with a sort of glee in
the smell of the smoke of battle. The judicial calmness of statesmanship
had entirely disappeared in the violence of sectional passion. Perhaps
he might be capable of ruining his country from pure love of turbulence
and power, could he but find a pretext of force sufficient to blind
first himself and then others. Yet Robert Toombs, in the Senate Chamber,
takes little children in his arms, and is one of the kindest of the
noblemen of Nature in the sphere of his unpolitical sympathies. The
reader who is familiar with Mr. Toombs's speeches will need no assurance
that he spoke frankly.[A]

[Footnote A: Ten days later, in the Senate, with a face full of the
combined erubescence of revolutionary enthusiasm and unstatesmanlike
anger, Mr. Toombs closed a speech to the Northern Senators in the
following amazing words, (_Congressional Globe_, 1860-61, p. 271,)
which justify, it will be seen, every syllable of the report of the
conversation upon the same points:--

"You will not regard confederate obligations; you will not regard
constitutional obligations; you will not regard your oaths. What am I to
do? Am I a freeman? Is my State, a free State, to lie down and submit
because political fossils raise the cry of 'The Glorious Union'? Too
long already have we listened to this delusive song. We are freemen. We
have rights: I have stated them. We have wrongs: I have recounted them.
I have demonstrated that the party now coming into power has declared
us outlaws, and is determined to exclude four thousand millions of our
property from the common territories,--that it has declared us under the
ban of the empire and out of the protection of the laws of the United
States, everywhere. They have refused to protect us from invasion and
insurrection by the Federal power, and the Constitution denies to us
in the Union the right either to raise fleets or armies for our own
defence. All these charges I have proven by the record, and I put
them before the civilized world, and demand the judgment of to-day, of
to-morrow, of distant ages, and of Heaven itself, upon these causes. I
am content, whatever it be, to peril all in so noble, so holy a cause.
We have appealed time and time again for these constitutional rights.
You have refused them. We appeal again. Restore us these rights as we
had them, as your court adjudges them to be, just as all our people have
said they are, redress these flagrant wrongs, seen of all men, and it
will restore fraternity and peace and unity to all of us. Refuse them,
and what then? We shall then ask you to 'let us depart in peace.' Refuse
that, and you present us war. We accept it; and inscribing upon our
banners the glorious words, 'Liberty and Equality,' we will trust to
the blood of the brave and the God of battles for security and
tranquillity."

Sincere, but undoubtedly mistaken, Mr. Toombs! To this philippic, let
the words of another Southern, but not sectional Senator, reply, and
that from a golden age:--

"But if, unhappily, we should be involved in war, in civil war, between
the two parts of this Confederacy, in which the effort upon the one
side should be to restrain the introduction of slavery into the new
territories, and upon the other side to force its introduction there,
what a spectacle should we present to the astonishment of mankind, in an
effort, not to propagate right, but--I must say it, though I trust it
will be understood to be said with no design to excite feeling--a war to
propagate wrong in the territories thus acquired from Mexico. It would
be a war in which we should have no sympathies, no good wishes, in which
all mankind would be against us; for, from the commencement of the
Revolution down to the present time, we have constantly reproached
our British ancestors for the introduction of slavery into this
country."--HENRY CLAY, _Congressional Globe_, Part II., Vol. 22, p.
117.]

Sick at heart, as the future of the nation stood to his dim vision
through the present, the writer found his way to his hotel. At this
time the North was silent, apparently apathetic, unbelieving, almost
criminally allowed to be undeceived by its presses and by public men who
had means of information, while this volcano continued to prepare itself
thus defiantly beneath the very feet of a President sworn to support the
laws!

       *       *       *       *       *

The formal interview with the Honorable R.M.T. Hunter was sought in
company with two other students of New-England colleges. We had hoped to
meet Mr. Mason at the same apartments, but were disappointed. The great
contrast of personal character between Mr. Hunter and Mr. Toombs made
the concurrence of the former in the chief views presented by the
latter the more significant. The careful habits of thought, the
unostentatiousness, and the practical common sense for which the
Virginian farmer is esteemed, and which had made his name a prominent
one for President of a Central Confederacy, in case of the separate
secession of the Border States, were curiously manifested both in
his apartments and his manner. The chamber was apparently at a
boarding-house, but very plainly furnished with red cotton serge
curtains and common hair-cloth chairs and sofa. The Senator's manner of
speech was slow, considerate,--indeed, sometimes approaching awkwardness
in its plain, farmer-like simplicity. One of the first questions was the
central one, concerning the chief grievance of the South, which had been
presented to Mr. Toombs.

"Yes," was Mr. Hunter's reply, somewhat less promptly given, "it may be
said to come chiefly from that,--the non-recognition of our property
under the Constitution. We wish our property recognized, as we think the
Constitution provides. We should like to remain with the North."

He spoke without a particle of expressed passion or ardor, though by
no means incapable, when aroused, as those who have seen his plethoric
countenance and figure can testify, of both.

"We are mutually helpful to each other. _We want to use your navy and
your factories. You want our cotton. The North to manufacture, and the
South to produce, would make the strongest nation_. But, if we separate,
we shall try to do more in Virginia than we do now. We shall make mills
on our streams."

His language was chiefly Saxon monosyllables.

"The climate is not as severe, the nights are not as long with us as
with you. I think we can do well at manufacturing in Virginia. The
Chesapeake Bay and our rivers should aid commerce. As for the slaves,
I think there is little danger of any trouble. There may be some," he
said, with a frankness that surprised us slightly, but in the same
moderate, honest way, his hands clasped upon his breast, and the
extended feet rubbing together slowly, "in the Cotton States, where they
are very thick together; but I think that there is very little danger in
Virginia. The way they take to rise in never shows much skill. The last
time they rose in our State, I think the attempt was brought on by some
sign in an eclipse of the moon."

Nearly all that passed of political interest is contained in the
foregoing sentences, except one honest reply to a question concerning
his opinion of the probability of the North's attempting coercion.

"If only three States go out, they may coerce," said Mr. Hunter; "but if
fifteen go, I guess they won't try."

At the present period of the Rebellion, this indication of the
anticipations of its leaders in engaging in it must be of interest.

It must be understood that the writer and his companions presented
themselves simply as students, with no fixed exclusive predilections for
either of the public parties in politics,--which, in the writer's case
at least, was certainly a statement wholly true,--and that this evident
freedom from political bias secured perhaps an unusual share of the
confidence of the Southern Senators. It will be remembered, also, that
in every conversation, however startling the revelation of criminal
purpose or absurd motive, the manner of these Senators was always
totally devoid of any approach to that vulgar intellectual levity which
too often, in treating of public affairs, painfully characterizes
the fifth-rate men whom the North sometimes chooses to make its
representatives. The manner of the Southern leaders was to us a
sufficient proof of their sincerity.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the house of the Honorable Jefferson Davis, now in the world's
gaze President of the then nascent Confederacy, the writer, in the
intelligent and genial company of the graduate of Harvard and the
student of Amherst before mentioned, called formally, on the evening
of the New Year's reception-day. A representative from one of the
Southwestern States was present, but we were soon admitted to the front
of the open blazing grate of the reception-parlor. We had before seen
Mr. Davis busy in the Senate.

The urbanity, the intellectual energy, and the intensely shrewd
watchfulness and ambition, combined with a covertly expressed, but
powerful native instinct for strategy and command, which have made Mr.
Davis a public leader, were evident at the first glance. The Senator
seemed compact of ambition, will, intellect, activity, and shrewdness.
A high and broad, but square forehead; the aquiline nose; the square,
fighting chin; the thin, compressed, but flexible lips; the almost
haggardly sunken cheek; the piercing, not wholly uncovered eye; the
dark, somewhat thinning hair; the clear, slightly browned, nervous
complexion, all well given in the best current photographs, were united
to a figure slightly bent in the shoulders, of more respiratory than
digestive breadth, in outlines almost equally balancing ruggedness and
grace, of compactness wrought by the pressure of perhaps few more than
fifty summers, not above medium height, but composed throughout of silk
and steel. A certain similarity between the decorations of the parlor
and the character of the owner, perhaps more fanciful than real, at once
attracted attention. Everything was simple, graceful, and rich, without
being tropically luxuriant; the paintings appeared to be often of airy,
winged, or white-robed figures, that suggested a reflective and not
unimaginative mind in the one who had chosen them. This was the leader
whom Mr. Calhoun's fervent political metaphysics and his own ambition
for place and power had misled. His conversation was remarkable in
manner for perfect unostentatiousness, clearness, and self-control, and
in matter for breadth and minuteness of political information. In the
whole conversation, he never uttered a broken or awkwardly constructed
sentence, nor wavered, while stating facts, by a single intonation. This
considerable intellectual energy, combined with courtesy, was his
chief fascination. Yet, underneath all lay an atmosphere of covert
haughtiness, and, at times, even of audacious remorselessness, which,
under stimulative circumstances, were to be feared. Undoubtedly, passion
and ambition were natively stronger in the countenance than reason,
conscience, and general sympathy,--an observation best felt to be true
when the face was compared in imagination with the faces of some of the
world's chief benefactors; but culture, native urbanity, and a powerful
reflective tendency had evidently so wrought, that, though conscience
might be imperilled frequently by great adroitness in the casuistry of
self-excuse, justice could not be consciously opposed for any length of
time without powerful silent reaction. The quantity of being, however,
though superior, was not of so high a measure as the quality, and the
principal deficiencies, though perhaps almost the sole ones, were
plainly moral. In his presence, no man could deny to him something of
that dignity, of a kind superior to that of intellect and will, which
must be possessed by every leader as a basis of confidence. But mournful
severe truth would testify that there was yet, at times, palpably
something of the treacherous serpent in the eye, and it could not
readily be told where it would strike.

In reply to a reference to a somewhat celebrated speech by Senator
Benjamin of Louisiana, which we had heard the day previous, he said that
we might consider it, as a whole, a very fair statement both of the
arguments and the purposes of the South. Perhaps a speech of more
horrible doctrine, upheld by equal argumentative and rhetorical power,
has never been heard in the American Senate. In reply, also, to the one
central question concerning the chief grievance of the South, he gave in
substance the same answer, uttered perhaps with more logical calmness,
that had been given by Mr. Hunter and Mr. Toombs, that it was
substantially covered by Mr. Calhoun's old complaint, the
non-recognition of slave-property under the Federal Constitution. Of
course we were as yet too well established in the belief that slavery in
the United States is upheld by the Constitution only very remotely and
indirectly, under local or municipal law, to desire, even by questions,
to draw on any debate.

In reply to a question by the gentleman from Harvard, he spoke of a
Central Confederacy as altogether improbable, and thought, if Georgia
seceded, as the telegrams for the last fortnight had indicated she
would, Maryland would be sure to go. "I think the commercial and
political interests of Maryland," he remarked, in his calm and simple,
but distinct and watchful manner, manifesting, too, at the same time,
a natural command of dignified, antithetical sentences, "would be
promoted, perhaps can be only preserved, by secession. Her territory
extends on both sides of a great inland water communication, and is at
the natural Atlantic outlet, by railway, of the Valley of the West.
Baltimore in the Union is sure to be inferior to Philadelphia and New
York: Baltimore out of the Union is sure to become a great commercial
city. In every way, whether we regard her own people or their usefulness
to other States, I think the interests of Maryland would be promoted by
secession."

"But would not Maryland lose many more slaves, as the border member of a
foreign confederacy, than she does now in the Union?"

The reply to this question we looked for with the greatest interest,
since no foreign nation, such as the North would be, in case of
the success of the attempted Confederacy, ever thinks of giving up
fugitives, and since the policy of the South upon this point, in case
she should succeed, would determine the possibility or impossibility of
peace between the two portions of the Continent.

Mr. Davis's reply was in the following words, uttered in a tone of equal
shrewdness, calmness, and decision:--

"I think, for all Maryland would lose in that way she would be more than
repaid by reprisals. While we are one nation and you steal our property,
we have little redress; _but when we become two nations, we shall say,
Two can play at this game_."

We breathed more freely after so frank an utterance. The great
importance of this reply, coming from the even then proposed political
chief of the Confederacy, as indicating the impossibility of peace, even
in case of the recognition of the South, so long as it should continue,
as it has begun, to make Slavery the chief corner-stone of the State,
will be at once perceived.

"But," the writer ventured to inquire, "what will become of the Federal
District, since its inhabitants have no 'State right of secession'?"

"Have you ever studied law?" he asked.

The gentleman from Amherst confessed our ignorance of any point covering
the case.

"There is a rule in law," continued Mr. Davis, "that, when property is
granted by one party to another for use for any specified purpose, and
ceases to be used for that purpose, it reverts by law to the donor.
Now the territory constituting at present the District of Columbia was
granted, as you well know, by Maryland to the United States for use as
the seat of the Federal capital. When it ceases to be used for that
purpose, it, with all its public fixtures, will revert by law to
Maryland. But," and his eye brightened to the hue of cold steel in a
way the writer will never forget, as he uttered, in a tone perfectly
self-poised, undaunted, and slightly defiant, the words, "_that is a
point which may be settled by force rather than by reason_."

This was January 1, 1861, only eleven days after South Carolina had
passed her Act of Secession, and shows that even then, notwithstanding
the professed desire of the South to depart in peace, the attack not
only upon the national principles of union, but upon the national
property as well, was projected. Mr. Davis, loaded with the benefits of
his country, yet occupied a seat in the Senate Chamber, under the most
solemn oath to uphold its Constitution, which, even if his grievances
had been well founded, afforded Constitutional and peaceful remedies
that he had never attempted to use. Presenting regards, very formal
indeed, sick at heart, indignant, and anxious, we left the house of the
traitor.

The historical conclusions to be drawn from the above slight sketches
are important in several respects. Mr. Davis, Mr. Toombs, and Mr. Hunter
are among the strongest leaders of the Rebellion. Representing the
Northern, Southeastern, and Southwestern populations of the disaffected
regions, their testimony had a wide application, and was perhaps as
characteristic and pointed in these brief conversations, occurring just
upon the eve of the bursting of the storm, as we should have heard in a
hundred interviews. That they spoke frankly was not only evidenced to
us by their entire manner, but, as it is not unimportant to repeat,
has been proved by subsequent events. The conversations, therefore,
indicate,--

1. That the grand, fundamental, legal ground for the Rebellion was a
view of Constitutional rights by which property in human beings claimed
equal protection under the General Government with the products of Free
Labor, and to be admitted, therefore, at will, to all places under the
jurisdiction of the Federal power, and not simply to be protected under
local or municipal law,--rights which the South proposed to vindicate,
constitutionally, by Secession, or, in other words, by the domination of
State over National sovereignty: an entire view of the true intent of
the Federal compacts and powers, which, in the great debates between Mr.
Webster and Mr. Calhoun, to say nothing of elucidations by previous and
subsequent jurists and statesmen, has been again and again abundantly
demonstrated to be absurd.

2. That the immediate, comprehensive pretext for the Rebellion was the
success of a legal majority having in its platform of principles the
doctrine of the non-extension of involuntary human bondage in the
territories over which the Constitution had given to the whole people
absolute control, a doctrine which the mass of the Southern populations
were educated to believe not only deadly to their local privileges, but
distinctly unconstitutional.

3. That the leaders of the Rebellion frankly admitted, that, excepting
this one point of Constitutional grievance, the interests of the
populations which they represented would be better subserved in the
Union than out of it.

4. That the leaders of the Rebellion appear not to have anticipated
coercion; but yet, from the earliest days of Secession, contemplated
the spoliation of the Southern National property, and particularly the
seizure of the Federal capital.

5. That, even should the independence of the South be acknowledged,
peace could not result so long as Slavery should continue: their avowed
system of reprisals for the certain escape of slaves precluding all
force in any but piratical international law.

6. That the spirit of the Rebellion is the haughty, grasping, and,
except within its own circle, the remorseless spirit universally
characteristic of oligarchies, before the success of whose principles
upon this continent the liberties of the whites could be no safer than
those of the blacks.

"We are the gentlemen of this land," said the Georgian senator, "and
gentlemen always make revolutions in history." And just previously he
had said, with haughty significance, "_Your_ poor population can hold
ward-meetings, and can vote. But _we_ know better how to take care of
ours. They are in the fields, and under the eye of their overseers."

In these two brief remarks, taken singly, or, especially, in
juxtaposition, from so representative a source, and so characteristic
of oligarchical opinions everywhere, appears condensed the suggestive
political warning of these times, indeed of all times, and which a
people regardful of civil and religious liberty can never be slow to
heed.

Let the pride of race and the aristocratic tendencies which underlie the
resistance of the South prevail, and we shall see a new America. The
land of the fathers and of the present will become strange to us. In
place of a thriving population, each member socially independent,
self-respecting, contented, and industrious, contributing, therefore,
to the general welfare, and preserving to posterity and to mankind a
national future of inconceivable power and grandeur, we shall see a
class of unemployed rich and unemployed poor, the former a handful, the
latter a host, in perpetual feud. The asylum of nations, ungratefully
rejecting the principles of equality, to which it has owed a career
of prosperity unexampled in history, will find in arrested commerce,
depressed credit, checked manufactures, an effeminate and selfish,
however brilliant, governing class, and an impoverished and imbruted
industrial population, the consequences of turning back upon its path of
advance. The condition of the most unfortunate aristocracies of the Old
World will become ours.

But the venerated principles partially promulgated in our golden age
forbid such unhappy auspices. Undoubtedly gentlemen make revolutions in
history; but since all may be Christians, may not all men be gentlemen?
At least, have not all men, everywhere, the sacred and comprehensive
right of equal freedom of endeavor to occupy their highest capacities?
_Does not the Creator, who makes nothing in vain, wherever He implants a
power, imply a command to exercise that power according to the highest
aspiration, and is not responsibility eternally exacted, wherever
power and command coexist?_ By that fearful sanction, may not all men,
everywhere, become the best they can become? What that may be, is not
free, equal, and perpetual experiment, judged by conscience in the
individual and by philanthropy in his brother, and not by arrogance
or cupidity in his oppressor, to decide? To secure the wisdom and
perpetuity of this experiment, are not governments instituted? Is not
a monopoly of opportunity by any single class, by all historical and
theoretical proof, not only unjust to the excluded, but crippling
and suicidal to the State? Nay, is not the slightest infringement of
regulated social and political justice, liberty, and humanity, in
the person of black or of white, that makes the greatest potential
development of the highest in human nature impossible or difficult, to
be resisted, as a violation of the peace of the soul, endless treachery
to mankind, an affront to Heaven? Would not the very soil of America,
in which Liberty is said to inhere, cry out and rise against any but an
affirmative answer to such questions?

A near future will decide.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE HOUR AND THE MAN.


The Twenty-Second of September, 1862, bids fair to become as remarkable
a date in American history as the Fourth of July, 1776; for on that day
the President of the United States, availing himself of the full powers
of his position, declared this country free from that slaveholding
oligarchy which had so long governed it in peace, and the influence of
which was so potently felt for more than a year after it had broken up
the Union, and made war upon the Federal Government. Be the event what
it may,--and the incidents of the war have taught us not to be too
sanguine as to the results of any given movement,--President Lincoln has
placed the American nation in a proper attitude with respect to that
institution the existence of which had so long been the scandal and
the disgrace of a people claiming to be the freest on earth, but whose
powers had been systematically used and abused for the maintenance and
the extension of slave-labor.

It was our misfortune, and in some sense it was also our fault, that we
were bound to uphold the worst system of slavery that ever was known
among men; for we must judge of every wrong that is perpetrated by the
circumstances that are connected with it, and our oppression of the
African race was peculiarly offensive, inasmuch as it was a proceeding
in flagrant violation of our constantly avowed principles, was continued
in face of the opinions of the founders of the nation, was frankly
upheld on the unmanly ground that the intellectual weakness of the
slaves rendered it safe to oppress them, and was not excused by that
general ignorance of right which has so often been brought forward in
palliation of wrong,--as slavery had come under the ban of Christendom
years before Americans could be found boldly bad enough to claim for it
a divine origin, and to avow that it was a proper, and even the best,
foundation for civil society. Our offence was of the rankest, and its
peculiar character rendered us odious in the eyes of the nations, who
would not admit the force of our plea as to the great difficulties that
lay in the way of the removal of the evil, as they had seen it condemned
by most communities, and abolished by some of their number.

The very circumstance upon which Americans have relied for the
justification of their form of slavery, namely, that it was confined to
one race, and that race widely separated from all other races by
the existence of peculiar characteristics, has been regarded as an
aggravation of their misconduct by all humane and disinterested persons.
The Greek system of slavery, which was based on the idea that Greeks
were noblemen of Heaven's own creating, and that they therefore were
justified in treating all other men as inferiors, and making the same
use of them as they made of horses; the Roman system, which was based on
the will of society, and therefore made no exceptions on the score of
color, but saw in all strangers only creatures of chase; the Mussulman
system, brought out so strongly by the action of the States of Barbary,
and which was colored by the character of the long quarrel between
Mahometans and Christians, and under which Northern Africa was filled
with myriads of slaves from Southern Europe, among whom were men of
the highest intellect,--Cervantes, for example;--all these systems
of servitude, and others that might be adduced, were respectable in
comparison with our system, which proceeded upon the blasphemous
assumption that God had created and set apart one race that should
forever dwell in the house of bondage. If, in some respects, our system
has been more humane than that of other peoples in other times, the fact
is owing to that general improvement which has taken place the earth
over during the present century. The world has gone forward, and even
American slaveholders have been compelled to go with it, whether they
would or not.

It was a distinctive feature of slavery, as here known, that it tended
to debauch the mind of Christendom. So long as all men were liable to be
enslaved, and even Shakspeare and Milton were in some danger of sharing
the fate of Cervantes,--and the Barbary corsairs did actually carry
off men from the British Islands in the times of Milton and
Shakspeare,--there could not fail to grow up a general hostility to
slavery, and the institution was booked for destruction. But when
slavery came to be considered as the appropriate condition of one race,
and the members of that race so highly qualified to engage in the
production of cotton and sugar, tobacco and rice, the danger was, not
only that slavery would once more come into favor, but that the African
slave-trade would be replaced in the list of legitimate commercial
pursuits, and become more extensive than it was in those days when it
was defended by bishops and kings' sons in the British House of Lords.
That this is not an unfounded opinion will be admitted by those who
recollect that the London "Times," that representative of the average
English mind, but recently published articles that could mean nothing
less than a desire to revive the old system of slavery, with all that
should be necessary to maintain it in force; that Mr. Carlyle is an
advocate of the oppression of negroes; and that the French Government
at one time seemed disposed to have resort to a course that must, if
adopted, have converted Africa into a storehouse of slaves.

Our slaveholders were not blind to this altered state of the European
mind, of which they availed themselves, and of which, in a certain
sense, they had the best of all rights to avail themselves, for it was
largely their own work. At the same time that England abolished slavery
in her dominions, the chief Nullifiers, who were the fathers of the
Secession Rebellion, assumed the position that negro slavery was good in
itself, and that it was the duty of white men to uphold and to extend
it. This was done by Governor McDuffie, of South Carolina, in 1834,
and it was warmly approved by many Southern men, as well out of South
Carolina as in that most fanatical of States, but generally condemned by
the Democrats of that time, though now it is not uncommon to find men
in the North who accept all that the old Nullifier put forward as a new
truth eight-and-twenty years ago. Earnestly and zealously, and with no
small amount of talent, the friends of slavery labored to impose their
views upon the entire Southern mind,--and that not so much because they
loved slavery for itself as because they knew, that, if the slaveholding
interest could be placed in opposition to the Federal Union, that Union
might be destroyed. They were fanatics in their attachment to slavery,
but even their fanaticism was secondary to their hatred of that
power which, as represented by Andrew Jackson, had trampled down
Nullification, and compelled Carolina and Calhoun to retreat from cannon
and the gallows. Mr. Rhett, then Mr. Barnwell Smith, said, in the
debates in the Convention on the proposition to accept the Tariff
Compromise of 1833, that he hated the star-spangled banner; and
unquestionably he expressed the feelings of many of his contemporaries,
who deemed submission prudent, but who were consoled by the reflection
that slavery would afford them a far better means for breaking up the
Union than it was possible to get through the existence of any tariff,
no matter how protective it might be. All the great leaders of the first
Secession school had passed away from the earth, when Rhett "still
lived" to see the flag he hated pulled down before the fire that was
poured upon Fort Sumter from Carolina's batteries worked by the hands
of Carolinians. Calhoun, Hamilton, McDuffie, Hayne, Trumbull, Cooper,
Harper, Preston, and others, men of the first intellectual rank in
America, had departed; but Rhett survived to see what they had labored
to effect, and what they would have effected, had they not encountered
one of those iron spirits to whom is sometimes intrusted the government
of nations, and who are of more value to nations than gold and fleets
and armies. All that we have lately seen done, and more, would have been
done thirty years since, had any other man than Andrew Jackson been at
that time President of the United States. There was much cant in those
days about "the one-man power," because President Jackson saw fit to
make use of the Constitutional qualified veto-power to express his
opposition to certain measures adopted by Congress; but the best
exhibition of "the one-man power" that the country ever saw, then or
before or since, was when the same magistrate crushed Nullification,
maintained the Union, and secured the nation's peace for more than a
quarter of a century. We never knew what a great man Jackson was, until
the country was cursed by Buchanan's occupation of the same chair that
Jackson had filled,--a chair that he was unworthy to dust,--and by his
cowardice and treachery which made civil war inevitable. One man, at the
close of 1860, could have done more than has yet been accomplished by
the million of men who have been called to arms because no such man was
then in the nation's service. The "one hour of Dundee" was not more
wanting to the Stuarts than the one month of Jackson was wanting to us
but two years ago.

The powerful teaching of the Nullifiers was successful. The South, which
assumed to be the exclusive seat of American nationality, while the
North was declared given up to sectionalism, with no other lights on its
path than "blue lights," became the South so devoted to slavery that
it could see nothing else in the country. Old Union men of 1832 became
Secessionists, though Nullification, the milder thing of the two, had
been too much for them to endure. They not only endured the more hideous
evil, but they embraced it. Between 1832 and 1860 a change had been
wrought such as twice that time could not have accomplished at any
earlier period of human history. The old Southern ideas respecting
slavery had disappeared, and that institution had become an object of
idolatry, so that any criticisms to which it was subjected kindled the
same sort of flame that is excited in a pious community when objects of
devotion are assailed and destroyed by the hands of unbelievers.
The astonishing material prosperity that accompanied the system of
slave-labor had, no doubt, much to do with the regard that was bestowed
upon the system itself. That was the time when Cotton became King,--at
least, in the opinion of its worshippers. The Democratic party of the
North passed from that position of radicalism to which the name of
_Locofocoism_ was given, to the position of supporters of the extremest
Southern doctrines, so that for some years it appeared to exist for no
other purpose than to do garrison-duty in the Free States, the cost of
its maintenance being supplied by the Federal revenues. Abroad the same
change began to be noted, the demand for cotton prevailing over the
power of conscience. Everything worked as well for evil as it could
work, and as if Satan himself had condescended to accept the post of
stage-manager for the disturbers of America's peace.

To take advantage of the change that had been brought about was the
purpose of the whole political population of the South. But though that
section was united in its determination to support the supremacy of
slavery, it was far from being united in its opinions as to the best
mode of accomplishing its object. There were three parties in the South
in the last days of the old Union. The first, and the largest, of these
parties answered very nearly to the Southern portion of the Democratic
party, and contained whatever of sense and force belonged to the South.
It was made up of men who were firmly resolved upon one thing, namely,
that they would ruin the Union, if they should forever lose the power to
rule it; but they had the sagacity to see that the ends which they had
in view could be more easily achieved in the Union than out of it.
They were not disunionists _per se_, but were quite ready to become
disunionists, if the Union was to be governed otherwise than in the
direct and immediate interest of slavery. Slavery was the basis of their
political system, and they knew that it could be better served by the
American Union's continued existence than by the construction of
a Southern Confederacy, provided the former should do all that
slaveholders might require it to do.

The second Southern party, and the smallest of them all, was composed
of the minions of the Nullifiers, and of their immediate followers, men
whose especial object it was to destroy the Union, and who hated the
subservient portion of the Northern people far more bitterly than they
hated Republicans, or even Abolitionists. They would have preferred
abolition and disunion to the triumph of slavery and the preservation of
the Union. It was not that they loved slavery less, but that they hated
the Union more. Even if the country should submit to the South, the
leaders of this faction knew that they would not be the Southrons to
whom should be intrusted the powers and the business of government. Few
of them were of much account even in their own States, and generally
they could have been set down as chiefs of the opposition to everything
that was reasonable. A remarkable proof of the little hold which this
class of men had on even the most mad of the Southern States, when at
the height of their fury, was afforded by the refusal of South Carolina
to elect Mr. Rhett Governor, her Legislature conferring that post on Mr.
Pickens, a moderate man when compared with Mr. Rhett, and who, there
is reason for believing, would have prevented a resort to Secession
altogether, could he have done so without sacrificing what he held to be
his honor.

The third Southern party consisted of men who desired the continuance
of the Union, but who wished that some "concessions" should be made, or
"compromises" effected, in order to satisfy men, one portion of whom
were resolved upon having everything, while the other portion were
resolute in their purpose to destroy everything that then existed of a
national character. This third party was mostly composed of those
timid men whose votes count for much at ordinary periods, but who in
extraordinary times are worse than worthless, being in fact incumbrances
on bolder men. They loved the Union, because they loved peace, and were
opposed to violence of all kinds; but their Unionism was much like
Bailie Macwheeble's conscience, which was described as never doing him
any harm. What they would have done, had Government been able to send a
strong force to their assistance at the beginning of the war, we cannot
undertake to say; but they have done little to aid the Federal cause in
the field, while their influence in the Federal councils has been more
prejudicial to the country than the open exertions of the Secessionists
to effect the nation's destruction.

Of these parties, the first had every reason to believe that it could
soon regain possession of Congress, and that in 1864 it would be able to
elect its candidate to the Presidency. Hence it had no wish to dissolve
the Union; and if its leaders could have had their way, the Union would
have been spared. But the second party, making up for its deficiency in
numbers by the intensity of its zeal, and laboring untiringly, was too
much for the moderates. Hate is a stronger feeling than love of any
kind, stronger even than love of spoils; and the men who followed Rhett
and Yancey, Pryor and Spratt, hated the Union with a perfect hatred.
They got ahead of the men who followed Davis and Stephens, and the rest
of those Southern chiefs who would have been content with the complete
triumph of Southern principles in the Republic as it stood in 1860. As
they broke up the Democratic party in order to render the election
of the Republican candidate certain, so that they might found on his
election the _cri de guerre_ of a "sectional triumph" over the South, so
they "coerced" the Southern people into the adoption of a war-policy. We
have more than once heard Mr. Lincoln blamed for "precipitating matters"
in April, 1861. He should have temporized, it has been said, and so
have preserved peace; but when he called for seventy-five thousand
volunteers, he made war unavoidable. The truth is, that Mr. Lincoln did
not begin the war. It was begun by the South. His call for volunteers
was the consequence of war being made on the nation, and not the cause
of war being made either on the South or by the South. The enemy fired
upon and took Fort Sumter before the first call for volunteers was
issued; and that proceeding must be admitted to have been an act of war,
unless we are prepared to admit that there is a right of Secession.
And Fort Sumter was fired upon and taken through the influence of the
violent party at the South, who were resolved that there should be war.
They knew that it was beyond the power of the Federal Government to send
supplies to the doomed fort, and that in a few days it would pass into
the hands of the Confederates; and this they determined to prevent,
because they knew also that the mere surrender of the garrison, when
it had eaten its last rations, would not suffice to "fire the Northern
heart." They carried their point, and hence it was that war was begun
the middle of April, 1861. But for the triumph of the violent Southern
party, the contest might have been postponed, and even a peace patched
up for the time, and the inevitable struggle put off to a future day.
As it was, Government had no choice, and was compelled to fight; and it
would have been compelled to fight, had it been composed entirely of
Quakers.

