Astor's boldness increased with years. He bought government loans at a
time when other capitalists shrunk, and the price had run down to the
lowest mark. He bought claims against old estates--one of which paid an
enormous profit, and would have been accounted a splendid fortune of
itself--while the gradual increase of the city brought his waste lands
into demand; and the opening of the Erie Canal may be said to have at
one stroke added a million of dollars to the value of his estate.
Whatever was bought was held with determined grasp, however small the
prospect of advance. For instance, a friend of ours (now dead)
purchased, in company with Mr. Astor, two lots on Broadway, of which
they took separate deeds, and held for an advance. Year after year
passed by, but no advance appeared, while assessments were continually
made for city improvement. At the end of this period our friend called
on Mr. Astor and stated that he was weary of such long delay in getting
return for his investment, and asked him if he would not take the lot
and give him its simple cost. Mr. Astor calmly acceded to the proposal.
Had our friend held the same views as the great land operator, he would
have realized a fortune from this single lot, since what then cost one
thousand dollars is now worth fifty thousand dollars.

The Napoleonic character of Mr. Astor's mind is shown by the great
commercial schemes which shared the claims of real estate. He was
extending the ramifications of his trade through the North-west
wilderness and competing with the Hudson Bay Company for the peltry
taken by the numerous tribes of savages, while at the same time a vast
export trade was carried on with Europe, and also with China, whence he
brought teas in exchange for furs. It was this broad ambition which
prompted the grand scheme of a new station at the mouth of the Columbia.
And this scheme, though it failed, was not without great national
results. Its misfortunes were chronicled by the pen of Irving, and in
his pages the story of the crew murdered, and the ship plundered and
burned, was recorded among the tragedies of commerce.

Mr. Astor lived to old age, and his life was one of few changes. From
his humble shop in Little Dock street (now Water street near Coenties
Slip) he removed his place of business to Liberty street, (Number 71,)
and subsequently to Broadway. His longest place of abode was Number 223
Broadway, now a part of the site of the Astor House, whence, after a
residence in Hoboken, he removed up-town to a block in Broadway near
Prince street. Here he remained until death, but he lived long enough to
see the progress of the city covering his lands with dwellings, and
bequeathed to his son the largest estate in America. Mr. Astor had a
literary taste, and was fond of book-men. He gave Fitz-Green Halleck a
snug and profitable clerkship, and on the death of the capitalist,
William B. Astor presented to the poet the sum of ten thousand dollars.
Mr. Astor also sought the acquaintance of Washington Irving on the
return of that distinguished gentleman from Europe, and it was at his
especial request that the _Astoria_ was written. The friendship between
these two distinguished men continued until death, when it was found
that Mr. Irving had been appointed one of the executors of the will. The
fees connected with this office could not have been less than one
hundred thousand dollars, and the executors (six in number) at one time
received ten thousand dollars apiece.

Mr. Astor's project of the library was conceived long before his death,
and he had Dr. Cogswell for several years engaged in the collection of
books for this purpose. The full provisions, however, were not known
until the reading of the will developed the plan and funds. The plan was
not carried out in detail, but was left to the judgment of the trustees,
who modified it considerably, making an institution for reference
instead of a mere circulating library.

To the original bequest Mr. William B. Astor has since added a large
conveyance of real estate, and the institution is nearly double its
original size. Speaking of Mr. William B. Astor, we may be led to a few
references of a personal nature. As the ordinary street-passenger is
traversing Prince street, he is not likely to be struck by any of its
surroundings. The street itself is but of third-rate character, and the
houses are but of a common stamp. Near Broadway, however, one may notice
a small brick office, neatly built, of one story, with gable to the
street, but with doors and windows closed, and the whole appearance one
of security. Near the door may be seen a little sign which reads thus:
'Entrance next door: office hours from nine to three.' The next door, to
which we are referred, is a plain three-story brick dwelling, with no
name on the door, and might be taken for the residence of some
well-to-do old-fashioned family. Hence one is quite startled to find
that this is the headquarters of the chief capitalist of America.
Entering the street-door, one will find himself in a small vestibule,
neatly floored with checkered oil-cloth, and opening a door on his left,
he will enter a well-lighted front-room, destitute of any furniture but
a counting-house desk and a few chairs. At this desk stands an
accountant (or perhaps two) working at a set of books, and evidently
enjoying an easy berth. He will answer all ordinary inquiries, will do
the duty of refusing charitable demands, and will attend to any thing in
the ordinary run of business; but if one has any thing special on hand,
he will point to a door opening into a rear office. This apartment is of
moderate size and of simple furniture. On the table are a few books, and
on opening one of them, which appears well thumbed, it will be found to
contain maps of plots of city property, carefully and elegantly
executed, and embracing the boundaries of an enormous estate. Seated by
the table may generally be seen a stout-built man with large and
unattractive features, and upon the whole an ordinary face. He is
plainly dressed, and has a somewhat care-worn look, and appears to be
fifty or sixty years of age. One naturally feels (that is, if he be a
poor man) that it is quite a rare thing to address a capitalist, and
especially when that capitalist is the representative, say of
twenty-five millions of dollars. Such, at least, was our experience at
our first interview with William B. Astor.

Mr. Astor occupies an imposing mansion in Lafayette Place, and
immediately adjoining is the magnificent library to which we have
referred, and which should commemorate the name of the son as well as
that of the father. At this house he spends that small portion of his
time which is not occupied by his duties in Prince street, where he does
a full day's work (Sundays excepted) every day in the week. Thus the
daily routine of the richest man in America is a walk to and from home,
of a half-mile or so, and close attention to business.

The care of Mr. Astor's estate is a vast burden. His tenements of all
grades number several hundreds, ranging from the dwelling at three
hundred dollars per annum to the magnificent warehouse or hotel at
thirty thousand dollars. To relieve himself from the more vexatious
features of his business, he has committed his real estate collections
to an agent who does the work well, and who is, no doubt, largely paid.
He, with his clerks, collects rents, and makes returns of a rent-roll,
whose very recital would be wearisome. As a matter of course, such a man
must employ a small army of painters, carpenters, and other mechanics,
in order to keep up suitable repairs. As Mr. Astor pays no insurance,
the work of rebuilding after fires is in itself a large item.

A large part of Mr. Astor's property consists of vacant lots, which are
in continual demand, and which he generally prefers to hold rather than
sell; hence he is much employed with architects and master-builders, and
always has several blocks in course of erection. This is a very heavy
burden, and were it not for the help derived from his family, would, we
believe, crush him. However, his son, John Jacob, is quite a business
man, and bears his share of the load. This young gentleman has shown his
patriotism by serving in the army for the Union, in which he bears an
important commission. In addition to this, Mr. Astor has the aid of a
gentleman of business character and habits, once a member of one of the
largest shipping houses in the city, who has become connected with the
family by marriage. The labors of all these parties would not be more
than adequate to the task of collecting interest on bonds, looking after
dividends, etc., since that little fire-proof office in Prince street
contains several millions of Government and State securities.

In order to give something like an estimate of the immense income
rolling in upon this family, we must commence with the fact that two
dollars per day is considered fair wages for working men; that the man
who makes five dollars per day all the year round may be considered very
fortunate; that ten dollars per day is attained by that few who are more
favored and gifted, and whose proportion to the mass is about one to a
thousand. Starting from this estimate, we may be better prepared to rate
Mr. Astor's position by comparing any of the above sums with six
thousand dollars, which is said to be his daily income. Bless me! one
can not but exclaim; here Croesus himself might die with envy. Yet we
reply, after a moment's pause, let no one envy the man of gold. It is
said that when John Jacob Astor was once congratulated by a certain
person for his wealth, he replied by pointing to his pile of bonds, and
maps of property, at the same time inquiring: 'Would you like to manage
these matters for your board and clothes?' The man demurred to the idea.
'Sir,' continued the rich man, '_it is all that I get_!' Hence, thinking
on these things, we have never envied Mr. Astor, and would not bear the
burden of his wealth for all its glory. It is not the possession but the
use of money, which affords enjoyment, and this is a secret which the
rich seldom learn. Alas! among the annals of moneyed men, how seldom do
we meet a Stuart or a Lenox--men who have learned what Goldsmith calls
'the luxury of doing good.'

It is one of the peculiar misfortunes of the rich, to be subject to the
attentions of parasites and flatterers, and hence they can not possess
that same certainty of the value of friendship enjoyed by the poor. The
latter of these classes know that when a kind act is done to them, it
comes from a pure motive; the other seldom can be sure that it is not
from selfish ends. To illustrate the idea which wealth suggests, as to
the motive of friendly visitors, we may state that among Mr. Astor's
class-mates in Columbia College was a young man who became a preacher.
The students separated--the one to handle millions, and to touch the
springs of the money-market, and become the colossus of wealth; the
other to his flock, as a poor domestic missionary, whose history was
indeed a 'shady side.' The latter struggled on through thick and thin,
and never in all his privations thought of sending a begging-letter to
his old class-mate. But being once upon a time in New-York, he yielded
to the inclination to make him a visit. Mr. Astor received him
courteously, and the two conversed on the scenes of their early days. As
the pastor arose to depart, an idea struck the capitalist's heart, which
we mention to his credit. '_Can I do any thing for you_?' he inquired.
He had, in fact, misconceived the object of the visit, and supposed that
under the guise of a friendly call, lurked an inclination to beg, which
fear of refusal had suppressed. The poor clergyman at once perceived the
drift of the question. Nothing could have been farther from his mind,
and blushing at the thought, he acknowledged the suggestion with an
expression of gratitude, and retired.

Perhaps a view of the unrest of the human heart appears most terrible
when contrasted with the almost fabulous heaps of surrounding wealth,
and one is thus led to the conclusion arrived at by Goldsmith:

  'Vain, very vain, my weary search to find
  That bliss which only centres in the mind;
  With secret course which no loud streams annoy,
  Glides the smooth current of domestic joy;
  Still to ourselves in every place consigned,
  Our own felicity we make or find.'

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 4: _Undercurrents_ is not a romance, and although its author
calls it a 'Romance of business,' it is a life-like presentation of the
deep things of trade, a series of dramatic scenes, holding the mirror up
to a terrible reality. The characters are no fictions; they exist, they
labor, they suffer daily, and will continue to do so, go long as the
present system obtains, Mr. Kimball boldly lays bare the secret disease,
like a demonstrator of anatomy. He is the only author who has succeeded
in this department of literature, and here he shows himself a master.]

[Footnote 5: Since writing the above, we have heard of that masterpiece
of munificence, the gift of fifty thousand dollars to the Theological
Seminary of Princeton by the Messrs. Stuart.]

[Footnote 6: Calling on Church lately, we found him finishing his
Cotopaxi for Mr. Lenox. Price, six thousand dollars.]


THUNDER ALL ROUND!

  'When it once begins to thunder,
  You will hear it all around!'
  And we waited--till in wonder
  Soon we heard the awful sound:
  Crashing cannon, rifle-rattle,
  Bowing many a traitor-head:
  On, McClellan, with the battle!
  Strike the Typhon-serpent dead!


WAS HE SUCCESSFUL?

    'Do but grasp into the thick of human life! Every one _lives_ it--to
    not many is it _known;_ and seize it where you will, it is
    interesting.'--_Goethe_.

    'SUCCESSFUL.--Terminating in accomplishing what is wished
    or intended.'--_Webster's Dictionary_.


CHAPTER V.

SOME ACCOUNT OF JOEL BURNS OF BURNSVILLE

You will find, as you travel through the country, but few very poor
people in New-England. Rarely are the 'selectmen' called to act either
on applications for admission as one of the 'town's poor,' or to 'bind
out' a boy or girl till one-and-twenty.

One evening--it was the close of a cold, raw day in the latter part of
November--the stage deposited a woman, and a lad perhaps twelve years
old, at the village tavern in Sudbury. She was intending to ride all
night; indeed, she had paid her 'fare' through to New-Haven, but, seized
with sudden illness, she was compelled to stop. Her malady proved to be
typhus fever. The doctor was summoned, who subjected his patient to the
terrific treatment then in vogue for that disorder, and in due course
she died. It turned out on inquiry, that the woman, whose name was
Burns, was on her way to a married sister's in Pennsylvania; further,
that she was a widow, the lad her only child, and the sister in
Pennsylvania the only near relation she had in the world. This sister
was by no means in affluent circumstances, but she could offer a home to
'Sarah,' which the latter was glad to accept. After disposing of the
trifling articles unsuitable to carry with her, she had barely money
enough to defray the expenses of herself and 'Joel' to their new abode.
The poor woman's journey was interrupted, as we have explained, at
Sudbury, and a new direction given to it. She departed for 'the
undiscovered country,' leaving little Joel to cry himself asleep; for
the time quite heart-broken, and desolate enough.

There was not time to write to the married sister; so the selectmen,
after ascertaining what money still remained in the purse of the
deceased, undertook the burial. They ordered a cheap pine coffin,
scantily 'stained.' It cost but a quarter of a dollar to dig the grave,
and old Sally agreed to 'lay the woman out' for the comfortable dress
she wore on arriving at the inn. Of the three selectmen of Sudbury, two
were from the east part of the town--thrifty, hard-working farmers; the
third was a Mr. Bellows, a popular store-keeper of the village. The
latter had not interfered with the action of his colleagues, because he
himself was very busy, and they, having very little to do at that
season, were pleased with the excitement the affair afforded them. But
passing the inn the morning Mrs. Burns was to be buried, Mr. Bellows
stepped in a moment at the request of the landlord, who was a
kind-hearted fellow, and did not feel quite satisfied with the
arrangements. Ascending to the chamber, he saw a sad but
handsome-looking boy standing over a rudely constructed coffin, a
picture of sorrow and despair. The little fellow had witnessed the
action of the coarse-hearted men who took the direction of the funeral.
He heard their private discussion as to the 'cost of burying the woman.'
He was a witness to their haggling with Aunt Sally about laying her out.
He could hear various propositions as to what was to be done with _him_.
He saw his mother hurriedly draped for the coffin and placed inside of
it. He did not sob nor cry; a dreadful reality had so overcome him, that
he lost the power of doing either. Once or twice, when every body had
left the room, he had stolen softly up and kissed the face of the
corpse, and some tears would then roll down his cheeks. It was at such a
time that Mr. Bellows entered, and his heart smote him that he had not
sooner looked in. He spoke kindly to Joel, which seemed to loose the
flood-gates of his grief, and for a time he continued to cry in the most
piteous manner. Mr. Bellows soon decided what to do. His own family was
small; he had a wife and one child--a little girl nine years old. He
took Joel in his lap, told him not to cry--that he should go home with
him, and be _his_ boy. The tone in which this was uttered had more
effect to soothe the lad than what was said to him. After a few minutes,
Joel was persuaded to leave the room and to accompany his new friend to
the house. Mr. Bellows then called on his minister, and requested him to
perform the funeral rites at the grave; for so little interest had been
shown in the fate of the strange woman, that her illness had not even
been communicated to the clergyman, and the selectmen did not think it
'worth while to have any funeral'! Mr. Bellows hurried hack to the inn.
The coffin was placed in a wagon. It was followed by the clergyman and
Mr. Bellows, the two other selectmen, the landlord of the inn, and his
wife. The burying-ground was soon reached, a short prayer made, and the
company dispersed, leaving the man to fill up the grave according to
contract. Mr. Bellows and his two associates returned to the tavern
together, in order, as the latter expressed it, to settle up the
business. Going into the sitting-room, and taking seats around a small
table, one of them opened the subject in a serious and important tone,
indicative of the weight of responsibility he felt was resting on his
shoulders, by asking what was to be done with the boy.

'What do you think best to do with him?' said Mr. Bellows.

'Well, I suppose there is room in the town-house. There is nobody there
now but Aunt Lois and foolish Tom, and we can probably bind him out next
spring.'

'I don't think we have a right to charge the town with the expense,'
said selectman number two. 'We know where the boy came from; the best
way is to send him back to Granby.'

'He has got an aunt,' said the other; 'hadn't we better write to her?'

'Gentlemen,' said Mr. Bellows, 'I will cut this matter short. I will
take the lad myself. You shall bind him out to me in the regular way. I
do not think you need fear any interference from the town of Granby. As
to his aunt, I propose first to write and get her consent. If she
prefers to take the boy, why, she will send for him.'

This question disposed of, the spokesman next proposed to go into the
accounts; which meant his own and his neighbor's charge for time and
personal expenses twice from East-Sudbury with horse and wagon. They
thought six dollars about right.

'How do you propose to be paid?' quoth Mr. Bellows.

'Twenty dollars and seventy-two cents was in their possession, taken
from the pocket of the woman after she died.'

'And how did you dare interfere with property of any kind,' exclaimed
Mr. Bellows, his smothered indignation bursting forth, 'without
consulting with me? Don't you know the landlord has the first claim on
every thing till his bill is paid? Don't you know, too, you are simply
doing the town business, and if you have any claim, the town must pay
you for it?'

Well, that is so, I guess,' said the third. 'It _is_ agin the town. I'll
take my chances, for one--had rather settle it that way, any how.'

The result of the conference was, that the whole business, including the
twenty dollars and seventy-two cents, was handed over to Mr. Bellows,
leaving his colleagues to make out and collect their bill at leisure.
Joel's aunt was written to, and freely gave her consent that the boy
should go with his new friend. The latter promptly paid the bill at the
inn, and the doctor for his services, and soon after paid his colleagues
what they claimed, lest it might in the future be a subject of comment
when Joel grew up.

He was a good man, this Mr. Bellows; not specially refined in manner,
but possessing a delicacy of character and a lively sensibility which
placed him among the ranks of nature's noblemen. He had been fortunate
in business, and owned the principal store in the place, where he
exercised a decided influence.

Little Joel gave promise of not disappointing his patron's expectations.
In fact, he was a child of most engaging manners. His features were not
regular, nor indeed handsome; but he had bright black eyes, a fine
complexion, and an open, ingenuous countenance. He was treated by Mr.
Bellows as considerately as if he were his own son. To be sure, Joel had
some unpleasant scenes to pass through. As nothing is ever lost sight of
in a small country village, the story of how he came to be living with
Mr. Bellows was not forgotten. At school, occasionally, one of the boys
would, on some slight provocation, point at him and call him 'Bellows's
nigger,' or make faces and cry 'charity boy,' 'town's poor.' Now,
fortunately, Joel had a happy, joyous nature--somewhat fiery and
irascible, but still joyous--else he might have become morbidly
miserable. As it was, these manifestations only provoked his anger, and
led him forthwith into a rough-and-tumble fight, in which, whether
victor or not, he always showed unquestionable pluck. If he came off
second-best a dozen times, he went confidently into the thirteenth
trial, brave as Bruce, and equally successful. At length the voice of
gossip was hushed. Joel became the most popular lad in the village.
Every body liked him, and what is better, he deserved it.

But the evil days came at last to good Mr. Bellows--came after years of
happy, moderate, unclouded prosperity. First his wife died. This was
when Joel was twenty years old, and Ellen Bellows seventeen. The illness
was short, and the daughter was summoned from boarding-school in time
only to attend her mother's funeral. Mr. Bellows, after that, as every
body said, was an altered man. He could not bring his mind to business.
Some people thought at times he acted strangely, by which they meant he
was a little out of his head. Still, his affairs could not suffer while
such a young man as Joel Burns was about. The fact is, in some things
matters were even better managed than before. But great mistakes were
made in the purchase of goods, which Mr. Bellows continued to attend to,
and which Joel had too much respect for his benefactor to criticise. The
succeeding year, speculation in wool ran high. Mr. Bellows was anxious
to go into it. Joel took the freedom of begging him not to do so. The
latter appeared to be persuaded; but he did what was worse than engaging
actively in purchases, for then he would have had Joel's tact and energy
to aid him. He lent his name to an acquaintance, for a very large
amount, who was to go extensively into the scheme with him and divide
the profits. The result was disastrous. Wool fell rapidly. An attempt
was made to borrow money on it and hold it over to the next
season--worse and worse; Mr. Bellows was ruined.

One morning, very early, several attachments were levied on his goods,
and the store was shut up. One of the officers next proceeded to the
house and took possession there, so that Mr. Bellows was now tied hand
and foot.

I suppose few of my readers can appreciate what it is for a man to 'fail
up' in the country. In our large cities, it is regarded, to be sure, as
a misfortune, but one to which every merchant is exposed; and the usual
course is to propose a compromise, obtain a release, and set cheerfully
to work again, with loss of property, doubtless, but _not_ with any
damage to reputation. But in the country, failure is regarded as a
disgrace, and a 'failed man' is looked and pointed at something as a
felon would be.

When Joel Burns awoke in the morning and found every thing in the hands
of the sheriff, he was astounded, for Mr. Bellows had not told him a
word about his last year's operations. He perceived the amounts were
larger than could ever be realized. He took in the whole situation at a
glance. He hastened to consult with Mr. Bellows, but he was listened to
with entire apathy. The merchant would say but little, and that was so
incoherent and unintelligible, it was evident he was laboring under
mental aberration. He continued moody through the day, and the next
morning was found dead in his bed. He had severed an artery.

At this time Joel was in his twenty-second year. Already displaying
extraordinary capacity in affairs, this event served to call out all his
resources.

I ought to have mentioned, before this, what every body will guess, that
Joel was desperately in love with Ellen Bellows, without, however,
giving her the least reason to believe so, beyond that silent,
unobtrusive devotion which girls, after all, are not very apt to
mistake. Joel felt that in his situation he had no right to attempt to
win Ellen's affection; but he unconsciously took the very best way to
win it. In his intercourse with her he was reserved, almost formal, and,
I may say, apparently indifferent. Ellen, when she came home from school
to spend her vacations, used to feel a good deal piqued that Joel was
not more demonstrative in his welcome. I can not believe she did not
comprehend pretty well how Joel really felt; but his manner annoyed her,
nevertheless. For example, he would frequently step aside and permit
another to wait on Miss Bellows, when Miss Bellows would much prefer
Joel had not been so accommodating. In fact, she was vexed with him half
the time for what she called his stupidity, and half the time tantalized
by his 'studious reserve.' Meanwhile, Joel pursued his career of
self-martyrdom, honest and true-hearted.

Now the scene had changed, and Joel was no longer the diffident youth,
but a man, competent and energetic. He took the direction of every
thing; nothing was overlooked. Of course the relatives were sent for. It
was the old story: they had paid great respect to their rich cousin, but
they did not seem to care much for the memory of the broken-down
insolvent.

The day of the funeral arrived--a dreary November day. It was just
eleven years from the day Joel's mother was buried and he himself taken
to the house of Mr. Bellows. Joel did not forget it, and it gave
additional strength to carry out what devolved on him. There was a very
large attendance at the house. The circumstances of the failure and
subsequent suicide, the situation of the only daughter, and the many
petty incidents which were now the town talk, excited the curiosity of
the good people, and there was an opportunity to gratify it by attending
the funeral. They wanted to see how the corpse would look. They were
crazy to know how Ellen Bellows would appear, and what Joel Burns would
do. So the house was thronged. After all, there was not much to satisfy
their curiosity. The corpse was not exposed; Ellen Bellows, contrary to
all custom in New-England, remained in her chamber, for which, as you
may believe, she was pretty thoroughly picked to pieces; and Joel Burns
sat quietly, with sad but tranquil countenance, among the mourners.

The next day Joel called Ellen aside and asked her whether she was not
going home with her aunt.

'Am I not to stay here?' she said.

Joel could not explain to her just then the absolute ruin which stared
her in the face. He simply answered: 'No, Ellen, you must go away for a
few weeks. There is much to do, and for a time you had better be
absent.'

'Very well, Joel, if you advise it. I have nobody else to advise me,'
and she burst into tears.

Joel remained calm. He had previously made up his mind just what to do,
and he brought all the energy of his nature to sustain him. His composed
air helped to restore Ellen--she tried to be as calm as he.

'But aunt, since she came, has not invited me return with her,' she
said.

'Oh! but she will, I am sure,' replied Joel, and he went out rather
abruptly; for here was an obstacle to his plan which did not occur to
him before. He proceeded at once to the aunt, and found her preparing to
leave that afternoon.

'You will take Ellen with you, I suppose?' he said.

'I am sure I had not thought of doing it. You know all the children are
home, and really we have no room at present.'

Two weeks previous she had written a pressing invitation to Ellen to
come at this particular time. Joel bluntly reminded her of it.

'Yes, but circumstances alter cases. The fact is, I can't afford to
maintain the girl, and I don't think I had better begin; and that's the
English of it, Joel, if you force me to say so. You know very well there
won't be a cent left.'

'I think I know more about that than you do,' replied Joel, with an air
which would have done credit to a _diplomat_, 'and, I assure you, Ellen
will _not_ be left penniless; and if you will insist on her going with
you for a short time--mind, I say _insist_--I promise before long to
make certain disclosures which will satisfy you as to my assertion. But
she must not be here while they are settling up. You understand.'

The old lady did not understand, but Joel carried his point by the aid
of the mystery with which he surrounded it. It put her on her good
behavior at once, lest she should lose the promised revelation. She
spoke even affectionately to Ellen, and declared she should not let her
remain in the house alone, but she must go home with her.

Before the two left Sudbury, Joel had a very long interview with Ellen.
What passed at that interview never transpired, but the young girl's
countenance, though very sad, did not wear the desolate and despairing
expression which it exhibited before.

The stage now drew up, the ladies got in, and it rolled away, leaving
Joel and the deputy-sheriffs the sole possessors of the premises.


CHAPTER VI.

A few miles to the north-east of Sudbury the country, at the time I
speak of it, had a wild and forbidding appearance. This was partly owing
to the immense forest which stretched along a continuous ridge of land
covering both sides of it and the plain below. On one side of this ridge
the face of the country was very rough; on the other side, through a
fine intervale, flowed a stream of respectable size called Pine Creek,
which took its rise in the mountains at some distance, and was fed by
innumerable springs and rivulets from the surrounding hills. Nearly a
thousand acres of these lands were owned by an old merchant in New-York,
who had taken them for debt many years before, and had become, as he
said, tired of paying taxes on them.

Joel had had his eye on the property for two or three years. What his
views were, we shall presently see, for no sooner did Miss Bellows quit
Sudbury with her aunt, than Joel, after remarking to the sheriff that he
did not propose to interfere with him in any way, proceeded to pack his
trunks, which he removed to the inn. Then he hired a horse and wagon for
a week, and set off no one knew whither. He came back within the time
limited, and found a committee of creditors awaiting his return. They
wanted to engage him to sell out the stock of goods and to close up Mr.
Bellows' affairs. Joel declined the service, although the offers were
liberal and coupled with the intimation that it would be the means of
starting him in business as the successor of Mr. Bellows. Joel
resolutely declined. He knew the estate was hopelessly insolvent, and
that he could not be of the least service to Ellen by any labors he
should undertake; and besides, he did not care to even appear to thrive
out of the broken fortunes of his patron. When still pressed by the now
perplexed creditors, he turned sharply on them and said: 'Gentlemen,
don't you think it would have been more judicious, not to say more
humane, had you waited on Mr. Bellows in his lifetime, and requested
_him_ to undertake this service instead of pouncing on his property,
closing his store, and hurrying him into his grave? He was an honest
man, and would have worked honestly for your benefit, and I would have
aided him. As it is, I do not feel disposed to lift a finger for you.
Good morning.'

Joel left the same day for New-York, and did not again return to
Sudbury. Some weeks afterward, in mid-winter, the report was circulated
that he was living in the woods on Pine Creek. Then the story went
abroad that the poor fellow was crazy and had turned hermit. This was
followed by other rumors still more ridiculous.

I have no desire to alarm the reader on Joel's account. It is time,
therefore, I should say that he had formed extensive plans for the
future, which he was proceeding to carry out. During his week's absence
he went carefully over the entire tract owned by the old merchant in
New-York. This lay on both sides of the creek, and extended to the
eastward quite over the 'ridge.' It was well timbered and beautifully
situated. After making these observations, Joel proceeded to New-York
and called on the proprietor. He stated his object to be to purchase a
hundred acres of the tract, for which he would pay five dollars an acre
cash. He wanted, besides, the refusal of the rest of the property, for a
certain time, at the same rate. The old merchant was pleased with Joel's
ingenuous manner as well as with his intelligence. He questioned him
minutely about the lands, for he had never seen them, and asked him what
he proposed to do with his purchase. Joel answered promptly and
truthfully. He put the owner in possession of every material fact.

'And all you will give is five dollars per acre?'

'Yes.'

'Do you think that is all the lands are really worth?'

