MEL. No, no! I would not, were I fifty times a prince, be a pensioner on
the dead! I honor birth and ancestry when they are regarded as the
incentives to exertion, not the title-deeds to sloth! I honor the
laurels that overshadow the graves of our fathers--it is our fathers I
emulate, when I desire that beneath the evergreen I myself have planted
my own ashes may repose! Dearest! couldst thou but see with my eyes!

PAULINE. I cannot forego pride when I look on thee, and think that thou
lovest me. Sweet Prince, tell me again of thy palace by the lake of
Como; it is so pleasant to hear of thy splendors since thou didst swear
to me that they would be desolate without Pauline; and when thou
describest them, it is with a mocking lip and a noble scorn, as if
custom had made thee disdain greatness.


     MEL. Nay, dearest, nay, if thou wouldst have me paint
          The home to which, could love fulfill its prayers,
          This hand would lead thee, listen! A deep vale
          Shut out by Alpine hills from the rude world;
          Near a clear lake, margin'd by fruits of gold
          And whispering myrtles; glassing softest skies,
          As cloudless, save with rare and roseate shadows,
          As I would have thy fate!

     PAULINE.                        My own dear love!

     MEL. A palace lifting to eternal summer
          Its marble walls, from out a glossy bower
          Of coolest foliage, musical with birds,
          Whose songs should syllable thy name! At noon
          We'd sit beneath the arching vines, and wonder
          Why Earth could be unhappy, while the Heavens
          Still left us youth and love! We'd have no friends
          That were not lovers; no ambition, save
          To excel them all in love; we'd read no books
          That were not tales of love--that we might smile
          To think how poorly eloquence of words
          Translates the poetry of hearts like ours!
          And when night came, amidst the breathless Heavens
          We'd guess what star should be our home when love
          Becomes immortal; while the perfumed light
          Stole through the mist of alabaster lamps,
          And every air was heavy with the sighs
          Of orange groves and music from sweet lutes,
          And murmurs of low fountains that gush forth
          I' the midst of roses!--Dost thou like the picture?

     PAULINE. Oh, as the bee upon the flower, I hang
          Upon the honey of thy eloquent tongue!
          Am I not blest? And if I love too wildly,
          Who would not love thee like Pauline?

     MEL.                                       Oh, false one!
          It is the prince thou lovest, not the man;
          If in the stead of luxury, pomp, and power,
          I had painted poverty, and toil, and care,
          Thou hadst found no honey on my tongue; Pauline,
          That is not love.

     PAULINE.               Thou wrong'st me, cruel Prince!
          At first, in truth, I might not have been won,
          Save through the weakness of a flatter'd pride;
          But now--oh! trust me--couldst thou fall from power
          And sink--

     MEL.            As low as that poor gardener's son
          Who dared to lift his eyes to thee?

     PAULINE.                                 Even then,
          Methinks thou wouldst be only made more dear
          By the sweet thought that I could prove how deep
          Is woman's love! We are like the insects, caught
          By the poor glittering of a garish flame;
          But, oh, the wings once scorch'd, the brightest star
          Lures us no more; and by the fatal light
          We cling till death!

     MEL. Angel! [_Aside._] O conscience! conscience!
          It must not be--her love hath grown a torture
          Worse than her hate. I will at once to Beauseant,
          And--ha! he comes. Sweet love, one moment leave me.
          I have business with these gentlemen--I--I
          Will forthwith join you.

     PAULINE. I obey, sweet Prince.       [_Exit separately._


ACT III, SCENE II


     CHARACTERS: Pauline, Claude, and the Widow Melnotte, the mother of
     Claude.

     SCENE: Melnotte's cottage, widow bustling about, a table spread for
     supper.


WIDOW. So, I think that looks very neat. He sent me a line, so blotted
that I can scarcely read it, to say he would be here almost immediately.
She must have loved him well indeed to have forgotten his birth; for
though he was introduced to her in disguise, he is too honorable not to
have revealed to her the artifice; which her love only could forgive.
Well, I do not wonder at it; for though my son is not a prince, he ought
to be one, and that's almost as good. [_Knock at door._] Ah! here they
are.

_Enter_ MELNOTTE _and_ PAULINE

WIDOW. Oh, my boy--the pride of my heart!--welcome, welcome. I beg
pardon, ma'am, but I do love him so!

PAULINE. Good woman, I really--why, Prince, what is this?--does the old
lady know you? Oh, I guess you have done her some service. Another proof
of your kind heart; is it not?

MEL. Of my kind heart, ay!

PAULINE. So you know the Prince?

WIDOW. Know him, madam? Ah, I begin to fear it is you who know him not!

PAULINE. Can we stay here, my lord? I think there's something very wild
about her.

MEL. Madam, I--no, I cannot tell her; what a coward is a man who has
lost his honor! Speak to her--speak to her--[_to his mother_] tell her
that--O Heaven, that I were dead!

PAULINE. How confused he looks!--this strange place!--this woman--what
can it mean?--I half suspect--who are you, madam?--who are you? can't
you speak? are you struck dumb?

WIDOW. Claude, you have not deceived her? Ah, shame upon you! I thought
that, before you went to the altar, she was to have known all.

PAULINE. All! what! My blood freezes in my veins!

WIDOW. Poor lady--dare I tell her, Claude? Know you not, then, madam,
that this young man is of poor though honest parents? Know you not that
you are wedded to my son, Claude Melnotte?

PAULINE. Your son! hold--hold! do not speak to me. [_Approaches_
MELNOTTE.] Is this a jest? is it? I know it is, only speak--one
word--one look--one smile. I cannot believe--I who loved thee so--I
cannot believe that thou art such a--no, I will not wrong thee by a
harsh word! Speak.

MEL. Leave us. [_To_ WIDOW.] Have pity on her, on me; leave us!

WIDOW. Oh, Claude, that I should live to see thee bowed by shame! thee
of whom I was so proud! [_Exit._

PAULINE. Her son--her son!

     MEL.  Now, lady, hear me.


     PAULINE.                   Hear thee!
           Ay, speak--her son! have fiends a parent? speak,
           That thou mayst silence curses--speak!

     MEL. No, curse me;
           Thy curse would blast me less than thy forgiveness.

     PAULINE [_laughing wildly_]. This is thy palace, where "the
             perfumed light
           Steals through the mist of alabaster lamps,
           And every air is heavy with the sighs
           Of orange groves and music from sweet lutes,
           And murmurs of low fountains that gush forth
           I' the midst of roses!--Dost thou like the picture?"
           This is my bridal home, and thou my bridegroom!
           O fool--O dupe--O wretch! I see it all.
           The by-word and the jeer of every tongue
           In Lyons. Hast thou in thy heart one touch
           Of human kindness? if thou hast, why kill me,
           And save thy wife from madness. No, it cannot--
           It cannot be; this is some horrid dream;
           I shall wake soon. [_Touching him._] Art flesh? art man? or
             but
           The shadows seen in sleep? It is too real.
           What have I done to thee? how sinn'd against thee,
           That thou shouldst crush me thus?

     MEL. Pauline, by pride
           Angels have fallen ere thy time; by pride--
           That sole alloy of thy most lovely mold--
           The evil spirit of a bitter love,
           And a revengeful heart, had power upon thee.
           From my first years my soul was fill'd with thee;
           I saw thee midst the flow'rs the lowly boy
           Tended, unmark'd by thee--a spirit of bloom,
           And joy, and freshness, as if Spring itself
           Were made a living thing, and wore thy shape!
           I saw thee, and the passionate heart of man
           Enter'd the breast of the wild-dreaming boy.
           And from that hour I grew--what to the last
           I shall be--thine adorer! Well, this love,
           Vain, frantic, guilty, if thou wilt, became
           A fountain of ambition and bright hope;
           I thought of tales that by the winter hearth
           Old gossips tell--how maidens, sprung from kings,
           Have stoop'd from their high sphere; how love, like death,
           Levels all ranks, and lays the shepherd's crook
           Beside the scepter.
           My father died; and I, the peasant born,
           Was my own lord. Then did I seek to rise
           Out of the prison of my mean estate;
           And, with such jewels as the exploring mind
           Brings from the caves of knowledge, buy my ransom
           From those twin jailers of the daring heart--
           Low birth and iron fortune. For thee I grew
           A midnight student o'er the dreams of sages.
           For thee I sought to borrow from each grace,
           And every muse, such attributes as lend
           Ideal charms to love. I thought of thee,
           And passion taught me poesy--of thee,
           And on the painter's canvas grew the life
           Of beauty! Art became the shadow
           Of the dear starlight of thy haunting eyes!
           Men call'd me vain--some mad--I heeded not;
           But still toil'd on--hoped on--for it was sweet,
           If not to win, to feel more worthy thee.

     PAULINE. Why do I cease to hate him!

     MEL. At last, in one mad hour, I dared to pour
           The thoughts that burst their channels into song,
           And set them to thee--such a tribute, lady,
           As beauty rarely scorns, even from the meanest.
           The name--appended by the burning heart
           That long'd to show its idol what bright things
           It had created--yea, the enthusiast's name,
           That should have been thy triumph, was thy scorn;
           That very hour--when passion, turn'd to wrath,
           Resembled hatred most--when thy disdain
           Made my whole soul a chaos--in that hour
           The tempters, found me a revengeful tool
           For their revenge! Thou hadst trampled on the worm--
           It turned and stung thee!

     PAULINE. Love, sir, hath no sting.
           What was the slight of a poor powerless girl
           To the deep wrong of this most vile revenge?
           Oh, how I loved this man!--a serf--a slave!

     MEL. Hold, lady! No, not a slave! Despair is free.
           I will not tell thee of the throes--the struggles--
           The anguish--the remorse. No, let it pass!
           And let me come to such most poor atonement
           Yet in my power. Pauline!--

     PAULINE. No, touch me not!
           I know my fate. You are, by law, my tyrant;
           And I--O Heaven!--a peasant's wife! I'll work--
           Toil--drudge--do what thou wilt--but touch me not!
           Let my wrongs make me sacred!

     MEL. Do not fear me.
           Thou dost not know me, madam; at the altar
           My vengeance ceased--my guilty oath expired!
           Henceforth, no image of some marble saint,
           Niched in cathedral aisles, is hallowed more
           From the rude hand of sacrilegious wrong.
           I am thy husband--nay, thou need'st not shudder!--
           Here, at thy feet, I lay a husband's rights.
           A marriage thus unholy--unfulfill'd--
           A bond of fraud--is, by the laws of France,
           Made void and null. To-night sleep--sleep in peace.
           To-morrow, pure and virgin as this morn
           I bore thee, bathed in blushes, from the shrine,
           Thy father's arms shall take thee to thy home.
           The law shall do thee justice, and restore
           Thy right to bless another with thy love.
           And when them art happy, and hast half forgot
           Him who so loved--so wrong'd thee, think at least
           Heaven left some remnant of the angel still
           In that poor peasant's nature! Ho! my mother!

     _Enter_ WIDOW

           Conduct this lady (she is not my wife;
           She is our guest--our honor'd guest, my mother)
           To the poor chamber, where the sleep of virtue
           Never, beneath my father's honest roof,
           E'en villains dared to mar! Now, lady, now
           I think thou wilt believe me.
           Go, my mother!

     WIDOW. She is not thy wife!

     MEL. Hush, hush! for mercy's sake!
           Speak not, but go.

     [_Exit_ WIDOW. PAULINE _follows, weeping--turns to look back_.

                                      All angels bless and guard her!


RIP VAN WINKLE[80]

WASHINGTON IRVING


ACT I, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Rip Van Winkle; Derrick Von Beekman, the villain of the
     play, who endeavors to get Rip drunk, in order to have him sign
     away his property; Nick Vedder, the village innkeeper.

     SCENE: The village inn; present, Von Beekman, alone.


_Enter_ RIP, _shaking off the children, who cling about him_

RIP [_to the children_]. Say! hullo, dere, yu Yacob Stein! Let that dog
Schneider alone, will you? Dere, I tole you dat all de time, if you
don'd let him alone he's goin' to bide you! Why, hullo, Derrick! How you
was? Ach, my! Did you hear dem liddle fellers just now? Dey most plague
me crazy. Ha, ha, ha! I like to laugh my outsides in every time I tink
about it. Just now, as we was comin' along togedder, Schneider and me--I
don'd know if you know Schneider myself? Well, he's my dog. Well, dem
liddle fellers, dey took Schneider, und--ha, ha, ha!--dey--ha, ha,
ha!--dey tied a tin kettle mit his tail! Ha, ha, ha! My gracious! Of you
had seen dat dog run! My, how scared he was! Vell, he was a-runnin' an'
de kettle was a-bangin' an'--ha, ha, ha! you believe it, dat dog, he run
right betwixt me an' my legs! Ha, ha, ha! He spill me und all dem leddle
fellers down in de mud togedder. Ha, ha, ha!

VON B. Ah, yes, that's all right, Rip, very funny, very funny; but what
do you say to a glass of liquor, Rip?

RIP. Well, now, Derrick, what do I generally say to a glass? I generally
say it's a good ting, don'd I? Und I generally say a good deal more to
what is in it, dan to de glass.

VON B. Certainly, certainly! Say, hallo, there! Nick Vedder, bring out a
bottle of your best!

RIP. Dat's right--fill 'em up. You wouldn't believe, Derrick, but dat is
de first one I have had to-day. I guess maybe de reason is, I couldn't
got it before. Ah, Derrick, my score is too big! Well, here is your good
health und your family's--may dey all live long and prosper. [_They
drink._] Ach! you may well smack your lips, und go ah, ah! over dat
liquor. You don'd give me such liquor like dat every day, Nick Vedder.
Well, come on, fill 'em up again. Git out mit dat water, Nick Vedder, I
don'd want no water in my liquor. Good liquor und water, Nick Vedder, is
just like man and wife, dey don'd agree well togedder--dat's me und my
wife, any way. Well, come on again. Here is your good health und your
family's, und may dey all live long und prosper!

NICK VEDDER. That's right, Rip; drink away, and "drown your sorrows in
the flowing bowl."

RIP. Drown my sorrows? Ya, dat's all very well, but she don'd drown. My
wife is my sorrow und you can't drown her; she tried it once, but she
couldn't do it. What, didn't you hear about dat, de day what Gretchen
she like to got drownded? Ach, my; dat's de funniest ting in de world.
I'll tell you all about it. It was de same day what we got married. I
bet I don'd forget dat day so long what I live. You know dat Hudson
River what dey git dem boats over--well, dat's de same place. Well, you
know dat boat what Gretchen she was a-goin' to come over in, dat got
upsetted--ya, just went righd by der boddom. But she wasn't in de boat.
Oh, no; if she had been in de boat, well, den, maybe she might have got
drownded. You can't tell anyting at all about a ting like dat!

VON B. Ah, no; but I'm sure, Rip, if Gretchen were to fall into the
water now, you would risk your life to save her.

RIP. Would I? Well, I am not so sure about dat myself. When we was first
got married? Oh, ya; I know I would have done it den, but I don'd know
how it would be now. But it would be a good deal more my duty now as it
was den. Don'd you know, Derrick, when a man gits married a long
time--mit his wife, he gits a good deal attached mit her, und it would
be a good deal more my duty now as it was den. But I don'd know,
Derrick. I am afraid if Gretchen should fall in de water now und should
say, "Rip, Rip! help me oud"--I should say, "Mrs. Van Winkle, I will
just go home and tink about it." Oh, no, Derrick; if Gretchen fall in de
water now she's got to swim, I told you dat--ha, ha, ha, ha! Hullo!
dat's her a-comin' now; I guess it's bedder I go oud! [_Exit_ RIP.


ACT II, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Rip Van Winkle; Gretchen, his wife; Meenie, their
     little daughter.

     SCENE: The dimly lighted kitchen of Rip's cottage. Shortly after
     his conversation with Von Beekman, Rip's wife catches him carousing
     and dancing upon the village green. She drives him away in no very
     gentle fashion, and he runs away from her only to carouse the more.
     Returning home after nightfall in a decidedly muddled condition, he
     puts his head through the open window at the rear, not observing
     his irate wife, who stands in ambush behind the clothes-bars with
     her ever-ready broomstick, to give him a warm reception, but seeing
     only his little daughter Meenie, of whom he is very fond, and who
     also loves him very tenderly.


RIP. Meenie! Meenie, my darlin'!

MEENIE. Hush-sh-h. [_Shaking finger, to indicate the presence of her
mother._]

RIP. Eh! what's de matter? I don'd see not'ing, my darlin'.

MEENIE. 'Sh-sh-sh!

RIP. Eh! what? Say, Meenie, is de ole wild cat home? [GRETCHEN _catches
him quickly by the hair_.] Oh, oh! say, is dat you, Gretchen? Say, dere,
my darlin', my angel, don'd do dat. Let go my head, won'd you? Well,
den, hold on to it so long what you like. [GRETCHEN _releases him_.]
Dere, now, look at dat, see what you done--you gone pull out a whole
handful of hair. What you want to do a ting like dat for? You must want
a bald-headed husband, don'd you?

GRETCHEN. Who was that you called a wild cat?

RIP. Who was dat I called a wild cat? Well, now, let me see, who was dat
I called a wild cat? Dat must 'a' been de same time I come in de winder
dere, wasn't it? Yes, I know, it was de same time. Well, now, let me
see. _[Suddenly.]_ It was de dog Schneider dat I call it.

GRETCHEN. The dog Schneider? That's a likely story.

RIP. Why, of course it is a likely story--ain't he my dog? Well, den, I
call him a wild cat just so much what I like, so dere now. [_Gretchen
begins to weep_.] Oh, well; dere, now, don'd you cry, don'd you cry,
Gretchen; you hear what I said? Lisden now. If you don'd cry, I nefer
drink anoder drop of liquor in my life.

GRETCHEN [_crying_]. Oh, Rip! you have said so many, many times, and you
never kept your word yet.

RIP. Well, I say it dis time, and I mean it.

GRETCHEN. Oh, Rip! if I could only trust you.

RIP. You mustn't suspect me. Can't you see repentance in my eye?

GRETCHEN. Rip, if you will only keep your word, I shall be the happiest
woman in the world.

RIP. You can believe it. I nefer drink anoder drop so long what I live,
if you don'd cry.

GRETCHEN. Oh, Rip, how happy we shall be! And you'll get back all the
village, Rip, just as you used to have it; and you'll fix up our little
house so nicely; and you and I, and our little darling Meenie, here--how
happy we shall be!

RIP. Dere, now! you can be just so happy what you like. Go in de odder
room, go along mit you; I come in dere pooty quick. [_Exit_ GRETCHEN and
MEENIE.] My! I swore off from drinkin' so many, many times, and I never
kept my word yet. [_Taking out bottle._] I don'd believe dere is more as
one good drink in dat bottle, anyway. It's a pity to waste it! You goin'
to drink dat? Well, now, if you do, it is de last one, remember dat, old
feller. Well, here is your goot held, und--

_Enter_ GRETCHEN, _suddenly, who snatches the bottle from him_.

GRETCHEN. Oh, you brute! you paltry thief!

RIP. Hold on dere, my dear, you will spill de liquor.

GRETCHEN. Yes, I will spill it, you drunken scoundrel. [_Throwing away
the bottle._] That's the last drop you ever drink under this roof.

RIP [_slowly, after a moment's silence, as if stunned by her severity_].
Eh! what?

GRETCHEN. Out, I say! you drink no more here.

RIP. What? Gretchen, are you goin' to drive me away?

GRETCHEN. Yes! Acre by acre, foot by foot, you have sold everything that
ever belonged to you for liquor. Thank Heaven, this house is mine, and
you can't sell it.

RIP [_rapidly sobering, as he begins to realize the gravity of the
situation_]. Yours? Yours? Ya, you are right--it is yours; I have got no
home. [_In broken tones, almost sobbing._] But where will I go?

GRETCHEN. Anywhere! out into the storm, to the mountains. There's the
door--never let your face darken it again.

RIP. What, Gretchen! are you goin' to drive me away like a dog on a
night like dis?

GRETCHEN. Yes; out with you! You have no longer a share in me or mine.
[_Breaking down and sobbing with the intensity of her passion._]

RIP [_very slowly and quietly, but with great intensity_]. Well, den, I
will go; you have drive me away like a dog, Gretchen, and I will go. But
remember, Gretchen, after what you have told me here to-night, I can
never come back. You have open de door for me to go; you will never open
it for me to return. But, Gretchen, you tell me dat I have no longer a
chare here. [_Points at the child, who kneels crying at his feet._]
Good-by [_with much emotion_], my darlin'. God bless you! Don'd you
nefer forgit your fader. Gretchen (_with a great sob_), I wipe de
disgrace from your door. Good-by, good-by!

[_Exit_ RIP _into the storm_.

FOOTNOTE:

[80] Adapted by Mr. A. P. Burbank.


THE RIVALS

RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN

ACT I, SCENE II


     CHARACTERS: Mrs. Malaprop, with her bad grammar and ludicrous
     diction; Lydia Languish, in love with Beverley; Sir Anthony
     Absolute, choleric, but kind-hearted.

     SCENE: A dressing room in Mrs. Malaprop's lodgings.


_Enter_ MRS. MALAPROP, LYDIA, _and_ SIR ANTHONY

MRS. MALAPROP. There, Sir Anthony, there stands the deliberate
simpleton, who wants to disgrace her family and lavish herself on a
fellow not worth a shilling.

LYDIA. Madam, I thought you once--

MRS. M. You thought, miss! I don't know any business you have to think
at all: thought does not become a young woman. But the point we would
request of you is, that you will promise to forget this fellow--to
illiterate him, I say, from your memory.

LYD. Ah, madam! our memories are independent of our wills. It is not so
easy to forget.

MRS. M. But I say it is, miss! there is nothing on earth so easy as to
forget, if a person chooses to set about it. I'm sure I have as much
forgot your poor dear uncle, as if he had never existed; and I thought
it my duty so to do; and let me tell you, Lydia, these violent memories
don't become a young woman.

LYD. What crime, madam, have I committed, to be treated thus?

MRS. M. Now don't attempt to extirpate yourself from the matter; you
know I have proof controvertible of it. But tell me, will you promise me
to do as you are bid? Will you take a husband of your friend's choosing?

LYD. Madam, I must tell you plainly, that, had I no preference for any
one else, the choice you have made would be my aversion.

MRS. M. What business have you, miss, with preference and aversion? They
don't become a young woman. But, suppose we were going to give you
another choice, will you promise us to give up this Beverley?

LYD. Could I belie my thoughts so far as to give that promise, my
actions would certainly as far belie my words.

MRS. M. Take yourself to your room! You are fit company for nothing but
your own ill humors.

LYD. Willingly, ma'am; I cannot change for the worse.

MRS. M. There's a little intricate hussy for you! [_Exit._

SIR A. It is not to be wondered at, ma'am; all that is the natural
consequence of teaching girls to read. On my way hither, Mrs. Malaprop,
I observed your niece's maid coming forth from a circulating library:
from that moment, I guessed how full of duty I should see her mistress!

MRS. M. Those are vile places, indeed!

SIR A. Madam, a circulating library in a town is as an evergreen tree of
diabolical knowledge!

MRS. M. Fie, fie, Sir Anthony! you surely speak laconically.

SIR A. Why, Mrs. Malaprop, in moderation, now, what would you have a
woman know?

MRS. M. Observe me, Sir Anthony--I would by no means wish a daughter of
mine to be a progeny of learning; I don't think so much learning becomes
a young woman; for instance, I would never let her meddle with Greek, or
Hebrew, or Algebra, or Simony, or Fluxions, or Paradoxes, or such
inflammatory branches of learning; nor will it be necessary for her to
handle any of your mathematical, astronomical, diabolical instruments;
but, Sir Anthony, I would send her, at nine years old, to a
boarding-school, in order to learn a little ingenuity and artifice.
Then, sir, she should have a supercilious knowledge in accounts; and, as
she grew up, I would have her instructed in geometry, that she might
know something of the contagious countries; above all, she would be
taught orthodoxy. This, Sir Anthony, is what I would have a woman know;
and I don't think there is a superstitious article in it.

SIR A. Well, well, Mrs. Malaprop, I will dispute the point no further
with you; though I must confess, that you are a truly moderate and
polite arguer, for almost every third word you say is on my side of the
question.--But to the more important point in debate--you say you have
no objection to my proposal?

MRS. M. None, I assure you. We have never seen your son, Sir Anthony;
but I hope no objection on his side.

SIR A. Objection!--let him object, if he dare!--No, no, Mrs. Malaprop;
Jack knows that the least demur puts me in a frenzy directly. My
process was always very simple--in his younger days, 'twas "Jack, do
this,"--if he demurred, I knocked him down; and, if he grumbled at that,
I always sent him out of the room.

MRS. M. Aye, and the properest way, o' my conscience!--Nothing is so
conciliating to young people as severity. Well, Sir Anthony, I shall
give Mr. Acres his discharge, and prepare Lydia to receive your son's
invocations; and I hope you will represent her to the Captain as an
object not altogether illegible.

SIR A. Madam, I will handle the subject prudently. I must leave you; and
let me beg you, Mrs. Malaprop, to enforce this matter roundly to the
girl--take my advice, keep a tight hand--if she rejects this proposal,
clap her under lock and key; and if you were just to let the servants
forget to bring her dinner for three or four days, you can't conceive
how she'd come about.

MRS. M. Well, at any rate, I shall be glad to get her from under my
jurisprudence. [_Exit._


ACT II, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Sir Anthony Absolute; Captain Absolute, his son.

     SCENE: Captain Absolute's lodgings.


_Enter_ SIR ANTHONY _and_ CAPTAIN ABSOLUTE

CAPTAIN ABSOLUTE. Sir, I am delighted to see you here, and looking so
well! Your sudden arrival at Bath made me apprehensive for your health.

SIR ANTHONY. Very apprehensive, I dare say, Jack. What, you are
recruiting here, hey?

CAPT. A. Yes, sir; I am on duty.

SIR A. Well, Jack, I am glad to see you, though I did not expect it; for
I was going to write to you on a little matter of business. Jack, I have
been considering that I grow old and infirm, and shall probably not
trouble you long.

CAPT. A. Pardon me, sir, I never saw you look more strong and hearty;
and I pray fervently that you may continue so.

SIR A. I hope your prayers may be heard, with all my heart. Well, then,
Jack, I have been considering that I am so strong and hearty, I may
continue to plague you a long time. Now, Jack, I am sensible that the
income of your commission, and what I have hitherto allowed you, is but
a small pittance for a lad of your spirit.

CAPT. A. Sir, you are very good.

SIR A. And it is my wish, while yet I live, to have my boy make some
figure in the world. I have resolved, therefore, to fix you at once in a
noble independence.

CAPT. A. Sir, your kindness overpowers me. Such generosity makes the
gratitude of reason more lively than the sensations even of filial
affection.

SIR A. I am glad you are so sensible of my attention; and you shall be
master of a large estate in a few weeks.

CAPT. A. Let my future life, sir, speak my gratitude. I cannot express
the sense I have of your munificence. Yet, sir, I presume you would not
wish me to quit the army.

SIR A. Oh, that shall be as your wife chooses.

CAPT. A. My wife, sir!

SIR A. Aye, aye, settle that between you--settle that between you.

CAPT. A. A wife, sir, did you say?

SIR A. Aye, a wife--why, did not I mention her before?

CAPT. A. Not a word of her, sir.

SIR A. Upon my word, I mustn't forget her, though! Yes, Jack, the
independence I was talking of is by a marriage,--the fortune is saddled
with a wife; but I suppose that makes no difference?

CAPT. A. Sir, sir, you amaze me!

SIR A. What's the matter? Just now you were all gratitude and duty.

CAPT. A. I was, sir; you talked to me of independence and a fortune, but
not one word of a wife.

SIR A. Why, what difference does that make? Sir, if you have the estate,
you must take it with the live stock on it, as it stands.

CAPT. A. If my happiness is to be the price, I must beg leave to decline
the purchase. Pray, sir, who is the lady?

SIR A. What's that to you, sir? Come, give me your promise to love, and
to marry her directly.

CAPT. A. Sure, sir, that's not very reasonable, to summon my affections
for a lady I know nothing of!

SIR A. I am sure, sir, 'tis more unreasonable in you to object to a lady
you know nothing of.

CAPT. A. You must excuse me, sir, if I tell you, once for all, that on
this point I cannot obey you.

SIR A. Hark you, Jack! I have heard you for some time with patience; I
have been cool--quite cool; but take care; you know I am compliance
itself, when I am not thwarted; no one more easily led--when I have my
own way; but don't put me in a frenzy.

CAPT. A. Sir, I must repeat it; in this I cannot obey you.

SIR A. Now, shoot me, if ever I call you Jack again while I live!

CAPT. A. Nay, sir, but hear me.

SIR A. Sir, I won't hear a word--not a word!--not one word! So, give me
your promise by a nod; and I'll tell you what, Jack,--I mean, you
dog,--if you don't--

CAPT. A. What, sir, promise to link myself to some mass of ugliness;
to--

SIR A. Sir, the lady shall be as ugly as I choose; she shall have a lump
on each shoulder; she shall be as crooked as the crescent; her one eye
shall roll like the bull's in Cox's mu-se-um; she shall have a skin like
a mummy, and the beard of a Jew; she shall be all this, sir! yet I'll
make you ogle her all day, and sit up all night to write sonnets on her
beauty!

CAPT. A. This is reason and moderation, indeed!

SIR A. None of your sneering, puppy!--no grinning, jackanapes!

CAPT. A. Indeed, sir, I never was in a worse humor for mirth in my life.

SIR A. 'Tis false, sir! I know you are laughing in your sleeve; I know
you'll grin when I am gone, sir!

CAPT. A. Sir, I hope I know my duty better.

SIR A. None of your passion, sir! none of your violence, if you please!
It won't do with me, I promise you.

CAPT. A. Indeed, sir, I never was cooler in my life.

SIR A. I know you are in a passion in your heart; I know you are, you
hypocritical young dog! But it won't do!

CAPT. A. Nay, sir, upon my word--

SIR A. So, you will fly out? Can't you be cool, like me? What good can
passion do? Passion is of no service, you impudent, insolent,
overbearing reprobate! There, you sneer again! Don't provoke me! But you
rely upon the mildness of my temper, you do, you dog! You play upon the
meekness of my disposition! Yet take care; the patience of a saint may
be overcome at last! But, mark! I give you six hours and a half to
consider of this: if you then agree, without any condition, to do
everything on earth that I choose, why, I may, in time, forgive you. If
not, don't enter the same hemisphere with me; don't dare to breathe the
same air, or use the same light, with me; but get an atmosphere and a
sun of your own! I'll strip you of your commission; I'll lodge a
five-and-threepence in the hands of trustees, and you shall live on the
interest! I'll disown you, I'll disinherit you! I'll never call you Jack
again! [_Exit_.

CAPT. A. Mild, gentle, considerate father! I kiss your hand.


ACT III, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Sir Anthony Absolute; Captain Absolute.

     SCENE: The North Parade. Captain Absolute has discovered that the
     lady whom his father so peremptorily commanded him to marry is none
     other than Lydia Languish with whom he, under the name of Beverley,
     was plotting an elopement.


_Enter_ CAPTAIN ABSOLUTE

CAPT. A. 'Tis just as Fag told me, indeed!--Whimsical enough, 'faith! My
father wants to force me to marry the very girl I am plotting to run
away with! He must not know of my connection with her yet awhile. He has
too summary a method of proceeding in these matters; however, I'll read
my recantation instantly. My conversion is something sudden, indeed; but
I can assure him, it is very sincere.--So, so, here he comes. He looks
plaguy gruff! [_Steps aside_.

_Enter_ SIR ANTHONY

SIR A. No--I'll die sooner than forgive him! Die, did I say? I'll live
these fifty years to plague him. At our last meeting, his impudence had
almost put me out of temper--an obstinate, passionate, self-willed boy!
This is my return for putting him, at twelve years old, into a marching
regiment, and allowing him fifty pounds a year, besides his pay, ever
since! But I have done with him--he's anybody's son for me--I never will
see him more--never--never--never--never.

CAPT. A. Now for a penitential face! [_Comes forward_.

SIR A. Fellow, get out of my way!

CAPT. A. Sir, you see a penitent before you.

SIR A. I see an impudent scoundrel before me.

CAPT. A. A sincere penitent. I am come, sir, to acknowledge my error,
and to submit entirely to your will.

SIR A. What's that?

CAPT. A. I have been revolving, and reflecting, and considering on your
past goodness, and kindness, and condescension to me.

SIR A. Well, sir?

CAPT. A. I have been likewise weighing and balancing, what you were
pleased to mention concerning duty, and obedience, and authority.

SIR A. Why, now you talk sense, absolute sense; I never heard anything
more sensible in my life. Confound you, you shall be Jack again!

CAPT. A. I am happy in the appellation.

SIR A. Why then, Jack, my dear Jack, I will now inform you who the lady
really is. Nothing but your passion and violence, you silly fellow,
prevented me telling you at first. Prepare, Jack, for wonder and
rapture--prepare! What think you of Miss Lydia Languish?

CAPT. A. Languish! What, the Languishes of Worcestershire?

SIR A. Worcestershire! No! Did you never meet Mrs. Malaprop, and her
niece, Miss Languish, who came into our country just before you were
last ordered to your regiment?

CAPT. A. Malaprop! Languish! I don't remember ever to have heard the
name before. Yet, stay: I think I do recollect something. Languish,
Languish! She squints, don't she? A little red-haired girl?

SIR A. Squints! A red-haired girl! Zounds, no!

CAPT. A. Then I must have forgot; it can't be the same person.

SIR A. Jack, Jack! what think you of blooming, love-breathing seventeen?

CAPT. A. As to that, sir, I am quite indifferent: if I can please you in
the matter, 'tis all I desire.

SIR A. Nay, but, Jack, such eyes! such eyes! so innocently wild! so
bashfully irresolute! Not a glance but speaks and kindles some thought
of love! Then, Jack, her cheeks! her cheeks, Jack! so deeply blushing at
the insinuations of her tell-tale eyes! Then, Jack, her lips! Oh, Jack,
lips, smiling at their own discretion! and, if not smiling, more sweetly
pouting, more lovely in sullenness! Then, Jack, her neck! Oh! Jack!
Jack!

CAPT. A. And which is to be mine, sir; the niece, or the aunt?

SIR A. Why, you unfeeling, insensible puppy, I despise you! When I was
of your age, such a description would have made me fly like a rocket!
The aunt, indeed! Odds life! when I ran away with your mother, I would
not have touched anything old or ugly to gain an empire.

CAPT. A. Not to please your father, sir?

SIR A. To please my father--zounds! not to please--Oh! my father? Oddso!
yes, yes! if my father, indeed, had desired--that's quite another
matter. Though he wasn't the indulgent father that I am, Jack.

CAPT. A. I dare say not, sir.

SIR A. But, Jack, you are not sorry to find your mistress is so
beautiful?

CAPT. A. Sir, I repeat it, if I please you in this affair, 'tis all I
desire. Not that I think a woman the worse for being handsome; but, sir,
if you please to recollect, you before hinted something about a hump or
two, one eye, and a few more graces of that kind. Now, without being
very nice, I own I should rather choose a wife of mine to have the usual
number of limbs, and a limited quantity of back; and though one eye may
be very agreeable, yet, as the prejudice has always run in favor of two,
I would not wish to affect a singularity in that article.

SIR A. What a phlegmatic sot it is! Why, sirrah, you are an anchorite! a
vile, insensible stock! You a soldier! you're a walking block, fit only
to dust the company's regimentals on! Odds life, I've a great mind to
marry the girl myself!

CAPT. A. I am entirely at your disposal, sir; if you should think of
addressing Miss Languish yourself, I suppose you would have me marry the
aunt; or if you should change your mind, and take the old lady, 'tis the
same to me--I'll marry the niece.

SIR A. Upon my word, Jack, thou art either a very great hypocrite,
or--but, come, I know your indifference on such a subject must be all a
lie--I'm sure it must. Come, now, off with your demure face; come,
confess, Jack, you have been lying, ha'nt you? You have been playing the
hypocrite, hey? I'll never forgive you, if you ha'nt been lying and
playing the hypocrite.

CAPT. A. I am sorry, sir, that the respect and duty which I bear to you,
should be so mistaken.

SIR A. Hang your respect and duty! But come along with me. I'll write a
note to Mrs. Malaprop, and you shall visit the lady directly. Her eyes
shall be the Promethean torch to you; come along, I'll never forgive
you, if you don't come back stark mad with rapture and impatience; if
you don't, 'egad, I'll marry the girl myself! [_Exeunt._


ACT IV, SCENE II


     CHARACTERS: Mrs. Malaprop; Lydia; Captain Absolute known to Lydia
     as "Beverley"; Sir Anthony; Servant.


_Enter_ MRS. MALAPROP _and_ LYDIA

MRS M. Why, thou perverse one!--tell me what you can object to in
him?--Isn't he a handsome man?--tell me that. A genteel man? a pretty
figure of a man?

LYD. She little thinks whom she is praising. [_Aside_.] So is Beverley,
ma'am.

MRS. M. No caparisons, miss, if you please. Caparisons don't become a
young woman. No! Captain Absolute is indeed a fine gentleman.

LYD. Ay, the Captain Absolute you have seen. [_Aside_.

MRS. M. Then he's so well bred;--so full of alacrity and adulation!--He
has so much to say for himself, in such good language, too. His
physiognomy so grammatical; then his presence so noble! I protest, when
I saw him, I thought of what Hamlet says in the play:--"Hesperian
curls--the front of Job himself! an eye, like March, to threaten at
command! a station, like Harry Mercury, new"--Something about
kissing--on a hill--however, the similitude struck me directly.

LYD. How enraged she'll be presently, when she discovers her mistake!
[_Aside_.

_Enter_ SERVANT

SERV. Sir Anthony and Captain Absolute are below, ma'am.

MRS. M. Show them up here. [_Exit_ SERVANT.] Now, Lydia, I insist on
your behaving as becomes a young woman. Show your good breeding, at
least, though you have forgot your duty.

LYD. Madam, I have told you my resolution; I shall not only give him no
encouragement, but I won't even speak to, or look at him.

[_Flings herself into a chair, with her face from the door_.

_Enter_ SIR ANTHONY _and_ CAPTAIN ABSOLUTE

SIR A. Here we are, Mrs. Malaprop; come to mitigate the frowns of
unrelenting beauty,--and difficulty enough I had to bring this fellow. I
don't know what's the matter, but if I had not held him by force he'd
have given me the slip.

MRS. M. You have infinite trouble, Sir Anthony, in the affair. I am
ashamed for the cause! Lydia, Lydia, rise, I beseech you!--pay your
respects! [_Aside to her_.

SIR A. I hope, madam, that Miss Languish has reflected on the worth of
this gentleman, and the regard due to her aunt's choice, and my
alliance. Now, Jack, speak to her.

[_Aside to him_.

CAPT. A. What the devil shall I do? [_Aside_.]--You see, sir, she won't
even look at me while you are here. I knew she wouldn't!--I told you
so.--Let me entreat you, sir, to leave us together!

MRS. M. I am sorry to say, Sir Anthony, that my affluence over my niece
is very small. Turn round, Lydia, I blush for you! [_Aside to her_.

SIR A. Why don't you begin, Jack? Zounds! sirrah! why don't you speak?
[_Aside to him_.

CAPT. A. Hem! hem! Madam--hem! [CAPTAIN ABSOLUTE _attempts to speak,
then returns to_ SIR ANTHONY.] 'Faith! sir, I am so confounded!--and
so--so confused! I told you I should be so, sir,--I knew it. The--the
tremor of my passion entirely takes away my presence of mind.

SIR A. But it don't take away your voice, does it? Go up, and speak to
her directly!

CAPT. A. [_draws near_ LYDIA]. [_Aside_.] Now heaven send she may be too
sullen to look round! I must disguise my voice.--Will not Miss Languish
lend an ear to the mild accents of true love? Will not--

SIR A. Why don't you speak out?--not stand croaking like a frog in a
quinsey!

CAPT. A. The--the--excess of my awe, and my--my modesty quite choke me!

SIR A. Ah! your modesty again! Mrs. Malaprop, I wish the lady would
favor us with something more than a side-front.

[MRS. MALAPROP _seems to chide_ LYDIA.

CAPT. A. So! all will out, I see! [_Goes up to_ LYDIA, _speaks softly_.]
Be not surprised, my Lydia, suppress all surprise at present.

LYD. [_aside_]. Heavens! 'tis Beverley's voice!--[_Looks round by
degrees, then starts up_.] Is this possible!--my Beverley! how can this
be?--my Beverley!

CAPT. A. Ah! 'tis all over! [_Aside._

SIR A. Beverley!--the devil--Beverley! What can the girl mean? This is
my son, Jack Absolute.

MRS. M. For shame! for shame!--your head runs so on that fellow, that
you have him always in your eyes! beg Captain Absolute's pardon,
directly.

LYD. I see no Captain Absolute, but my loved Beverley!

SIR A. Zounds, the girl's mad!--her brain's turned by reading!

MRS. M. O' my conscience, I believe so!--what do you mean by
Beverley?--you saw Captain Absolute before to-day, there he is: your
husband that shall be.

LYD. With all my soul, ma'am--when I refuse my Beverley--

SIR A. Oh! she's as mad as Bedlam!--or has this fellow been playing us a
rogue's trick? Come here, sirrah, who the devil are you?

CAPT. A. 'Faith, sir, I am not quite clear myself; but I'll endeavor to
recollect.

SIR A. Are you my son, or not?--answer for your mother, you dog, if you
won't for me.

CAPT. A. Ye powers of impudence, befriend me!--[_Aside._]--Sir Anthony,
most assuredly I am your wife's son; Mrs. Malaprop, I am your most
respectful admirer, and shall be proud to add affectionate nephew. I
need not tell my Lydia that she sees her faithful Beverley, who, knowing
the singular generosity of her temper, assumed that name, and a station,
which has proved a test of the most disinterested love, which he now
hopes to enjoy, in a more elevated character.

LYD. So!--there will be no elopement after all!

SIR A. Upon my soul, Jack, thou art a very impudent fellow! To do you
justice, I think I never saw a piece of more consummate assurance! Well,
I am glad you are not the dull insensible varlet you pretend to be,
however! I'm glad you have made a fool of your father, you dog--I am.
So, this was your penitence, your duty, and obedience! Ah! you
dissembling villain! Come, we must leave them together, Mrs. Malaprop;
they long to fly into each other's arms. I warrant! Come, Mrs. Malaprop,
we'll not disturb their tenderness; theirs is the time of life for
happiness! [_Sings_.] _Youth's the season made for joy_--hey! odds life!
I'm in such spirits! Permit me, ma'am.

[_Gives his hand to_ MRS. MALAPROP. _Exit singing, and handing her off.
Exit_ CAPTAIN ABSOLUTE _with_ LYDIA _in the opposite direction._


BEAU BRUMMELL

BLANCHARD JERROLD


ACT I, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Beau Brummell, a fastidious aristocrat with luxurious
     tastes and a depleted fortune; Isidore, his valet; Mr. Fotherby,
     his aspiring young protégé.

     SCENE: A handsome apartment in Brummell's house, Calais, France.
     Isidore discovered, in chair, looking over his master's toilette
     table.


ISIDORE. Twenty shirts a week, twenty-four pocket-handkerchiefs, to say
nothing of thirty cravats and twelve waistcoats--indeed, for people that
cannot pay their servants! Well, he owes me just six thousand three
hundred and thirty-seven francs, ten sous. [_Picks up paper._] Ah, I
see, I'm in the list. It costs something to have the honor of serving
Mr. Brummell--to be chamberlain to His Majesty, the King of Calais! But
he is a wonderful man! People almost thank him for condescending to be
in their debt; still, much as I esteem the honor, I can't afford it any
longer, nor can the laundress, nor can the hairdresser. Eight hundred
francs a year for washing! Three clean shirts a day, three cravats!
Boots blacked, soles and all, and with such varnish! But then he has
such exquisite taste! why, he blackballed a friend of his who wanted to
enter his club, because the candidate's boots were polished with bad
blacking. I wonder whether the king will do anything for him? It is Mr.
Brummell's dressing hour, and here he comes.

[_Enter_ BRUMMELL, _letter in hand_. ISIDORE _busies himself piling
cravats upon the side of dressing table, and wheels chair to the
mirror_. BRUMMELL _throws himself in the chair before the glass,
examines the cravats and throws two or three of them away_.

BRUMMELL. Isidore, take those dusters away; the chambermaid has
forgotten them. [_Re-reads the letter_.] Strange girl this; the only
thing I know against her is that she takes soup twice. It's the old
story. Her father wants her to marry a fellow who can keep her, and she
wants to have a young fellow who can't. Well, the young fellow who can't
is the more interesting of the two. I must ask the father to dinner I
suppose--it's a deuced bore; but it will put him under a heavy
obligation. I must make excuses to Ballarat and Gill. Isidore, when I'm
dressed take my compliments to Mr. Davis, and tell him I shall be happy
to see him at dinner to-day.

ISID. Very well, sir. [_Aside_.] To Davis, a retired fellow from the
city! This is a tumble!--I am sorry to trouble you, sir, but----

BRUM. I can't talk to you to-day, Isidore. Give me a cravat.

ISID. [_handing one_]. I am a poor man, and six thousand francs----

BRUM. I understand, Isidore. We'll see--we'll see; don't disturb me.
Zounds! man, haven't you been long enough with me to know that these are
not moments when I can speak or listen? [_Bell rings_.] If that be Mr.
Fotherby, show him in. [_Exit_ ISIDORE.] I intend to form that young
fellow--there's stuff in him. I've noticed that he uses my blacking.
[_Enter_ FOTHERBY _followed by_ ISIDORE.] How d'e do, Fotherby?

FOTHERBY. This admittance is an honor, indeed, sir!

BRUM. My dear fellow, why, what do you call those things upon your feet?

FOTHER. Things on my feet! Shoes, to be sure!

BRUM. Shoes! I thought they were slippers!

FOTHER. You prefer boots then, sir, doubtless?

BRUM. Well, let me see. Humph! Isidore, which do I prefer, boots or
shoes?

ISID. The Hessian was always your favorite, sir, in London.

BRUM. Right, Isidore--so it was. By-the-bye, I have asked Davis here
to-day. It was a great sacrifice; but as you and the young lady want to
have the old gentleman melted, I resigned myself. I hope he'll keep his
knife out of his mouth.

FOTHER. We shall be eternally grateful to you, sir. He wanted Helen to
become old Armand's wife next week.

BRUM. I think he's right; and but for one circumstance, I should be on
Armand's side of the question.

FOTHER. And this circumstance?

BRUM. The brute has a toothpick in his waistcoat pocket, or in the thing
that serves him for a waistcoat--an instrument that, he says, has been
in his family the last fifty years. Conceive, my dear Fotherby, an
hereditary toothpick! No, Mr. Davis does not deserve that fate. And now
let me give you a bit of advice. Never wear perfumes, but fine linen,
plenty of it, and country washing. Look at you now, my good fellow, you
are dressed in execrable taste--all black and white, like a magpie.
Still, never be remarkable. The severest mortification a gentleman can
incur, is to attract observation in the street by his dress. Everything
should fit without a fault. You can't tell what this has cost me--but
then it is a coat--while that thing you wear--I really don't know what
we can call it.

FOTHER. Still, sir, under your guidance I shall improve. By the way, my
mother asked me to invite you to take tea with us in our humble way.

BRUM. Really, my good young friend, you surprise me. Don't you know that
you take medicine--you take a walk--you take a liberty--but you drink
tea! My dear Fotherby, never be bearer of such a dreadful message again.
Isidore! has my Paris wig arrived? Any card or letter?

ISID. No cards, sir. The wig arrived by the diligence.

BRUN. Is the wig fit to put on?

ISID. I have been examining it, and, as the times go, I think it will
do. There is one of the side locks not quite to my taste.

BRUM. Ah! a mat, no doubt--a door-mat! [_Exit_ ISIDORE. _To_ FOTHERBY.]
You see what a gentleman may be reduced to! It's the most fortunate
thing in the world that I never fell in love!

FOTHER. But were you never in love?--never engaged?

BRUM. Engaged?--why, yes, something of the kind; but I discovered that
the lady positively ate cabbage, and so I broke it off.

FOTHER. And so, sir, you will persuade the old gentleman to postpone
Helen's marriage with Armand--while I----

BRUM. My dear young friend, I will tell the old gentleman to do so--you
must see that I could not possibly think of persuading a person who
grows onions in his garden----

FOTHER. We shall be eternally grateful----

BRUM. For three weeks exactly--from which time you, at all events, will
begin to wish that I had confined my attention to my own particular
affairs. But the world is ungrateful. I once waved my hand to a
saddler's son from White's window. Well, sir, I owed him five hundred
pounds, and he had afterwards the assurance to ask me for it.

FOTHER. You astonish me!

BRUM. Positive fact. So be cautious, young man, and in your way through
life--if you wave your hand to such a fellow, let it be over a stamped
receipt.

FOTHER. I shall follow your counsel most scrupulously.

BRUM. There, sir, never let me see you again in those gloves! These,
sir, [_showing his_] are the only gloves for a gentleman. Pray leave
me--I can't bear the sight of them. Meantime, tell your betrothed that I
shall do everything in my power to secure your unhappiness. I have
already spoken to Lord Ballarat about you. I told him you were the
laziest fellow and the best dresser in the town--in fact, cut out by
nature to serve the government. Good-bye--I shall ask you to dine with
me some of these days--but not yet awhile--you must work up to that. And
now, Fotherby, to show you how deep an interest I take in your welfare,
you shall give me your arm to the ramparts. [_Exeunt._


ACT II, SCENE III


     CHARACTERS: Brummell; Isidore; Fotherby; Nurse; another Old Woman;
     Landlord; Waiter.

     SCENE: Brummell's lodgings in a miserable apartment house at Caen,
     France. Eight years have elapsed. With no means of livelihood and
     pursued by creditors, Brummell is now reduced to abject poverty,
     broken health, and a deranged mind. He is thrown among people of
     low rank and is subjected to many indignities; but to the last he
     clings to his fastidious tastes and is a gentleman among imaginary
     aristocrats.


OLD NURSE. _in high Norman cap, discovered seated in arm chair, mending
stockings; another_ WOMAN _near her._

NURSE. Yes, my dear, clean out of his mind--that's what he's gone.

OLD WOMAN. Deary me!

NURSE. Aye, and there be folks as says he was once as neat and tidy as a
new sixpence. Now he's as dirty as a George the First halfpenny!

OLD W. Deary me!

NURSE. Aye, child, and he knew lords and dooks--and such like--now it's
anybody as'll give him a dinner. It's time they did something with
him--for put up with his going's on any longer, I cannot! A nuss's is a
horrid life, ain't it, child?

OLD W. 'Orrid--deary me! So this very afternoon that's comin', he's to
go?

NURSE. Aye, child--the landlord's goin' to offer to take him for a walk,
which'll please him--and then take him off to see if the nuns'll have
charity upon him--if not, there's nothing but the street. He wouldn't go
if he know'd it--still he hasn't a copper coin--he's as cunning as any
fox. Have a little drop of somethin' comfortable, child!

OLD W. Deary me!--at this time of day--but I do feel a sinking!

NURSE. It'll do you a world of good. [_Getting bottle_--_a knock._]
Lawk! what an awkward hour for people to call! [_Knock again._]

OLD W. Deary me! Perhaps it's Mr. Brummell.

NURSE. Not it! It's more than he dare do, to knock twice like that. It's
his old man-servant, come to take off that there dirty screen. [_Opens
door._]

_Enter_ BRUMMELL--_muddy_--_supported by_ ISIDORE

BRUM. Isidore, give me my dressing gown!

ISID. Dressing gown! that's good--why I never put my own on nowadays!

BRUM. [_talking to himself_]. That screen mustn't go--nor the duchess's
armchair. [_Turning to_ NURSE.] Mind that, nurse, whatever happens to
me, this chair and the screen remain. Ha! ha! what would Ballarat say,
if----

NURSE. There, never mind them folks. Pull your coat off, and put your
dressing gown on, do!

BRUM. Dear me! I hope the ices will be better--the punch I've seen to!
The duchess shall sit here.

NURSE [_to_ OLD WOMAN]. That's how he goes on nearly every day. The high
folks he knew have turned his head. Sometimes he makes one of the
waiters announce a lot of folks, as never come, while he, like an old
fool, bows to nobody, and hands nothing to that old chair.

OLD W. What work it must give you.

NURSE [_to_ BRUMMELL]. There, take that muddy coat off, nobody's coming
to-day.

BRUM. Leave the room and see that everything is ready.

NURSE. Drat it. [_Rings the bell._] I must have the waiter up. He'll
soon manage him.

BRUM. [_rising, totters forward, and arranges his shabby dress_]. Well,
now I'm ready! Hark! I think I hear the first carriage. Sir Harry, no
doubt.

_Enter_ WAITER

NURSE. Just see to this old man--make him change his coat, for I can't.

WAITER. Well, this is the last of it. Master says he may sleep in the
streets, but he doesn't stay here another night if he knows it. They
won't have him at the asylum without money, and he hasn't a rap.

NURSE. Nor a stick; for there's little enough left to pay my poor wages.

WAITER [_to_ BRUMMELL]. Come, off with the coat!

BRUM. My good fellow, leave it me to-night. I've a few friends coming.
Hush! there's the first arrival. Pray, my good sir, see to my guests.

WAITER. Well, let's humor the old blade once more--he'll be in the
streets to-morrow.

NURSE [_to_ OLD WOMAN]. Just notice this tomfoolery, child.

OLD W. Deary me! it almost frightens me. See how pleased he is.

WAITER. Sir Harry Gill!

BRUM. [_advancing ceremoniously, and holding out his hand, and coming
down, as though talking to somebody at his side_]. My dear Harry, I'm
delighted to see you. Were you at the opera last night?

NURSE [_to_ OLD WOMAN]. Did you ever hear the like of it?

WAITER. Here goes again! [_Goes as before to door, and throws it open._]
Lord Ballarat!

BRUM. [_advancing as before, and receiving imaginary visitor_]. My good
fellow, I'm sorry I missed you at the club the other night; but I went
into the duchess's box, and----

WAITER. I must stop this. The duchess always comes last, and then he's
satisfied. [_Throwing open the door, and calling pompously._] Her
Highness the Duchess of Canterbury.

BRUM. [_totters to door, bowing very profoundly, and handing the
imaginary duchess to his armchair--leans over the chair, and bows
frequently as he talks_]. Your highness is too good! This is indeed an
honor. Permit me the satisfaction of handing you to your seat. And is
the duke well? And little Nutmeg--is his ear better? Poor little fellow!
I hope you will allow me to give him a charming little collar I have for
him.

WAITER. There, that'll do! [_To_ BRUMMELL.] Come, now, they're all
gone--take your coat off.

BRUM. [_starting, and falling into chair_]. Yes,
gone--gone--true--they're gone! [WAITER _helps him to take his coat
off._] Give me my cap! [NURSE _puts his old velvet cap on._]

WAITER. [_going_]. Call me up again, nurse, if he won't mind you. Do you
hear what I say, Mr. Brummell?

BRUM. Yes--yes--I'll be very good, nurse--I'll be very good.

WAITER. Well, it will be a lucky day when we get rid of this business!
[_Exit._

OLD W. But think of the poor creature turned into the streets! He'd die
upon the nighest door-step!

NURSE. Can't be helped--out he goes to-night and no mistake! I'll nuss
him no longer--and the landlord wants the room. The men are comin' to
whitewash it at sunrise to-morrow.

OLD W. Deary me! Well--good-day!

NURSE. Good-day, child. You'll find me at home to-morrow. Good-bye!
[_Exit_ OLD WOMAN.

BRUM. [_tottering to an old bureau, sits before it_]. Dinner at four.
Nurse, nurse! my glass and razors--come!

NURSE. Drat the old man! [_Gives him glass, etc._]

_Enter_ LANDLORD, _followed by_ WAITER

Now he's completely done up!

BRUM. [_politely to_ LANDLORD]. Good morning, monsieur, delighted to
see----

LANDLORD. Hang your compliments--I want no more of them.

BRUM. My good sir, you surprise me!

LAND. [_to_ WAITER]. Get his rubbish together--for out he goes, and no
mistake. [_To_ BRUMMELL.] Now, Mr. Brummell, can you pay me--or can't
you--or won't you?

BRUM. Dear, dear me! We'll talk about it.

LAND. No, we won't. I'll have it--or out you bundle this minute.

BRUM. [_rising_]. Sir, I am a gentleman--a poor one, it is true; and
this hand, fleshless as it is--is strong enough to chastise a man who
forgets it! [BRUMMELL _falls back in chair exhausted._]

LAND. [_to_ WAITER]. Now for it--out with him! [LANDLORD _and_ WAITER
_rush forward, and are about to seize_ BRUMMELL.]

_Enter_ FOTHERBY

FOTHER. [_pushing back_ LANDLORD _and_ WAITER]. Put your hands on the
old man at your peril.

LAND. Do you know that you are in my house, sir?--stand back!

FOTHER. Do you know that you are in my rooms, sir? [_Throws paper to
him_.] I think you will find that regular. Leave the room.

NURSE [_aside_]. Wonders'll never cease. But the old fool'll spile all
again--you'll see.

LAND. [_aside to Waiter_]. He's paid missus the rent--there's luck!
[_Exit_.

WAITER. A pretty bit of business I've done for myself. Not a sou for the
waiter, I'll bet. [_Exit_.

FOTHER. [_advancing to_ BRUMMELL]. My dear Mr. Brummell.

BRUM. Really, you have the advantage of me.

FOTHER. You surely remember me, Mr. Brummell. [_To_ NURSE.] The good
sisters will take care of him for the rest of his days. I must take him
to them. Is he always so, my good woman?

NURSE. Poor dear, good, kind old gentleman, not allays. He takes on so
at times.

BRUM. Don't know you in the least. [_Imagines he sees Ballarat_.]
Ballarat! dear old boy! Tut! tut! Ballarat! Well, this is kind. But I
can't be seen in this state.

FOTHER. No. Here you are among friends, my good sir. [_Leading him
out_.] This way, Mr. Brummell, I come from Lord Ballarat.

BRUM. Well--be it so. Ballarat--mind--when you return to England let
them know that, even in this squalor--to his last hour in the
world--Brummell--poor Brummell was a gentleman still. I am ready--I am
ready.

[_Exit_ FOTHERBY, _leading_ BRUMMELL, _the_ NURSE _following_.


THE SET OF TURQUOISE

THOMAS BAILEY ALDRICH

ACT I, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Count of Lara, a poor nobleman; Beatrice, his wife
     Miriam, a maid, who personates a page.

     SCENE: Count of Lara's villa. A balcony overlooking the garden.


     LARA. The third moon of our marriage, Beatrice!
           It hangs in the still twilight, large and full,
           Like a ripe orange.

     BEATRICE. Like an orange? yes,
           But not so red, Count. Then it has no stem.
           Now, as 'tis hidden by those drifts of cloud,
           With one thin edge just glimmering through the dark,
           'Tis like some strange, rich jewel of the east,
           In the cleft side of a mountain.
           And that reminds me--speaking of jewels--love,
           There is a set of turquoise at Malan's,
           Ear-drops and bracelets and a necklace--ah!
           If they were mine.

     LARA. And so they should be, dear,
           Were I Aladdin, and had slaves o' the lamp
           To fetch me ingots. Why, then, Beatrice,
           All Persia's turquoise-quarries should be yours,
           Although your hand is heavy now with gems
           That tear my lips when I would kiss its whiteness.
           Oh! so you pout! Why make that full-blown rose
           Into a bud again?

     BEATRICE.                You love me not.

     LARA. A coquette's song.

     BEATRICE.                I sing it.

     LARA.                                A poor song.

     BEATRICE. You love me not, or love me over-much,
           Which makes you jealous of the gems I wear!
           You do not deck me as becomes our state,
           For fear my grandeur should besiege the eyes
           Of Monte, Clari, Marcus, and the rest--
           A precious set! You're jealous, sir!

     LARA.                                      Not I.
           I love you.

     BEATRICE.   Why, that is as easy said
           As any three short words; takes no more breath
           To say, "I hate you." What, sir, have I lived
           Three times four weeks your wedded loyal wife,
           And do not know your follies? I will wager
           (If I could trap his countship into this!)
           The rarest kisses I know how to give
           Against the turquoise, that within a month
           You'll grow so jealous--and without a cause,
           Or with a reason thin as window glass--
           That you will ache to kill me!

     LARA.                                 Will you so?
           And I--let us clasp hands and kiss on it.

     BEATRICE. Clasp hands, Sir Trustful; but not kiss--nay, nay!
           I will not pay my forfeit till I lose.

     LARA. And I'll not lose the forfeit.

     BEATRICE.                            We shall see.

                                               [_Exit_ BEATRICE.

     LARA. She has as many fancies as the wind
           Which now, like slumber, lies 'mong spicy isles,
           Then suddenly blows white furrows in the sea!
           Lovely and dangerous is my leopardess.
           To-day, low-lying at my feet; to-morrow,
           With great eyes flashing, threatening doleful death--
           With strokes like velvet! She's no common clay,
           But fire and dew and marble. I'll not throw
           So rare a wonder in the lap o' the world!
           Jealous? I am not jealous--though they say
           Some sorts of love breed jealousy. And yet,
           I would I had not wagered; it implies
           Doubt. If I doubted? Pshaw! I'll walk awhile
           And let the cool air fan me. 'Twas not wise.
           'Tis only Folly with its cap and bells
           Can jest with sad things. She seemed earnest, too.
           What if, to pique me, she should overstep
           The pale of modesty, and give bold eyes
           (I could not bear that, nay, not even that!)
           To Marc or Claudian? Why, such things have been
           And no sin dreamed of. I will watch her close.
           There, now, I wrong her.

                                       Yet if she,
           To win the turquoise of me, if she should--
           O cursèd jewels! Would that they were hung
           About the glistening neck of some mermaid
           A thousand fathoms underneath the sea!

                                 [A PAGE _crosses the garden_.

           That page again! 'Tis twice within the week
           The supple-waisted, pretty-ankled knave
           Has crossed my garden at this self-same hour,
           Trolling a canzonetta with an air
           As if he owned the villa. Why, the fop!
           He might have doffed his bonnet as he passed.
           I'll teach him better if he comes again.
           What does he at the villa? O! perchance
           He comes in the evening when his master's out,
           To lisp soft romance in the ready ear
           Of Beatrice's dressing-maid; but then
           She has one lover. Now I think she's two:
           This gaudy popinjay would make the third,
           And that's too many for an honest girl!
           I'll ask the Countess--no, I'll not do that;
           She'd laugh at me; and vow by the Madonna
           This varlet was some noble in disguise,
           Seeking her favor. Then I'd let the light
           Of heaven through his doublet--I would--yes,
           That is, I would, were I a jealous man:
           But then I'm not.

                             When he comes out again
           I'll stop him, question him, and know the truth.
           I cannot sit in the garden of a night
           But he glides by me in his jaunty dress,
           Like a fantastic phantom!--never looks
           To the right nor left, but passes gayly on,
           As if I were a statue. Soft, he comes!
           I'll make him speak, or kill him; then, indeed,
           It were unreasonable to ask it. Soh!
           I'll speak him gently at the first, and then--

_The_ PAGE _enters by a gate in the villa-garden, and walks past the_
COUNT.

           Ho! pretty page, who owns you?

     PAGE.                                No one now.
           Once Signor Juan, but I am his no more.

     LARA. What, then, you stole from him?

     PAGE.                                 O! no, sir, no.
           He had so many intrigues on his hands,
           There was no sleep for me nor night nor day.
           Such carrying of love-favors and pink notes!
           He's gone abroad now, to break other hearts
           And so I left him.

     LARA.                     A frank knave.

     PAGE.                                    To-night
           I've done his latest bidding--

     LARA.                                 As you should--

     PAGE. A duty wed with pleasure--'twas to take
           A message to a countess all forlorn,
           In yonder villa.

     LARA. [_aside_].          Why! that villa's mine!
           A message to a countess all forlorn?
           In yonder villa?

     PAGE.                  Ay, sir. You can see
           The portico among the mulberries,
           Just to the left, there.

     LARA.                           Ay, I see, I see.
           A pretty villa. And the lady's name?

     PAGE. The lady's name, sir?

     LARA.                        Ay, the lady's name.

     PAGE. O! that's a secret which I cannot tell.

     LARA. No? but you shall, though, or I'll strangle you!
           In my strong hands your slender neck would snap
           Like a fragile pipe-stem.

     PAGE.                            You are choking me!
           O! loose your grasp, sir!

     LARA.                            Then the name! the name!

     PAGE. Countess of Lara.

     LARA.                    Not her dressing-maid?

     PAGE. No, no, I said the mistress, not the maid.

     LARA. And then you lied. I never saw two eyes
           So wide and frank but they'd a pliant tongue
           To shape a lie for them. Say you are false!
           Tell me you lie, and I will make you rich,
           I'll stuff your cap with ducats twice a year.

     PAGE. Well, then--I lie.

     LARA.                     Ay, now you lie, indeed!
           I see it in the cunning of your eyes;
           Night cannot hide the Satan leering there.
           Only a little lingering fear of heaven
           Holds me from dirking you between the ribs!

     PAGE. What would you have? I will say nothing, then.

     LARA. Say everything, and end it! Here is gold.
           You brought a billet to the Countess--well?
           What said the billet?

     PAGE.                       Take away your hand.
           And, by St. Mary, I will tell you all.
           There, now, I breathe. You will not harm me, sir?
           Stand six yards off, or I will not a word.
           It seems the Countess promised Signor Juan
           A set of turquoise--

     LARA.                       Turquoise? Ha! that's well.

     PAGE. Just so--wherewith my master was to pay
           Some gaming debts; but yester-night the cards
           Tumbled a golden mountain at his feet;
           And ere he sailed, this morning, Signor Juan
           Gave me a perfumed, amber-tinted note,
           For Countess Lara, which, with some adieus,
           Craved her remembrance morning, noon, and night;
           Her prayers while gone, her smiles when he returned;
           Then told his sudden fortune with the cards,
           And bade her keep the jewels. That is all.

     LARA. All? Is that all? 'T has only cracked my heart!
           A heart, I know, of little, little worth--
           An ill-cut ruby, scarred and scratched before,
           But now quite broken! I have no heart, then;
           Men should not have, when they are wronged like this.
           Out of my sight, thou demon of bad news!

                                                  [_Exit_ LARA.

     PAGE. I did not think 't would work on him like that.
           How pale he grew! Alack! I fear some ill
           Will come of this. I'll to the Countess now,
           And warn her of his madness.
                                                  [_Exit_ PAGE.


ACT I, SCENE II


     SCENE: Beatrice's chamber. Beatrice sits on a fauteuil in the
     attitude of listening.


     BEATRICE. Hist! that's his step. Miriam, place the lights
           Farther away; keep you behind the screen,
           Breathing no louder than a lily does;
           For if you stir or laugh 'twill ruin all.

     MIRIAM. Laugh! I am faint with terror.

     BEATRICE.                              Then be still.
           Move not for worlds until I touch the bell,
           Then do the thing I told you. Hush! his step
           Sounds in the corridor, and I'm asleep!

LARA _enters. He approaches within a few yards of_ BEATRICE, _pauses,
and looks at her._

     LARA. Asleep!--and guilt can slumber! Guilt can lie
           Down-lidded and soft-breathed like innocence!
           Hath dreams as sweet as childhood's--who can tell?
           Were I an artist, and did wish to paint
           A devil to perfection, I'd not limn
           A hornèd monster, with a leprous skin,
           Red-hot from Pandemonium--not I.
           But with my delicatest tints, I'd paint
           A woman in the glamour of her youth,
           All garmented with loveliness and mystery!
           How fair she is! Her beauty glides between
           Me and my purpose, like a pleading angel.

                                                [BEATRICE _sighs_.

           Her dream's broke, like a bubble, in a sigh.
           She'll waken soon, and that--that must not be!
           I could not kill her if she looked at me.
           I loved her, loved her, by the saints, I did--
           I trust she prayed before she fell asleep!

     BEATRICE [_springing up_]. So, you are come--your dagger in
             your hand?
           Your lips compressed and blanchèd, and your hair
           Tumbled wildly all about your eyes,
           Like a river-god's? O love, you frighten me!
           And you are trembling. Tell me what this means.

     LARA. Oh! nothing, nothing--I did think to write
           A note to Juan, to Signor Juan, my friend
           (Your cousin and my honorable friend);
           But finding neither ink nor paper here,
           I thought to scratch it with my dagger's point
           Upon your bosom, Madam! That is all.

     BEATRICE. You've lost your senses!

     LARA.                              Madam, no, I've found 'em!

     BEATRICE. Then lose them quickly, and be what you were.

     LARA. I was a fool, a dupe--a happy dupe.
           You should have kept me in my ignorance;
           For wisdom makes us wretched, king and clown.
           Countess of Lara, you are false to me!

     BEATRICE. Now, by the saints--

     LARA.                            Now, by the saints, you are!

     BEATRICE. Upon my honor--

     LARA.                        On your honor? fie!
           Swear by the ocean's feathery froth, for that
           Is not so light a substance.

     BEATRICE.                           Hear me, love!

     LARA. Lie to that marble Io! I am sick
           To the heart with lying.

     BEATRICE.                       You've the ear-ache, sir,
           Got with too much believing.

     LARA.                              Beatrice,
           I came to kill you.

     BEATRICE.                  Kiss me, Count, you mean!

     LARA. If killing you be kissing you, why yes.

     BEATRICE. Ho! come not near me with such threatening looks,
           Stand back there, if you love me, or have loved!

[_As_ LARA _advances_, BEATRICE _retreats to the table and rings a small
hand-bell._ MIRIAM, _in the dress of a page, enters from behind the
screen and steps between them_.

     LARA [_starting back_]. The Page? now, curse him! What? no! Miriam?
           Hold! 'twas at twilight, in the villa-garden,
           At dusk, too, on the road to Mantua;
           But here the light falls on you, man or maid!
           Stop now; my brain's bewildered. Stand you there,
           And let me touch you with incredulous hands!
           Wait till I come, nor vanish like a ghost.
           If this be Juan's page, why, where is Miriam?
           If this be Miriam, where's--by all the saints,
           I have been tricked!

     MIRIAM [_laughing_].        By two saints, with your leave!

     LARA. The happiest fool in Italy, for my age!
           And all the damning tales you fed me with,
           You Sprite of Twilight, Imp of the old Moon!--

     MIRIAM [_bowing_]. Were arrant lies as ever woman told;
           And though not mine, I claim the price for them--
           This cap stuffed full of ducats twice a year!

     LARA. A trap! a trap that only caught a fool!
           So thin a plot, I might have seen through it.
           I've lost my reason!

     MIRIAM.                    And your ducats!

     BEATRICE.                                    And
           A certain set of turquoise at Malan's!


SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER

OLIVER GOLDSMITH


ACT II, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Hardcastle, hospitable and urbane, with a touch of
     humor in his nature; Marlow and Hastings who come from London to
     visit the Hardcastles; servants.

     SCENE: Hardcastle's house. Young Marlow and Hastings have journeyed
     from London to the home of Mr. Hardcastle, an old family friend
     whom they have never seen. They are deceived into believing they
     are many miles from their destination when they really have
     arrived. They are told that Mr. Hardcastle's house is a public inn.
     This leads to much confusion. The genial Hardcastle is drilling his
     servants.


_Enter_ HARDCASTLE, _followed by_ DIGGORY _and three or four awkward_
SERVANTS

MR. H. Well, I hope you're perfect in the table exercise I have been
teaching you these three days. You all know your posts and your places,
and can show that you have been used to good company, without stirring
from home?

ALL. Ay! ay!

MR. H. When company comes, you are not to pop out and stare, and then
run in again, like frightened rabbits in a warren.

ALL. No! no!

MR. H. You, Diggory, whom I have taken from the barn, are to make a show
at the side table; and you, Roger, whom I have advanced from the plough,
are to place yourself behind my chair. But you're not to stand so, with
your hands in your pockets. Take your hands from your pockets, Roger;
and from your head, you blockhead you! See how Diggory carries his
hands. They're a little too stiff, indeed, but that's no great matter.

DIGGORY. Ay, mind how I hold them. I learned to hold my hands this way,
when I was upon drill for the militia. And so being upon drill----

MR. H. You must not be so talkative, Diggory; you must be all attention
to the guests. You must hear us talk, and not think of talking; you must
see us drink, and not think of drinking; you must see us eat, and not
think of eating.

DIG. By the laws, your worship, that's perfectly unpossible.

                                                              [_Exeunt._

_Enter_ SERVANTS, _showing in_ MARLOW _and_ HASTINGS

SERV. Welcome, gentlemen, very welcome. This way.

HAST. After the disappointments of the day, welcome once more, Charles,
to the comforts of a clean room, and a good fire. Upon my word, a very
well-looking house; antique, but creditable.

MAR. The usual fate of a large mansion. Having first ruined the master
by good housekeeping, it at last comes to levy contributions as an inn.

HAST. As you say, we passengers are to be taxed to pay all these
fineries. I have often seen a good side-board, or a marble
chimney-piece, though not actually put in the bill, inflame the bill
confoundedly.

MAR. Travelers, George, must pay in all places. The only difference is,
that in good inns you pay dearly for luxuries; in bad inns you are
fleeced and starved.

_Enter_ HARDCASTLE

MR. H. Gentlemen, once more you are heartily welcome. Which is Mr.
Marlow? Sir, you're heartily welcome. It's not my way, you see, to
receive my friends with my back to the fire. I like to give them a
hearty reception in the old style at my gate. I like to see their horses
and trunks taken care of.

MAR. [_aside_]. He has got our names from the servants already. [_To_
HARDCASTLE.] We approve your caution and hospitality. [_To_ HASTINGS.] I
have been thinking, George, of changing our traveling dresses in the
morning, I am grown confoundedly ashamed of mine.

MR. H. [_putting chairs and tables in order in background_]. I beg, Mr.
Marlow, you'll use no ceremony in this house.

HAST. I fancy, George, you're right; the first blow is half the battle.
I intend opening the campaign with the white and gold.

MR. H. Mr. Marlow--Mr. Hastings--gentlemen--pray be under no restraint
in this house. This is Liberty Hall, gentlemen. You may do just as you
please here.

MAR. Yet, George, if we open the campaign too fiercely at first, we may
want ammunition before it is over. I think to reserve the embroidery to
secure a retreat.

MR. H. Your talking of a retreat, Mr. Marlow, puts me in mind of the
Duke of Marlborough, when he went to besiege Denain. He first summoned
the garrison--

MAR. Aye, and we'll summon your garrison, old boy.

MR. H. He first summoned the garrison, which might consist of about five
thousand men--

HAST. What a strange fellow is this!

MR. H. I say, gentlemen, as I was telling you, he summoned the garrison,
which might consist of about five thousand men--

MAR. Well, but suppose--

MR. H. Which might consist of about five thousand men, well appointed
with stores, ammunition, and other implements of war. Now, says the Duke
of Marlborough to George Brooks, that stood next to him--you must have
heard of George Brooks--I'll pawn my dukedom, says he, but I take that
garrison without spilling a drop of blood. So--

MAR. What, my good friend, if you give us a glass of punch in the
meantime, it would help us to carry on the siege with vigor.

MR. H. Punch, sir?

MAR. Yes, sir, punch. A glass of warm punch, after our journey, will be
comfortable. This is Liberty Hall, you know.

MR. H. Here's a cup, sir.

MAR. [_aside_]. So this fellow, in his Liberty Hall, will only let us
have just what he pleases.

MR. H. I hope you'll find it to your mind. I have prepared it with my
own hands, and I believe you'll own the ingredients are tolerable. Will
you be so good as to pledge me, sir? Here, Mr. Marlow, here is to our
better acquaintance. [_Drinks_.]

MAR. [_aside_]. A very impudent fellow, this! but he's a character, and
I'll humor him a little. [_Aloud_.] Sir, my service to you. [_Drinks_.]

HAST. [_aside_]. I see this fellow wants to give us his company, and
forgets that he's an inn-keeper before he has learned to be a
gentleman.

MAR. From the excellence of your cup, my old friend, I suppose you have
a good deal of business in this part of the country. Warm work, now and
then, at elections, I suppose?

MR. H. No, sir; I have long given that work over.

HAST. So, then, you have no turn for politics, I find?

MR. H. Why, no, sir; there was a time, indeed, when I fretted myself
about the mistakes of government, like other people; but finding myself
every day grow more angry, and the government no better, I left it to
mend itself. Sir, my service to you. [_Drinks._]

HAST. So that, with eating above stairs, and drinking below, with
receiving your friends within, amusing them without, you lead a good,
pleasant, bustling life of it.

MR. H. I do stir about a great deal, that's certain. Half the
differences of the parish are adjusted in this very parlor.

MAR. And you have an argument in your cup, old gentleman, better than
any in Westminster Hall.

MR. H. Aye, young gentleman, that, and a little philosophy.

MAR. [_aside_]. Well, this is the first time I ever heard of an
inn-keeper's philosophy.

HAST. So, then, like an experienced general, you attack them on every
quarter. If you find their reason manageable you attack it with your
philosophy; if you find they have no reason, you attack them with this.
Here's your health, my philosopher.

MR. H. Good, very good, thank you; ha! ha! Your generalship puts me in
mind of Prince Eugene, when he fought the Turks at the battle of
Belgrade. You shall hear.

MAR. Instead of the battle of Belgrade, I think it's almost time to talk
about supper. What has your philosophy got in the house for supper?

MR. H. For supper, sir? Was ever such a request made to a man in his own
house?

MAR. Yes, sir, supper, sir; I begin to feel an appetite. I shall make
devilish work to-night in the larder, I promise you.

MR. H. Such a brazen dog sure never my eyes beheld. Why, really, sir, as
for supper, I can't well tell. My Dorothy and the cook-maid settle these
things between them. I leave these kind of things entirely to them.

MAR. You do, do you?

MR. H. Entirely. By-the-bye, I believe they are in actual consultation
upon what's for supper this moment in the kitchen.

MAR. Then I beg they'll admit me as one of their privy council. It's a
way I have got. When I travel, I always choose to regulate my own
supper. Let the cook be called. No offense, I hope, sir.

MR. H. O, no, sir, none in the least; yet I don't know how; our Bridget,
the cook-maid, is not very communicative upon these occasions. Should we
send for her she might scold us all out of the house.

HAST. Let's see the list of the larder, then. I ask it as a favor. I
always match my appetite to my bill of fare.

MAR. Sir, he's very right, and it's my way too.

MR. H. Sir, you have a right to command here. Here, Roger, bring us the
bill of fare for to-night's supper--I believe it's drawn out. Your
manner, Mr. Hastings, puts me in mind of my uncle, Colonel Gunthorp. It
was a saying of his, that no man was sure of his supper till he had
eaten it.

_Enter_ ROGER, _with a bill of fare_

HAST. [_aside_]. All upon the high ropes! His uncle a colonel--we shall
soon hear of his mother being a justice of the peace. But let's hear the
bill of fare. [_Exit_ ROGER.

MAR. What's here? For the first course, for the second course, for the
dessert! The devil, sir! do you think we have brought down the whole
joiner's company, or the corporation of Bedford? two or three little
things, clean and comfortable, will do.

HAST. But let's hear it.

MAR. "For the first course at the top, a pig's face and prune sauce."

HAST. Out with your pig, I say.

MAR. Out with your prune sauce, say I.

MR. H. And yet, gentlemen, to men that are hungry, pig, with prune
sauce, is very good eating. But, gentlemen, you are my guests, make what
alterations you please. Is there anything else you wish to retrench or
alter, gentlemen?

MAR. Why, really, sir, your bill of fare is so exquisite, that any one
part of it is full as good as another. Send us what you please. So much
for supper. And now to see that our beds are aired, and luggage properly
taken care of.

MR. H. I entreat you'll leave all that to me. You shall not stir a step.

MAR. Leave that to you? I protest, sir. You must excuse me, I always
look to these things myself.

MR. H. I must insist, sir, you'll make yourself easy on that head.

MAR. You see I'm resolved on it. [_Aside_.] A very troublesome fellow
this as ever I met with.

MR. H. Well, sir, I'm resolved at least to attend you.

                                        [_Exeunt_ MARLOW _and_ HASTINGS.

[_Aside_.] This may be modern modesty, but I never saw anything look so
like old-fashioned impudence. What could my old friend Sir Charles
Marlow mean by recommending his son as the modestest young man in town!
To me he appears the most impudent piece of brass that ever spoke with a
tongue!

                                                     [_Exit_ HARDCASTLE.


PYGMALION AND GALATEA

W. S. GILBERT


ACT I, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Pygmalion, an Athenian sculptor; Cynisca, his wife;
     Galatea, an animated statue.

     SCENE: Pygmalion's studio; several classical statues are placed
     about the room; at the back a cabinet containing a statue of
     Galatea, before which curtains are drawn concealing the statue.


       PYG. It all but breathes--therefore it talks aloud!
     It all but moves--therefore it walks and runs!
     It all but lives, and therefore it is life!
     No, no, my love, the thing is cold, dull stone,
     Shaped to a certain form, but still dull stone,
     The lifeless, senseless mockery of life.
     The gods make life, I can make only death!
     Why, my Cynisca, though I stand so well,
     The merest cut-throat, when he plies his trade,
     Makes better death than I with all my skill!

       CYN. Hush, my Pygmalion! the gods are good,
     And they have made thee nearer unto them
     Than other men; this is ingratitude!

       PYG. Not so; has not a monarch's second son
     More cause for anger that he lacks a throne
     Than he whose lot is cast in slavery?

       CYN. Not much more cause, perhaps, but more excuse.
     Now I must go.

       PYG.          So soon, and for so long?

       CYN. One day, 'twill quickly pass away!

       PYG. With those who measure time, by almanacs, no doubt,
     But not with him who knows no days save those
     Born of the sunlight of Cynisca's eyes;
     It will be night with me till she returns.

       CYN. Then sleep it through, Pygmalion! But stay,
     Thou shalt not pass the weary hours alone;
     Now mark thou this--while I'm away from thee,
     There stands my only representative;       [_Withdrawing curtains._
     She is my proxy, and I charge you, sir,
     Be faithful unto her as unto me!
     Into her quietly attentive ear
     Pour all thy treasures of hyperbole,
     And give thy nimble tongue full license, lest
     Disuse should rust its glib machinery;                [_Advancing._
     If thoughts of love should haply crowd on thee,
     There stands my other self, tell them to her,
     She'll listen well; nay, that's ungenerous,
     For she is I, yet lovelier than I,
     And hath no temper, sir, and hath no tongue;
     Thou hast thy license--make good use of it.
     Already I'm half jealous--there!

                                     [_Draws curtain concealing statue._

                                      It's gone.
     The thing is but a statue after all,
     And I am safe in leaving thee with her;
     Farewell, Pygmalion, till I return.                        [_Exit._

       PYG. "The thing is but a statue after all!"
     Cynisca little thought that in those words
     She touched the key-note of my discontent.
     True, I have powers denied to other men;
     Give me a block of senseless marble--Well,
     I'm a magician, and it rests with me
     To say what kernel lies within its shell;
     It shall contain a man, a woman, a child,
     A dozen men and women if I will.
     So far the gods and I run neck and neck,
     Nay, so far I can beat them at their trade;
     I am no bungler--all the men I make
     Are straight limbed fellows, each magnificent
     In the perfection of his manly grace;
     I make no crook-backs; all my men are gods,
     My women, goddesses, in outward form.
     But there's my tether--I can go so far,
     And go no farther--at that point I stop,
     To curse the bonds that hold me sternly back.
     To curse the arrogance of those proud gods,
     Who say, "Thou shalt be greatest among men,
     And yet infinitesimally small!"

       GALATEA [_from behind curtain_]. Pygmalion!

       PYG.                                          Who called?

       GAL.                                              Pygmalion!

     [PYGMALION _tears away curtain and, discovers_ GALATEA _alive_.

       PYG. Ye gods! It lives!

       GAL.                    Pygmalion!

       PYG.                               It speaks!
     I have my prayer! my Galatea breathes!

       GAL. Where am I? Let me speak, Pygmalion;
     Give me thy hand--both hands--how soft and warm!
     Whence came I?                                         [_Descends._

       PYG. Why, from yonder pedestal.

       GAL. That pedestal! Ah, yes, I recollect.
     There was a time when it was part of me.

       PYG. That time has passed forever, thou art now
     A living, breathing woman, excellent
     In every attribute of womankind.

       GAL. Where am I, then?

       PYG.                   Why, born into the world
     By miracle.

       GAL.        Is this the world?

       PYG.                           It is.

       GAL. This room?

       PYG.            This room is portion of a house;
     The house stands in a grove, the grove itself
     Is one of many, many thousand groves
     In Athens.

       GAL. And is Athens then the world?

       PYG. To an Athenian--Yes--

       GAL.                       And I am one?

       PYG. By birth and parentage, not by descent.

       GAL. But how came I to be?

       PYG.                       Well--let me see.
     Oh--you were quarried in Pentelicus;
     I modeled you in clay--my artisans
     Then roughed you out in marble--I, in turn,
     Brought my artistic skill to bear on you,
     And made you what you are--in all but life--
     The gods completed what I had begun,
     And gave the only gift I could not give.

       GAL. Then is this life?

       PYG.                    It is.

       GAL.                          And not long since
     I was a cold, dull stone. I recollect
     That by some means I knew that I was stone,
     That was the first dull gleam of conscience;
     I became conscious of a chilly self,
     A cold immovable identity,
     I knew that I was stone, and knew no more;
     Then, by an imperceptible advance,
     Came the dim evidence of outer things,
     Seen--darkly and imperfectly--yet seen--
     The walls surrounded me, and I, alone,
     That pedestal--that curtain--then a voice
     That called on Galatea! At that word,
     Which seemed to shake my marble to the core,
     That which was dim before, came evident.
     Sounds, that had hummed around me, indistinct,
     Vague, meaningless--seemed to resolve themselves
     Into a language I could understand;
     I felt my frame pervaded with a glow
     That seemed to thaw my marble into flesh;
     Its cold hard substance throbbed with active life,
     My limbs grew supple, and I moved--I lived!
     Lived in the ecstasy of new born life;
     Lived in the love of him that fashioned me;
     Lived in a thousand tangled thoughts of hope,
     Love, gratitude, thoughts that resolved themselves
     Into one word, that word, Pygmalion!                     [_Kneels._

       PYG. I have no words to tell thee of my joy,
     O woman--perfect in thy loveliness.

       GAL. What is that word? Am I a woman?

       PYG.                                  Yes.

       GAL. Art thou a woman?

       PYG.                   No, I am a man.

       GAL. What is a man?

       PYG.                A being strongly framed,
     To wait on woman, and protect her from
     All ills that strength and courage can avert;
     To work and toil for her, that she may rest;
     To weep and mourn for her, that she may laugh;
     To fight and die for her, that she might live!

       GAL. I'm glad I am a woman.               [_He leads her down._

       PYG.                        So am I.

       GAL. That I escape the pains thou hast to bear?

       PYG. That I may undergo those pains for thee.

       GAL. With whom then wouldst thou fight?

       PYG.                                    With any man
     Whose word or deed gave Galatea pain.

       GAL. Then there are other men in this strange world?

       PYG. There are indeed.

       GAL.                   And other women?

       PYG.                                          Yes;
     Though for the moment I'd forgotten it;
     Yes, other women.

       GAL.              And for all of these
     Men work, and toil, and mourn, and weep and fight?

       PYG. It is man's duty, if he's called upon,
     To fight for all; he works for those he loves.

       GAL. Then by thy works I know thou lovest me.

       PYG. Indeed, I love thee!

       GAL.                      With what kind of love?

       PYG. I love thee as a sculptor does his work!
     [_Aside._] There is diplomacy in that reply.

       GAL. My love is different in kind to thine;
     I am no sculptor, and I've done no work,
     Yet I do love thee; say--what love is mine?

       PYG. Tell me its symptoms--then I'll answer thee.

       GAL. Its symptoms? Let me call them as they come.
     A sense that I am made by thee for thee,
     That I've no will that is not wholly thine,
     That I've no thought, no hope, no enterprise,
     That does not own thee as its sovereign;
     That I have life, that I may live for thee,
     That I am thine--that thou and I are one!
     What kind of love is that?

       PYG.                       A kind of love
     That I shall run some risk in dealing with.

       GAL. And why, Pygmalion?

       PYG.                     Such love as thine
     A man may not receive, except indeed
     From one who is, or is to be, his wife.

       GAL. Then I will be thy wife.

       PYG.                          That may not be;
     I have a wife--the gods allow but one.

       GAL. Why did the gods then send me here to thee?

       PYG. I cannot say--unless to punish me
     For unreflecting and presumptuous prayer!
     I prayed that thou shouldst live. I have my prayer,
     And now I see the fearful consequence
     That must attend it!

       GAL.                 Yet thou lovest me?

       PYG. Who could look on that face and stifle love?

       GAL. Then I am beautiful?

       PYG.                      Indeed thou art.

       GAL. I wish that I could look upon myself,
     But that's impossible.

       PYG.                   Not so indeed,
     This mirror will reflect thy face. Behold!

       GAL. How beautiful! I am very glad to know
     That both our tastes agree so perfectly;
     Why, my Pygmalion, I did not think
     That aught could be more beautiful than thou,
     Till I behold myself. Believe me, love,
     I could look in this mirror all day long.
     So I'm a woman.

       PYG.            There's no doubt of that!

       GAL. Oh happy maid to be so passing fair!
     And happier still Pygmalion, who can gaze,
     At will, upon so beautiful a face.

       PYG. Hush! Galatea--in thine innocence
     Thou sayest things that others would reprove.

       GAL. Indeed, Pygmalion; then it is wrong
     To think that one is exquisitely fair?

       PYG. Well, Galatea, it's a sentiment
     That every woman shares with thee;
     They think it--but they keep it to themselves.

       GAL. And is thy wife as beautiful as I?

       PYG. No, Galatea, for in forming thee
     I took her features--lovely in themselves--
     And in the marble made them lovelier still.

       GAL. Oh! then I'm not original?

       PYG.                            Well--no--
     That is--thou hast indeed a prototype,
     But though in stone thou didst resemble her,
     In life, the difference is manifest.

       GAL. I'm very glad that I am lovelier than she.
     And am I better?

       PYG.             That I do not know.

       GAL. Then she has faults.

       PYG.                      Very few indeed;
     Mere trivial blemishes, that serve to show
     That she and I are of one common kin.
     I love her all the better for such faults.

       GAL. Tell me some faults and I'll commit them now.

       PYG. There is no hurry; they will come in time;
     Though for that matter, it's a grievous sin
     To sit as lovingly as we sit now.

       GAL. Is sin so pleasant? If to sit and talk
     As we are sitting, be indeed a sin,
     Why I could sin all day. But tell me, love,
     Is this great fault that I'm committing now
     The kind of fault that only serves to show
     That thou and I are of one common kin?

       PYG. Indeed, I'm very much afraid it is.

       GAL. And dost thou love me better for such fault?

       PYG. Where is the mortal that could answer "no"?

       GAL. Why, then I'm satisfied, Pygmalion;
     Thy wife and I can start on equal terms.
     She loves thee?

       PYG.            Very much.

       GAL.                       I'm glad of that.
     I like thy wife.

       PYG.             And why?

       GAL.                      Our tastes agree.
     We love Pygmalion well, and what is more,
     Pygmalion loves us both. I like thy wife;
     I'm sure we shall agree.

       PYG. [_aside._]           I doubt it much.

       GAL. Is she within?

       PYG.                No, she is not within.

       GAL. But she'll come back?

       PYG.                       Oh, yes, she will come back.

       GAL. How pleased she'll be to know when she returns,
     That there was some one here to fill her place.

       PYG. Yes, I should say she'd be extremely pleased.

       GAL. Why, there is something in thy voice which says
     That thou art jesting. Is it possible
     To say one thing and mean another?

       PYG.                               Yes,
     It's sometimes done.

       GAL.                 How very wonderful!
     So clever!

       PYG.       And so very useful.

       GAL.                           Yes.
     Teach me the art.

       PYG.              The art will come in time.
     My wife will not be pleased; there--that's the truth.

       GAL. I do not think that I shall like thy wife.
     Tell me more of her.

       PYG.                 Well--

       GAL.                        What did she say
     When last she left thee?

       PYG.                     Humph! Well, let me see;
     Oh! true, she gave thee to me as my wife,--
     Her solitary representative;
     She feared I should be lonely till she came.
     And counseled me, if thoughts of love should come,
     To speak those thoughts to thee, as I am wont
     To speak to her.

       GAL. That's right.

       PYG.              But when she spoke
     Thou wast a stone, now thou art flesh and blood,
     Which makes a difference.

       GAL.                      It's a strange world;
     A woman loves her husband very much,
     And cannot brook that I should love him too;
     She fears he will be lonely till she comes,
     And will not let me cheer his loneliness;
     She bids him breathe his love to senseless stone,
     And when that stone is brought to life--be dumb!
     It's a strange world, I cannot fathom it.

       PYG. [_aside_]. Let me be brave and put an end to this.
     Come Galatea--till my wife returns,
     My sister shall provide thee with a home;
     Her house is close at hand.

       GAL. Send me not hence
     Pygmalion; let me stay.

       PYG. It may not be.
     Come, Galatea, we shall meet again.

       GAL. Do with me as thou wilt, Pygmalion!
     But we shall meet again?--and very soon?

       PYG. Yes, very soon.

       GAL. And when thy wife returns,
     She'll let me stay with thee?

       PYG. I do not know.
     [_Aside_]. Why should I hide the truth from her [_aloud_] alas!
     I may not see thee then.

       GAL. Pygmalion!
     What fearful words are these?

       PYG. The bitter truth.
     I may not love thee; I must send thee hence.

       GAL. Recall those words, Pygmalion, my love!
     Was it for this that heaven gave me life?
     Pygmalion, have mercy on me; see,
     I am thy work, thou hast created me;
     The gods have sent me to thee. I am thine!
     Thine! only, and unalterably thine!
     This is the thought with which my soul is charged.
     Thou tellest me of one who claims thy love,
     That thou hast love for her alone. Alas!
     I do not know these things; I only know
     That heaven has sent me here to be with thee.
     Thou tellest me of duty to thy wife,
     Of vows that thou wilt love but her. Alas!
     I do not know these things; I only know
     That heaven, who sent me here, has given me
     One all absorbing duty to discharge--
     To love thee, and to make thee love again.

[PYGMALION _takes her in his arms, and embraces her passionately._]


ACT III, SCENE I


     CHARACTERS: Pygmalion; Myrine, his sister; Cynisca, his wife;
     Galatea.

     SCENE: Pygmalion's studio.


_Enter_ MYRINE

       MYR. Pygmalion's heard that he must lose his wife,
     And swears, by all the gods that reign above,
     He will not live if she deserts him now!
     What--what is to be done?

_Enter_ GALATEA

       GAL.                 Myrine here!
     Where is Pygmalion?

       MYR.                 Oh, wretched girl!
     Art thou not satisfied with all the ill
     Thy heedlessness has worked, that thou art come
     To gaze upon thy victim's misery?
     Well, thou hast come in time!

       GAL.   What dost thou mean?

       MYR. Why, this is what I mean; he will not live,
     Now that Cynisca has deserted him.
     O, girl, his blood will be upon thy head!

       GAL. Pygmalion will not live! Pygmalion die!
     And I, alas, the miserable cause!
     Oh, what is to be done?

       MYR.    I do not know.
     And yet there is one chance, but one alone;
     I'll see Cynisca, and prevail on her
     To meet Pygmalion but once again.

       GAL. But should she come too late? He may not live
     Till she returns.

       MYR.    I'll send him now to thee,
     And tell him that his wife awaits him here.
     He'll take thee for Cynisca; when he speaks
     Answer thou him as if thou wast his wife.

       GAL. Yes, yes, I understand.

       MYR.    Then I'll be gone.
     The gods assist thee in this artifice!              [_Exit_ MYRINE.

       GAL. The gods will help me, for the gods are good.
     [_Kneels._] Oh, heaven, in this great grief I turn to thee,
     Teach me to speak to him, as, ere I lived,
     Cynisca spake to him. Oh, let my voice
     Be to Pygmalion as Cynisca's voice,
     And he will live--for her and not for me--
     Yet he will live. I am the fountain head

_Enter_ PYGMALION, _unobserved, led in by_ MYRINE

     Of all the horrors that surround him now,
     And it is fit that I should suffer this;
     Grant this, my first appeal--I do not ask
     Pygmalion's love; I ask Pygmalion's life.

[PYGMALION _utters an exclamation of joy. She rushes to him and seizes
his hand_.

     Pygmalion!

       PYG.        I have no words in which
     To tell the joy with which I heard that prayer.
     Oh, take me to thine arms, my dearly loved!
     And teach me once again how much I risked
     In risking such a heaven-sent love as thine.

       GAL. [_believing that he refers to her_]. Pygmalion! my love!
       Pygmalion!
     Once more those words! again! say them again!
     Tell me that thou forgivest me the ill
     That I unwittingly have worked on thee!

       PYG. Forgive thee? Why, my wife, I did not dare
     To ask thy pardon, and thou askest mine.
     The compact with thy mistress, Artemis,
     Gave thee a heaven-sent right to punish me.
     I've learnt to take whate'er the gods may send.

[GALATEA, _at first delighted, learns in the course of this speech that_
PYGMALION _takes her for_ CYNISCA, _and expresses extreme horror_.

       GAL. [_with an effort_]. But then, this woman, Galatea--

       PYG.                                                        Well?

       GAL. Thy love for her is dead?

       PYG.                            I had no love. A miracle
     Did crown my handiwork, and brought to life
     The fair creation of my sculptor's skill,
     I yielded to her god-sent influence,
     For I had worshiped her before she lived
     Because she called Cynisca's face to me;
     But when she lived--that love died--word by word.

       GAL. That is well said; thou dost not love her then?
     She is no more to thee than senseless stone?

       PYG. Speak not of her, Cynisca, for I swear

_Enter_ CYNISCA, _unobserved_

     The unhewn marble of Pentelicus
     Hath charms for me, which she, in all her glow
     Of womanly perfection, could not match.

       GAL. I'm very glad to hear that this is so.
     Thou art forgiven!

       PYG.                Thou hast pardoned me,
     And though the law of Artemis declared
     Thy pardon should restore to me the light
     Thine anger took away, I would be blind,
     I would not have mine eyes lest they should rest
     On her who caused me all this bitterness!

       GAL. Indeed, Pygmalion, 'twere better thus;
     If thou couldst look on Galatea now,
     Thy love for her, perchance, might come again.

       PYG. No, no.

       GAL.         They say that she endureth pains
     That mock the power of words.

       PYG.                          It should be so.

       GAL. Hast thou no pity for her?            [CYNISCA _comes down_.

       PYG.                          No, not I.
     The ill that she hath worked on thee, on me,
     And on Myrine, surely were enough
     To make us curse the hour that gave her life.
     She is not fit to live upon this world!

       GAL. Upon this worthy world, thou sayest well.
     The woman shall be seen of thee no more.

[_Takes_ CYNISCA'S _hand and leads her to_ PYGMALION.]

     What wouldst thou with her now? Thou hast thy wife!

[_She substitutes_ CYNISCA _in her place, and retires, weeping_. CYNISCA
_takes him to her arms and kisses him. He recovers his sight_.

       PYG. Cynisca! see! the light of day is mine!
     Once more I look upon thy well loved face!

_Enter_ GALATEA

       MYR. Pygmalion!
     See--Galatea's here!                             [GALATEA _kneels_.

       PYG.                 Away from me,
     Woman or statue! Thou the only blight
     That ever fell upon my love--begone,

                                                [CYNISCA _comforts her_.

     For thou hast been the curse of all who fell
     Within the compass of thy waywardness!

       CYN. No, no; recall those words, Pygmalion,
     Thou knowest not all.

       GAL.                  Nay, let me go from him;
     That curse--his curse still ringing in mine ears,
     For life is bitterer to me than death.  [_She mounts the pedestal_.
     Farewell, Pygmalion, I am not fit
     To live upon this world--this worthy world.
     Farewell, Pygmalion. Farewell, farewell!

                                            [_The curtains conceal her_.

       CYN. Thou art unjust to her as I to thee!
     Hers was the voice that pardoned thee--not mine.
     I knew no pity till she taught it me.
     I heard the words she spoke, and little thought
     That they would find an echo in my heart;
     But so it was. I took them for mine own,
     And asking for thy pardon, pardoned thee!

     PYG. Cynisca! Is this so?

     CYN.                      In truth it is.

     GAL. [_behind curtain_]: Farewell, Pygmalion! Farewell--farewell!

[PYGMALION _tears away the curtain, discovering_ GALATEA _as a statue._


INDEX OF AUTHORS


Aldrich, Thomas Bailey, 478.

Angell, James B., 220.

Anonymous, 89, 92, 349, 353, 354, 380, 386, 395, 404.

Arnold, Edwin, 110.


Barham, R. H., 54.

Beecher, Henry Ward, 208, 215.

Bell, H. G., 431.

Beveridge, Albert J., 217.

Blaine, James Gillespie, 237.

Bossuet, Jacques Bénigne, 169.

Bright, John, 218, 222.

Brooks, Katherine R., 125.

Browning, Robert, 21.

Bryan, William Jennings, 231.

Bryant, William Cullen, 132.

Burke, Edmund, 175, 178, 182.

Burns, Robert, 129.

Burroughs, John, 53.

Byron, Lord, 147.


Cable, George W., 77.

Campbell, Thomas, 157.

Carlyle, Thomas, 156.

Castelar, Emilio, 258.

Channing, William E., 302.

Chatham, William Pitt, Earl of, 171, 173.

Chrysostom, Saint-John, 165, 167.

Cicero, Marcus Tullius, 162.

Cockran, Bourke, 314.

Cooke, Edmund Vance, 52.

Coolidge, Susan, 42.

Corwin, Thomas, 278.

Crawford, F. Marion, 139.

Curtis, George William, 273, 275.


Delano, Myra S., 37.

Demosthenes, 159.

Dickens, Charles, 15, 103.

Dunbar, Paul Laurence, 325, 327, 389.

Dunne, Finley Peter, 337.


Edwards, Harry Stillwell, 340.

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 148.

Everett, Edward, 312.


Field, Eugene, 76.

Flagg, Edmund, 304.


Garfield, James A., 260.

Gilbert, W. S., 493.

Gillilan, S. W., 137, 343.

Gladstone, William E., 222, 255.

Goldsmith, Oliver, 486.

Grady, Henry W., 249, 283, 284.

Graves, John Temple, 246.


Hamilton, Alexander, 196.

Harris, Joel Chandler, 335, 370.

Hay, John, 59, 124, 261, 362.

Hemans, Felicia, 151.

Henry, Daniel, 12, 130.

Henry, Patrick, 193, 292.

Hoar, George F., 309.

Holmes, Oliver W., 145.

Howe, Julia Ward, 225.

Hugo, Victor, 345, 400.

Hunt, Leigh, 57.


Ingalls, John J., 235.

Ingelow, Jean, 47, 101.

Ingersoll, Robert G., 279, 315.

Irving, Washington, 449.


Jenkins, Lucy Dean, 366.

Jerome, Jerome K., 354.

Jerrold, Blanchard, 468.


King, Ben F., 357, 379.

Kingsley, Charles, 102.

Kipling, Rudyard, 155, 368.

Kossuth, Louis, 250, 313.


Le Fanu, Joseph S., 113.

Lincoln, Abraham, 206, 241, 305, 307.

Lippard, George, 98.

Lodge, Henry Cabot, 226.

Longfellow, H. W., 8, 61.

Lover, Samuel, 364.

Lowell, James Russell, 152.

Lytton, Edward Bulwer, 25, 80.

Lytton, Robert Bulwer, 8, 423, 441.


McKinley, William, 251.

Mead, Edwin D., 294, 299, 318.

Mitchell, Agnes E., 391.

Moore, Thomas, 41.


Nadaud, Gustav, 13.


Phelps, Elizabeth Stuart, 330.

Phillips, Charles, 321.

Phillips, Wendell, 202, 239, 290, 296, 297.

Pierce, Etta W., 133.

Poe, Edgar Allan, 426.


Quincy, Josiah, 284.


Richards, Laura E., 414.

Riley, James Whitcomb, 323, 324, 359.

Robbins, R. D. C., 118.

Roosevelt, Theodore, 264, 280.


Savonarola, Girolamo, 228.

Saxe, John G., 384.

Scott, Walter, 123.

Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, 454.

Sienkiewicz, Henryk, 1.

Smith, F. Hopkinson, 375.

Stephens, Alexander H., 243.

Streeter, R. M., 387.

Sumner, Charles, 212, 248.


Taylor, Benjamin F., 373.

Tennyson, Alfred, Lord, 32, 67, 94, 146.

Thompson, Maurice, 138.

Togo, Admiral Heihaichiro, 242, 271.


Van Dyke, Henry, 72.

Verne, Jules, 408.


Weatherly, F. E., 328.

Webster, Daniel, 185, 188, 191, 199.

Whitman, Walt, 88.

Whittier, John G., 144, 149.

Wilcox, Ella Wheeler, 117.

Williams, Henry L., 437.




ANNOUNCEMENTS


BOOKS IN PUBLIC SPEAKING

By ROBERT I. FULTON, late of Ohio Wesleyan University, and THOMAS C.
TRUEBLOOD, University of Michigan


ESSENTIALS OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

(Second Edition)

This book shows the relation of intellect, feeling, and gesture to the
elements of effective expression in oratorical and dramatic art. It
treats the elements of expression in their simplest and most natural
order, showing their application to the various sentiments and emotions,
and provides exercises in the technic of voice and action. In
illustration of the principles full selections as well as illustrative
passages are given, together with the necessary explanation, _xiv_ +
_250 pages_


BRITISH AND AMERICAN ELOQUENCE

Accounts of the lives and public careers of twenty-two noted British and
American orators together with selections from their greatest speeches.
The purpose is to point out by concrete example the abstract principles
of public speaking which should guide the beginner. The book aims to
select, adapt, and utilize in a single volume such helpful material as
the student of public speaking can find elsewhere only in many separate
volumes. _403 pages, illustrated_


CHOICE READINGS FROM POPULAR AND STANDARD AUTHORS

The number, variety, and interest of the selections are noteworthy. They
include prose and verse from a wide range of writers. Selections are
grouped in fourteen divisions, according to the nature of the subject
matter, _xix_ + _729 pages_


STANDARD SELECTIONS

Edited by ROBERT I. FULTON, THOMAS C. TRUEBLOOD, and EDWIN P. TRUEBLOOD

The purpose of the book is to provide material in poetry and oratory
that has never before appeared in books of this character, and to
stimulate interest in the authors represented. Nearly two hundred
selections of varying character are included. _510 pages_


GINN AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS


EXTEMPORE SPEAKING

By EDWIN DUBOIS SHURTER, Associate Professor of Public Speaking in the
University of Texas

12mo, cloth, 178 pages

This manual provides an analysis of the art of extempore speaking,
together with specific examples and exercises. It is distinctly modern
in treatment, although drawing also from the rich fund of material in
classical and modern literature.


MASTERPIECES OF MODERN ORATORY

By EDWIN DUBOIS SHURTER

12mo, cloth, 369 pages

These fifteen orations, edited with introductions and notes, are
intended to furnish models for students of oratory, argumentation, and
debate. The orators represented are Burke, Webster, Lincoln, Phillips,
Curtis, Grady, Watterson, Daniel, Porter, Reed, Beveridge, Cockran,
Schurz, Spalding, and Van Dyke.


VOCAL EXPRESSION IN SPEECH

By HENRY EVARTS GORDON, late Professor of Public Speaking in the
University of Iowa

12mo, cloth, viii + 315 pages

A fresh and stimulating treatise on the fundamentals of public speaking
from its cultural side, intended primarily for college classes but
easily adaptable to high-school use. A thorough program of study is
provided for speech melody, speech quality, speech rhythm, and speech
dynamics, accompanied by several hundred illustrative selections.


GINN AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS


BOOKS IN PUBLIC SPEAKING


THE MAKING OF ARGUMENTS

By JOHN HAYS GARDINER, late of Harvard University

A brief course in argumentation to meet the needs of the future average
citizen rather than of the few who go on to law or political life. The
examples used throughout the book and the exercises and questions
suggested for argument are drawn from matters in which young people from
eighteen to twenty-two have a natural, lively interest and which they
argue about in real life. The aim of the book is to develop habits of
analysis and effective presentation of facts which will serve the
student in the practical concerns of later life. _290 pages_


THE PRINCIPLES OF ARGUMENTATION

(Revised and Enlarged Edition)

By GEORGE P. BAKER, Harvard University, and H. B. HUNTINGTON, Brown
University

This book holds an established place as one of the standard textbooks in
the subject. Fundamental matters of analytical investigation, sifting of
evidence, brief-drawing, and persuasive adaptation are clearly
illustrated by numerous extracts and are made teachable by varied
practical exercises. The book as a whole develops intellectual power and
avoids that "predigested" argumentative material which enables a student
easily to remember--and surely to forget--"how to argue." _677 pages_


ORAL ENGLISH

By JOHN M. BREWER, Los Angeles State Normal School

This textbook treats oral English as a subject independent both of
literature and of written composition. It furnishes the student brief
directions, detailed exercises, and suggestive lists of topics of
every-day interest which will provide material for doing with conscious
direction of thought the things which unconsciously are done in the
pursuit of every other study--arguing, explaining, and telling. It
embodies the latest ideas in the teaching of this subject by
substituting for imitation of masterpieces of eloquence a direct and
effective way of speaking without unnecessary adornment, more fitted to
be of practical use to men and women of to-day. _396 pages_


GINN AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS


BOOKS IN PUBLIC SPEAKING


ELEMENTS OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

By HARRY GARFIELD HOUGHTON, University of Wisconsin xi + 333 pages

This textbook aims to teach the student,


     First, how to organize his subject matter into clear and logical
     form for purposes of public utterance.

     Second, how to cultivate his powers of expression so as to enable
     him to convey his ideas most effectively.


The book combines a definite amount of accurately expressed theory with
a maximum of practice. Special emphasis has been laid upon clear and
accurate thinking as the foundation for all expression, and each
principle has been treated in its relation thereto.

The book, while intended primarily for college courses, will also prove
valuable in classes in practical speaking in preparatory schools, as an
aid in declamatory work (for this purpose Chapter II, The Conversational
Mode, and Appendix II, Declamation, are particularly useful), and as a
reference book.


THE BRIEF-MAKER'S NOTEBOOK

By WARREN C. SHAW, Dartmouth College vii + 240 pages, in Biflex Binder

"The Brief-Maker's Notebook" presents a logical system for analyzing
debaters' propositions and supplies a blank form of brief based upon
this system. It is devised to accomplish several aims:


     1. To enable the debater to use a loose-leaf system of note-taking.

     2. To help him to investigate details of his case without losing
     his grip upon the problem as a whole.

     3. To enable him to write a brief directly from his notes without
     rearranging the material.

     4. To crystallize his methods of analysis.

     5. To apply the theory of argumentation in the preparation of a
     debate and to develop thoroughness and accuracy.


The material consists of sets of forty pages each. Each set is designed
for the complete handling of one proposition.


GINN AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS