
    DEAR ALEC,--What's the idea? You say you let the fishing a
    fortnight ago; but last Wednesday you wrote about catching
    eleven beauties, one over nineteen and a half inches long.
    Some trout--what? But why the terriers? Yours in darkness,

    GARRY NORTON.


    _Postcard_.

    _Rats_.

    ALEC.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "WHEN GREEK JOINS GREEK."

    "The Red Cross announces that the repatriation of Greeks
    forcibly removed from their homes in Eastern Macedonia has
    been virtually completed despite Bulgarian opposition. The
    reports says the Greek Red Cross rendered invaluable aid
    in looting imprisoned Greeks hidden remotely."--_Egyptian
    Gazette_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NAVY AT CAMBRIDGE.

  When first I joined the R.N.V.
  And ventured out upon the sea,
  The war-tried Subs. R.N. and Looties
  Who guided me about my duties
  Were wont to wink and chuckle if
  I found the going rather stiff;
  And when, upon the Nor'-East Rough,
  My legs proved scarcely firm enough
  To keep me yare and head-to-wind
  The very nicest of them grinned.

  Now times are changed, and here I am
  Once more beside the brimming Cam,
  Where lo, those selfsame Loots and Subs
  Whirl madly by in punts and tubs,
  Which they propel by strength of will
  And muscle rather more than skill.
  For (if one may be fairly frank)
  They barge across from bank to bank,
  With zig-zag motions, in and out,
  As though torpedoes were about;
  Whilst I with all an expert's ease
  Glide by as gaily as you please,
  Or calmly, 'mid the rout of punts,
  Perform accomplished super-stunts.

  But do not think I jibe or jeer
  However strangely they career.
  In soothing accents, sweet as spice,
  I offer them my best advice,
  Or deftly show them how to plant a
  Propulsive pole in oozy Granta,
  Observing, "If you only knew it
  _This_ is the proper way to do it;"
  Till soon each watching Looty's face
  Grows full of wonder at my grace,
  And daring Subs in frail Rob Roys
  Attempt to imitate my poise.

  O war-tried Loots and Subs. R.N.,
  Thus by the Cam we meet again;
  And, as in wilder sterner days,
  We shared the ocean's dreary ways
  In fellowship of single aim,
  I never doubt we'll do the same
  By sunny Cam in happier times;
  And therefore, if through these my rhymes
  Some gentle banter slyly flits,
  Forgive me, Sirs--and call it quits.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a club journal:--

    "Members will look forward to the River Trip this year as a
    change from a Trip to the River."

This constant craving for variety is one of the most unhealthy
symptoms of the times in which we live.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a report of the debate on the National Shipyards:--

    "'The Mercantile Marine was our weakest front. If the sinking
    increased our unbiblical cord would be cut' (a graphic phrase
    this)."--_Provincial Paper_.

Graphic, perhaps, but hardly stenographic.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Poacher (to gamekeeper who has been chasing him for
twenty minutes)._ "NOW, SONNY, IF YOU'VE 'AD A GOOD REST WE'LL SET OFF
AGAIN."]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

_(By Mr. Punch's Staff of Learned Clerks.)_

MR. E.F. BENSON, seizing occasion as it flies, has given us, in
_Across the Stream_ (MURRAY), a story on the very topical subject of
spiritualism and communication with the dead. As a practised novelist,
with a touch so sure that it can hardly fail to adorn, he has made a
tale that is interesting throughout and here and there aspires to real
beauty of feeling; though not all the writer's skill can disguise a
certain want of unity in the natural and supernatural divisions of
his theme. The early part of the book, which tells of the boyhood
of _Archie_ and the attempts of his dead brother _Martin_ to "get
through" to him, are admirably done. As always in these studies of
happy and guarded childhood, Mr. BENSON is at his best, sympathetic,
tender, altogether winning. There was lung trouble in _Archie's_
record--_Martin_ indeed had died of it (sometimes I wonder whether any
of Mr. BENSON'S protagonists can ever be wholly robust), and there is
a genuine thrill in the scene at the Swiss sanatorium, where the
dead and living boys touch hands over the little _cache_ of childish
treasure buried by the former beneath a pine-tree in the garden.
Later, when _Archie_ had recovered from his disease and grown to
suitor's estate, I could not but feel, despite the sardonically
observed figure of _Helena_, the detestable girl who nearly ruins him,
that the whole affair had become conventional, and by so much lost
interest for its creator. Apart, however, from the bogie chapters of
Possession (which I shall not further indicate) the most moving scenes
in this latter part are those between _Archie_ and his father. I have
seldom known a horrible situation handled with more delicate art; it
is for this, rather than for its slightly unconvincing devilments,
that I would give the book an honourable place in the ranks of
Bensonian romance.

       *       *       *       *       *

I quite agree with Mr. HAROLD BEGBIE, whose _Mr. Sterling Sticks it
Out_ (HEADLEY) is a generous attempt to put into the form of a story
the case of the conscientious objector of the finest type, that,
when we are able to think about this matter calmly, we shall have
considerable misgivings at least about details in our treatment of
this difficult problem. I also agree that the officials of the Press
Bureau don't come at all well out of the correspondence which he
prints in his preface, and, further, that the Government ought to have
had the courage to alter the law allowing absolute exemption rather
than stretch it beyond the breaking point. But I emphatically dispute
his assumption that the matter was a simple one. It was not the
saintly, single-minded and sweet-natured C.O.'s of _Christopher
Sterling's_ type that made the chief difficulty. There were few of
this literal interpretation and heroic texture. The real difficulty
was created by men of a very different character and in much greater
numbers, sincere in varying degrees, but deliberately, passionately
and unscrupulously obstructive, bent on baulking the national will and
making anything like reasonable treatment of them impossible. It would
require saints, not men, to deal without occasional lapses from strict
equity with such infuriating folk. Mr. BEGBIE'S book is unfair in
its emphasis, but it is not fanatical or subversive, and I can see no
decent reason why it should have been banned. I certainly commend it
to the majority-minded as a wholesome corrective.

       *       *       *       *       *

