"My wills are all of the very best quality."

"Then I suppose I must let you make me one. What sort of things do
people leave?"

"All sorts of things. Anything they've got and quite often things they
haven't got."

"Animals? Dogs? Can I will away Bobs, for instance?"

"Yes."

"Can I leave anything to anyone I like?"

"Yes, to anyone you like or don't like." I was thinking of Bobs. He is
not a very amiable dog and no friend of mine.

"I think I'll leave Bobs to you." I had felt it coming.

"But I might die before Bobs. Bobs being a specific legacy would then
lapse and fall into residue," I hurriedly explained.

"That doesn't sound nice."

"It isn't nice. Bobs would never be happy there. You had better leave
him to some one younger."

After we had settled Bobs on a young cousin we got on quite quickly. We
left her old dance programmes and several unimportant things of doubtful
ownership to her greatest rival; her piano (with three notes missing),
on which she had learnt to play as a child, to her Aunt in Australia,
said Aunt to pay carriage and legacy duty; her violin to the people in
the next flat; her French novels to the church library; her golf clubs
and tennis racket to her old nurse; her Indian clubs to the Olympic
Games Committee; her early water-colour sketches to the Nation. We
divided up all her goods. Everybody got something appropriate. It was a
good will. And when I suggested that there should be no immediate
charge, but that the cost should be paid out of the estate in due
season, Miranda very cheerfully agreed; and even went so far as to
express a generous hope that I should outlive her.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MAN OF THE MOMENT.

_January_ 23, 1914.

Who is the happy tradesman? Who is he?

I mean in this peculiarly horrible weather?

The chemist.

There is no happier tradesman than he. He stands all day long, and a
large part of the night, among his bottles and boxes and jars and
jarlets and pots and potlets and tabloids and capsules, selling remedies
for colds and coughs and sore throats and rheumatism and neuralgia.

The colder it is the more he is on velvet, the chemist.

In America he is called a "druggist," but "chemist" is better, even
though it confuses a mere peddler of ammoniated quinine with Sir WILLIAM
RAMSAY and Sir WILLIAM CROOKES.

The old-fashioned spelling was "chymist," and there are still one or two
shops in London where this spelling holds, but I think it's affectation.

Meanwhile the chemist (or chymist) is coining money.

Not even his lavish expenditure of clean white paper and red, red
sealing wax, and the gas that burns always to melt that red, red
sealing-wax, can make his profits look ridiculous.

Not even the constant loss of small articles from the counter, such as
manicure sticks, and digestive tablets, and jujubes, and face cream and
smokers' cachous, which never ought to be spread about there at all,
because they are so easily conveyed by the dishonest customer into
pocket or muff, can seriously upset the smiling side of the chemist's
ledger.

Every night, when at last, laden with gold, he climbs to his bed, he
hopes piously that the morrow may be colder.

And it usually is.

He will soon be a millionaire.

It is only a warm wind that can blow the chemist no good.

I wish I was a chemist, but it is now too late.

Still, I wish I was a chemist.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Aunt._ "I can't think of letting you two girls go alone,
and as I shall not be able to go your Uncle will look after you."

_Niece._ "That's very kind of him, Auntie; but I hope you don't expect
us to cling to his apron strings all the time."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BEER-FIGHT.

(Suggested by Mr. CHESTERTON's "The Flying Inn.")

  Of G. K. C. a tale I tell, of GILBERT CHESTERTON,
  And how he met GAMBRINUS once and how they carried on.
  Each roared a lusty challenge out, as only topers can,
  And sat him down and called for beer, and then the bout began.

  One had a _Seidel_ to his hand, and one a pewter pot;
  They drank potations pottle deep, in fact they drank a lot.
  And as they drank the barrels dry they rolled them on the floor,
  And sang a stave and drained a quart and called aloud for more.

  Their glowing souls o'ertopped the stars; they had their hearts' desire,
  The while the world spun round and round its busy track of fire.
  "I've lived for this," said G. K. C. and tossed his flaming head;
  "_Der Kerl ist stark, das Bier ist gut_," was what GAMBRINUS said.

  The sun looked on, the moon looked on, the comets all stood still
  To see this stout and jolly pair who never had their fill.
  And still they drained their beer as if they'd only just begun;
  And no one dared to interfere to settle which had won.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESSIMISM.

The Bard to the schemer of newspaper placards.

  Why, crystalliser of the world's diurnal
    Experience, why plunge my soul in gloom
  With tidings that are ghastly and infernal?
    Why dim my morning eye with tales of doom,
  Of flood and fire, of pestilence and drouth--
  Leaving me down, distinctly, in the mouth?

  Why stun me with: "Explosion in a Larder:
     Cook and Policeman Blown to Bits"; "The Girl
  That Poisoned Half a Parish"; "Weather Harder
     And Death Rate Rising"; "Poacher Brains an Earl";
  Why blazon blackly forth such blighting news,
  Nor give a glimpse of life's less dismal hues?

  Why not proclaim such gladness as the following:
    "Twins Born in Tooting: Trio Doing Well";
  "Chelsea Churchwarden much Improved, and Swallowing
    Beef-Tea With Ease"; "A Famous Barking Belle
  Gets Off at Last"; "A Navvy's Love of Greek";
    "Young Poet Earns a Guinea in a Week"?

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Velour Hat, pretty blue, trimmed large elephant."--_Advt._

A small seagull looks prettier and is less in the way at _matinées_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CONVERTED STATISTICIAN.

A sudden jolt as we thundered over some points caused me to shoot a
piece of bread-and-butter on to the floor. I stooped to pick it up.

"Stop a moment, please!" cried my companion. He jumped to his feet and
examined it. "Ah," said he, "buttered side downward!"

"It's always the same," I said, as I jerked the thing viciously out of
the window. "It's _always_ buttered side downward."

"No, there you fall into a common error," protested the other. "You may
take it that fifty-seven per cent. fall buttered side upward, and only
forty-three per cent. buttered side downward."

"H'm," I said dubiously.

"You must pardon me for my officiousness," he went on, "especially as I
have now no reason to be interested in such things. But habits are
strong."

I looked at him curiously. "Habits?" I said.

"Yes, habits. For years I kept an accurate record of every slice of
bread-and-butter I saw fall to the ground. I had better explain myself.
Nearly all my life, you must understand, I have maintained the view that
the generally accepted theory of the 'cussedness of things' is all
wrong. You know that to most people 'cussedness' is the governing factor
of life."

"Rather!" I agreed.

"Well, I disbelieved it, and I set to work to collect materials for a
book which was to prove my case. For years I incessantly gathered
statistics on the subject. Do I bore you?"

"Not at all," I assured him.

"The results were extraordinary. Take, for example, catching trains. It
is highly important that you should catch a train at short notice. In
nine cases out of ten, you will say, your taxicab breaks down, or your
tram is held up by a block in the traffic, or the current fails on the
Underground."

"Certainly it does."

"On the contrary--I am speaking from memory, but I think my figures are
accurate--the taxicab only breaks down in 1.5 per cent. of cases; with
the tram the percentage rises to 1.8; with the Underground it falls to
.2."

I gasped.

"Or take the case of studs," he went on. "You drop a stud, and it
promptly and inevitably rolls away into some quite impossible
hiding-place. So most of us believe. As a matter of fact it only does so
approximately three times out of a hundred. Or bootlaces. If you are
exceptionally late in the morning; your bootlace always snaps, you say.
Not at all. It breaks in such circumstances only four times out of a
possible hundred. And with bicycles, to take another example. If ever
you get a puncture, you fancy that it always occurs on some occasion
when you are sorely pressed for time. Again, not at all. Out of a
hundred punctures only seventeen are sustained at such unfortunate
moments."

"You seem to have studied the subject pretty deeply," I remarked.

"Oh, my dear Sir, I cannot myself recall a tithe of the material I
collected. I carried out my inquiries in every conceivable direction.
Suppose we take the obscure case of a--let me see--of a burglar. This
was one of my most difficult researches. A burglar will assure you, if
you happen to be in his confidence, that every time he enters a house,
at a moment when absolute quiet is from his point of view essential, a
door slams, or a pot of jam falls off a shelf, or a--a canary commences
to sing loudly, or there occurs one of a hundred other unlucky noises he
will name. As you may imagine, my investigations into this problem were
extraordinarily difficult. But the result was a triumph. In only .375
per cent. of cases is our burglar disturbed by an unexpected noise for
which he is not himself responsible. As for the specific examples given,
the results here are even more striking. The pot of jam, for instance,
only falls down in, I think, .0025 per cent. of cases, the canary bursts
into song in only .00175 per cent., and so on."

"It is astonishing," I admitted. "I must certainly obtain a copy of your
book. Perhaps----"

"I never published it," he interrupted. "As a matter of fact I became
converted."

"Converted?" I exclaimed in amazement. "In the face of all your
statistics?"

"Yes," he said meditatively. "I remember the occasion well. It happened
a few months ago, in early Spring. I had just completed the last chapter
of my book, and I laid down my pen with a sigh. There before me lay all
the statistics I had so laboriously collected, neatly tabulated and
arranged with the proper explanatory notes and diagrams. It was finished
after all these years! I can assure you it was an emotional moment. I
don't know if you have ever brought a great work to a successful
conclusion; if so, you can understand my feelings."

"I can imagine them," I said.

"Well, I opened the French windows and stepped out into the garden to
calm myself. It was a lovely March day, I remember, sunny and fresh, and
I paced up and down the garden till my emotions subsided and I gradually
recovered my self-control. Then I went indoors again."

The train slowed down and he began to gather his things together. "While
I was gone," he said sadly, "the wind blew my manuscript and the best
part of my notes into the fire."

"How excessively unfortunate!" I murmured sympathetically. "And this
converted you to the 'cussedness' theory?"

"Yes," said he, as he stepped down to the platform. "It was the only
book I ever wrote, and it was burned practically to a cinder. It works
out you see, at exactly 100 per cent...."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE EPIDEMIC.

(A French contemporary, commenting upon the fact that the sudden
appearance of cold weather in London is accompanied by an equally sudden
disappearance of cats, demonstrates the cause of this coincidence.)

