The horticultural show was in the Town-hall, a large, handsome
apartment, with long aisles of tables, covered with piles of fruits
and vegetables; and such fruits! peaches, nectarines, apricots, and
the choicest plums, all of open-air growth, and not surpassed by any I
have seen--fully equal to the best hot-house productions of England.
Vegetables also very fine, all equal to the finest, except the turnip,
which in New England is small. The flowers as beautiful as in the Old
Country, but much smaller; consequently, that part of the show was
much inferior to our shows of the kind. In the evening of each day,
the fruits are put up to auction, and a good deal of merriment is
caused by this part of the entertainment. Those who supply the show
are well paid, as each morning there is a fresh supply; thus proving
that it is not the selected few that are exhibited, but the average
produce of the county.

From thence I walked to the show of products of industry. I found a
building 600 feet in length, 40 feet wide, and two storeys high,
crammed with such a variety of articles that it is extremely difficult
to describe them, or, indeed, to reduce them to order in the mind. I
do not propose to send you a catalogue, but to convey, as far as I
can, the impression made upon me. The ground-floor is devoted to the
exhibition of agricultural implements and machinery. I have no
intention to enter into the question of our own patent laws, but I
cannot refuse to acknowledge the superiority of the arrangements here.
The greatest advantage is, that the right to an invention is so
simply, cheaply, and easily secured, that there is no filching or
ill-feeling. Talking with a very intelligent person, who was kindly
trying to give me definite ideas in this labyrinth of cranks and
wheels, by shewing and explaining to me the movements of a most
singular machine for making carding implements--I said: 'How is it,
that with these wonders, the American portion of the Crystal Palace in
London should have been so scant? Here is enough for almost an
indefinite supply: the reaping-machine is but a unit.' 'True,' he
replied, 'but we could get no guarantee for securing the patents; and
if one man was simple enough to give the English his reaping-machine,
it did not suit others to be robbed. We have little ambition about the
matter: satisfied with what we have, we cannot afford to give away
inventions for the sake of fine words.' This explained the whole to
me.

The first store I looked over in this country was one in Boston,
having an immense stock of agricultural implements, and tools for
every mechanical purpose. I should know something of such matters,
having whistled at the plough myself, and used most of the implements;
and being therefore curious on the point, I looked in for the sake of
old associations. I am positive that every article for agricultural
and mechanical use is better made than with us, and more adapted to
its purpose--tools especially. What has been said of the plough in
London, is equally true of all other implements in use in America,
from the most complicated to the most simple. The Englishman uses what
his fathers used; the American will have the tool best adapted,
whether existing before his time or not. In favour of this superiority
in tools is the fine quality of the hard-woods used here. At the Fair
I saw some coach and chaise wheels, of the most beautiful make, of
hickory, which is as durable as metal-spokes, not thicker than the
middle finger, but strong enough for any required weight, and with
great flexibility; and from its extreme toughness, calculated for the
woodwork of implements. The apartment on the ground-floor was entirely
occupied by machines in motion, and each was attended by a person who
explained, with the greatest civility and intelligence, the uses of
the various parts of the machine, setting it going, or stopping it, as
necessary: each had its crowd of listeners; and I could not but admire
the patience and politeness of the lecturer, as he endeavoured to
explain the wondrous capabilities of his own pet machine. It would
require a volume to follow the subject thoroughly; but I will mention
what appeared to be the newest inventions, or those not known in
England.

A crowd of ladies were watching with great attention the
Sewing-machine--sewing away with the greatest exactness, and much
stronger than by the ordinary mode with a needle, as each stitch is a
knot. The inventor was shewing it; and he said he had nearly completed
a machine for the button-holes. The next was a machine called 'The
Man'--and truly named, for a more marvellous production can scarcely
be conceived--for making implements for carding wool or cotton, the
article passing in as raw wire, going through before our eyes four
processes of the most delicate description, and finally coming out a
perfect card, with its wire-teeth exactly set, and ready for use. My
attention was drawn to the application of the Jacquard principle to a
loom engaged in weaving a calico fabric, of various colours woven with
a pattern, and thus producing an elegant article, thick, and well
adapted for bed-furniture. But the most curious and simple, and
withal, perhaps, the most important invention for facilitating
manufactures, is what is called the 'Turpin Wheel,' taking its name
from the inventor. How simple may be the birth of a great idea! We all
observe that a log under a waterfall, coming down perpendicularly upon
it, spins round, as on an axis, till it escapes. This led to the
invention in question. The water falls upon the spokes of a horizontal
wheel, which it sends round with great velocity; and by this
contrivance the force of the water is more than doubled. I must not
omit to mention the machine just invented for weaving the fabric we
call Brussels carpeting. This machine will weave twenty yards of
carpeting per day, with one female to attend it. The carpet is worth
3s. per yard, while the wages paid for human aid in its production is
1-1/4d. per yard: machinery can go little further. Let me add, that I
was informed that everything on this floor was the invention of
working-men.

Upon ascending to the first floor, I found the apartment arranged with
stands--each stand devoted to one sort of manufacture--and attended,
as below, by an intelligent person, to shew and explain. Here was
every description of furniture, cotton, and woollen fabric; but
neither velvets nor silks, which have not, as yet, been introduced. We
know so much of our doings in England in the woollen and cotton line,
that my attention was principally attracted to these specimens. Here
was everything except the broad-cloths--all the patterns of
plaid-shawls, so beautifully imitated and executed, that they would, I
am sure, pass in Edinburgh. I saw the kerseymere fabric that obtained
the prize in London, and nothing could be more beautiful; for the
calicoes, I believe we cannot produce them cheaper or better. A writer
in a journal here, observes: 'Why should our cotton go to England to
be spun when we can spin it in Massachusetts?' A very pertinent
question, well worth thinking of at home. We should be thankful to the
projectors of the Crystal Palace, that it has opened our eyes, for
nothing else could. There is no manner of doubt, that we can learn
something beyond yacht-sailing; but we shall not open our eyes to the
widest until the arrival in our market of the first cargo of
manufactured woollens and cottons; and as surely as we have barrels of
flour and pork, we shall soon find them with us: I saw first-rate
calico, which could be sold at 2d. per yard.

