  365 Luncheon Dishes

  A Luncheon Dish for every day
  in the year

  Selected from

  MARION HARLAND, CHRISTINE TERHUNE
  HERRICK, BOSTON COOKING SCHOOL
  MAGAZINE, TABLE TALK, GOOD HOUSEKEEPING,
  AND OTHERS.

[Illustration: Publisher's Logo]

  PHILADELPHIA
  GEORGE W. JACOBS & CO
  PUBLISHERS

  Copyright, 1902, by
  George W. Jacobs & Company,
  _Published September, 1902_


JANUARY.


1.--Stewed Breast of Lamb.

Cut a breast of lamb into small pieces, season, and stew until tender in
enough gravy to cover the meat. Thicken the sauce, flavor with a
wine-glass of wine, pile in the centre of a platter and garnish with
green peas.


2.--Chicken Creams.

Chop and pound 1/2 a lb. of chicken and 3 ozs. of ham; pass this through
a sieve, add 1 oz. of melted butter, 2 well-beaten eggs, and 1/2 a pint
of cream, which must be whipped; season with pepper and salt. Mix all
lightly together, put into oiled moulds and steam fifteen minutes, or if
in one large mould half an hour.


3.--Herring's Roes on Toast.

Have rounds of toast buttered and seasoned with salt and pepper, on each
piece place 1/2 the soft roe of a herring which has been slightly fried
and on the top of this a fried mushroom. Serve very hot.


4.--French Omelet.

For a very small omelet beat 2 whole eggs and the yokes of two more
until a full spoonful can be taken up. Add 3 tablespoonfuls of water,
1/4 of a teaspoonful of salt, and a dash of pepper, and when well mixed
turn into a hot omelet pan, in which a tablespoonful of butter has been
melted, lift the edges up carefully and let the uncooked part run under.
When all is cooked garnish with parsley.


5.--Cheese Ramequins.

Melt 1 oz. of butter, mix with 1/2 oz. of flour, add 1/4 of a pint of
milk, stir and cook well. Then beat in the yolks of two eggs, sprinkle
in 3 ozs. of grated cheese, add the well-beaten whites of three eggs.
Mix in lightly and put in cases. Bake a quarter of an hour.


6.--Scotch Collops.

Cut cold roast veal into thin slices, and dust over them a little mace,
nutmeg, cayenne, and salt, and fry them in a little butter. Lay on a
dish and make a gravy by adding 1 tablespoonful of flour, 1/4 of a pint
of water, 1 teaspoonful of anchovy sauce, 1 tablespoonful of lemon
juice, 1/4 of a teaspoonful of lemon peel, 3 tablespoonfuls of cream,
and 1 of sherry. Let boil up once and pour over the meat. Garnish with
lemon and parsley.


7.--Orange Salad.

Slice 3 sweet oranges, after removing the skin and pith, make a dressing
with 3 tablespoonfuls of olive oil, a tablespoonful of lemon juice, and
a pinch of salt. Serve on lettuce leaves.


8.--Oyster Potpie.

Scald one quart of oysters in their own liquor. When boiling take out
the oysters and keep them hot. Stir together a tablespoonful of butter
and two of flour, and moisten with cold milk. Add two small cups of
boiling water to the oyster liquor, season with salt and pepper, and
stir in the flour mixture, and let it cook until it thickens like cream.
Make a light biscuit dough and cut out with a thimble. Drop these into
the boiling mixture, cover the saucepan and cook until the dough is
done. Put the oysters on a hot dish and pour biscuit balls and sauce
over them.


9.--Chicken Cutlets.

Chop cold chicken fine; season with onion-juice, celery salt, pepper,
and chopped parsley. For 2 cupfuls allow a cupful of cream or rich milk.
Heat this (with a bit of soda stirred in) in a saucepan, and thicken
with a tablespoonful of butter rubbed in, one of corn-starch, stirred in
when the cream is scalding. Cook one minute, put in the seasoned
chicken, and cook until smoking hot. Beat two eggs light; take the
boiling mixture from the fire and add gradually to these. Pour into a
broad dish or agate-iron pan and set in a cold place until perfectly
chilled and stiff. Shape with your hands, or with a cutter, into the
form of cutlets or chops. Dip in egg, then in cracker-crumbs. Set on the
ice an hour or two and fry in deep boiling fat. Send around white sauce
with them.--From "The National Cook Book," by Marion Harland and
Christine Terhune Herrick.


10.--Cocoanut Ice Cream.

Put 1 pint of milk over the fire in a double boiler with the grated
yellow rind of a lemon and three well-beaten eggs. Stir until the
mixture begins to thicken. Remove from the fire; add a cup and a half of
sugar, and 1 qt. of cream. Then add a grated cocoanut. Stir until the
custard is cold, add the lemon juice and freeze.


11.--Loaf Corn Bread.

Mix together 2 cupfuls of corn-meal, 1 cupful of flour, 1 teaspoonful of
salt, and 2 of baking powder. Beat together 3 eggs until thick and
light. Add 2-1/2 cupfuls of milk and stir into the dry mixture, adding 2
tablespoonfuls of sugar, and 2 tablespoonfuls of melted butter, and
beating well until the batter is smooth. Grease the pans well, or it
will stick. Have the batter a little more than 2 inches deep in the pans
and bake in a hot oven for about half an hour.--"Table Talk," Phila.


12.--Beef Ragout.

Cut cold roast beef into large slices. Put it into a saucepan with 2
slices of onion, salt and pepper. Pour over it 1/2 a pt. of boiling
water and add 3 tablespoonfuls of soup stock. Stew gently until cooked.


13.--Curried Rice.

Boil 1 cup of rice rapidly for half an hour, drain in a colander and
stand in the oven for a few minutes to dry out the rice. Put 2
tablespoonfuls of butter and a slice of onion into a saucepan. Stir
until the onion is a golden brown, add a tablespoonful of flour. (Take
out the slice of onion.) Stir until smooth, then add a teaspoonful of
curry powder, bring to a boil, add salt. Pour over the rice and serve
hot.


14.--Tapioca Soup.

One qt. of veal or chicken broth, 1 pt. of cream or milk, 1 onion, a
little celery, 1/3 of a cupful of tapioca, 2 cupfuls of cold water, 1
tablespoonful of butter, a small piece of mace, salt and pepper. Wash
and soak the tapioca over night. Cook it in the broth for an hour. Cook
milk, onion, mace and celery together for 15 minutes, then strain into
the tapioca and broth; add the butter, salt and pepper.


15.--Haddock Roes and Bacon.

Haddock roes are much cheaper than shad roes, and are very nice prepared
in this way. Soak for an hour in water and lemon juice, then parboil in
salt and water for ten minutes. Fry brown in a little lard and butter
mixed. Fry the bacon in a separate pan until brown, remove from the pan
and put it in the oven for a few minutes to crisp it. Put the roes in
the centre of a hot platter and garnish the bacon around it.


16.--Rice Moulds.

Wash a teacupful of rice in several waters, put it into a saucepan and
just cover with cold water, and when it boils, add two cupfuls of milk,
and boil until it becomes dry; put it into a mould and press it well.
When cold serve with a garnish of preserves around it or with a boiled
custard.


17.--English Muffins.

Scald 1 pt. of milk and add 1 oz. of butter and let cool; when cool add
1/4 of a yeast cake, a teaspoonful of salt and three cups of flour, beat
well, cover and let rise about two hours. When light, add sufficient
flour to make a soft dough; work lightly and divide into small balls;
put each one into a well-greased muffin ring and let rise again. Then
bake on a hot griddle. When ready to eat tear them open and butter.


18.--Minced Veal and Macaroni.

Mince 3/4 of a lb. of cold veal and 3 ozs. of ham, wet with 1
tablespoonful of gravy. Season with salt and pepper, a little nutmeg, a
quarter of a lb. of bread crumbs and a well-beaten egg. Butter a mould
and line it with some boiled macaroni. Mix more macaroni with the veal
mixture, fill the mould, put a plate on it and steam for 1/2 an hour.
Turn out carefully, pour a good brown gravy _around_ it.


19.--Baked Beans and Tomato Salad.

Stir 3 tablespoonfuls of vinegar very gradually into 6 tablespoonfuls of
oil and a dash of paprika. Add salt, if the beans have not been
seasoned. The oil and vinegar will not unite perfectly. Pour gradually
over a pint of cold baked beans such portions of the dressing as they
will absorb, toss together and arrange on a serving dish. Make a border
of sliced tomatoes around the beans and over these pour the rest of the
dressing.--Janet Hill in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


20.--Tomato Croquettes.

Stew together for 20 minutes 1/2 a can of tomatoes, 1 tablespoonful of
chopped onion, 1 sprig of parsley, 1/2 a bay leaf, 4 cloves and enough
salt and pepper to season highly. Rub through a sieve. In a clean
saucepan melt together 2 tablespoonfuls of butter and 5 tablespoonfuls
of flour. Add 2 cupfuls of the strained tomato and stir and cook for ten
minutes. Take from the fire and set aside until cold. Flour the hands
and carefully mould into small croquettes. Dip each into slightly beaten
egg and roll in fine bread crumbs. Let stand for 20 minutes, then repeat
the dipping and rolling in crumbs. Fry at once in very hot fat and drain
on unglazed paper.--"Table Talk," Phila.


21.--Eggs on Rice.

Cover a platter an inch deep with hot well-boiled rice, to which has
been added 1 tablespoonful of melted butter. On this serve six
well-poached eggs. Garnish with parsley.


22.--Baked Celery.

Parboil a bunch of celery, using only the stalks; cut into two inch
lengths, put them into a baking dish. Rub smooth 2 tablespoonfuls of
butter and 2 of flour, then beat in the yolks of 3 eggs; stir this into
1 qt. of veal stock and pour it over the celery, cover with grated bread
crumbs and dust the top with grated cheese.


23.--Stewed Steak and Oyster Sauce.

Wash 1 pt. of small oysters in a little water, drain into a saucepan and
put this water on to heat. As soon as it comes to a boil skim and set
back. Put 3 tablespoonfuls of butter into a frying pan and when hot, put
in 2 lbs. of round steak; cook ten minutes. Take out the steak and sift
1 tablespoonful of flour into the butter, stir until browned. Add the
oyster liquor and boil 1 minute, season; put back the steak, cover and
simmer 1/2 an hour, then add the oysters and 1 tablespoonful lemon
juice. Boil for 1 minute and serve.


24.--Barley Stew.

Cut 1/2 a lb. of cold meat into dice; wash 1/4 of a cupful of barley,
chop 2 onions very fine, put all into a saucepan and dredge with flour,
season with salt and pepper. Add a qt. of water and simmer about 2
hours. Pare and slice 5 potatoes, add them to the stew and simmer an
hour longer.


25.--Bread Omelet.

Beat 3 eggs separately. To the yolks add 1/2 a cup of milk, pinch of
salt, pepper and 1/2 a cup of bread crumbs. Cut into this very carefully
the well beaten whites; mix lightly. Put 1 tablespoonful of butter into
a frying pan; and as soon as it is hot turn in the mixture. Set it over
a good fire, being careful not to burn. When half done, set the pan in
the oven for a few minutes to set the middle of the omelet. Turn onto a
hot platter and serve.


26.--Calf's Liver Fried in Crumbs.

Wash and parboil slices of liver, then roll each piece, in crumbs, then
in beaten egg, then in crumbs again. Fry in hot lard.


27.--Toad in a Hole.

Cut 1 pt. of meat into 1 inch pieces and put them into a greased baking
dish. Beat 2 eggs very light, add to it 1 pint of milk and pour it
gradually into 6 tablespoonfuls of flour, beating all the time. Strain,
add salt and pepper and pour it over the meat. Bake an hour and serve at
once.


28.--Shrimp Salad.

Shell 1 can of shrimps, arrange on lettuce leaves, serve with French
dressing.


29.--Creamed Corn Beef.

Scald 1 pt. of milk with slice of onion and stalk of celery. Stir into
this 1/4 of a cup each of butter and flour creamed together, let cook 15
minutes, stirring until thickened and then occasionally add a dash of
paprika and strain over 1 pt. of cold cooked corn beef, cut into cubes.
Turn into a pudding dish and cover with half a cup of cracker crumbs,
mixed with 3 tablespoonfuls of melted butter. Set into the oven to
reheat and brown the crumbs.--Janet M. Hill in "Boston Cooking School
Magazine."


30.--Potted Beef.

Take the outside slices left from boiled or braised beef, cut up into
small pieces and pound it thoroughly with a little butter in a mortar;
add salt, pepper and a little powdered mace. Mix thoroughly. Put it into
jelly glasses, pour a coating of clarified butter over the top. Cover
with paper until wanted.


31.--Carolina Philpes.

One gill of rice, boiled soft; when cold, rub it with a spoon. Moisten
with water a gill of rice flour, and mix it with the rubbed rice. Beat 1
egg, very light, and stir in. Bake on a shallow tin plate, split and
butter while hot.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Oyster Loaf.

Take a loaf of bread, cut off the crusts, dig out the centre, making a
box of it, brush it all over with melted butter and put into the oven to
brown. Fill with creamed oysters, cover the top with fried bread crumbs,
put into the oven for a minute and serve. Garnish with parsley.


2.--Broiled Sweetbreads.

For these use veal sweetbreads. Wash and parboil them and cut in half
lengthwise. When cold, season with salt and pepper, and pour over them a
little melted butter. Broil over a clear fire about 5 minutes. Serve
with melted butter and chopped parsley poured over them.


3.--Liver and Onions.

Take 1 lb. of liver, cover it with boiling water and let it stand for
five minutes, then cut it into dice. Into a frying pan put 3 slices of
fat bacon and fry. When the fat is fried out add the liver and 4 onions,
sliced thin; cook until done. Add a tablespoonful of flour, salt, and
pepper. Mix well and serve.


4.--Broiled Beef and Mushroom Sauce.

Stew 1/2 a can of mushrooms in 1 oz. of butter, salt, and cayenne
pepper. Have ready mashed potatoes. Put them in a mound in the centre of
a hot dish; make a hole in the centre, pour in the mushrooms, lay
against the outside of the mound slices of cold roast beef.


5.--Kornlet Omelet.

Melt 1 tablespoonful of butter; cook in this 1 tablespoonful of flour,
1/4 of a tablespoonful each of salt and pepper, then add gradually 1/2 a
cup of kornlet. When the mixture boils, remove from the fire and stir in
the yolks of three eggs beaten until thick, then fold in the whites of
the eggs beaten dry. Turn into an omelet pan, in which two
tablespoonfuls of butter have been melted. Spread evenly in the pan and
let cook until "set" on the bottom, then put into the oven. When a knife
cut down into the omelet comes out clean, score across the top at right
angles to the handle of the pan. Fold and turn onto a heated
dish.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


6.--Liver Rolls.

Have 1/2 a lb. of calf's liver cut in thin slices, parboil for 5
minutes, wipe each piece dry, lay a thin slice of bacon on each slice of
liver, season with salt and pepper, roll up and fasten with a wooden
toothpick, dredge with flour and fry until done in bacon fat or
drippings. When done take out the rolls and thicken the gravy with a
little brown flour. If there is not gravy enough add a little boiling
water. A teaspoonful of mushroom catsup added to the gravy is an
improvement or a squeeze of onion juice.


7.--A Box of Chestnuts.

Shell 1 qt. of chestnuts and cover with boiling water; leave them for
fifteen minutes, then rub off the brown skins. Put them into a
saucepan, cover them with soup stock and let them boil 1/2 an hour; when
done, drain. Save the stock. Into a frying pan put 1 tablespoonful of
butter and when melted add 1 of flour; cook until browned, then add the
stock and stir until it boils; add salt and pepper to taste. Lay the
chestnuts in a box made of fried bread and pour the sauce over.

To make the box, take a loaf of bread, cut off the crust and leave the
sides as smooth as possible. Cut out the centre, leaving a box shaped
piece. Fry this in deep fat.


8.--Curried Hare.

Clean and cut the hare or rabbit as for fricassee. Simmer slowly in just
enough water to cover, add a thickening of 1 tablespoonful each of
butter and flour, season with salt, pepper, and 1 tablespoonful of curry
powder.


9.--Scrambled Eggs with Shad Roes.

When you have shad for dinner scald the roes ten minutes in boiling
water (salted), drain, throw into cold water, leave them there three
minutes, wipe dry, and set in a cold place until you wish to use them.
Cut them across into pieces an inch or more wide, roll them in flour,
and fry to a fine brown. Scramble a dish of eggs, pile the roes in the
centre of a heated platter, and dispose the eggs in a sort of hedge all
around them.--From "The National Cook Book," by Marion Harland and
Christine Terhune Herrick.


10.--Chicken in Celery Sauce.

Take the roots of a bunch of celery, clean and cut it into small pieces,
put them into a saucepan and cover with cold water, about a pint, stew
slowly and when tender put through a vegetable press. Into a saucepan
put 1 tablespoonful each of flour and butter. When melted and rubbed
smooth add 1/2 a cup of milk and the celery. Stir well and when it boils
add salt and pepper. Have 1 pt. of cold chicken cut into dice, and add
them to the boiling sauce when all is hot. Serve with toast points.


11.--Fig Ice Cream.

Put 3-1/2 cupfuls of milk in a double boiler and as soon as it comes to
a boil stir in two tablespoonfuls of corn-starch that has been mixed
with 1/2 a cupful of cold milk. Cook for ten minutes. Beat together 3
eggs and a cup and a half of sugar. Pour the cooked corn-starch and milk
on this, stirring all the time. Put back again on the fire, and add 1
tablespoonful of gelatine which has been dissolved in 4 tablespoonfuls
of cold water. Cook three minutes. Set away to cool. When cold add 1 pt.
of cream and 1 tablespoonful of vanilla and freeze. When the mixture has
been freezing for ten minutes, take off the cover and add 2 cupfuls of
chopped figs. Cover again and freeze hard.


12.--Souffle Biscuit.

Rub 4 ozs. of butter with a qt. of wheat flour, add a little salt. Make
it into a paste with 1/2 a pt. of milk. Knead it well: roll it as thin
as paper. Cut it out with a tumbler, and bake brown.


13.--Fish Chowder.

Put 1/4 of a lb. of bacon into a frying pan with 1 onion sliced; fry a
light brown. Into a saucepan put a layer of potatoes, a layer of fish,
then a few slices of the onion and bacon, then season. Continue until
all has been used. Add 1 qt. of water, cover and let simmer 20 minutes
without stirring. In a double boiler put 1 pt. of milk and break into it
6 water crackers; let it stand a few minutes then add to the chowder.
Let it boil up once and serve. Use 3 lbs. of chopped fish and 3 potatoes
for this.


14.--Cold Duck and Chestnut-Border.

Arrange slices of cold duck on a platter. Shell and blanch 1 qt. of
chestnuts, then boil until soft, drain and put them through a colander.
Add a tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper to taste, arrange around
the cold duck. Garnish with olives or bits of red currant jelly.


15.--Oysters with Madeira Sauce.

Into a saucepan put 2 tablespoonfuls of butter and 1 of flour, 1/2 a cup
of milk, a teaspoonful of salt and a dash of cayenne. Stir until smooth,
then add 25 oysters that have been washed and drained. When cooked take
from the stove and add 2 tablespoonfuls of Madeira wine.


16.--Chicken Fritters.

Season well, pieces of cold roast chicken. Make a fritter batter, stir
the pieces in. Drop by spoonfuls into boiling fat. Lemon juice added to
the seasoning is an improvement.


17.--Baked Rice Cake.

One pt. of cold boiled rice, mixed with a cup of cold milk, 1 egg, about
1/2 a pt. of flour just sufficient to hold it together. Put into a deep
pan and bake 1/2 an hour.


18.--Cheese and Tomato Rarebit.

(Chafing Dish.)

Put a tablespoonful of butter in the blazer and let the melted butter
run over the bottom. Then add 2 cups of cheese grated or cut into dice.
Stir until melted, then add the yolks of 2 eggs, beaten and diluted with
1/2 a cup of tomato purée, 1/4 of a teaspoonful each of soda, salt, and
paprika. Stir constantly until the mixture is smooth, then serve on
bread toasted upon but one side.--Janet M. Hill in "Boston Cooking
School Magazine."


19.--Onion Souffle.

Cook 3 tablespoonfuls of flour in four of butter; add 1/2 a cup of
milk, season with salt and pepper. Mix this with 1 cupful of cooked
onions put through a sieve; add three eggs beaten very light. Turn into
a baking dish and stand in a pan of hot water. Bake 1/2 an hour.


20.--Hungarian Chicken.

Joint a fowl as for fricassee; put it on the fire in enough cold water
to cover it; bring it to a boil slowly, and cook until tender. Unless
the chicken is quite young this should require from 2 to 3 hours. When
it has been simmering about an hour put in a sliced onion, 2 stalks of
celery, 3 sprigs of parsley, and a teaspoonful of paprika. When the
chicken is done, arrange it in a dish, add to the gravy salt to taste
and the juice of 1/2 a lemon and pour it over the chicken.--From "The
National Cook Book," by Marion Harland and Christine Terhune Herrick.


21.--Bean Croquettes.

Soak 1 qt. of white soup beans over night. In the morning, drain, cover
with fresh cold water, bring to a boil, drain, and cover with 1 qt.
boiling water; boil slowly for about an hour. When the beans are tender
press through a sieve then add 1 tablespoonful of vinegar, 2 of
molasses, 2 of butter, salt and cayenne to taste, let the mixture get
cold, when form into croquettes, dip in egg and in bread crumbs and fry
in boiling fat.


22.--Potato Balls.

Beat the yolks of 2 eggs and add them to 2 cups of mashed potatoes, then
add 1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a teaspoonful of onion juice, 2
tablespoonfuls of cream or milk, 1 tablespoonful of butter; mix well,
form into small balls, and egg and bread crumb them. Fry in deep fat.


23.--Bologna Sandwich.

Take off the skin from a bologna sausage. Rub to a paste. Spread slices
of rye bread with butter and if liked, a little French mustard, then a
layer of the bologna. Put two slices together.


24.--Breaded Ham Saute.

Cut cold boiled ham into rather thick slices, cover with a mixture of
pepper, olive oil, and mustard; dip in egg, then in cracker crumbs and
set in a cold place. Fry slices of fat bacon or pork crisp, take them
out and put the breaded ham into the hissing fat. Turn when the lower
side is brown and cook the upper. Garnish with hard-boiled eggs cut in
slices, serving a slice upon each portion of ham.--From "The National
Cook Book," by Marion Harland and Christine Terhune Herrick.


25.--Potato Stew.

Peel and slice 8 large potatoes. Into a deep saucepan put 3 slices of
salt pork cut into small pieces, fry them, and then add the potatoes
with salt, pepper, and 1 large peeled tomato, sliced, cover with water
and let cook until the potatoes are done.


26.--Codfish Hash.

Freshen 1 pt. of salt codfish, add to it 1 qt. chopped, boiled potatoes,
mix well, cut three slices of salt pork in very small pieces and fry
brown; remove half the pork and add the fish and potatoes to the
remainder; let it stand and steam five minutes without stirring; be
careful not to let it burn; then add 1/3 cup of milk, and stir well. Put
the remainder of the pork around the edge of the pan, and a little
butter over it; simmer slowly for 1/2 an hour, until a brown crust is
formed, then turn on a platter and serve.


27.--Sugared Sweet Potatoes.

Boil 6 sweet potatoes, peel them, and let them get cold, then cut in two
lengthwise; lay them with the rounded side down in a baking dish, put a
bit of butter and salt and pepper on each piece. Sprinkle granulated
sugar over all and put in a quick oven to brown for 1/2 an hour.


28.--Cracker Custard.

Take a dozen milk crackers, break them up in small pieces and put into a
pudding dish. Heat 1 qt. of milk, until boiling, sweeten and flavor to
taste with vanilla, lemon or orange, and stir into it three well-beaten
eggs. Take the milk from the fire at once and pour over the broken
crackers. When cool stand on the ice and serve icy cold.


MARCH.


1.--Veal Mould.

Boil 3 eggs, cut in slices crosswise and line the bottom and sides of a
mould. Place in the mould alternate layers of thin slices of cold veal
and ham. Cover with stock well boiled down. Set into the oven for 1/2 an
hour; when cold turn out of mould and garnish with parsley.


2.--Halibut Rechauffe.

Cut an onion into a saucepan, add a cup of water, a little mace and
parsley. When thoroughly boiled, add 1 cup of cream or milk, 1 small
spoonful of butter, 1 tablespoonful of flour, and strain all through a
sieve. Take cold halibut, remove the bones and skin, and flake it,
butter a dish and put in a layer of fish then one of the dressing,
alternately, until the dish is full. Put grated bread crumbs on top and
bake half an hour.


3.--Yorkshire Pork Pie.

Chop lean pork somewhat coarsely; butter a pudding dish and line with
good paste; put in the pork interspersed with minced onion and hard
boiled eggs, cut into bits and sprinkle with pepper, salt, and powdered
sage. Now and then dust with flour and drop in a bit of butter. When all
the meat is in, dredge with flour and stick small pieces of butter quite
thickly all over it. Cover with puff paste, cut a slit in the middle of
the crust and bake 1/2 an hour for each lb. of meat. When it begins to
brown, wash the crust with the white of an egg. It will give a fine
gloss to it.--From "The National Cook Book," by Marion Harland and
Christine Terhune Herrick.


4.--Coffee Fritters.

Cut stale bread into finger-shaped pieces, mix 3/4 of a cup of coffee
infusion, 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 1/4 of a teaspoonful of salt, 1 egg
slightly beaten, and 1/4 of a cup of cream. Dip the pieces of bread into
the liquid and "egg and bread crumb," and fry in deep fat. Drain on soft
paper at the oven door. Serve at once, with sauce.--Janet M. Hill, in
"Boston Cooking School Magazine."

COFFEE SAUCE.--Scald 1-1/2 cups of milk, half a cup of ground coffee,
and let stand 20 minutes. Strain and add the infusion slowly to 1/3 of a
cup of sugar, mixed with 3/4 of a tablespoonful of arrowroot and a few
grains of salt. Cook 5 minutes. Serve hot.--"Boston Cooking School
Magazine."


5.--Finnan-haddie.

Wash the fish thoroughly, soak 1/2 an hour in cold water, skin side up;
then cover with boiling water and let stand 5 minutes. Drain carefully,
then remove the skin and bone. Put the flaked fish into a buttered
serving dish and pour over it white sauce equal in quantity to that of
the fish; cover with buttered crumbs and bake in a hot oven long enough
to brown the crumbs.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School
Magazine."


6.--Roast Pigeons with Bread Sauce.

Stuff the pigeons with ordinary force meat. Roast and serve around a
pyramid of baked tomatoes, and serve with the following sauce.

SAUCE.--Simmer three small onions, sliced, in 1/2 a pint of milk for an
hour. Take out the onions, put in grated bread, a small lump of butter,
pepper, salt, a dessertspoonful of chopped parsley, 1 chili and 1
anchovy (washed and boned) shredded fine. Make it the consistency of
bread sauce.


7.--Oyster Chartreuse.

Boil and mash fine 6 potatoes, add a cupful of milk, salt and pepper to
taste, a little butter, and the whites of 4 eggs beaten to a stiff
froth. Have a plain mould well buttered and sprinkle the bottom and
sides with bread crumbs. Line the mould with the potatoes and let stand
for a few minutes. Put a slice of onion and 1 pt. of cream or milk to
boil. Mix two tablespoonfuls of flour with a little cream or milk, and
stir into the boiling cream. Season well with salt and pepper and cook
eight minutes. Let the oysters come to a boil in their own liquor, skim
them out and add to the cream, take out the piece of onion. Season and
turn carefully into the mould. Cover with mashed potato, being careful
not to add too much at once. Bake 1/2 an hour. Take from the oven about
ten minutes before dishing and let it cool a little. Then place a large
dish over the mould and turn out carefully. Caution should be taken that
every part of the mould has a thick coating of the potato, and when the
covering is put on, no opening is left for the sauce to escape.


8.--Potatoes au Gratin.

Slice eight boiled potatoes, and put a layer of them in a buttered
baking dish; make a white sauce with 1 tablespoonful each of butter and
flour and a cup of milk; season with cayenne and salt; cover the layer
of potatoes with a layer of sauce, and so continue until the dish is
full. Sprinkle the top with bread crumbs and grated cheese; bake about
20 minutes.


9.--Mutton Kidneys.

Cut some mutton kidneys, open down the centre, do not separate them;
peel, and pass a skewer across them to keep them open, season and dip
them in melted butter, broil over a clear fire, doing the cut side
first; remove the skewers; have ready a little butter mixed with some
chopped parsley, salt, pepper and a little lemon juice and a dash of
nutmeg; put a small piece of this butter in the centre of each kidney
and serve hot.


10.--Beefsteak and Kidney Pudding.

Cut 2 lbs. of round steak into small pieces and slice one beef kidney.
Line a deep dish with suet crust, leaving a small piece of crust to
overlap the edge, then cover the bottom with a portion of the steak and
kidney, season with salt and pepper, then add more steak and kidney,
season again. Put in sufficient stock or water to come to within 2
inches of the top of the dish. Moisten the edges of the crust with cold
water, cover the pudding over, press the two crusts together that the
gravy may not escape and turn up the overhanging paste. Steam for 3 or 4
hours.


11.--Hot Pot.

Cut nice pieces of cold pork and put them into a deep pan. (If there are
bones put them on to simmer and make a gravy, if not, use stock.)
Parboil some potatoes and onions, cut them into rather large pieces and
mix them in well with the meat, season with pepper, salt and a little
sage, and add the gravy. Put a layer of potatoes on the top and brown in
the oven.


12.--Lobster Patties.

Mince the boiled lobster meat, add to it 6 drops anchovy sauce, lemon
juice and cayenne to taste and 4 tablespoonfuls of béchamel sauce. Line
patty pans with light paste. Stir the lobster mixture over the fire for
5 minutes and put in the cases.

BÉCHAMEL SAUCE.--One small bunch of parsley, 2 cloves, small bunch of
herbs, salt to taste, 1 cup white stock and 1 cup of milk, 1
tablespoonful of arrowroot.


13.--Curried Fowl.

Chop fine pieces of cold fowl, and brown 2 onions in 2 ozs. butter, add
1 teaspoonful flour, 1 dessertspoonful curry powder, 1 tablespoonful
lemon juice, 1/2 pint gravy, season with salt and pepper. Stew 20
minutes.


14.--Minced Collops.

Mince very fine 1 lb. of beef, 1 onion, 2 ozs. suet; add a little flour,
pepper and salt. Stew half an hour, stirring frequently.


15.--Crescent Croquettes.

Roll some light pie crust very thin and cut in half moons. Chop beef or
mutton very fine, add a little summer savory, parsley, salt and pepper.
Lay some of this between two layers of paste. Egg and bread crumb them
and fry in boiling fat for ten minutes.


16.--German Way of Cooking Chickens.

Stuff the chickens with a force meat made of French rolls, a little
butter, egg, finely-chopped onion, parsley, thyme, and grated lemon
peel; then lard and bread crumb them, putting a piece of fat over the
breasts that they may not become too brown. Place them in a stewpan with
1 oz. of butter, leave uncovered for a short time, then cover and bake
about 1-1/2 hours. Half an hour before serving add a small cup of cream
or milk and baste thoroughly over a hotter fire.


17.--Breast of Lamb Broiled.

Heat and grease a gridiron, broil a breast of lamb first on one side,
then on the other. Rub over with butter, pepper and salt. Serve on a hot
dish with mint sauce.


18.--Onion Soup.

Simmer 2 finely minced onions for 3/4 of an hour in a qt. of stock. Rub
through a colander and put back again on the stove. Stir 2
tablespoonfuls each of flour and butter together until smooth; add to
the soup. In another saucepan heat a cup of milk and a pinch of soda,
add this to the stock, beat in the white of an egg, season with salt and
pepper, and minced parsley.


19.--Saratoga Corn Cake.

Sift together 2 cups of pastry flour, 1-1/2 cups of granulated yellow
corn-meal, 1/2 a cup of sugar, 1/2 a teaspoonful of salt, and 1
teaspoonful of soda. Beat 2 eggs without separating, add 2 cups of thick
sour cream or milk, and three tablespoonfuls of melted butter, and stir
into the dry mixture. Beat thoroughly and bake in a large shallow pan
for 25 minutes.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


20.--Clam Pie No. 1.

(An old New England seashore dish.)

Chop the clams if large, saving the liquor that runs from them. Heat,
strain, and season this and cook the chopped clams for 10 minutes in
it. Have a thick top crust of good pastry, but none at the bottom of the
bake dish. Fill with alternate layers of the minced clams, season with
salt, pepper, a few drops of onion juice, some bits of butter and a few
teaspoonfuls of strained tomato sauce, and thin slices of boiled
potatoes. Dredge each layer of clams with flour. Lastly, pour in a
cupful of clam juice, put on the crust and bake half an hour in a quick
oven.--From "The National Cook Book," by Marion Harland and Christine
Terhune Herrick.


21.--Collared Head.

Boil 1/2 a pig's head until the meat comes from the bone, chop it fine
and add salt and pepper and a slice of onion minced very fine. Stir all
well together and turn into a mould. Serve cold.


22.--Lobster Creams.

Whip 1/2 a pint of cream stiff, season it highly with cayenne and salt.
Cut up 1/2 a boiled lobster and mix with the cream. Put into cases.
Garnish with parsley and some of the lobster coral.


23.--Western Balls.

Put 1/2 a pound of boiled potatoes through a sieve, mix with them 2 ozs.
of grated ham, a little butter, a well-beaten egg, cayenne and salt to
taste; if not moist enough, add a little cream, form into small balls,
egg and bread crumb them and fry a golden brown in deep fat.


24.--Zephyr Eggs.

Beat four eggs very light, add to them a pint of cream, season with salt
and pepper. Butter small moulds and pour in the mixture, stand the
moulds in a pan with about 2 inches of water, steam 20 minutes. Turn
them out and pour a rich brown gravy around them. Garnish with chopped
olives and red chillies.


25.--English Bread Pudding.

Grease small cups and fill 2/3 full with bread crumbs and a little
chopped candied fruit; beat 2 eggs without separating and 2
tablespoonfuls of sugar and 1-1/2 cups of milk. Pour this carefully over
the crumbs and stand the cups in a pan of boiling water and bake in a
moderate oven 15 minutes. Turn out and serve with a vanilla or wine
sauce.


26.--Tomato Jelly Salad.

Cook a can of tomatoes with 1/2 an onion, a stalk of celery, a bay leaf
and pepper and salt. Dissolve 3/4 of a box of gelatine in 1/2 a cup of
cold water. Add the gelatine to the tomato and strain into small round
moulds; serve each one on a lettuce leaf with a circle of mayonnaise
dressing around.


27.--Clams Sauteed and Creamed.

Chop fine two strings of soft shell clams after washing them. Melt one
large tablespoonful of butter in a frying pan, add the clams and stir
frequently until they are nicely browned. Keep well broken with a spoon.
When browned dredge over them 1 heaping tablespoonful of butter and stir
again until it is absorbed and browned, then add gradually 1 cupful of
milk, stirring until it is smooth and thick. Season well with salt and
pepper, simmer for 5 minutes and serve on toast.--"Table Talk," Phila.


28.--Cheese Fondue No. 1.

Beat 5 eggs without separating. When light, add 1 cupful of grated
Swiss or mild American cheese, 1/2 a teaspoonful of salt, 1/4 of a
teaspoonful of white pepper, and three tablespoonfuls of butter cut into
bits. Cook in a double boiler until the cheese has melted and the
mixture is smooth and as thick as custard. Pour over hot buttered toast
and send at once to the table.--"Table Talk," Phila.


29.--Beef Cutlets.

Trim and cut like cutlets some slices of beef; season. Fry on both sides
until done; sprinkle over them chopped parsley, place on a dish and
serve with a brown gravy.


30.--German Prune Cake.

For this use a recipe for short cake adding more milk to make it into a
thick batter. Turn into a shallow, oblong pan and over the top press
lightly into the mixture a close layer of partly cooked prunes. Sprinkle
thickly with granulated sugar and bake in a quick oven. Serve hot.--From
"Table Talk," Phila.


31.--Dormers.

Chop cold beef very fine, and season it with salt and pepper, then add
some onion chopped fine and fried previously, also some rice boiled very
dry. Mix all well together and make into small rounds, flour them and
fry until brown. Serve with a hot gravy poured over them.


APRIL.


1.--Potato and Meat Turnovers.

Mix with mashed potatoes a few spoonfuls of flour, a little salt and
baking powder in the proportion of half a teaspoonful to 1/2 a cupful of
flour. Use only sufficient flour to roll out in a 1/2 inch sheet. Cut
into circles the size of a saucer, lay on each a spoonful of seasoned
meat, fold over and pinch the edges together. Lay on a greased pan,
brush each with milk and bake brown in a hot oven.--From "Table Talk,"
Phila.


2.--Browned Potato Puree.

Put 3 tablespoonfuls of good dripping into your soup-kettle and fry in
it 1 dozen potatoes which have been pared, quartered, and laid in cold
water for an hour. With them should go into the boiling fat a large,
sliced onion. Cook fast but do not let them scorch. When they are
browned add two quarts of boiling water, cover the pot, and simmer
until the potatoes are soft and broken. Rub through a colander back into
the kettle and stir in a great spoonful of butter rolled in browned
flour, a tablespoonful of browned parsley, salt and pepper to taste. In
another saucepan make a sugarless custard of a cup of boiling milk and 2
well-beaten eggs; take from the fire and beat fast for 1 minute, put
into a heated tureen, beat in the potato and serve.--From "The National
Cook Book," by Marion Harland and Christine Terhune Herrick.


3.--Buttered Lobster.

Mince fine the meat of a boiled lobster, mix the coral with it, and the
green fat, 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, 1/4 of a lb. of butter and a
saltspoon each of cayenne and made mustard. Let all get very hot. Serve
on a hot dish with lettuce leaves and hard boiled egg.


4.--Tomato Croutes.

Take small tomatoes, scald and peel them, then cut a slice from the stem
end. Place them, the cut side down, on slices of buttered bread, put
them in a buttered baking tin, season with salt and pepper, bake 1/2 an
hour. Serve with cold roast beef.


5.--English Monkey.

Soak 1 cup of stale bread crumbs in 1 cup of milk for 15 minutes. Into a
saucepan put 1 teaspoonful of butter and 1/2 cup cream cheese, melt and
add the crumbs, also a well-beaten egg, 1/2 teaspoonful salt and a pinch
of cayenne. Cook for 3 minutes and pour it on toasted crackers.


6.--Shad Roe Croquettes.

Boil the roe for 15 minutes in salted water; then drain and mash. Mix 4
tablespoonfuls each of butter and corn-starch and stir into a pint of
boiling milk. Add to this the roe and 1 teaspoonful of salt, the juice
of a lemon, cayenne and a grating of nutmeg. Boil up once and let get
cold. Shape into croquettes and fry.


7.--Cerkestal (TURKISH).

Take pieces of cold chicken. Make a sauce with 1 onion, sliced, 6
walnuts, chopped, 1/2 cup stock, cayenne and salt. Cook the chicken in
this and when hot take it out and thicken the gravy with a little flour.


8.--Squash Bread.

Take 1 cup of stewed and strained squash, add to it 2 tablespoonfuls of
sugar and 1 teaspoonful of salt; melt 1 tablespoonful of butter in 1-1/2
cups of scalded milk, and when lukewarm, add 1/2 cup yeast, and flour
enough to knead; knead 1/4 hour, let rise until light; knead again and
put it into greased tins, let rise again and bake.


9.--Fried Whitebait.

Clean, wash and wipe dry, season with salt, roll in flour and fry in hot
fat. Melt 1 tablespoonful of butter, add a squeeze of lemon juice and a
little chopped parsley, pour this over the fish and serve.


10.--Zephyrs.

Whip 1/4 of a pt. of cream. Dissolve 1 good tablespoonful of gelatine in
1/2 a pt. of milk. Warm the milk in which the gelatine is dissolved, add
2 ozs. of grated Parmesan cheese. Stir on the fire for a few moments,
take it off, season with pepper and salt, add the whipped cream, pour
into small moulds and let it set. When cold turn out and garnish with
aspic cut into dice.


11.--Spider Cake.

Beat 2 eggs very light, add 1 cup sour milk and 1 cup of sweet milk;
stir into this 2 cups corn-meal and 1/2 cup of flour, 1 tablespoonful of
sugar and 1 teaspoonful each of salt and soda. Mix, and heat thoroughly,
and then pour it into the spider; pour over it 1 cup of sweet milk, but
_do not stir it into the batter_. Bake in a hot oven 1/2 an hour. Slip
it carefully onto a platter and serve at once.


12.--Hungarian Patties.

Make a paste with 1/2 a lb. of flour, 1/4 of a lb. of lard, the yolk of
1 egg, 1/2 a teaspoonful of lemon juice, and 1/2 a teaspoonful of baking
powder. Line some patty pans with this paste and fill with the following
mixture. Mince 2 ozs. of chicken and 6 mushrooms, and an anchovy, season
with cayenne, salt, and a little lemon peel. Mix enough white sauce with
this, put into the patty pans, cover with paste, brush them over with an
egg, bake in a hot oven.


13.--Clam Pie, No. 2.

Put the required number of small, soft-shell clams into a saucepan, and
bring to a boil, in their own liquor. Cut cold boiled potatoes into
small cubes. Line a pudding-dish with pie-crust around the sides, and
put a tea-cup in the centre of the dish to support the top crust when it
is added. Put a layer of clams, then the potatoes, salt and pepper, and
bits of butter; dredge with flour when all the clams and potatoes are
used. Add the liquor and a little water if necessary. Put on the top
crust, cutting several slits in it for the steam to escape. Bake 45
minutes.


14.--Broiled Live Lobster.

Kill the lobster by inserting a sharp knife in its back between the body
and tail shells cutting the spinal cord. Split the shell the entire
length of the back, remove the stomach and intestinal canal, crack the
large claws and lay the fish as flat as possible. Brush the meat with
melted butter, season with salt and pepper, place in a broiler, and with
the flesh side down, cover and broil slowly until a delicate brown,
about 20 minutes. Turn the broiler and broil 10 minutes longer. Serve
hot, with a sauce of melted butter.


15.--Cheese Fondu, No. 2.

One cup of bread-crumbs very fine and dry, 2 scant cups of _fresh_ milk,
1/2 a lb. of grated cheese, 3 eggs beaten very light, a small spoonful
of melted butter, pepper and salt, a pinch of soda dissolved in hot
water and stirred into the milk. Soak the crumbs in the milk, beat into
these the eggs, and butter a baking dish. Pour the fondu into it, then
sprinkle crumbs over the top. Bake in rather a quick oven until a
delicate brown. Serve at once, as it will fall.


16.--Mutton Custard.

Fill a buttered custard cup lightly with stale bread-crumbs (centre of
the loaf), and cooked mutton (chicken is more dainty), finely chopped.
Beat an egg, add 1/2 a cup of milk, and a few grains of salt; pour the
mixture over the bread and meat. Bake in a pan of hot water, or cook on
the top of the stove, until the egg is lightly set. _Do not allow the
water about the egg to boil._--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School
Magazine."


17.--Grape Fruit Salad.

Cut a grape-fruit in half, and scoop out the pulp in as large pieces as
possible, and lay them on lettuce leaves. Make a dressing with two
tablespoonfuls of sherry wine, and sugar to taste.


18.--Asparagus in Rolls.

Cut off the tips of a well-boiled bunch of asparagus, mix with a thick
cream sauce, season well, and fill with this the crusts of baker's
rolls.


19.--Walnut Salad, No. 1.

Crack and parboil 1/2 a lb. of English walnuts, rub off the brown skin
and when cold serve on lettuce leaves, with a French dressing.


20.--Oatmeal Bread.

Boil 2 cups of oatmeal as for porridge, add 1/2 teaspoonful salt, and
when cool, 1/2 cup molasses, and 1/2 a yeast cake; stir in enough wheat
flour to make as stiff as it can be stirred with a spoon; put it into 2
well-greased tin pans and let stand in a warm place until very light;
bake about an hour and a quarter. Do not cut until the next day.


21.--Kidney Omelet.

Take 3 eggs, 1 kidney, 2-1/2 ozs. of butter; skin the kidney and cut it
very small, fry it in some of the butter until cooked. Mix 3 eggs,
beating yolks and whites separately, add salt and cayenne, and the
kidney, melt the butter in the pan and fry the omelet until done, turn
and serve.


22.--Deviled Cheese.

Melt in a saucepan 1/2 a lb. of dairy cheese, add 1/4 of a cupful of
cream or milk, a small piece of butter, 1 beaten egg, 1 teaspoonful
Worcestershire sauce, a tablespoonful finely chopped cucumber pickle;
season highly with salt and cayenne. Melt the cheese over hot water and
stir all the ingredients until thick and smooth. Serve at once on
buttered toast.


23.--Veal and Ham Pates.

Mince cold cooked veal and ham in the proportion of 2/3 veal and 1/3
ham. A few mushrooms are a pleasing addition. To each cup of the mixture
allow a tablespoonful of fine crumbs; season highly with salt, a dash of
cayenne, a little lemon juice, and a teaspoonful of catsup. Wet up with
stock, or butter and water, and heat in a vessel set in another of hot
water, to a smoking boil. Take from the fire, stir in a beaten egg and a
glass of sherry, and fill in shells of pastry that have been baked
empty. The shells should be hot when the mince goes in. Set in the oven
for 2 or 3 minutes, but the mixture must not cook.--From "The National
Cook Book," by Marion Harland and Christine Terhune Herrick.


24.--Asparagus Salad.

Boil a bunch of asparagus in rapid boiling salted water. When cooked put
on a dish to cool. Cut off the tender part and place four or five stalks
on a large lettuce leaf. Put a teaspoonful of thick mayonnaise dressing
on the end of each bunch and serve.

25.--Chicken Pie (CONCORD STYLE).

Roll puff paste 1/4 of an inch thick, cut in diamond shaped pieces,
chill thoroughly, and bake about 15 minutes. Put a stewed or fricasseed
chicken into a serving dish, reheat the pastry and arrange on top of the
chicken.--Janet M. Hill in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


26.--Parmesan Puffs.

Put 4 ozs. of fine bread crumbs, 4 ozs. of grated Parmesan cheese, 2
ozs. of butter and a little salt and cayenne into a mortar, and pound
them thoroughly. Bind the mixture together with a well-beaten egg and
form into small balls, egg and bread crumb them and fry a light brown.
Drain them and serve very hot.


27.--French Bean Omelet.

Cut up 2 tablespoonfuls of boiled French beans and stir them into 4
well-beaten eggs; add 2 tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese, salt
and pepper to taste. Mix well, put into an omelet pan with 2 ozs. of
butter, and fry until done. Serve very hot.


28.--Curry of Lobster.

Remove the meat from a 3 lbs. boiled lobster and cut into 2 inch
pieces; season with salt and a little cayenne, and set away where it is
cold. Heat hot in a frying pan, 3 tablespoonfuls of butter, and then add
2 of flour and 1 small teaspoonful of curry powder. Stir this until
browned and then add gradually 1-1/2 cupfuls of stock and season to
taste. Add the lobster, cook 6 minutes, then pour over toast arranged on
a warm dish. Garnish with parsley. If onion is liked a few slices may be
fried with the butter before the flour and curry powder are added.


29.--Champignons en Caisse.

Peel and cut small 12 large mushrooms, put them into well buttered china
cases. Add pepper, salt and chopped parsley.


30.--Potato and Meat Puffs.

Take 1 cup cold meat, chopped fine, and season with salt and pepper.
Make a paste with 1 cup of mashed potato and 1 egg, roll out with a
little flour, cut it round with a saucer, put the meat on 1 half, fold
it over like a puff, pinch the edges together in scallops, fry a light
brown.


MAY.


1.--Kedgeree (FISH).

Take equal parts of cold fish (free from skin and bone) boiled rice and
some hard boiled eggs. Chop the fish and eggs; mix with the rice, add
bits of butter, about a tablespoonful in all, season with salt and
pepper, and a sprinkle of curry powder. Warm in a saucepan and serve as
hot as possible.


2.--Veal Eggs in a Nest a la Turin.

Mince cold veal, season to taste, and wet slightly with a good gravy. To
each cupful allow a tablespoonful of finely minced blanched almonds, or
the same quantity of chopped mushrooms. Bind the mixture with a beaten
egg, stir over the fire one minute and set aside to cool. Flour your
hands and form into balls the size and shape of an egg; let them get
cold, roll in egg and cracker-dust and fry in deep fat. Arrange upon a
platter a border of spaghetti, boiled tender in salted water and
drained. Butter plentifully and pour carefully over it a cupful of
strained tomato sauce. Heap the eggs in the centre.--From "The National
Cook Book," by Marion Harland and Christine Terhune Herrick.


3.--Baked Cheese and Rice.

Make a white sauce with one heaping tablespoonful each of flour and
butter, 1/3 of a teaspoonful of white pepper and 1 cupful and a half of
milk. In a deep baking dish place alternate layers of rice, sauce, and
grated cheese, having the last layer cheese. Place in a hot oven until
brown.--From "Table Talk," Phila.


4.--Stewed Trout.

Wash and wipe the fish dry. Lay it in a saucepan with half an onion; cut
in thin slices, parsley, two cloves, 1 blade of mace, two bay leaves,
thyme, salt and pepper, 1 pint of meat stock, a glass of claret or port
wine. Simmer gently for 1/2 an hour. Take out the fish, thicken the
gravy with a little flour and butter rubbed together. Stir for five
minutes. Pour over the fish and serve.


5.--Squash Griddle Cakes.

Mix 1 pt. of flour, 1 teaspoonful of baking powder, 1 teaspoonful of
salt, and 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar together; sift them; add 2
well-beaten eggs, a pint of milk, and 2 cupfuls of boiled squash that
has been strained. Beat until light. Bake on the griddle or add a little
more flour and bake in muffin rings.


6.--Jellied Chicken.

Take a fowl, cut it up in joints, and put it in a saucepan with enough
water to cover it, a pinch of mace, a teaspoonful of salt and a little
pepper. Let it stew until the meat will leave the bones. Then take the
meat out, remove the bones and arrange the meat nicely in a mould.
Season the liquor with a little more salt and pepper and dissolve in it
1/4 of an ounce of gelatine. Pour over the chicken. The mould may be
lined with slices of hard boiled egg.


7.--Jambalayah (A CREOLE DISH).

Take 1 large cupful of cold meat, 1 of boiled rice and 1 of stewed
tomatoes. Let these cook well, season highly; fill a baking dish, cover
with crumbs and bits of butter, and brown in the oven.


8.--Lobster (SOUTHERN WAY).

Prepare as for salad, only cutting in larger pieces. One tablespoonful
of flour, one of butter rubbed together, the yolk of an egg, one
teaspoonful of curry powder, salt and pepper and a cupful of cream. Mix
and pour over the lobster. To be either baked or stewed.


9.--Rice Balls.

To 1 pt. of boiled rice add, while still hot, 1/2 a cup of thick white
sauce, the well-beaten yolk of 1 egg, 1/2 of a teaspoonful of salt, 3
tablespoonfuls of grated cheese and a dash of cayenne. Set aside until
cold, then mould into small balls; dip each one into slightly-beaten
egg, roll in fine bread crumbs and fry in smoking hot fat.--From "Table
Talk," Phila.


10.--Cod Fish Puffs.

Take 4 cups of mashed potatoes, 3 cups of salt cod fish (which has
previously been freshened) picked fine, a small lump of butter and 2
well-beaten eggs; beat all together very light, put into a greased
baking dish, cover the top with cracker or bread crumbs and bits of
butter; brown in the oven and serve hot.


11.--French Toast.

To 1 egg well-beaten, add 1 cup of milk and a pinch of salt. Dip slices
of bread into this mixture, allowing each slice to become very moist.
Brown on a hot-buttered griddle, spread with butter and serve at once.


12.--Cheese Scallop.

Soak 1 cup of dry bread crumbs in fresh milk. Beat into this 3 eggs; add
1 tablespoonful of butter and half a pound of grated cheese; cover the
top with grated crumbs and bake until well-browned. Serve with cold
tongue.


13.--Lobster a la Mode Francaise.

Pick out the meat of one boiled lobster; cut into small bits. Put four
tablespoonfuls of white stock, two tablespoonfuls of cream, a little
pounded mace, cayenne and salt into a stewpan. When hot, add the lobster
and simmer for six minutes. Serve in shells. Cover with bread crumbs;
place small bits of butter over, and brown.


14.--Beet Salad.

Slice and cut into fancy shapes cold boiled beets; heap them in a salad
bowl; cover with a thin sauce tartar. Garnish with young lettuce leaves.


15.--Puree of Dried Beans.

Mash and soak 1 qt. of dried beans in lukewarm water over night. In the
morning drain and cover with fresh cold water, boil an hour, drain
again; just cover with fresh water; add quarter of a teaspoonful of
cooking soda, 1 lb. of ham, a bay leaf, an onion and a carrot; boil
until soft. When done, take out the ham and press the vegetables,
(onion, carrot and beans) through a sieve. Return them to the kettle,
add a tablespoonful of butter and enough milk to make the required
thickness. Season with salt and pepper. Let boil once and serve.


16.--Sweetbread Salad.

Take 6 beef sweetbreads, parboil and cut fine. Mix well with mayonnaise
dressing, pile on lettuce leaves, garnish with hard boiled egg.


17.--Anchovy Canapes.

Cut stale bread a third of an inch thick and cut out with a small round
cutter, and fry a golden-brown in butter or lard; boil two eggs hard,
bone and fillet the anchovies and curl two fillets on each piece of
toast and fill up the centre with the white of the eggs chopped fine and
the yellow rubbed through a sieve.


18.--Beef Bubble and Squeak (ENGLISH).

Fry thin slices of cold roast beef, taking care not to dry them up. Lay
them on a flat dish and cover with fried greens. The greens are prepared
from young cabbage, which should be boiled until tender, well drained
and minced fine and placed until quite hot, in a frying-pan, with
butter, a slice of onion and season with salt and pepper.


19.--Planked Shad.

Have a well-seasoned plank about 2 ft. long and 1-1/2 wide, hickory is
the best wood. Clean the fish, split it open and tack it to the plank
with four good-sized tacks, skin side to the board. Dredge it with salt
and pepper. Put the plank before the fire with the large end down. Then
change and put the small end down; when done spread with butter and
serve just as it is.


20.--Cheese Timbales.

Make a sauce with 2 tablespoonfuls each of butter and flour and half a
cup each of thin cream, white stock and milk. Melt in this half a pound
of grated cheese, add a dash of salt and paprika and pour over three
whole eggs and the yolks of 4 beaten until a spoonful can be taken up.
Turn into buttered timbale moulds and bake standing in a pan of hot
water (the water should not boil), until the centres are firm. Serve hot
with cream or tomato sauce.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School
Magazine."


21.--Angels on Horseback.

Cut the required amount of bacon into little squares (large enough to
roll an oyster in), sprinkle over each one some finely chopped parsley,
lay on the oysters, season with pepper and lemon juice, roll up and
fasten with a skewer and fry in butter until the bacon is cooked. Cut
stale bread into squares and fry a golden-brown and lay on each slice an
oyster. Serve very hot.


22.--Asparagus Omelet.

Boil a bunch of asparagus and when tender cut the green ends into very
small pieces, mix them with four well-beaten eggs and add a little salt
and pepper. Melt a piece of butter, about two ounces, in an omelet-pan,
pour in the mixture, stir until it thickens, fold over and serve with
clear brown gravy.


23.--Beef Collops.

Have two pounds of rump steak, cut thin, and divide it into pieces about
3 inches long; beat these with the blade of a knife and dredge with
flour. Put them in a frying-pan with a tablespoon of butter and let them
fry for three minutes, then lay them in a small stewpan and pour over
them the gravy, add a little more butter mixed smooth with a little
flour, and a small onion chopped fine, a pickled walnut and 1
teaspoonful of capers. _Simmer_ for ten minutes and serve in a covered
dish.


24.--Fried Bananas.

Cut lengthwise 3 bananas, roll them in flour and fry in butter until a
light-brown. Serve with cold duck.


25.--Philadelphia Relish.

Mix 2 cups of shredded cabbage, 2 green peppers, cut in shreds or finely
chopped, 1 teaspoonful of celery seed, 1/4 of a teaspoonful of mustard
seed, 1/2 a teaspoonful of salt, 1/4 of a cup of brown sugar, and 1/4 of
a cup of vinegar.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


26.--Beignets Souffles.

Boil 3 ozs. of butter in 1/2 a pint of water and add flour enough to
make the mixture stiff enough to leave the sides of the pan, then add
the yolks of three eggs and beat the mixture well. When cold, add the
whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth, with one dessertspoonful of
sugar and a flavoring of vanilla; fry in spoonfuls in hot fat. Serve at
once. Grated cheese and cayenne pepper may be substituted for the sugar
and vanilla.


27.--Waldorf Salad.

Chop equal quantities of celery and apples, quite fine. Serve on lettuce
leaves, with French dressing.


28.--Beef Rissoles.

Mince a pound of cold beef fine and mix with this three-quarters of a
pound of bread crumbs, seasoned with salt and pepper and 1 teaspoonful
of minced lemon peel. Make all into a thick paste with one or two eggs,
form into balls and fry a golden-brown. Garnish with parsley and serve a
brown sauce with them.


29.--Potatoes Cooked in Stock.

Pare and slice six large potatoes, put in a saucepan, cover with stock,
season, cook until potatoes are tender, add tablespoon butter and the
same of chopped parsley. Stir carefully and serve with cold meat.


30.--Spanish Rice.

Boil 1/2 a lb. of rice. Dry it well and fry it with a little butter
until lightly browned. Stir into it two large toasted tomatoes and a
tablespoonful of grated cheese. Season with pepper and salt. Serve very
hot.


31.--Clam Chowder.

Take 1 qt. of clams and chop them fine. Fry two slices of salt pork in
an iron pot. When the fat is fried out, take the brittle out, put into
the fat 2 slices of onion, then a layer of sliced potatoes, then a layer
of chopped clams, sprinkle well with salt and pepper, then a layer of
onion, then the bits of fried pork, cut into small pieces, add a layer
of broken crackers. Do this until all is used. Then add the clam liquor
and enough water to cover. Cook 20 minutes. Add 2 cups of hot milk just
before serving. Use for this 6 large crackers, 1 onion, 6 potatoes, 1
qt. clams.


JUNE.


1.--Stuffed Fillets of Flounders.

Take fillets from a flounder weighing 2-1/2 lbs., season with salt and
pepper, and a few drops of onion juice, if desired. Spread on one half
of each fillet a tablespoonful of mashed potato (about 1 cup should be
prepared) mixed with the beaten yolk of an egg, and seasoned with 1
tablespoonful of butter, 1/4 of a teaspoonful of salt and a dash of
pepper. Fold the other half of each fillet over the potato, cover with
crumbs, dip in the white of egg beaten with 2 tablespoonfuls of water,
and again cover with crumbs and fry in deep fat. Drain on soft paper,
then insert a short piece of macaroni in the pointed end of each fillet
and cover this with a paper frill. Garnish and serve with tomato
sauce.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


2.--Mutton Stew with Canned Peas.

Cut a breast of mutton into small pieces; dredge with flour and sauté to
a golden brown in drippings or the fat of salt pork; cover with boiling
water and let simmer until tender, seasoning with salt and pepper during
the latter part of the cooking. Take out the meat, skim off the fat and
add one can of peas drained, reheated in boiling water, and drained
again; add more seasoning, if needed, and pour over the mutton on the
serving-dish.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


3.--Potato Souffle.

Bake 4 large potatoes; when soft scoop out the inside and rub through a
fine sieve. Boil an oz. of butter and a quarter of a pint of milk; add
the yolks of three eggs, one by one, beating well together with a wooden
spoon. Beat the whites of the eggs and a pinch of salt in another dish,
mix all together carefully, and bake in a well-greased tin, in a hot
oven until it rises well, and is a pale brown in color. The tin should
be only 1/2 full. If it is desired for a dessert add 15 drops of
vanilla, and sugar to taste.


4.--Stewed Kidney with Macaroni.

Take 3 kidneys, skin them, remove the fat and cut into thin slices,
season with salt, cayenne, and minced herbs; fry on both sides in
butter, then stew in 1/2 a pt. of gravy flavored with tomatoes. Turn in
a dish and cover the top with 2 ozs. of boiled macaroni; sprinkle some
Parmesan cheese over the top and brown.


5.--Hot Ham Sandwiches.

Spread bread cut for sandwiches with chopped ham, season with a little
made mustard and press together in pairs. Beat an egg, add 1/2 a cup of
rich milk, and in the mixture soak the sandwiches a few moments. Heat a
tablespoonful of butter, and in this brown the sandwiches, first on one
side and then on the other. Drain on soft paper and serve at
once.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


6.--Friars' Eggs.

Cook 1/3 of a cupful of stale bread-crumbs in 1/3 of a cupful of milk to
a smooth paste. Add to it 1 cup lean ham, chopped fine, 1 teaspoonful
made mustard, 1/2 a saltspoonful cayenne pepper, and mix smooth with 1
raw egg. Remove the shells from 6 hard-boiled eggs, and cover them with
this mixture. Fry in hot fat until brown, drain, and serve hot or cold
on a bed of parsley.


7.--Lobster in a Chafing Dish.

Cut a small boiled lobster into small pieces, pour over them four
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice, add salt and pepper, and mix well. Melt 2
tablespoonfuls of butter in the chafing dish, add the lobster and serve
hot.


8.--Asparagus a l'Indienne.

Make a curry sauce as in curried macaroni, and heat in it a cup of
asparagus tips. Serve with sippets of toast.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston
Cooking School Magazine."


9.--Chicken Short-cake.

Mix 2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder with 1 pt. of flour. Rub it into a
half cup of butter, add 1 cup of sweet milk. Bake quickly. Have prepared
nice pieces of cold chicken, heat with gravy or a little soup stock,
season well. Add some chopped parsley, pour over the short-cake and
serve at once.


10.--Newport Tea Cakes.

Sift together 3 cups of sifted flour and a teaspoonful of salt. Beat the
yolks of three eggs until very light, add 1 pt. of milk and stir into
the dry ingredients. Then beat the whites of three eggs, beaten dry.
Bake in small buttered tins in a very hot oven.--Janet M. Hill, in
"Boston Cooking School Magazine."


11.--Veal and Tomato Salad.

Take thick slices of cold veal and remove all the fat. Cut into dice,
chop up tomatoes in the same sized pieces. Mix well and cover with
mayonnaise.


12.--Fried Lobster.

Take the meat out of a boiled lobster in large pieces. Dip each piece in
egg, then in bread-crumbs. Fry in deep, hot fat. Serve with tartar
sauce.


13.--Crab Salad.

Boil 6 crabs, pick the meat out carefully, arrange a head of lettuce on
a round platter. Put the crab meat in the centre, cover with mayonnaise
dressing.


14.--Tongue Toast.

Mince cold boiled tongue fine; mix it well with cream and to every 1/2
pint of the mixture allow the well-beaten yolks of 2 eggs; place over
the fire and let it simmer a few minutes. Serve on hot buttered toast.


15.--Spanish Potatoes.

Take two cups of mashed potato, form into balls, dip them into beaten
egg, then into bread crumbs; fry in deep fat, stick a piece of the green
stem of parsley into each one.


16.--Fried Corn-Meal Gems.

Pour 1 pt. of _boiling_ water on 1 pt. of corn-meal, add 1 teaspoonful
of salt and 1 heaping tablespoonful of sugar. Beat well and set away
until morning in a cool place. When ready to use add 2 well-beaten eggs
and 1 heaping tablespoonful of flour. Drop by spoonful into boiling fat.
Cook ten minutes.


17.--Scotch Eggs.

Boil 6 eggs for 20 minutes, take the shell off, and when cold cover with
the following: Cook 1/2 a cupful of stale bread crumbs and 1/2 a cupful
of milk together until a smooth paste. Add 1 cupful of cooked lean ham
chopped very fine, salt and pepper, and 1 beaten egg. Mix well and cover
the hard boiled eggs with it. Fry in a frying basket in boiling lard for
a minute.


18.--Curried Lobster.

Into a saucepan put the meat from a boiled lobster (broken into small
pieces) and 1/2 a cup of gravy and 1/2 a cup of cream or milk, and half
a blade of mace. Mix 2 teaspoonfuls of curry powder with one teaspoonful
of flour and 1 oz. of butter; add this to the lobster and _simmer_ for
1/2 hour. After it is done add a squeeze of lemon juice and a little
salt. Serve hot.


19.--Parmesan Fritters.

Boil together 1/4 of a cup of water and 2 ozs. of butter, then shake in
2 ozs. of flour, stirring all the time; it must be well cooked. Add 2
ozs. of grated Parmesan cheese, salt and cayenne, stir well and mix in
by degrees 2 well-beaten eggs. Drop this mixture by the spoonful into
hot boiling fat and fry a golden brown and serve at once.


20.--Walnut Salad, No. 2.

Crack 1/2 a pound of English walnuts very carefully, to keep them in
halves, make little balls of cream cheese and put half a walnut on each
side (like the cream walnut candy) lay them on lettuce leaves, pour a
French dressing over and serve with hot toasted crackers.


21.--Benton Beef.

Mix 1 tablespoonful of grated horse radish, 1 teaspoonful of made
mustard, 1 teaspoonful of sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls of vinegar; pour over
slices of hot roast or broiled beef.


22.--Rice Border with Creamed Fish.

Put one cupful of rice on to boil in 3 cupfuls of water. When it has
been boiling for half an hour, add 2 tablespoonfuls of butter and a
teaspoonful of salt. Let it just simmer for an hour. Mash it fine with a
spoon and add 2 well-beaten eggs, and stir for 5 minutes. Butter a
border mould and fill with the rice. Put in the oven for a few minutes.
Turn out on a hot dish and fill the centre with creamed fish.


23.--Wigs.

A lb. of flour, 1/4 of a lb. of butter, 2 ozs. of sugar, 3 eggs, 1/2 a
pint of milk, 1/2 a gill of yeast. Melt the butter and sugar in the milk
and mix several hours before baking. Bake in muffin rings.


24.--Orange Marmalade Sandwiches.

Spread orange marmalade on buttered bread. Put four slices on top of
each other. Put under a weight and when well pressed trim off the crusts
and cut down in thin slices so they will look like jelly cake.


25.--Fish Salad.

Take cold baked or boiled fish. Pick into small pieces. Cover with
mayonnaise dressing. Garnish with sliced cucumber and serve.


26.--Creme de Fromage.

Take 2 tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese and 2 scant ones of
cream, a little cayenne and salt. Mix into a smooth cream and spread on
rounds of thin puff paste; double it over, press the edges well
together, dip them in egg and chopped vermicelli; fry in boiling fat.
Serve very hot.


27.--Cauliflower au Gratin.

Boil a cauliflower, drain well and put it on a round platter. Make the
sauce. Melt 1 oz. of butter, add 1 oz. of flour and a cupful of milk,
and boil; sprinkle in 2 ozs. of grated Parmesan cheese, cayenne and salt
to taste. Press the cauliflower together, pour the sauce over, sprinkle
a little more cheese on top and put into the oven to brown.


28.--Franklin Eggs.

Take out the yolks from four hard boiled eggs. Pass them and 8 olives
and 4 red chillies through a wire sieve; add a little salt. Put this
paste back into the whites of the eggs which have been cut lengthwise.
Serve on fried bread; hot or cold.


29.--Savory Tomatoes.

Take three large tomatoes and cut them in halves, take out the insides
and mix thoroughly with two tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs, 1
tablespoonful of grated cheese, a gill of cream, 1/2 a teaspoonful of
sugar, salt and cayenne to taste. Fill the tomatoes with this and on top
of each piece put a thin slice of bacon. Put into the oven to cook and
when the bacon is done, serve each one on a thin slice of toast.


30.--Rhubarb Puffs. One cupful of finely-chopped rhubarb, 1 cupful of
sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, 1 teaspoonful of baking powder, 1/4
of a cupful of milk, 2 eggs, sufficient flour to make a thick batter;
cream the butter and sugar, add the well-beaten eggs, the milk, flour,
rhubarb and baking powder. Half fill well-greased cups and steam 1/2 an
hour.

SAUCE.--Cream together 1/2 a cup each of butter and powdered sugar, then
add by degrees one beaten egg, beating until perfectly smooth. The last
thing before serving stir in 3 tablespoonfuls of boiling water.--"Table
Talk," Phila.


JULY.


1.--Cherry Salad.

Take large ripe cherries, stone them and lay them on young lettuce
leaves. Sprinkle over them finely chopped blanched nuts, almonds or
English walnuts. For the dressing use 2 tablespoonfuls each of lemon and
orange juice.


2.--Italian Asparagus.

Boil 1 bunch of asparagus, when cooked lay one layer of the tender part
in a baking dish, sprinkle over grated cheese, then another layer of
asparagus, so on until the dish is full. Pour over this 2 tablespoonfuls
of melted butter, a little onion juice. Cover with a layer of fine dried
bread crumbs. Bake a light brown.


3.--Cherry Fritters.

Remove the stems and stones from some ripe cherries. Roll each one in
the white of an egg, beaten with a tablespoonful of water; then in
chopped blanched almonds; dip them one by one in a thick fritter batter,
arrange in a frying basket and plunge into very hot fat. When brown,
remove, drain on blotting paper and serve on a folded napkin.--"Table
Talk," Phila.


4.--Tomato Ice Salad.

Into a saucepan put 1 white onion sliced, and 1 qt. of sliced tomatoes,
1/4 of a green pepper, 1 sprig of parsley, 4 cloves and a teaspoonful of
sugar, salt and pepper to taste. Cook all together until the onion is
tender. Then strain through a fine sieve to remove all the seeds. Let it
cool, then pour into a mould and freeze. Serve on lettuce leaves, with
mayonnaise dressing.


5.--Calf's Brains on Toast.

Boil the brains of a calf, and chop them up with 2 ozs. of ham, 2 gills
of cream, salt and cayenne. Serve on fried toast with fried bread crumbs
on top of each.


6.--Ham and Asparagus.

Take equal quantities of cooked asparagus, cut into bits, and cold
cooked ham cut into small cubes. For each cup of material make a sauce
of 2 tablespoonfuls each of butter and flour, a cup of the liquid in
which the asparagus was cooked, a teaspoonful of lemon juice with salt
and nutmeg to taste. Add 2 beaten eggs, also the ham and asparagus. Turn
into small buttered cups, cover the tops with buttered cracker crumbs
and bake in the oven until a golden brown.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston
Cooking School Magazine."


7.--Strawberry Jelly.

Soak 1/2 box of gelatine in 1/2 a cupful of cold water until soft. Add
1/2 a cupful of boiling water. Crush 1 qt. of strawberries and strain
out the juice. Add to it 1 cupful of sugar and the juice of 1 lemon. Add
this syrup to the hot gelatine. Strain through a flannel bag and mould
in a porcelain dish. Serve with whipped cream.--From "Good
Housekeeping."


8.--Spring Salad.

Arrange lettuce leaves on a round platter, pile neatly in the centre a
dozen red radishes sliced thin with the red peel left on. Around these
a row of sliced hard boiled eggs, then a row of sliced cold boiled
beets; pour a French dressing over all.


9.--Normandy Shrimps.

Shell 1 pt. of shrimps. Into a stewpan put one oz. of butter and when
melted add 1 tablespoonful of ground rice, and 1/2 a pt. of milk. Stir
until smooth, then add the shrimps. When boiling hot pour over toast and
serve.


10.--Sardine Sandwiches.

Take half a box of sardines, remove the bones and skin, mash to a paste,
spread on buttered bread. Squeeze a little lemon juice on each. Put two
together and serve with dressed lettuce.


11.--Shredded Wheat Biscuit and Apples.

Wash, pare and cook in three cups of water, 6 apples, until tender. Dip
the tops of 6 shredded wheat biscuits in 1 pt. of milk, strain them and
shape into 6 cups. When the apples are tender remove to a colander to
drain, then put one in each of the shredded wheat cups. Add to the
water in which the apples were cooked 1 cup of sugar and 1/4 box of pink
gelatine which has previously been soaked in 1/4 cup of cold water, and
the grated rind and juice of a lemon; let cook until reduced one third.
Turn this mixture over the apples until the cups are filled. When cold
turn out and serve with cream.


12.--Guava and Cheese Sandwiches.

Butter twelve slices of bread; spread six of them with guava jelly and
the other six with cream cheese. Put a guava and a cream cheese
together. Press them and trim the edges.


13.--Veal Loaf.

Chop fine, 3-1/2 lbs. of veal and 1 lb. of fat pork. Mix well with 4
soda crackers rolled fine, 3 well-beaten eggs, 1 tablespoonful of salt,
1 oz. of pepper, 1 nutmeg and a small piece of butter. Make it into a
loaf, and bake without water. Quick heat at first. A little grated lemon
peel is an improvement.


14.--Fig Sandwiches.

Cook twelve figs in as little water as possible. When tender drain dry.
Chop the figs fine, spread on slices of buttered bread. Put two
together. Press them and trim.


15.--Fried Green Tomatoes.

Slice green tomatoes in thin slices, roll in flour. Heat and butter the
griddle, fry the slices on it and when cooked sprinkle with powdered
sugar. Serve with fish.


16.--Okra and Corn Fricassee.

In a skillet melt and heat 1/2 of a cupful of lard or bacon fat. When
smoking turn in 1 pt. of sliced okra and stir occasionally until it
begins to color. Add three cupfuls of sliced raw corn and when it is
lightly browned pour off nearly all the fat. Dredge in 1 tablespoonful
of flour, stir until it is absorbed, then add 2/3 of a cupful of milk
and stir occasionally for 15 minutes, seasoning to taste.--From "Table
Talk," Phila.


17.--Boiled Cucumber Salad.

For those who cannot eat raw cucumbers a very nice salad is made by
peeling and then boiling until tender, the cucumbers. When icy cold
slice thin, lay the slices on lettuce leaves and pour a mayonnaise
dressing over. Garnish with a few round, red radishes.


18.--Frozen Pudding.

A quart of milk, 1 tablespoonful gelatine dissolved in a little of the
milk, 4 eggs, a pinch of salt, a cup of sugar, a wine-glass of wine, a
lb. of English walnuts and a lb. of figs; make a custard of the milk and
eggs and the gelatine, strain into a bowl and freeze. Vanilla may be
used instead of wine.


19.--Lobster Salad.

Pick the meat from a boiled lobster, break up into small pieces, mix
with a French dressing, pile neatly on lettuce leaves, and cover over
with mayonnaise dressing.


20.--Strawberry Puffs.

Mix well 1 pt. of flour, 2 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder and a
little salt. Make into a soft dough with milk, about 1 cupful. Put a
spoonful of the dough into well-greased cups, then a spoonful of
strawberries, then another of dough. Steam for 20 minutes. Turn out
onto a platter and serve with strawberry sauce.

SAUCE.--Cream 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, add gradually 1 cupful of
powdered sugar and a little lemon juice. Beat in as many crushed berries
as the mixture will hold and serve cold or melt over hot water and serve
hot.--From "Good Housekeeping."


21.--Mushroom Toasts.

Fry rounds of bread crisp, and cover with the following: Mince 12 large
mushrooms fine, add pepper and salt, 1/2 a gill of cream and stew until
tender. When cooked heap the mushrooms high on the rounds of toast;
sprinkle Parmesan cheese over each, brown and serve very hot.


22.--Dutch Sauce and Cold Meat.

Beat up the white of an egg, with salt and pepper, a spoonful of chopped
parsley, a small onion and a teaspoonful of olive oil. Beat well and add
a spoonful of tarragon vinegar. Serve with cold meat.


23.--Cream of Chicken Sandwiches.

Take 1/2 a cupful of finely-chopped chicken and pound it fine. Dissolve
a teaspoonful of gelatine in 2 tablespoonfuls of cold water. Whip 1/2 a
pt. of cream to a stiff froth. Add the liquid gelatine to the chicken;
season with salt and a teaspoonful of grated horse radish (if liked).
Stir until it begins to thicken, add the whipped cream a little at a
time, and stand away until very cold. Cut bread into fancy slices and
spread with the mixture.


24.--Cauliflower with Cheese.

Boil a cauliflower whole, pour a white sauce over it. Cover this with
grated cheese, and place in the oven and brown.


25.--Cucumber and Lobster Salad.

Cut a slice off the cucumbers lengthwise, scoop them out, fill with
boiled lobster meat. Arrange the lobster claws across the top. Ornament
with mayonnaise dressing.


26.--Horseshoe Cakes.

Beat together very light 3/4 of a lb. of sugar and the same of butter,
add 4 eggs and mix in 1-1/4 lbs. of flour. Mix 1/4 of a lb. of sugar and
flour together, and lay in on the bread board. Take a small spoonful of
the mixture and roll it with a broad-blade knife in the flour and sugar.
When rolled to the right length lay on tin sheet in the form of a
horseshoe and bake.


27.--Lettuce Sandwiches.

Wash and dry the young and tender leaves of a head of lettuce. Butter
slices of graham bread, spread with a thick layer of mayonnaise
dressing, lay lettuce leaves between two slices.


28--Sally Lunn.

Heat 1 pt. of milk blood warm, add 3 tablespoonfuls of butter, melted, 2
well-beaten eggs, and 1/2 a yeast cake dissolved in 3 tablespoonfuls of
cold water. Pour gradually on the flour and beat into a smooth batter;
then add 1 teaspoonful of salt and 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar. Butter
baking pans and pour half full. Let it rise for 2 hours in a warm place.
Bake 1/2 an hour.


29.--Lobster Fritanella.

Take half a loaf of stale bread, crumb, and soak in cold water. When
soaked, squeeze dry in a cloth. Chop a very little onion fine, add two
tablespoonfuls of butter; stir together over the fire until a good
brown; add the bread; stir well; put into this the chopped meat of a
large lobster; salt, cayenne and nutmeg. When very hot, add the yolks of
two eggs; stir hard, and then turn out to cool. When quite cold, form
into rolls with a little flour; egg and bread-crumb them and fry.


30.--Frenchman's Pie.

Boil 1-1/2 lbs. of calf's liver; when cold put it through the chopping
machine twice, put it in a mortar with cayenne pepper, salt, nutmeg,
mace and black pepper to taste. Line a china mould with very thin slices
of fat bacon, then put a layer of cooked veal or chicken, cut in very
thin slices, next a layer of the pounded liver, and so on until the
mould is full. Pour in a pint of good gravy or stock in which 1-1/2 ozs.
of gelatine has been melted. Bake in a moderate oven for two hours. When
quite cold, turn out on a platter.


31.--Scalloped Corn.

Cut corn from the cob, spread a layer in a baking dish, season, put on a
layer of sliced tomatoes, season, and so on with alternate layers until
the dish is nearly full; then fill the dish with rich milk in which
dissolve a little soda and bake an hour.


AUGUST.


1.--Mock Crabs.

Cook a teaspoonful of finely chopped onion in 2-1/2 tablespoonfuls of
butter in the blazer of a chafing dish 5 minutes. Add 4 tablespoonfuls
of flour, and when blended with the butter, stir in 3/4 of a cup of
milk. When the mixture boils, add 1 cup of korulet, 1-1/4 teaspoonfuls
of Worcestershire sauce, 1/3 of a teaspoonful of mustard, 1/4 of a
teaspoonful of paprika, and a few grains of cayenne. When again boiling,
set over hot water and stir in 1 beaten egg. Serve on thin
crackers.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston Cooking School Magazine."


2.--Rice Waffles.

Warm 1-1/2 cups of boiled rice in a pt. of milk; stir in a pint of cold
milk, add an egg, a little salt, and flour enough to make a thin batter.
Bake in waffle irons well buttered.


3.--Chicola.

Cut or grate 3 ears of corn, add a large piece of butter, and the yolk
of one egg, well beaten. Cut the outside of a green pepper into small
pieces. Stir all well together, bake 1/2 an hour, or until brown.


4.--Buttered Shrimps.

Shell some shrimps and put them in a saucepan with a little butter, a
seasoning of salt and pepper and stir over the fire until hot. Fry some
thin pieces of bread in butter or lard. Drain, place them on a hot
platter, pile the buttered shrimps on top and serve.


5.--Lobster Sandwiches.

Pick fine the meat of a boiled lobster, mix well with mayonnaise
dressing. Butter slices of white bread. Lay a small lettuce leaf on each
and the lobster on that; put a slice of plain bread and butter on top;
press together; trim off the crust.


6.--Potato Border with Meat Filling.

Pare, boil and mash 6 potatoes, add 1 tablespoonful of butter, salt and
pepper and 2 well-beaten eggs. Butter a border mould and pack the
potato in it. Let this stand for fifteen minutes, then turn out on a
dish and brush over with a well-beaten egg. Brown in the oven and fill
with any kind of meat cut into blocks and seasoned well; cook in either
a white or brown sauce.


7.--Cold Slaw.

Cut the centre of a cabbage very fine. Put 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar
on to boil, beat 2 eggs light, add to them 1/2 a cup of sour cream or
milk, a tablespoonful of butter. Pour the boiling vinegar on to these.
Stir over the fire until boiling hot, add salt and pepper and pour over
the cabbage. Serve cold.


8.--Cucumber Salad.

Peal and slice 3 cucumbers; leave them in ice water until wanted, then
cover with French dressing.


9.--Corn Pudding.

One pint of uncooked green corn either grated or cut from the cob, 2
tablespoonfuls of flour, pint of milk, three eggs, three tablespoonfuls
of melted butter, 1 teaspoonful of salt and 1/4 of a teaspoonful of
pepper. Bake in a moderate oven until firm in the centre.


10.--Savory Trifles.

Mince fine 2 ozs. of cold game or chicken with 12 pickled mushrooms and
a gill of cream; season with salt and pepper. Serve on slices of fried
bread.


11.--Corn Chowder.

Pare and slice 4 potatoes and 2 onions. Cut 1/2 a pound of bacon into
small pieces. Fry the bacon and onion until a light brown. Into a
saucepan put the potatoes, 1 qt. of grated corn, the bacon and
seasoning. Put these in, in layers, potatoes, bacon, corn, and continue
in that way until all is used. Now add 1/2 a pint of boiling water and
let simmer for 1/2 an hour. Add 1 pint of hot milk. Thicken with 1
tablespoonful of butter and 2 of flour rubbed smooth. Add 6 broken water
crackers. The last thing add the beaten yolk of an egg and serve at
once.


12.--Cauliflower Salad.

Save part of a boiled cauliflower and cover with mayonnaise, arrange on
lettuce leaves and serve.


13.--Corn Omelet.

Grate 12 ears of green corn, add 1 cup sweet milk, a tablespoonful of
sugar, salt and pepper to taste, and the yolks of 4 well-beaten eggs.
Beat the whites and stir in the last thing, put bits of butter on top
and bake a rich brown.


14.--Pea-pod Soup.

Wash the peas before shelling, and save the pods. Cover the pods with as
little water as will cover them, let boil until tender, strain all and
press through a colander. Add to this (water and pods) a pint of milk
and a thickening of 2 tablespoonfuls of flour and 2 of butter, a
teaspoonful of sugar, salt and pepper to taste. Stir and cook until
thickened. Serve with croutons.


15.--Salade a la Russe.

A boiled carrot, a boiled turnip, two boiled potatoes, a head of celery,
a boiled beet, four olives, four anchovies, yolks of two eggs, a
tablespoonful of vinegar, a teaspoonful of tarragon vinegar, one
teaspoonful of salt, 1/2 of pepper. Put the eggs into a bowl, and drip
salad oil slowly over them and beat to a cream; add the vinegars, pepper
and salt. Cut the vegetables into small dice and pour the dressing over.


16.--Shrewsbury Cakes.

Sift a lb. of sugar, some cinnamon and a nutmeg into 3 lbs. of flour;
add a little rose water, and 3 eggs beaten light and mix well with the
flour; then pour into it as much melted butter as will make it a good
thickness to roll out. Mould it well, roll thin and cut it into shapes.
Bake on tin sheets.


17.--Potato Salad.

Slice cold boiled potatoes. Rub a bowl with garlic; put in the potatoes;
add half a pint of finely chopped small onions, a tablespoonful of
finely chopped parsley, a teaspoonful each of salt and pepper. Mix a
teacupful of chicken broth, four tablespoonfuls each of oil and vinegar,
and toss up lightly with the potatoes, so as to break them as little as
possible. Serve on lettuce leaves and garnish with slices of beets cut
in shapes or hard boiled eggs sliced.


18.--Fricadelles.

Chop fine some cold cooked beef and a slice of onion; season with salt
and pepper, a little lemon juice and parsley, add 1/4 as much boiled
rice or bread crumbs as there is meat; add 1 beaten egg and sufficient
water to make a paste. Form into balls and fry in deep fat.


19.--Eggs Stuffed with Sardines.

Skin and bone a small box of sardines, chop fine 6 hard boiled _yolks_
of eggs, a little chopped parsley, salt, pepper and a tablespoonful of
butter, rub all to a paste and fill in the cavities of the white of
eggs. Garnish with watercress. Serve cold.


20.--Ham Sandwich.

Toast saltine biscuit, butter and spread with potted ham. Put two
together, serve hot.


21.--Laplander Cakes.

One pt. of milk, 1 pt. of flour, 2 eggs well beaten, a tablespoonful of
butter, a pinch of salt, a tablespoonful of sugar. Have the pans _very_
hot before filling.


22.--Ham Canapes.

Cut six slices of bread and toast to a golden brown. Put them on a
platter. Cover each piece with a slice of lean cooked ham, spread a
little mustard over it, then chopped parsley and fine bread crumbs, and
a little Parmesan cheese. Place in a hot oven for ten minutes and serve.


23.--Veal Rissoles.

Mince a few slices of cold veal fine and the same quantity of ham or
bacon; add one tablespoonful of minced parsley and one of herbs, a very
little nutmeg, cayenne and salt. Mix into a paste with a well-beaten
egg. Form into balls, egg and bread crumb them and fry in hot fat.


24.--Savory Toast.

Take the yolk of an egg and beat it well, pour into it stirring all the
time a dessert spoonful of Worcestershire sauce, a teaspoonful of
anchovy sauce, a piece of butter the size of a walnut, a large
tablespoonful of finely minced meat (fowl is better) a dash of red
pepper, salt and black pepper to taste and a dash of nutmeg. Mix all
well together until it becomes a paste. Spread it on slices of toast,
place it in the oven a few minutes and serve hot.


25.--Scalloped Tongue.

Take the ends and poorer parts of a boiled tongue, chop quite fine, add
a little parsley, a little seasoning of salt and cayenne. Butter a
baking dish. Put in a layer of bread crumbs, a layer of the tongue; fill
the dish in this way. When nearly full pour over the whole 1/2 a cup of
stock. Then finish with a layer of bread crumbs and bits of butter.
Brown in the oven.


26.--Egg Sandwiches.

Butter slices of graham bread. Put 4 hard boiled eggs through a sieve,
add salt and a tablespoonful of cream or milk, rub to a paste, spread on
the bread, put two slices together, trim neatly and serve with lettuce
salad.


27.--Corn-meal Puffs.

Scald 4 tablespoonfuls of corn-meal in a little water. While hot, stir
in two tablespoonfuls of butter. When cool, add 2 eggs, well beaten, 2
cups of milk, 8 tablespoonfuls of wheat flour and a little salt. Bake in
cups in a quick oven.


28.--Potted Chicken.

Take the good meat from a cold roast or boiled chicken and to every lb.
allow 1/4 of a lb. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of pounded mace, and 1/2 a
small grated nutmeg; salt and pepper to taste. Cut the meat in small
pieces, pound it well with the butter, sprinkle in the spices gradually
and keep pounding until reduced to a paste. Put it into small jars and
cover with clarified butter and seal tight.


29.--Chocolate Cream.

Beat well the yolks of four eggs, put them into a dish with 3 ozs. of
grated chocolate, 1/4 of a lb. of sugar, and 1 pt. of milk; stir these
well and pour them into a pitcher set in a saucepan of boiling water;
stir one way carefully but do not let boil or it will curdle. Strain the
cream through a sieve into a dish and add 1-1/2 ozs. of gelatine and 1/2
a pt. of well whipped cream. Pour into a mould and set on ice until
ready to use.


30.--Spanish Buns.

1-1/4 lbs. of flour, 1 lb. of sugar, 1/2 a lb. of butter, 4 eggs, a
teacup of cream or milk, warmed sufficiently to melt the butter, a
tablespoonful of rose water, 2 of wine, a grated nutmeg. Make into buns
and bake.


31.--Chicken Salad.

Cut very fine the good parts of a cold boiled chicken; chop up celery in
the proportion of 2/3 to 1/3 of chicken and mix well. Let it stand for
an hour or two with a French dressing poured over it. When it is well
soaked up, cover with a mayonnaise dressing and garnish with celery
tops. Serve on lettuce leaves.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Banana Croquettes.

Cut 3 bananas into 2 inch lengths, roll lightly in fine bread crumbs and
put on ice to harden. Fry carefully in a frying basket in deep hot fat.
Serve with hot or cold chicken.


2.--Celery au Gratin.

Cook until tender a large bunch of celery cut into one inch lengths.
Drain, return to the saucepan and cover with a cupful of white sauce.
Season with salt and pepper and chopped parsley. When cold butter a
baking dish and cover the bottom with crumbs. When the celery is cold
add to it 2 well beaten eggs. Cover with crumbs and bits of butter. Bake
1/2 an hour.


3.--Boiled Partridge with Celery Sauce.

Dress the partridge as for roasting, make a stuffing with 1/2 cup of
bread crumbs, 1/2 cup of chopped celery seasoned with a little butter
and celery salt. Cover with boiling water, cook until tender. Make a
sauce with 1 tablespoonful of butter in which fry 2 tablespoonfuls of
bread crumbs, 1/2 cup of chopped celery, 1 cup milk, salt and pepper.
Let this boil up once.


4.--Rice and Apples.

Parboil 1 cup of rice for 10 minutes in boiling water, then drain and
rinse with cold water. Return to a saucepan and cover with fresh water,
add 1/2 teaspoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful of sugar. Pare, peel and chop
fine 6 apples, add them to the rice and cook until done. Serve as a
border for hot or cold slices of pork.


5.--Moulded Chopped Meat.

Take any kind of cold meat, chop it very fine. Dissolve 1/2 a box of
gelatine in 1/2 a cup of cold water. Slice two hard boiled eggs, wet a
mould and lay the slices of egg in the bottom and on the sides, then put
in the chopped meat. Dissolve one Anker's Bouillon Capsule in 1 cup of
boiling water. When dissolved add this to the gelatine, stir well and
pour over the meat.


6.--Curry Sandwiches.

Make a paste with four hard boiled eggs, a tablespoonful of stock and a
teaspoonful of curry powder. Spread on slices of buttered bread. Put two
together and serve.


7.--Pickled Salmon.

After the fish has been boiled and drained add the following sauce: Take
equal quantities of water in which the fish was boiled and vinegar. Add
a few pepper corns, a little mace, a very little allspice; boil for a
few minutes and pour over the fish.


8.--Boston Cookies.

Cream one cup of butter, add gradually 1-1/2 of sugar and 3 eggs well
beaten. Add 1 teaspoonful of soda dissolved in 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls of
hot water. Sift together 3-1/4 cups of flour, half a teaspoonful of salt
and 1 teaspoonful of cinnamon. Add 1/2 of this to the thin mixture, then
1 cup of chopped English walnut meat, 1/2 a cup of currants and 1/2 a
cup of chopped and seeded raisins. Put in the rest of the flour and
beat well. Drop by spoonfuls 1 inch apart on a buttered sheet and bake
in a moderate oven.--From "Good Housekeeping."


9.--Maple Sugar Sandwiches.

Cut and butter slices of white bread, scrape maple sugar and spread
thickly on the bread. Cut with a maple leaf cutter and serve with hot
coffee.


10.--Stuffed Egg Plant.

Cut off the top and scoop out the inside; lay the shell in salt and
water for 1/2 an hour. Boil the inside part in about 1/2 a cup of water
and put through the colander. Then mix it with 1/2 a teacup of bread
crumbs, 1 large tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper to taste. Wipe
dry the inside of the shell and put the mixture in. Bake 20 minutes and
sprinkle top with bread crumbs and butter.


11.--Corn Fritters.

Grate the corn; allow an egg and a tablespoonful of cream for every
cupful. Beat the eggs well; add the corn by degrees, beating very hard,
salt to taste; put in a tablespoonful of melted butter to every pint of
corn; stir in the milk, thicken with just enough flour to hold together,
say 1 tablespoonful for every two eggs, cook on the griddle. Serve with
lamb or pork chops.


12.--Jellied Veal.

Cut up a knuckle of veal and cover it with 2 quarts of cold water, bring
it slowly to boiling point and simmer slowly for 2 hours. Add 2 sliced
onions, a bay leaf, a few pepper corns, 12 whole cloves and 1/2 a
teaspoonful of ground allspice. Let it simmer for an hour longer. Take
out the meat, remove all the bones and pick the meat into small pieces.
Put it into a mould, reduce the liquor to 1 qt., add salt and pepper.
Turn over the meat and stand away for 12 hours or more to harden.


13.--Coburg Puddings.

Mix 6 ozs. of flour and 1 pt. of milk to a smooth batter, add 6 ozs. of
sugar, 6 ozs. of butter, 6 ozs. of currants and brandy to taste. When
all are well mixed turn into small cups, previously well buttered, and
bake 3/4 of an hour. Only fill the cups half full, as it rises very
light. Turn out on a dish and serve with wine sauce.


14.--Maple Sugar Tea Biscuit.

Sift together 1 qt. of sifted flour, 1 teaspoonful of salt and 3 level
teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Work into these ingredients 2
tablespoonfuls of butter and then mix to a dough with milk or milk and
water. Cut the dough until light and spongy, then pat out into a
rectangular sheet with the rolling-pin; spread with maple sugar and roll
up like a jelly roll. Cut from the end in rounds. Bake in a buttered pan
and serve hot with butter.


15.--Tomato Salad.

Scoop out the centres of 6 tomatoes, fill with chopped watercress and
the inside of the tomato and pour a French dressing on. Serve on lettuce
leaves.


16.--Tongue Squares.

Fry squares of bread, sprinkle grated Parmesan cheese on them, season
highly with pepper and salt. Pile grated tongue in a pyramid on each
square. Serve either hot or cold.


17.--Cheese Straws.

Grate 2 ozs. of cheese, and mix well with 2 ozs. of butter, 2 ozs. of
flour, 2 ozs. of bread crumbs, season with cayenne and salt to taste.
Roll out very thin and cut into strips 1/4 of an inch wide and 6 long.
Lay on a buttered tin and bake brown.


18.--Cinnamon Wafers.

One cup of butter, 2 cups of sugar, 4 of flour, 3 eggs, a cup of sweet
milk or, better, sour milk with a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in it.
Spread with a spoon thin on tin sheets either in small cakes or one
large one, which can be cut after baking. When half baked, draw to the
front of the oven and sift granulated sugar mixed with cinnamon over
them.


19.--A Pretty Salad.

Boil six young beets, and when cooked, scoop out the centres and fill
with asparagus tips which have been soaked in French dressing. Make a
mayonnaise dressing, spread it evenly on a round dish, sink the beets
into it, and garnish with young lettuce leaves.


20.--Gatineau Trout (BAKED).

Make a stuffing of fine bread crumbs, parsley or thyme, butter, salt and
pepper. Have the fish carefully dried and cleaned, put in the stuffing
and sew it up. Bake 20 minutes to half an hour. Baste well with
drippings and serve with a garnish of parsley.


21.--Southern Corn Pone.

Sift a qt. of white corn-meal and add a teaspoonful of salt; pour on
enough cold water to make a mixture that will squeeze easily through the
fingers. Work to a soft dough. Mould into oblong cakes an inch thick at
the ends, and a little thicker in the centre. Slap them down on the pan
and press them a little to show the marks of the fingers. Bake in a hot
oven 20 minutes.


22.--Valentia Rice.

Chop fine 2 onions, fry in half a cup of rendered bacon. Do not let them
burn. Take six tomatoes, pare, cut fine. Add to the onions and fry until
done. Take two cups of rice, wash and put into a saucepan, pour the
mixture over, and add as much water as will boil the rice well; then
add two seeded green peppers, cut in quarters, salt to taste and boil
until rice is soft. Take out the ends of the peppers. Serve with cold
meat.


23.--Stewed Black Fish.

Take a four-pound fish; throw a little salt over it to harden it, and
let it stand an hour. Score and brown it upon a buttered gridiron. Lay
it upon a strainer with some fresh mushrooms, a white onion sliced, a
sprig of parsley, a few pepper corns, four cloves, a little mace, a
pinch of cayenne, the juice and grated rind of a lemon, a pint of
claret, and one of water. Cover the kettle well, simmer slowly, and when
done, lift the fish gently and strain the sauce over it, laying the
mushrooms around it.


24.--Alpine Eggs.

Butter a shallow tin and line it with thin slices of cheese, break over
this five eggs, being careful not to break the yolks, and season with
salt and pepper. Grate a little cheese and chop fine a few sprigs of
parsley, mix and sprinkle over the top, put a few bits of butter over
it and bake in a quick oven ten minutes.


25.--Blanquette of Chicken.

One pt. of cold chicken cut into small dice, 1/2 a cup of stock, 1/2 a
cup of milk, 1 tablespoonful of flour, 1 of butter, yolks of 2 eggs. Rub
the butter and flour smooth and put into a frying pan. Add the stock,
milk and season with salt and pepper, stir until it boils; then add the
chicken and stand over a moderate fire until hot. Take it from the fire
and add the well-beaten yolks; do not let it boil after the eggs are
added. Serve at once.


26.--Chestnut Soup.

Peel 1 qt. of large chestnuts and blanch them in hot water. Drain and
rub off the inner skin and cook until tender in good stock, drain and
rub them through a fine sieve. Add more stock and season with mace,
cayenne and salt, and stir until it boils, then add 1/4 of a pint of
cream. Serve at once.


27.--Eels with Tartare Sauce.

Cut the eels into four-inch pieces. Let them stand in boiling water for
5 minutes, drain, season, dip in egg and bread crumbs and fry in hot
fat. Serve with tartare sauce.


28.--Lunch Sandwiches.

Butter slightly, slices of white bread. Chop fine four stalks of celery,
and the same quantity of cold meat. Make a mayonnaise dressing, stir it
into the meat and celery, spread on the bread; put a plain slice of
bread and butter on top.


29.--Bread Dumplings.

Soak stale bread in cold water for 15 minutes, then squeeze as dry as
possible. To each pt. add 2 tablespoonfuls of milk, 1 well beaten egg, 2
tablespoonfuls of melted butter, 1/2 of a teaspoonful of salt and the
same of sugar and sufficient flour to make of such consistence that the
mixture will not fall apart when a small spoonful is dropped into
boiling water. Have the water slightly salted and boiling hard. Test a
spoonful of the mixture. When of the right consistency drop a number of
spoonfuls at a time into the water and cook for 5 minutes. Lift out with
a skimmer and arrange in a dish, keeping them hot over water until all
are done.--"Table Talk," Phila.


30.--Chopped Ham and Egg.

Chop fine cold cooked ham. Toast and butter some slices of bread, spread
the ham on the toast, put them in the oven for 3 or 4 minutes. Beat 4
eggs in a cup of milk, season with salt and pepper. Put 2 tablespoonfuls
of butter in a saucepan, pour in the beaten eggs and stir over the fire
until thick but do not let it boil. Pour the eggs over the ham and
serve.


OCTOBER.


1.--Potato Croquettes.

Four mashed potatoes, season highly with pepper and salt, butter and
chopped parsley. Beat very well. Roll into balls, egg and bread crumb
them and fry in boiling lard.


2.--Brown Apple Sauce for Cold Pork.

Put 1/2 a pt. of gravy in a saucepan with 5 pared, cored and quartered
apples. Simmer gently, until tender; beat to a pulp, season with cayenne
and serve with cold roast pork.


3.--Cod Cutlets.

Make the following sauce and simmer the fish cutlets in it. One cupful
of stock, pepper, salt, parsley, onion, a little lemon juice and a glass
of sherry. Thicken with browned flour. Heat the cutlets slowly, do not
let them boil.


4.--Crumb Griddle Cakes.

Put a large cup of bread crumbs to soak in a qt. of sour milk over
night; in the morning rub through a sieve. Add the yolks of 4 eggs, well
beaten, 2 teaspoonfuls of soda dissolved in a little water, 1
tablespoonful melted butter, and enough corn-meal to make it the
consistency of ordinary griddle cakes. Add the whites of the eggs just
before frying.


5.--Fillets of Weakfish.

Take a three lb. fish, cut off the head and tail, split the fish through
the back and take out the bone, cut these two pieces into four or six,
season with salt and pepper. Dip each piece into melted butter, then
roll in crumbs and broil on both sides. Serve with tartare sauce.


6.--Celery Sandwiches.

Chop very fine a few stalks of celery, mix well with a mayonnaise
dressing, spread on buttered bread, put two together; press and cut in
any shape desired.


7.--Cheese Fritters.

One oz. of well boiled macaroni, cut very small, 1 large tablespoonful
of grated cheese, 1 of cream; mix all together. Season with pepper and
salt. Roll out puff paste very thin, cut into rounds, place some of this
mixture on each round, double them over, egg and vermicelli them, fry a
light brown. Serve hot.


8.--Veal Salad.

Chop cold veal very fine, season, mix well with mayonnaise dressing.
Heap on lettuce leaves. Garnish with slices of hard boiled egg.


9.--Fish and Rice.

Bone and flake cold fish; season with salt and cayenne pepper. Stir in a
stewpan with a good piece of fresh butter. When hot add a teacupful of
ready boiled rice, and the yolks of 4 hard boiled eggs. Stir well
together until hot. Dish and serve with pickles.


10.--Curry of Macaroni.

Melt 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, cook in it 2 slices of onion until the
onion becomes of a pale straw color, then add two tablespoonfuls of
flour, 1 tablespoonful of curry powder, 1/4 teaspoonful of salt and a
dash of pepper. When blended with the butter, add gradually 1 cup of
milk and stir until smooth and boiling. Then strain over 1 cup of
macaroni, cooked until tender in boiling salted water and then drained
and rinsed in cold water. Reheat and serve.--Janet M. Hill in "Boston
Cooking School Magazine."


11.--Oyster Canapes.

Into a saucepan put 1 dozen finely chopped oysters, a teaspoonful of
cracker dust, a tablespoonful of butter and 1/2 a cup of milk, season
with salt and pepper. Stir and let the mixture simmer for a few minutes;
pour the mixture over buttered toast and serve.


12.--Dried Apple Cake.

Soak 3 cups of dried apples over night; drain the water off and cut them
up a little and put them over the fire with 2 cups of molasses; boil
until thick; take off the fire and put into a bowl. Add a cup of
shortening, a tablespoonful of cinnamon, dessertspoonful of cloves, the
same of allspice, a cup of sweet milk; when cold a tablespoonful of
soda, dissolved in hot water, 4 cups of flour, added by degrees, 3 eggs
well beaten, added last. Grease 3 pans well and bake.


13.--Vegetable Soup.

Cut fine 2 carrots, 1 turnip, 3 stalks of celery and half an onion; cook
ten minutes in 4 tablespoonfuls of butter, stirring constantly. Add 1
cup of chopped potatoes, cover and cook five minutes, then add a qt. of
boiling water and cook an hour. Mash the vegetables, add a tablespoonful
of butter and a little chopped parsley. Season with salt and pepper.


14.--Beef Salad.

Chop very fine slices of cold roast beef, having first removed all fat;
add six finely chopped cold potatoes, the same quantity of beets, a few
slices of tomatoes, a few leaves of lettuce, a small bunch of parsley.
Mix thoroughly, and chop all together, until the whole is almost reduced
to a cream. Cover with a rich mayonnaise. Garnish with slices of tomato
and lettuce leaves.


15.--Corn-starch Cake.

Beat well the whites of 4 eggs, beat the yolks, then beat them
together. Cream a 1/4 of a lb. of butter. Add to it gradually 1/2 a lb.
of granulated sugar and beat until light, then add the eggs and beat
again. Mix 2 ozs. of corn-starch with a quarter of a lb. of wheat flour;
add a teaspoonful of baking powder and sift, stir this into the cake.
Add the grated rind of 1/2 a lemon, bake in greased gem pans in a
moderate oven 15 minutes.


16.--Fried Celery.

Cut it into inch lengths and boil until tender in slightly salted water,
dip the pieces in fritter batter and fry in smoking hot fat. Garnish
with parsley and serve with tomato sauce.


17.--Beef a la Mode.

Take a round of beef, trim off the fat, cut fat bacon into strips and
roll them in a mixture of sweet herbs, spice, salt and pepper. Lard the
meat with these and rub the rest of the seasoning into the meat. Flour
it, put in a deep pan, add a pt. of water and bake in a moderate oven.
Baste often. Strain the gravy and if you like a little cooking wine may
be added to the gravy. Serve hot or cold.


18.--Potato Chowder.

Pare and chop into dice 6 potatoes. Put into a frying pan 1 chopped
onion and 2 slices of bacon cut into small pieces, fry until a light
brown. Put the potatoes, bacon and onion, a little chopped parsley, salt
and pepper into a saucepan. Add 1 pt. of water, cover and simmer 15 or
20 minutes. Then add 1 pt. of milk. Mix 1 tablespoonful each of butter
and flour, add to the rest and stir carefully until it boils.


19.--A Spanish Fish Dish.

Bone some nice pieces of cold fish. Warm it in a cupful of olive oil, 1
clove of garlic, some Spanish red pepper and a wine-glass of tarragon
vinegar. Lay tomatoes, cooked down to a thick purée, in a dish; lay the
fish upon it, pour the sauce over and serve.


20.--Stewed Celery in Brown Sauce.

Cut the celery in six inch lengths, boil in salt and water, strain. Put
1/2 a pint of soup stock or gravy on the fire and cook the celery in
it; add pepper and salt, a little nutmeg, 4 tablespoonfuls of cream, a
little thickening of butter and flour. Simmer only a few minutes.


21.--Baked Oyster Dumplings.

Drain the oysters and cover with a little lemon juice. Make a light puff
paste and cut into pieces about 4 inches square; brush them over with
white of egg. Place upon each square 2 or 3 of the prepared oysters and
put a little piece of butter on them. Bring the four corners of the
paste together and fasten them with a small wooden toothpick, leaving
the crust open between the points. Bake in the oven until a nice brown,
take out the toothpicks and serve.


22.--Barbacued Lobster.

Cut up and chop a large lobster; add both black and cayenne pepper,
mustard, salt, a small cup of sweet oil, two or three powdered crackers
or bread crumbs; a wine-glass of wine, lemon juice; mix well. Shape into
a loaf and cover with bread crumbs. Bake half an hour.


23.--Oyster Patties.

Make a rich puff paste and bake it in small patty-pans. When cool turn
out on a large dish. Stew the oysters with a few cloves, a little whole
mace and the yolk of an egg boiled hard and grated, a little butter and
enough oyster liquor to cover. When the oysters are cooked, set away to
cool. When cold put two or three oysters and a little sauce in each
patty-shell, serve with lettuce and French dressing.


24.--Jellied Tongue.

Make a jelly of 1/4 a box of gelatine and a pint of soup stock; season
highly when it begins to thicken. Wet a mould and lay slices of tongue
all over the bottom and sides. When it begins to set fill the centre
with chopped chicken, hard boiled eggs, or just use tongue alone. When
cold and firm garnish with parsley.


25.--Dolmas (A TURKISH DISH).

Chop fine 1 cup of cold mutton and 1 small onion; add to this 1/2 a cup
boiled rice, salt and pepper, mix well. Take some cabbage leaves and put
them into boiling water for a minute, and then roll the chopped meat
mixture up in them like a sausage; then stew them in a little soup
stock. Serve hot with garnish of hard boiled egg.


26.--Harlequin Sandwiches.

Butter slices of both white and Graham bread. Spread each with Neuchatel
cheese, chop fine a few English walnuts and sprinkle over. Put a white
and a brown slice together.


27.--Pickled Oysters.

Take 1/2 a pt. of white wine and 1/2 a pt. of vinegar, 4 teaspoonfuls of
salt, six of whole black pepper, and a little mace. Strain the oyster
liquor and add the above ingredients. Boil up once and pour hot over the
oysters. Let them stand ten minutes or until cold and then put in a jar
and cover tightly.


28.--Calas.

Three gills of soft boiled rice, 1 gill of rice flour, a pinch of salt,
6 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 2 of wheat flour, 3 eggs, a little yeast. Fry
quickly.


29.--Potato Puff.

Beat light, two cupfuls of mashed potatoes, add 2 tablespoonfuls of
melted butter, salt, pepper, cream, 2 eggs beaten separately; beat all
hard. Pile high on a dish; put into the oven to color and become light.


30.--Beef Tongue (FRESH).

Boil a fresh beef tongue, fifteen minutes, skin it. Put in a pot, 1
carrot, 1 onion, thyme, bay leaf, salt and pepper, 2 cloves, glass of
cooking wine, and a little water. Stew 4 hours. Strain out the
vegetables and put in a little browned flour.


31.--Salmon Salad.

Take a qt. can of salmon, pick it over carefully, as there are a great
many little bones. Season with salt and pepper and a little lemon juice.
Pile neatly on a platter, arrange the tops of boiled asparagus around it
and cover with mayonnaise dressing.


NOVEMBER.


1.--Turbot a la Creme.

Take cold cooked bluefish, flake it and pick out the bones. Have ready
the following sauce: Rub 2 large spoonfuls of flour, by degrees, into a
qt. of milk; mix very smooth; add an onion, several sprigs of parsley,
thyme, grated nutmeg, salt, pepper. Boil until it becomes a thick sauce;
stirring always. Remove from the fire, add a quarter of a pound of fresh
butter; strain through a sieve. Lay a little in the bottom of a pudding
dish, then a layer of fish and so on until the dish is full. Sprinkle
bread crumbs over the top. Heat and brown in the oven. Do not let it
cook.


2.--Oyster Fritters.

Chop fine 25 oysters. Beat 2 eggs very light and add 1 cup of milk, 2
cups of flour, pinch of salt. Beat until free from lumps; add the
oysters, and 1/2 a teaspoonful of baking powder. Mix well and drop by
spoonfuls into boiling fat; lift out with a skimmer, lay on brown paper
and serve very hot.


3.--Chops Masked with Potato.

Broil 6 chops. Cover the meat part of each chop with a spoonful of
mashed potato (which has been beaten up with 2 eggs); put into the oven
and brown.


4.--Cheese Pudding No. 1.

Grate some cheese, mix it with half as much fine bread crumbs, add 1
beaten egg, a little seasoning and milk enough to make a thick batter.
Turn into a well greased dish and bake 3/4 of an hour.


5.--Meat Pie with Potato Crust.

Cut cold roast beef into thin slices, removing the fat and gristle;
cover the bones and trimmings with cold water; add a few slices of onion
and carrot, and a stalk of celery, if at hand; let simmer several hours;
strain off the broth and simmer in it the slices of beef, until they are
perfectly tender. Season with salt and pepper, and pour into a baking
dish; cover with a round of potato crust in which there is an opening;
bake until the crust is done (about 15 minutes).--Janet M. Hill in
"Boston Cooking School Magazine."

POTATO CRUST.--Sift together 2 cups of flour, half a teaspoonful of
salt, and 2 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder. With the tips of the
fingers work in half a cup of shortening, and then 1 cup of cold mashed
potatoes; add milk to make a soft dough, turn on to the board, handle as
little as possible and pat and roll out to fit the dish.


6.--Indian Trifle.

Mix together 3 tablespoonfuls of rice flour and 3 of finely ground white
Indian meal. Scald 3 cupfuls of milk, add then a portion of it to the
dry mixture, stir all together and continue to stir over the fire until
the milk is very thick. Add 4 tablespoonfuls of sugar, cover and cook
slowly for ten minutes; add 5 drops of cinnamon extract, and 1/2 of a
cupful of shaved citron and turn into a mould or glass dish. Serve with
a custard sauce.--"Table Talk," Phila.


7.--Shredded Wheat Fish Balls.

Freshen 1/2 a lb. of salt codfish and pick it very fine, add 4 shredded
biscuits rolled very fine, a pinch of white pepper, a tablespoonful of
butter, and 1 pt. of hot milk. Stir well and let stand 5 or 10 minutes.
Make into balls, roll in egg and shredded biscuit crumbs. Then drop in
hot fat and fry a light brown.


8.--Hoe Cake.

Make a thin batter of corn-meal and milk, add a little melted butter,
and a little salt. If sweet milk is used, add a teaspoonful of baking
powder; if sour milk 1/2 a teaspoonful of soda. Put a little fat in a
frying pan; when hot pour in the batter till 1/2 an inch in thickness;
when brown on one side turn. Serve hot.


9.--Canned Salmon Salad.

Take a can of salmon, pick it out carefully and arrange on lettuce
leaves with a mayonnaise dressing.


10.--Cheese Polenta.

Cook salted corn-meal for at least an hour; turn into a baking dish and
add a cupful of grated cheese and season with pepper. Brown in the
oven.--"Table Talk," Phila.


11.--Oysters a l'Indienne.

Cook 1 doz. oysters until the gills curl. Take 1 dessertspoonful of
curry powder, 1 of flour, a quarter of a pint of cream, a little onion,
and a slice of apple, chopped, half a teaspoonful of lemon juice. Stir
all together and add the oysters. Turn into a rice border, when very
hot, and serve.


12.--Baked Pumpkin.

Take a small pumpkin cut in half, and remove the seeds, scallop the
edge. Put in a baking dish in the oven and bake until tender. When done
take it out and serve at once and help just as it is.


13.--Hot Potato Salad.

Fry two slices of bacon in a pan until all the fat is fried out, then
add 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Arrange lettuce leaves around a
platter; slice 6 hot potatoes in slices and pile in the centre; pour the
bacon fat and vinegar over, sprinkle salt and pepper over, and chopped
parsley. Serve with sausage.


14.--St. Charles Indian Bread.

Beat two eggs very light; mix alternately with them a pint of sour milk,
and a pint of fine Indian meal; add a tablespoonful of melted butter, a
teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in a little milk and added the last
thing. Beat very hard, pour into a deep pan and bake in a quick oven.


15.--Lobster Cream.

Pour 1/2 a pint of boiling milk over a small cupful of bread crumbs;
when nearly cold add 3 well-beaten eggs, the lobster chopped fine, 2
teaspoonfuls of anchovy sauce, a pinch of cayenne. Stir well and mix in
3 tablespoonfuls of cream. Pour into a buttered mould, cover with
buttered paper and steam for an hour. Serve with a good fish sauce.


16.--Oysters in Puff Paste.

Roll out some puff paste and cut it into round pieces. Chop some
oysters, mix them with the same amount of chopped hard boiled egg, a
little chopped parsley and a little grated lemon peel, season with salt
and pepper and a little pounded mace; moisten the mixture with a little
cream and some of the oyster liquor; put a spoonful on each round of
paste; fold over, moisten the edges and press them together. Brush over
with the yolk of one egg and fry for fifteen minutes.


17.--Veal Gumbo.

In two tablespoonfuls of hot fat brown one chopped onion and quarter of
a pound of fat ham cut into dice. Add 1 qt. of boiling water, 1/2 a can
of tomatoes, 3 lbs. of veal cut in pieces, and half a teaspoonful of
salt. Stew for 2 hours; add 1 qt. can of okra and cook for an hour and a
half longer, adding seasoning as necessary 1/2 an hour before it is
done. Serve with a separate dish of boiled rice.--From "Table Talk,"
Phila.


18.--Florida Corn Cake.

One egg, 1 cup of milk, 1 tablespoonful salt fat pork, 1 teaspoonful
salt, 1 of sugar, 2 cups white corn-meal, 1 tablespoonful baking powder.
Mix all thoroughly and bake in 2 thin cakes.


19.--Laurentian Salad.

Chop fine slices of cold roast beef and the same amount each of cold
boiled potatoes and beets, a few slices of tomatoes and a few leaves of
lettuce. Mix well. Cover with mayonnaise dressing and garnish with
sliced red radishes.


20.--Beef Pot Pie.

Cut into small pieces, some beef from the chuck or round, put in a
saucepan and stew for two hours well covered; add a slice of fat pork or
bacon, an onion, salt and pepper to taste, and thicken with flour. Line
a deep dish with biscuit dough, pour in the beef, cover over the top
with more of the dough. Bake in a quick oven.


21.--Tripe Baked with Potatoes.

Put into an earthen dish 1 lb. of tripe cut into small pieces and four
chopped onions, season with salt and pepper, cover with stock or water
and bake in a slow oven 3 hours. Thicken with a little flour, cover over
with mashed potatoes. Brown in the oven and serve.


22.--Roast Oysters.

Scrub the shells until perfectly clean. Put into pans and set them in
the oven. Take them out as soon as the shells begin to open, and before
the liquor is lost. Take the upper shells off and serve on a hot
platter.


23.--Beefsteak and Potatoes.

Put 1/2 a cup of drippings into a frying pan; let it get very hot; fry
six potatoes in this, cut in long, thin slices. When done take out and
drain. Broil the steak. Put 1 teaspoonful of finely chopped parsley, a
little onion, salt and pepper into the drippings in which the potatoes
were fried, pour it over the steak and pile the potatoes around it.


24.--Tomato Timbales.

Stew a can of tomatoes until quite thick, season with salt, pepper and
onion juice and put away to cool. To one cupful of this add 3
well-beaten eggs; mix thoroughly, then fill well-buttered timbale molds.
Stand them in a pan of hot water in the oven and cook slowly until firm
in the middle as a baked custard would be.--From "Table Talk," Phila.


25.--Oyster Kromeskys.

Parboil a dozen oysters in their own liquor, remove the beards, strain
the liquor and cut up the oysters in dice; melt a tablespoonful of
butter and 1 of flour; stir until smooth; add the oyster liquor, a
little milk, the chopped oysters, a teaspoonful of chopped celery, a
little nutmeg, salt and pepper. Take the saucepan off the fire, stir in
the yolk of an egg. Garnish the dish with thin strips of well-cooked
bacon. Serve very hot.


26.--Chicken a la Merengo.

Prepare a young chicken as for fricassee. Fry each piece in olive oil,
add a sprig of parsley, a slice of onion, salt and pepper, and five
mushrooms if you have them. Cook slowly about 3/4 of an hour. Serve with
cream sauce.


27.--Hominy Waffles.

To a pint of cold boiled hominy add 1 qt. sour milk, 2 beaten eggs, 2
tablespoonfuls of melted butter, sufficient flour to make a thick batter
and 1 teaspoonful of soda.


28.--Vermicelli Pudding.

One cup of vermicelli, 2 tablespoonfuls of ground rice, a qt. of milk, 3
eggs, sugar to taste. Boil the vermicelli in the milk, until it is
quite smooth; then add the other ingredients and thicken over the fire.
Put into a mould and steam for an hour. Serve hot with any liquid sauce.


29.--Potatoes Gruyere.

Allow 1 large potato for each person. Wash and bake in a hot oven, then
open and scoop into a heated bowl. Mash and for each potato, add 1/2 a
teaspoonful of Gruyere (Swiss) cheese, grated, salt and pepper to taste,
and the stiffly whipped whites of three eggs for 1/2 a dozen potatoes.
Beat well, turn into a pastry bag and press out in heaps on a buttered
pan. Brush with beaten egg yolk and brown in a quick oven.--From "Table
Talk," Phila.


30.--Eggs in Tomato Cases.

Scoop out the centres of as many large firm tomatoes as there are people
to serve. Drain, then sprinkle the inside of each with chopped tarragon
(or tarragon vinegar), salt, pepper, dropping in carefully a raw egg and
a quarter of a teaspoonful of butter. Place in a baking pan in a hot
oven until the eggs are set and serve very hot.--From "Table Talk,"
Phila.


DECEMBER.


1.--Round of Beef, Southern Style.

Take a 6 or 8 pound piece of round of beef. Heat a large skillet very
hot, grease with a bit of fat from the meat and quickly sear and brown
the meat on all sides. With a sharp knife cut gashes around the sides
and sprinkle in each gash salt, pepper and a pinch of cloves. Place in a
deep baking dish with 3 blades of mace, 1 cupful of capers or pickled
nasturtium seeds, a bunch of parsley, 3 sliced lemons, and sufficient
claret to almost cover the meat. Cover closely and bake in a moderate
oven for 4 hours. Serve hot or cold. If hot slightly thicken the gravy,
season to taste and serve.--From "Table Talk," Phila.


2.--Nut Loaf.

Chop fine sufficient nut meats to measure 1-1/2 cupfuls, add one pint of
stale bread-crumbs, 1 teaspoonful of salt and 1 of sweet herbs. Mix
well, add sufficient boiling water to moisten, cover closely and let
stand for 10 minutes to swell. Now add another cupful of hot water and
turn into a well-greased loaf-pan. Bake for one hour in a moderate oven
and serve hot with a brown sauce or serve cold with mayonnaise.--"Table
Talk," Phila.


3.--Sweet Potato Pone No. 1.

To 3 lbs. of grated raw sweet potatoes add 2 lbs. of sugar, 1 dozen
eggs, well beaten, 1 qt. and a pt. of milk, the juice and grated rind of
1 lemon, 1/2 of a cupful of butter, melted, 1 tablespoonful of rose
water, 1/2 of a teaspoonful of nutmeg, 1/2 of a teaspoonful of mace, 1
teaspoonful cinnamon, 1 scant teaspoonful of salt. Mix well, turn into 2
loaf-pans and bake for 2 hours in a moderate oven.--"Table Talk," Phila.


4.--Breaded Sausage.

Wipe the sausage and dip each piece in well-beaten egg and then in bread
crumbs. Fry in boiling fat. Serve with lemon and parsley garnish.


5.--Brown Betty.

Chop 1 pt. of apples fine. Butter a baking dish. Put in a layer of bread
crumbs, then a layer of apple, then bits of butter; continue until the
dish is full, having the last layer crumbs and then bits of butter. If
the pudding is desired sweet add a sprinkling of sugar over each layer
of apple. Bake in a good oven 1/2 an hour. Serve hard sauce with it.


6.--Chestnut Puree.

Shell 1 qt. of chestnuts, throw them into boiling water until the brown
skins loosen, rub them off and put the chestnuts into a saucepan with a
qt. of stock and boil gently for half an hour; mash them through a
colander, return them to the saucepan; add 1 tablespoonful of butter,
salt and pepper; stir until it boils, then serve.


7.--Roast Clams.

Three dozen clams in their shells. Wash and lay them in the dripping
pan. Put them into the oven until the shells open. Take off the top
shell and serve in the lower one, with lemon or melted butter. Sprinkle
salt over them.


8.--Scalloped Oyster Plant.

Scrape and cut the oyster plant into small pieces and boil until tender,
in water with a teaspoonful of vinegar in it. When cooked, drain and put
into a thick white sauce, to which add a little cayenne pepper and a
very little anchovy sauce. Put this into shells and sprinkle fried bread
crumbs over them. Heat very hot.


9.--Steamed Indian Pudding.

Sift together 1-1/2 cups of Indian meal, 1/2 a cup of wheat flour, 2
teaspoonfuls (level) of baking powder, and half a teaspoonful of salt;
add one generous cup of grated maple sugar and 1 cup of beef suet
chopped fine; mix thoroughly, then add 1-1/4 cups of sweet milk; mix
thoroughly and steam three or four hours.--Janet M. Hill, in "Boston
Cooking School Magazine."


10.--Broiled Mutton and Tomato Sauce.

Take 6 tomatoes, cut and squeeze the juice out, put them in a pan with a
little onion, 1 clove, a blade of mace, a little parsley, salt, cayenne,
a half cup of gravy, and let them simmer gently until the tomatoes are
tender enough to pulp. Rub the whole through a sieve. Boil for a few
minutes and pour over some slices of mutton which have been salted and
broiled.


11.--Sausage Rissoles.

Mash a cupful of potato, make into a paste with a little butter and
flour. Roll out, cut in rounds, lay a cooked sausage in each one, turn
one half the paste over, pinch the sides together, fry in hot fat.


12.--Boudinettes.

Chop fine a little cold meat and bacon; add chopped parsley and season.
Mash boiled potatoes, add butter and enough flour to make a paste. Line
patty pans which have been well greased with the paste, fill with the
chopped meat, put a piece of butter and a teaspoonful of gravy into each
one and brown in the oven.


13.--Eggs Cupped.

Butter 4 teacups, sprinkle them with chopped parsley, add a little
pepper and salt, and into each one break an egg. Cover with bread crumbs
and set them in a saucepan of boiling water for about 5 minutes. Turn
out carefully on buttered toast.


14.--Polish Salad.

Chop fine some cold meat, 1/2 a head of lettuce, hard boiled eggs,
boiled beets and an onion and pickled cucumber. Arrange lettuce leaves
on a platter. Mix the chopped ingredients with a good French dressing.
Heap on the lettuce leaves and ornament with a few slices of hard boiled
egg and parsley.


15.--Baked Spanish Onions.

Put the onions in a pan in the oven and bake 4 hours. They will blacken
on the outside, but that does not matter; when they begin to shrink try
them with a knitting-needle, and if quite tender strip off the skin. Add
a little butter, pepper and salt on top and set into the oven again for
a few minutes.


16.--Codfish with Potato Border.

Boil and mash 6 potatoes, add 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, salt, pepper
and a cup of milk, beat well and pile in a circle on a round platter.
Freshen 1 pt. of codfish, pick into small pieces. Into a saucepan put 2
tablespoonfuls of butter and 1 of flour, mix well, add 2 tablespoonfuls
of hot milk and a little onion. Stir well, add the fish, cook for
fifteen minutes. Turn into the potato circle. Serve hot.


17.--Scotch Broth.

Wash and clean a sheep's head and soak for 2 hours. Put it in a deep
saucepan with just enough water to cover it. When the head is thoroughly
heated, add 2 qts. of water and boil for 2 hours. Take out the head and
remove the meat from the bones. Put back the bones into the saucepan
with an onion, a bunch of sweet herbs, salt and pepper. Simmer another
hour. Chop the meat into small pieces and add it to the soup ten minutes
before serving.


18.--Oyster Stew No. 1.

Strain the juice from the oysters; let it come to a boil; remove the
scum, rinse the oysters in cold water, add them to the liquor, with a
cup of cream, small piece of butter and pepper and salt to taste. Serve
the oysters on slices of hot buttered toast.


19.--Sweet Rice Balls.

Wash thoroughly 1 scant cupful of rice in cold water, put in a double
boiler with 1 pt. of milk, cover and cook until soft. Add 1 teaspoonful
of butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, salt to taste and the well beaten
yolk of an egg. When cold mould into small balls, pressing into the
centre of each a raisin or a candied cherry. Dip in egg, roll in crumbs
and fry in smoking hot fat. Drain and roll in powdered sugar before
serving.--From "Table Talk," Phila.


20.--Stewed Eels.

Skin and cut the eels into 2 inch pieces, cover with boiling water, add
a tablespoonful of vinegar and simmer for 10 minutes; drain. In a
saucepan melt 1 tablespoonful of butter and add 2 of flour, mix well;
when smooth add 1 pt. of veal stock, 1 small sliced onion, 1 bay leaf, a
little parsley, salt and pepper. Cook the eels gently in this for 1/2 an
hour. When done, dish the eels and pour the sauce over.


21.--Beef Roll.

1-1/2 lbs. of round steak, 2 eggs, salt, summer savory and pepper. Chop
the meat fine, season. Beat the eggs well and add to the meat; when well
mixed, roll it up closely, put into a dripping pan and bake an hour. To
be eaten cold.


22.--Turnip Cream Soup.

1 qt. of mutton broth. Cook until tender in this 4 young white turnips;
when tender rub through a sieve, return this to the fire, thicken with 2
tablespoonfuls of butter and 2 of flour, season with salt and pepper;
beat in an egg and serve.


23.--Oyster Croquettes.

Chop 1/2 a pt. of raw oysters and 1/2 a pt. of cooked veal very fine.
Soak 3 tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs in the oyster broth and then add a
tablespoonful of butter, a little onion juice, the beaten yolks of 2
eggs. Mix all well together, shape into croquettes and fry.


24.--Sweet Potato Pone No. 2.

Peel and grate sufficient raw sweet potatoes to make 5 cupfuls. Add 3
cupfuls of best West Indian molasses, 2 cupfuls of butter, 1 cupful
each of preserved ginger and candied orange peel cut fine, 2
tablespoonfuls of mixed spices (cinnamon, nutmeg and cloves), 1
tablespoonful of ground ginger, 1 scant teaspoonful of salt. Mix all
well together, turn into a deep buttered earthen dish and bake slowly in
a moderate oven for from 2 to 3 hours, according to thickness. When done
a knife blade run down to the bottom of the dish will come out clean.
Serve hot, cutting in thick slices. It can be reheated 2 or 3 times if
necessary. This recipe is said to be over 200 years old.--"Table Talk,"
Phila.


25.--Baked Turnips.

Half boil 6 turnips, cut them in slices, butter a pudding dish, put in
the turnips, add a little milk, season with salt and pepper, cover the
top with bread crumbs and grated cheese. Bake until golden brown.


26--Oyster Stew No. 2.

Boil 1/2 a pint of milk and 1/2 a pint of oyster juice, remove the scum,
throw in the oysters, add 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, salt and pepper.
When the edges curl they are done. Serve with small crackers and celery.


27.--Apple Griddle Cakes.

Put 1 cup _finely_ chopped apple in 1 qt. of any griddle batter; stir
well to keep the apple evenly distributed.


28.--Turkey and Sausage Scallop.

Butter a pudding dish and fill with alternate layers of cold minced
turkey and cooked minced and cold sausage meat, seasoning slightly as
you go. The sausage will supply nearly all the seasoning you wish. Pour
in as much gravy or weak stock as the dish will hold; let it soak in for
a few minutes and cover with a mush of bread crumbs, peppered, salted
and soaked in cream or milk, then beaten smooth with an egg and a
tablespoonful of butter melted. It should be half an inch thick. Cover
and bake for 1/2 an hour, then uncover and brown. Serve at once, as the
crust will soon fall.--From "The National Cook Book," by Marion Harland
and Christine Terhune Herrick.


29.--Rice Johnny Cake.

Take 2 cups of boiled rice and mix with a little cold milk, a little
salt and flour enough to hold it together. Spread it a quarter of an
inch thick on flat tin sheets, and brown it in front of the fire or put
it in the oven. When brown butter it and cut in square slices and serve
very hot.


30.--Cheese Pudding No. 2.

Mix well together 1/2 a pint of bread crumbs, a little thyme and
parsley, a teaspoonful of curry powder, 2 hard boiled eggs, chopped, a
few slices of cheese broken up in small pieces, 2 ozs. of butter
dissolved in a pint of warm milk and two raw eggs beaten well. Let this
soak for 1/2 an hour. Bake in a slow oven. Cover the top with a plate
until half done, then remove it and brown the pudding. Bake an hour and
a half.


31--Pease Pudding.

Wash and soak 1-1/2 cupfuls of dried green peas over night. Put on in a
kettle of cold water with 1 teaspoonful of salt and simmer slowly until
very tender, drain and rub through a sieve, then set aside until cold.
Season highly with salt and pepper, add 2 well-beaten eggs, turn into a
floured pudding cloth, drop into salted boiling water and boil hard for
an hour. Turn out on a hot dish and serve with butter.--"Table Talk,"
Phila.


INDEX.


  A Box of Chestnuts, 16.

  Alpine Eggs, 106.

  Anchovy Canapés, 58.

  Angels on Horseback, 59.

  Apple Griddle Cake, 142.

  A Pretty Salad, 104.

  A Spanish Fish Dish, 116.

  Asparagus a l'Indienne, 67.
    in Rolls, 47.
    Omelet, 60.
    Salad, 49.


  Baked Beans and Tomato Salad, 8.

  Baked Celery, 10.
    Cheese and Rice, 53.
    Oyster Dumpling, 117.
    Pumpkin, 125.
    Rice Cake, 21.
    Spanish Onions, 137.
    Turnips, 141.

  Banana Croquettes, 98.

  Barbacued Lobster, 117.

  Barley Stew, 11.

  Bean Croquettes, 22.

  Beef à la Mode, 115.
    Bubble and Squeak, 58.
    Collops, 60.
    Cutlets, 38.
    Potpie, 128.
    Ragout, 5.
    Rissoles, 62.
    Roll, 139.
    Salad, 114.
    Tongue (Fresh), 120.

  Beefsteak and Kidney Pudding, 31.

  Beefsteak and Potatoes, 129.

  Beet Salad, 57.

  Beignets Soufflés, 61.

  Benton Beef, 71.

  Blanquette of Chicken, 107.

  Boiled Cucumber Salad, 80.
    Partridge with Celery Sauce, 98.

  Bologna Sandwich, 23.

  Boston Cookies, 100.

  Boudinettes, 136.

  Bread Dumplings, 108.
    Omelet, 11.

  Breaded Ham Sauté, 23.
    Sausage, 133.

  Breast of Lamb Broiled, 33.

  Broiled Beef and Mushroom Sauce, 15.
    Live Lobster, 45.
    Mutton and Tomato Sauce, 135.
    Sweetbreads, 14.

  Brown Apple Sauce for Cold Pork, 110.
    Betty, 134.

  Browned Potato Purée, 40.

  Buttered Lobster, 41.
    Shrimps, 88.


  Calas, 119.

  Calf's Brains on Toast, 76.
    Liver Fried in Crumbs, 11.

  Canned Salmon Salad, 124.

  Carolina Philpes, 13.

  Cauliflower au Gratin, 73.
    Salad, 90.
    with Cheese, 83.

  Celery au Gratin, 98.
    Sandwiches, 111.

  Cerkestal (Turkish), 42.

  Champignons en Caisse, 51.

  Cheese Fondue No. 1, 37.
    Fondue No. 2, 46.
    Fritters, 111.
    Polenta, 124.
    Pudding No. 1, 122.
    Pudding No. 2, 143.
    Ramequins, 2.
    Scallop, 56.
    Straws, 104.
    Timbales, 59.
    and Tomato Rarebit, 21.

  Cherry Fritters, 75.
    Salad, 75.

  Chestnut Purée, 134.
    Soup, 107.

  Chicken à la Merengo, 130.
    Creams, 1.
    Cutlets, 4.
    Fritters, 20.
    in Celery Sauce, 18.
    Pie (Concord Style), 49.
    Salad, 97.
    Short-cake, 67.

  Chicola, 88.

  Chocolate Cream, 96.

  Chopped Ham and Egg, 109.

  Chops Masked with Potato, 122.

  Cinnamon Wafers, 104.

  Clams Sautéd and Creamed, 37.

  Clam Chowder, 63.

  Clam Pie No. 1, 34.
    Pie No. 2, 45.

  Coburg Pudding, 102.

  Cocoanut Ice Cream, 5.

  Cod Cutlets, 110.

  Codfish Hash, 24.
    with Potato Border, 137.
    Puffs, 55.

  Coffee Fritters, 27.

  Cold Duck and Chestnut Border, 20.

  Cold Slaw, 89.

  Collared Head, 35.

  Corn Chowder, 90.
    Fritters, 101.

  Corn-meal Puffs, 95.

  Corn Omelet, 91.
    Pudding, 89.

  Corn-starch Cake, 114.

  Crab Salad, 68.

  Cracker Custard, 25.

  Cream of Chicken Sandwich, 82.

  Creamed Corned Beef, 12.

  Crême de Fromage, 72.

  Crescent Croquettes, 33.

  Crumb Griddle Cakes, 111.

  Curried Fowl, 32.
    Hare, 17.
    Lobster, 70.
    Rice, 6.

  Curry of Lobster, 50.
    of Macaroni, 112.
    Sandwiches, 6.

  Cucumber and Lobster Salad, 83.

  Cucumber Salad, 89.


  Deviled Cheese, 48.

  Dolmas (a Turkish Dish), 118.

  Dormers, 38.

  Dried Apple Cake, 113.

  Dutch Sauce and Cold Meat, 82.


  Eels with Tartare Sauce, 107.

  Egg Sandwiches, 95.

  Eggs Cupped, 136.
    in Tomato Cases, 131.
    on Rice, 9.
    Stuffed with Sardines, 93.

  English Bread Pudding, 36.
    Monkey, 42.
    Muffins, 7.


  Fig Ice Cream, 18.
    Sandwich, 79.

  Fillets of Weakfish, 111.

  Finnan-haddie, 28.

  Fish Chowder, 19.
    and Rice, 112.
    Salad, 72.

  Florida Corn Cake, 127.

  Franklin Eggs, 73.

  French Bean Omelet, 50.

  Frenchman's Pie, 85.

  French Omelet, 2.
    Toast, 56.

  Friars' Eggs, 66.

  Fricadelles, 93.

  Fried Bananas, 61.
    Celery, 115.
    Corn-meal Gems, 69.
    Green Tomatoes, 80.
    Lobster, 68.
    Whitebait, 43.

  Frozen Pudding, 81.


  Gatineau Trout (Baked), 105.

  German Prune Cake, 38.
    Way of Cooking Chicken, 33.

  Grape Fruit Salad, 47.

  Guava and Cheese Sandwiches, 79.


  Haddock Roes and Bacon, 7.

  Halibut Réchauffé, 26.

  Ham and Asparagus, 76.
    Canapés, 94.
    Sandwich, 93.

  Harlequin Sandwiches, 119.

  Herring Roes on Toast, 1.

  Hoe Cake, 124.

  Hominy Waffles, 130.

  Horseshoe Cakes, 83.

  Hot Ham Sandwiches, 66.
    Pot, 31.
    Potato Salad, 125.

  Hungarian Chicken, 22.
    Patties, 44.


  Indian Trifle, 123.

  Italian Asparagus, 75.


  Jambalayah, 54.

  Jellied Chicken, 54.
    Tongue, 118.
    Veal, 102.


  Kedgéree, 52.

  Kidney Omelet, 48.

  Kornlet Omelet, 15.


  Laplander Cakes, 93.

  Laurentian Salad, 127.

  Lettuce Sandwiches, 84.

  Liver and Onions, 14.
    Rolls, 16.

  Loaf Corn Bread, 5.

  Lobster à la Mode Française, 56.
    Cream, 126.
    Creams, 35.
    Fritanella, 84.
    in a Chafing Dish, 67.
    Patties, 32.
    Salad, 81.
    Sandwiches, 88.
    (Southern way), 55.

  Lunch Sandwiches, 108.


  Maple Sugar Tea Biscuit, 103.

  Maple Sugar Sandwiches, 101.

  Meat Pie with Potato Crust, 122.

  Minced Collops, 32.
    Veal and Macaroni, 8.

  Mock Crabs, 87.

  Moulded Chopped Meat, 99.

  Mushroom Toasts, 82.

  Mutton Custard, 46.
    Kidneys, 30.
    Stew with Canned Peas, 65.


  Newport Tea Cakes, 68.

  Normandy Shrimps, 78.

  Nut Loaf, 132.


  Oatmeal Bread, 47.

  Okra and Corn Fricassee, 80.

  Onion Soufflé, 21.
    Soup, 34.

  Orange Marmalade Sandwiches, 72.
    Salad, 3.

  Oysters à l'Indienne, 125.
    in Puff Paste, 126.
    with Madeira Sauce, 20.

  Oyster Canapés, 113.
    Chartreuse, 29.
    Croquettes, 140.
    Fritters, 121.
    Kromeskys, 129.
    Loaf, 14.
    Patties, 118.
    Potpie, 3.
    Stew No. 1, 138.
    Stew No. 2, 141.


  Parmesan Fritters, 70.
    Puffs, 50.

  Pea-pod Soup, 91.

  Pease Pudding, 143.

  Philadelphia Relish, 61.

  Pickled Oysters, 119.
    Salmon, 100.

  Planked Shad, 59.

  Polish Salad, 137.

  Potatoes au Gratin, 30.
    Gruyere, 131.

  Potato Balls, 23.
    Border with Meat Filling, 88.
    Chowder, 116.
    Cooked in Stock, 62.
    Croquettes, 110.
    and Meat Turnovers, 40.
    and Meat Puff, 51.
    Puff, 120.
    Salad, 92.
    Soufflé, 65.
    Stew, 24.

  Potted Beef, 13.
    Chicken, 96.

  Purée of Dried Beans, 57.


  Rhubarb Puffs, 74.

  Rice and Apples, 99.
    Balls, 55.
    Border with Creamed Fish, 71.
    Johnny-cake, 143.
    Moulds, 7.
    Waffles, 87.

  Roast Clams, 134.
    Oysters, 128.
    Pigeon with Bread Sauce, 28.

  Round of Beef (Southern style), 132.


  Salade a la Russe, 91.

  Sally Lunn, 84.

  Salmon Salad, 120.

  Saratoga Corn Cake, 34.

  Sardine Sandwiches, 78.

  Sausage Rissoles, 136.

  Savory Toast, 94.
    Trifles, 90.
    Tomatoes, 73.

  Scalloped Corn, 86.
    Oyster Plant, 135.
    Tongue, 95.

  Scotch Broth, 138.
    Collops, 2.
    Eggs, 69.

  Scrambled Eggs with Shad Roes, 17.

  Shad Roe Croquettes, 42.

  Shredded Wheat Biscuit and Apples, 78.
    Wheat Fish Balls, 124

  Shrewsbury Cakes, 92.

  Shrimp Salad, 12.

  Soufflé Biscuit, 19.

  Southern Corn Pone, 105.

  Spanish Buns, 97.
    Potatoes, 69.
    Rice, 63.

  Spider Cake, 44.

  Spring Salad, 77.

  Squash Bread, 43.
    Griddle Cakes, 54.

  St. Charles Indian Bread, 126.

  Steamed Indian Pudding, 135.

  Stewed Blackfish, 106.
    Breast of Lamb, 1.
    Celery and Brown Sauce, 116.
    Eels, 139.
    Kidney with Macaroni, 66.
    Steak and Oyster Sauce, 10.
    Trout, 53.

  Strawberry Jelly, 77.
    Puffs, 81.

  Stuffed Egg-plant, 101.
    Fillets of Flounders, 64.

  Sugared Sweet Potatoes, 25.

  Sweetbread Salad, 58.

  Sweet Potato Pone No. 1, 133.

  Sweet Potato Pone No. 2, 140.

  Sweet Rice Balls, 139.


  Tapioca Soup, 6.

  Toad in a Hole, 12.

  Tomato Croquettes, 9.
    Croutes, 41.
    Ice Salad, 76.
    Jelly Salad, 37.
    Salad, 103.
    Timbales, 129.

  Tongue Toast, 69.
    Squares, 103.

  Tripe Baked with Potatoes, 128.

  Turbot à la Crême, 121.

  Turkey and Sausage Scallop, 142.

  Turnip Cream Soup, 140.


  Valentia Rice, 105.

  Veal and Ham Patés, 48.
    Eggs in a Nest à la Turin, 52.
    Gumbo, 127.
    Loaf, 79.
    Mould, 26.
    Rissoles, 94.
    Salad, 112.
    and Tomato Salad, 68.

  Vegetable Soup, 114.

  Vermicelli Pudding, 130.


  Waldorf Salad, 62.

  Walnut Salad No. 1, 47.
    Salad No. 2, 71.

  Western Balls, 36.

  Wigs, 72.


  Yorkshire Pork Pie, 27.


  Zephyr Eggs, 36.

  Zephyrs, 43.