Reaching the town of merry Springs and doleful Swallows, Mr. P. went
straight to the house of the good LELANDS. When he got there he was
amazed--he couldn't believe that that grand palace was the old "Union."
But he soon reflected that it was the fashion, now-a-days, to
reconstruct old Unions of every kind, and so it wasn't so surprising to
his mind after he had got through with his reflections. But he couldn't
help hoping that the fellows down at Washington, who were also at work
on an old Union, would turn out as good a job as the LELANDS had. As
soon as he got inside, Mr. P. summoned his friend WARREN, that they
might consult together about his accommodations. There were plenty of
vacant rooms, but Mr. P. made up his mind that he would prefer to take
one of those delightful cottages in the court-yard. One of these was so
much more gorgeous than the others, that Mr. P. chose it on the spot.

"Ah!--yes--" quoth the gentle WARREN, "I should be delighted, I'm sure,
but that cottage is reserved especially for the Empress EUGENIE, who,
you know, is expected here daily."

"Indeed!" said Mr. P. "If she is coming so soon, I could not, of course,
keep it very long. So tell me, my good friend, for what trifling sum
will you let me have this cottage till the Empress comes?"

Mr. LELAND gazed earnestly at Mr. P., and asked him what he thought of
the Chinese question; and whether he believed that this would be a good
year for corn. Then Mr. P. struck a bargain for a back-room in the
seventh story of the right-hand tower.

Early the next morning Mr. P., like a conscientious man as he is, went
to drink of the waters of the place. He had a strong belief, based upon
experience, that he would not fancy any of the old springs, and so he
tried a new one--the "Geyser."

Mr. P. stayed a good while at the Geyser. There happened to be a young
lady there who insisted upon helping him to the water with her own lily
hands--the boy might dip it up, but she _must_ hand it to him--and she
had such a way with her that he drank fifty-one glasses. When he came
back to the hotel, and the good WARREN asked him what was the matter, he
merely remarked:

"I'm a quiz, LELAND. If you choose, you may call me a Guy, sir."

Mr. P. got himself analysed that day by Dr. ALLEN, and he was found to
consist principally of carbonate of Lime; Silicate of Potassa; Iodide of
Magnesia; and Chloride of Sodium; with a strong trace of Sulphate of
Strontia.

At night, however, he was able to attend the hop in the grand saloon.
For a time Mr. P. danced with one girl right along. A pretty girl she
was, too, and the style of her dress showed very plainly that it was
EUGENIE she was hoping to see at Saratoga, and not Madame OLLIVIER.
Well, she had not danced with Mr. P. more than a couple of hours when
she left him for a Pole--one of these wandering Counts that you always
see at such places--a regular hop-Pole, in fact. Mr. P. got very angry
at this insult, and if he had had his way he would have had the fellow
partitioned off--like his beloved country. He was so wrathy, indeed,
that when the hop was over he started on an Arctic expedition, but he
had the same luck as KANE, HALL, and the other fellows.

He never saw that Pole.

