 "My thoughts are wing'd with hopes, my hopes with love;
    Mount, love, unto the moone in cleerest night,
  And say, as she doth in the heavens move,
    In earth so wanes and waxes my delight:
  And whisper this, but softly, in her eares,
  Hope oft doth hang the head, and trust shed teares.

 "And you, my thoughts, that some mistrust do cary,
    If for mistrust my mistresse do you blame,
  Say, though you alter, yet you do not vary,
    As she doth change, and yet remaine the same.
  Distrust doth enter hearts, but not infect,
  And love is sweetest season'd with suspect.

 "If she for this with cloudes do maske her eyes,
    And make the heavens darke with her disdaine,
  With windie sighes disperse them in the skies,
    Or with the teares dissolve them into rain.
  Thoughts, hopes, and love return to me no more,
  Till Cynthia shine as she hath done before."

J. M. G.

Worcester.

_Mr. Collier's "Notes and Emendations:" Passage in "All's Well that Ends
Well."_--

             "O you leaden messengers,
  That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
  Fly with false aim; move the still-peering air,
  That sings with piercing, do not touch my lord!"

Such is the text of the first folio. MR. PAYNE COLLIER, at p. 162. of his
_Notes and Emendations_, informs us that the old corrector of his folio of
1632 reads _volant_ for "violent," _wound_ for "move," and _still-piecing_
for "still-peering."

Two of these substitutions are easily shown to be correct. In the
_Tempest_, Act III. Sc. 3., we read:

                     "The elements,
  Of whom your swords are tempered, may as well
  _Wound the loud winds, or with bemockt-at stabs_
  _Kill the still-closing waters_."

What is _still-closing_ but _still-piecing_, the silent reunion after
severance? What is to _wound the loud winds_ but to _wound the air that
sings with piercing_?

But as to the third substitution, I beg permission through your pages to
enter a _caveat_. If {427} we had no proof from the text of Shakspeare that
_violent_ is the correct reading, I fancy that any reader's common sense
would tell him that it is more an appropriate and trenchant term than
_volant_. "What judgment would _stoop_ from this to this?" _Volant_,
moreover, is not English, but French, and as such is used in _Henry V._;
but happily, in this case, we have most abundant evidence from the text of
Shakspeare that he wrote _violent_ in the above passage. In _Henry VIII._,
Act I. Sc. 1., we have the passage,

                 "We may outrun,
  By _violent swiftness_, that which we run at,
  And lose by over-running."

In _Othello_, Act III. Sc. 3., we have the passage,

 "Even so my bloody thoughts, with _violent pace_,
  Shall ne'er look back."

These passages prove that _violent_ is a true Shakspearian epithet for
_velocity_. But how exquisitely appropriate is the epithet when applied to
the velocity of a ball issuing from the mouth of a cannon: and here we have
full confirmation from _Romeo and Juliet_, Act V. Sc. 1., where we read:

 "As _violently_ as hasty powder fir'd
  Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb."

I trust that MR. COLLIER will not, in the teeth of such evidence,
substitute _volant_ for _violent_ in correcting the text of his forthcoming
edition.

C. MANSFIELD INGLEBY.

Birmingham.

       *       *       *       *       *

GENERAL MONK AND THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

A document has recently come into my possession which may perhaps be deemed
worth preserving in the pages of "N. & Q." It is a letter from the
University of Cambridge to General Monk, and, from the various corrections
which occur in it, it has every appearance of being the original draft.
Unfortunately it is not dated; but there can, I presume, be little doubt of
its having been written shortly before the assembling of the parliament in
April, 1660, which led to the Restoration, and in which Monk sat as member
for the county of Devon. The words erased in the original are here placed
between parentheses, and those substituted are given in Italics:

        My Lord,

    As it hath pleased God to make your Excell^{cie} eminently instrumental
    for the raising up of three gasping and dying nations, into the faire
    hopes and prospect of peace and settlement, so hath He engraven you (r
    name) in characters of gratitude upon the hearts of all (true) _to_
    who_m_ (cordially wish) the welfare of _this_ church and state (are)
    _is_ deare and pretious. (Out) From this principle it is that our
    University of Cambridge hath, with great alacrity and unanimity, made
    choyse of your Excellency with whom to deposite the(ire) managing of
    theire concernments in the succeeding Parl^t, w^{ch}, if your
    Excell^{cy} shall please to admitt into a favourable (interpretation)
    _acceptance_, (you will thereby) you will thereby (add) _put_ a further
    obligation of gratitude upon us all; w^{ch} none shalbe more ready to
    expresse than he who is

      Your Excell^{cies} most humble serv^t,
                  W. D.

    [Endorsed]
    To the L^d General Monk.

Who was "W. D."? Was he the then Vice-Chancellor?

LEICESTRIENSIS.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Notes.

_Curiosities of Railway Literature._--Has "Bradshaw" had any reviewers? If
not, an example or two from this neighbourhood, of the absurdities which
reappear month after month in the time-tables, may show the necessity of
them. A Midland train proposes to leave Gloucester at 12.40 p.m., and reach
Cheltenham at 1 p.m. The Great Western Company advertise an express train,
on the _very same line_, to leave two minutes _later_ and arrive five
minutes _earlier_. It is therefore obvious, that if these trains were to
keep their proper time, the express must run into the slow coach in front.
The Great Western Railway Company have also, in a very unassuming manner,
been advertising a feat hitherto unparalleled in the annals of railway
speed,--the mail from Cheltenham at 8.20 a.m. to leave Gloucester at 8.27;
that is to say, seven miles, including starting, slackening speed at two or
three "crossings," stopping, starting again, all in seven minutes! Let the
narrow gauge beat this if it can.

H. H.

Gloucester.

_Cromwell's Seal._--I am in possession of a fine seal; it is a beautiful
engraving of the head of Oliver Cromwell, and was once his property: he
presented it to a favourite officer, whose nephew, to whom it was
bequeathed, gave it to the father of the lady from whom I received it a few
years ago. Thus I am in the singular position of being the _fifth_ holder
of it from the Protector.

Y. S. M.

Dublin.

_Rhymes upon Places._--Buckinghamshire:

 "Brill upon the Hill,
    Oakley in the Hole,
  Shabby little Ickford,
    Dirty Worminghall."

H. T.

Ingatestow.

_Tom Track's Ghost._--The following piece of metrical romance has dwelt in
my memory as long {428} as I have been able to remember. I have never seen
it in print, nor heard it, at least for some years, from any one else; and
have not been able to discover who wrote it:

 "Tom Track he came from Buenos Ayres;
  And now, thought I, for him who cares:
  But soon his coming wrought me woe;
  He misled Poll,--as you shall know.
  All in the togs that I had bought,
  With that ere Tom she did consort,
  Which gave my feelings great concern,
  And caused a row,--as you shall learn.
  So then challenge Tom I did;
  We met, shook hands, and took a quid;
  I shot poor Tom.--The worse for me;
  It brought his ghost,--as you shall see.
  Says he, 'I'm Tom Track's ghost, that's flat.'
  Says I, 'Now only think on that.'
  Says he, 'I'm come to torment you now;'
  Which was hard lines,--as you'll allow.
 'So, Master Ghost, belay your jaw;
  For if on me you claps a claw,
  My locker yonder will reveal,
  A tight rope's end, which you shall feel.'
  Then off his winding-sheet he throwed,
  And by his trousers Tom I knowed;
  He wasn't dead; but come to mess,
  So here's an end,--as you may guess."

The _implicatio_, the _agnitio_, and the _peripetia_ are so well worked
out, that Aristotle would, I think, be compelled to admit it as an almost
perfect specimen of that most ancient kind of drama which was recited by
one actor. I refer especially to C. XXII. of the _Poetics_, which says,
that that _agnitio_ is most beautiful which is joined with the _peripetia_,
of which here we have so striking an example. These reasons embolden me to
ask if it be worth preserving in "N. & Q," and who was the author?

W. FRASER.

Tor-Mohun.

       *       *       *       *       *


Queries.

JACOB BOBART AND HIS DRAGON, ETC.

Dr. Zachary Grey, in his edition of _Hudibras_, vol. i. p. 125., relates
the following anecdote:

    "Mr. Jacob Bobart, Botany Professor of Oxford, did, about forty years
    ago (in 1704), find a dead rat in the Physic Garden, which he made to
    resemble the common picture of dragons, by altering its head and tail,
    and thrusting in taper sharp sticks, which distended the skin on each
    side till it mimicked wings. He let it dry as hard as possible. The
    learned immediately pronounced it a dragon, and one of them sent an
    accurate description of it to Dr. Maliabechi, Librarian to the Grand
    Duke of Tuscany: _several fine copies of verses_ were wrote upon so
    rare a subject, but at last Mr. Bobart owned the cheat: however, it was
    looked upon as a masterpiece of art, and as such deposited in the
    anatomy schools (at Oxford), where I saw it some years after."

Can any of the readers of "N. & Q." inform me where I can procure the
_several_ fine copies of verses, or where they are to be seen, and any
other particulars relating to Jacob Bobart?

Where can I procure copies of the following, mentioned in Wood's _Athenæ
Oxon._, vol. iii. p. 757.:

    "Poem upon Mr. Jacob Bobards Yew-man of the Guards to the Physic
    Garden, to the tune of the 'Counter-Scuffle.' Oxon. 1662."

On one side of a sheet of paper.

Also:

    "A Ballad on the Gyants in the Physic Garden in Oxon, who have been
    breeding Feet as long as Garagantua was Teeth."

On one side of a sheet of paper.

H. T. BOBART.

       *       *       *       *       *

BISHOP BERKELEY'S PORTRAIT.

The following letter may perhaps have some interest in itself; but I send
it for insertion in the pages of "N. & Q." in the hope of obtaining some
information about the pictures which it mentions. It is addressed on the
back, "The Reverend the Provost and Fellows, Dublin College;" and in the
corner, "Pr. Favour of The Right Hon. Lord Viscount Molesworth;" and does
not appear to have ever passed through the post.

        Reverend Sir, and Gentlemen,

