"Just the opposite, in fact,--pardon me! To my eye, you had a mocking,
ironical cast of countenance. I felt sure at once you were the sort of
person I never could make a _friend_ of, and acquaintances I leave to
Flora, who wants to know every body. I thought the less I had to do
with you the better."

I felt hurt, and almost insulted. I had not been mistaken, then; she
had disliked me, and perhaps disliked me yet.

"It was not that I stood in fear of your satire," she continued; "I am
indifferent to ridicule or censure in general; no one but a _friend_
has power to wound me."

A flattering emphasis, truly! I felt my temper a little stirred by
Miss Etty's frankness. I was sulkily silent.

"_I_ had no claim to any forbearance, any consideration for
peculiarities of any sort. I am perfectly resigned to being the theme
of your wit in any circle, if you can find aught in _my_ country-bred
ways to amuse you."

Zounds! I must speak.

"My conduct to Flora must have confirmed the charming impression
produced by my unlucky phiz, I imagine. But don't bear malice against
me in _her_ behalf; you must have seen that she was perfectly able to
revenge herself."

Etty's light-hearted laugh rung out, and reminded me of my once
baffled curiosity when it reached my ear from Norah's domain. But
though this unsuppressed mirth of hers revealed the prettiest row of
teeth in the world, and made the whole face decidedly beautiful,
somehow or other it gave me no pleasure, but rather a feeling of
depression. My joining in it was pure pretence.

Presently the brightness faded, and I found myself gazing at the cold
countenance of Little Ugly again.

"No, I did not refer to Flora," said she. "As you say, she can avenge
her own quarrel, and we both were quite as ready to laugh at you, as
you could be to laugh at us, I assure you."

"No doubt of it," said I, with some pique.

"But what I cannot forgive you, cannot think of with any toleration,
is--"

"What?" cried I, astonished. "How have I offended?"

"A man of any right feeling at all could not make game of an aged
woman, his own relative, at the same time that he was receiving her
hearty and affectionate hospitality."

"Neither have I done so," cried I, in a towering passion. "You do me a
great wrong in accusing me of it. I would knock any man down who
should treat my aunt with any disrespect. And if I have sometimes
allowed Flora to do it unrebuked, you well know that she might once
have pulled my hair, or cuffed my ears, and I should have thought it a
becoming thing for a young lady to do. I have played the fool under
your eye, and submit that you should entertain no high opinion of my
wisdom. But you have no right to judge so unfavorably of my heart. If
I have spoken to my aunt with boyish petulance when she vexed me, at
least it was to her face, and regretted and atoned for to her
satisfaction. I am incapable of deceiving her, much less of ridiculing
her either behind her back or before her face. I respond to her love
for me with sincere gratitude, and the sister of my grandmother shall
never want any attention that an own grandson could render while I
live. I shall find it hard to forgive you this accusation, Miss Etty,"
I said, haughtily, and shut my mouth as if I would never speak to her
again.

She made no answer, but looked up into my face with one of those
wondrous smiles. It went as straight to my heart as a pistol bullet
could do, my high indignation proving no defence against it. I was
instantly vanquished, and as I heartily shook the hand she held out to
me, I was just able to refrain from pressing it to my lips, which, now
I think of it, would have been a most absurd thing for me to do. I
wonder what could have made me think of doing it!

_After Dinner_. I hear Flora's musical laugh in the mysterious
boudoir, and a low, congratulatory little murmur of good humor on
Etty's part. I believe she is afraid to laugh loud, lest I should hear
her do it, and rush to the spot. The door is ajar; I'll storm the
castle.

Flora admitted me with a shout of welcome, the instant I tapped.  Etty
pushed a rocking-chair toward me, but said nothing. The little room
was almost lined with books. Drawings, paintings, shells, corals, and,
in the sunny window, plants, met my exploring gaze, but the great
basket was nowhere to be seen. It was got up for the nonce, I imagine.
Etty a rogue!

"This is the pleasantest nook in the house. It is a shame you have not
been let in before," said Flora, zealously. "You shall see Etty's
drawings." Neither of us opened the portfolio she seized, however, but
watched Etty's eyes. They were cast down with a diffident blush which
gave me pain; I was indeed an intruder. She gave us the permission we
waited for, however. There were many good copies of lessons: those I
did not dwell upon. But the sketches, spirited though imperfect, I
studied as if they had been those of an Allston. Etty was evidently in
a fidget at this preference of the smallest line of original talent
over the corrected performances which are like those of every body
else. I drew out a full-length figure done in black chalk on brown
paper. It chained Flora's wondering attention as quite new. It was a
young man with his chair tipped back; his feet rested on a table, with
a slipper perched on each toe. His hands were clasped upon the back of
his head. The face--really, I was angry at the diabolical expression
given it by eyes looking askance, and lips pressed into an arch by a
contemptuous smile. It was a corner of this very brown sheet that I
saw under her arm, when she vanished from the kitchen as I entered;
the vociferous mirth which attracted me was at my expense. Before
Flora could recognize my portrait, Little Ugly pounced upon it; it
fell in a crumpled lump into the bright little wood fire, and ceased
to exist.

"I had totally forgotten it," said she, with a blush which avenged my
wounded self-love. Ironical pleasure at having been the subject of her
pencil I could not indulge myself in expressing, as I did not care to
enlighten Little Handsome. Any lurking pique was banished when Etty
showed me, with a smile, the twilight view by the pond.

"Do you draw?" she asked; and Flora cried, "He makes caricatures of
his friends with pen and ink; let him deny it if he can!"

I was silent.