Exhibiting, as Mr. Livermore's book does, the contrast between the
opinions of the founders of the Republic and those professed by the
would-be destroyers of the Republic, and showing, as it does, how far a
large portion even of the people of the North have fallen away from the
just and generous doctrine of the earlier time, it must lead every
thoughtful reader to a deep sense of the need of a regeneration of the
spirit of the nation, and to a confirmed conviction of the
incompatibility of Slavery with national greatness and virtue. The
Rebellion has taught us that the Republic is not safe while Slavery is
permitted to exercise any political power. It ought to teach us also,
that, as long as Slavery exists in any of the States, it will not cease
to exercise political power, and that the only means to make the nation
safe is utterly to abolish and destroy Slavery, wherever it is found
within its limits. Nor is this all; the lesson of the Rebellion is but
half learned, unless we resolve that henceforth there shall be no fatal
division between our consciences, our principles, our theories, and our
treatment of the black race, and unless we acknowledge their inalienable
right to that justice by which alone the most ancient heavens and the
most sacred institutions are fresh and strong.

There is no better textbook for enforcing these lessons than Mr.
Livermore's Research.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECENT AMERICAN PUBLICATIONS

RECEIVED BY THE EDITORS OF THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY.


"Christopher North." A Memoir of John Wilson, late Professor of Moral
Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh. Compiled from Family-Papers
and other Sources. By his Daughter, Mrs. Gordon. With an Introduction by
R. Shelton Mackenzie, D.C.L., Editor of the "Noctes Ambrosianæ," etc.
Complete in One Volume. New York. W.J. Widdleton. 8vo. pp. xii., 484.
$2.00.

Alphabetical Army-Register; giving the Names, Date of Present and
Original Commissions, Rank, Place of Nativity, and from whence
Appointed, of all the Officers of the United States Army, as shown by
the Official Army-Register, May, 1863. New York. D. Van Nostrand. 8vo.
paper, pp. 64. 50 cts.

The Works of Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, Viscount St. Albans, and
Lord High Chancellor of England. Collected and edited by James Spedding,
M.A., of Trinity College, Cambridge; Robert Leslie Ellis, M.A., late
Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge; and Douglas Denon Heath,
Barrister-at-Law, late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Vol. VI.
Boston. Taggard & Thompson. 12mo. pp. 450. $1.50.

Money. By Charles Moran. New York. D. Appleton & Co. 12mo. pp. 228.
$1.00.

The Crisis. New York. D. Appleton & Co. 8vo. paper, pp. 95. 50 cts.

Chemistry. By William Thomas Brande, D.C.L., F.R.S.L. and E., of Her
Majesty's Mint, Member of the Senate of the University of London, and
Honorary Professor of Chemistry in the Royal Institution of Great
Britain; and Alfred Swaine Taylor, M.D., F.R.S., Fellow of the Royal
College of Physicians of London, and Professor of Chemistry and Medical
Jurisprudence in Guy's Hospital. Philadelphia. Blanchard & Lea. 8vo. pp.
696. $3.50.

The Life and Letters of Washington Irving. By his Nephew, Pierre M.
Irving. New York. G.P. Putnam. 12mo. pp. 403. $1.50.

Lectures on the Symbolic Character of the Sacred Scriptures. By Rev.
Abiel Silver, Minister of the New Jerusalem Church in New York. New
York. D. Appleton & Co. 12mo. pp. 286. $1.25.

Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature. By Thomas H. Huxley, F.R.S.,
F.L.S., Professor of Natural History in the Jermyn-Street School of
Mines. New York. D. Appleton & Co. 12mo. pp. 184. $1.25.

