_Wednesday._--Excellent. This martial law is a wonderful thing. On Monday I
had the whole of the Opposition kidnapped and sent down by one of the
special Saturday trains, well guarded and labelled "Football Party," to
Twickenham. The train was guaranteed to stop for some hours at every
station on the way, and is not due at Twickenham till to-morrow morning.
Meanwhile my Indemnity Bill went triumphantly through the House this
evening, and now all is well.

_Thursday._--End of martial law. Rather a dull day on the whole.

A.A.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

Answer to a Clergyman.

No, dear Sir, your high calling does not excuse you from observing the
rules of civility common amongst laymen when writing to the Editor of a
paper which has expressed views that do not happen to accord with your own.

       *       *       *       *       *

     "Dancing was engaged in around the bonfire to the skirl of the
     philabeg."--_Glasgow Herald._

On reading this we immediately went
round to our tailor and ordered a new
pair of bagpipes.

       *       *       *       *       *

     "A change has come over the domestic habits of the French middle
     class. This means that the money that would have been accumulated for
     the girl's diary is now in some cases diverted into other
     channels."--_T. P's Weekly._

Probably squandered on a packet of those useless New Year's cards.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Bosun_ (_to new deck hand who has trodden on his toes while
hauling on a rope_). "'BEG YOUR PARDON,' INDEED! THAT'S BLOOMIN' FINE
LANGUAGE TO USE TO A SHIPS BOSUN."]

       *       *       *       *       *

LOCAL COLOUR.


I.

     _From the Editor of "The Globe Fiction Magazine" to Aubrey Aston,
     Esq._
     _May 5th._

DEAR MR. ASTON,--We are extremely sorry that we cannot see our way to using
_Red Shadows_. The idea is an excellent one, if a trifle improbable. But
you must be aware that West Africa has been worse handled by
fiction-writers than any other locality, and we are afraid we dare not risk
publishing a story in which the writer has drawn on his imagination for
local colour, however vivid that imagination may be. The West African
expert at our office assures us that _Red Shadows_ contains some
inaccuracies which would be bound to spring to the eye of any reader who
had been near the West Coast. We cannot imperil the reputation of a
magazine so widely circulated as ours, and we feel that in returning the
MS. we are in some degree safeguarding your own. Thanking you for the many
excellent stories you have let us have,

     Yours very truly,
     J. W. INGLEBY, Editor.


II.

     _Aubrey Aston to the Editor._
     _Laburnam Rise, Hornsey._
     _May 8th._

DEAR MR. EDITOR,--Thanks for your note. I cannot help feeling that you were
to some extent influenced by your knowledge of the fact that I had never
been near the West Coast. I hope, however, to visit the White Man's Grave
shortly and will possibly let you have some stuff from the spot.

     Yours,
     A. A.


III.

     _The Same to the Same._
     _From Sherbro, Sierra Leone._
     _June, 18th._

Mr. Aubrey Aston begs to enclose to the Editor of "The Globe Fiction
Magazine" another West African effort, and hopes that it may pass his
critic.


IV.

     _The Editor to Aubrey Aston._
     _July 31st._

DEAR MR. ASTON,--Herewith proof of _The Case of Mr. Everett._ I trust you
will be able to let us have some more West Coast tales while you are out.
Stories with the true African ring about them, from such a practised pen as
your own, are hard to come by. Our "critic" passed _Mr. Everett_ with
honours. You will no doubt see yourself by now how comparatively bald and
unconvincing _Red Shadows_ is, when set against a tale "hot from the oven."

     Yours very truly,
     J. W. I.

P.S.--Our West African expert asks me to thank you for information on
several points on which he had been hazy. It is news to him that the Mendes
have an Arabic strain in their blood; he had believed them to be pure
Zishtis. He had also been in the dark as to the origin of the "leopard"
murders.


V.

     _From Aubrey Aston to the Editor._
     _Hornsey, September 20th._

DEAR MR. EDITOR,--Many thanks for the proof (forwarded to me from Sierra
Leone) of _The Case of Mr. Everett_--which I return corrected--and for your
very gratifying note.

I'm afraid I have not yet found time to visit West Africa, but I still hope
to. When I do, I will perhaps let you have some tales "hot from the oven."
In the meantime I find the Travel section of our local library a more
comfortable and probably a more accurate source of copy. But I still have
to draw on my imagination to some extent. The Mendes may be pure Yanks for
all I know to the contrary; but I hope for their own sakes they aren't
Zishtis. It sounds such a horrible thing to be.

As for the "leopard" murders, I got my information from Major Kingsley,
D.S.O., who has been a Government officer in Nigeria and Sierra Leone for
fourteen years, so there may be something in it. As he is a close friend of
mine I sent my story to him out there for him to look through before
letting you have it, and he very kindly posted it direct to you. He has
written to tell me that the ignorance shown in it was such as to preclude
any possibility of improvement by revision.

By the way, Major Kingsley was the author of _Red Shadows_. He asked me as
a special favour to godfather it, as he believed an unknown writer stood no
chance. It is a perfectly true story. My kindest regards to your expert.

     Yours very truly,
     AUBREY ASTON.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FLOWERS OF SPEECH (U.S.A.).

_Wealthy American Westerner_ (_anxious to show his great appreciation of
the able and enthusiastic way in which the duchess has pleaded the cause of
her pet charity_). "WAAL, GOOD-BYE, DUCHESS. I WILL SEND YOU A CHEQUE,
SURE. I GUESS SOME OF THESE CHARITIES WOULDN'T BE SO SICK IF THEY HAD CRAZY
BOOMERS LIKE YOU TO BOOST 'EM ALONG."]

       *       *       *       *       *

     "Many correspondents have asked whether Mrs. Cornwallis received this
     compensation because her husband was a reader of this
     journal."--_Daily Mail._

Could they have meant--correspondents being notoriously rude--that the
husband deserved it more?

       *       *       *       *       *

A CHARM

(_whereby a modern male adult mortal may be pleasantly initiated into the
fairy state_).

  O male adult, O male adult!
    This is the way we make a fairy:--
  _Quicunque vult
    Silvis terrisque imperare_,
  Think upon oaks and thorns and ashes,
  On glow-worms and on fire-fly flashes,
  On rooty loams and stony brashes!
  Then upon thyme and tansy think,
  On fields of sainfoin, ruddy pink,
  On dells deep down and rocks upreared,
  On lad's-love and on old-man's-beard,
  On spearmint and on silver sages,
  On colewort and on saxifrages!
    Then think on pools in dimmest haunts,
  Unwhipped of any wind that rages,
    Where the lithe flag her purple flaunts,
  Where frogs go plopping round the edge
  And gnats are humming through the sedge,
    And on the leaf of each wide lily
  The scaly newts do lay their eggs
  And the small people dip their legs
    To shatter the moonshine floating stilly
  O'er the pool's mystic weedy dregs!
  Think yet again on rolling hills
  Where little sleepy new-born rills
    Are bedded deep in upland mosses,
  Where tiny stars of tormentils
  Peer skyward with their golden gaze,
    Where lichened dikes and shallow fosses
  Are signs of far-forgotten days--
  Forgotten save by us who roam
  Those uplands nightly after gloam,
  And, linking in our magic rings,
  Whirl in a dazzle of dancing wings--
  Us only whose hot eyes beheld
  Fordone delights of vanished eld!
  Think on it! think on it!
  And think no more on what you quit--
  On hearth and home, on streets and shops,
  On trousers, ties, and hunting-tops--
  Think no more on City dinners,
  On office hours and all the winners--
  For you are fitted by field and dell
  Us to follow, with us to dwell,
  To be for ever free from harm,
  A fairy changeling by this charm,
  To be the lord of light and mirth,
  To be the lord of all the earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: (_After ORCHARDSON'S picture of NAPOLEON en route for St.
Helena._)

THE NEW BELLEROPHON:
OR, BOTHA'S SURPRISE PACKET.

(The Government of S. Africa are sending, as a present to the
Mother-country, the ten men whom they regard as their leading
undesirables.)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE WORLD-WIDE ATTENTION AROUSED BY THE RECENT
CORRESPONDENCE ABOUT RULE 18, BY WHICH A PLAYER LOSES THE HOLE IF HIS
OPPONENT'S BALL STRIKES HIM, HIS CADDIE OR HIS CLUBS, IS ALREADY
BRIGHTENING GOLF. THE DOCTOR, WHO WAS PLAYING "THREE MORE," GOT "DORMY" AT
THE SEVENTEENTH WITH A BEAUTIFUL QUARTER BRASSIE BACKHANDER, WHICH TOOK THE
COLONEL IN THE LOWER CHEST.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BUT THE COLONEL SAVED THE GAME ON THE LAST GREEN. THE DOCTOR
(WHOSE CADDIE'S PLAY WAS BEYOND ALL PRAISE) WAS CAUGHT NAPPING, FOR HE
FAILED TO AVOID A STAB TO LEG (THE ODD) WHICH JUST FOUND HIS PUTTER.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A MODERN IDYLL.

(_With acknowledgments to various distinguished writers in this vein._)

To me the robin is a peculiarly attractive bird. It bears itself with a
sort of pompous pathos which moves me to a friendly tear and gentle
laughter.

       * * *

One came to the ledge of my parlour window the other morning, a not
infrequent occurrence. "Good morning, Robin Red-breast," quoth I; and it
acquiesced in an expressive silence. The conversation is generally
one-sided on these occasions. "Bird," I continued, "it may interest you to
know that I am writing a book. What about, you wonder? About any old thing
that happens to crop up--yourself, for instance." The robin tripped hither
and thither with vast self-importance. "Not so much of it," said I. "It
isn't your intrinsic worth but the fact that you chanced to crop up first,
that got you this publicity."

The robin flew away in high dudgeon as Martha entered the room bearing the
boiled eggs and tea with which it is my custom to break my fast.

       * * *

How long the greater tragedies of life lie hidden beneath the careless
surface! From a chance remark of this excellent Martha's, I have but now
discovered, after many years' experience of it, that what I have always
fondly supposed to be tea, she, who makes it, equally fondly supposes to be
coffee.

       * * *

There is only one other thing worth mentioning about Martha, and I will
mention it. For very many years, as she is in the habit of telling me once
a week, she has been walking out with a policeman. This has suggested to me
a quaint thought, that to marry a policeman is the cheapest and most
effective way of insuring against burglary, but otherwise, I confess, I
have shown and felt but little interest in this _affaire de coeur_.

       * * *

A letter lay on the table beside my plate. It was addressed to me. I picked
it up and, holding the envelope in my left hand, with the first finger of
my right hand I tore open the flap. I then withdrew the enclosure and,
standing with my back to the window so that the light fell on to the
written sheet, I read it.

       * * *

It was from my sister, my little sister Clare, and it told me that she was
engaged to be married. My sister, my little sister Clare, engaged to be
married, and to a partner in a firm of publishers of all people! Here was
news indeed! I own that Clare's publisher interested me very much more than
Martha's policeman.

       * * *

I remember nothing more until I looked up a few moments later to see a
robin once again upon my window-ledge. I would not swear that it was the
same bird, but, feeling that one robin was as good as another, I told it
all about Clare's publisher and what this might mean to all of us.

       * * *

Some days later I came down to breakfast, to find another letter lying on
the table beside my plate. This letter also was addressed to me. Having
gone through much the same process as that used with regard to my earlier
correspondence, I discovered that this was from Clare's _fiancé_. He
thanked me for my very kind congratulations of the 13th ultimo, and went on
to say that, with regard to the latter part of my letter, he was not quite
sure exactly what an idyll might be, and so my interesting description of
my embryo book conveyed little to him. Even so, he went on, he would have
been honoured to publish any book written by any relative of his dear
Clare, but that he dealt, to be candid, exclusively in legal text-books.

       * * *

To Martha, entering at this moment, I confessed that there was at least
this to be said for her and her man, that they had never concealed their
connection with that odious thing, the Law.

       * * *

Later, I read an extract from my manuscript aloud to the robin. He wore an
air of abstraction and I could see that his thoughts were running on other
matters more immediately concerned with his own interests.

       * * *

To me the robin is a peculiarly human bird.

       *       *       *       *       *

BLANCHE'S LETTERS.

     _REVUES_ AND THINGS.
     _Park Lane._
     _January 31st._

DEAREST DAPHNE,--I've been putting in quite a pleasant little time down at
Much Gaddington with Bosh and Wee-Wee. Theatricals were the order of the
night, and the best thing we did was a _revue_ written for us by the Rector
of Much Gaddington, who's a perfectly sweet man and immensely clever. It's
a better _revue_ than _any_ of those at the theatres, and as that dreadful
Censor had, of course, nothing to do with it the dear rector could make it
as snappy as he liked. Wee-Wee and I were two "plume girls," Sal and Nan,
in aprons, you know, and feathers and boots stitched with white; and our
duet, "Biff along, Old Sport!" with a pavement dance between the verses,
fairly brought down the house. The rector himself was _impayable_ in his
songs, "Wink to me only," and "Tango--Tangoing--Tangone!" But the
outstanding feature of the whole affair was certainly Dick Flummery, who
introduced his new and sensational _Danse à trois Jambes_, entirely his own
invention!

What Dick doesn't know about dancing isn't worth knowing, and he says all
the steps that _can_ be done with two legs have _been_ done, and for
_anything_ really novel another leg must be added. So he's had a clockwork
leg made, and he winds it up before beginning and makes its movements blend
in with the steps of his _real_ legs, and the effect is simply enormous!

People wrote to Wee-Wee from far and near begging to come and see "Hold
Tight, Please!"--that's the name of the rector's _revue_--so we decided to
give it in the village school-room for charity. Since then Dick's been
fairly snowed under with offers from London managers. They offer him big
terms, and if his colonel decides that the prestige of the regiment won't
suffer through one of its officers doing a three-legged dance at the Halls
Dick will accept. If the colonel objects, Dick will still accept, for then
he'll send in his papers, and go on the music-hall stage in earnest.

The rector has also had good offers for "Hold Tight, Please!" and he's busy
toning it down before it's given in front of the dear old prudish public.
He made us laugh one evening by telling us how he met his bishop lately at
a Church Congress or something, and the bishop said, "There's a report that
you've been seen once or twice lately at the Up-to-Date Variety Theatre,
Piccadilly Square, London. You're able to contradict it, of course?" "Oh,
that's quite all right, bishop," answered the dear rector; "I _have_ run up
to town several times in order to go to the Up-to-Date, but it was for
business, not amusement. I'm responsible for the new ballet there, 'Fun,
Frills and Frocks.'" So of course the bishop had no more to say.

I was talking to Norty yesterday about the state of Europe, and _when_
we're to know who's who in the Near East, and which of the kingdoms out
there are to be absorbed or abolished or allowed to go on; and he threw a
new light on things by telling me that these matters are a good deal in the
hands of the _stamp-collectors_--that when _they_ agree among themselves as
to what's to be done it _will_ be done. A great many people who matter very
much indeed are stamp-collectors, it seems, and it would make an _immense_
difference in the value of their collections if certain countries were
absorbed or abolished or allowed to go on. For instance, suppose anyone had
a complete set of Albelian stamps, and Albelia wasn't allowed to go on, the
set would become almost priceless. Norty says also that _heaps_ of
stamp-collectors who have been opposed tooth and nail to Home Rule on
principle have been won over by the Coalition with the promise that an
absolutely _sweet_ set of Irish stamps would be issued as soon as H. R.
became an accomplished fact. _Ainsi va le monde._

The swing of the pendulum is going to make the coming season a _stately_
one. It will be correct to be haughty and dignified. _Features_ will be _de
rigueur_, and aquiline noses will be very much worn. Dancing is to be
deliberate and majestic, and partners will not touch each other; as Teddy
Foljambe put it, "Soccer dancing will be in and Rugby dancing out." As far
as one can see at present, the most popular dance at parties will be the
war-dance of the Umgaroos, a tribe who live on the banks of some river at
the back of beyond. I can't tell you anything about them except that they
were found near this river doing this dance, and someone's brought it to
Europe. It's very slow and impressive, and a native weapon, like a big
egg-boiler with a long handle, is carried. The dance grows faster towards
the end and the native weapon is twirled. In a crowded room there'd be a
little danger here, and one would have to practise carefully beforehand.
Already Popsy Lady Ramsgate's maid, has brought an action against her for
"grievous bodily harm." In practising the war-dance of the Umgaroos, Popsy
twirled her weapon too wide and struck the girl on the head.

What do you think of the New Music, my child? No answer is expected. It's a
question few people _dare_ to answer. Norty's definition of the New
Humour--"the old Humour without the Humour"--won't do for the New Music.
It's quite out by itself. But on the whole it's darling music, full of new
paths to somewhere or other, and ideas and impressions of one doesn't know
what, and sprinkled all over with delicious accidentals that seem to have
been shaken out of a pepper-pot.

I've just got some piano studies of Schönvinsky's, to be played with the
eyes shut and gloves on, and they're too wonderful for words!

     Ever thine, BLANCHE.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BACK FROM SWITZERLAND.

(1) SNAPSHOT, ILLUSTRATING THE COOLNESS DISPLAYED BY THE INTREPID
MOUNTAIN-CLIMBER, AS SENT TO FRIENDS. (2) A FULL-SIZED UNEXPURGATED EDITION
OF THE SAME.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LEGEND OF EVERYMATRON.

(Showing one of the reasons why the Tango is already _démodé_.)

(_With apologies to Mr. KIPLING._)

  This is the sorrowful story told at the Tango Teas
  Of the old folks dancing together, frivolous as you please:--

  "Our mothers, came to the dances; dignified matrons, they,
  They smilingly sat and watched us after we waltzed away.

  "Our mothers looked on at the dancing--that was their business then;
  Frowned on the detrimentals, smiled on the right young men.

  "Then came this Tangomania, and when the fad was new
  Badly it shocked the old folks--now they are doing it too!

  "Now we may watch our mothers, smiling and flushed and gay,
  Doing it, doing it, doing it, tangoing night and day,

  "Stamping a Texas Tommy, wreathing a Grapevine Swirl,
  Gleefully Gaby Gliding, young as the youngest girl.

  "We may not laugh at our mothers, for (between me and you)
  They can out-dance us often--get all our partners too!"

  This is the sorrowful story told by a chastened lot
  Of maidens sitting together, watching their mothers trot.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Nervous Lady_ (_in whose street there have been several
burglaries_). "HOW OFTEN DO YOU POLICEMEN COME DOWN THIS ROAD? I'M
CONSTANTLY ABOUT, BUT I NEVER SEE YOU."

_Policeman._ "AH, VERY LIKELY I SEES YOU WHEN YOU DON'T SEE ME, MUM. IT'S A
POLICEMAN'S BUSINESS TO SECRETE 'ISSELF!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OBLIQUE METHOD.

"I want to engage the next cook myself," I had said to my wife.

"Why?" she asked.

"Chiefly," I said, "because I am the only person in the house who minds
what is placed on the table. If the food is distasteful I complain of it;
you defend it; and we lose our tempers. Now it is perfectly clear that you
cannot guard against certain culinary monstrosities when you engage a cook.
I can. And coming from a man it will impress her more."

"Why can't I do it?"

"Because you haven't," I said. "You have engaged scores of cooks in your
time and everyone does a certain thing which infuriates me."

"Have it your own way," she said.

I meant to.

In course of time the prospective cook was ushered into my study. If I
liked her she was to stay.

"Good morning," I said. "There's only one thing I want to discuss with you.
Apple tart. Can you cook apple tarts really well?"

She said it was her speciality, her _forte_.

"Yes, but can you do them as I like them, I wonder."

How did I like them?

"Well, my idea of an apple tart is that there should be so much lemon in it
that it tastes of lemon rather than apple."

"Mine, too," she said. "I always put a lot of lemon in."

"And," I went on, "wherever the tart doesn't taste of lemon I like it to
taste of cloves."

"I was just going to say the same. I always put in plenty of cloves."

"In short, the whole duty of a cook who is given an apple to cook is," I
said, "to see that every scrap of the divine--of the flavour of the apple
is smothered and killed."

She looked at me a little in perplexity.

"Isn't it?" I asked.

"Yes," she faltered.

"Well," I said, "I've recently been to see my doctor and he says that there
are two things I must never touch again, at least in an apple tart: lemon
and cloves. Otherwise he can't answer for the consequences. Will you help
me to avoid them, at home at any rate? Will you?"

She was a good woman with a kind heart and she promised.

She has kept her promise.

Apple tarts in our house are worth eating.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRYING ON.

"I am going to London," I said.

"Going to London?" said the lady of the house. "What for?"

"To live a double life," I said. "Many men do it and are never found out
till they have been dead quite a long time. I'm going to begin to-day, and
first I'm going to call on my tailor."

"But you can't call on your tailor in those clothes."

"Why not?" I said. "He made the clothes, and the least he can do is to look
at them after I've worn them all these years."

