He tried to picture these Heinrich parents. He supposed they were
kindly, civilised people. It was manifest the youngster had come to him
from a well-ordered and gentle-spirited home. But he imagined them--he
could not tell why--as people much older than himself. Perhaps young
Heinrich had on some occasion said they were old people--he could not
remember. And he had a curious impulse too to write to them in phrases
of consolation; as if their loss was more pitiable than his own. He
doubted whether they had the consolation of his sanguine temperament,
whether they could resort as readily as he could to his faith, whether
in Pomerania there was the same consoling possibility of an essay on the
Better Government of the World. He did not think this very clearly, but
that was what was at the back of his mind. He went on writing.

    _If you think that these two boys have both perished, not in some
    noble common cause but one against the other in a struggle of
    dynasties and boundaries and trade routes and tyrannous
    ascendancies, then it seems to me that you must feel as I feel that
    this war is the most tragic and dreadful thing that has ever
    happened to mankind._

He sat thinking for some minutes after he had written that, and when
presently he resumed his writing, a fresh strain of thought was
traceable even in his opening sentence.

    _If you count dead and wounds this is the most dreadful war in
    history; for you as for me, it has been almost the extremity of
    personal tragedy.... Black sorrow.... But is it the most dreadful
    war?_

    _I do not think it is. I can write to you and tell you that I do
    indeed believe that our two sons have died not altogether in vain.
    Our pain and anguish may not be wasted--may be necessary. Indeed
    they may be necessary. Here am I bereaved and wretched--and I hope.
    Never was the fabric of war so black; that I admit. But never was
    the black fabric of war so threadbare. At a thousand points the
    light is shining through._

Mr. Britling's pen stopped.

There was perfect stillness in the study bedroom.

"The tinpot style," said Mr. Britling at last in a voice of extreme
bitterness.

He fell into an extraordinary quarrel with his style. He forgot about
those Pomeranian parents altogether in his exasperation at his own
inexpressiveness, at his incomplete control of these rebel words and
phrases that came trailing each its own associations and suggestions to
hamper his purpose with it. He read over the offending sentence.

"The point is that it is true," he whispered. "It is exactly what I want
to say."...

Exactly?...

His mind stuck on that "exactly."... When one has much to say style is
troublesome. It is as if one fussed with one's uniform before a
battle.... But that is just what one ought to do before a battle.... One
ought to have everything in order....

He took a fresh sheet and made three trial beginnings.

    _"War is like a black fabric."_...

    _"War is a curtain of black fabric across the pathway."_

    _"War is a curtain of dense black fabric across all the hopes and
    kindliness of mankind. Yet always it has let through some gleams of
    light, and now--I am not dreaming--it grows threadbare, and here and
    there and at a thousand points the light is breaking through. We owe
    it to all these dear youths--"_

His pen stopped again.

"I must work on a rough draft," said Mr. Britling.


Section 5

