  "Curiosity is so strong in human nature, that it can conquer even
  fear: notwithstanding the orders of the boyárin, all his servants
  rushed to obtain a glance at the terrible stranger; one at the gate,
  another through the crevices of the wooden fence, another over it.
  Khabár, with his arms haughtily a-kimbo, gazed with stern pride from
  the other gate. Now for the frightful face with mouse's ears, winking
  owlish eyes streaming with fiendish fire! now for the beak! They
  beheld a young man, tall, graceful, of noble deportment, overflowing
  with fresh vigorous life. In his blue eyes shone the light of
  goodness and benevolence through the moisture called up by the recent
  spectacle of the execution: the lips, surmounted by a slight soft
  mustache, bore a good-humoured smile--one of those smiles that it is
  impossible to feign, and which can only find their source in a heart
  never troubled by impure passions. Health and frost had united to
  tinge the cheeks with a light rosy glow; he took off his cap, and his
  fair curls streamed forth over his broad shoulders. He addressed
  Mamón in a few words of such Russian as he knew, and in his voice
  there was something so charming, that even the evil spirit which
  wandered through the boyárin's heart, sank down to its abyss. This,
  then, was the horrible stranger, who had harmed Obrazétz and his
  household! This, then, was he--after all! If this was the devil, the
  fiend must again have put on his original heavenly form. All the
  attendants, as they looked upon him, became firmly convinced that he
  had bewitched their eyes.

  "'Haste, Nástia![4] look how handsome he is!' cried Andrióusha to the
  voevóda's daughter, in whose room he was, looking through the sliding
  window, which he had drawn back. 'After this, believe stupid reports!
  My father says that he is my brother: oh, how I shall love him! Look,
  my dear!'

    [4]_Nástia_--the diminutive of Anastasia; Nástenka, the same.
    Russian caressing names generally end in sia, sha, óusha, or
    óushka--as Vásia, (for Iván;) Andrióusha, (Andrei;)
    Varpholoméoushka, ( Bartholomew.)"--T.B.S.

  "And the son of Aristotle, affirming and swearing that he was not
  deceiving his godmother, drew her, trembling and pale, to the window.
  Making the sign of the cross, with a fluttering heart she ventured to
  look out--she could not trust her eyes, again she looked out;
  confusion! a kind of delighted disappointment, a kind of sweet thrill
  running through her blood, never before experienced, fixed her for
  some moments to the spot: but when Anastasia recovered herself from
  these impressions, she felt ashamed and grieved that she had given
  way to them. She already felt a kind of repentance. The sorcerer has
  put on a mask, she thought, remembering her father's words: from this
  moment she became more frequently pensive."

We are conducted to the state prisons of Moscow, and introduced to some of
the prisoners whose names have figured in history. We select the following
dialogue as a specimen of the author's power to deal with such matters.
The prisoner is Márpha, the lady of Novogorod, who, by her courage and her
wealth, had laboured to preserve its independence.

  "Here the Great Prince rapped with his staff at a grating; at the
  knock there looked out an old roman, who was fervently praying on her
  knees. She was dressed in a much-worn high cap, and in a short veil,
  poor, but white as new-fallen snow; her silver hair streamed over a
  threadbare mantle: it was easy to guess that this was no common woman.
  Her features were very regular, in her dim eyes was expressed
  intellect, and a kind of stern greatness of soul. She looked proudly
  and steadily at the Great Prince.

  "'For whom wert thou praying, Marphóusha?' asked the sovereign.

  "'For whom but for the dead!' she sullenly replied.

  "'But for whom in particular, if I may make bold to ask?'

  "'Ask concerning that of my child, thou son of a dog--of him who was
  called thy brother, whom thou murderedst--of Nóvgorod, which thou
  hast drowned in blood, and covered with ashes!'

  "'O, ho, ho!... Thou hast not forgotten thy folly, then--Lady of
  Nóvgorod the Great.'

  "'I was such once, my fair lord!'

  "At these words she arose.

  "'Wilt thou not think again?'

  "'Of what?... I said that I was praying for the dead. Thy Moscow,
  with all its hovels, can twice a-year be laid in ashes, and twice
  built up again. The Tartar hath held it two ages in slavery.... It
  pined, it pined away and yet it remains whole. It hath but changed
  one bondage for another. But once destroy the queen--Nóvgorod the
  Great--and Nóvgorod the Great will perish for ever.'

  "'How canst thou tell that?'

  "'Can ye raise up a city of hewn stone in a hundred years?'

  "'I will raise one in a dozen.'

  "'Ay, but this is not in the fairy tale, where 'tis done as soon as
  said. Call together the Hanse traders whom thou hast driven away.'

  "'Ha, hucksteress! thou mournest for the traders more than for
  Nóvgorod itself.'

  "'By my huckstering she grew not poor, but rich.'

  "'Let me but jingle a piece of money, and straight will fly the
  merchants from all corners of the world, greedy for my grosches.'

  "'Recall the chief citizens whom thou hast exiled to thy towns.'

  "'Cheats, knaves, rebels! they are not worth this!'

  "'When was power in the wrong? Where is the water of life that can
  revive those thou hast slain? Even if thou couldst do all this,
  liberty, liberty would be no more for Nóvgorod, Iván Vassílievitch;
  and Nóvgorod will never rise again! It may live on awhile like
  lighted flax, that neither flameth nor goeth out, even as I live in a
  dungeon!'

  "'It is thine inflexible obstinacy that hath ruined both of ye. I
  should like to have seen how thou wouldst have acted in my place.'

  "'Thou hast done thy work, Great Prince of Moscow, I--mine. Triumph
  not over me, in my dungeon, at my last hour.'

  "Márpha Borétzkaia coughed, and her face grew livid; she applied the
  end of her veil to her lips, but it was instantly stained with blood,
  and Iván remarked this, though she endeavoured to conceal it.

  "'I am sorry for thee, Márpha,' said the Great Prince in a
  compassionate tone.

  "'Sharp is thy glance.... What! doth it delight thee?... Spread this
  kerchief over Nóvgorod.... 'Twill be a rich pall!'... she added with
  a smile.

  "'Let me in! let me in!... I cannot bear it.... Let me go in to her!'
  cried Andrióusha, bursting into tears.

  "On the Great Prince's countenance was mingled compassion and
  vexation. He, however, lifted the latch of the door, and let the son
  of Aristotle pass in to Borétzkaia.

  "Andrea kissed her hand. Borétzkaia uttered not a word; she
  mournfully shook her head, and her warm tears fell upon the boy's
  face.

  "'Ask him how many years she can live,' said the Great Prince to
  Aristotle, in a whisper.

  "'It is much, much, if she live three months; but, perhaps, 'twill be
  only till spring,' answered Antony. 'No medicine can save her: that
  blood is a sure herald of death.'

  "This reply was translated to Iván Vassílievitch in as low a tone as
  possible, that Borétzkaia might not hear it; but she waved her hand,
  and said calmly--'I knew it long ago'....

  "'Hearken, Márpha Isákovna, if thou wilt, I will give thee thy
  liberty, and send thee into another town.'

  "'Another town ... another place ... God hath willed it so, without
  thee!'

  "'I would send thee to Báyjetzkoi-Verkh.'

  "''Tis true, that was our country. If I could but die in my native
  land!'

  "'Then God be with thee: there thou mayst say thy prayers, give alms
  to the churches; I will order thy treasury to be delivered up to
  thee--and remember not the Great Prince of Moscow in anger.'

  "She smiled. Have you ever seen something resembling a smile on the
  jaws of a human skull?

  "'Farewell, we shall never meet again,' said the Great Prince.

  "'We shall meet at the judgment-seat of God!' was the last reply of
  Borétzkaia."

The daughter of Obrazétz loved the heretic, who was long unconscious of
the feelings he had inspired, and himself untouched by the mysterious fire
that was consuming the heart of the young Anastasia. But his turn, too,
had come--he, too, had seen and loved; but she knew not of his love--she
hardly knew the nature of her own feelings; sometimes she feared she was
under the influence of magic, or imagined that the anxiety she felt for
the heretic was a holy desire to turn him from the errors of his faith to
save his immortal soul--or, if she knew the truth, she dared not
acknowledge it even to her own heart--far less to any human being. To love
a heretic was a deadly sin; but to save a soul would be acceptable to
God--a holy offering at the footstool of the throne of grace and mercy.
This hope would justify any sacrifice. The great Prince was about to march
against Tver, and Antonio was to accompany him. Could she permit him to
depart without an effort to redeem him from his heresy, or, alas! without
a token of her love? She determined to send him the crucifix she wore
round her neck--a holy and a sacred thing, which it would have been a
deadly sin to part with unless to rescue a soul from perdition--and she
sent it. Her brother, too, was to accompany the army, and had besides, on
his return, to encounter a judicial combat. The soul of the old warrior
Obrazétz was deeply moved by the near approach of his son's departure. One
son had died by his side--he might never see Iván more, and his heart
yearned to join with him in prayer. "The mercies of God are unaccountable."

  "Trusting in them, Obrazétz proceeded to the oratory, whither, by his
  command, he was followed by Khabár and Anastasia.

  "Silently they go, plunged in feelings of awe: they enter the oratory;
  the solitary window is curtained; in the obscurity, feebly dispelled
  by the mysterious glimmer of the lamp, through the deep stillness,
  fitfully broken by the flaring of the taper, they were gazed down
  upon from every side by the dark images of the Saviour, the Holy
  Mother of God, and the Holy Saints. From them there seems to breathe
  a chilly air as of another world: here thou canst not hide thyself
  from their glances; from every side they follow thee in the slightest
  movement of thy thoughts and feelings. Their wasted faces, feeble
  limbs, and withered frames--their flesh macerated by prayer and
  fasting--the cross, the agony--all here speaks of the victory of will
  over passions. Themselves an example of purity in body and soul, they
  demand the same purity from all who enter the oratory, their holy
  shrine.

  "To them Anastasia had recourse in the agitation of her heart; from
  them she implored aid against the temptations of the Evil One; but
  help there was none for her, the weak in will, the devoted to the
  passion which she felt for an unearthly tempter.

  Thrice, with crossing and with prayer, did Obrazétz bow before the
  images; thrice did his son and daughter bow after him. This pious
  preface finished, the old man chanted the psalm--'Whoso dwelleth
  under the defence of the Most High.' Thus, even in our own times,
  among us in Russia, the pious warrior, when going to battle, almost
  always arms himself with this shield of faith. With deep feeling,
  Khabár repeated the words after his father. All this prepared
  Anastasia for something terrible she trembled like a dove which is
  caught by the storm in the open plain, where there is no shelter for
  her from the tempest that is ready to burst above her. When they
  arose from prayer, Obrazétz took from the shrine a small image of St
  George the Victorious, cast in silver, with a ring for suspending it
  on the bosom. 'In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
  Holy Ghost!' he said, with a solemn voice, holding the image in his
  left hand, and with his right making three signs of the cross--'with
  this mercy of God I bless thee, my dear and only son, Iván, and I
  pray that the holy martyr, George, may give thee mastery and victory
  over thine enemies: keep this treasure even as the apple of thine eye.
  Put it not off from thee in any wise, unless the Lord willeth that
  the foe shall take it from thee. I know thee, Ivan, they will not
  take it from thee living; but they may from thy corse. Keep in mind at
  every season thy father's blessing.'

  "Anastasia turned as white as snow, and trembled in every limb; her
  bosom felt oppressed as with a heavy stone, a sound as of hammering
  was in her ears. She seemed to hear all the images, one after another,
  sternly repeating her father's words. He continued--'It is a great
  thing, this blessing. He who remembereth it not, or lightly esteemeth
  it, from him shall the heavenly Father turn away his face, and shall
  leave him for ever and ever. He shall be cast out from the kingdom of
  heaven, and his portion shall be in hell. Keep well my solemn word.'

  "Every accent of Obrazétz fell upon Anastasia's heart like a drop of
  molten pitch. She seemed to be summoned before the dreadful
  judgment-seat of Christ, to hear her father's curse, and her own
  eternal doom. She could restrain herself no longer, and sobbed
  bitterly; the light grew dim in her eyes; her feet began to totter.
  Obrazétz heard her sobs, and interrupted his exhortation. 'Nástia,
  Nástia! what aileth thee?' he enquired, with lively sympathy, of his
  daughter, whom he tenderly loved. She had not strength to utter a
  word, and fell into her brother's arms. Crossing himself, the boyárin
  put back the image into its former place, and then hastened to
  sprinkle his child with holy water which always stood ready in the
  oratory. Anastasia revived, and when she saw herself surrounded by
  her father and brother, in a dark, narrow, sepulchral place, she
  uttered a wild cry, and turned her dim eyes around. 'My life, my
  darling child, my dove! what aileth thee?' cried the father.
  'Recollect thyself: thou art in the oratory. 'Tis plain some evil eye
  hath struck thee. Pray to the Holy Virgin: she, the merciful one,
  will save thee from danger.'

  "The father and son bore her to the image of the Mother of God. Her
  brother with difficulty raised her arm, and she, all trembling, made
  the sign of the cross. Deeply, heavily she sighed, applied her
  ice-cold lips to the image, and then signed to them with her hand
  that they should carry her out speedily. She fancied that she saw the
  Holy Virgin shake her head with a reproachful air.

  "When they had carried Anastasia to her chamber, she felt better."

Hitherto none had shared her secret thoughts; but the experienced eye of
the widow Selínova had detected the nature of her malady, and she longed
to know the object of her affection.

