SOLOMIN rushed out to the factory gates as soon as he was informed that
some sort of gentleman, with a lady, who had arrived in a cart, was
asking for him. Without a word of greeting to his visitors, merely
nodding his head to them several times, he told the peasant to drive
into the yard, and asking him to stop before his own little dwelling,
helped Mariana out of the cart. Nejdanov jumped out after her. Solomin
conducted them both through a long dark passage, up a narrow, crooked
little staircase at the back of the house, up to the second floor. He
opened a door and they all went into a tiny neat little room with two
windows.

"I'm so glad you've come!" Solomin exclaimed, with his habitual smile,
which now seemed even broader and brighter than usual.

"Here are your rooms. This one and another adjoining it. Not much to
look at, but never mind, one can live here and there's no one to spy
on you. Just under your window there is what my employer calls a flower
garden, but which I should call a kitchen garden. It lies right up
against the wall and there are hedges to right and left. A quiet little
spot. Well, how are you, my dear lady? And how are you, Nejdanov?"

He shook hands with them both. They stood motionless, not taking off
their things, and with silent, half-bewildered, half-joyful emotion
gazed straight in front of them.

"Well? Why don't you take your things off?" Solomin asked. "Have you
much luggage?"

Mariana held up her little bundle.

"I have only this."

"I have a portmanteau and a bag, which I left in the cart. I'll go
and--"

"Don't bother, don't bother." Solomin opened the door. "Pavel!" he
shouted down the dark staircase, "run and fetch the things from the
cart!"

"All right!" answered the never-failing Pavel.

Solomin turned to Mariana, who had taken off her shawl and was
unfastening her cloak.

"Did everything go off happily?" he asked.

"Quite... not a soul saw us. I left a letter for Madame Sipiagina.
Vassily Fedotitch, I didn't bring any clothes with me, because
you're going to send us..." (Mariana wanted to say to the people, but
hesitated). "They wouldn't have been of any use in any case. I have
money to buy what is necessary."

"We'll see to that later on... Ah!" he exclaimed, pointing to Pavel who
was at that moment coming in together with Nejdanov and the luggage from
The cart, "I can recommend you my best friend here. You may rely on
him absolutely, as you would on me. Have you told Tatiana about the
samovar?" he added in an undertone.

"It will soon be ready," Pavel replied; "and cream and everything."

"Tatiana is Pavel's wife and just as reliable as he is," Solomin
continued. "Until you get used to things, my dear lady, she will look
after you."

Mariana flung her cloak on to a couch covered with leather, which was
standing in a corner of the room.

"Will you please call me Mariana, Vassily Fedotitch; I don't want to be
a lady, neither do I want servants... I did not go away from there to be
waited on. Don't look at my dress--I hadn't any other. I must change all
that now."

Her dress of fine brown cloth was very simple, but made by a St.
Petersburg dressmaker. It fitted beautifully round her waist and
shoulders and had altogether a fashionable air.

"Well, not a servant if you like, but a help, in the American fashion.
But you must have some tea. It's early yet, but you are both tired, no
doubt. I have to be at the factory now on business, but will look in
later on. If you want anything, ask Pavel or Tatiana."

Mariana held out both her hands to him quickly.

"How can we thank you enough, Vassily Fedotitch?" She looked at him with
emotion. Solomin stroked one of her hands gently. "I should say it's
not worth thanking for, but that wouldn't be true. I had better say
that your thanks give me the greatest of pleasure. So we are quits. Good
morning. Come along, Pavel."

Mariana and Nejdanov were left alone.

She rushed up to him and looked at him with the same expression with
which she had looked at Solomin, only with even greater delight,
emotion, radiance: "Oh, my dear!" she exclaimed. "We are beginning a new
life... at last! At last! You can't believe how this poor little room,
where we are to spend a few days, seems sweet and charming compared to
those hateful palaces! Are you glad?"

Nejdanov took her hands and pressed them against his breast.

"I am happy, Mariana, to begin this new life with you! You will be my
guiding star, my support, my strength--"

"Dear, darling Aliosha! But stop--we must wash and tidy ourselves a
little. I will go into my room... and you... stay here. I won't be a
minute--"

Mariana went into the other room and shut the door. A minute later she
opened it half-way and, putting her head through, said: "Isn't Solomin
nice!" Then she shut the door again and the key turned in the lock.

Nejdanov went up to the window and looked out into the garden... One
old, very old, apple tree particularly attracted his attention. He shook
himself, stretched, opened his portmanteau, but took nothing out of it;
he became lost in thought...

A quarter of an hour later Mariana returned with a beaming,
freshly-washed face, brimming over with gaiety, and a few minutes later
Tatiana, Pavel's wife, appeared with the samovar, tea things, rolls, and
cream.

In striking contrast to her gipsy-like husband she was a typical
Russian--buxom, with masses of flaxen hair, which she wore in a
thick plait twisted round a horn comb. She had coarse though pleasant
features, good-natured grey eyes, and was dressed in a very neat though
somewhat faded print dress. Her hands were clean and well-shaped,
though large. She bowed composedly, greeted them in a firm, clear
accent without any sing-song about it, and set to work arranging the tea
things.

Mariana went up to her.

"Let me help you, Tatiana. Only give me a napkin."

"Don't bother, miss, we are used to it. Vassily Fedotitch told me to.
If you want anything please let us know. We shall be delighted to do
anything we can."

"Please don't call me miss, Tatiana. I am dressed like a lady, but I
am... I am quite--"

Tatiana's penetrating glance disconcerted Mariana; she ceased.

"And what are you then?" Tatiana asked in her steady voice.

"If you really want to know... I am certainly a lady by birth. But I
want to get rid of all that. I want to become like all simple women."

"Oh, I see! You want to become simplified, like so many do nowadays."

"What did you say, Tatiana? To become simplified?"

"Yes, that's a word that has sprung up among us. To become simplified
means to be like the common people. Teaching the people is all very
well in its way, but it must be a difficult task, very difficult! I hope
you'll get on."

"To become simplified!" Mariana repeated. "Do you hear, Aliosha, you and
I have now become simplified!"

"Is he your husband or your brother?" Tatiana asked, carefully washing
the cups with her large, skilful hands as she looked from one to the
other with a kindly smile.

"No," Mariana replied; "he is neither my husband nor my brother."

Tatiana raised her head.

"Then you are just living together freely? That also happens very often
now. At one time it was to be met with only among nonconformists, but
nowadays other folks do it too. Where there is God's blessing you can
live in peace without the priest's aid. We have some living like that at
the factory. Not the worst of folk either."

"What nice words you use, Tatiana! 'Living together freely'... I like
that. I'll tell you what I want to ask of you, Tatiana. I want to make
or buy a dress, something like yours, only a little plainer. Then I want
shoes and stockings and a kerchief--everything like you have. I've got
some money."

"That's quite easy, miss... There, there, don't be cross. I won't call
you miss if you don't like it. But what am I to call you?"

"Call me Mariana."

"And what is your father's Christian name?"

"Why do you want my father's name? Call me simply Mariana, as I call you
Tatiana."

"I don't like to somehow. You had better tell me."

"As you like. My father's name was Vikent. And what was your father's?

"He was called Osip."

"Then I shall call you Tatiana Osipovna."

"And I'll call you Mariana Vikentievna. That will be splendid."

"Won't you take a cup of tea with us, Tatiana Osipovna?"

"For once I will, Mariana Vikentievna, although Egoritch will scold me
afterwards."

"Who is Egoritch?"

"Pavel, my husband."

"Sit down, Tatiana Osipovna."

"Thank you, Mariana Vikentievna."

Tatiana sat down and began sipping her tea and nibbling pieces of sugar.
She kept turning the lump of sugar round in her fingers, screwing up her
eye on the side on which she bit it. Mariana entered into conversation
with her and she replied quite at her ease, asked questions in her turn,
and volunteered various pieces of information. She simply worshipped
Solomin and put her husband only second to him. She did not, however,
care for the factory life.

"It's neither town nor country here. I wouldn't stop an hour if it were
not for Vassily Fedotitch!"

Mariana listened to her attentively, while Nejdanov, sitting a little to
one side, watched her and wondered at her interest. For Mariana it was
all so new, but it seemed to him that he had seen crowds of women like
Tatiana and spoken to them hundreds of times.

"Do you know, Tatiana Osipovna?" Mariana began at last; "you think that
we want to teach the people, but we want to serve them."

"Serve them? Teach them; that's the best thing you can do for them. Look
at me, for instance. When I married Egoritch I didn't so much as know
how to read and write. Now I've learned, thanks to Vassily Fedotitch.
He didn't teach me himself, he paid an old man to do it. It was he who
taught me. You see I'm still young, although I'm grown up."

Mariana was silent.

"I wanted to learn some sort of trade, Tatiana Osipovna," Mariana began;
"we must talk about that later on. I'm not good at sewing, but if I
could learn to cook, then I could go out as a cook."

Tatiana became thoughtful.

"Why a cook? Only rich people and merchants keep cooks; the poor do
their own cooking. And to cook at a mess for workmen... why you couldn't
do that!"

"But I could live in a rich man's house and get to know poor people. How
else can I get to know them? I shall not always have such an opportunity
as I have with you."

Tatiana turned her empty cup upside down on the saucer.

"It's a difficult matter," she said at last with a sigh, "and can't be
settled so easily. I'll do what I can, but I'm not very clever. We must
talk it over with Egoritch. He's clever if you like! Reads all sorts
of books and has everything at his fingers' ends." At this point she
glanced at Mariana who was rolling up a cigarette.

"You'll excuse me, Mariana Vikentievna, but if you really want to become
simplified you must give that up." She pointed to the cigarette. "If you
want to be a cook, that would never do. Everyone would see at once that
you are a lady."

Mariana threw the cigarette out of the window.

"I won't smoke any more... It's quite easy to give that up. Women of the
people don't smoke, so I suppose I ought not to."

"That's quite true, Mariana Vikentievna. Our men indulge in it, but not
the women. And here's Vassily Fedotitch coming to see you. Those are
his steps. You ask him. He'll arrange everything for you in the best
possible way."

Solomin's voice was heard at the door.

"Can I come in?"

"Come in, come in!" Mariana called out.

"It's an English habit of mine," Solomin observed as he came in. "Well,
and how are you getting on? Not homesick yet, eh? I see you're having
tea with Tatiana. You listen to her, she's a sensible person. My
employer is coming today. It's rather a nuisance. He's staying to
dinner. But it can't be helped. He's the master."

"What sort of a man is he?" Nejdanov asked, coming out of his corner.

"Oh, he's not bad... knows what he's about. One of the new generation.
He's very polite, wears cuffs, and has his eyes about him no less than
the old sort. He would skin a flint with his own hands and say, 'Turn
to this side a little, please... there is still a living spot here... I
must clean it!' He's nice enough to me, because I'm necessary to him.
I just looked in to say that I may not get a chance of seeing you
again today. Dinner will be brought to you here, and please don't show
yourselves in the yard. Do you think the Sipiagins will make a search
for you, Mariana? Will they make a hunt?"

"I don't think so," Mariana replied.

"And I think they will," Nejdanov remarked.

"It doesn't matter either way," Solomin continued. "You must be a little
careful at first, but in a short time you can do as you like."

"Yes; only there's one thing," Nejdanov observed, "Markelov must know
where I am; he must be informed."

"But why?"

"I am afraid it must be done--for the cause. He must always know my
whereabouts. I've given my word. But he's quite safe, you know!"

"Very well. We can send Pavel."

"And will my clothes be ready for me?"

"Your special costume you mean? Why, of course... the same masquerade.
It's not expensive at any rate. Goodbye. You must be tired. Come,
Tatiana."

Mariana and Nejdanov were left alone again.


XXVIII

FIRST they clasped each other's hands, then Mariana offered to help him
tidy his room. She immediately began unpacking his portmanteau and bag,
declining his offer of help on the ground that she must get used to work
and wished to do it all herself. She hung his clothes on nails which she
discovered in the table drawer and knocked into the wall with the back
of a hairbrush for want of a hammer. Then she arranged his linen in a
little old chest of drawers standing in between the two windows.

"What is this?" she asked suddenly. "Why, it's a revolver. Is it loaded?
What do you want it for?"

"It is not loaded... but you had better give it to me. You want to know
why I have it? How can one get on without a revolver in our calling?"

She laughed and went on with her work, shaking each thing out separately
and beating it with her hand; she even stood two pairs of boots under
the sofa; the few books, packet of papers, and tiny copy-book of verses
she placed triumphantly upon a three-cornered table, calling it a
writing and work table, while the other, a round one, she called a
dining and tea table. Then she took up the copy-book of verses in both
hands and, raising it on a level with her face, looked over the edge at
Nejdanov and said with a smile:

"We will read this together when we have some time to spare, won't we?

"Give it to me! I'll burn it!" Nejdanov burst out. "That's all it's fit
for!

"Then why did you take it with you? No, I won't let you burn it.
However, authors are always threatening to burn their things, but they
never do. I will put it in my room."

Nejdanov was just about to protest when Mariana rushed into the next
room with the copy-book and came back without it.

She sat down beside him, but instantly got up again. "You have not yet
been in my room; would you like to see it? It's quite as nice as yours.
Come and look."

Nejdanov rose and followed her. Her room, as she called it, was somewhat
smaller than his, but the furniture was altogether smarter and newer.
Some flowers in a crystal vase stood on the window-sill and there was an
iron bedstead in a corner.

"Isn't Solomin a darling!" Mariana exclaimed. "But we mustn't get too
spoiled. I don't suppose we shall often have rooms like these. Do you
know what I've been thinking? It would be rather nice if we could get a
place together so that we need not part! It will probably be difficult,"
she added after a pause; "but we must think of it. But all the same, you
won't go back to St. Petersburg, will you?

"What should I do in St. Petersburg? Attend lectures at the university
or give lessons? That's no use to me now."

"We must ask Solomin," Mariana observed. "He will know best."

They went back to the other room and sat down beside each other again.
They praised Solomin, Tatiana, Pavel; spoke of the Sipiagins and how
their former life had receded from them far into the distance, as
if enveloped in a mist; then they clasped each other's hand again,
exchanged tender glances; wondered what class they had better go among
first, and how to behave so that people should not suspect them.

Nejdanov declared that the less they thought about that, and the more
naturally they behaved, the better.

"Of course! We want to become simple, as Tatiana says."

"I didn't mean it in that sense," Nejdanov began; "I meant that we must
not be self-conscious."

Mariana suddenly burst out laughing.

"Do you remember, Aliosha, how I said that we had both become
simplified?"

Nejdanov also laughed, repeated "simplified," and began musing. Mariana
too became pensive.

"Aliosha!" she exclaimed.

"What is it?"

"It seems to me that we are both a little uncomfortable. Young--des
nouveaux maries," she explained, "when away on their honeymoon no doubt
feel as we do. They are happy... all is well with them--but they feel
uncomfortable."

Nejdanov gave a forced smile.

"You know very well, Mariana, that we are not young in that sense."

Mariana rose from her chair and stood before him.

"That depends on yourself."

"How?"

"Aliosha, you know, dear, that when you tell me, as a man of honour...
and I will believe you because I know you are honourable; when you tell
me that you love me with that love... the love that gives one person the
right over another's life, when you tell me that--I am yours."

Nejdanov blushed and turned away a little.

"When I tell you that...

"Yes, then! But you see, Aliosha, you don't say that to me now... Oh
yes, Aliosha, you are truly an honourable man. Enough of this! Let us
talk of more serious things."

"But I do love you, Mariana!"

"I don't doubt that... and shall wait. But there, I have not quite
finished arranging your writing table. Here is something wrapped up,
something hard."

Nejdanov sprang up from his chair.

"Don't touch that, Mariana... Leave it alone, please!"

Mariana looked at him over her shoulder and raised her eyebrows in
amazement.

Is it a mystery? A secret? Have you a secret?

"Yes... yes..." Nejdanov stammered out, and added by way of explanation,
"it's a portrait."

The word escaped him unawares. The packet Mariana held in her hand was
her own portrait, which Markelov had given Nejdanov.

"A portrait?" she drawled out. "Is it a woman's?"

She handed him the packet, which he took so clumsily that it slipped out
of his hand and fell open.

"Why... it's my portrait!" Mariana exclaimed quickly. "I suppose I may
look at my own portrait." She took it out of Nejdanov's hand.

"Did you do it?"

"No... I didn't."

"Who then? Markelov?"

"Yes, you've guessed right."

"Then how did it come to be in your possession?"

"He gave it to me."

"When?"

Nejdanov told her when and under what circumstances. While he was
speaking Mariana glanced from him to the portrait. The same thought
flashed across both their minds. "If HE were in this room, then HE
would have the right to demand..." But neither Mariana nor Nejdanov gave
expression to this thought in words, perhaps because each was conscious
what was in the other's mind.

Mariana quietly wrapped the portrait up again in its paper and put it on
the table.

"What a good man he is!" she murmured. "I wonder where he is now?"

"Why, at home of course. Tomorrow or the day after I must go and see
him about some books and pamphlets. He promised to give me some, but
evidently forgot to do so before I left."

"And do you think, Aliosha, that when he gave you this portrait he
renounced everything... absolutely everything?"

"I think so."

"Do you think you will find him at home?"

"Of course."

"Ah!" Mariana lowered her eyes and dropped her hands at her sides. "But
here comes Tatiana with our dinner," she exclaimed suddenly. "Isn't she
a dear!"

Tatiana appeared with the knives and forks, serviettes, plates and
dishes. While laying the table she related all the news about the
factory. "The master came from Moscow by rail and started running from
floor to floor like a madman. Of course he doesn't understand anything
and does it only for show--to set an example so to speak. Vassily
Fedotitch treats him like a child. The master wanted to make some
unpleasantness, but Vassily Fedotitch soon shut him up. 'I'll throw
it up this minute,' he said, so he soon began to sing small. They are
having dinner now. The master brought someone with him. A Moscow swell
who does nothing but admire everything. He must be very rich, I think,
by the way he holds his tongue and shakes his head. And so stout, very
stout! A real swell! No wonder there's a saying that 'Moscow lies at the
foot of Russia and everything rolls down to her.'"

"How you notice everything!" Mariana exclaimed.

"Yes, I do rather," Tatiana observed. "Well, here is your dinner. Come
and have it and I'll sit and look at you for a little while."

Mariana and Nejdanov sat down to table, whilst Tatiana sat down on the
window-sill and rested her cheek in her hand.

"I watch you..." she observed. "And what dear, young, tender creatures
you are. You're so nice to look at that it quite makes my heart ache.
Ah, my dear! You are taking a heavier burden on your shoulders than you
can bear. It's people like you that the tsar's folk are ready to put
into prison."

"Nothing of the kind. Don't frighten us," Nejdanov remarked. "You know
the old saying, 'As you make your bed so you must lie on it.'"

"Yes, I know. But the beds are so narrow nowadays that you can't get out
of them!"

"Have you any children?" Mariana asked to change the subject.

"Yes, I have a boy. He goes to school now. I had a girl too, but she's
gone, the little bird! An accident happened to her. She fell under a
wheel. If only it had killed her at once! But no, she suffered a long
while. Since then I've become more tender-hearted. Before I was as wild
and hard as a tree!"

"Why, did you not love your Pavel?"

"But that's not the same. Only a girl's feelings. And you--do you love
HIM?"

"Of course I do."

Very much?

"Ever so much."

"Really?..." Tatiana looked from one to the other, but said nothing
more.

"I'll tell you what I would like. Could you get me some coarse, strong
wool? I want to knit some stockings...plain ones."

Tatiana promised to have everything done, and clearing the table, went
out of the room with her firm, quiet step.

"Well, what shall we do now?" Mariana asked, turning to Nejdanov, and
without, waiting for a reply, continued, "Since our real work does not
begin until tomorrow, let us devote this evening to literature. Would
you like to? We can read your poems. I will be a severe critic, I
promise you."

It took Nejdanov a long time before he consented, but he gave in at last
and began reading aloud out of his copybook. Mariana sat close to him
and gazed into his face as he read. She had been right; she turned out
to be a very severe critic. Very few of the verses pleased her. She
preferred the purely lyrical, short ones, to the didactic, as she
expressed it. Nejdanov did not read well. He had not the courage to
attempt any style, and at the same time wanted to avoid a dry tone. It
turned out neither the one thing nor the other. Mariana interrupted him
suddenly by asking if he knew Dobrolubov's beautiful poem, which begins,
"To die for me no terror holds." She read it to him--also not very
well--in a somewhat childish manner.

[To die for me no terror holds, Yet one fear presses on my mind, That
death should on me helpless play A satire of the bitter kind. For much
I fear that o'er my corpse The scalding tears of friends shall flow, And
that, too late, they should with zeal Fresh flowers upon my body throw.
That fate sardonic should recall The ones I loved to my cold side, And
make me lying in the ground, The object of love once denied. That all my
aching heart's desires, So vainly sought for from my birth, Should crowd
unbidden, smiling kind Above my body's mound of earth.]

Nejdanov thought that it was too sad and too bitter. He could not
have written a poem like that, he added, as he had no fears of any one
weeping over his grave... there would be no tears.

"There will be if I outlive you," Mariana observed slowly, and lifting
her eyes to the ceiling she asked, in a whisper, as if speaking to
herself:

"How did he do the portrait of me? From memory?"

Nejdanov turned to her quickly.

"Yes, from memory."

Mariana was surprised at his reply. It seemed to her that she merely
thought the question. "It is really wonderful..." she continued in
the same tone of voice. "Why, he can't draw at all. What was I talking
about?" she added aloud. "Oh yes, it was about Dobrolubov's poems. One
ought to write poems like Pushkin's, or even like Dobrolubov's. It is
not poetry exactly, but something nearly as good."

"And poems like mine one should not write at all. Isn't that so?"
Nejdanov asked.

"Poems like yours please your friends, not because they are good, but
because you are a good man and they are like you."

Nejdanov smiled.

"You have completely buried them and me with them!" Mariana slapped his
hand and called him naughty. Soon after she announced that she was tired
and wanted to go to bed.

"By the way," she added, shaking back her short thick curls, "do you
know that I have a hundred and thirty roubles? And how much have you?"

"Ninety-eight."

"Oh, then we are rich... for simplified folk. Well, good night, until
tomorrow."

She went out, but in a minute or two her door opened slightly and he
heard her say, "Goodnight!" then more softly another "Goodnight!" and
the key turned in the lock.

Nejdanov sank on to the sofa and covered his face with his hands. Then
he got up quickly, went to her door and knocked.

"What is it?" was heard from within.

"Not till tomorrow, Mariana... not till tomorrow!"

"Till tomorrow," she replied softly.


XXIX

EARLY the next morning Nejdanov again knocked at Mariana's door.

"It is I," he replied in answer to her "Who's that?" "Can you come out to
me?"

"In a minute."

She came out and uttered a cry of alarm. At first she did not recognise
him. He had on a long-skirted, shabby, yellowish nankin coat, with small
buttons and a high waist; his hair was dressed in the Russian fashion
with a parting straight down the middle; he had a blue kerchief round
his neck, in his hand he held a cap with a broken peak, on his feet a
pair of dirty leather boots.

"Heavens!" Mariana exclaimed. "How ugly you look!" and thereupon threw
her arms round him and kissed him quickly. "But why did you get yourself
up like this? You look like some sort of shopkeeper, or pedlar, or a
retired servant. Why this long coat? Why not simply like a peasant?"

"Why?" Nejdanov began. He certainly did look like some sort of
fishmonger in that garb, was conscious of it himself, and was annoyed
and embarrassed at heart. He felt uncomfortable, and not knowing what to
do with his hands, kept patting himself on the breast with the fingers
outspread, as though he were brushing himself.

"Because as a peasant I should have been recognised at once Pavel says,
and that in this costume I look as if I had been born to it ... which is
not very flattering to my vanity, by the way."

"Are you going to begin at once?" Mariana asked eagerly.

"Yes, I shall try, though in reality--"

"You are lucky!" Mariana interrupted him.

"This Pavel is a wonderful fellow," Nejdanov continued. "He can see
through and through you in a second, and will suddenly screw up his face
as if he knew nothing, and would not interfere with anything for the
world. He works for the cause himself, yet laughs at it the whole time.
He brought me the books from Markelov; he knows him and calls him Sergai
Mihailovitch; and as for Solomin, he would go through fire and water for
him."

"And so would Tatiana," Mariana observed. "Why are people so devoted to
him?"

Nejdanov did not reply.

"What sort of books did Pavel bring you?" Mariana asked.

"Oh, nothing new. 'The Story of the Four Brothers,' and then the
ordinary, well-known ones, which are far better I think."

Mariana looked around uneasily.

"I wonder what has become of Tatiana? She promised to come early."

"Here I am!" Tatiana exclaimed, coming in with a bundle in her hand. She
had heard Mariana's exclamation from behind the door.

"There's plenty of time. See what I've brought you!"

Mariana flew towards her.

"Have you brought it?"

Tatiana patted the bundle.

"Everything is here, quite ready. You have only to put the things on and
go out to astonish the world."

"Come along, come along, Tatiana Osipovna, you are a dear--"

Mariana led her off to her own room.

Left alone, Nejdanov walked up and down the room once or twice with a
peculiarly shuffling gait (he imagined that all shopkeepers walked like
that), then he carefully sniffed at this sleeves, the inside of his cap,
made a grimace, looked at himself in the little looking-glass hanging in
between the windows, and shook his head; he certainly did not look very
prepossessing. "So much the better," he thought. Then he took several
pamphlets, thrust them into his side pocket, and began to practise
speaking like a shopkeeper. "That sounds like it," he thought, "but
after all there is no need of acting, my get-up is convincing enough."
Just then he recollected a German exile, who had to make his escape
right across Russia with only a poor knowledge of the language. But
thanks to a merchant's cap which he had bought in a provincial town, he
was taken everywhere for a merchant and had successfully made his way
across the frontier.

At this moment Solomin entered.

"I say!" he exclaimed. "Arrayed in all your war paint? Excuse me, my
dear fellow, but in that garb one can hardly speak to you respectfully."

"Please don't. I had long meant to ask you--"

"But it's early as yet. It doesn't matter if you only want to get used
to it, only you must not go out yet. My employer is still here. He's in
bed."

"I'll go out later on," Nejdanov responded. "I'll explore the
neighbourhood a little, until further orders come."

"Capital! But I tell you what, Alexai... I may call you Alexai, may I
not?"

"Certainly, or Lexy if you like," Nejdanov added with a smile.

"No; there is no need to overdo things. Listen. Good counsel is
better than money, as the saying goes. I see that you have pamphlets.
Distribute them wherever you like, only not in the factory on any
account!"

"Why not?"

"In the first place, because it won't be safe for you; in the second,
because I promised the owner not to do that sort of thing here. You see
the place is his after all, and then something has already been done...
a school and so on. You might do more harm than good. Further than
that, you may do as you like, I shall not hinder you. But you must not
interfere with my workpeople."

"Caution is always useful," Nejdanov remarked with a sarcastic smile.

Solomin smiled his characteristic broad smile.

"Yes, my dear Alexai, it's always useful. But what do I see? Where are
we?"

The last words referred to Mariana, who at that moment appeared in the
doorway of her room in a print dress that had been washed a great many
times, with a yellow kerchief over her shoulders and a red one on her
head. Tatiana stood behind her, smiling good-naturedly. Mariana seemed
younger and brighter in her simple garment and looked far better than
Nejdanov in his long-skirted coat.

"Vassily Fedotitch, don't laugh, please," Mariana implored, turning as
red as a poppy.

"There's a nice couple!" Tatiana exclaimed, clapping her hands. "But
you, my dear, don't be angry, you look well enough, but beside my little
dove you're nowhere."

"And, really, she is charming," Nejdanov thought; "oh, how I love her!"

"Look now," Tatiana continued, "she insisted on changing rings with me.
She has given me a golden ring and taken my silver one."

"Girls of the people do not wear gold rings," Mariana observed.

Tatiana sighed.

"I'll take good care of it, my dear; don't be afraid."

"Well, sit down, sit down both of you," Solomin began; he had been
standing all the while with his head bent a little to one side, gazing
at Mariana. "In olden days, if you remember, people always sat down
before starting on a journey. And you have both a long and wearisome one
before you."

Mariana, still crimson, sat down, then Nejdanov and Solomin, and last
of all Tatiana took her seat on a thick block of wood. Solomin looked at
each of them in turn.

     "Let us step back a pace,
     Let us step back a bit,
     To see with what grace
     And how nicely we sit,"

he said with a frown. Suddenly he burst out laughing, but so
good-naturedly that no one was in the least offended, on the contrary,
they all began to feel merry too. Only Nejdanov rose suddenly.

"I must go now," he said; "this is all very nice, but rather like a
farce. Don't be uneasy," he added, turning to Solomin. "I shall not
interfere with your people. I'll try my tongue on the folk around about
and will tell you all about it when I come back, Mariana, if there is
anything to tell. Wish me luck!"

"Why not have a cup of tea first?" Tatiana remarked.

"No thanks. If I want any I can go into an eating-house or into a public
house."

Tatiana shook her head.

"Goodbye, goodbye... good luck to you!" Nejdanov added, entering upon
his role of small shopkeeper. But before he had reached the door Pavel
thrust his head in from the passage under his very nose, and handing him
a thin, long staff, cut out all the way down like a screw, he said:

"Take this, Alexai Dmitritch, and lean on it as you walk. And the
farther you hold it away from yourself the better it will look."

Nejdanov took the staff without a word and went out. Tatiana wanted to
go out too, but Mariana stopped her.

"Wait a minute, Tatiana Osipovna. I want you."

"I'll be back directly with the samovar. Your friend has gone off
without tea, he was in such a mighty hurry. But that is no reason why
you should not have any. Later on things will be clearer."

Tatiana went out and Solomin also rose. Mariana was standing with her
back to him, but when at last she turned towards him, rather surprised
that he had not said a single word, she saw in his face, in his eyes
that were fixed on her, an expression she had not seen there before; an
expression of inquiry, anxiety, almost of curiosity. She became confused
and blushed again. Solomin, too, was ashamed of what she had read in his
face and began talking louder than was his wont.

"Well, well, Mariana, and so you have made a beginning."

"What sort of beginning, Vassily Fedotitch? Do you call this a
beginning? Alexai was right. It's as if we were acting a farce."

Solomin sat down again.

"But, Mariana... what did you picture the beginning to be like? Not
standing behind the barricades waving a flag and shouting, 'Hurrah for
the republic!' Besides, that is not a woman's work. Now, today you will
begin teaching some Lukeria, something good for her, and a difficult
matter it will be, because you won't understand your Lukeria and she
won't understand you, and on top of it she will imagine that what you
are teaching is of no earthly use to her. In two or three weeks you will
try your hand on another Lukeria, and meanwhile you will be washing a
baby here, teaching another the alphabet, or handing some sick man his
medicine. That will be your beginning."

"But sisters of mercy do that, Vassily Fedotitch! What is the use of
all this, then?" Mariana pointed to herself and round about with a vague
gesture. "I dreamt of something else."

"Did you want to sacrifice yourself?"

Mariana's eyes glistened.

"Yes, yes, yes!"

"And Nejdanov?"

Mariana shrugged her shoulders.

"What of Nejdanov? We shall go together... or I will go alone."

Solomin looked at her intently.

"Do you know, Mariana... excuse the coarse expression... but, to my
mind, combing the scurfy head of a gutter child is a sacrifice; a great
sacrifice of which not many people are capable."

"I would not shirk that, Vassily Fedotitch."

"I know you would not. You are capable of doing that and will do it,
until something else turns up.

"But for that sort of thing I must learn of Tatiana!"

"You could not do better. You will be washing pots and plucking
chickens... And, who knows, maybe you will save your country in that
way!"

"You are laughing at me, Vassily Fedotitch."

Solomin shook his head slowly.

"My dear Mariana, believe me, I am not laughing at you. What I said was
the simple truth. You are already, all you Russian women, more capable
and higher than we men."

Mariana raised her eyes.

"I would like to live up to your idea of us, Solomin... and then I
should be ready to die."

Solomin stood up.

"No, it is better to live! That's the main thing. By the way, would you
like to know what is happening at the Sipiagins? Won't they do anything?
You have only to drop Pavel a hint and he will find out everything in a
twinkling."

Mariana was surprised.

"What a wonderful person he is!"

"Yes, he certainly is wonderful. And should you want to marry Alexai,
he will arrange that too with Zosim, the priest. You remember I told you
about him. But perhaps it is not necessary as yet, eh?"

"No, not yet."

"Very well." Solomin went up to the door dividing the two rooms,
Mariana's and Nejdanov's, and examined the lock.

"What are you doing?" Mariana asked. "Does it lock all right?"

"Yes," Mariana whispered.

Solomin turned to her. She did not raise her eyes.

"Then there is no need to bother about the Sipiagins," he continued
gaily, "is there?"

Solomin was about to go out.

"Vassily Fedotitch..."

"Yes..."

"Why is it you are so talkative with me when you are usually so silent?
You can't imagine what pleasure it gives me."

"Why?" Solomin took both her soft little hands in his big hard ones.
"Why, did you ask? Well, I suppose it must be because I love you so
much. Good-bye."

He went out. Mariana stood pensive looking after him. In a little while
she went to find Tatiana who had not yet brought the samovar. She had
tea with her, washed some pots, plucked a chicken, and even combed out
some boy's tangled head of hair.

Before dinner she returned to her own rooms and soon afterwards Nejdanov
arrived.

He came in tired and covered with dust and dropped on to the sofa. She
immediately sat down beside him.

"Well, tell me what happened."

"You remember the two lines," he responded in a weary voice:

"It would have been so funny Were it not so sad."

"Do you remember?"

"Of course I do."

"Well, these lines apply admirably to my first expedition, excepting
that it was more funny than sad. I've come to the conclusion that there
is nothing easier than to act a part. No one dreamed of suspecting me.
There was one thing, however, that I had not thought of. You must be
prepared with some sort of yarn beforehand, or else when any one asks
you where you've come from and why you've come, you don't know what to
say. But, however, even that is not so important. You've only to stand a
drink and lie as much as you like."

"And you? Did you lie?"

"Of course I did, as much as I could. And then I've discovered that
absolutely everyone you come across is discontented, only no one cares
to find out the remedy for this discontent. I made a very poor show at
propaganda, only succeeded in leaving a couple of pamphlets in a room
and shoving a third into a cart. What may come of them the Lord only
knows! I ran across four men whom I offered some pamphlets. The first
asked if it was a religious book and refused to take it; the second
could not read, but took it home to his children for the sake of the
picture on the cover; the third seemed hopeful at first, but ended by
abusing me soundly and also not taking it; the fourth took a little
book, thanked me very much, but I doubt if he understood a single word I
said to him. Besides that, a dog bit my leg, a peasant woman threatened
me with a poker from the door of her hut, shouting, 'Ugh! you pig! You
Moscow rascals! There's no end to you!' and then a soldier shouted after
me, 'Hi, there! We'll make mince-meat of you!' and he got drunk at my
expense!"

"Well, and what else?

"What else? I've got a blister on my foot; one of my boots is horribly
large. And now I'm as hungry as a wolf and my head is splitting from the
vodka."

"Why, did you drink much?"

"No, only a little to set the example, but I've been in five
public-houses. I can't endure this beastliness, vodka. Goodness knows
why our people drink it. If one must drink this stuff in order to become
simplified, then I had rather be excused!"

"And so no one suspected you?"

"No one, with the exception, perhaps, of a bar-man, a stout individual
with pale eyes, who did look at me somewhat suspiciously. I overheard
him saying to his wife, 'Keep an eye on that carroty-haired one with
the squint.' (I was not aware until that moment that I had a squint.)
'There's something wrong about him. See how he's sticking over his
vodka.' What he meant by 'sticking' exactly, I didn't understand, but it
could hardly have been to my credit. It reminded me of the mauvais ton
in Gogol's "Revisor", do you remember? Perhaps because I tried to pour
my vodka under the table. Oh dear! It is difficult for an aesthetic
creature like me to come in contact with real life."

"Never mind. Better luck next time," Mariana said consolingly. "But I am
glad you see the humorous side of this, your first attempt. You were not
really bored, were you?"

"No, it was rather amusing. But I know that I shall think it all over
now and it will make me miserable."

"But I won't let you think about it! I will tell you everything I did.
Dinner will be here in a minute. By the way, I must tell you that
I washed the saucepan Tatiana cooked the soup in... I'll tell you
everything, every little detail."

And so she did. Nejdanov listened and could not take his eyes off her.
She stopped several times to ask why he looked at her so intently, but
he was silent.

After dinner she offered to read Spielhagen aloud to him, but had
scarcely got through one page when he got up suddenly and fell at her
feet. She stood up; he flung both his arms round her knees and began
uttering passionate, disconnected, and despairing words. He wanted to
die, he knew he would soon die... She did not stir, did not resist.
She calmly submitted to his passionate embraces, and calmly, even
affectionately, glanced down upon him. She laid both her hands on his
head, feverishly pressed to the fold of her dress, but her calmness had
a more powerful effect on him than if she had repulsed him. He got up
murmuring: "Forgive me, Mariana, for today and for yesterday. Tell me
again that you are prepared to wait until I am worthy of your love, and
forgive me."

"I gave you my word. I never change."

"Thank you, dear. Goodbye."

Nejdanov went out and Mariana locked the door of her room.


XXX

A FORTNIGHT later, in the same room, Nejdanov sat bending over his
three-legged table, writing to his friend Silin by the dim light of a
tallow candle. (It was long past midnight. Muddy garments lay scattered
on the sofa, on the floor, just where they had been thrown off. A fine
drizzly rain pattered against the window-panes and a strong, warm wind
moaned about the roof of the house.)

MY DEAR VLADIMIR,--I am writing to you without giving my address and
will send this letter by a messenger to a distant posting-station as my
being here is a secret, and to disclose it might mean the ruin not of
myself alone. It is enough for you to know that for the last two weeks
I have been living in a large factory together with Mariana. We ran away
from the Sipiagins on the day on which I last wrote to you. A friend has
given us shelter here. For convenience sake I will call him Vassily. He
is the chief here and an excellent man. Our stay is only of a temporary
nature; we will move on when the time for action comes. But, however,
judging by events so far, the time is hardly likely ever to come!
Vladimir, I am horribly miserable. I must tell you before everything
that although Mariana and I ran away together, we have so far been
living like brother and sister. She loves me and told me she would be
mine if I feel I have the right to ask it of her.

Vladimir, I do not feel that I have the right! She trusts me, believes
in my honour--I cannot deceive her. I know that I never loved nor will
ever love any one more than her (of that I am convinced), but for all
that, how can I unite her fate forever with mine? A living being to
a corpse? Well, if not a complete corpse, at any rate, a half-dead
creature. Where would one's conscience be? I can hear you say that if
passion was strong enough the conscience would be silent. But that is
just the point; I am a corpse, an honest, well-meaning corpse if
you like, but a corpse nevertheless. Please do not say that I always
exaggerate. Everything I have told you is absolutely true. Mariana is
very reserved and is at present wrapped up in her activities in which
she believes, and I?

Well, enough of love and personal happiness and all that. It is now
a fortnight since I have been going among "the people," and really it
would be impossible to imagine anything more stupid than they are. Of
course the fault lies probably more in me than in the work itself. I
am not a fanatic. I am not one of those who regenerate themselves by
contact with the people and do not lay them on my aching bosom like a
flannel bandage--I want to influence them. But how? How can it be done?
When I am among them I find myself listening all the time, taking things
in, but when it comes to saying anything--I am at a loss for a word! I
feel that I am no good, a bad actor in a part that does not suit him.
Conscientiousness or scepticism are absolutely of no use, nor is a
pitiful sort of humour directed against oneself. It is worse than
useless! I find it disgusting to look at the filthy rags I carry about
on me, the masquerade as Vassily calls it! They say you must first
learn the language of the people, their habits and customs, but rubbish,
rubbish, rubbish, I say! You have only to BELIEVE in what you say
and say what you like! I once happened to hear a sectarian prophet
delivering a sermon. Goodness only knows what arrant nonsense he talked,
a sort of gorgeous mix-up of ecclesiastical learning, interspersed with
peasant expressions, not even in decent Russian, but in some outlandish
dialect, but he took one by storm with his enthusiasm--went straight to
the heart. There he stood with flashing eyes, the voice deep and firm,
with clenched fist--as though he were made of iron! No one understood
what he was saying, but everyone bowed down before him and followed
him. But when I begin to speak, I seem like a culprit begging for
forgiveness. I ought to join the sectarians, although their wisdom is
not great... but they have faith, faith!

Mariana too has faith. She works from morning until night with
Tatiana--a peasant woman here, as good as can be and not by any means
stupid; she says, by the way, that we want to become simplified and
calls us simple souls. Mariana is about working with this woman from
morning until night, scarcely sitting down for a moment, just like a
regular ant! She is delighted that her hands are turning red and rough,
and in the midst of these humble occupations is looking forward to the
scaffold! She has even attempted to discard shoes; went out somewhere
barefoot and came back barefoot. I heard her washing her feet for a long
time afterwards and then saw her come out, treading cautiously; they
were evidently sore, poor thing, but her face was radiant with smiles
as though she had found a treasure or been illuminated by the sun. Yes,
Mariana is a brick! But when I try to talk to her of my feelings,
a certain shame comes over me somehow, as though I were violating
something that was not my own, and then that glance... Oh, that
awful devoted, irresistible glance! "Take me," it seems to say, "BUT
REMEMBER...." Enough of this! Is there not something higher and better
in this world? In other words, put on your filthy coat and go among the
people... Oh, yes, I am just going.

How I loathe this irritability, sensitiveness, impressionable-ness,
fastidiousness, inherited from my aristocratic father! What right had
he to bring me into this world, endowed with qualities quite unsuited
to the sphere in which I must live? To create a bird and throw it in the
water? An aesthetic amidst filth! A democrat, a lover of the people, yet
the very smell of their filthy vodka makes me feel sick!

But it's too bad blaming my father. He was not responsible for my
becoming a democrat.

"Yes, Vladimir, I am in a bad plight. Grey, depressing thoughts are
continually haunting me. Can it be, you will be asking me, that I have
not met with anything consoling, any good living personality, however
ignorant he might not be? How shall I tell you? I have run across
someone--a decent clever chap, but unfortunately, however hard I may try
to get nearer him, he has no need of either me or my pamphlets--that is
the root of the matter! Pavel, a factoryhand here (he is Vassily's right
hand, a clever fellow with his head screwed on the right way, a future
"head," I think I wrote to you about him), well this Pavel has a friend,
a peasant called Elizar, also a smart chap, as free and courageous as
one would wish, but as soon as we get together there seems a dead wall
between us! His face spells one big "No!" Then there was another man I
ran across--he was a rather quarrelsome type by the way. "Don't you try
to get around me, sir," he said. "What I want to know is would you give
up your land now, or not?" "But I'm not a gentleman," I remonstrated.
"Bless you!" he exclaimed, "you a common man and no more sense than that!
Leave me alone, please!

Another thing I've noticed is that if anyone listens to you readily
and takes your pamphlets at once, he is sure to be of an undesirable,
brainless sort. Or you may chance upon some frightfully talkative
individual who can do nothing but keep on repeating some favourite
expression. One such nearly drove me mad; everything with him was
"production." No matter what you said to him he came out with his
"production," damn him! Just one more remark.

Do you remember some time ago there used to be a great deal of talk
about "superfluous" people--Hamlets? Such "superfluous people" are now
to be met with among the peasants! They have their own characteristics
of course and are for the most part inclined to consumption. They are
interesting types and come to us readily, but as far as the cause is
concerned they are ineffective, like all other Hamlets. Well, what can
one do? Start a secret printing press? There are pamphlets enough as it
is, some that say, "Cross yourself and take up the hatchet," and others
that say simply, "Take up the hatchet" without the crossing. Or should
one write novels of peasant life with plenty of padding? They wouldn't
get published, you know. Perhaps it might be better to take up the
hatchet after all? But against whom, with whom, and what for? So that
our state soldier may shoot us down with the state rifle? It would only
be a complicated form of suicide! It would be better to make an end of
yourself--you would at any rate know when and how, and choose the spot
to aim at.

I am beginning to think that if some war were to break out, some
people's war--I would go and take part in it, not so as to free others
(free others while one's own are groaning under the yoke!!), but to make
an end of myself.

Our friend Vassily, who gave us shelter here, is a lucky man. He belongs
to our camp, but is so calm and quiet. He doesn't want to hurry over
things. I should have quarrelled with another, but I can't with him. The
secret lies not in his convictions, but in the man himself. Vassily has
a character that you can't kindle, but he's all right nevertheless. He
is with us a good deal, with Mariana. What surprises me is that although
I love her and she loves me (I see you smiling at this, but the fact
remains!) we have nothing to talk about, while she is constantly
discussing and arguing with him and listening too. I am not jealous of
him; he is trying to find a place for her somewhere, at any rate, she
keeps on asking him to do so, but it makes me feel bitter to look at
them both. And would you believe it--I have only to drop a hint about
marrying and she would agree at once and the priest Zosim would put in
an appearance, "Isaiah, rejoice!" and the rest of it. But this would not
make it any easier for me and NOTHING WOULD BE CHANGED BY IT... Whatever
you do, there is no way out of it! Life has cut me short, my dear
Vladimir, as our little drunken tailor used to say, you remember, when
he used to complain about his wife.

I have a feeling that it can't go on somehow, that something is
preparing.

Have I not again and again said that the time has come for action? Well,
so here we are in the thick of it.

I can't remember if I told you anything about another friend of mine--a
relative of the Sipiagins. He will get himself into such a mess that it
won't be easy for him to get out of it.

I quite meant finishing this letter and am still going on. It seems to
me that nothing matters and yet I scribble verses. I don't read them to
Mariana and she is not very anxious to hear them, but you have sometimes
praised my poor attempts and most of all you'll keep them to yourself.
I have been struck by a common phenomenon in Russia... But, however, let
the verses speak for themselves--


SLEEP

     After long absence I return to my native land,
     Finding no striking change there.
     The same dead, senseless stagnation; crumbling houses, crumbling
     walls,
     And the same filth, dirt, poverty, and misery.
     Unchanged the servile glance, now insolent, now dejected.
     Free have our people become, and the free arm
     Hangs as before like a whip unused.
     All, all as before. In one thing only may we equal
     Europe, Asia, and the World!
     Never before has such a fearful sleep oppressed our land.

     All are asleep, on all sides are they;
     Through town and country, in carts and in sledges,
     By day or night, sitting or standing,
     The merchant and the official, and the sentinel at his post
     In biting snow and burning heat--all sleep.
     The judged ones doze, and the judge snores,
     And peasants plough and reap like dead men,
     Father, mother, children; all are asleep.
     He who beats, and he who is beaten.
     Alone the tavern of the tsar ne'er closes a relentless eye.
     So, grasping tight in hand the bottle,
     His brow at the Pole and his heel in the Caucasus,
     Holy Russia, our fatherland, lies in eternal sleep.

I am sorry, Vladimir. I never meant to write you such a melancholy
letter without a few cheering words at the end. (You will no doubt
tumble across some defects in the lines!) When shall I write to you
again? Shall I ever write? But whatever happens to me I am sure you will
never forget,

Your devoted friend,

A. N.

P.S.--Our people are asleep... But I have a feeling that if anything
does wake them, it will not be what we think.

After writing the last line, Nejdanov flung down the pen. "Well, now
you must try and sleep and forget all this nonsense, scribbler!" he
exclaimed, and lay down on the bed. But it was long before he fell
asleep.

The next morning Mariana woke him passing through his room on her way to
Tatiana. He had scarcely dressed when she came back. She seemed excited,
her face expressing delight and anxiety at the same time.

"Do you know, Aliosha, they say that in the province of T., quite near
here, it has already begun!"

"What? What has begun? Who said so?"

"Pavel. They say the peasants are rising, refusing to pay taxes,
collecting in mobs."

"Have you heard that yourself?"

"Tatiana told me. But here is Pavel himself. You had better ask him."

Pavel came in and confirmed what Mariana had said.

"There is certainly some disturbance in T.," he began, shaking his beard
and screwing up his bright black eyes. "Sergai Mihailovitch must have
had a hand in it. He hasn't been home for five days."

Nejdanov took his cap.

"Where are you off to?" Mariana asked.

"Why there of course," he replied, not raising his eyes and frowning, "I
am going to T."

"Then I will come with you. You'll take me, won't you? Just let me get a
shawl."

"It's not a woman's work," Nejdanov said irritably with his eyes still
fixed on the floor.

"No, no! You do well to go, or Markelov would think you a coward ... but
I'm coming with you."

"I am not a coward," Nejdanov observed gloomily.

"I meant to say that he would have thought us both cowards. I am coming
with you."

Mariana went into her own room to get a shawl, while Pavel gave an
inward ha, ha, and quickly vanished. He ran to warn Solomin.

Mariana had not yet appeared, when Solomin came into Nejdanov's room.
The latter was standing with his face to the window, his forehead
resting on the palm of his hand and his elbow on the window-pane.
Solomin touched him on the shoulder. He turned around quickly;
dishevelled and unwashed, Nejdanov had a strange wild look. Solomin,
too, had changed during the last days. His face was yellow and drawn and
his upper front teeth showed slightly--he, too, seemed agitated as far
as it was possible for his well-balanced temperament to be so.

"Markelov could not control himself after all," he began. "This may turn
out badly both for him and for others."

"I want to go and see what's going on there," Nejdanov observed.

"And I too," Mariana added as she appeared in the doorway.

Solomin turned to her quickly.

"I would not advise you to go, Mariana. You may give yourself away--and
us, without meaning to, and without the slightest necessity. Let
Nejdanov go and see how the land lies, if he wants to--and the sooner
he's back the better! But why should you go?"

"I don't want to be parted from him."

"You will be in his way."

Mariana looked at Nejdanov. He was standing motionless with a set sullen
expression on his face.

"But supposing there should be danger?" she asked.

Solomin smiled.

"Don't be afraid... when there's danger I will let you go."

Mariana took off her shawl without a word and sat down. Solomin then
turned to Nejdanov.

"It would be a good thing for you to look about a little, Alexai. I dare
say they exaggerate. Only do be careful. But, however, you will not
be going alone. Come back as quickly as you can. Will you promise?
Nejdanov? Will you promise?"

"Yes."

"For certain?

"I suppose so, since everybody here obeys you, including Mariana."

Nejdanov went out without saying goodbye. Pavel appeared from somewhere
out of the darkness and ran down the stairs before him with a great
clatter of his hob-nailed boots. Was HE then to accompany Nejdanov?

Solomin sat down beside Mariana.

"You heard Nejdanov's last word?"

"Yes. He is annoyed that I listen to you more than to him. But it's
quite true. I love him and listen to you. He is dear to me... and you
are near to me."

Solomin stroked her hand gently.

"This is a very unpleasant business," he observed at last. "If Markelov
is mixed up in it then he's a lost man."

Mariana shuddered.

"Lost?"

"Yes. He doesn't do things by halves--and won't hide things for the sake
of others."

"Lost!" Mariana whispered again as the tears rolled down her cheeks.
"Oh, Vassily Fedotitch! I feel so sorry for him. But what makes you
think that he won't succeed? Why must he inevitably be lost?"

"Because in such enterprises the first always perish even if they come
off victorious. And in this thing not only the first and second, but the
tenth and twentieth will perish--"

"Then we shall never live to see it?"

"What you have in your mind--never. We shall never see it with our eyes;
with these living eyes of ours. But with our spiritual ... but that
is another matter. We may see it in that way now; there is nothing to
hinder us."

"Then why do you--"

"What?"

"Why do you follow this road?"

"Because there is no other. I mean that my aims are the same as
Markelov's--but our paths are different."

"Poor Sergai Mihailovitch!" Mariana exclaimed sadly. Solomin passed his
hand cautiously over hers.

"There, there, we know nothing as yet. We'll see what news Pavel brings
back. In our calling one must be brave. The English have a proverb
'Never say die.' A very good proverb, I think, much better than our
Russian, 'When trouble knocks, open the gates wide!' We mustn't meet
trouble half way."

Solomin stood up.

"And the place you were going to find me?" Mariana asked suddenly. The
tears were still shining on her cheeks, but there was no sadness in her
eyes. Solomin sat down again.

"Are you in such a great hurry to get away from here?

"Oh, no! Only I wanted to do something useful."

"You are useful here, Mariana. Don't leave us yet, wait a little longer.
What is it?" Solomin asked of Tatiana who was just coming in.

"Some sort of female is asking for Alexai Dmitritch," Tatiana replied,
laughing and gesticulating with her hands.

"I said that there was no such person living here, that we did not know
him at all, when she--"

"Who is she?"

"Why the female of course. She wrote her name on this piece of paper
and asked me to bring it here and let her in, saying that if Alexai
Dmitritch was really not at home, she could wait for him."

On the paper was written in large letters "Mashurina."

"Show her in," Solomin said. "You don't mind my asking her in here,
Mariana, do you? She is also one of us."

"Not at all."

A few moments later Mashurina appeared in the doorway, in the same dress
in which we saw her at the beginning of the first chapter.


XXXI

"Is Nejdanov not at home?" she asked, then catching sight of Solomin,
came up to him and extended her hand.

"How do you do, Solomin?" She threw a side-glance at Mariana.

"He will be back directly," Solomin said. "But tell me how you came to
know--"

"Markelov told me. Besides several people in the town already know that
he's here."

"Really?"

"Yes. Somebody must have let it out. Besides Nejdanov has been
recognised."

"For all the dressing up!" Solomin muttered to himself. "Allow me to
introduce you," he said aloud, "Miss Sinitska, Miss Mashurina! Won't you
sit down?"

Mashurina nodded her head slightly and sat down. "I have a letter for
Nejdanov and a message for you, Solomin."

"What message? And from whom?"

"From someone who is well known to you... Well, is everything ready
here?"

"Nothing whatever."

Mashurina opened her tiny eyes as wide as she could.

"Nothing?

"Nothing."

"Absolutely nothing?"

"Absolutely nothing."

"Is that what I am to say?"

"Exactly."

Mashurina became thoughtful and pulled a cigarette out of her pocket.

"Can I have a light?"

"Here is a match."

Mashurina lighted her cigarette.

"They expected something different," she began, "Altogether different
from what you have here. However, that is your affair. I am not going to
stay long. I only want to see Nejdanov and give him the letter."

"Where are you going to?

"A long way from here." (She was going to Geneva, but did not want
Solomin to know as she did not quite trust him, and besides a stranger
was present. Mashurina, who scarcely knew a word of German, was being
sent to Geneva to hand over to a person absolutely unknown to her a
piece of cardboard with a vine-branch sketched on it and two hundred and
seventy-nine roubles.)

"And where is Ostrodumov? Is he with you?"

"No, but he's quite near. Got stuck on the way. He'll be here when he's
wanted. Pemien can look after himself. There is no need to worry about
him."

"How did you get here?"

"In a cart of course. How else could I have come? Give me another match,
please."

Solomin gave her a light.

"Vassily Fedotitch!" A voice called out suddenly from the other side of
the door. "Can you come out?"

"Who is it? What do you want?"

"Do come, please," the voice repeated insistently. "Some new workmen
have come. They're trying to explain something, and Pavel Egoritch is
not there."

Solomin excused himself and went out. Mashurina fixed her gaze on
Mariana and stared at her for so long that the latter began to feel
uncomfortable.

"Excuse me," Mashurina exclaimed suddenly in her hard abrupt voice, "I
am a plain woman and don't know how to put these things. Don't be angry
with me. You need not tell me if you don't wish to. Are you the girl who
ran away from the Sipiagins?"

"Yes," Mariana replied, a little surprised.

"With Nejdanov?"

"Yes."

"Please give me your hand... and forgive me. You must be good since he
loves you."

Mariana pressed Mashurina's hand.

"Have you known him long?"

"I knew him in St. Petersburg. That was what made me talk to you. Sergai
Mihailovitch has also told me--"

"Oh Markelov! Is it long since you've seen him?

"No, not long. But he's gone away now."

"Where to?"

"Where he was ordered."

Mariana sighed.

"Oh, Miss Mashurina, I fear for him."

"In the first place, I'm not miss. You ought to cast off such manners.
In the second, you say... 'I fear,' and that you must also cast aside.
If you do not fear for yourself, you will leave off fearing for others.
You must not think of yourself, nor fear for yourself. I dare say it's
easy for me to talk like that. I am ugly, while you are beautiful. It
must be so much harder for you." (Mariana looked down and turned away.)
"Sergai Mihailovitch told me... He knew I had a letter for Nejdanov...
'Don't go to the factory,' he said, 'don't take the letter. It will
upset everything there. Leave them alone! They are both happy... Don't
interfere with them!' I should be glad not to interfere, but what shall
I do about the letter?"

"Give it to him by all means," Mariana put in. "How awfully good
Sergai Mihailovitch is! Will they kill him, Mashurina... or send him to
Siberia?"

"Well, what then? Don't people come back from Siberia? And as for losing
one's life; it is not all like honey to everybody. To some it is sweet,
to others bitter. His life has not been over-sweet."

Mashurina gave Mariana a fixed searching look.

"How beautiful you are!" she exclaimed, "just like a bird! I don't think
Alexai is coming... I'll give you the letter. It's no use waiting any
longer.

"I will give it him, you may be sure."

Mashurina rested her cheek in her hand and for a long, long time did not
speak.

"Tell me," she began, "forgive me for asking... do you love him?"

"Yes."

Mashurina shook her heavy head.

"There is no need to ask if he loves you. However, I had better be
going, otherwise I shall be late. Tell him that I was here... give him
my kind regards. Tell him Mashurina was here. You won't forget my name,
will you? Mashurina. And the letter... but say, where have I put it?"

Mashurina stood up, turned round as though she were rummaging in her
pockets for the letter, and quickly raising a small piece of folded
paper to her lips, swallowed it. "Oh, dear me! What have I done with
it? Have I lost it? I must have dropped it. Dear me! Supposing some one
should find it! I can't find it anywhere. It's turned out exactly as
Sergai Mihailovitch wanted after all!"

"Look again," Mariana whispered. Mashurina waved her hand.

"It's no good. I've lost it."

Mariana came up to her.

"Well, then, kiss me."

Mashurina suddenly put her arms about Mariana and pressed her to her
bosom with more than a woman's strength.

"I would not have done this for anybody," she said, a lump rising in her
throat, "against my conscience... the first time! Tell him to be more
careful... And you too. Be cautious. It will soon be very dangerous
for everybody here, very dangerous. You had better both go away, while
there's still time... Goodbye!" she added loudly with some severity.
"Just one more thing... tell him... no, it's not necessary. It's
nothing."

Mashurina went out, banging the door behind her, while Mariana stood
perplexed in the middle of the room.

"What does it all mean?" she exclaimed at last. "This woman loves him
more than I do! What did she want to convey by her hints? And why did
Solomin disappear so suddenly, and why didn't he come back again?"

She began pacing up and down the room. A curious sensation of fear,
annoyance, and amazement took possession of her. Why did she not go with
Nejdanov? Solomin had persuaded her not to... but where is Solomin? And
what is going on around here? Of course Mashurina did not give her the
letter because of her love for Nejdanov. But how could she decide to
disregard orders? Did she want to appear magnanimous? What right had
she? And why was she, Mariana, so touched by her act? An unattractive
woman interests herself in a young man... What is there extraordinary
about it? And why should Mashurina assume that Mariana's attachment to
Nejdanov is stronger than the feelings of duty? And did Mariana ask for
such a sacrifice? And what could the letter have contained? A call for
speedy action? Well, and what then?

And Markelov? He is in danger... and what are we doing? Markelov spares
us both, gives us the opportunity of being happy, does not part us...
What makes him do it? Is it also magnaminity... or contempt?

And did we run away from that hateful house merely to live like turtle
doves?

Thus Mariana pondered, while the feeling of agitation and annoyance grew
stronger and stronger within her. Her pride was hurt. Why had everyone
forsaken her? EVERYONE. This stout woman had called her a bird, a
beauty... why not quite plainly, a doll? And why did Nejdanov not go
alone, but with Pavel? It's just as if he needed someone to look after
him! And what are really Solomin's convictions? It's quite clear that
he's not a revolutionist! And could any one really think that he does
not treat the whole thing seriously?

These were the thoughts that whirled round, chasing one another and
becoming entangled in Mariana's feverish brain. Pressing her lips
closely together and folding her arms like a man, she sat down by the
window at last and remained immovable, straight up in her chair, all
alertness and intensity, ready to spring up at any moment. She had no
desire to go to Tatiana and work; she wanted to wait alone. And she sat
waiting obstinately, almost angrily. From time to time her mood seemed
strange and incomprehensible even to herself... Never mind. "Am I
jealous?" flashed across her mind, but remembering poor Mashurina's
figure she shrugged her shoulders and dismissed the idea.

Mariana had been waiting for a long time when suddenly she heard the
sound of two persons' footsteps coming up the stairs. She fixed her
eyes on the door... the steps drew nearer. The door opened and Nejdanov,
supported under the arm by Pavel, appeared in the doorway. He was deadly
pale, without a cap, his dishevelled hair hung in wet tufts over his
forehead, he stared vacantly straight in front of him. Pavel helped him
across the room (Nejdanov's legs were weak and shaky) and made him sit
down on the couch.

Mariana sprang up from her seat.

"What is the meaning of this? What's the matter with him? Is he ill?"

As he settled Nejdanov, Pavel answered her with a smile, looking at her
over his shoulder.

"You needn't worry. He'll soon be all right. It's only because he's not
used to it."

"What's the matter?" Mariana persisted.

"He's only a little tipsy. Been drinking on an empty stomach; that's
all."

Mariana bent over Nejdanov. He was half lying on the couch, his head
sunk on his breast, his eyes closed. He smelled of vodka; he was quite
drunk.

"Alexai!" escaped her lips.

He raised his heavy eyelids with difficulty, and tried to smile.

"Well, Mariana!" he stammered out, "you've always talked of
sim-plif-ication... so here I am quite simplified. Because the people
are always drunk... and so..."

He ceased, then muttered something indistinctly to himself, closed his
eyes, and fell asleep. Pavel stretched him carefully on the couch.

"Don't worry, Mariana Vikentievna," he repeated. "He'll sleep an hour or
two and wake up as fresh as can be."

Mariana wanted to ask how this had happened, but her questions would
have detained Pavel and she wanted to be alone... she did not wish Pavel
to see him in this disgusting state before her. She walked away to the
window while Pavel, who instantly understood her, carefully covered
Nejdanov's legs with the skirts of his coat, put a pillow under his
head, and observing once again, "It's nothing," went out on tiptoe.

Mariana looked round. Nejdanov's head was buried in the pillow and on
his pale face there was an expression of fixed intensity as on the face
of one dangerously ill.

"I wonder how it happened?" she thought.


XXXII

IT happened like this.

Sitting down beside Pavel in the cart, Nejdanov fell into a state of
great excitement. As soon as they rolled out of the courtyard onto the
high road leading to T. he began shouting out the most absurd things to
the peasants he met on the way. "Why are you asleep? Rouse yourself! The
time has come! Down with the taxes! Down with the landlords!"

Some of the peasants stared at him in amazement, others passed on
without taking any notice of him, thinking that he was drunk; one even
said when he got home that he had met a Frenchman on the way who was
jabbering away at something he did not understand. Nejdanov had common
sense enough to know that what he was doing was unutterably stupid and
absurd had he not got himself up to such a pitch of excitement that he
was no longer able to discriminate between sense and nonsense. Pavel
tried to quiet him, saying that it was impossible to go on like that;
that they were quite near a large village, the first on the borders of
T., and that there they could look around.... But Nejdanov would not
calm down, and at the same time his face bore a sad, almost despairing,
expression. Their horse was an energetic, round little thing, with a
clipped mane on its scraggy neck. It tugged at the reins, and its strong
little legs flew as fast as they could, just as if it were conscious
of bearing important people to the scene of action. Just before they
reached the village, Nejdanov saw a group of about eight peasants
standing by the side of the road at the closed doors of a granary. He
instantly jumped out of the cart, rushed up to them, and began shouting
at them, thumping his fists and gesticulating for about five minutes.
The words "For Freedom! March on! Put the shoulder to the wheel!" could
be distinguished from among the rest of his confused words.

The peasants, who had met before the granary for the purpose of
discussing how to fill it once more--if only to show that they
were doing something (it was the communal granary and consequently
empty)--fixed their eyes on Nejdanov and seemed to listen to him with
the greatest attention, but they had evidently not understood a word he
had said, for no sooner was his back turned, shouting for the last time
"Freedom!" as he rushed away, when one of them, the most sagacious of
the lot, shook his head saying, "What a severe one!" "He must be an
officer," another remarked, to which the wise one said: "We know all
about that--he doesn't talk for nothing. We'll have to pay the piper."

"Heavens! what nonsense this all is!" Nejdanov thought to himself, as he
sat down next to Pavel in the cart. "But then none of us know how to get
at the people--perhaps this is the right way after all! Who knows? Go
on! Does your heart ache? Let it!"

They found themselves in the main street of the village in the middle
of which a number of people were gathered together before a tavern.
Nejdanov, paying no heed to Pavel, who was trying to hold him back,
leapt down from the cart with a cry of "Brothers!" The crowd made way
for him and he again began preaching, looking neither to right nor left,
as if furious and weeping at the same time. But things turned out quite
differently than with his former attempt at the barn. An enormous fellow
with a clean-shaven, vicious face, in a short greasy coat, high boots,
and a sheepskin cap, came up to him and clapped him on the shoulder.

"All right! my fine fellow!" he bawled out in a wheezy voice; "but wait
a bit! good deeds must be rewarded. Come along in here. It'll be much
better talking in there." He pulled Nejdanov into the tavern, the others
streamed in after them. "Michaitch!" the fellow shouted, "twopennyworth!
My favourite drink! I want to treat a friend. Who he is, what's his
family, and where he's from, only the devil knows! Drink!" he said,
turning to Nejdanov and handing him a heavy, full glass, wet all over
on the outside, as though perspiring, "drink, if you really have any
feeling for us!" "Drink!" came a chorus of voices. Nejdanov, who seemed
as if in a fever, seized the glass and with a cry of "I drink to you,
children!" drank it off at a gulp. Ugh! He drank it off with the same
desperate heroism with which he would have flung himself in storming
a battery or on a line of bayonets. But what was happening to him?
Something seemed to have struck his spine, his legs, burned his throat,
his chest, his stomach, made the tears come into his eyes. A shudder of
disgust passed all over him. He began shouting at the top of his voice
to drown the throbbing in his head. The dark tavern room suddenly became
hot and thick and suffocating--and people, people everywhere! Nejdanov
began talking, talking incessantly, shouting furiously, in exasperation,
shaking broad rough hands, kissing prickly beards. ... The enormous
fellow in the greasy coat kissed him too, nearly breaking his ribs.
This fellow turned out to be a perfect fiend. "I'll wring the neck," he
shouted, "I'll wring the neck of anyone who dares to offend our brother!
And what's more, I'll make mincemeat of him too... I'll make him cry
out! That's nothing to me. I was a butcher and know how to do such
jobs!" At this he held up an enormous fist covered with freckles.
Someone again shouted, "Drink!" and Nejdanov again swallowed a glass
of the filthy poison. But this second time was truly awful! Blunt hooks
seemed to be tearing him to pieces inside. His head was in a whirl,
green circles swam before his eyes. A hubbub arose... Oh horror! a third
glass. Was it possible he emptied that too? He seemed to be surrounded
by purple noses, dusty heads of hair, tanned necks covered with nets
of wrinkles. Rough hands seized him. "Go on!" they bawled out in angry
voices, "talk away! The day before yesterday another stranger talked
like that. Go on." The earth seemed reeling under Nejdanov's feet, his
voice sounded strange to his own ears as though coming from a long way
off... Was it death or what?

And suddenly he felt the fresh air blowing about his face, no more
pushing and shoving, no more stench of spirits, sheep-skin, tar, nor
leather.... He was again sitting beside Pavel in the cart, struggling at
first and shouting, "Where are you off to? Stop! I haven't had time to
tell them anything--I must explain..." and then added, "and what are
your own ideas on the subject, you sly-boots?"

"It would certainly be well if there were no gentry and the land
belonged to us, of course," Pavel replied, "but there's been no such
order from the government." He quietly turned the horse's head and,
suddenly lashing it on the back with the reins, set off at full gallop,
away from this din and uproar, back to the factory.

Nejdanov sat dozing, rocked by the motion of the cart, while the
wind played pleasantly about his face and kept back gloomy depressing
thoughts.

He was annoyed that he had not been allowed to say all that he had
wanted to say. Again the wind caressed his overheated face.

And then--a momentary glimpse of Mariana--a burning sense of shame--and
sleep, deep, sound sleep...

Pavel told Solomin all this afterwards, not hiding the fact that he did
not attempt to prevent Nejdanov from drinking--otherwise he could not
have got him out of the whirl. The others would not have let him go.

"When he seemed to be getting very feeble, I asked them to let him off,
and they agreed to, on condition that I gave them a shilling, so I gave
it them."

"You acted quite rightly," Solomin said, approvingly.

Nejdanov slept, while Mariana sat at the window looking out into the
garden. Strange to say the angry, almost wicked, thoughts that had
been tormenting her until Nejdanov and Pavel arrived had completely
disappeared. Nejdanov himself was not in the least repulsive or
disgusting to her; she was only sorry for him. She knew quite well that
he was not a debauchee, a drunkard, and was wondering what she would say
to him when he woke up; something friendly and affectionate to minimise
the first sting of conscience and shame. "I must try and get him to tell
me himself how it all happened," she thought.

She was not disturbed, but depressed--hopelessly depressed. It seemed
as if a breath of the real atmosphere of the world towards which she was
striving had blown on her suddenly, making her shudder at its coarseness
and darkness. What Moloch was this to which she was going to sacrifice
herself?

But no! It could not be! This was merely an incident, it would soon pass
over. A momentary impression that had struck her so forcibly because it
had happened so unexpectedly. She got up, walked over to the couch on
which Nejdanov was lying, took out her pocket-handkerchief and wiped his
pale forehead, which was painfully drawn, even in sleep, and smoothed
back his hair...

She pitied him as a mother pities her suffering child. But it was
somewhat painful for her to look at him, so she went quietly into her
own room, leaving the door unlocked.

She did not attempt to take any work in her hand. She sat down and
thoughts began crowding in upon her. She felt how the time was slipping
away, how one minute flew after another, and the sensation was even
pleasant to her. Her heart beat fast and again she seemed to be waiting
for something.

What has become of Solomin?

The door creaked softly and Tatiana came into the room. "What do you
want?" Mariana asked with a shade of annoyance.

"Mariana Vikentievna," Tatiana began in an undertone, "don't worry, my
dear. Such things happen every day. Besides, the Lord be thanked--"

"I am not worrying at all, Tatiana Osipovna," Mariana interrupted her.
"Alexai Dmitritch is a little indisposed, nothing very serious!"

"That's all right! I wondered why you didn't come, and thought there
might be something the matter with you. But still I wouldn't have come
in to you. It's always best not to interfere. But someone has come--a
little lame man, the Lord knows who he is--and demands to see Alexai
Dmitritch! I wonder what for? This morning that female came for him and
now this little cripple. 'If Alexai Dmitritch is not at home,' he says,
'then I must see Vassily Fedotitch! I won't go away without seeing him.
It's on a very urgent matter.' We wanted to get rid of him, as we did
of that woman, told him Vassily Fedotitch was not at home, but he is
determined to see him even if he has to wait until midnight. There he
is walking about in the yard. Come and have a look at him through the
little window in the corridor. Perhaps you'll recognise him."

Mariana followed Tatiana out into the corridor, and on passing Nejdanov
was again struck by that painful frown on his forehead and passed her
pocket-handkerchief over it a second time.

Through the dusty little window she caught a glimpse of the visitor whom
Tatiana had spoken of. He was unknown to her. At this moment Solomin
appeared from a corner of the house.

The little cripple rushed up to him and extended his hand. Solomin
pressed it. He was obviously acquainted with him. They both
disappeared... Soon their footsteps were heard coming up the stairs.
They were coming to see her.

Mariana fled into her own room and remained standing in the middle of
it, hardly able to breathe. She was mortally afraid... but of what? She
did not know herself.

Solomin's head appeared through the door.

"Mariana Vikentievna, can I come in? I have brought someone whom it's
absolutely necessary for you to see."

Mariana merely nodded her head in reply and behind Solomin in
walked--Paklin.


XXXIII

"I AM a friend of your husband's," he said, bowing very low, as if
anxious to conceal his frightened face, "and also of Vassily Fedotitch.
I hear Alexai Dmitritch is asleep and not very well. Unfortunately, I
have brought bad news. I have already told Vassily Fedotitch something
about it and am afraid decisive measures will have to be taken."

Paklin's voice broke continually, like that of a man who was tortured
by thirst. The items of news he had to communicate were certainly very
unpleasant ones. Some peasants had seized Markelov and brought him to
the town. The stupid clerk had betrayed Golushkin, who was now under
arrest, he in his turn was betraying everything and everybody, wanted to
go over to the Orthodox Church, had offered to present a portrait of the
Bishop Filaret to the public school, and had already given five thousand
roubles to be distributed among crippled soldiers. There was not a
shadow of a doubt that he had informed against Nejdanov; the police
might make a raid upon the factory any moment. Vassily Fedotitch was
also in danger. "As for myself," Paklin added, "I am surprised that
I'm still allowed to roam at large, although it's true that I've never
really interested myself in practical politics or taken part in any
schemes. I have taken advantage of this oversight on the part of the
police to put you on your guard and find out what had best be done to
avoid any unpleasantness."

Mariana listened to Paklin to the end. She did not seem alarmed; on the
other hand she was quite calm. But something must really be done! She
fixed her eyes on Solomin.

He was also composed; only around his lips there was the faintest
movement of the muscles; but it was not his habitual smile.

Solomin understood the meaning of Mariana's glance; she waited for him
to say what had best be done.

"It's a very awkward business," he began; "I don't think it would do
Nejdanov any harm to go into hiding for a time. But, by the way, how did
you get to know that he was here, Mr. Paklin?"

Paklin gave a wave of the hand.

"A certain individual told me. He had seen him preaching about the
neighbourhood and had followed him, though with no evil intent. He is a
sympathiser. Excuse me," he added, turning to Mariana, "is it true that
our friend Nejdanov has been very... very careless?"

"It's no good blaming him now," Solomin began again. "What a pity we
can't talk things over with him now, but by tomorrow he will be all
right again. The police don't do things as quickly as you seem to
imagine. You will have to go away with him, Mariana Vikentievna."

"Certainly," she said resolutely, a lump rising in her throat.

"Yes," Solomin said, "we must think it over, consider ways and means."

"May I make a suggestion?" Paklin began. "It entered my head as I was
coming along here. I must tell you, by the way, that I dismissed the
cabman from the town a mile away from here."

"What is your suggestion?" Solomin asked.

"Let me have some horses at once and I'll gallop off to the Sipiagins."

"To the Sipiagins!" Mariana exclaimed. "Why?"

"You will see."

"But do you know them?"

"Not at all! But listen. Do think over my suggestion thoroughly. It
seems to me a brilliant one. Markelov is Sipiagin's brother-in-law,
his wife's brother, isn't that so? Would this gentleman really make
no attempt to save him? And as for Nejdanov himself, granting that Mr.
Sipiagin is most awfully angry with him, still he has become a relation
of his by marrying you. And the danger hanging over our friend--"

"I am not married," Mariana observed.

Paklin started.

"What? Haven't managed it all this time! Well, never mind," he added,
"one can pretend a little. All the same, you will get married directly.
There seems nothing else to be done! Take into consideration the fact
that up until now Sipiagin has not persecuted you, which shows him to
be a man capable of a certain amount of generosity. I see that you don't
like the expression--well, a certain amount of pride. Why should we not
take advantage of it? Consider for yourself!"

Mariana raised her head and passed her hand through her air.

"You can take advantage of whatever you like for Markelov, Mr. Paklin...
or for yourself, but Alexai and I do not desire the protection or
patronage of Mr. Sipiagin. We did not leave his house only to go
knocking at his door as beggars. The pride and generosity of Mr.
Sipiagin and his wife have nothing whatever to do with us!"

"Such sentiments are extremely praiseworthy," Paklin replied ("How
utterly crushed!" he thought to himself), "though, on the other hand, if
you think of it... However, I am ready to obey you. I will exert myself
only on Markelov's account, our good Markelov! I must say, however,
that he is not his blood relation, but only related to him through his
wife--while you--"

"Mr Paklin, I beg of you!"

"I'm sorry... Only I can't tell you how disappointing it is--Sipiagin is
a very influential man."

"Have you no fears for yourself?" Solomin asked.

Paklin drew himself up.

"There are moments when one must not think of oneself!" he said proudly.
And he was thinking of himself all the while. Poor little man! he wanted
to run away as fast as he could. On the strength of the service rendered
him, Sipiagin might, if need be, speak a word in his favour. For
he too--say what he would--was implicated, he had listened and had
chattered a little himself.

"I don't think your suggestion is a bad one," Solomin observed at last,
"although there is not much hope of success. At any rate there is no harm
in trying."

"Of course not. Supposing they pitch me out by the scruff of the neck,
what harm will it do?"

"That won't matter very much" ("Merci," Paklin thought to himself).
"What is the time?" Solomin asked. "Five o'clock. We mustn't dawdle. You
shall have the horses directly. Pavel!"

But instead of Pavel, Nejdanov appeared in the doorway. He staggered
and steadied himself on the doorpost. He opened his mouth feebly, looked
around with his glassy eyes, comprehending nothing. Paklin was the first
to approach him.

"Aliosha!" he exclaimed, "don't you know me?" Nejdanov stared at him,
blinking slowly.

"Paklin?" he said at last.

"Yes, it is I. Aren't you well?"

"No... I'm not well. But why are you here?"

"Why?"... But at this moment Mariana stealthily touched Paklin on the
elbow. He turned around and saw that she was making signs to him. "Oh,
yes!" he muttered. "Yes.... You see, Aliosha," he added aloud, "I've
come here upon a very important matter and must go away at once. Solomin
will tell you all about it--and Mariana--Mariana Vikentievna. They both
fully approve of what I am going to do. The thing concerns us all. No,
no," he put in hastily in response to a look and gesture from Mariana.
"The thing concerns Markelov; our mutual friend Markelov; it concerns
him alone. But I must say goodbye now. Every minute is precious.
Goodbye, Aliosha... We'll see each other again sometime. Vassily
Fedotitch, can you come with me to see about the horses?"

"Certainly. Mariana, I wanted to ask you to be firm, but that is not
necessary. You're a brick!"

"Yes, yes," Paklin chimed in, "you are just like a Roman maiden in
Cato's time! Cato of Utica! We must be off, Vassily Fedotitch, come
along!"

"There's plenty of time," Solomin observed with a faint smile. Nejdanov
stood on one side to allow them room to pass out, but there was the same
vacant expression in his eyes. After they had gone he took a step or two
forward and sat down on a chair facing Mariana.

"Alexai," she began, "everything has been found out. Markelov has been
seized by the very peasants he was trying to better, and is now under
arrest in this town, and so is the merchant with whom you dined once.
I dare say the police will soon be here for us too. Paklin has gone to
Sipiagin."

"Why?" Nejdanov asked in a scarcely audible whisper. But there was a
keen look in his eyes--his face assumed it's habitual expression. The
stupor had left him instantly.

"To try and find out if he would be willing to intercede."

Nejdanov sat up straight.

"For us?

"No, for Markelov. He wanted to ask him to intercede for us too... but
I wouldn't let him. Have I done well, Alexai?"

"Have you done well?" Nejdanov asked and without rising from his chair,
stretched out his arms to her. "Have you done well?" he repeated,
drawing her close to him, and pressing his face against her waist,
suddenly burst into tears.

"What is the matter? What is the matter with you?" Mariana exclaimed.
And as on the day when he had fallen on his knees before her, trembling
and breathless in a torrent of passion, she laid both her hands on his
trembling head. But what she felt now was quite different from what she
had felt then. Then she had given herself up to him--had submitted to
him and only waited to hear what he would say next, but now she pitied
him and only wondered what she could do to calm him.

"What is the matter with you?" she repeated. "Why are you crying? Not
because you came home in a somewhat... strange condition? It can't be!
Or are you sorry for Markelov--afraid for me, for yourself? Or is it for
our lost hopes? You did not really expect that everything would go off
smoothly!"

Nejdanov suddenly lifted his bead.

"It's not that, Mariana," he said, mastering his sobs by an effort, "I
am not afraid for either of us... but... I am sorry.

"For whom?"

"For you, Mariana! I am sorry that you should have united your fate with
a man who is not worthy of you."

"Why not?"

"If only because he can be crying at a moment as this!"

"It is not you but your nerves that are crying!"

"You can't separate me from my nerves! But listen, Mariana, look me in
the face; can you tell me now that you do not regret--"

"What?"

"That you ran away with me."

"No!"

"And would you go with me further? Anywhere?"

"Yes!"

"Really? Mariana... really?

"Yes. I have given you my word, and so long as you remain the man I
love--I shall not take it back."

Nejdanov remained sitting on the chair, Mariana standing before him. His
arms were about her waist, her's were resting on his shoulders.

"Yes, no," Nejdanov thought... "when I last held her in my arms like
this, her body was at least motionless, but now I can feel it--against
her will, perhaps--shrink away from me gently!"

He loosened his arms and Mariana did in fact move away from him a
little.

"If that's so," he said aloud, "if we must run away from here before the
police find us... I think it wouldn't be a bad thing if we were to get
married. We may not find another such accommodating priest as Father
Zosim!"

"I am quite ready," Mariana observed.

Nejdanov gave her a searching glance.

"A Roman maiden!" he exclaimed with a sarcastic half-smile. "What a
feeling of duty!"

Mariana shrugged her shoulders.

"We must tell Solomin."

"Yes... Solomin..." Nejdanov drawled out. "But he is also in danger. The
police would arrest him too. It seems to me that he also took part in
things and knew even more than we did."

"I don't know about that," Mariana observed. "He never speaks of
himself!

"Not as I do!" Nejdanov thought. "That was what she meant to imply.
Solomin... Solomin!" he added after a pause. "Do you know, Mariana, I
should not be at all sorry if you had linked your fate forever with a
man like Solomin... or with Solomin himself."

Mariana gave Nejdanov a penetrating glance in her turn. "You had no
right to say that," she observed at last.

"I had no right! In what sense am I to take that? Does it mean that
you love me, or that I ought not to touch upon this question generally
speaking?"

"You had no right," Mariana repeated.

Nejdanov lowered his head.

"Mariana!" he exclaimed in a slightly different tone of voice.

"Yes?

"If I were to ask you now... now... you know what... But no, I will not
ask anything of you.. goodbye."

He got up and went out; Mariana did not detain him. Nejdanov sat down on
the couch and covered his face with his hands. He was afraid of his own
thoughts and tried to stop thinking. He felt that some sort of dark,
underground hand had clutched at the very root of his being and would
not let him go. He knew that the dear, sweet creature he had left in
the next room would not come out to him and he dared not go to her. What
for? What would he say to her?

Firm, rapid footsteps made him open his eyes. Solomin passed through his
room, knocked at Mariana's door, and went in.

"Honour where honour is due!" Nejdanov whispered bitterly.


XXXIV

IT was already ten o'clock in the evening; in the drawing-room of the
Arjanov house Sipiagin, his wife, and Kollomietzev were sitting over
a game at cards when a footman entered and announced that an unknown
gentleman, a certain Mr. Paklin, wished to see Boris Andraevitch upon a
very urgent business.

"So late!" Valentina Mihailovna exclaimed, surprised.

"What?" Boris Andraevitch asked, screwing up his handsome nose; "what did
you say the gentleman's name was?"

"Mr. Paklin, sir."

"Paklin!" Kollomietzev exclaimed; "a real country name. Paklin. ..
Solomin... De vrais noms ruraux, hein?"

"Did you say," Boris Andraevitch continued, still turned towards the
footman with his nose screwed up, "that the business was an urgent one?"

"The gentleman said so, sir."

"H'm.... No doubt some beggar or intriguer."

"Or both," Kollomietzev chimed in.

"Very likely. Ask him into my study." Boris Andraevitch got up. "Pardon,
ma bonne. Have a game of ecarte till I come back, unless you would like
to wait for me. I won't be long."

"Nous causerons... Allez!" Kollomietzev said.

When Sipiagin entered his study and caught sight of Paklin's poor,
feeble little figure meekly leaning up against the door between the wall
and the fireplace, he was seized by that truly ministerial sensation of
haughty compassion and fastidious condescension so characteristic of the
St. Petersburg bureaucrat. "Heavens! What a miserable little wretch!" he
thought; "and lame too, I believe!"

"Sit down, please," he said aloud, making use of some of his most
benevolent baritone notes and throwing back his head, sat down before
his guest did. "You are no doubt tired from the journey. Sit down,
please, and tell me about this important matter that has brought you so
late."

"Your excellency," Paklin began, cautiously dropping into an arm-chair,
"I have taken the liberty of coming to you--"

"Just a minute, please," Sipiagin interrupted him, "I think I've seen
you before. I never forget faces. But er... er... really... where have I
seen you?"

"You are not mistaken, your excellency. I had the honour of meeting
you in St. Petersburg at a certain person's who... who has since...
unfortunately... incurred your displeasure--"

Sipiagin jumped up from his chair.

"Why, at Mr. Nejdanov's? I remember now. You haven't come from him by
the way, have you?"

"Not at all, your excellency; on the contrary...I--"

Sipiagin sat down again.

"That's good. For had you come on his account I should have asked you to
leave the house at once. I cannot allow any mediator between myself
and Mr. Nejdanov. Mr. Nejdanov has insulted me in a way which cannot
be forgotten... I am above any feelings of revenge, but I don't wish
to know anything of him, nor of the girl--more depraved in mind than in
heart" (Sipiagin had repeated this phrase at least thirty times since
Mariana ran away), "who could bring herself to abandon a home that had
sheltered her, to become the mistress of a nameless adventurer! It is
enough for them that I am content to forget them."

At this last word Sipiagin waved his wrist into space.

"I forget them, my dear sir!"

"Your excellency, I have already told you that I did not come from them
in particular, but I may inform your excellency that they are legally
married..." ("It's all the same," Paklin thought; "I said that I would
lie and so here I am. Never mind!")

Sipiagin moved his head from left to right on the back of his chair.

"It does not interest me in the least, sir. It only makes one foolish
marriage the more in the world--that's all. But what is this urgent
matter to which I am indebted for the pleasure of your visit?"

"Ugh! you cursed director of a department!" Paklin thought, "I'll soon
make you pull a different face!" "Your wife's brother," he said aloud,
"Mr. Markelov, has been seized by the peasants whom he had been inciting
to rebellion, and is now under arrest in the governor's house."

Sipiagin jumped up a second time.

"What... what did you say?" he blurted out, not at all in his accustomed
ministerial baritones, but in an extremely undignified manner.

"I said that your brother-in-law has been seized and is in chains. As
soon as I heard of it, I procured horses and came straight away to tell
you. I thought that I might be rendering a service to you and to the
unfortunate man whom you may be able to save!"

"I am extremely grateful to you," Sipiagin said in the same feeble tone
of voice, and violently pressing a bell, shaped like a mushroom, he
filled the whole house with its clear metallic ring. "I am extremely
grateful to you," he repeated more sharply, "but I must tell you that
a man who can bring himself to trample under foot all laws, human
and divine, were he a hundred times related to me--is in my eyes not
unfortunate; he is a criminal!"

A footman came in quickly.

"Your orders, sir?

"The carriage! the carriage and four horses this minute! I am going to
town. Philip and Stepan are to come with me!" The footman disappeared.
"Yes, sir, my brother-in-law is a criminal! I am going to town not to
save him! Oh, no!"

"But, your excellency--"

"Such are my principles, my dear sir, and I beg you not to annoy me by
your objections!"

Sipiagin began pacing up and down the room, while Paklin stared with
all his might. "Ugh! you devil!" he thought, "I heard that you were a
liberal, but you're just like a hungry lion!"

The door was flung open and Valentina Mihailovna came into the room with
hurried steps, followed by Kollomietzev.

"What is the matter, Boris? Why have you ordered the carriage? Are you
going to town? What has happened?"

Sipiagin went up to his wife and took her by the arm, between the elbow
and wrist. "Il faut vous armer de courage, ma chere. Your brother has
been arrested."

"My brother? Sergai? What for?"

"He has been preaching socialism to the peasants." (Kollomietzev gave
a faint little scream.) "Yes! preaching revolutionary ideas, making
propaganda! They seized him--and gave him up. He is now under arrest in
the town."

"Madman! But who told you?"

"This Mr... Mr... what's his name? Mr. Konopatin brought the news."

Valentina Mihailovna glanced at Paklin; the latter bowed dejectedly.
("What a glorious woman!" he thought. Even in such difficult moments...
alas! how susceptible Paklin was to feminine beauty!)

"And you want to go to town at this hour?"

"I think the governor will still be up."

"I always said it would end like this," Kollomietzev put in. "It
couldn't have been otherwise! But what dears our peasants are really!
Pardon, madame, c'est votre frere! Mais la verite avant tout!"

"Do you really intend going to town, Boris?" Valentina Mihailovna asked.

"I feel absolutely certain," Kollomietzev continued, "that that tutor,
Mr. Nejdanov, is mixed up in this. J'en mettrais ma main au feu. It's
all one gang! Haven't they seized him? Don't you know?"

Sipiagin waved his wrist again.

"I don't know--and don't want to know! By the way," he added, turning to
his wife, "il parait qu'il sont maries."

"Who said so? That same gentleman?" Valentina Mihailovna looked at
Paklin again, this time with half-closed eyes.

"Yes."

"In that case," Kollomietzev put in, "he must know where they are. Do
you know where they are? Do you know? Eh? Do you know?"

Kollomietzev took to walking up and down in front of Paklin as if to
cut off his way, although the latter had not betrayed the slightest
inclination of wanting to run away. "Why don't you speak? Answer me! Do
you know, eh? Do you know?"

"Even if I knew," Paklin began, annoyed; his wrath had risen up in him
at last and his eyes flashed fire: "even if I knew I would not tell
you."

"Oh... oh..." Kollomietzev muttered. "Do you hear? Do you hear? This one
too--this one too is of their gang!"

"The carriage is ready!" a footman announced loudly. Sipiagin with a
quick graceful movement seized his hat, but Valentina Mihailovna was so
insistent in her persuasions for him to put off the journey until the
morning and brought so many convincing arguments to bear--such as: that
it was pitch dark outside, that everybody in town would be asleep, that
he would only upset his nerves and might catch cold--that Sipiagin at
length came to agree with her.

"I obey!" he exclaimed, and with the same graceful gesture, not so rapid
this time, replaced his hat on the table.

"I shall not want the carriage now," he said to the footman, "but see
that it's ready at six o'clock in the morning! Do you hear? 'You can
go now! But stay! See that the gentleman's carriage is sent off and the
driver paid... I What? Did you say anything, Mr. Konopatin? I am going
to take you to town with me tomorrow, Mr. Konopatin! What did you say? I
can't hear... Do you take vodka? Give Mr. Konopatin some vodka! No? You
don't drink? In that case... Feodor! take the gentleman into the green
room! Goodnight, Mr. Kono--"

Paklin lost all patience.

"Paklin!" he shouted, "my name is Paklin!"

"Oh, yes... it makes no difference. A bit alike, you know. What a
powerful voice you have for your spare build! Till tomorrow, Mr.
Paklin.... Have I got it right this time? Simeon, vous viendrez avec
nous?"

"Je crois bien!"

Paklin was conducted into the green room and locked in. He distinctly
heard the key turned in the English lock as he got into bed. He scolded
himself severely for his "brilliant idea" and slept very badly.

He was awakened early the next morning at half-past five and given
coffee. As he drank it a footman with striped shoulder-knots stood over
him with the tray in his hand, shifting from one leg to the other as
though he were saying, "Hurry up! the gentlemen are waiting!" He
was taken downstairs. The carriage was already waiting at the door.
Kollomietzev's open carriage was also there. Sipiagin appeared on the
steps in a cloak made of camel's hair with a round collar. Such cloaks
had long ago ceased to be worn except by a certain important dignitary
whom Sipiagin pandered to and wished to imitate. On important official
occasions he invariably put on this cloak.

Sipiagin greeted Paklin affably, and with an energetic movement of
the hand pointed to the carriage and asked him to take his seat. "Mr.
Paklin, you are coming with me, Mr. Paklin! Put your bag on the box, Mr.
Paklin! I am taking Mr. Paklin," he said, emphasising the word "Paklin"
with special stress on the letter a. "You have an awful name like that
and get insulted when people change it for you--so here you are then!
Take your fill of it! Mr. Paklin! Paklin!" The unfortunate name rang out
clearly in the cool morning air. It was so keen as to make Kollomietzev,
who came out after Sipiagin, exclaim several times in French...

"Brrr! brrr! brrr!" He wrapped his cloak more closely about him and
seated himself in his elegant carriage with the hood thrown back. (Had
his poor friend Michael Obrenovitch, the Servian prince, seen it, he
would certainly have bought one like it at Binder's.... "Vous savez
Binder, le grand carrossier des Champs Elysees?")

Valentina Mihailovna, still in her night garments, peeped out from
behind the half-open shutters of her bedroom. Sipiagin waved his hand to
her from the carriage.

"Are you quite comfortable, Mr. Paklin? Go on!"

"Je vous recommande mon frere, epargnez-le!" Valentina Mihailovna said.

"Soyez tranquille!" Kollomietzev exclaimed, glancing up at her quickly
from under the brim of his travelling cap--one of his own special design
with a cockade in it--"C'est surtout l'autre, qu'il faut pincer!"

"Go on!" Sipiagin exclaimed again. "You are not cold, Mr. Paklin? Go
on!"

The two carriages rolled away.

For about ten minutes neither Sipiagin nor Paklin pronounced a single
word. The unfortunate Sila, in his shabby little coat and crumpled cap,
looked even more wretched than usual in contrast to the rich background
of dark blue silk with which the carriage was upholstered. He looked
around in silence at the delicate pale blue blinds, which flew up
instantly at the mere press of a button, at the soft white sheep-skin
rug at their feet, at the mahogany box in front with a movable desk for
letters and even a shelf for books. (Boris Andraevitch never worked in
his carriage, but he liked people to think that he did, after the manner
of Thiers, who always worked when travelling.) Paklin felt shy. Sipiagin
glanced at him once or twice over his clean-shaven cheek, and with a
pompous deliberation pulled out of a side-pocket a silver cigar-case
with a curly monogram and a Slavonic band and offered him... really
offered him a cigar, holding it gently between the second and third
fingers of a hand neatly clad in an English glove of yellow dogskin.

"I don't smoke," Paklin muttered.

"Really!" Sipiagin exclaimed and lighted the cigar himself, an excellent
regalia.

"I must tell you... my dear Mr. Paklin," he began, puffing gracefully
at his cigar and sending out delicate rings of delicious smoke, "that I
am... really... very grateful to you. I might have... seemed... a
little severe... last night... which does not really... do justice to
my character... believe me." (Sipiagin purposely hesitated over his
speech.) "But just put yourself in my place, Mr. Paklin!" (Sipiagin
rolled the cigar from one corner of his mouth to the other.) "The
position I occupy places me... so to speak... before the public eye,
and suddenly, without any warning... my wife's brother... compromises
himself... and me, in this impossible way! Well, Mr. Paklin? But perhaps
you think that it's nothing?"

"I am far from thinking that, your excellency."

"You don't happen to know exactly why... and where he was arrested?"

"I heard that he was arrested in T. district."

"Who told you so?"

"A certain person."

"Of course it could hardly have been a bird. But who was this person?"

"An assistant... of the director of the governor's office--"

"What's his name?"

"The director's?"

"No, the assistant's."

"His name is... Ulyashevitch. He is a very honest man, your excellency.
As soon as I heard of the affair, I hastened to tell you."

"Yes, yes. I am very grateful to you indeed. But what utter madness!
downright madness! Don't you think so, Mr. Paklin?"

"Utter madness!" Paklin exclaimed, while the perspiration rolled down
his back in a hot stream, "it just shows," he continued, "the folly of
not understanding the peasant. Mr. Markelov, so far as I know him, has
a very kind and generous heart, but he has no conception of what the
Russian peasant is really like." (Paklin glanced at Sipiagin who sat
slightly turned towards him, gazing at him with a cold, though not
unfriendly, light in his eyes.) "The Russian peasant can never be
induced to revolt except by taking advantage of that devotion of his
to some high authority, some tsar. Some sort of legend must be
invented--you remember Dmitrius the pretender--some sort of royal sign
must be shown him, branded on the breast."

"Just like Pugatchev," Sipiagin interrupted him in a tone of voice which
seemed to imply that he had not yet forgotten his history and that
it was really not necessary for Paklin to go on. "What madness! what
madness!" he added, and became wrapped in the contemplation of the rings
of smoke as they rose quickly one after another from the end of his
cigar.

"Your excellency," Paklin began apologetically, "I have just said that I
didn't smoke... but it was not true. I do smoke and your cigar smells so
nice--"

"Eh? What?" Sipiagin asked as if waking up; and without giving Paklin
time to repeat his request, he proved in the most unmistakable manner
that he had heard every word, and had merely asked his questions for the
sake of dignity, by offering him his cigar-case.

Paklin took a cigar gratefully and lighted it with care.

"Here's a good opportunity," he thought, but Sipiagin had anticipated
him.

"I remember your saying..." he began carelessly, stopping to look at his
cigar and pulling his hat lower over his forehead, "you spoke... of...
of that friend of yours, who married my ... niece. Do you ever see them?
They've settled not far from here, eh?"

("Take care! be on your guard, Sila!" Paklin thought.)

"I have only seen them once, your excellency. They are living.. .
certainly... not very far from here."

"You quite understand, I hope," Sipiagin continued in the same tone,
"that I can take no further serious interest--as I explained to
you--either in that frivolous girl or in your friend. Heaven knows that
I have no prejudices, but really, you will agree with me, this is too
much! So foolish, you know. However, I suppose they were more drawn
together by politics.. ." ("politics!" he repeated, shrugging his
shoulders) "than by any other feeling!"

"I think so too, your excellency!"

"Yes, Mr. Nejdanov was certainly revolutionary. To do him justice he
made no secret of his opinions."

"Nejdanov," Paklin ventured, "may have been carried away, but his
heart--"

"Is good," Sipiagin put in; "I know, like Markelov's. They all have good
hearts. He has no doubt also been mixed up in this affair... and will be
implicated.... I suppose I shall have to intercede for him too!"

Paklin clasped his hands to his breast.

"Oh, your excellency! Extend your protection to him! He fully...
deserves... your sympathy."

Sipiagin snorted.

"You think so?"

"At any rate if not for him... for your niece's sake; for his wife!"
("Heavens! What lies I'm telling," Paklin thought.)

Sipiagin half-closed his eyes.

"I see that you're a very devoted friend. That's a very good quality,
very praiseworthy, young man. And so you said they lived in this
neighbourhood?"

"Yes, your excellency; in a large establishment--" Here Paklin bit his
tongue.

"Why, of course, at Solomin's! that's where they are! However, I knew it
all along. I've been told so; I've already been informed." (Mr.
Sipiagin did not know this in the least, and no one had told him, but
recollecting Solomin's visit and their midnight interview, he promptly
threw out this bait, which caught Paklin at once.)

"Since you know that," he began and bit his tongue a second time ... But
it was already too late. A single glance at Sipiagin made him realise
that he had been playing with him as a cat plays with a mouse.

"I must say, your excellency," the unfortunate Paklin stammered out; "I
must say, that I really know nothing--"

"But I ask you no questions! Really! What do you take me and yourself
for?" Sipiagin asked haughtily, and promptly withdrew into his
ministerial heights.

And Paklin again felt himself a mean little ensnared creature. Until
that moment he had kept the cigar in the corner of his mouth away from
Sipiagin and puffed at it quietly, blowing the smoke to one side; now he
took it out of his mouth and ceased smoking altogether.

"My God!" he groaned inwardly, while the perspiration streamed down his
back more and more, "what have I done? I have betrayed everything and
everybody... I have been duped, been bought over by a good cigar!! I am
a traitor! What shall I do now to help matters? Oh God!"

But there was nothing to be done. Sipiagin dozed off in a haughty,
dignified, ministerial manner, enveloped in his stately cloak.


XXXV

THE governor of S. was one of those good-natured, happy-go-lucky,
worldly generals who, endowed with wonderfully clean, snow-white bodies
and souls to match, of good breeding and education, are turned out of a
mill where they are never ground down to becoming the "shepherds of
the people." Nevertheless they prove themselves capable of a tolerable
amount of administrative ability--do little work, but are forever
sighing after St. Petersburg and paying court to all the pretty women of
the place. These are men who in some unaccountable way become useful to
their province and manage to leave pleasant memories behind them. The
governor had only just got out of bed, and was comfortably seated before
his dressing-table in his night-shirt and silk dressing-gown, bathing
his face and neck with eau-de-cologne after having removed a whole
collection of charms and coins dangling from it, when he was informed of
the arrival of Sipiagin and Kollomietzev upon some urgent business. He
was very familiar with Sipiagin, having known him from childhood and
constantly run across him in St. Petersburg drawing-rooms, and lately he
had begun to ejaculate a respectful "Ah!" every time his name occurred
to him--as if he saw in him a future statesman. Kollomietzev he did not
know so well and respected less in consequence of various unpleasant
complaints that had been made against him; however, he looked upon him
as a man qui fera chemin in any case.

He ordered his guests to be shown into his study, where he soon joined
them, as he was, in his silk dressing-gown, and not so much as excusing
himself for receiving them in such an unofficial costume, shook hands
with them heartily. Only Sipiagin and Kollomietzev appeared in the
governor's study; Paklin remained in the drawing-room. On getting out
of the carriage he had tried to slip away, muttering that he had some
business at home, but Sipiagin had detained him with a polite firmness
(Kollomietzev had rushed up to him and whispered in his ear: "Ne le
lacher pas! Tonnerre de tonnerres!") and taken him in. He had not,
however, taken him to the study, but had asked him, with the same polite
firmness, to wait in the drawing-room until he was wanted. Even here
Paklin had hoped to escape, but a robust gendarme at Kollomietzev's
instruction appeared in the doorway; so Paklin remained.

"I dare say you've guessed what has brought me to you, Voldemar,"
Sipiagin began.

"No, my dear, no, I can't," the amiable Epicurean replied, while a smile
of welcome played about his rosy cheeks, showing a glimpse of shiny
teeth, half hidden by his silky moustache.

"What? Don't you know about Markelov?"

"What do you mean? What Markelov?" the governor repeated with the same
joyful expression on his face. He did not remember, in the first place,
that the man who was arrested yesterday was called Markelov, and, in
the second, he had quite forgotten that Sipiagin's wife had a brother
of that name. "But why are you standing, Boris? Sit down. Would you like
some tea?"

Sipiagin's mind was far from tea.

When at last he explained why they had both appeared, the governor
uttered an exclamation of pain and struck himself on the forehead, while
his face assumed a sympathetic expression.

"Dear me! what a misfortune! And he's here now--today.... You know we
never keep that sort with us for more than one night at the outside,
but the chief of police is out of town, so your brother-in-law has been
detained. He is to be sent on tomorrow. Dear me! what a dreadful thing!
What your wife must have gone through! What would you like me to do?"

"I would like to have an interview with him here, if it is not against
the law."

"My dear boy! laws are not made for men like you. I do feel so sorry for
you.... C'est affreux, tu sais!"

He gave a peculiar ring. An adjutant appeared.

"My dear baron, do please make some arrangement there..." He told him
what he wanted and the baron vanished. "Only think, mon cher ami, the
peasants nearly killed him. They tied his hands behind him, flung him
in a cart, and brought him here! And he's not in the least bit angry
or indignant with them you know! He was so calm altogether that I was
amazed! But you will see for yourself. C'est un fanatique tranquille."

"Ce sont les pires," Kollomietzev remarked sarcastically. The governor
looked up at him from under his eyebrows. "By the way, I must have a
word with you, Simion Petrovitch."

"Yes; what about?"

"I don't like things at all--"

"What things?"

"You know that peasant who owed you money and came here to complain--"

"Well?"

"He's hanged himself."

"When?"

"It's of no consequence when; but it's an ugly affair."

Kollomietzev merely shrugged his shoulders and moved away to the window
with a graceful swing of the body. At this moment the adjutant brought
in Markelov.

The governor had been right; he was unnaturally calm. Even his habitual
moroseness had given place to an expression of weary indifference, which
did not change when he caught sight of his brother-in-law. Only in the
glance which he threw on the German adjutant, who was escorting him,
there was a momentary flash of the old hatred he felt towards such
people. His coat had been torn in several places and hurriedly stitched
up with coarse thread; his forehead, eyebrows, and the bridge of his
nose were covered with small scars caked with clotted blood. He had not
washed, but had combed his hair.

"Sergai Mihailovitch!" Sipiagin began excitedly, taking a step or two
towards him and extending his right hand, only so that he might touch
him or stop him if he made a movement in advance, "Sergai Mihailovitch!
I am not here to tell you of our amazement, our deep distress--you can
have no doubt of that! You wanted to ruin yourself and have done so!
But I've come to tell you... that... that... to give you the chance of
hearing sound common-sense through the voice of honour and friendship.
You can still mitigate your lot and, believe me, I will do all in
my power to help you, as the honoured head of this province can bear
witness!" At this point Sipiagin raised his voice. "A real penitence
of your wrongs and a full confession without reserve which will be duly
presented in the proper quarters--"

"Your excellency," Markelov exclaimed suddenly, turning towards the
governor--the very sound of his voice was calm, though it was a little
hoarse; "I thought that you wanted to see me in order to cross-examine
me again, but if I have been brought here solely by Mr. Sipiagin's wish,
then please order me to be taken back again. We cannot understand one
another. All he says is so much Greek to me."

"Greek, eh!" Kollomietzev shrieked. "And to set peasants rioting, is
that Greek too? Is that Greek too, eh?

"What have you here, your excellency? A landowner of the secret police?
And how zealous he is!" Markelov remarked, a faint smile of pleasure
playing about his pale lips.

Kollomietzev stamped and raged, but the governor stopped him.

"It serves you right, Simion Petrovitch. You shouldn't interfere in what
is not your business."

"Not my business... not my business... It seems to me that it's the
business of every nobleman--"

Markelov scanned Kollomietzev coldly and slowly, as if for the last time
and then turned to Sipiagin.

"If you really want to know my views, my dear brother-in-law, here they
are. I admit that the peasants had a right to arrest me and give me up
if they disapproved of what I preached to them. They were free to
do what they wanted. I came to them, not they to me. As for the
government--if it does send me to Siberia, I'll go without grumbling,
although I don't consider myself guilty. The government does its work,
defends itself. Are you satisfied?"

Sipiagin wrung his hands in despair.

"Satisfied!! What a word! That's not the point, and it is not for us
to judge the doings of the government. The question, my dear Sergai,
is whether you feel" (Sipiagin had decided to touch the tender strings)
"the utter unreasonableness, senselessness, of your undertaking and are
prepared to repent; and whether I can answer for you at all, my dear
Sergai."

Markelov frowned.

"I have said all I have to say and don't want to repeat it."

"But don't you repent? Don't you repent?"

"Oh, leave me alone with your repentance! You want to steal into my very
soul? Leave that, at any rate, to me."

Sipiagin shrugged his shoulders.

"You were always like that; never would listen to common-sense. You have
a splendid chance of getting out of this quietly, honourably...

"Quietly, honourably," Markelov repeated savagely. "We know those words.
They are always flung at a man when he's wanted to do something mean!
That is what these fine phrases are for!"

"We sympathise with you," Sipiagin continued reproachfully, "and you
hate us."

"Fine sympathy! To Siberia and hard labour with us; that is your
sympathy. Oh, let me alone! let me alone! for Heaven's sake!"

Markelov lowered his head.

He was agitated at heart, though externally calm. He was most of all
tortured by the fact that he had been betrayed--and by whom? By Eremy of
Goloplok! That same Eremy whom he had trusted so much! That Mendely the
sulky had not followed him, had really not surprised him. Mendely was
drunk and was consequently afraid. But Eremy! For Markelov, Eremy stood
in some way as the personification of the whole Russian people, and
Eremy had deceived him! Had he been mistaken about the thing he was
striving for? Was Kisliakov a liar? And were Vassily Nikolaevitch's
orders all stupid? And all the articles, books, works of socialists and
thinkers, every letter of which had seemed to him invincible truth, were
they all nonsense too? Was it really so? And the beautiful simile of
the abscess awaiting the prick of the lancet--was that, too, nothing more
than a phrase? "No! no!" he whispered to himself, and the colour spread
faintly over his bronze-coloured face; "no! All these things are true,
true... only I am to blame. I did not know how to do things, did not
put things in the right way! I ought simply to have given orders, and
if anyone had tried to hinder, or object--put a bullet through his head!
there is nothing else to be done! He who is against us has no right to
live. Don't they kill spies like dogs, worse than dogs?"

All the details of his capture rose up in Markelov's mind. First the
silence, the leers, then the shrieks from the back of the crowd...
someone coming up sideways as if bowing to him, then that sudden rush,
when he was knocked down. His own cries of "What are you doing, my
boys?" and their shouts, "A belt! A belt! tie him up!" Then the rattling
of his bones... unspeakable rage... filth in his mouth, his nostrils...
"Shove him in the cart! shove him in the cart!" someone roared with
laughter..

"I didn't go about it in the right way..." That was the thing that
most tormented him. That he had fallen under the wheel was his personal
misfortune and had nothing to do with the cause--it was possible to bear
that... but Eremy! Eremy!!

While Markelov was standing with his head sunk on his breast, Sipiagin
drew the governor aside and began talking to him in undertones. He
flourished two fingers across his forehead, as though he would suggest
that the unfortunate man was not quite right in his head, in order to
arouse if not sympathy, at any rate indulgence towards the madman. The
governor shrugged his shoulders, opened and shut his eyes, regretted
his inability to do anything, but made some sort of promise in the end.
"Tous les egards... certainement, tous les egards," the soft, pleasant
words flowed through his scented moustache. "But you know the law, my
boy!"

"Of course I do!" Sipiagin responded with a sort of submissive severity.

While they were talking in the corner, Kollomietzev could scarcely stand
still in one spot. He walked up and down, hummed and hawed, showed every
sign of impatience. At last he went up to Sipiagin, saying hastily,
"Vous oublier l'autre!"

"Oh, yes!" Sipiagin exclaimed loudly. "Merci de me l'avoir rappele. Your
excellency," he said, turning to the governor (he purposely addressed
his friend Voldemar in this formal way, so as not to compromise the
prestige of authority in Markelov's presence), "I must draw your
attention to the fact that my brother-in-law's mad attempt has certain
ramifications, and one of these branches, that is to say, one of the
suspected persons, is to be found not very far from here, in this town.
I've brought another with me," he added in a whisper, "he's in the
drawing-room. Have him brought in here."

"What a man!" the governor thought with admiration, gazing respectfully
at Sipiagin. He gave the order and a minute later Sila Paklin stood
before him.

Paklin bowed very low to the governor as he came in, but catching sight
of Markelov before he had time to raise himself, remained as he
was, half bent down, fidgetting with his cap. Markelov looked at him
vacantly, but could hardly have recognised him, as he withdrew into his
own thoughts.

"Is this the branch?" the governor asked, pointing to Paklin with a long
white finger adorned with a turquoise ring.

"Oh, no!" Sipiagin exclaimed with a slight smile. "However, who knows!"
he added after a moment's thought. "Your excellency," he said aloud,
"the gentleman before you is Mr. Paklin. He comes from St. Petersburg
and is a close friend of a certain person who for a time held the
position of tutor in my house and who ran away, taking with him a
certain young girl who, I blush to say, is my niece.

"Ah! oui, oui," the governor mumbled, shaking his head, "I heard the
story... The princess told me--"

Sipiagin raised his voice.

"That person is a certain Mr. Nejdanov, whom I strongly suspect of
dangerous ideas and theories--"

"Un rouge a tous crins," Kollomietzev put in.

"Yes, dangerous ideas and theories," Sipiagin repeated more
emphatically. "He must certainly know something about this propaganda.
He is... in hiding, as I have been informed by Mr. Paklin, in the
merchant Falyaeva's factory--"

At these words Markelov threw another glance at Paklin and gave a slow,
indifferent smile.

"Excuse me, excuse me, your excellency," Paklin cried, "and you, Mr.
Sipiagin, I never... never--"

"Did you say the merchant Falyaeva?" the governor asked, turning to
Sipiagin and merely shaking his fingers in Paklin's direction, as much
as to say, "Gently, my good man, gently." "What is coming over our
respectable, bearded merchants? Only yesterday one was arrested in
connection with this affair. You may have heard of him--Golushkin, a
very rich man. But he's harmless enough. He won't make revolutions; he's
grovelling on his knees already."

"The merchant Falyaeva has nothing whatever to do with it," Sipiagin
began; "I know nothing of his ideas; I was only talking of his factory
where Mr. Nejdanov is to be found at this very moment, as Mr. Paklin
says--"

"I said nothing of the kind!" Paklin cried; "you said it yourself!"

"Excuse me, Mr. Paklin," Sipiagin pronounced with the same relentless
precision, "I admire that feeling of friendship which prompts you to
deny it." ("A regular Guizot, upon my word!" the governor thought to
himself.) "But take example by me. Do you suppose that the feeling of
kinship is less strong in me than your feeling of friendship? But there
is another feeling, my dear sir, yet stronger still, which guides all
our deeds and actions, and that is duty!"

"Le sentiment du devoir," Kollomietzev explained.

Markelov took both the speakers in at a glance.

"Your excellency!" he exclaimed, "I ask you a second time; please have
me removed out of sight of these babblers."

But there the governor lost patience a little.

"Mr. Markelov!" he pronounced severely, "I would advise you, in your
present position, to be a little more careful of your tongue, and to
show a little more respect to your elders, especially when they give
expression to such patriotic sentiments as those you have just heard
from the lips of your beau-frere! I shall be delighted, my dear Boris,"
he added, turning to Sipiagin, "to tell the minister of your noble
action. But with whom is this Nejdanov staying at the factory?"

Sipiagin frowned.

"With a certain Mr. Solomin, the chief engineer there, Mr. Paklin says."

It seemed to afford Sipiagin some peculiar pleasure in tormenting poor
Sila. He made him pay dearly for the cigar he had given him and the
playful familiarity of his behaviour.

"This Solomin," Kollomietzev put in, "is an out-and-out radical and
republican. It would be a good thing if your excellency were to turn
your attention to him too."

"Do you know these gentlemen... Solomin, and what's his name. ..
Nejdanov?" the governor asked Markelov, somewhat authoritatively.

Markelov distended his nostrils malignantly.

"Do you know Confucius and Titus Livius, your excellency?"

The governor turned away.

"Il n'y a pas moyen de causer avec cette homme," he said, shrugging his
shoulders. "Baron, come here, please."

The adjutant went up to him quickly and Paklin seized the opportunity of
limping over to Sipiagin.

"What are you doing?" he asked in a whisper. "Why do you want to ruin
your niece? Why, she's with him, with Nejdanov!"

"I am not ruining any one, my dear sir," Sipiagin said loudly, "I am
only doing what my conscience bids me do, and--"

"And what your wife, my sister, bids you do; you dare not stand up
against her!" Markelov exclaimed just as loudly.

Sipiagin took no notice of the remark; it was too much beneath him!

"Listen," Paklin continued, trembling all over with agitation, or may
be from timidity; there was a malignant light in his eyes and the tears
were nearly choking him--tears of pity for them and rage at himself;
"listen, I told you she was married--it wasn't true, I lied! but they
must get married--and if you prevent it, if the police get there--there
will be a stain on your conscience which you'll never be able to wipe
out--and you--"

"If what you have just told me be true," Sipiagin interrupted him
still more loudly, "then it can only hasten the measures which I
think necessary to take in this matter; and as for the purity of my
conscience, I beg you not to trouble about that, my dear sir.

"It's been polished," Markelov put in again; "there is a coat of St.
Petersburg varnish upon it; no amount of washing will make it come
clean. You may whisper as much as you like, Mr. Paklin, but you won't
get anything out of it!"

At this point the governor considered it necessary to interfere.

"I think that you have said enough, gentlemen," he began, "and I'll ask
you, my dear baron, to take Mr. Markelov away. N'est ce pas, Boris, you
don't want him any further--"

Sipiagin made a gesture with his hands.

"I said everything I could think of!"

"Very well, baron!"

The adjutant came up to Markelov, clinked his spurs, made a horizontal
movement of the hand, as if to request Markelov to make a move; the
latter turned and walked out. Paklin, only in imagination it is true,
but with bitter sympathy and pity, shook him by the hand.

"We'll send some of our men to the factory," the governor continued;
"but you know, Boris, I thought this gentleman" (he moved his chin in
Paklin's direction) "told you something about your niece... I understood
that she was there at the factory. Then how..."

"It's impossible to arrest her in any case," Sipiagin remarked
thoughtfully; "perhaps she will think better of it and return. I'll
write her a note, if I may."

"Do please. You may be quite sure... nous offrerons le quidam ... mais
nous sommes galants avec les dames et avec celle-la donc!"

"But you've made no arrangements about this Solomin," Kollomietzev
exclaimed plaintively. He had been on the alert all the while, trying to
catch what the governor and Sipiagin were saying. "I assure you he's the
principal ringleader! I have a wonderful instinct about these things!"

"Pas trop de zele, my dear Simion Petrovitch," the governor remarked
with a smile. "You remember Talleyrand! If it is really as you say the
fellow won't escape us. You had better think of your--" the governor put
his hand to his throat significantly. "By the way," he said, turning to
Sipiagin, "et ce gaillard-la" (he moved his chin in Paklin's direction).
"Qu'enferons nous? He does not appear very dangerous."

"Let him go," Sipiagin said in an undertone, and added in German, "Lass'
den Lumpen laufen!"

He imagined for some reason that he was quoting from Goethe's Gotz von
Berlichingen.

"You can go, sir!" the governor said aloud. "We do not require you any
longer. Good day."

Paklin bowed to the company in general and went out into the street
completely crushed and humiliated. Heavens! this contempt had utterly
broken him.

"Good God! What am I? A coward, a traitor?" he thought, in unutterable
despair. "Oh, no, no! I am an honest man, gentlemen! I have still some
manhood left!"

But who was this familiar figure sitting on the governor's step and
looking at him with a dejected, reproachful glance? It was Markelov's
old servant. He had evidently come to town for his master, and would
not for a moment leave the door of his prison. But why did he look so
reproachfully at Paklin? He had not betrayed Markelov!

"And why did I go poking my nose into things that did not concern me?
Why could I not sit quietly at home? And now it will be said and written
that Paklin betrayed them--betrayed his friends to the enemy!" He
recalled the look Markelov had given him and his last words, "Whisper as
much as you like, Mr. Paklin, but you won't get anything out of it!" and
then these sad, aged, dejected eyes! he thought in desperation. And as
it says in the scriptures, he "wept bitterly" as he turned his steps
towards the oasis, to Fomishka and Fimishka and Snandulia.


XXXVI

WHEN Mariana came out of her room that morning she noticed Nejdanov
sitting on the couch fully dressed. His head was resting against one
arm, while the other lay weak and helpless on his knee. She went up to
him.

"Goodmorning, Alexai. Why, you haven't undressed? Haven't you slept? How
pale you are!"

His heavy eyelids rose slowly.

"No, I haven't."

"Aren't you well, or is it the after-effects of yesterday?"

Nejdanov shook his head.

"I couldn't sleep after Solomin went into your room."

"When?"

"Last night."

"Alexai! are you jealous? A new idea! What a time to be jealous in! Why,
he was only with me a quarter of an hour. We talked about his cousin,
the priest, and discussed arrangements for our marriage."

"I know that he was only with you a short time. I saw him come out. And
I'm not jealous, oh no! But still I couldn't fall asleep after that."

"But why?"

Nejdanov was silent.

"I kept thinking... thinking... thinking!"

"Of what?"

"Oh, of you... of him... and of myself."

"And what came of all your thinking?"

"Shall I tell you?"

"Yes, tell me."

"It seemed to me that I stood in your way--in his... and in my own."

"Mine? His? It's easy to see what you mean by that, though you declare
you're not jealous, but your own?"

"Mariana, there are two men in me and one doesn't let the other live. So
I thought it might be better if both ceased to live."

"Please don't, Alexai. Why do you want to torment yourself and me? We
ought to be considering ways and means of getting away. They won't leave
us in peace you know."

Nejdanov took her hand caressingly.

"Sit down beside me, Mariana, and let us talk things over like comrades
while there is still time. Give me your hand. It would be a good thing
for us to have an explanation, though they say that all explanations
only lead to further muddle. But you are kind and intelligent and are
sure to understand, even the things that I am unable to express. Come,
sit down."

Nejdanov's voice was soft, and a peculiarly affectionate tenderness
shone in his eyes as he looked entreatingly at Mariana.

She sat down beside him readily and took his hand.

"Thanks, dearest. I won't keep you long. I thought out all the things
I wanted to say to you last night. Don't think I was too much upset by
yesterday's occurrence. I was no doubt extremely ridiculous and rather
disgusting, but I know you didn't think anything bad of me--you know me.
I am not telling the truth exactly when I say that I wasn't upset--I was
horribly upset, not because I was brought home drunk, but because I was
convinced of my utter inefficiency. Not because I could not drink like
a real Russian--but in everything! everything! Mariana, I must tell you
that I no longer believe in the cause that united us and on the strength
of which we ran away together. To tell the truth, I had already lost
faith when your enthusiasm set me on fire again. I don't believe in it!
I can't believe in it!"

He put his disengaged hand over his eyes and ceased for awhile. Mariana
did not utter a single word and sat looking downwards. She felt that he
had told her nothing new.

"I always thought," Nejdanov continued, taking his hand away from his
eyes, but not looking at Mariana again, "that I believed in the
cause itself, but had no faith in myself, in my own strength, my own
capacities. I used to think that my abilities did not come up to my
convictions... But you can't separate these things. And what's the use
of deceiving oneself? No--I don't believe in the cause itself. And you,
Mariana, do you believe in it?"

Mariana sat up straight and raised her head.

"Yes, I do, Alexai. I believe in it with all the strength of my soul,
and will devote my whole life to it, to the last breath!"

Nejdanov turned towards her and looked at her enviously, with a tender
light in his eyes.

"I knew you would answer like that. So you see there is nothing for us
to do together; you have severed our tie with one blow."

Mariana was silent.

"Take Solomin, for instance," Nejdanov began again, "though he does not
believe--"

"What do you mean?"

"It's quite true. He does not believe... but that is not necessary for
him; he is moving steadily onwards. A man walking along a road in a town
does not question the existence of the town--he just goes his way. That
is Solomin. That is all that's needed. But I... I can't go ahead, don't
want to turn back, and am sick of staying where I am. How dare I ask
anyone to be my companion? You know the old proverb, 'With two people
to carry the pole, the burden will be easier.' But if you let go your
end--what becomes of the other?"

"Alexai," Mariana began irresolutely, "I think you exaggerate. Do we not
love each other?"

Nejdanov gave a deep sigh.

"Mariana... I bow down before you... you pity me, and each of us has
implicit faith in the other's honesty--that is our position. But there
is no love between us."

"Stop, Alexai! what are you saying? The police may come for us today...
we must go away together and not part--"

"And get Father Zosim to marry us at Solomin's suggestion. I know that
you merely look upon our marriage as a kind of passport--a means of
avoiding any difficulties with the police... but still it will bind us
to some extent; necessitate our living together and all that. Besides it
always presupposes a desire to live together."

"What do you mean, Alexai? You don't intend staying here?"

Nejdanov said hesitatingly. The word "yes" nearly escaped his lips, but
he recollected himself in time.

"Then you are going to a different place--not where I am going?"

Nejdanov pressed her hand which still lay in his own.

"It would indeed be vile to leave you without a supporter, without a
protector, but I won't do that, as bad as I may be. You shall have a
protector--rest assured."

Mariana bent down towards him and, putting her face close against his,
looked anxiously into his eyes, as though trying to penetrate to his
very soul.

"What is the matter, Alexai? What have you on your mind? Tell me ...
you frighten me. Your words are so strange and enigmatical ... And your
face! I have never seen your face like that!"

Nejdanov put her from him gently and kissed her hand tenderly. This time
she made no resistance and did not laugh, but sat still looking at him
anxiously.

"Don't be alarmed, dear. There is nothing strange in it. They say
Markelov was beaten by the peasants; he felt their blows--they crushed
his ribs. They did not beat me, they even drank with me--drank
my health--but they crushed my soul more completely than they did
Markelov's ribs. I was born out of joint, wanted to set myself right,
and have made matters worse. That is what you notice in my face."

"Alexai," Mariana said slowly, "it would be very wrong of you not to be
frank with me."

He clenched his hands.

"Mariana, my whole being is laid bare before you, and whatever I might
do, I tell you beforehand, nothing will really surprise you; nothing
whatever!"

Mariana wanted to ask him what he meant, but at that moment Solomin
entered the room.

His movements were sharper and more rapid than usual. His eyes were half
closed, his lips compressed, the whole of his face wore a drier, harder,
somewhat rougher expression.

"My dear friends," he began, "I must ask you not to waste time, but
prepare yourselves as soon as possible. You must be ready in an hour.
You have to go through the marriage ceremony. There is no news of
Paklin. His horses were detained for a time at Arjanov and then sent
back. He has been kept there. They've no doubt brought him to town by
this time. I don't think he would betray us, but he might let things out
unwittingly. Besides, they might have guessed from the horses. My cousin
has been informed of your coming. Pavel will go with you. He will be a
witness."

"And you... and you?" Nejdanov asked. "Aren't you going? I see you're
dressed for the road," he added, indicating Solomin's high boots with
his eyes.

"Oh, I only put them on... because it's rather muddy outside."

"But you won't be held responsible for us, will you?"

"I hardly think so... in any case... that's my affair. So you'll be
ready in an hour. Mariana, I believe Tatiana wants to see you. She has
something prepared for you."

"Oh, yes! I wanted to see her too..." Mariana turned to the door.

A peculiar expression of fear, despair, spread itself over Nejdanov's
face.

"Mariana, you're not going?" he asked in a frightened tone of voice.

She stood still.

"I'll be back in half an hour. It won't take me long to pack."

"Come here, close to me, Mariana."

"Certainly, but what for?"

"I wanted to have one more look at you." He looked at her intently.
"Goodbye, goodbye, Mariana!"

She seemed bewildered.

"Why... what nonsense I'm talking! You'll be back in half an hour, won't
you, eh?"

"Of course--"

"Never mind; forgive me, dear. My brain is in a whirl from lack of
sleep. I must begin... packing, too."

Mariana went out of the room and Solomin was about to follow her when
Nejdanov stopped him.

"Solomin!"

"What is it?"

"Give me your hand. I must thank you for your kindness and hospitality."

Solomin smiled.

"What an idea!" He extended his hand.

"There's another thing I wished to say," Nejdanov continued. "Supposing
anything were to happen to me, may I hope that you won't abandon
Mariana?"

"Your future wife?

"Yes... Mariana!"

"I don't think anything is likely to happen to you, but you may set your
mind at rest. Mariana is just as dear to me as she is to you."

"Oh, I knew it... knew it, knew it! I'm so glad! thanks. So in an hour?"

"In an hour."

"I shall be ready. Goodbye, my friend!"

Solomin went out and caught Mariana up on the staircase. He had intended
saying something to her about Nejdanov, but refrained from doing so. And
Mariana guessed that he wished to say something about him and that he
could not. She, too, was silent.


XXXVII

DIRECTLY Solomin had gone, Nejdanov jumped up from the couch, walked
up and down the room several times, then stood still in the middle in
a sort of stony indecision. Suddenly he threw off his "masquerade"
costume, kicked it into a corner of the room, and put on his own
clothes. He then went up to the little three-legged table, pulled out of
a drawer two sealed letters and some other object which he thrust into
his pocket; the letters he left on the table. Then he crouched down
before the stove and opened the little door. A whole heap of ashes lay
inside. This was all that remained of Nejdanov's papers, of his sacred
book of verses ... He had burned them all in the night. Leaning against
one side of the stove was Mariana's portrait that Markelov had given
him. He had evidently not had the heart to burn that too! He took it out
carefully and put in on the table beside the two letters.

Then, with a quick resolute movement, he put on his cap and walked
towards the door. But suddenly he stopped, turned back, and went into
Mariana's room. There, he stood still for a moment, gazed round, then
approaching her narrow little bed, bent down and with one stifled sob
pressed his lips to the foot of the bed. He then jumped up, thrust his
cap over his forehead, and rushed out. Without meeting anyone in the
corridor, on the stairs, or down below, he darted out into the garden.
It was a grey day, with a low-hanging sky and a damp breeze that blew in
waves over the tops of the grass and made the trees rustle. A whiff of
coal, tar, and tallow was borne along from the yard, but the noise and
rattling in the factory was fainter than usual at that time of day.
Nejdanov looked round sharply to see if anyone was about and made
straight for the old apple tree that had first attracted his attention
when he had looked out of the little window of his room on the day of
his arrival. The whole of its trunk was evergrown with dry moss, its
bare, rugged branches, sparsely covered with reddish leaves, rose
crookedly, like some old arms held up in supplication. Nejdanov stepped
firmly on to the dark soil beneath the tree and pulled out the object he
had taken from the table drawer. He looked up intently at the windows of
the little house. "If somebody were to see me now, perhaps I wouldn't
do it," he thought. But no human being was to be seen anywhere--everyone
seemed dead or turned away from him, leaving him to the mercy of fate.
Only the muffled hum and roar of the factory betrayed any signs of life;
and overhead a fine, keen, chilly rain began falling.

Nejdanov gazed up through the crooked branches of the tree under
which he was standing at the grey, cloudy sky looking down upon him so
unfeelingly. He yawned and lay down. "There's nothing else to be done.
I can't go back to St. Petersburg, to prison," he thought. A kind of
pleasant heaviness spread all over his body. .. He threw away his cap,
took up the revolver, and pulled the trigger.

Something struck him instantly, but with no very great violence. .. He
was lying on his back trying to make out what had happened to him and
how it was that he had just seen Tatiana. He tried to call her... but
a peculiar numbness had taken possession of him and curious dark green
spots were whirling about all over him--in his eyes, over his head, in
his brain--and some frightfully heavy, dull weight seemed to press him
to the earth forever.

Nejdanov did really get a glimpse of Tatiana. At the moment when he
pulled the trigger she had looked out of a window and caught sight of
him standing under the tree. She had hardly time to ask herself what he
was doing there in the rain without a hat, when he rolled to the ground
like a sheaf of corn. She did not hear the shot--it was very faint--but
instantly felt that something was amiss and rushed out into the garden.
She came up to Nejdanov, breathless.

"Alexai Dmitritch! What is the matter with you?"

But a darkness had already descended upon him. Tatiana bent over and
noticed blood...

"Pavel!" she shouted at the top of her voice, "Pavel!"

A minute or two later, Mariana, Solomin, Pavel, and two workmen were in
the garden. They lifted him instantly, carried him into the house, and
laid him on the same couch on which he had passed his last night.

He lay on his back with half-closed eyes, his face blue all over. There
was a rattling in his throat, and every now and again he gave a choking
sob. Life had not yet left him. Mariana and Solomin were standing on
either side of him, almost as pale as he was himself. They both felt
crushed, stunned, especially Mariana--but they were not surprised. "How
did we not foresee this?" they asked themselves, but it seemed to them
that they had foreseen it all along. When he said to Mariana, "Whatever
I do, I tell you beforehand, nothing will really surprise you," and when
he had spoken of the two men in him that would not let each other live,
had she not felt a kind of vague presentiment? Then why had she ignored
it? Why was it she did not now dare to look at Solomin, as though he
were her accomplice...as though he, too, were conscience-stricken? Why
was it that her unutterable, despairing pity for Nejdanov was mixed with
a feeling of horror, dread, and shame? Perhaps she could have saved him?
Why are they both standing there, not daring to pronounce a word, hardly
daring to breathe-waiting... for what? "Oh, God!"

Solomin sent for a doctor, though there was no hope. Tatiana bathed
Nejdanov's head with cold water and vinegar and laid a cold sponge on
the small, dark wound, now free from blood. Suddenly the rattling in
Nejdanov's throat ceased and he stirred a little.

"He is coming to himself," Solomin whispered. Mariana dropped down on
her knees before him. Nejdanov glanced at her.. up until then his eyes
had borne that fixed, far-away look of the dying.

"I am... still alive," he pronounced scarcely audible. "I couldn't even
do this properly... I am detaining you."

"Aliosha!" Mariana sobbed out.

"It won't... be long.... Do you... remember... Mariana ... my poem?...
Surround me with flowers... But where... are the... flowers? Never
mind... so long as you... are here...There in... my letter..."

He suddenly shuddered.

"Ah! here it comes... Take... each other's hands... before me...
quickly... take..."

Solomin seized Mariana's hand. Her head lay on the couch, face
downwards, close to the wound. Solomin, dark as night, held himself
severely erect.

"That's right... that's..."

Nejdanov broke out into sobs again--strange unusual sobs... His breast
rose, his sides heaved.

He tried to lay his hand on their united ones, but it fell back dead.

"He is passing away," Tatiana whispered as she stood at the door, and
began crossing herself.

His sobs grew briefer, fewer... He still searched around for Mariana
with his eyes, but a menacing white film was spreading over them.

"That's right," were his last words.

He had breathed his last... and the clasped hands of Mariana and Solomin
still lay upon his breast.

The following are the contents of the two letters he had left. One
consisting only of a few lines, was addressed to Silin:

"Goodbye, my dear friend, goodbye! When this reaches you, I shall be no
more. Don't ask why or wherefore, and don't grieve; be sure that I
am better off now. Take up our immortal Pushkin and read over the
description of the death of Lensky in 'Yevgenia Onegin.' Do you
remember? The windows are white-washed. The mistress has gone--that's
all. There is nothing more for me to say. Were I to say all I wanted to,
it would take up too much time. But I could not leave this world without
telling you, or you might have gone on thinking of me as living and I
should have put a stain upon our friendship. Goodbye; live well.--Your
friend, A. N."

The other letter, somewhat longer, was addressed to Solomin and Mariana.
It began thus:

"MY DEAR CHILDREN" (immediately after these words there was a break, as
if something had been scratched or smeared out, as if tears had fallen
upon it),--"It may seem strange to you that I should address you in this
way--I am almost a child myself and you, Solomin, are older than I am.
But I am about to die--and standing as I do at the end of my life, I
look upon myself as an old man. I have wronged you both, especially you,
Mariana, by causing you so much grief and pain (I know you will grieve,
Mariana) and giving you so much anxiety. But what could I do? I could
think of no other way out. I could not simplify myself, so the only
thing left for me to do was to blot myself out altogether.

"Mariana, I would have been a burden to you and to myself. You are
generous, you would have borne the burden gladly, as a new sacrifice,
but I have no right to demand such a sacrifice of you--you have a higher
and better work before you. My children, let me unite you as it were
from the grave. You will live happily together. Mariana, I know you will
come to love Solomin--and he. .. he loved you from the moment he first
saw you at the Sipiagins. It was no secret to me, although we ran away
a few days later. Ah! that glorious morning! how exquisite and fresh and
young it was! It comes back to me now as a token, a symbol of your life
together--your life and his--and I by the merest chance happened to
be in his place. But enough! I don't want to complain, I only want
to justify myself. Some very sorrowful moments are in store for you
tomorrow. But what could I do? There was no other alternative. Goodbye,
Mariana, my dear good girl! Goodbye, Solomin! I leave her in your
charge. Be happy together; live for the sake of others. And you,
Mariana, think of me only when you are happy. Think of me as a man who
had also some good in him, but for whom it was better to die than to
live. Did I really love you? I don't know, dear friend. But I do know
that I never loved anyone more than you, and that it would have been
more terrible for me to die had I not that feeling for you to carry
away with me to the grave. Mariana, if you ever come across a Miss
Mashurina--Solomin knows her, and by the way, I think you've met her
too--tell her that I thought of her with gratitude just before the end.
She will understand. But I must tear myself away at last. I looked out
of the window just now and saw a lovely star amidst the swiftly moving
clouds. No matter how quickly they chased one another, they could not
hide it from view. That star reminded me of you, Mariana. At this moment
you are asleep in the next room, unsuspecting... I went to your door,
listened, and fancied I heard your pure, calm breathing.. . Goodbye!
goodbye! goodbye, my children, my friends!--Yours, A.

"Dear me! how is it that in my final letter I made no mention of our
great cause? I suppose lying is of no use when you're on the point of
death. Forgive this postscript, Mariana... The falsehood lies in me, not
in the thing in which you believe! One more word. You might have thought
perhaps, Mariana, that I put an end to myself merely because I was
afraid of going to prison, but believe me that is not true. There is
nothing terrible about going to prison in itself, but being shut up
there for a cause in which you have no faith is unthinkable. It was
not fear of prison that drove me to this, Mariana. Goodbye! goodbye! my
dear, pure girl."

Mariana and Solomin each read the letter in turn. She then put her
own portrait and the two letters into her pocket and remained standing
motionless.

"Let us go, Mariana; everything is ready. We must fulfil his wish,"
Solomin said to her.

Mariana drew near to Nejdanov and pressed her lips against his forehead
which was already turning cold.

"Come," she said, turning to Solomin. They went out, hand in hand.

When the police arrived at the factory a few hours later, they found
Nejdanov's corpse. Tatiana had laid out the body, put a white pillow
under his head, crossed his arms, and even placed a bunch of flowers
on a little table beside him. Pavel, who had been given all the needful
instructions, received the police officers with the greatest respect and
as great a contempt, so that those worthies were not quite sure whether
to thank or arrest him. He gave them all the details of the suicide,
regaled them with Swiss cheese and Madeira, but as for the whereabouts
of Vassily Fedotitch and the young lady, he knew nothing of that. He was
most effusive in his assurances that Vassily Fedotitch was never away
for long at a time on account of his work, that he was sure to be back
either today or tomorrow, and that he would let them know as soon as he
arrived. They might depend on him!

So the officers went away no wiser than they had come, leaving a guard
in charge of the body and promising to send a coroner.


XXXVIII

Two days after these events, a cart drove up the courtyard of the worthy
Father Zosim, containing a man and woman who are already known to the
reader. The following day they were legally married. Soon afterwards
they disappeared, and the good father never regretted what he had done.
Solomin had left a letter in Pavel's charge, addressed to the proprietor
of the factory, giving a full statement of the condition of the business
(it turned out most flourishing) and asking for three months' leave. The
letter was dated two days before Nejdanov's death, from which might be
gathered that Solomin had considered it necessary even then to go away
with him and Mariana and hide for a time. Nothing was revealed by the
inquiry held over the suicide. The body was buried. Sipiagin gave up
searching for his niece.

Nine months later Markelov was tried. At the trial he was just as calm
as he had been at the governor's. He carried himself with dignity, but
was rather depressed. His habitual hardness had toned down somewhat, not
from any cowardice; a nobler element had been at work. He did not defend
himself, did not regret what he had done, blamed no one, and mentioned
no names. His emaciated face with the lustreless eyes retained but one
expression: submission to his fate and firmness. His brief, direct,
truthful answers aroused in his very judges a feeling akin to pity. Even
the peasants who had seized him and were giving evidence against
him shared this feeling and spoke of him as a good, simple-hearted
gentleman. But his guilt could not possibly be passed over; he could not
escape punishment, and he himself seemed to look upon it as his due. Of
his few accomplices, Mashurina disappeared for a time. Ostrodumov was
killed by a shopkeeper he was inciting to revolt, who had struck him
an "awkward" blow. Golushkin, in consideration of his penitence (he was
nearly frightened out of his wits), was let off lightly. Kisliakov was
kept under arrest for about a month, after which he was released and
even allowed to continue "galloping" from province of province. Nejdanov
died, Solomin was under suspicion, but for lack of sufficient evidence
was left in peace. (He did not, however, avoid trial and appeared when
wanted.) Mariana was not even mentioned; Paklin came off splendidly;
indeed no notice was taken of him.

A year and a half had gone by--it was the winter of 1870. In St.
Petersburg--the very same St. Petersburg where the chamberlain Sipiagin,
now a privy councillor, was beginning to play such an important part;
where his wife patronised the arts, gave musical evenings, and founded
charitable cook-shops; where Kollomietzev was considered one of the most
hopeful members of the ministerial department--a little man was limping
along one of the streets of the Vassily island, attired in a shabby coat
with a catskin collar. This was no other than our old friend Paklin.
He had changed a great deal since we last saw him. On his temples a few
strands of silvery hair peeped out from under his fur cap. A tall, stout
woman, closely muffled in a dark cloth coat, was coming towards him on
the pavement. Paklin looked at her indifferently and passed on. Suddenly
he stopped, threw up his arms as though struck by something, turned back
quickly, and overtaking her peeped under her hat.

"Mashurina!" he exclaimed in an undertone.

The lady looked at him haughtily and walked on without saying a word.

"Dear Mashurina, I recognised you at once," Paklin continued, hobbling
along beside her; "don't be afraid, I won't give you away! I am so glad
to see you! I'm Paklin, Sila Paklin, you know, Nejdanov's friend. Do
come home with me. I live quite near here. Do come!"

"Io sono contessa Rocca di Santo Fiume!" the lady said softly, but in a
wonderfully pure Russian accent.

"Contessa! nonsense! Do come in and let us talk about old times--"

"Where do you live?" the Italian countess asked suddenly in Russian.
"I'm in a hurry."

"In this very street; in that grey three-storied house over there. It's
so nice of you not to have snubbed me! Give me your hand, come on. Have
you been here long? How do you come to be a countess? Have you married
an Italian count?"

Mashurina had not married an Italian count. She had been provided with
a passport made out in the name of a certain Countess Rocca di Santo
Fiume, who had died a short time ago, and had come quite calmly to
Russia, though she did not know a single word of Italian and had the
most typical of Russian faces.

Paklin brought her to his humble little lodging. His humpbacked sister
who shared it with him came out to greet them from behind the partition
dividing the kitchen from the passage.

"Here, Snapotchka," he said, "let me introduce you to a great friend of
mine. We should like some tea as soon as you can get it."

Mashurina, who would on no account have come had not Paklin mentioned
Nejdanov, bowed, then taking off her hat and passing her masculine hand
through her closely cropped hair, sat down in silence. She had scarcely
changed at all; even her dress was the same she had worn two years ago;
only her eyes wore a fixed, sad expression, giving a pathetic look to
her usually hard face. Snandulia went out for the samovar, while Paklin
sat down opposite Mashurina and stroked her knee sympathetically. His
head dropped on his breast, he could not speak from choking, and the
tears glistened in his eyes. Mashurina sat erect and motionless, gazing
severely to one side.

"Those were times!" Paklin began at last. "As I look at you everything
comes back to me, the living and the dead. Even my little poll-parrots
are no more...I don't think you knew them, by the way. They both died
on the same day, as I always predicted they would. And Nejdanov... poor
Nejdanov! I suppose you know--"

"Yes, I know," Mashurina interrupted him, still looking away.

"And do you know about Ostrodumov too?"

Mashurina merely nodded her head. She wanted him to go on talking about
Nejdanov, but could not bring herself to ask him. He understood her,
however.

"I was told that he mentioned you in the letter he left. Was it true?

"Yes," Mashurina replied after a pause.

"What a splendid chap he was! He didn't fall into the right rut somehow.
He was about as fitted to be a revolutionist as I am! Do you know what
he really was? The idealist of realism. Do you understand me?"

Mashurina flung him a rapid glance. She did not understand him and did
not want to understand him. It seemed to her impertinent that he should
compare himself to Nejdanov. "Let him brag!" she thought, though he was
not bragging at all, but rather depreciating himself, according to his
own ideas.

"Some fellow called Silin sought me out; Nejdanov, it seems, had left
a letter for him too. Well, he wanted to know if Alexai had left any
papers, but we hunted through all his things and found nothing. He
must have burned everything, even his poems. Did you know that he wrote
verses? I'm sorry they were destroyed; there must have been some good
things among them. They all vanished with him--became lost in the
general whirl, dead and gone for ever. Nothing was left except the
memories of his friends--until they, too, vanish in their turn!"

Paklin ceased.

"Do you remember the Sipiagins?" he began again; "those respectable,
patronising, loathsome swells are now at the very height of power and
glory." Mashurina, of course, did not remember the Sipiagins, but Paklin
hated them so much that he could not keep from abusing them on every
possible occasion. "They say there's such a high tone in their house!
they're always talking about virtue! It's a bad sign, I think. Reminds
me rather of an over-scented sick room. There must be some bad smell to
conceal. Poor Alexai! It was they who ruined him!"

"And what is Solomin doing?" Mashurina asked. She had suddenly ceased
wishing to hear Paklin talk about him.

"Solomin!" Paklin exclaimed. "He's a clever chap! turned out well too.
He's left the old factory and taken all the best men with him. There was
one fellow there called Pavel--could do anything; he's taken him along
too. They say he has a small factory of his own now, somewhere near
Perm, run on cooperative lines. He's all right! he'll stick to anything
he undertakes. Got some grit in him! His strength lies in the fact that
he doesn't attempt to cure all the social ills with one blow. What a
rum set we are to be sure, we Russians! We sit down quietly and wait for
something or someone to come along and cure us all at once; heal all our
wounds, pull out all our diseases, like a bad tooth. But who or what
is to work this magic spell, Darwinism, the land, the Archbishop
Perepentiev, a foreign war, we don't know and don't care, but we must
have our tooth pulled out for us! It's nothing but mere idleness,
sluggishness, want of thinking. Solomin, on the other hand, is
different; he doesn't go in for pulling teeth--he knows what he's
about!"

Mashurina gave an impatient wave of the hand, as though she wished to
dismiss the subject.

"And that girl," she began, "I forget her name... the one who ran away
with Nejdanov--what became of her?"

"Mariana? She's Solomin's wife now. They married over a year ago. It was
merely for the sake of formality at first, but now they say she really
is his wife."

Mashurina gave another impatient gesture. There was a time when she was
jealous of Mariana, but now she was indignant with her for having been
false to Nejdanov's memory.

"I suppose they have a baby by now," she said in an offhanded tone.

"I really don't know. But where are you off to?" Paklin asked, seeing
that she had taken up her hat. "Do stay a little longer; my sister will
bring us some tea directly."

It was not so much that he wanted Mashurina to stay, as that he
could not let an opportunity slip by of giving utterance to what had
accumulated and was boiling over in his breast. Since his return to St.
Petersburg he had seen very little of people, especially of the younger
generation. The Nejdanov affair had scared him; he grew more cautious,
avoided society, and the young generation on their side looked upon him
with suspicion. Once someone had even called him a traitor to his face.

As he was not fond of associating with the elder generation, it
sometimes fell to his lot to be silent for weeks. To his sister he
could not speak out freely, not because he considered her too stupid
to understand him--oh, no! he had the highest opinion of her
intelligence--but as soon as he began letting off some of his pet
fireworks she would look at him with those sad reproachful eyes of hers,
making him feel quite ashamed. And really, how is a man to go through
life without letting off just a few squibs every now and again? So life
in St. Petersburg became insupportable to Paklin and he longed to remove
to Moscow. Speculations of all sorts--ideas, fancies, and sarcasms--were
stored up in him like water in a closed mill. The floodgates could not
be opened and the water grew stagnant. With the appearance of Mashurina
the gates opened wide, and all his pent-up ideas came pouring out with a
rush. He talked about St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg life, the whole of
Russia. No one was spared! Mashurina was very little interested in
all this, but she did not contradict or interrupt, and that was all he
wanted of her.

"Yes," he began, "a fine time we are living in, I can assure you!
Society in a state of absolute stagnation; everyone bored to death! As
for literature, it's been reduced to a complete vacuum swept clean! Take
criticism for example. If a promising young critic has to say, 'It's
natural for a hen to lay eggs,' it takes him at least twenty whole pages
to expound this mighty truth, and even then he doesn't quite manage
it! They're as puffed up as feather-beds, these fine gentlemen, as
soft-soapy as can be, and are always in raptures over the merest
commonplaces! As for science, ha, ha, ha! we too have our learned Kant!
[The word kant in Russian means a kind of braid or piping.] on the
collars of our engineers! And it's no better in art! You go to a concert
and listen to our national singer Agremantsky. Everyone is raving about
him. But he has no more voice than a cat! Even Skoropikin, you know,
our immortal Aristarchus, rings his praises. 'Here is something,'
he declares, 'quite unlike Western art!' Then he raves about our
insignificant painters too! 'At one time, I bowed down before Europe
and the Italians,' he says, 'but I've heard Rossini and seen Raphael
and confess I was not at all impressed.' And our young men just go about
repeating what he says and feel quite satisfied with themselves. And
meanwhile the people are dying of hunger, crushed down by taxes. The
only reform that has been accomplished is that the men have taken to
wearing caps and the women have left off their head-dresses! And the
poverty! the drunkenness! the usury!"

But at this point Mashurina yawned and Paklin saw that he must change
the subject.

"You haven't told me yet," he said, turning to her, "where you've
been these two years; when you came back, what you've been doing with
yourself, and how you managed to turn into an Italian countess--"

"There is no need for you to know all that," she put in. "It can hardly
have any interest for you now. You see, you are no longer of our camp."

Paklin felt a pang and gave a forced laugh to hide his confusion.

"As you please," he said; "I know I'm regarded as out-of-date by the
present generation, and really I can hardly count myself.. . of those
ranks--" He did not finish the sentence. "Here comes Snapotchka with the
tea. Take a cup with us and stay a little longer. Perhaps I may tell you
something of interest to you."

Mashurina took a cup of tea and began sipping it with a lump of sugar in
her mouth.

Paklin laughed heartily.

"It's a good thing the police are not here to see an Italian countess--"

"Rocca di Santo Fiume," Mashurina put in solemnly, sipping the hot tea.

"Contessa Rocca di Santo Fiume!" Paklin repeated after her; "and
drinking her tea in the typical Russian way! That's rather suspicious,
you know! The police would be on the alert in an instant."

"Some fellow in uniform bothered me when I was abroad," Mashurina
remarked. "He kept on asking so many questions until I couldn't stand it
any longer. 'Leave me alone, for heaven's sake!' I said to him at last."

"In Italian?

"Oh no, in Russian."

"And what did he do?"

"Went away, of course."

"Bravo!" Paklin exclaimed. "Well, countess, have another cup. There is
just one other thing I wanted to say to you. It seemed to me that you
expressed yourself rather contemptuously of Solomin. But I tell you that
people like him are the real men! It's difficult to understand them at
first, but, believe me, they're the real men. The future is in their
hands. They are not heroes, not even 'heroes of labour' as some crank
of an American, or Englishman, called them in a book he wrote for the
edification of us heathens, but they are robust, strong, dull men of the
people. They are exactly what we want just now. You have only to look at
Solomin. A head as clear as the day and a body as strong as an ox. Isn't
that a wonder in itself? Why, any man with us in Russia who has had any
brains, or feelings, or a conscience, has always been a physical wreck.
Solomin's heart aches just as ours does; he hates the same things that
we hate, but his nerves are of iron and his body is under his full
control. He's a splendid man, I tell you! Why, think of it! here is
a man with ideals, and no nonsense about him; educated and from the
people, simple, yet all there... What more do you want?

"It's of no consequence," Paklin continued, working himself up more and
more, without noticing that Mashurina had long ago ceased listening to
him and was looking away somewhere, "it's of no consequence that Russia
is now full of all sorts of queer people, fanatics, officials, generals
plain and decorated, Epicureans, imitators, all manner of cranks. I once
knew a lady, a certain Havrona Prishtekov, who, one fine day, suddenly
turned a legitimist and assured everybody that when she died they had
only to open her body and the name of Henry V. would be found engraven
on her heart! All these people do not count, my dear lady; our true
salvation lies with the Solomins, the dull, plain, but wise Solomins!
Remember that I say this to you in the winter of 1870, when Germany is
preparing to crush France--"

"Silishka," Snandulia's soft voice was heard from behind Paklin, "I
think in your speculations about the future you have quite forgotten
our religion and its influence. And besides," she added hastily, "Miss
Mashurina is not listening to you. You had much better offer her some
more tea."

Paklin pulled himself up.

"Why, of course... do have some more tea."

But Mashurina fixed her dark eyes upon him and said pensively:

"You don't happen to have any letter of Nejdanov s... or his
photograph?"

"I have a photograph and quite a good one too. I believe it's in the
table drawer. I'll get it in a minute."

He began rummaging about in the drawer, while Snandulia went up to
Mashurina and with a long, intent look full of sympathy, clasped her
hand like a comrade.

"Here it is!" Paklin exclaimed and handed her the photograph.

Mashurina thrust it into her pocket quickly, scarcely glancing at it,
and without a word of thanks, flushing bright red, she put on her hat
and made for the door.

"Are you going?" Paklin asked. "Where do you live? You might tell me
that at any rate."

"Wherever I happen to be."

"I understand. You don't want me to know. Tell me at least, are you
still working under Vassily Nikolaevitch?"

"What does it matter to you? Or someone else, perhaps Sidor Sidoritch?"
Mashurina did not reply.

"Or is your director some anonymous person?" Mashurina had already
stepped across the threshold. "Perhaps it is someone anonymous!"

She slammed the door.

Paklin stood for a long time motionless before this closed door.

"Anonymous Russia!" he said at last.