21 Some words obliterated.  The reading is Forster's, and seems to be correct.

22 Susan Armine, elder daughter of Sir William Armine, Bart., of Osgodby,
Lincolnshire, was created a life peeress in 1674, as Baroness Belasyse of
Osgodby.  She died March 6, 1713.  Her first husband was the Honourable Sir
Henry Belasyse, son and heir of John, Baron Belasyse, of Worlaby; and her
second, Mr. Fortney, of Chequers.

23 See Letter 7, note 9.

24 A word before "Ppt" is illegible.  Forster's reading, "yes," does not seem
right.

25 In November 1711 it was reported that Miss Kingdom was privately married to
Lord Conway (Wentworth Papers, 207), but this was not the case.  Lord Conway
was a widower in 1713, but he married an Irish lady named Bowden.

26 Forster reads, "Nite, my own dee sollahs.  Pdfr roves MD"; but the last
three words, at least, do not seem to be in the MS.

27 Probably the Bishop of Raphoe's son (see Letter 29, note 20).

28 What.

29 As Master of the Savoy.

30 William Burgh was Comptroller and Accountant-General for Ireland from 1694
to 1717, when his patent was revoked.  He was succeeded by Eustace Budgell.

31 William Paget, sixth Lord Paget, died in March 1713, aged seventy-six.  He
spent a great part of his life as Ambassador at Vienna and Constantinople.

32 Pocket.

33 Forster reads, "Lele lele logues"; Mr. Ryland, "Lele lele. . . "


Letter 62.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc.  Endorsed "Apr. 13."

2 Esther Johnson's brother-in-law, Filby (see Letter 55, note 19).

3 Earl Poulett (see Letter 20, note 7).

4 Francis Annesley, M.P. for Westbury.  His colleague in the representation of
that borough was Henry Bertie (third son of James, Earl of Abingdon), who
married Earl Poulett's sister-in-law, Anthony Henley's widow (see Letter 12,
note 24).

5 "Has" (MS.).

6 A dozen words are erased.  The reading is Forster's, and appears to be
correct.

7 The British Ambassadress's Speech to the French King.  The printer was sent
to the pillory and fined.

8 The Examiner (vol. iii. No. 35) said that Swift--"a gentleman of the first
character for learning, good sense, wit, and more virtues than even they can
set off and illustrate"--was not the author of that periodical.  "Out of pure
regard to justice, I strip myself of all the honour that lucky untruth did
this paper."

9 A purgative electuary.

10 Bargains.

11 Three or four words illegible.  Forster reads, "Nite, nite, own MD."

12 Forster reads, "devil's brood "; probably the second word is "bawd:" Cf.
Letter 60, note 14 and Feb. 18, 1712-13.

13 Several "moving pictures," mostly brought from Germany, were on view in
London at about this time.  See Tatler, No. 129, and Gay's Fables, No. 6.

14 See Letter 6, note 45.

15 "Mr. Charles Grattan, afterwards master of a free school at Enniskillen"
(Scott).

16 So given in the MS.  Forster suggests that it is a mistake for "wood."

17 See Letter 28, note 11.

18 It is probable that this is Pope's friend, William Cleland, who died in
1741, aged sixty-seven.  William Cleland served in Spain under Lord Rivers,
but was not a Colonel, though he seems to have been a Major.  Afterwards he
was a Commissioner of Customs in Scotland and a Commissioner of the Land Tax
in England.  Colonel Cleland cannot, as Scott suggested (Swift's Works, iii.
142, xviii.  137-39, xix. 8), have been the son of the Colonel William
Cleland, Covenanter and poet, who died in 1689, at the age of twenty-eight.
William Cleland allowed his name to be appended to a letter of Pope's prefixed
to the Dunciad, and Pope afterwards described him as "a person of universal
learning, and an enlarged conversation; no man had a warmer heart for his
friends, or a sincerer attachment to the constitution of his country."  Swift,
referring to this letter, wrote to Pope, "Pray tell me whether your Colonel
(sic) Cleland be a tall Scots gentleman, walking perpetually in the Mall, and
fastening upon everybody he meets, as he has often done upon me?" (Pope's
Works, iv. 48, vii. 214).

19 Henry Grey, Lord Lucas (died 1741), who became twelfth Earl of Kent in
1702, was made Duke of Kent in 1710.  He held various offices under George I.
and George II.

20 Forster found, among the MSS. at Narford, the "lie" thus prepared for All
Fools' Day.  Richard Noble, an attorney, ran away with a lady who was the wife
of John Sayer and daughter of Admiral Nevill; and he killed Sayer on the
discovery of the intrigue.  The incident was made use of by Hogarth in the
fifth scene of "Marriage a la Mode."

21 See Letter 5, note 3.

22 See Letter 13, note 10.

23 Charles XII.

24 "Is" (MS.).

25 Cibber says that he saw four acts of Cato in 1703; the fifth act, according
to Steele, was written in less than a week.  The famous first performance was
on April 14, 1713.

26 The first number of the Guardian appeared on March 12, and the paper was
published daily until Oct. 1, 1713.  Pope, Addison, and Berkeley were among
the contributors.

27 See Letter 52, note 6.

28 See Letter 39, note 16.

29 The first preached after the period of his suspension by the House of
Lords.  It was delivered at St. Saviour's, Southwark, before his installation
at St. Andrew's, and was published with the title, "The Christian's Triumph,
or the Duty of praying for our Enemies".

30 Swift's curate at Laracor.

31 Richard Gorges (died 1728) was eldest son and heir of Dr. Robert Gorges, of
Kilbrue, County Meath, by Jane, daughter of Sir Arthur Loftus, and sister of
Adam, Viscount Lisburne.  He was appointed Adjutant-General of the Forces in
Ireland 1697, Colonel of a new Regiment of Foot 1703, Major-General of the
Forces 1707, and Lieutenant-General 1710 (Dalton's Army Lists, iii. 75).

32 See Letter 60, note 10.

33 Mrs. Oldfield.

34 See Letter 56, note 6.

35 Never saw the like.

36 See Letter 53, note 10.

37 The remainder has been partially obliterated.



Letter 63.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc.  Endorsed "May 4."

2 Lord Cholmondeley (see Letter 36, note 15).

3 Harcourt.

4 Forster's reading; the last two words are doubtful.

5 See Letter 7, note 27.

6 Francis Palmes, who was wounded at Blenheim, was made a Lieutenant-General
in 1709.  In 1707 he was elected M.P. for West Loo; in 1708 he was sent as
Envoy Extraordinary to the Duke of Savoy, and in 1710 to Vienna.

7 Apparently "so heed."

8 Henry Villiers (died 1743), second son of the first Earl of Jersey and of
Barbara, daughter of William Chiffinch (see Letter 29, note 3 and Letter 59,
note 25).

9 See Letter 61, Mar. 8, 1712-13.  The Speech and Address are in the Commons'
Journals, xvii. 278, 28O.  For the draft Address, in Swift's handwriting, see
the Portland Papers (1899), v. 276.

10 Scoffed, jeered.

11 Dr. Gastrell (see Letter 25, note 8).

12 George Berkeley, afterwards Bishop of Cloyne, but then a young man of
twenty-eight, came to London in January 1713.  He was already known by his
"New Theory of Vision" and "Treatise on the Principles of Human Knowledge",
and he brought with him his "Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous".
Steele was among the first to welcome him, and he soon made the acquaintance
of Addison, Pope, and Swift.  On March 27, Berkeley wrote to Sir John Perceval
of the breach between Swift and the Whigs:  "Dr. Swift's wit is admired by
both of them (Addison and Steele], and indeed by his greatest enemies, and. .
.  I think him one of the best-matured and agreeable men in the world."  In
November 1713 Swift procured for Berkeley the chaplaincy and secretaryship to
Lord Peterborough, the new Envoy to Sicily.

13 Forster reads, "all oo sawcy Ppt can say oo may see me"; but the words are
illegible.

14 Possibly "see," written in mistake for "say."

15 "J" (MS.).

16 Obliterated.  Forster imagined that he read, "Nite dee logues.  Poo Mr."

17 There were two General Hamiltons at this time; probably Swift's
acquaintance was Gustavus Hamilton (1639-1723), who was created Viscount Boyne
in 1717.  Hamilton distinguished himself at the battle of the Boyne and the
capture of Athlone, and was made Brigadier-General in 1696, and Major General
in 1703.  He took part in the siege of Vigo, and was made a member of the
Privy Council in 1710.

18 See Letter 43, note 38.

19 The History of the Peace of Utrecht.

20 This is Forster's reading, and appears to be correct.  The last word, which
he gives as "iss truly," is illegible.

21 Belonging to Ireland.

22 See Letter 40, note 1.

23 Another excellent reading of Forster's.  I cannot decipher the last word,
which he gives as "dee rogues."

24 Sentence obliterated.

25 The number at the beginning of each entry in the Journal.

26 Mr. Ryland's reading.  Forster has "morning, dee."

27 Dr. Thomas Lindsay (see Letter 6, note 45).

28 I think the "MD" is right, though Forster gives "M."  The "Pr" is probably
an abbreviation of "Pdfr."

29 The last three lines have been obliterated.


Letter 64.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc.  Endorsed "May 22."

2 Illegible.  Forster reads, "and dee deelest Ppt."

3 The last few words have been partially obliterated.

4 Am very angry.  The last word is scribbled over.

5 The History of the Peace of Utrecht.

6 The signature has been cut off.


Letter 65.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc.  Endorsed "Chester Letter."

2 "Others" (MS.).

3 See Letter 10, note 31 and Letter 31, note 1.

4 See Letter 7, note 7.