Cromlehs are among the most interesting of all monumental relics of our
ancestors; but the question of their original purposes has excited much
controversy among the lovers of antiquarian lore. They are immense
stones, by some believed to have been the altars, by others, the tombs,
of the Druids; but Mr. Toland explains the word _cromleac_, or
_cromleh_, from the Irish _crom_, to adore, and _leac_, a stone--stone
of adoration. Crom was also one of the Irish names of God; hence
cromleac may mean the stone of Crom, or of the Supreme God. The cromleac
is also called _Bothal_, from the Irish word _Both_, a house, and _al_,
or _Allah_, God; this is evidently the same with _Bethel_, or house of
God, of the Hebrews.

The above vignette represents a Cromleh at Plas Newydd, the seat of the
Marquess of Anglesea, in the Isle of Anglesea. This part of the island
is finely wooded, and forcibly recalls to the mind its ancient state,
when it was the celebrated seat of the Druids, the terrific rites of
whose religion were performed in the gloom of the thickest groves.

The Cromleh at Plas Newydd is 12 feet 9 inches long, and 13 feet 2
inches broad, in the broadest part. Its greatest depth or thickness is 5
feet. Its contents cannot be less in cubic feet and decimal parts than
392,878,125. It follows, therefore, from calculating according to the
specific gravity of stone of its kind, that it cannot weigh less than 30
tons 7 hundreds. The engraving is copied from "The Celtic Druids," by
Godfrey Higgins, Esq. F.S.A. 4to, 1827, one of the most valuable
antiquarian volumes it has ever been our good fortune to secure; and by
the aid of an esteemed correspondent, we hope shortly to introduce a few
of its curiosities more in detail than we are enabled to do at present.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF A READER.

WOMAN AND SONG.

(_From a graceful little volume, entitled, "Poetical Recreations," by
C.A. Hulbert._)


  Oh, who shall say that woman's ear
    Thrills to the minstrel's voice in vain?
  She hath a balm diffusing tear,
    She hath a softer, holier strain--
  A cheering smile of hope to give,
  A voice to bid the mourner live.

  She hath a milder beam of praise,
    Her heart a soil where Truth may bloom,
  And while her drooping flowers we raise,
    They yield us back a rich perfume.
  Her influence bids our talents rise
  'Neath Love and Fancy's native skies!

  I heard an infant's lisping tongue
    Address his mother's smiling eye,
  And fondly ask his favourite song--
    His soul seemed wrapt in harmony;
  She sung--and gave the cheering kiss,
  Which made the poet's fortune his.

  His mother saw his fancies stray
    To fragrant poesy, and leave
  The dull pursuit of fortune's way,
    'Till some would chide and others grieve;
  But she had marked the rising flame,
  And led and nourish'd it to fame!

  When verse his mind to writing bore,
    And genius shed its lustre there,
  How proudly did she con it o'er,
    Unconscious fell the blissful tear:
  'Twas her's to lighten care's control,
  And raise the drooping, pensive soul.

  Her labour past, another breast,
    Still lovely woman's, urged his pen--
  Pure love was sent to make him blest,
    And bid his fancies flow again:
  She yielded to his minstrel pride
  The heart, the hand to lips denied!

  Quick roll'd the years in tranquil peace,
    The peace by harmony begun.
  And numbers charm'd each day of bliss,
    That flowing verse and concord won:
  His Mary's music soothed his woe,
  And chased the tear that chanced to flow.

  Death came--and Poetry was o'er,
    The chords of song had ceas'd to thrill,
  The Minstrel's name was heard no more,
    But one true heart was heaving still--
  His Mary's voice would nightly weave
  Its lone, deep notes around his grave!

       *       *       *       *       *


CLAUDE LORRAINE.


Lanzi, in his _History of Italian Painting_, gives the following
exquisite encomium on this prince of landscape painters:

"His landscapes present to the spectator an endless variety; so many
views of land and water, so many interesting objects, that, like an
astonished traveller, the eye is obliged to pause and measure the extent
of the prospect, and his distances of mountain and of sea, are so
illusive, that the spectator feels, as it were, fatigued by gazing. The
edifices and temples which so finely round off his compositions, the
lakes peopled with aquatic birds, the foliage diversified in conformity
to the different kinds of trees, all is nature in him; every object
arrests the attention of an amateur, every thing furnishes instruction
to a professor. There is not an effect of light, or a reflection in
water which he has not imitated; and the various changes of the day are
nowhere better represented than in Claude. In a word, he is truly the
painter who, in depicting the three regions of air, earth, and water,
has combined the whole universe. His atmosphere almost always bears the
impress of the sky at Rome, whose horizon is, from its situation, rosy,
dewy, and warm. He did not possess any peculiar merit in his figures,
which are insipid, and generally too much attenuated; hence he was
accustomed to remark to the purchasers of his pictures, that he sold
them the landscape, and presented them with the figures gratis."

       *       *       *       *       *

"TINTORETTO," says his biographer, "produced works in which the most
captious of critics could not find a shade of defect."

       *       *       *       *       *


KISSING THE FOOT.


Rollo, the celebrated Danish hero, (whose stature is said to have been
so gigantic, that no horse could carry him) on becoming a feudatory of
the French crown, was required, in conformity with general usage, to
kiss the foot of his superior lord; but he refused to stoop to what he
considered so great a degradation; yet as the homage could not be
dispensed with, he ordered one of his warriors to perform it for him.
The latter, as proud as his chief, instead of stooping to the royal
foot, raised it so high, that the poor monarch fell to the ground, amid
the laughter of the assembly.

       *       *       *       *       *


BOHEMIAN BLESSING.


  Now sleep in blessedness--till morn
    Brings its sweet light;
  And hear the awful voice of God
    Bid ye--Good Night!
  Yet ere the hand of slumber close
    The eye of care,
  For the poor huntsman's soul's repose
    Pour out one prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIEWING.


There are three ways of reviewing a book. First, to take no more notice
of it, or of its author, than if neither the one nor the other had ever
been produced--cautiously to avoid the most distant allusions to their
names, characters, or professions, thereby avoiding all personality, in
their case at least, all intrusion, either into public or private life.
Secondly, to select all the good passages, and to comment upon them with
such power and vivacity, that beside your pearls they seem paste.
Thirdly, to select all the best passages, and to string them all
together on a very slight thread--like dew-drops on gossamer--and boldly
palm it upon the public as an original article.--_Blackwood's Mag_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MOTTOES FOR SUN DIALS.

_By the Rev. W. Lisle Bowles_.


       MORNING SUN.--_Tempus volat_.
  OH! early passenger, look up--be wise,
  And think how, night and day, TIME ONWARD
       FLIES.

  NOON.--_Dum tempus habemus, operemur bonum_.
  Life steals away--this hour, oh man, is lent thee,
  Patient to "WORK THE WORK OF HIM WHO SENT
       THEE."

       SETTING SUN.--_Redibo, tu nunquam_.
  Haste, traveller, the sun is sinking now--
  He shall return again--but never thou.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE PINE-APPLE.


Oviedo extols the pine-apple above all the fruits which grew in the
famous gardens of his time, and above all that he had tasted in his
travels in Spain, France, England, Germany, the whole of Italy, Sicily,
the Tyrol, and the whole of the Low Countries. "No fruit," says he,
"have I known or seen in all these parts, nor do I think that in the
world there is one better than it, or equal to it, in all those points
which I shall now mention, and which are, beauty of appearance,
sweetness of smell, taste of excellent savour; so that there being three
senses out of the five which can be gratified by fruit, such is its
excellence above all other fruits or dainties in the world, that it
gratifies those three, and even the fourth also; to wit the touch. As
for the fifth, that is to say, the hearing, fruit, indeed, can neither
hear nor listen, but in its place the reader may hear and attend to what
is said of this fruit, and he will perceive that I do not deceive myself
in what I shall say of it. For albeit fruit can as little be said to
possess any of the other four senses, in relation to the which I have,
as above, spoken, of these I am to be understood in the exercise and
person of him who eats, not of the fruit itself, which hath no life,
save the vegetative one, and wants both the sensitive and rational, all
three of which exist in man. And he, looking at these pines, and
smelling to them, and tasting them, and feeling them, will justly,
considering these four parts or particularities, attribute to it the
principality above all other fruits."

       *       *       *       *       *


STONE-MASON'S CRITICISM


Mr. Bowles, the vicar of Bremhill, Wilts, is accustomed occasionally to
write epitaphs for the young and aged dead among his own parishioners.
An epitaph of his, on an aged father and mother, written in the
character of a most exemplary son--the father living to eighty-seven
years--ran thus:--

  "My father--my poor mother--both are gone,
  And o'er your cold remains I place this stone,
  In memory of your virtues. May it tell
  How _long one_ parent lived, and _both_ how well,"
    &c.

When this was shown to the stone-mason critic, (and Mr. Bowles
acknowledges he has heard worse public critics in his time,) he
observed, that the lines _might_ do with a _little_ alteration--thus:--

  "My father, and my mother too, are dead,
  And here I _put_ this grave-stone at their head;
  My father lived to eighty-seven, my mother
  No quite _so long_--and _one_ died after _t'other_."

       *       *       *       *       *


PLEASURES OF HISTORY.

