
The following account of the origin of the name "Forget-me-not," is
extracted from Mill's _History of Chivalry_, and was communicated to
that work by Dr. A.T. Thomson:--"Two lovers were loitering on the margin
of a lake on a fine summer's evening, when the maiden espied some of the
flowers of Myosòtis growing on the water, close to the bank of an
island, at some distance from the shore. She expressed a desire to
possess them, when the knight, in the true spirit of chivalry, plunged
into the water, and swimming to the spot, cropped the wished for plant,
but his strength was unable to fulfill the object of his achievement,
and feeling that he could not regain the shore, although very near it,
he threw the flowers upon the bank, and casting a last affectionate look
upon his lady-love, he cried 'Forget me not!' and was buried in the
waters."--_Gardener's Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *


HOME.


  _Leonhard._ See here what spacious halls: how all around
  Us breathes magnificence!

  _Spinarosa._              A princely pile!
  But ah! how nobler far its daring site!
  It rears its tow'rs amid these rocks and glaciers,
  As if proud man were in his might resolved
  To add _his_ rock to those that spurn the vale.

  _Leon._ All here is beautiful! but 'tis not home!
  'Tis true I was a child scarce eight years old
  When led by Pietro into Italy--
  Yet are my home's green lineaments as fresh
  As when first painted on my infant soul;
  This castle bears them not.--My home lay hid
  In the deep bosom of gigantic oaks,
  That o'er its roof their guardian shadows flung.
  Nor towers, nor gates, nor pinnacles, were there;
  With lowly thatch and humble wicket graced,
  Smiling, yet solitary, did it stand.

  _Blackwood's Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *


IRISH SONGS.


It is impossible to conceive any trash more despicable than the slang
songs which are current amongst the common people in Ireland; and this
is the more to be lamented, as the extreme susceptibility of the people
makes them liable to be easily moved to either good or evil by their
songs. Even the native Irish songs, as we are informed in Miss Brooke's
_Reliques of Irish Poetry_, are sadly interpolated with nonsensical
passages, which have been introduced to supply the place of lost or
forgotten lines; and of humorous lyrical poetry, she says there was none
in the language worth translating. Moore has given to the beautiful airs
of Ireland beautiful words; but Moore is a poet for ladies and
gentlemen, not for mankind. It may be, that there are not materials in
Ireland, for a kindred spirit to that of Burns to work upon; but the
fact is but too true, that the _poor_ Irishman has no song of even
decent ability, to cheer his hours of merriment, or soothe the period of
his sadness. Honour and undying praise be upon the memory of Burns, who
has left to us those songs which, like the breath of nature, from whose
fresh inspiration they were caught, are alike refreshing to the monarch
and the clown!--Ibid.

       *       *       *       *       *


A REAL MIRACLE.


The _fable_ of Dr. Southey's _Pilgrim of Compostella_, is as follows:--

A family set forth from Aquitaine to visit the shrine of St. James, at
Compostella, whither, according to the Catholic faith, the decapitated
body of that saint was conveyed from Palestine, (miraculously of
course,) in a ship of marble. At a certain small town by the way, their
son Pierre is tempted by the innkeeper's daughter. Like a second Joseph,
he resists the immodest damsel; like Potiphar's wife, she converts her
love to hate, and accuses the virtuous youth of a capital crime. Her
false oaths prevail, and he is condemned to the gallows. Rejoicing in
his martyred innocence, he exhorts his parents to pursue their
pilgrimage, and pray for the peace of his soul. Sorrowing, they proceed,
and returning, find their son hanging by the neck alive, and singing
psalms--in no actual pain--but naturally desirous to be freed from his
extraordinary state of suspended animation. They repair to the chief
magistrate of the town, by whose authority the youth was executed--find
his worship at dinner--relate the wonderful preservation of their
son--and request that he may be restored. The magistrate is incredulous,
and declares that he would sooner believe that the fowls on which he was
dining would rise again in full feather. The miracle is performed. The
cock and hen spring from the ocean of their own gravy, clacking and
crowing, with all appurtenances of spur, comb, and feather. Pierre, of
course, is liberated, and declared innocent. The cock and hen become
objects of veneration--live in a state of chastity--and are finally
translated--leaving just two eggs, from which arise another immaculate
cock and hen. The breed is perhaps still in existence, and time hath
been, that a lucrative trade was carried on in their feathers!!!--Ibid..

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GATHERER.


  A snapper up of unconsidered trifles.
  SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of Hogarth's first attempt at satire, the following story is related by
Nichols, who had it from one of Hogarth's fellow workmen. "One summer
Sunday, during his apprenticeship, he went with three companions to
Highgate, and the weather being warm and the way dusty, they went into a
public house, and called for ale. There happened to be other customers
in the house, who to free drinking added fierce talking, and a quarrel
ensued. One of them on receiving a blow with the bottom of a quart pot,
looked so ludicrously rueful, that Hogarth snatched out a pencil and
sketched him as he stood. It was very like and very laughable, and
contributed to the restoration of order and good humour."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE "GOOD BOY" LOVER.


"When I was a lad," said a facetious gentleman to the recorder of the
anecdote, "I was, or rather fancied myself to be, desperately in love
with a very charming young lady. Dining at her parents' house one day, I
was unfortunately helped to the gizzard of a chicken, attached to one of
the wings. Aware, like most '_good boys_' that it was extremely
ungenteel to leave anything upon my plate, and being over anxious to act
with etiquette and circumspection in this interesting circle, I, as a
'good boy' wished strictly to conform myself to the rules of good
breeding. But the _gizzard_ of a fowl! Alas! it was impossible! how
unfortunate! I _abhorred_ it! No, I could not either for _love_ or money
have swallowed such a thing! So, after blushing, playing with the
annoyance, and casting many a side-long glance to see if I was observed,
I contrived at length to roll it from my plate into my _mouchoir_, which
I had placed on my knees purposely for its reception; the next minute
all was safely lodged in my pocket. Conversing with the object of my
affections, during the evening, in a state of nervous forgetfulness, I
drew forth my handkerchief, and in a superb flourish, out flew the
GIZZARD! Good heavens! my fair one stared, coloured, laughed; I was
petrified; away flew my ecstatic dreams; and out of the house I flung
myself without one '_au revoir_,' but with a consciousness of the truth
of that delectable ballad which proclaims, that 'Love _has_ EYES!!' I
thought no more of love in that quarter, believe me!" M.L.B.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADMIRAL RODNEY.


During the heat of the memorable battles with Count de Grasse, of April
9th and 12th, 1782, the gallant Rodney desired his young aid-de-camp
(Mr. Charles Dashwood[9]) to make him a glass of lemonade, the
ingredients for which were at hand. Not having any thing to stir it with
but a knife, already discoloured by the cutting of the lemon, Sir George
coolly said, on Mr. Dashwood presenting it to him, "Child, that may do
for a midshipman, but not for an admiral--take it yourself, and send my
servant to me." C.C.

    [9] Afterwards advanced to the rank of post captain, in 1801.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXPRESSIVE WORDS.


I knew very well a French Chevalier, who on coming to England, applied
himself with amazing ardour to the study of our language, and his
remarks upon it, if not always very acute were at least entertaining.
One day, reading aloud an English work, he stopped at the word SPLASH;
expressed himself highly delighted with it, as a term, which minutely
described the thing meant; then repeating it many times with marked
pleasure, and a strong sibillation, he added, "No! no! dere is noting at
all, noting in _my_ language dat de same would be like _splash_!"
Perhaps the following sentence from the satire of a notorious wit in
Elizabeth's reign, is a fair specimen of those expressive words which
_paint_, the object of which they speak:--"To which place, Gabriel came,
_ruffling_ it out, hufty-tufty, in his new suit of velvet." The man was
vain; the writer has made him a _peacock_.          M.L.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

I would no more bring a new work out in summer than I would sell pork in
the dog-days.--_Bookseller in Cit. World._

       *       *       *       *       *

LIMBIRD'S EDITIONS.

CHEAP and POPULAR WORKS published at the MIRROR OFFICE in the Strand,
near Somerset House.

The ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS, Embellished with nearly 150
Engravings. Price 6s. 6d. boards.

The TALES of the GENII. Price 2s.

The MICROCOSM: By the Right Hon. G. CANNING. &c. Price 2s.

PLUTARCH'S LIVES, with Fifty Portraits, 2 vols. price 13s. boards.

COWPER'S POEMS, with 12 Engravings, price 3s. 6d. boards.

COOK'S VOYAGES, 2 vols. price 8s. boards.

The CABINET of CURIOSITIES: or, WONDERS of the WORLD DISPLAYED. Price
5s. boards.

BEAUTIES of SCOTT. 2 vols. price 7s. boards.

The ARCANA of SCIENCE for 1828. Price 4s. 6d.