That the spirit of adventure was strong within him, is shown by his
daring to go up to London, and disguising himself as a mountebank. He
had a coat made, called a 'Jack Pudding Coat:' a little hat was stuck on
his head, with a fox's tail in it, and cocks' feathers here and there. A
wizard's mask one day, a daubing of flour another, completed the
disguise it was then so usual to assume: witness the long traffic held
at Exeter Change by the Duchess of Tyrconnel, Francis Jennings, in a
white mask, selling laces, and French gew-gaws, a trader to all
appearance, but really carrying on political intrigues; every one went
to chat with the 'White Milliner,' as she was called, during the reign
of William and Mary. The Duke next erected a stage at Charing Cross--in
the very face of the stern Rumpers, who, with long faces, rode past the
sinful man each day as they came ambling up from the Parliament House. A
band of puppet-players and violins set up their shows; and music covers
a multitude of incongruities. The ballad was then the great vehicle of
personal attack, and Villiers's dawning taste for poetry was shown in
the ditties which he now composed, and in which he sometimes assisted
vocally. Whilst all the other Cavaliers were forced to fly, he thus
bearded his enemies in their very homes: sometimes he talked to them
face to face, and kept the sanctimonious citizens in talk, till they
found themselves sinfully disposed to laugh. But this vagrant life had
serious evils: it broke down all the restraints which civilised society
naturally, and beneficially, imposes. The Duke of Buckingham, Butler,
the author of Hudibras, writes, 'rises, eats, goes to bed by the Julian
account, long after all others that go by the new style, and keeps the
same hours with owls and the Antipodes. He is a great observer of the
Tartar customs, and never eats till the great cham, having dined, makes
proclamation that all the world may go to dinner. He does not dwell in
his house, but haunts it like an evil spirit, that walks all night, to
disturb the family, and never appears by day. He lives perpetually
benighted, runs out of his life, and loses his time as men do their ways
in the dark: and as blind men are led by their dogs, so he is governed
by some mean servant or other that relates to his pleasures. He is as
inconstant as the moon which he lives under; and although he does
nothing but advise with his pillow all day, he is as great a stranger to
himself as he is to the rest of the world. His mind entertains all
things that come and go; but like guests and strangers, they are not
welcome if they stay long. This lays him open to all cheats, quacks, and
impostors, who apply to every particular humour while it lasts, and
afterwards vanish. He deforms nature, while he intends to adorn her,
like Indians that hang jewels in their lips and noses. His ears are
perpetually drilling with a fiddlestick, and endures pleasures with less
patience than other men do their pains.'

The more effectually to support his character as a mountebank, Villiers
sold mithridate and galbanum plasters: thousands of spectators and
customers thronged every day to see and hear him. Possibly many guessed
that beneath all the fantastic exterior some ulterior project was
concealed; yet he remained untouched by the City Guards. Well did Dryden
describe him:--

    'Then all for women, painting, rhyming, drinking,
     Beside ten thousand freaks that died in thinking.
     Blest madman, who could every hour employ
     With something new to wish or to enjoy.'

His elder sister, Lady Mary Villiers, had married the Duke of Richmond,
one of the loyal adherents of Charles I. The duke was, therefore, in
durance at Windsor, whilst the duchess was to be placed under strict
surveillance at Whitehall.

Villiers resolved to see her. Hearing that she was to pass into
Whitehall on a certain day, he set up his stage where she could not fail
to perceive him. He had something important to say to her. As she drew
near, he cried out to the mob that he would give them a song on the
Duchess of Richmond and the Duke of Buckingham: nothing could be more
acceptable. 'The mob,' it is related, 'stopped the coach and the duchess
... Nay, so outrageous were the mob, that they forced the duchess, who
was then the handsomest woman in England, to sit in the boot of the
coach, and to hear him sing all his impertinent songs. Having left off
singing, he told them it was no more than reason that he should present
the duchess with some of the songs. So he alighted from his stage,
covered all over with papers and ridiculous little pictures. Having come
to the coach, he took off a black piece of taffeta, which he always wore
over one of his eyes, when his sister discovered immediately who he was,
yet had so much presence of mind as not to give the least sign of
mistrust; nay, she gave him some very opprobrious language, but was very
eager at snatching the papers he threw into her coach. Among them was a
packet of letters, which she had no sooner got but she went forward, the
duke, at the head of the mob, attending and hallooing her a good way out
of the town.'

[Illustration: VILLIERS IN DISGUISE--THE MEETING WITH HIS SISTER.]

A still more daring adventure was contemplated also by this young,
irresistible duke. Bridget Cromwell, the eldest daughter of Oliver, was,
at that time, a bride of twenty-six years of age; having married, in
1647, the saintly Henry Ireton, Lord Deputy of Ireland. Bridget was the
pattern heroine of the '_unco guid_,' the quintessence of all propriety;
the impersonation of sanctity; an ultra republican, who scarcely
accorded to her father the modest title of Protector. She was esteemed
by her party a 'personage of sublime growth:' 'humbled, not exalted,'
according to Mrs. Hutchinson, by her elevation: 'nevertheless,' says
that excellent lady, 'as my Lady Ireton was walking in the St. James's
Park, the Lady Lambert, as proud as her husband, came by where she was,
and as the present princess always hath precedency of the relict of the
dead, so she put by my Lady Ireton, who, notwithstanding her piety and
humility, was a little grieved at the affront.'

After this anecdote one cannot give much credence to this lady's
humility: Bridget was, however, a woman of powerful intellect, weakened
by her extreme, and, to use a now common term, _crochety_ opinions.
Like most _esprits forts_, she was easily imposed upon. One day this
paragon saw a mountebank dancing on a stage in the most exquisite style.
His fine shape, too, caught the attention of one who assumed to be above
all folly. It is sometimes fatal to one's peace to look out of a window;
no one knows what sights may rivet or displease. Mistress Ireton was
sitting at her window unconscious that any one with the hated and
malignant name of 'Villiers' was before her. After some unholy
admiration, she sent to speak to the mummer. The duke scarcely knew
whether to trust himself in the power of the bloodthirsty Ireton's bride
or not--yet his courage--his love of sport--prevailed. He visited her
that evening: no longer, however, in his jack-pudding coat, but in a
rich suit, disguised with a cloak over it. He wore still a plaster over
one eye, and was much disposed to take it off, but prudence forbade; and
thus he stood in the presence of the prim and saintly Bridget Ireton.
The particulars of the interview rest on his statement, and they must
not, therefore, be accepted implicitly. Mistress Ireton is said to have
made advances to the handsome incognito. What a triumph to a man like
Villiers, to have intrigued with my Lord Protector's sanctified
daughter! But she inspired him with disgust. He saw in her the
presumption and hypocrisy of her father; he hated her as Cromwell's
daughter and Ireton's wife. He told her, therefore, that he was a Jew,
and could not by his laws become the paramour of a Christian woman. The
saintly Bridget stood amazed; she had imprudently let him into some of
the most important secrets of her party. A Jew! It was dreadful! But how
could a person of that persuasion be so strict, so strait-laced? She
probably entertained all the horror of Jews which the Puritanical party
cherished as a virtue; forgetting the lessons of toleration and
liberality inculcated by Holy Writ. She sent, however, for a certain
Jewish Rabbi to converse with the stranger. What was the Duke of
Buckingham's surprise, on visiting her one evening, to see the learned
doctor armed at all points with the Talmud, and thirsting for dispute,
by the side of the saintly Bridget. He could noways meet such a body of
controversy; but thought it best forthwith to set off for the Downs.
Before he departed he wrote, however, to Mistress Ireton, on the plea
that she might wish to know to what tribe of Jews he belonged. So he
sent her a note written with all his native wit and point.[4]

Buckingham now experienced all the miseries that a man of expensive
pleasures with a sequestrated estate is likely to endure. One friend
remained to watch over his interests in England. This was John Traylman,
a servant of his late father's, who was left to guard the collection of
pictures made by the late duke, and deposited in York House. That
collection was, in the opinion of competent judges, the third in point
of value in England, being only inferior to those of Charles I. and the
Earl of Arundel.

It had been bought, with immense expense, partly by the duke's agents in
Italy, the Mantua Gallery supplying a great portion--partly in
France--partly in Flanders; and to Flanders a great portion was destined
now to return. Secretly and laboriously did old Traylman pack up and
send off these treasures to Antwerp, where now the gay youth whom the
aged domestic had known from a child was in want and exile. The pictures
were eagerly bought by a foreign collector named Duart. The proceeds
gave poor Villiers bread; but the noble works of Titian and Leonardo da
Vinci, and others, were lost for ever to England.

It must have been very irritating to Villiers to know that whilst he
just existed abroad, the great estates enjoyed by his father were being
subjected to pillage by Cromwell's soldiers, or sold for pitiful sums by
the Commissioners appointed by the Parliament to break up and annihilate
many of the old properties in England. Burleigh-on-the-Hill, the stately
seat on which the first duke had lavished thousands, had been taken by
the Roundheads. It was so large, and presented so long a line of
buildings, that the Parliamentarians could not hold it without leaving
in it a great garrison and stores of ammunition. It was therefore burnt,
and the stables alone occupied; and those even were formed into a house
of unusual size. York House was doubtless marked out for the next
destructive decree. There was something in the very history of this
house which might be supposed to excite the wrath of the Roundheads.
Queen Mary (whom we must not, after Miss Strickland's admirable life of
her, call Bloody Queen Mary, but who will always be best known by that
unpleasant title) had bestowed York House on the See of York, as a
compensation for York House, at Whitehall, which Henry VIII. had taken
from Wolsey. It had afterwards come into possession of the Keepers of
the Great Seal. Lord Bacon was born in York House, his father having
lived there; and the

    'Greatest, wisest, meanest of mankind,'

built here an aviary which cost £300. When the Duke of Lennox wished to
buy York House, Bacon thus wrote to him:--'For this you will pardon me:
York House is the house where my father died, and where I first
breathed; and there will I yield my last breath, if it so please God and
the King.' It did not, however, please the King that he should; the
house was borrowed only by the first Duke of Buckingham from the
Archbishop of York, and then exchanged for another seat, on the plea
that the duke would want it for the reception of foreign potentates, and
for entertainments given to royalty.

The duke pulled it down: and the house, which was erected as a temporary
structure, was so superb that even Pepys, twenty years after it had been
left to bats and cobwebs, speaks of it in raptures, as of a place in
which the great duke's soul was seen in every chamber. On the walls were
shields on which the arms of Manners and of Villiers--peacocks and
lions--were quartered. York House was never, however, finished; but as
the lover of old haunts enters Buckingham Street in the Strand, he will
perceive an ancient water-gate, beautifully proportioned, built by Inigo
Jones--smoky, isolated, impaired--but still speaking volumes of
remembrance of the glories of the assassinated duke, who had purposed to
build the whole house in that style.

'_Yorschaux_,' as he called it--York House--the French ambassador had
written word to his friends at home, 'is the most richly fitted up of
any that I saw.' The galleries and state rooms were graced by the
display of the Roman marbles, both busts and statues, which the first
duke had bought from Rubens; whilst in the gardens the Cain and Abel of
John of Bologna, given by Philip IV. of Spain to King Charles, and by
him bestowed on the elder George Villiers, made that fair _pleasaunce_
famous. It was doomed--as were what were called the 'superstitious'
pictures in the house--to destruction: henceforth all was in decay and
neglect. 'I went to see York House and gardens,' Evelyn writes in 1655,
'belonging to the former greate Buckingham, but now much ruined through
neglect.'

Traylman, doubtless, kept George Villiers the younger in full possession
of all that was to happen to that deserted tenement in which the old man
mourned for the departed, and thought of the absent.

The intelligence which he had soon to communicate was all-important.
York House was to be occupied again; and Cromwell and his coadjutors had
bestowed it on Fairfax. The blow was perhaps softened by the reflection
that Fairfax was a man of generous temper; and that he had an only
daughter, Mary Fairfax, young, and an heiress. Though the daughter of a
Puritan, a sort of interest was attached, even by Cavaliers, to Mary
Fairfax, from her having, at five years of age, followed her father
through the civil wars on horseback, seated before a maid-servant; and
having, on her journey, frequently fainted, she was so ill as to have
been left in a house by the roadside, her father never expecting to see
her again.

In reference to this young girl, then about eighteen years of age,
Buckingham now formed a plan. He resolved to return to England
disguised, to offer his hand to Mary Fairfax, and so recover his
property through the influence of Fairfax. He was confident of his own
attractions; and, indeed, from every account, he appears to have been
one of those reckless, handsome, speculative characters that often take
the fancy of better men than themselves. 'He had,' says Burnet, 'no sort
of literature, only he was drawn into chymistry; and for some years he
thought he was very near the finding of the philosopher's stone, which
had the effect that attends on all such men as he was, when they are
drawn in, to lay out for it. He had no principles of religion, virtue,
or friendship; pleasure, frolic, or extravagant diversion, was all he
laid to heart. He was true to nothing; for he was not true to himself.
He had no steadiness nor conduct; he could keep no secret, nor execute
any design without spoiling it; he could never fix his thoughts, nor
govern his estate, though then the greatest in England. He was bred
about the king, and for many years he had a great ascendant over him;
but he spoke of him to all persons with that contempt, that at last he
drew a lasting disgrace upon himself. And he at length ruined both body
and mind, fortune and reputation, equally.'

This was a sad prospect for poor Mary Fairfax, but certainly if in their
choice

    ----'Weak women go astray,
    Their stars are more in fault than they,'

and she was less to blame in her choice than her father, who ought to
have advised her against the marriage. Where and how they met is not
known. Mary was not attractive in person: she was in her youth little,
brown, and thin, but became a 'short fat body,' as De Grammont tells us,
in her early married life; in the later period of her existence she was
described by the Vicomtesse de Longueville as a 'little round crumpled
woman, very fond of finery;' and she adds that, on visiting the duchess
one day, she found her, though in mourning, in a kind of loose robe over
her, all edged and laced with gold. So much for a Puritan's daughter!

To this insipid personage the duke presented himself. She soon liked
him, and in spite of his outrageous infidelities, continued to like him
after their marriage.

He carried his point: Mary Fairfax became his wife on the 6th of
September, 1675, and, by the influence of Fairfax, his estate, or, at
all events, a portion of the revenues, about £4,000 a year, it is said,
were restored to him. Nevertheless, it is mortifying to find that in
1682, he sold York House, in which his father had taken such pride, for
£30,000. The house was pulled down; streets were erected on the
gardens: George Street, Villiers Street, Duke Street, Buckingham Street,
Off Alley recall the name of the ill-starred George, first duke, and of
his needy, profligate son; but the only trace of the real greatness of
the family importance thus swept away is in the motto inscribed on the
point of old Inigo's water-gate, towards the street: '_Fidei coticula
crux_.' It is sad for all good royalists to reflect that it was not the
rabid Roundhead, but a degenerate Cavalier, who sold and thus destroyed
York House.

The marriage with Mary Fairfax, though one of interest solely, was not a
_mésalliance_: her father was connected by the female side with the
Earls of Rutland; he was also a man of a generous spirit, as he had
shown, in handing over to the Countess of Derby the rents of the Isle of
Man, which had been granted to him by the Parliament. In a similar
spirit he was not sorry to restore York House to the Duke of Buckingham.

Cromwell, however, was highly exasperated by the nuptials between Mary
Fairfax and Villiers, which took place at Nun-Appleton, near York, one
of Fairfax's estates. The Protector had, it is said, intended Villiers
for one of his own daughters. Upon what plea he acted it is not stated:
he committed Villiers to the Tower, where he remained until the death of
Oliver, and the accession of Richard Cromwell.

In vain did Fairfax solicit his release: Cromwell refused it, and
Villiers remained in durance until the abdication of Richard Cromwell,
when he was set at liberty, but not without the following conditions,
dated February 21st, 1658-9:--

'The humble petition of George Duke of Buckingham was this day read.
Resolved that George Duke of Buckingham, now prisoner at Windsor Castle,
upon his engagement upon his honour at the bar of this House, and upon
the engagement of Lord Fairfax in £20,000 that the said duke shall
peaceably demain himself for the future, and shall not join with, or
abet, or have any correspondence with, any of the enemies of the Lord
Protector, and of this Commonwealth, in any of the parts beyond the sea,
or within this Commonwealth, shall be discharged of his imprisonment and
restraint; and that the Governor of Windsor Castle be required to bring
the Duke of Buckingham to the bar of this House on Wednesday next, to
engage his honour accordingly. Ordered, that the security of £20,000 to
be given by the Lord Fairfax, on the behalf of the Duke of Buckingham,
be taken in the name of His Highness the Lord Protector.'

During his incarceration at Windsor, Buckingham had a companion, of whom
many a better man might have been envious: this was Abraham Cowley, an
old college friend of the duke's. Cowley was the son of a grocer, and
owed his entrance into academic life to having been a King's Scholar at
Westminster. One day he happened to take up from his mother's parlour
window a copy of Spenser's 'Faerie Queene.' He eagerly perused the
delightful volume, though he was then only twelve years old: and this
impulse being given to his mind, became at fifteen a reciter of verses.
His 'Poetical Blossoms,' published whilst he was still at school, gave,
however, no foretaste of his future eminence. He proceeded to Trinity
College, Cambridge, where his friendship with Villiers was formed; and
where, perhaps, from that circumstance, Cowley's predilections for the
cause of the Stuarts was ripened into loyalty.

No two characters could be more dissimilar than those of Abraham Cowley
and George Villiers. Cowley was quiet, modest, sober, of a thoughtful,
philosophical turn, and of an affectionate nature; neither boasting of
his own merits nor depreciating others. He was the friend of Lucius
Cary, Lord Falkland; and yet he loved, though he must have condemned,
George Villiers. It is not unlikely that, whilst Cowley imparted his
love of poetry to Villiers, Villiers may have inspired the pensive and
blameless poet with a love of that display of wit then in vogue, and
heightened that sense of humour which speaks forth in some of Cowley's
productions. Few authors suggest so many new thoughts, really his own,
as Cowley. 'His works,' it has been said, 'are a flower-garden run to
weeds, but the flowers are numerous and brilliant, and a search after
them will repay the pains of a collector who is not too indolent or
fastidious.'

As Cowley and his friend passed the weary hours in durance, many an old
tale could the poet tell the peer of stirring times; for Cowley had
accompanied Charles I. in many a perilous journey, and had protected
Queen Henrietta Maria in her escape to France: through Cowley had the
correspondence of the royal pair, when separated, been carried on. The
poet had before suffered imprisonment for his loyalty; and, to disguise
his actual occupation, had obtained the degree of Doctor of Medicine,
and assumed the character of a physician, on the strength of knowing the
virtues of a few plants.

Many a laugh, doubtless, had Buckingham at the expense of _Dr._ Cowley:
however, in later days, the duke proved a true friend to the poet, in
helping to procure for him the lease of a farm at Chertsey from the
queen, and here Cowley, rich upon £300 a year, ended his days.

For some time after Buckingham's release, he lived quietly and
respectably at Nun-Appleton, with General Fairfax and the vapid Mary.
But the Restoration--the first dawnings of which have been referred to
in the commencement of this biography--ruined him, body and mind.

He was made a Lord of the Bedchamber, a Member of the Privy Council, and
afterwards Master of the Horse,[5] and Lord Lieutenant of Yorkshire. He
lived in great magnificence at Wallingford House; a tenement next to
York House, intended to be the habitable and useful appendage to that
palace.

He was henceforth, until he proved treacherous to his sovereign, the
brightest ornament of Whitehall. Beauty of person was hereditary: his
father was styled the 'handsomest-bodied man in England,' and George
Villiers the younger equalled George Villiers the elder in all personal
accomplishments. When he entered the Presence-Chamber all eyes followed
him; every movement was graceful and stately. Sir John Reresby
pronounced him 'to be the finest gentleman he ever saw.' 'He was born,'
Madame Dunois declared, 'for gallantry and magnificence.' His wit was
faultless, but his manners engaging; yet his sallies often descended
into buffoonery, and he spared no one in his merry moods. One evening a
play of Dryden's was represented. An actress had to spout forth this
line--

    'My wound is great because it is so small!'

She gave it out with pathos, paused, and was theatrically distressed.
Buckingham was seated in one of the boxes. He rose, all eyes were fixed
upon a face well known in all gay assemblies, in a tone of burlesque he
answered--

    'Then 'twould be greater were it none at all.'

Instantly the audience laughed at the Duke's tone of ridicule, and the
poor woman was hissed off the stage.

The king himself did not escape Buckingham's shafts; whilst Lord
Chancellor Clarendon fell a victim to his ridicule: nothing could
withstand it. There, not in that iniquitous gallery at Whitehall, but in
the king's privy chambers, Villiers might be seen, in all the radiance
of his matured beauty. His face was long and oval, with sleepy, yet
glistening eyes, over which large arched eyebrows seemed to contract a
brow on which the curls of a massive wig (which fell almost to his
shoulders) hung low. His nose was long, well formed, and flexible; his
lips thin and compressed, and defined, as the custom was, by two very
short, fine, black patches of hair, looking more like strips of
sticking-plaster than a moustache. As he made his reverence, his rich
robes fell over a faultless form. He was a beau to the very fold of the
cambric band round his throat; with long ends of the richest, closest
point that was ever rummaged out from a foreign nunnery to be placed on
the person of this sacrilegious sinner.

Behold, now, how he changes. Villiers is Villiers no longer. He is
Clarendon, walking solemnly to the Court of the Star Chamber: a pair of
bellows is hanging before him for the purse; Colonel Titus is walking
with a fire shovel on his shoulder, to represent a mace; the king,
himself a capital mimic, is splitting his sides with laughter; the
courtiers are fairly in a roar. Then how he was wont to divert the king
with his descriptions! 'Ipswich, for instance,' he said, 'was a town
without inhabitants--a river it had without water--streets without
names; and it was a place where asses wore boots:' alluding to the
asses, when employed in rolling Lord Hereford's bowling-green, having
boots on their feet to prevent their injuring the turf.

Flecknoe, the poet, describes the duke at this period, in 'Euterpe
Revived'--

    The gallant'st person, and the noblest minde,
    In all the world his prince could ever finde,
    Or to participate his private cares,
    Or bear the public weight of his affairs,
    Like well-built arches, stronger with their weight,
    And well-built minds, the steadier with their height;
    Such was the composition and frame
    O' the noble and the gallant Buckingham.'

The praise, however, even in the duke's best days, was overcharged.
Villiers was no 'well-built arch,' nor could Charles trust to the
fidelity of one so versatile for an hour. Besides, the moral character
of Villiers must have prevented him, even in those days, from bearing
'the public weight of affairs.'

A scandalous intrigue soon proved the unsoundness of Flecknoe's tribute.
Amongst the most licentious beauties of the court was Anna Maria,
Countess of Shrewsbury, the daughter of Robert Brudenel, Earl of
Cardigan, and the wife of Francis, Earl of Shrewsbury: amongst many
shameless women she was the most shameless, and her face seems to have
well expressed her mind. In the round, fair visage, with its languishing
eyes, and full, pouting mouth, there is something voluptuous and bold.
The forehead is broad, but low; and the wavy hair, with its tendril
curls, comes down almost to the fine arched eyebrows, and then, falling
into masses, sets off white shoulders which seem to designate an
inelegant amount of _embonpoint_. There is nothing elevated in the whole
countenance, as Lely has painted her, and her history is a disgrace to
her age and time.

She had numerous lovers (not in the refined sense of the word), and, at
last, took up with Thomas Killigrew. He had been, like Villiers, a
royalist: first a page to Charles I., next a companion of Charles II.,
in exile. He married the fair Cecilia Croft; yet his morals were so
vicious that even in the Court of Venice to which he was accredited, in
order to borrow money from the merchants of that city, he was too
profligate to remain. He came back with Charles II., and was Master of
the Revels, or King's Jester, as the court considered him, though
without any regular appointment, during his life: the butt, at once, and
the satirist of Whitehall.

It was Killigrew's wit and descriptive powers which, when heightened by
wine, were inconceivably great, that induced Villiers to select Lady
Shrewsbury for the object of his admiration. When Killigrew perceived
that he was supplanted by Villiers, he became frantic with rage, and
poured out the bitterest invectives against the countess. The result was
that, one night, returning from the Duke of York's apartments at St.
James's, three passes with a sword were made at him through his chair,
and one of them pierced his arm. This, and other occurrences, at last
aroused the attention of Lord Shrewsbury, who had hitherto never doubted
his wife: he challenged the Duke of Buckingham; and his infamous wife,
it is said, held her paramour's horse, disguised as a page. Lord
Shrewsbury was killed,[6] and the scandalous intimacy went on as before.
No one but the queen, no one but the Duchess of Buckingham, appeared
shocked at this tragedy, and no one minded their remarks, or joined in
their indignation: all moral sense was suspended, or wholly stifled; and
Villiers gloried in his depravity, more witty, more amusing, more
fashionable than ever; and yet he seems, by the best-known and most
extolled of his poems, to have had some conception of what a real and
worthy attachment might be.

The following verses are to his 'Mistress':--

          'What a dull fool was I
           To think so gross a lie,
         As that I ever was in love before!
         I have, perhaps, known one or two,
           With whom I was content to be
           At that which they call keeping company.
         But after all that they could do,
           I still could be with more.
           Their absence never made me shed a tear;
           And I can truly swear,
         That, till my eyes first gazed on you,
           I ne'er beheld the thing I could adore.

          'A world of things must curiously be sought:
           A world of things must be together brought
         To make up charms which have the power to make,
         Through a discerning eye, true love;
         That is a master-piece above
           What only looks and shape can do;
           There must be wit and judgment too,
         Greatness of thought, and worth, which draw,
         From the whole world, respect and awe.

        'She that would raise a noble love must find
         Ways to beget a passion for her mind;
         She must be that which she to be would seem,
         For all true love is grounded on esteem:
         Plainness and truth gain more a generous heart
         Than all the crooked subtleties of art.
         She must be--what said I?--she must be _you_:
         None but yourself that miracle can do.
         At least, I'm sure, thus much I plainly see,
         None but yourself e'er did it upon me.
         'Tis you alone that can my heart subdue,
         To you alone it always shall be true.'

The next lines are also remarkable for the delicacy and happy turn of
the expressions--

        'Though Phillis, from prevailing charms,
         Have forc'd my Delia from my arms,
         Think not your conquest to maintain
         By rigour or unjust disdain.
         In vain, fair nymph, in vain you strive,
         For Love doth seldom Hope survive.
         My heart may languish for a time,
         As all beauties in their prime
         Have justified such cruelty,
         By the same fate that conquered me.
         When age shall come, at whose command
         Those troops of beauty must disband--
         A rival's strength once took away,
         What slave's so dull as to obey?
         But if you'll learn a noble way
         To keep his empire from decay,
         And there for ever fix your throne,
         Be kind, but kind to me alone.'

Like his father, who ruined himself by building, Villiers had a
monomania for bricks and mortar, yet he found time to write 'The
Rehearsal,' a play on which Mr. Reed in his 'Dramatic Biography' makes
the following observation: 'It is so perfect a masterpiece in its way,
and so truly original, that notwithstanding its prodigious success, even
the task of imitation, which most kinds of excellence have invited
inferior geniuses to undertake, has appeared as too arduous to be
attempted with regard to this, which through a whole century stands
alone, notwithstanding that the very plays it was written expressly to
ridicule are forgotten, and the taste it was meant to expose totally
exploded.'

The reverses of fortune which brought George Villiers to abject misery
were therefore, in a very great measure, due to his own misconduct, his
depravity, his waste of life, his perversion of noble mental powers: yet
in many respects he was in advance of his age. He advocated, in the
House of Lords, toleration to Dissenters. He wrote a 'Short Discourse on
the Reasonableness of Men's having a Religion, or Worship of God;' yet,
such was his inconsistency, that in spite of these works, and of one
styled a 'Demonstration of the Deity,' written a short time before his
death, he assisted Lord Rochester in his atheistic poem upon 'Nothing.'

Butler, the author of Hudibras, too truly said of Villiers 'that he had
studied _the whole body of vice_;' a most fearful censure--a most
significant description of a bad man. 'His parts,' he adds, 'are
disproportionate to the whole, and like a monster, he has more of some,
and less of others, than he should have. He has pulled down all that
nature raised in him, and built himself up again after a model of his
own. He has dammed up all those lights that nature made into the noblest
prospects of the world, and opened other little blind loopholes backward
by turning day into night, and night into day.'

The satiety and consequent misery produced by this terrible life are
ably described by Butler. And it was perhaps partly this wearied,
worn-out spirit that caused Villiers to rush madly into politics for
excitement. In 1666 he asked for the office of Lord President of the
North; it was refused: he became disaffected, raised mutinies, and, at
last, excited the indignation of his too-indulgent sovereign. Charles
dismissed him from his office, after keeping him for some time in
confinement. After this epoch little is heard of Buckingham but what is
disgraceful. He was again restored to Whitehall, and, according to
Pepys, even closeted with Charles, whilst the Duke of York was excluded.
A certain acquaintance of the duke's remonstrated with him upon the
course which Charles now took in Parliament. 'How often have you said to
me,' this person remarked, 'that the king was a weak man, unable to
govern, but to be governed, and that you could command him as you liked?
Why do you suffer him to do these things?'

'Why,' answered the duke, 'I do suffer him to do these things, that I
may hereafter the better command him.' A reply which betrays the most
depraved principle of action, whether towards a sovereign or a friend,
that can be expressed. His influence was for some time supreme, yet he
became the leader of the opposition, and invited to his table the
discontented peers, to whom he satirized the court, and condemned the
king's want of attention to business. Whilst the theatre was ringing
with laughter at the inimitable character of Bayes in the 'Rehearsal,'
the House of Lords was listening with profound attention to the
eloquence that entranced their faculties, making wrong seem right, for
Buckingham was ever heard with attention.

Taking into account his mode of existence, 'which,' says Clarendon, 'was
a life by night more than by day, in all the liberties that nature could
desire and wit invent,' it was astonishing how extensive an influence he
had in both Houses of Parliament. 'His rank and condescension, the
pleasantness of his humours and conversation, and the extravagance and
keenness of his wit, unrestrained by modesty or religion, caused persons
of all opinions and dispositions to be fond of his company, and to
imagine that these levities and vanities would wear off with age, and
that there would be enough of good left to make him useful to his
country, for which he pretended a wonderful affection.'

But this brilliant career was soon checked. The varnish over the hollow
character of this extraordinary man was eventually rubbed off. We find
the first hint of that famous coalition styled the _Cabal_ in Pepys's
Diary, and henceforth the duke must be regarded as a ruined man.

'He' (Sir H. Cholmly) 'tells me that the Duke of Buckingham his crimes,
as far as he knows, are his being of a cabal with some discontented
persons of the late House of Commons, and opposing the desires of the
king in all his matters in that House; and endeavouring to become
popular, and advising how the Commons' House should proceed, and how he
would order the House of Lords. And he hath been endeavouring to have
the king's nativity calculated; which was done, and the fellow now in
the Tower about it.... This silly lord hath provoked, by his ill
carriage, the Duke of York, my Lord Chancellor, and all the great
persons, and therefore most likely will die.'

One day, in the House of Lords, during a conference between the two
Houses, Buckingham leaned rudely over the shoulder of Henry Pierrepont
Marquis of Dorchester. Lord Dorchester merely removed his elbow. Then
the duke asked him if he was uneasy. 'Yes,' the marquis replied, adding,
'the duke dared not do this if he were anywhere else.' Buckingham
retorted, 'Yes, he would: and he was a better man than my lord marquis:'
on which Dorchester told him that he lied. On this Buckingham struck off
Dorchester's hat, seized him by the periwig, pulled it aside, and held
him. The Lord Chamberlain and others interposed and sent them both to
the Tower. Nevertheless, not a month afterwards, Pepys speaks of seeing
the duke's play of 'The Chances' acted at Whitehall. 'A good play,' he
condescends to say, 'I find it, and the actors most good in it; and
pretty to hear Knipp sing in the play very properly "All night I weepe,"
and sung it admirably. The whole play pleases me well: and most of all,
the sight of many fine ladies, amongst others, my Lady Castlemaine and
Mrs. Middleton.'

The whole management of public affairs was, at this period, intrusted to
five persons, and hence the famous combination, the united letters of
which formed the word 'Cabal:'--Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley,
and Lauderdale. Their reprehensible schemes, their desperate characters,
rendered them the opprobrium of their age, and the objects of censure to
all posterity. Whilst matters were in this state a daring outrage, which
spoke fearfully of the lawless state of the times, was ascribed, though
wrongly, to Buckingham. The Duke of Ormond, the object of his inveterate
hatred, was at that time Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Colonel Blood,--a
disaffected disbanded officer of the Commonwealth, who had been
attainted for a conspiracy in Ireland, but had escaped punishment,--came
to England, and acted as a spy for the 'Cabal,' who did not hesitate to
countenance this daring scoundrel.

His first exploit was to attack the Duke of Ormond's coach one night in
St. James's Street: to secure his person, bind him, put him on horseback
after one of his accomplices, and carry him to Tyburn, where he meant to
hang his grace. On their way, however, Ormond, by a violent effort,
threw himself on the ground; a scuffle ensued: the duke's servants came
up, and after receiving the fire of Blood's pistols, the duke escaped.
Lord Ossory, the Duke of Ormond's son, on going afterward to court, met
Buckingham, and addressed him in these words:--

'My lord, I know well that you are at the bottom of this late attempt on
my father; but I give you warning, if he by any means come to a violent
end, I shall not be at a loss to know the author. I shall consider you
as an assassin, and shall treat you as such; and wherever I meet you I
shall pistol you, though you stood behind the king's chair; and I tell
it you in his majesty's presence, that you may be sure I shall not fail
of performance.'

Blood's next feat was to carry off from the Tower the crown jewels. He
was overtaken and arrested: and was then asked to name his accomplices.
'No,' he replied, 'the fear of danger shall never tempt me to deny guilt
or to betray a friend.' Charles II., with undignified curiosity, wished
to see the culprit. On inquiring of Blood how he dared to make so bold
an attempt on the crown, the bravo answered, 'My father lost a good
estate fighting for the crown, and I considered it no harm to recover it
by the crown.' He then told his majesty how he had resolved to
assassinate him: how he had stood among the reeds in Battersea-fields
with this design; how then, a sudden awe had come over him: and Charles
was weak enough to admire Blood's fearless bearing and to pardon his
attempt. Well might the Earl of Rochester write of Charles--

    'Here lies my sovereign lord the king,
       Whose word no man relies on;
     Who never said a foolish thing,
       And never did a wise one.'

Notwithstanding Blood's outrages--the slightest penalty for which in
our days would have been penal servitude for life--Evelyn met him, not
long afterwards, at Lord Clifford's, at dinner, when De Grammont and
other French noblemen were entertained. 'The man,' says Evelyn, 'had not
only a daring, but a villanous, unmerciful look, a false countenance;
but very well-spoken, and dangerously insinuating.'

Early in 1662, the Duke of Buckingham had been engaged in practices
against the court: he had disguised deep designs by affecting the mere
man of pleasure. Never was there such splendour as at Wallingford
House--such wit and gallantry; such perfect good breeding; such
apparently openhanded hospitality. At those splendid banquets, John
Wilmot, Earl of Rochester, 'a man whom the Muses were fond to inspire,
but ashamed to avow,' showed his 'beautiful face,' as it was called; and
chimed in with that wit for which the age was famous. The frequenters at
Wallingford House gloried in their indelicacy. 'One is amazed,' Horace
Walpole observes, 'at hearing the age of Charles II. called polite. The
Puritans have affected to call everything by a Scripture' name; the new
comers affected to call everything by its right name;

    'As if preposterously they would confess
     A forced hypocrisy in wickedness.'

Walpole compares the age of Charles II. to that of Aristophanes--'which
called its own grossness polite.' How bitterly he decries the stale
poems of the time as 'a heap of senseless ribaldry;' how truly he shows
that licentiousness weakens as well as depraves the judgment. 'When
Satyrs are brought to court,' he observes, 'no wonder the Graces would
not trust themselves there.'

The Cabal is said, however, to have been concocted, not at Wallingford
House, but at Ham House, near Kingston-on-Thames.

In this stately old manor-house, the abode of the Tollemache family, the
memory of Charles II. and of his court seems to linger still. Ham House
was intended for the residence of Henry, Prince of Wales, and was built
in 1610. It stands near the river Thames; and is flanked by noble
avenues of elm and of chestnut trees, down which one may almost, as it
were, hear the king's talk with his courtiers; see Arlington approach
with the well-known patch across his nose; or spy out the lovely,
childish Miss Stuart and her future husband, the Duke of Richmond,
slipping behind into the garden, lest the jealous mortified king should
catch a sight of the 'conscious lovers.'

This stately structure was given by Charles II., in 1672, to the Duke
and Duchess of Lauderdale: she, the supposed mistress of Cromwell; he,
the cruel, hateful Lauderdale of the Cabal. This detestable couple,
however, furnished with massive grandeur the apartments of Ham House.
They had the ceilings painted by Verrio; the furniture was rich, and
even now the bellows and brushes in some of the rooms are of silver
filigree. One room is furnished with yellow damask, still rich, though
faded; the very seats on which Charles, looking around him, saw
Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley (the infamous Shaftesbury), and
Lauderdale--and knew not, good easy man, that he was looking on a band
of traitors--are still there. Nay, he even sat to Sir Peter Lely for a
portrait for this very place--in which, schemes for the ruin of the
kingdom were concocted. All, probably, was smooth and pleasing to the
monarch as he ranged down the fine gallery, ninety-two feet long; or sat
at dinner amid his foes in that hall, surrounded with an open
balustrade; or disported himself on the river's green brink. Nay, one
may even fancy Nell Gwynn taking a day's pleasure in this then lone and
ever sweet locality. We hear her swearing, as she was wont to do,
perchance at the dim looking-glasses, her own house in Pall Mall, given
her by the king, having been filled up, for the comedian, entirely,
ceiling and all, with looking-glass. How bold and pretty she looked in
her undress! Even Pepys--no very sound moralist, though a vast
hypocrite--tells us: Nelly, 'all unready' was 'very pretty, prettier far
than he thought.' But to see how she was 'painted,' would, he thought,
'make a man mad.'

'Madame Ellen,' as after her _elevation_, as it was termed, she was
called, might, since she held long a great sway over Charles's fancy, be
suffered to scamper about Ham House--where her merry laugh perhaps
scandalised the now Saintly Duchess of Lauderdale,--just to impose on
the world; for Nell was regarded as the Protestant champion of the
court, in opposition to her French rival, the Duchess of Portsmouth.

Let us suppose that she has been at Ham House, and is gone off to Pall
Mall again, where she can see her painted face in every turn. The king
has departed, and Killigrew, who, at all events, is loyal, and the
true-hearted Duke of Richmond, all are away to London. In yon
sanctimonious-looking closet, next to the duchess's bed-chamber, with her
psalter and her prayer-book on her desk, which is fixed to her great
chair, and that very cane which still hangs there serving as her support
when she comes forth from that closet, murmur and wrangle the component
parts of that which was never mentioned without fear--the Cabal. The
conspirators dare not trust themselves in the gallery: there is tapestry
there, and we all know what coverts there are for eaves-droppers and
spiders in tapestried walls: then the great Cardinal spiders do so click
there, are so like the death-watch, that Villiers, who is inveterately
superstitious, will not abide there. The hall, with its enclosing
galleries, and the buttery near, are manifestly unsafe. So they heard,
nay crouch, mutter, and concoct that fearful treachery which, as far as
their country is concerned, has been a thing apart in our annals, in 'my
Lady's' closet. Englishmen are turbulent, ambitious, unscrupulous; but
the craft of Maitland, Duke of Lauderdale--the subtlety of Ashley, seem
hardly conceivable either in a Scot or Southron.

These meetings had their natural consequence. One leaves Lauderdale,
Arlington, Ashley, and Clifford, to their fate. But the career of
Villiers inspires more interest. He seemed born for better things. Like
many men of genius, he was so credulous that the faith he pinned on one
Heydon, an astrologer, at this time, perhaps buoyed him up with false
hopes. Be it as it may, his plots now tended to open insurrection. In
1666, a proclamation had been issued for his apprehension--he having
then absconded. On this occasion he was saved by the act of one whom he
had injured grossly--his wife. She managed to outride the
serjeant-at-arms, and to warn him of his danger. She had borne his
infidelities, after the fashion of the day, as a matter of course:
jealousy was then an impertinence--constancy, a chimera; and her
husband, whatever his conduct, had ever treated her with kindness of
manner; he had that charm, that attribute of his family, in perfection,
and it had fascinated Mary Fairfax.

He fled, and played for a year successfully the pranks of his youth. At
last, worn out, he talked of giving himself up to justice. 'Mr. Fenn, at
the table, says that he hath been taken by the watch two or three times
of late, at unseasonable hours, but so disguised they did not know him;
and when I come home, by and by, Mr. Lowther tells me that the Duke of
Buckingham do dine publickly this day at Wadlow's, at the Sun Tavern;
and is mighty merry, and sent word to the Lieutenant of the Tower, that
he would come to him as soon as he dined.' So Pepys states.

Whilst in the Tower--to which he was again committed--Buckingham's
pardon was solicited by Lady Castlemaine; on which account the king was
very angry with her; called her a meddling 'jade;' she calling him
'fool,' and saying if he was not a fool he never would suffer his best
subjects to be imprisoned--referring to Buckingham. And not only did she
ask his liberty, but the restitution of his places. No wonder there was
discontent when such things were done, and public affairs were in such a
state. We must again quote the graphic, terse language of Pepys:--'It
was computed that the Parliament had given the king for this war only,
besides all prizes, and besides the £200,000 which he was to spend of
his own revenue, to guard the sea, above £5,000,000, and odd £100,000;
which is a most prodigious sum. Sir H. Cholmly, as a true English
gentleman, do decry the king's expenses of his privy purse, which in
King James's time did not rise to above £5,000 a year, and in King
Charles's to £10,000, do now cost us above £100,000, besides the great
charge of the monarchy, as the Duke of York has £100,000 of it, and
other limbs of the royal family.'

In consequence of Lady Castlemaine's intervention, Villiers was restored
to liberty--a strange instance, as Pepys remarks, of the 'fool's play'
of the age. Buckingham was now as presuming as ever: he had a theatre of
his own, and he soon showed his usual arrogance by beating Henry
Killigrew on the stage, and taking away his coat and sword; all very
'innocently' done, according to Pepys. In July he appeared in his place
in the House of Lords, as 'brisk as ever,' and sat in his robes,
'which,' says Pepys, 'is a monstrous thing that a man should be
proclaimed against, and put in the Tower, and released without any
trial, and yet not restored to his places.'

We next find the duke intrusted with a mission to France, in concert
with Halifax and Arlington. In the year 1680, he was threatened with an
impeachment, in which, with his usual skill, he managed to exculpate
himself by blaming Lord Arlington. The House of Commons passed a vote
for his removal; and he entered the ranks of the opposition.

But this career of public meanness and private profligacy was drawing to
a close. Alcibiades no longer--his frame wasted by vice--his spirits
broken by pecuniary difficulties--Buckingham's importance visibly sank
away. 'He remained, at last,' to borrow the words of Hume, 'as incapable
of doing hurt as he had ever been little desirous of doing good to
mankind.' His fortune had now dwindled down to £300 a year in land; he
sold Wallingford House, and removed into the City.

And now the fruits of his adversity, not, we hope, too late, began to
appear. Like Lord Rochester, who had ordered all his immoral works to be
burnt, Buckingham now wished to retrieve the past. In 1685 he wrote the
religious works which form so striking a contrast with his other
productions.

That he had been up to the very time of his ruin perfectly impervious to
remorse, dead also to shame, is amply manifested by his conduct soon
after his duel with the Earl of Shrewsbury.

Sir George Etherege had brought out a new play at the Duke of York's
Theatre. It was called, 'She Would if she Could.' Plays in those days
began at what we now consider our luncheon hour. Though Pepys arrived at
the theatre on this occasion at two o'clock--his wife having gone
before--about a thousand people had then been put back from the pit. At
last, seeing his wife in the eighteen-penny-box, Samuel 'made shift' to
get there and there saw, 'but lord!' (his own words are inimitable) 'how
dull, and how silly the play, there being nothing in the world good in
it, and few people pleased in it. The king was there; but I sat mightily
behind, and could see but little, and hear not at all. The play being
done, I went into the pit to look for my wife, it being dark and
raining, but could not find her; and so staid, going between the two
doors and through the pit an hour and a half, I think, after the play
was done; the people staying there till the rain was over, and to talk
to one another. And among the rest, here was the Duke of Buckingham
to-day openly in the pit; and there I found him with my Lord Buckhurst,
and Sedley, and Etheridge the poet, the last of whom I did hear mightily
find fault with the actors, that they were out of humour, and had not
their parts perfect, and that Harris did do nothing, nor could so much
as sing a ketch in it; and so was mightily concerned, while all the rest
did, through the whole pit, blame the play as a silly, dull thing,
though there was something very roguish and witty; but the design of the
play, and end, mighty insipid.'

Buckingham had held out to his Puritan friends the hope of his
conversion for some years; and when they attempted to convert him, he
had appointed a time for them to finish their work. They kept their
promise, and discovered him in the most profligate society. It was
indeed impossible to know in what directions his fancies might take him,
when we find him believing in the predictions of a poor fellow in a
wretched lodging near Tower Hill, who, having cast his nativity, assured
the duke he would be king.

He had continued for years to live with the Countess of Shrewsbury, and
two months after her husband's death, had taken her to his home. Then,
at last, the Duchess of Buckingham indignantly observed, that she and
the countess could not possibly live together. 'So I thought, madam,'
was the reply. 'I have therefore ordered your coach to take you to your
father's.' It has been asserted that Dr. Sprat, the duke's chaplain,
actually married him to Lady Shrewsbury, and that his legal wife was
thenceforth styled 'The Duchess-dowager.'

He retreated with his mistress to Claverdon, near Windsor, situated on
the summit of a hill which is washed by the Thames. It is a noble
building, with a great terrace in front, under which are twenty-six
niches, in which Buckingham had intended to place twenty-six statues as
large as life; and in the middle is an alcove with stairs. Here he lived
with the infamous countess, by whom he had a son, whom he styled Earl of
Coventry, (his second title,) and who died an infant.

One lingers still over the social career of one whom Louis XIV. called
'the only English gentleman he had ever seen.' A capital retort was made
to Buckingham by the Princess of Orange, during an interview, when he
stopped at the Hague, between her and the Duke. He was trying
diplomatically to convince her of the affection of England for the
States. 'We do not,' he said, 'use Holland like a mistress, we love her
as a wife.' '_Vraiment je crois que vous nous aimez comme vous aimez la
vôtre_,' was the sharp and clever answer.

On the death of Charles II., in 1685, Buckingham retired to the small
remnant of his Yorkshire estates. His debts were now set down at the sum
of £140,000. They were liquidated by the sale of his estates. He took
kindly to a country life, to the surprise of his old comrade in
pleasure, Etherege. 'I have heard the news,' that wit cried, alluding to
this change, 'with no less astonishment than if I had been told that the
Pope had begun to wear a periwig and had turned beau in the
seventy-fourth year of his age!'

Father Petre and Father Fitzgerald were sent by James II. to convert the
duke to Popery. The following anecdote is told of their conference with
the dying sinner:--'We deny,' said the Jesuit Petre, 'that any one can
be saved out of our Church. Your grace allows that our people may be
saved.'--'No,' said the duke, 'I make no doubt you will all be damned to
a man!' 'Sir,' said the father, 'I cannot argue with a person so void of
all charity.'--'I did not expect, my reverend father,' said the duke,
'such a reproach from you, whose whole reasoning was founded on the very
same instance of want of charity to yourself.'

Buckingham's death took place at Helmsby, in Yorkshire, and the
immediate cause was an ague and fever, owing to having sat down on the
wet grass after fox-hunting. Pope has given the following forcible, but
inaccurate account of his last hours, and the place in which they were
passed:--

    'In the worst inn's worst room, with mat half hung,
     The floors of plaster and the walls of dung,
     On once a flock-bed, but repaired with straw,
     With tape-tied curtains never meant to draw;
     The George and Garter dangling from that bed,
     Where tawdry yellow strove with dirty red,
     Great Villiers lies:--alas! how changed from him,
     That life of pleasure and that soul of whim!
     Gallant and gay, in Claverdon's proud alcove,
     The bower of wanton Shrewsbury and love,
     Or, just as gay, at council in a ring
     Of mimic'd statesmen and their merry King.
     No wit to flatter left of all his store,
     No fool to laugh at, which he valued more,
     Then victor of his health, of fortune, friends,
     And fame, this lord of useless thousands ends.'

Far from expiring in the 'worst inn's worst room,' the duke breathed his
last in Kirby Moorside, in a house which had once been the best in the
place. Brian Fairfax, who loved this brilliant reprobate, has left the
only authentic account on record of his last hours.

The night previous to the duke's death Fairfax had received a message
from him desiring him to prepare a bed for him in his house, Bishop
Hill, in York. The next day, however, Fairfax was sent for to his
master, whom he found dying. He was speechless, but gave the afflicted
servant an earnest look of recognition.

The Earl of Arran, son of the Duke of Hamilton, and a gentleman of the
neighbourhood, stood by his bedside. He had then received the Holy
Communion from a neighbouring clergyman of the Established Church. When
the minister came it is said that he inquired of the duke what religion
he professed. 'It is,' replied the dying man, 'an insignificant
question, for I have been a shame and a disgrace to all religions: if
you can do me any good, pray do.' When a Popish priest had been
mentioned to him, he answered vehemently, 'No, no!'

He was in a very low state when Lord Arran had found him. But though
that nobleman saw death in his looks, the duke said he 'felt so well at
heart that he knew he could be in no danger.'

He appeared to have had inflammation in the bowels, which ended in
mortification. He begged of Lord Arran to stay with him. The house seems
to have been in a most miserable condition, for in a letter from Lord
Arran to Dr. Sprat, he says, 'I confess it made my heart bleed to see
the Duke of Buckingham in so pitiful a place, and so bad a condition,
and what made it worse, he was not at all sensible of it, for he thought
in a day or two he should be well; and when we reminded him of his
condition, he said it was not as we apprehended. So I sent for a worthy
gentleman, Mr. Gibson, to be assistant to me in this work; so we jointly
represented his condition to him, who I saw was at first very uneasy;
but I think we should not have discharged the duties of honest men if we
had suffered him to go out of this world without desiring him to prepare
for death.' The duke joined heartily in the beautiful prayers for the
dying, of our Church, and yet there was a sort of selfishness and
indifference to others manifest even at the last.

'Mr. Gibson,' writes Lord Arran, 'asked him if he had made a will, or if
he would declare who was to be his heir? but to the first, he answered
he had made none; and to the last, whoever was named he answered, "No."
First, my lady duchess was named, and then I think almost everybody that
had any relation to him, but his answer always was, "No." I did fully
represent my lady duchess' condition to him, but nothing that was said
to him could make him come to any point.'

In this 'retired corner,' as Lord Arran terms it, did the former wit and
beau, the once brave and fine cavalier, the reckless plotter in
after-life, end his existence. His body was removed to Helmsby Castle,
there to wait the duchess' pleasure, being meantime embalmed. Not one
farthing could his steward produce to defray his burial. His George and
blue ribbon were sent to the King James, with an account of his death.

In Kirby Moorside the following entry in the register of burials
records the event, which is so replete with a singular retributive
justice--so constituted to impress and sadden the mind:--

    'Georges Villus Lord dooke of Buckingham.'

He left scarcely a friend to mourn his life; for to no man had he been
true. He died on the 16th of April according to some accounts; according
to others, on the third of that month, 1687, in the sixty-first year of
his age. His body, after being embalmed, was deposited in the family
vault in Henry VII.'s chapel.[7] He left no children, and his title was
therefore extinct. The Duchess of Buckingham, of whom Brian Fairfax
remarks, 'that if she had none of the vanities, she had none of the
vices of the court,' survived him several years. She died in 1705, at
the age of sixty-six, and was buried in the vault of the Villiers'
family, in the chapel of Henry VII.

Such was the extinction of all the magnificence and intellectual
ascendency that at one time centred in the great and gifted family of
Villiers.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Dryden.]

[Footnote 2: The day after the battle at Kingston, the Duke's estates
were confiscated. (8th July, 1648.)--Nichols's History of
Leicestershire, iii. 213; who also says that the Duke offered marriage
to one of the daughters of Cromwell, but was refused. He went abroad in
1648, but returned with Charles II. to Scotland in 1650, and again
escaped to France after the battle of Worcester, 1651. The sale of the
pictures would seem to have commenced during his first exile.]

[Footnote 3: Sir George Villiers's second wife was Mary, daughter of
Antony Beaumont, Esq., of Glenfield, (Nichols's Leicestershire, iii.
193,) who was son of Wm. Beaumont, Esq., of Cole Orton. She afterwards
was married successively to Sir Wm. Rayner and Sir Thomas Compton, and
was created Countess of Buckingham in 1618.]

[Footnote 4: This incident is taken from Madame Dunois' Memoirs, part i.
p. 86.]

[Footnote 5: The duke became Master of the Horse in 1688; he paid
£20,000 to the Duke of Albemarle for the post.]

[Footnote 6: The duel with the Earl of Shrewsbury took place 17th
January, 1667-8.]

[Footnote 7: Brian Fairfax states, that at his death (the Duke of
Buckingham's) he charged his debts on his estate, leaving much more than
enough to cover them. By the register of Westminster Abbey it appears
that he was buried in Henry VII.'s Chapel, 7th June, 1687.]


    COUNT DE GRAMMONT, ST. EVREMOND, AND LORD ROCHESTER.

  De Grammont's Choice.--His Influence with Turenne.--The Church or
      the Army?--An Adventure at Lyons.--A brilliant Idea.--De
      Grammont's Generosity.--A Horse 'for the
      Cards.'--Knight-Cicisbeism.--De Grammont's first Love.--His
      Witty Attacks on Mazarin.--Anne Lucie de la Mothe
      Houdancourt.--Beset with Snares.--De Grammont's Visits to
      England.--Charles II.--The Court of Charles II.--Introduction
      of Country-dances.--Norman Peculiarities.--St. Evremond, the
      Handsome Norman.--The most Beautiful Woman in Europe.--Hortense
      Mancini's Adventures.--Madame Mazarin's House at
      Chelsea.--Anecdote of Lord Dorset.--Lord Rochester in his
      Zenith.--His Courage and Wit.--Rochester's Pranks in the
      City.--Credulity, Past and Present.--'Dr. Bendo,' and La Belle
      Jennings.--La Triste Heritière.--Elizabeth, Countess of
      Rochester.--Retribution and Reformation.--Conversion.--Beaux
      without Wit.--Little Jermyn.--An Incomparable Beauty.--Anthony
      Hamilton, De Grammont's Biographer.--The Three Courts.--'La
      Belle Hamilton.'--Sir Peter Lely's Portrait of her.--The
      Household Deity of Whitehall.--Who shall have the Calèche?--A
      Chaplain in Livery.--De Grammont's Last Hours.--What might he
      not have been?


It has been observed by a French critic, that the Mémoires de Grammont
afford the truest specimens of French character in our language. To this
it may be added, that the subject of that animated narrative was most
completely French in principle, in intelligence, in wit that hesitated
at nothing, in spirits that were never daunted, and in that incessant
activity which is characteristic of his countrymen. Grammont, it was
said, 'slept neither night nor day;' his life was one scene of incessant
excitement.

His father, supposed to have been the natural son of Henry the Great, of
France, did not suppress that fact, but desired to publish it: for the
morals of his time were so depraved, that it was thought to be more
honourable to be the illegitimate son of a king than the lawful child of
lowlier parents. Born in the Castle of Semeac, on the banks of the
Garonne, the fame of two fair ancestresses, Corisande and Menadame, had
entitled the family of De Grammont to expect in each successive member
an inheritance of beauty. Wit, courage, good nature, a charming address,
and boundless assurance, were the heritage of Philibert de Grammont.
Beauty was not in his possession; good nature, a more popular quality,
he had in abundance:

    'His wit to scandal never stooping,
     His mirth ne'er to buffoonery drooping.'

As Philibert grew up, the two aristocratic professions of France were
presented for his choice: the army, or the church. Neither of these
vocations constitutes now the ambition of the high-born in France: the
church, to a certain extent, retains its _prestige_, but the army, ever
since officers have risen from the ranks, does not comprise the same
class of men as in England. In the reign of Louis XIII., when De
Grammont lived it was otherwise. All political power was vested in the
church. Richelieu was, to all purposes, the ruler of France, the
dictator of Europe; and, with regard to the church, great men, at the
head of military affairs, were daily proving to the world, how much
intelligence could effect with a small numerical power. Young men took
one course or another: the sway of the cabinet, on the one hand, tempted
them to the church; the brilliant exploits of Turenne, and of Condé, on
the other, led them to the camp. It was merely the difference of dress
between the two that constituted the distinction: the soldier might be
as pious as the priest, the priest was sure to be as worldly as the
soldier; the soldier might have ecclesiastical preferment; the priest
sometimes turned out to fight.

Philibert de Grammont chose to be a soldier. He was styled the Chevalier
de Grammont, according to custom, his father being still living. He
fought under Turenne, at the siege of Trino. The army in which he served
was beleaguering that city when the gay youth from the banks of the
Garonne joined it, to aid it not so much by his valour as by the fun,
the raillery, the off-hand anecdote, the ready, hearty companionship
which lightened the soldier's life in the trenches: adieu to
impatience, to despair, even to gravity. The very generals could not
maintain their seriousness when the light-hearted De Grammont uttered a
repartee--

    'Sworn enemy to all long speeches,
       Lively and brilliant, frank and free,
       Author of many a repartee:
       Remember, over all, that he
     Was not renowned for storming breaches.'

Where he came, all was sunshine, yet there breathed not a colder, graver
man than the Calvinist Turenne: modest, serious, somewhat hard, he gave
the young nobility who served under him no quarter in their
shortcomings; but a word, a look, from De Grammont could make him,
_malgrê lui_, unbend. The gay chevalier's white charger's prancing, its
gallant rider foremost in every peril, were not forgotten in
after-times, when De Grammont, in extreme old age, chatted over the
achievements and pleasures of his youth.

Amongst those who courted his society in Turenne's army was Matta, a
soldier of simple manners, hard habits, and handsome person, joined to a
candid, honest nature. He soon persuaded De Grammont to share his
quarters, and there they gave splendid entertainments, which,
Frenchman-like, De Grammont paid for out of the successes of the
gaming-tables. But chances were against them; the two officers were at
the mercy of their _maitre d'hôtel_, who asked for money. One day, when
De Grammont came home sooner than usual, he found Matta fast asleep.
Whilst De Grammont stood looking at him, he awoke, and burst into a
violent fit of laughter.

'What is the matter?' cried the chevalier.

'Faith, chevalier,' answered Matta, 'I was dreaming that we had sent
away our _maitre d'hôtel_, and were resolved to live like our neighbours
for the rest of the campaign.'

'Poor fellow!' cried De Grammont. 'So, you are knocked down at once:
what would have become of you if you had been reduced to the situation I
was in at Lyons, four days before I came here? Come, I will tell you all
about it.'

'Begin a little farther back,' cried Matta, 'and tell me about the
manner in which you first paid your respects to Cardinal Richelieu. Lay
aside your pranks as a child, your genealogy, and all your ancestors
together; you cannot know anything about them.'

'Well,' replied De Grammont, 'it was my father's own fault that he was
not Henry IV.'s son: see what the Grammonts have lost by this
crossed-grained fellow! Faith, we might have walked before the Counts de
Vendôme at this very moment.'

Then he went on to relate how he had been sent to Pau, to the college,
to be brought up to the church, with an old servant to act both as his
valet and his guardian. How his head was too full of gaming to learn
Latin. How they gave him his rank at college, as the youth of quality,
when he did not deserve it; how he travelled up to Paris to his brother
to be polished, and went to court in the character of an abbé. 'Ah,
Matta, you know the kind of dress then in vogue. No, I would not change
my dress, but I consented to draw over it a cassock. I had the finest
head of hair in the world, well curled and powdered above my cassock,
and below were my white buskins and spurs.'

Even Richelieu, that hypocrite, he went on to relate, could not help
laughing at the parti-coloured costume, sacerdotal above, soldier-like
below; but the cardinal was greatly offended--not with the absence of
decorum, but with the dangerous wit, that could laugh in public at the
cowl and shaven crown, points which constituted the greatest portion of
Richelieu's sanctity.

De Grammont's brother, however, thus addressed the Chevalier:--'Well, my
little parson,' said he, as they went home, 'you have acted your part to
perfection; but now you must choose your career. If you like to stick to
the church, you will possess great revenues, and nothing to do; if you
choose to go into the army, you will risk your arm or your leg, but in
time you may be a major-general with a wooden leg and a glass eye, the
spectacle of an indifferent, ungrateful court. Make your choice.'

The choice, Philibert went on to relate, was made. For the good of his
soul, he renounced the church, but for his own advantage, he kept his
abbacy. This was not difficult in days when secular abbés were common;
nothing would induce him to change his resolution of being a soldier.
Meantime he was perfecting his accomplishments as a fine gentleman, one
of the requisites for which was a knowledge of all sorts of games. No
matter that his mother was miserable at his decision. Had her son been
an abbé, she thought he would have become a saint: nevertheless, when he
returned home, with the air of a courtier and a man of the world, boy as
he was, and the very impersonation of what might then be termed _la
jeune France_, she was so enchanted with him that she consented to his
going to the wars, attended again by Brinon, his valet, equerry, and
Mentor in one. Next in De Grammont's narrative came his adventure at
Lyons, where he spent the 200 louis his mother had given Brinon for him,
in play, and very nearly broke the poor old servant's heart; where he
had duped a horse-dealer; and he ended by proposing plans, similarly
_honourable_, to be adopted for their present emergencies.

The first step was to go to head-quarters, to dine with a certain Count
de Cameran, a Savoyard, and invite him to supper. Here Matta interposed.
'Are you mad?' he exclaimed. 'Invite him to supper! we have neither
money nor credit; we are ruined; and to save us you intend to give a
supper!'

'Stupid fellow!' cried De Grammont. 'Cameran plays at quinze: so do I:
we want money. He has more than he knows what to do with: we give a
supper, he pays for it. However,' he added, 'it is necessary to take
certain precautions. You command the Guards: when night comes on, order
your _Sergent-de-place_ to have fifteen or twenty men under arms, and
let them lay themselves flat on the ground between this and
head-quarters. Most likely we shall win this stupid fellow's money. Now
the Piedmontese are suspicious, and he commands the Horse. Now, you
know, Matta, you cannot hold your tongue, and are very likely to let out
some joke that will vex him. Supposing he takes it into his head that he
is being cheated? He has always eight or ten horsemen: we must be
prepared.'

'Embrace me!' cried Matta, 'embrace me! for thou art unparalleled. I
thought you only meant to prepare a pack of cards, and some false dice.
But the idea of protecting a man who plays at quinze by a detachment of
foot is excellent: thine own, dear Chevalier.'

Thus, like some of Dumas' heroes, hating villany as a matter of course,
but being by no means ashamed to acknowledge it, the Piedmontese was
asked to supper. He came. Nevertheless, in the midst of the affair, when
De Cameran was losing as fast as he could, Matta's conscience touched
him: he awoke from a deep sleep, heard the dice shaking, saw the poor
Savoyard losing, and advised him to play no more.

'Don't you know, Count, you _cannot_ win?'

'Why?' asked the Count.

'Why, faith, because we are cheating you,' was the reply.

The Chevalier turned round impatiently, 'Sieur Matta,' he cried, 'do you
suppose it can be any amusement to Monsieur le Comte to be plagued with
your ill-timed jests? For my part, I am so weary of the game, that I
swear by Jupiter I can scarcely play any more.' Nothing is more
distasteful to a losing gamester than a hint of leaving off; so the
Count entreated the Chevalier to continue, and assured him that
'Monsieur Matta might say what he pleased, for it did not give him the
least uneasiness to continue.'

The Chevalier allowed the Count to play upon credit, and that act of
courtesy was taken very kindly: the dupe lost 1,500 pistoles, which he
paid the next morning, when Matta was sharply reprimanded for his
interference.

'Faith,' he answered, 'it was a point of conscience with me; besides, it
would have given me pleasure to have seen his Horse engaged with my
Infantry, if he had taken anything amiss.'

The sum thus gained set the spendthrifts up; and De Grammont satisfied
his conscience by giving it away, to a certain extent, in charity. It is
singular to perceive in the history of this celebrated man that moral
taint of character which the French have never lost: this total absence
of right reasoning on all points of conduct, is coupled in our Gallic
neighbours with the greatest natural benevolence, with a generosity only
kept back by poverty, with impulsive, impressionable dispositions, that
require the guidance of a sound Protestant faith to elevate and correct
them.

The Chevalier hastened, it is related, to find out distressed comrades,
officers who had lost their baggage, or who had been ruined by gaming;
or soldiers who had been disabled in the trenches; and his manner of
relieving them was as graceful and as delicate as the bounty he
distributed was welcome. He was the darling of the army. The poor
soldier knew him personally, and adored him; the general was sure to
meet him in the scenes of action, and to seek his company in those of
security.

And, having thus retrieved his finances, the gay-hearted Chevalier used,
henceforth, to make De Cameran go halves with him in all games in which
the odds were in his own favour. Even the staid Calvinist, Turenne, who
had not then renounced, as he did in after-life, the Protestant faith,
delighted in the off-hand merriment of the Chevalier. It was towards the
end of the siege of Trino, that De Grammont went to visit that general
in some new quarters, where Turenne received him, surrounded by fifteen
or twenty officers. According to the custom of the day, cards were
introduced, and the general asked the Chevalier to play.

'Sir,' returned the young soldier, 'my tutor taught me that when a man
goes to see his friends it is neither prudent to leave his own money
behind him nor civil to take theirs.'

'Well,' answered Turenne, 'I can tell you you will find neither much
money nor deep play among us; but that it cannot be said that we allowed
you to go off without playing, suppose we each of us stake a horse.'

De Grammont agreed, and, lucky as ever, won from the officers some
fifteen or sixteen horses, by way of a joke; but seeing several faces
pale, he said, 'Gentlemen, I should be sorry to see you go away from
your general's quarters on foot; it will do very well if you all send me
to-morrow your horses, except one, which I give for the cards.'

The _valet-de-chambre_ thought he was jesting. 'I am serious,' cried
the Chevalier. '_Parole d'honneur_ I give a horse for the cards; and
what's more, take which you please, only don't take mine.'

'Faith,' said Turenne, pleased with the novelty of the affair, 'I don't
believe a horse was ever before given for the cards.'

Young people, and indeed old people, can perhaps hardly remember the
time when, even in England, money used to be put under the candlesticks
'for the cards,' as it was said, but in fact for the servants, who
waited. Winner or loser, the tax was to be paid, and this custom of
vails was also prevalent in France.

Trino at last surrendered, and the two friends rushed from their
campaigning life to enjoy the gaieties of Turin, at that time the centre
of pleasure; and resolved to perfect their characters as military
heroes--by falling in love, if respectably, well; if disreputably, well
too, perhaps all the more agreeable, and venturesome, as they thought.

The court of Turin was then presided over by the Duchess of Savoy,
_Madame Royale_, as she was called in France, the daughter of Henry IV.
of France, the sister of Henrietta Maria of England. She was a woman of
talent and spirit, worthy of her descent, and had certain other
qualities which constituted a point of resemblance between her and her
father; she was, like him, more fascinating than respectable.

The customs of Turin were rather Italian than French. At that time
every lady had her professed lover, who wore the liveries of his
mistress, bore her arms, and sometimes assumed her very name. The
office of the lover was, never to quit his lady in public, and never
to approach her in private: to be on all occasions her esquire. In the
tournament her chosen knight-cicisbeo came forth with his coat, his
housings, his very lance distinguished with the cyphers and colours of
her who had condescended to invest him with her preference. It was the
remnant of chivalry that authorized this custom; but of chivalry
demoralized--chivalry denuded of her purity, her respect, the chivalry
of corrupted Italy, not of that which, perhaps, fallaciously, we
assign to the earlier ages.

Grammont and Matta enlisted themselves at once in the service of two
beauties. Grammont chose for the queen of beauty, who was to 'rain
influence' upon him, Mademoiselle de St. Germain, who was in the very
bloom of youth. She was French, and, probably, an ancestress of that
all-accomplished Comte de St. Germain, whose exploits so dazzled
successive European courts, and the fullest account of whom, in all its
brilliant colours, yet tinged with mystery, is given in the Memoirs of
Maria Antoinette, by the Marquise d'Adhémar, her lady of the bed-chamber.

The lovely object of De Grammont's 'first love' was a radiant brunette
belle, who took no pains to set off by art the charms of nature. She had
some defects: her black and sparkling eyes were small; her forehead, by
no means 'as pure as moonlight sleeping upon snow,' was not fair,
neither were her hands; neither had she small feet--but her form
generally was perfect; her elbows had a peculiar elegance in them; and
in old times to hold the elbow out well, and yet not to stick it out,
was a point of early discipline. Then her glossy black hair set off a
superb neck and shoulders; and, moreover, she was gay, full of mirth,
life, complaisance, perfect in all the acts of politeness, and
invariable in her gracious and graceful bearing.

Matta admired her; but De Grammont ordered him to attach himself to the
Marquise de Senantes, a married beauty of the court; and Matta, in full
faith that all Grammont said and did was sure to succeed, obeyed his
friend. The Chevalier had fallen in love with Mademoiselle de St.
Germain at first sight, and instantly arrayed himself in her colour,
which was green, whilst Matta wore blue, in compliment to the marquise;
and they entered the next day upon duty, at La Venerie, where the
Duchess of Savoy gave a grand entertainment. De Grammont, with his
native tact and unscrupulous mendacity, played his part to perfection;
but his comrade, Matta, committed a hundred solecisms. The very second
time he honoured the marquise with his attentions, he treated her as if
she were his humble servant: when he pressed her hand, it was a pressure
that almost made her scream. When he ought to have ridden by the side of
her coach, he set off, on seeing a hare start from her form; then he
talked to her of partridges when he should have been laying himself at
her feet. Both these affairs ended as might have been expected.
Mademoiselle de St. Germain was diverted by Grammont, yet he could not
touch her heart. Her aim was to marry; his was merely to attach himself
to a reigning beauty. They parted without regret; and he left the then
remote court of Turin for the gayer scenes of Paris and Versailles. Here
he became as celebrated for his alertness in play as for his readiness
in repartee; as noted for his intrigues, as he afterwards was for his
bravery.

Those were stirring days in France. Anne of Austria, then in her
maturity, was governed by Mazarin, the most artful of ministers, an
Italian to the very heart's core, with a love of amassing wealth
engrafted in his supple nature that amounted to a monomania. The whole
aim of his life was gain. Though gaming was at its height, Mazarin never
played for amusement; he played to enrich himself; and when he played,
he cheated.

The Chevalier de Grammont was now rich, and Mazarin worshipped the rich.
He was witty; and his wit soon procured him admission into the clique
whom the wily Mazarin collected around him in Paris. Whatever were De
Grammont's faults, he soon perceived those of Mazarin; he detected, and
he detested, the wily, grasping, serpent-like attributes of the Italian;
he attacked him on every occasion on which a 'wit combat' was possible:
he gracefully showed Mazarin off in his true colours. With ease he
annihilated him, metaphorically, at his own table. Yet De Grammont had
something to atone for: he had been the adherent and companion in arms
of Condé; he had followed that hero to Sens, to Nordlingen, to Fribourg,
and had returned to his allegiance to the young king, Louis XIV., only
because he wished to visit the court at Paris. Mazarin's policy,
however, was that of pardon and peace--of duplicity and treachery--and
the Chevalier seemed to be forgiven on his return to Paris, even by Anne
of Austria. Nevertheless, De Grammont never lost his independence; and
he could boast in after-life that he owed the two great cardinals who
had governed France nothing that they could have refused. It was true
that Richelieu had left him his abbacy; but he could not refuse it to
one of De Grammont's rank. From Mazarin he had gained nothing except
what he had won at play.

After Mazarin's death the Chevalier intended to secure the favour of the
king, Louis XIV., to whom, as he rejoiced to find, court alone was now
to be paid. He had now somewhat rectified his distinctions between right
and wrong, and was resolved to have no regard for favour unless
supported by merit; he determined to make himself beloved by the
courtiers of Louis, and feared by the ministers; to dare to undertake
anything to do good, and to engage in nothing at the expense of
innocence. He still continued to be eminently successful in play, of
which he did not perceive the evil, nor allow the wickedness; but he was
unfortunate in love, in which he was equally unscrupulous and more rash
than at the gaming-table.

Among the maids of honour of Anne of Austria was a young lady named Anne
Lucie de la Mothe Houdancourt. Louis, though not long married, showed
some symptoms of admiration for this _débutante_ in the wicked ways of
the court.

Gay, radiant in the bloom of youth and innocence, the story of this
young girl presents an instance of the unhappiness which, without guilt,
the sins of others bring upon even the virtuous. The queen-dowager, Anne
of Austria, was living at St. Germains when Mademoiselle de la Mothe
Houdancourt was received into her household. The Duchess de Noailles, at
that time _Grande Maitresse_, exercised a vigilant and kindly rule over
the maids of honour; nevertheless, she could not prevent their being
liable to the attentions of Louis: she forbade him however to loiter, or
indeed even to be seen in the room appropriated to the young damsels
under her charge; and when attracted by the beauty of Annie Lucie de la
Mothe, Louis was obliged to speak to her through a hole behind a clock
which stood in a corridor.

Annie Lucie, notwithstanding this apparent encouragement of the king's
addresses, was perfectly indifferent to his admiration. She was secretly
attached to the Marquis de Richelieu, who had, or pretended to have,
honourable intentions towards her. Everything was tried, but tried in
vain, to induce the poor girl to give up all her predilections for the
sake of a guilty distinction--that of being the king's mistress: even
her _mother_ reproached her with her coldness. A family council was
held, in hopes of convincing her of her wilfulness, and Annie Lucie was
bitterly reproached by her female relatives; but her heart still clung
to the faithless Marquis de Richelieu, who, however, when he saw that a
royal lover was his rival, meanly withdrew.

Her fall seemed inevitable; but the firmness of Anne of Austria saved
her from her ruin. That queen insisted on her being sent away; and she
resisted even the entreaties of the queen, her daughter-in-law, and the
wife of Louis XIV.; who, for some reasons not explained, entreated that
the young lady might remain at the court. Anne was sent away in a sort
of disgrace to the convent of Chaïllot, which was then considered to be
quite out of Paris, and sufficiently secluded to protect her from
visitors. According to another account, a letter full of reproaches,
which she wrote to the Marquis de Richelieu upbraiding him for his
desertion, had been intercepted.

It was to this young lady that De Grammont, who was then, in the very
centre of the court, 'the type of fashion and the mould of form,'
attached himself to her as an admirer who could condescend to honour
with his attentions those whom the king pursued. The once gay girl was
thus beset with snares: on one side was the king, whose disgusting
preference was shown when in her presence by sighs and sentiment; on the
other, De Grammont, whose attentions to her were importunate, but failed
to convince her that he was in love; on the other was the time-serving,
heartless De Richelieu, whom her reason condemned, but whom her heart
cherished. She soon showed her distrust and dislike of De Grammont: she
treated him with contempt; she threatened him with exposure, yet he
would not desist: then she complained of him to the king. It was then
that he perceived that though love could equalize conditions, it could
not act in the same way between rivals. He was commanded to leave the
court. Paris, therefore, Versailles, Fontainbleau, and St. Germains were
closed against this gay Chevalier; and how could he live elsewhere?
Whither could he go? Strange to say, he had a vast fancy to behold the
man who, stained with the crime of regicide, and sprung from the people,
was receiving magnificent embassies from continental nations, whilst
Charles II. was seeking security in his exile from the power of Spain in
the Low Countries. He was eager to see the Protector, Cromwell. But
Cromwell, though in the height of his fame when beheld by De
Grammont--though feared at home and abroad--was little calculated to win
suffrages from a mere man of pleasure like De Grammont. The court, the
city, the country, were in his days gloomy, discontented, joyless: a
proscribed nobility was the sure cause of the thin though few
festivities of the now lugubrious gallery of Whitehall. Puritanism drove
the old jovial churchmen into retreat, and dispelled every lingering
vestige of ancient hospitality: long graces and long sermons,
sanctimonious manners, and grim, sad faces, and sad-coloured dresses
were not much to De Grammont's taste; he returned to France, and
declared that he had gained no advantage from his travels. Nevertheless,
either from choice or necessity, he made another trial of the damps and
fogs of England.[8]

When he again visited our country, Charles II. had been two years seated
on the throne of his father. Everything was changed, and the British
court was in its fullest splendour; whilst the rejoicings of the people
of England at the Restoration were still resounding through the land.

If one could include royal personages in the rather gay than worthy
category of the 'wits and beaux of society,' Charles II. should figure
at their head. He was the most agreeable companion, and the worst king
imaginable. In the first place he was, as it were, a citizen of the
world: tossed about by fortune from his early boyhood; a witness at the
tender age of twelve of the battle of Edge Hill, where the celebrated
Harvey had charge of him and of his brother. That inauspicious
commencement of a wandering life had perhaps been amongst the least of
his early trials. The fiercest was his long residence as a sort of royal
prisoner in Scotland. A travelled, humbled man, he came back to England
with a full knowledge of men and manners, in the prime of his life,
with spirits unbroken by adversity, with a heart unsoured by that 'stern
nurse,' with a gaiety that was always kindly, never uncourteous, ever
more French than English; far more natural did he appear as the son of
Henrietta Maria than as the offspring of the thoughtful Charles.

In person, too, the king was then agreeable, though rather what the
French would call _distingué_ than dignified; he was, however, tall, and
somewhat elegant, with a long French face, which in his boyhood was
plump and full about the lower part of the cheeks, but now began to sink
into that well-known, lean, dark, flexible countenance, in which we do
not, however, recognize the gaiety of the man whose very name brings
with it associations of gaiety, politeness, good company, and all the
attributes of a first-rate wit, except the almost inevitable ill-nature.
There is in the physiognomy of Charles II. that melancholy which is
often observable in the faces of those who are mere men of pleasure.

De Grammont found himself completely in his own sphere at Whitehall,
where the habits were far more French than English. Along that stately
Mall, overshadowed with umbrageous trees, which retains--and it is to be
hoped ever will retain--the old name of the 'Birdcage Walk,' one can
picture to oneself the king walking so fast that no one can keep up with
him; yet stopping from time to time to chat with some acquaintances. He
is walking to Duck Island, which is full of his favourite water-fowl,
and of which he has given St. Evremond the government. How pleasant is
his talk to those who attend him as he walks along; how well the quality
of good-nature is shown in his love of dumb animals: how completely he
is a boy still, even in that brown wig of many curls, and with the
George and Garter on his breast! Boy, indeed, for he is followed by a
litter of young spaniels: a little brindled greyhound frisks beside him;
it is for that he is ridiculed by the '_psalm_' sung at the Calves' Head
Club: these favourites were cherished to his death.

    'His dogs would sit in council boards
     Like judges in their seats:
     We question much which had most sense,
     The master or the curs.'

Then what capital stories Charles would tell, as he unbent at night
amid the faithful, though profligate, companions of his exile! He told
his anecdotes, it is true, over and over again, yet they were always
embellished with some fresh touch--like the repetition of a song which
has been encored on the stage. Whether from his inimitable art, or from
his royalty, we leave others to guess, but his stories bore repetition
again and again: they were amusing, and even novel to the very last.

To this seducing court did De Grammont now come. It was a delightful
exchange from the endless ceremonies and punctilios of the region over
which Louis XIV. presided. Wherever Charles was, his palace appeared to
resemble a large hospitable house--sometimes town, sometimes country--in
which every one did as he liked; and where distinctions of rank were
kept up as a matter of convenience, but were only valued on that score.

In other respects, Charles had modelled his court very much on the plan
of that of Louis XIV., which he had admired for its gaiety and spirit.
Corneille, Racine, Molière, Boileau, were encouraged by _le Grand
Monarque_. Wycherley and Dryden were attracted by Charles to celebrate
the festivities, and to amuse the great and the gay. In various points
De Grammont found a resemblance. The queen-consort, Catherine of
Braganza, was as complacent to her husband's vices as the queen of
Louis. These royal ladies were merely first sultanas, and had no right,
it was thought, to feel jealousy, or to resent neglect. Each returning
sabbath saw Whitehall lighted up, and heard the tabors sound for a
_branle_, (Anglicised 'brawl'). This was a dance which mixed up
everybody, and called a brawl, from the foot being shaken to a quick
time. Gaily did his Majesty perform it, leading to the hot exercise Anne
Hyde, Duchess of York, stout and homely, and leaving Lady Castlemaine to
his son, the Duke of Monmouth. Then Charles, with ready grace, would
begin the coranto, taking a single lady in this dance along the gallery.
Lords and ladies one after another followed, and 'very noble,' writes
Pepys, 'and great pleasure it was to see.' Next came the country dances,
introduced by Mary, Countess of Buckingham, the grandmother of the
graceful duke who is moving along the gallery;--and she invented those
once popular dances in order to introduce, with less chance of failure,
her rustic country cousins, who could not easily be taught to carry
themselves well in the brawl, or to step out gracefully in the coranto,
both of which dances required practice and time. In all these dances the
king shines the most, and dances much better than his brother the Duke
of York.

In these gay scenes De Grammont met with the most fashionable belles of
the court: fortunately for him they all spoke French tolerably; and he
quickly made himself welcome amongst even the few--and few indeed there
were--who plumed themselves upon untainted reputations. Hitherto those
French noblemen who had presented themselves in England had been poor
and absurd. The court had been thronged with a troop of impertinent
Parisian coxcombs, who had pretended to despise everything English, and
who treated the natives as if they were foreigners in their own country.
De Grammont, on the contrary, was familiar with every one: he ate, he
drank, he lived, in short, according to the custom of the country that
hospitably received him, and accorded him the more respect, because they
had been insulted by others.

He now introduced the _petits soupers_, which have never been understood
anywhere so well as in France, and which are even there dying out to
make way for the less social and more expensive dinner; but, perhaps, he
would even here have been unsuccessful, had it not been for the society
and advice of the famous St. Evremond, who at this time was exiled in
France, and took refuge in England.

This celebrated and accomplished man had some points of resemblance with
De Grammont. Like him, he had been originally intended for the church;
like him he had turned to the military profession; he was an ensign
before he was full sixteen; and had a company of foot given him after
serving two or three campaigns. Like De Grammont, he owed the facilities
of his early career to his being the descendant of an ancient and
honourable family. St. Evremond was the Seigneur of St Denis le Guast,
in Normandy, where he was born.

Both these sparkling wits of society had at one time, and, in fact, at
the same period, served under the great Condé; both were pre-eminent,
not only in literature, but in games of chance. St. Evremond was famous
at the University of Caen, in which he studied, for his fencing; and
'St. Evremond's pass' was well known to swordsmen of his time;--both
were gay and satirical; neither of them pretended to rigid morals; but
both were accounted men of honour among their fellow-men of pleasure.
They were graceful, kind, generous.

In person St. Evremond had the advantage, being a Norman--a race which
combines the handsomest traits of an English countenance with its blond
hair, blue eyes, and fair skin. Neither does the slight tinge of the
Gallic race detract from the attractions of a true, well-born Norman,
bred up in that province which is called the Court-end of France, and
polished in the capital. Your Norman is hardy, and fond of field-sports:
like the Englishman, he is usually fearless; generous, but, unlike the
English, somewhat crafty. You may know him by the fresh colour, the
peculiar blue eye, long and large; by his joyousness and look of health,
gathered up in his own marshy country, for the Norman is well fed, and
lives on the produce of rich pasture-land, with cheapness and plenty
around him. And St. Evremond was one of the handsomest specimens of this
fine locality (so mixed up as it is with _us_); and his blue eyes
sparkled with humour; his beautifully-turned mouth was all sweetness;
and his noble forehead, the whiteness of which was set off by thick dark
eyebrows, was expressive of his great intelligence, until a wen grew
between his eyebrows, and so changed all the expression of his face that
the Duchess of Mazarin used to call him the 'Old Satyr.' St. Evremond
was also Norman in other respects: he called himself a thorough Roman
Catholic, yet he despised the superstitions of his church, and prepared
himself for death without them. When asked by an ecclesiastic sent
expressly from the court of Florence to attend his death-bed, if he
'would be reconciled,' he answered, 'With all my heart; I would fain be
reconciled to my stomach, which no longer performs its usual
functions.' And his talk, we are told, during the fortnight that
preceded his death, was not regret for a life we should, in seriousness,
call misspent, but because partridges and pheasants no longer suited his
condition, and he was obliged to be reduced to boiled meats. No one,
however, could tell what might also be passing in his heart. We cannot
always judge of a life, any more than of a drama, by its last scene; but
this is certain, that in an age of blasphemy St. Evremond could not
endure to hear religion insulted by ridicule. 'Common decency,' said
this man of the world, 'and a due regard to our fellow-creatures, would
not permit it.' He did not, it seems, refer his displeasure to a higher
source--to the presence of the Omniscient,--who claims from us all not
alone the tribute of our poor frail hearts in serious moments, but the
deep reverence of every thought in the hours of careless pleasure.

It was now St. Evremond who taught De Grammont to collect around him the
wits of that court, so rich in attractions, so poor in honour and
morality. The object of St. Evremond's devotion, though he had, at the
æra of the Restoration, passed his fiftieth year, was Hortense Mancini,
once the richest heiress, and still the most beautiful woman in Europe,
and a niece, on her mother's side, of Cardinal Mazarin. Hortense had
been educated, after the age of six, in France. She was Italian in her
accomplishments, in her reckless, wild disposition, opposed to that of
the French, who are generally calculating and wary, even in their vices:
she was Italian in the style of her surpassing beauty, and French to the
core in her principles. Hortense, at the age of thirteen, had been
married to Armand Duc de Meilleraye and Mayenne, who had fallen so
desperately in love with this beautiful child, that he declared 'if he
did not marry her he should die in three months.' Cardinal Mazarin,
although he had destined his niece Mary to this alliance, gave his
consent on condition that the duke should take the name of Mazarin. The
cardinal died a year after this marriage, leaving his niece Hortense the
enormous fortune of £1,625,000; yet she died in the greatest
difficulties, and her corpse was seized by her creditors.

The Duc de Mayenne proved to be a fanatic, who used to waken his wife
in the dead of the night to hear his visions; who forbade his child to
be nursed on fast-days; and who believed himself to be inspired. After
six years of wretchedness poor Hortense petitioned for a separation and
a division of property. She quitted her husband's home and took refuge
first in a nunnery, where she showed her unbelief, or her irreverence,
by mixing ink with holy-water, that the poor nuns might black their
faces when they crossed themselves; or, in concert with Madame de
Courcelles, another handsome married woman, she used to walk through the
dormitories in the dead of night, with a number of little dogs barking
at their heels; then she filled two great chests that were over the
dormitories with water, which ran over, and, penetrating through the
chinks of the floor, wet the holy sisters in their beds. At length all
this sorry gaiety was stopped by a decree that Hortense was to return to
the Palais Mazarin; and to remain there until the suit for a separation
should be decided. That the result should be favourable was doubtful:
therefore, one fine night in June, 1667, Hortense escaped. She dressed
herself in male attire, and, attended by a female servant, managed to
get through the gate at Paris, and to enter a carriage. Then she fled to
Switzerland; and, had not her flight been shared by the Chevalier de
Rohan, one of the handsomest men in France, one could hardly have blamed
an escape from a half-lunatic husband. She was only twenty-eight when,
after various adventures, she came in all her unimpaired beauty to
England. Charles was captivated by her charms, and, touched by her
misfortunes, he settled on her a pension of £4,000 a year, and gave her
rooms in St. James's. Waller sang her praise:--

    'When through the world fair Mazarine had run,
     Bright as her fellow-traveller, the sun:
     Hither at length the Roman eagle flies,
     As the last triumph of her conquering eyes.'

If Hortense failed to carry off from the Duchess of Portsmouth--then the
star of Whitehall--the heart of Charles, she found, at all events, in
St. Evremond, one of those French, platonic, life-long friends, who, as
Chateaubriand worshipped Madame Récamier, adored to the last the exiled
niece of Mazarin. Every day, when in her old age and his, the warmth of
love had subsided into the serener affection of pitying, and yet
admiring friendship, St. Evremond was seen, a little old man in a black
coif, carried along Pall Mall in a sedan chair, to the apartment of
Madame Mazarin, in St. James's. He always took with him a pound of
butter, made in his own little dairy, for her breakfast. When De
Grammont was installed at the court of Charles, Hortense was, however,
in her prime. Her house at Chelsea, then a country village, was famed
for its society and its varied pleasures. St. Evremond has so well
described its attractions that his words should be literally given.
'Freedom and discretion are equally to be found there. Every one is made
more at home than in his own house, and treated with more respect than
at court. It is true that there are frequent disputes there, but they
are those of knowledge and not of anger. There is play there, but it is
inconsiderable, and only practised for its amusement. You discover in no
countenance the fear of losing, nor concern for what is lost. Some are
so disinterested that they are reproached for expressing joy when they
lose, and regret when they win. Play is followed by the most excellent
repasts in the world. There you will find whatever delicacy is brought
from France, and whatever is curious from the Indies. Even the commonest
meats have the rarest relish imparted to them. There is neither a plenty
which gives a notion of extravagance, nor a frugality that discovers
penury or meanness.'

What an assemblage it must have been! Here lolls Charles, Lord
Buckhurst, afterwards Lord Dorset, the laziest, in matters of business
or court advancement--the boldest, in point of frolic and pleasure, of
all the wits and beaux of his time. His youth had been full of adventure
and of dissipation. 'I know not how it is,' said Wilmot, Lord Rochester,
'but my Lord Dorset can do anything, and is never to blame.' He had, in
truth, a heart; he could bear to hear others praised; he despised the
arts of courtiers; he befriended the unhappy; he was the most engaging
of men in manners, the most loveable and accomplished of human beings;
at once poet, philanthropist, and wit; he was also possessed of
chivalric notions, and of daring courage.

Like his royal master, Lord Dorset had travelled; and when made a
gentleman of the bedchamber to Charles II., he was not unlike his
sovereign in other traits; so full of gaiety, so high-bred, so lax, so
courteous, so convivial, that no supper was complete without him: no
circle 'the right thing,' unless Buckhurst, as he was long called, was
there to pass the bottle round, and to keep every one in good-humour.
Yet, he had misspent a youth in reckless immorality, and had even been
in Newgate on a charge, a doubtful charge it is true, of highway robbery
and murder, but had been found guilty of manslaughter only. He was again
mixed up in a disgraceful affair with Sir Charles Sedley. When brought
before Sir Robert Hyde, then Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, his name
having been mentioned, the judge inquired whether that was the Buckhurst
lately tried for robbery? and when told it was, he asked him whether he
had so soon forgotten his deliverance at that time: and whether it would
not better become him to have been at his prayers begging God's
forgiveness than to come into such courses again?

The reproof took effect, and Buckhurst became what was then esteemed a
steady man; he volunteered and fought gallantly in the fleet under James
Duke of York: and he completed his reform, to all outward show, by
marrying Lady Falmouth.[9] Buckhurst, in society, the most good-tempered
of men, was thus referred to by Prior, in his poetical epistle to
Fleetwood Sheppard:--

    'When crowding folks, with strange ill faces,
     Were making legs, and begging places:
     And some with patents, some with merit,
     Tired out my good Lord Dorset's spirit.'

Yet his pen was full of malice, whilst his heart was tender to all.
Wilmot, Lord Rochester, cleverly said of him:--

    'For pointed satire I would Buckhurst chuse,
     The best good man with the worst-natured muse.'

Still more celebrated as a beau and wit of his time, was John Wilmot,
Lord Rochester. He was the son of Lord Wilmot, the cavalier who so
loyally attended Charles II. after the Battle of Worcester; and, as, the
offspring of that royalist, was greeted by Lord Clarendon, then
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, when he took his degree as
Master of Arts, with a kiss.[10] The young nobleman then travelled,
according to custom; and then most unhappily for himself and for others,
whom he corrupted by his example, he presented himself at the court of
Charles II. He was at this time a youth of eighteen, and one of the
handsomest persons of his age. The face of Buckhurst was hard and plain;
that of De Grammont had little to redeem it but its varying
intelligence; but the countenance of the young Earl of Rochester was
perfectly symmetrical: it was of a long oval, with large, thoughtful,
sleepy eyes; the eyebrows arched and high above them; the brow, though
concealed by the curls of the now modest wig, was high and smooth; the
nose, delicately shaped, somewhat aquiline; the mouth full, but
perfectly beautiful, was set off by a round and well-formed chin. Such
was Lord Rochester in his zenith; and as he came forward on state
occasions, his false light curls hanging down on his shoulders--a
cambric kerchief loosely tied, so as to let the ends, worked in point,
fall gracefully down: his scarlet gown in folds over a suit of light
steel armour--for men had become carpet knights then, and the coat of
mail worn by the brave cavaliers was now less warlike, and was mixed up
with robes, ruffles, and rich hose--and when in this guise he appeared
at Whitehall, all admired; and Charles was enchanted with the
simplicity, the intelligence, and modesty of one who was then an
ingenuous youth, with good aspirations, and a staid and decorous
demeanour.

Woe to Lady Rochester--woe to the mother who trusted her son's innocence
in that vitiated court! Lord Rochester forms one of the many instances
we daily behold, that it is those most tenderly cared for, who often
fall most deeply, as well as most early, into temptation. He soon lost
every trace of virtue--of principle, even of deference to received
notions of propriety. For a while there seemed hopes that he would not
wholly fall: courage was his inheritance, and he distinguished himself
in 1665, when as a volunteer, he went in quest of the Dutch East India
fleet, and served with heroic gallantry under Lord Sandwich. And when he
returned to court, there was a partial improvement in his conduct. He
even looked back upon his former indiscretions with horror: he had now
shared in the realities of life: he had grasped a high and honourable
ambition; but he soon fell away--soon became almost a castaway. 'For
five years,' he told Bishop Burnet, when on his death-bed, 'I was never
sober.' His reputation as a wit must rest, in the present day, chiefly
upon productions which have long since been condemned as unreadable.
Strange to say, when not under the influence of wine, he was a constant
student of classical authors, perhaps the worst reading for a man of his
tendency: all that was satirical and impure attracting him most.
Boileau, among French writers, and Cowley among the English, were his
favourite authors. He also read many books of physic; for long before
thirty his constitution was so broken by his life, that he turned his
attention to remedies, and to medical treatment; and it is remarkable
how many men of dissolute lives take up the same sort of reading, in the
vain hope of repairing a course of dissolute living. As a writer, his
style was at once forcible and lively; as a companion, he was wildly
vivacious: madly, perilously, did he outrage decency, insult virtue,
profane religion. Charles II. liked him on first acquaintance, for
Rochester was a man of the most finished and fascinating manners; but at
length there came a coolness, and the witty courtier was banished from
Whitehall. Unhappily for himself, he was recalled, and commanded to wait
in London until his majesty should choose to readmit him into his
presence.

Disguises and practical jokes were the fashion of the day. The use of
the mask, which was put down by proclamation soon after the accession of
Queen Anne, favoured a series of pranks with which Lord Rochester,
during the period of his living concealed in London, diverted himself.
The success of his scheme was perfect. He established himself, since he
could not go to Whitehall, in the City. 'His first design,' De Grammont
relates, 'was only to be initiated into the mysteries of those fortunate
and happy inhabitants; that is to say, by changing his name and dress,
to gain admittance to their feasts and entertainments.... As he was able
to adapt himself to all capacities and humours, he soon deeply
insinuated himself into the esteem of the substantial wealthy aldermen,
and into the affections of their more delicate, magnificent, and tender
ladies; he made one in all their feasts and at all their assemblies; and
whilst in the company of the husbands, he declaimed against the faults
and mistakes of government; he joined their wives in railing against the
profligacy of the court ladies, and in inveighing against the king's
mistresses: he agreed with them, that the industrious poor were to pay
for these cursed extravagances; that the City beauties were not inferior
to those at the other end of the town,... after which, to outdo their
murmurings, he said, that he wondered Whitehall was not yet consumed by
fire from heaven, since such rakes as Rochester, Killigrew, and Sidney
were suffered there.'

This conduct endeared him so much to the City, and made him so welcome
at their clubs, that at last he grew sick of their cramming, and endless
invitations.

He now tried a new sphere of action; and instead of returning, as he
might have done, to the court, retreated into the most obscure corners
of the metropolis; and again changing his name and dress, gave himself
out as a German doctor named Bendo, who professed to find out
inscrutable secrets, and to apply infallible remedies; to know, by
astrology, all the past, and to foretell the future.

If the reign of Charles was justly deemed an age of high civilization,
it was also one of extreme credulity. Unbelief in religion went hand in
hand with blind faith in astrology and witchcraft; in omens,
divinations, and prophecies: neither let us too strongly despise, in
these their foibles, our ancestors. They had many excuses for their
superstitions; and for their fears, false as their hopes, and equally
groundless. The circulation of knowledge was limited: the public
journals, that part of the press to which we now owe inexpressible
gratitude for its general accuracy, its enlarged views, its purity, its
information, was then a meagre statement of dry facts: an announcement,
not a commentary. 'The Flying Post,' the 'Daily Courant,' the names of
which may be supposed to imply speed, never reached lone country places
till weeks after they had been printed on their one duodecimo sheet of
thin coarse paper. Religion, too, just emerging into glorious light from
the darkness of popery, had still her superstitions; and the mantle that
priestcraft had contrived to throw over her exquisite, radiant, and
simple form, was not then wholly and finally withdrawn. Romanism still
hovered in the form of credulity.

But now, with shame be it spoken, in the full noonday genial splendour
of our Reformed Church, with newspapers, the leading articles of which
rise to a level with our greatest didactic writers, and are competent
even to form the mind as well as to amuse the leisure hours of the young
readers: with every species of direct communication, we yet hold to
fallacies from which the credulous in Charles's time would have shrunk
in dismay and disgust. Table-turning, spirit-rapping, _clairvoyance_,
Swedenborgianism, and all that family of follies, would have been far
too strong for the faith of those who counted upon dreams as their
guide, or looked up to the heavenly planets with a belief, partly
superstitious, partly reverential, for their guidance; and in a dim and
flickering faith trusted to their _stars_.

'Dr. Bendo,' therefore, as Rochester was called--handsome, witty,
unscrupulous, and perfectly acquainted with the then small circle of the
court--was soon noted for his wonderful revelations. Chamber-women,
waiting-maids, and shop-girls were his first customers: but, very soon,
gay spinsters from the court came in their hoods and masks to ascertain
with anxious faces, their fortunes; whilst the cunning, sarcastic 'Dr.
Bendo,' noted in his diary all the intrigues which were confided to him
by these lovely clients. La Belle Jennings, the sister of Sarah Duchess
of Marlborough, was among his disciples; she took with her the beautiful
Miss Price, and, disguising themselves as orange girls, these young
ladies set off in a hackney-coach to visit Dr. Bendo; but when within
half a street of the supposed fortune-teller's, were prevented by the
interruption of a dissolute courtier named Brounker.

'Everything by turns and nothing long.' When Lord Rochester was tired of
being an astrologer, he used to roam about the streets as a beggar; then
he kept a footman who knew the Court well, and used to dress him up in a
red coat, supply him with a musket, like a sentinel, and send him to
watch at the doors of all the fine ladies, to find out their goings on:
afterwards, Lord Rochester would retire to the country, and write libels
on these fair victims, and, one day, offered to present the king with
one of his lampoons; but being tipsy, gave Charles, instead, one written
upon himself.

At this juncture we read with sorrow Bishop Burnet's forcible
description of his career:--

'He seems to have freed himself from all impressions of virtue or
religion, of honour or good nature.... He had but one maxim, to which he
adhered firmly, that he has to do everything, and deny himself in
nothing that might maintain his greatness. He was unhappily made for
drunkenness, for he had drunk all his friends dead, and was able to
subdue two or three sets of drunkards one after another; so it scarce
ever appeared that he was disordered after the greatest drinking: an
hour or two of sleep carried all off so entirely, that no sign of them
remained.... This had a terrible conclusion.'

Like many other men, Rochester might have been saved by being kept far
from the scene of temptation. Whilst he remained in the country he was
tolerably sober, perhaps steady. When he approached Brentford on his
route to London, his old propensities came upon him.

When scarcely out of his boyhood he carried off a young heiress,
Elizabeth Mallett, whom De Grammont calls _La triste heritière_: and
triste, indeed, she naturally was. Possessed of a fortune of £2500 a
year, this young lady was marked out by Charles II. as a victim for the
profligate Rochester. But the reckless young wit chose to take his own
way of managing the matter. One night, after supping at Whitehall with
Miss Stuart, the young Elizabeth was returning home with her
grandfather, Lord Haly, when their coach was suddenly stopped near
Charing Cross by a number of bravos, both on horseback and on foot--the
'Roaring Boys and Mohawks,' who were not extinct even in Addison's time.
They lifted the affrighted girl out of the carriage, and placed her in
one which had six horses; they then set off for Uxbridge, and were
overtaken; but the outrage ended in marriage, and Elizabeth became the
unhappy, neglected Countess of Rochester. Yet she loved him--perhaps in
ignorance of all that was going on whilst _she_ stayed with her four
children at home.

'If,' she writes to him, 'I could have been troubled at anything, when I
had the happiness of receiving a letter from you, I should be so,
because you did not name a time when I might hope to see you, the
uncertainty of which very much afflicts me.... Lay your commands upon me
what I am to do, and though it be to forget my children, and the long
hope I have lived in of seeing you, yet will I endeavour to obey you; or
in the memory only torment myself, without giving you the trouble of
putting you in mind that there lives a creature as

    'Your faithful, humble servant.'

And he, in reply: 'I went away (to Rochester) like a rascal, without
taking leave, dear wife. It is an unpolished way of proceeding, which a
modest man ought to be ashamed of. I have left you a prey to your own
imaginations amongst my relations, the worst of damnations. But there
will come an hour of deliverance, till when, may my mother be merciful
unto you! So I commit you to what I shall ensue, woman to woman, wife to
mother, in hopes of a future appearance in glory....

'Pray write as often as you have leisure, to your

    'ROCHESTER.'

To his son, he writes: 'You are now grown big enough to be a man, if
you can be wise enough; and the way to be truly wise is to serve God,
learn your book, and observe the instructions of your parents first, and
next your tutor, to whom I have entirely resigned you for this seven
years; and according as you employ that time, you are to be happy or
unhappy for ever. I have so good an opinion of you, that I am glad to
think you will never deceive me. Dear child, learn your book and be
obedient, and you will see what a father I shall be to you. You shall
want no pleasure while you are good, and that you may be good are my
constant prayers.'

Lord Rochester had not attained the age of thirty, when he was
mercifully awakened to a sense of his guilt here, his peril hereafter.
It seemed to many that his very nature was so warped that penitence in
its true sense could never come to him; but the mercy of God is
unfathomable; He judges not as man judges; He forgives, as man knows not
how to forgive.

    'God, our kind Master, merciful as just,
     Knowing our frame, remembers man is dust:
     He marks the dawn of every virtuous aim,
     And fans the smoking flax into a flame;
     He hears the language of a silent tear,
     And sighs are incense from a heart sincere.'

And the reformation of Rochester is a confirmation of the doctrine of a
special Providence, as well as of that of a retribution, even in this
life.

The retribution came in the form of an early but certain decay; of a
suffering so stern, so composed of mental and bodily anguish, that never
was man called to repentance by a voice so distinct as Rochester. The
reformation was sent through the instrumentality of one who had been a
sinner like himself, who had sinned _with_ him; an unfortunate lady,
who, in her last hours, had been visited, reclaimed, consoled by Bishop
Burnet. Of this, Lord Rochester had heard. He was then, to all
appearance, recovering from his last sickness. He sent for Burnet, who
devoted to him one evening every week of that solemn winter when the
soul of the penitent sought reconciliation and peace.

The conversion was not instantaneous; it was gradual, penetrating,
effective, sincere. Those who wish to gratify curiosity concerning the
death-bed of one who had so notoriously sinned, will read Burnet's
account of Rochester's illness and death with deep interest; and nothing
is so interesting as a death-bed. Those who delight in works of nervous
thought, and elevated sentiments, will read it too, and arise from the
perusal gratified. Those, however, who are true, contrite Christians
will go still farther; they will own that few works so intensely touch
the holiest and highest feelings; few so absorb the heart; few so
greatly show the vanity of life; the unspeakable value of purifying
faith. 'It is a book which the critic,' says Doctor Johnson, 'may read
for its elegance, the philosopher for its arguments, the saint for its
piety.'

Whilst deeply lamenting his own sins, Lord Rochester became anxious to
redeem his former associates from theirs.

'When Wilmot, Earl of Rochester,'[11] writes William Thomas, in a
manuscript preserved in the British Museum, 'lay on his death-bed, Mr.
Fanshawe came to visit him, with an intention to stay about a week with
him. Mr. Fanshawe, sitting by the bedside, perceived his lordship
praying to God, through Jesus Christ, and acquainted Dr. Radcliffe, who
attended my Lord Rochester in this illness and was then in the house,
with what he had heard, and told him that my lord was certainly
delirious, for to his knowledge, he said, he believed neither in God nor
in Jesus Christ. The doctor, who had often heard him pray in the same
manner, proposed to Mr. Fanshawe to go up to his lordship to be further
satisfied touching this affair. When they came to his room the doctor
told my lord what Mr. Fanshawe said, upon which his lordship addressed
himself to Mr. Fanshawe to this effect: "Sir, it is true, you and I have
been very bad and profane together, and then I was of the opinion you
mention. But now I am quite of another mind, and happy am I that I am
so. I am very sensible how miserable I was whilst of another opinion.
Sir, you may assure yourself that there is a Judge and a future state;"
and so entered into a very handsome discourse concerning the last
judgment, future state &c., and concluded with a serious and pathetic
exhortation to Mr. Fanshawe to enter into another course of life; adding
that he (Mr. F.) knew him to be his friend; that he never was more so
than at this time; and "sir," said he, "to use a Scripture expression, I
am not mad, but speak the words of truth and soberness." Upon this Mr.
Fanshawe trembled, and went immediately a-foot to Woodstock, and there
hired a horse to Oxford, and thence took coach to London.'

There were other butterflies in that gay court; beaux without wit;
remorseless rakes, incapable of one noble thought or high pursuit; and
amongst the most foolish and fashionable of these was Henry Jermyn, Lord
Dover. As the nephew of Henry Jermyn, Lord St. Albans, this young
simpleton was ushered into a court life with the most favourable
auspices. Jermyn Street (built in 1667) recalls to us the residence of
Lord St. Albans, the supposed husband of Henrietta Maria. It was also
the centre of fashion when Henry Jermyn the younger was launched into
its unholy sphere. Near Eagle Passage lived at that time La Belle
Stuart, Duchess of Richmond; next door to her Henry Savile, Rochester's
friend. The locality has since been purified by worthier associations:
Sir Isaac Newton lived for a time in Jermyn Street, and Gray lodged
there.

It was, however, in De Grammont's time, the scene of all the various
gallantries which were going on. Henry Jermyn was supported by the
wealth of his uncle, that uncle who, whilst Charles II. was starving at
Brussels, had kept a lavish table in Paris: little Jermyn, as the
younger Jermyn was called, owed much indeed to his fortune, which had
procured him great _éclat_ at the Dutch court. His head was large; his
features small; his legs short; his physiognomy was not positively
disagreeable, but he was affected and trifling, and his wit consisted in
expressions learnt by rote, which supplied him either with raillery or
with compliments.

This petty, inferior being had attracted the regard of the Princess
Royal--afterwards Princess of Orange--the daughter of Charles I. Then
the Countess of Castlemaine--afterwards Duchess of Cleveland--became
infatuated with him; he captivated also the lovely Mrs. Hyde, a
languishing beauty, whom Sir Peter Lely has depicted in all her sleepy
attractions, with her ringlets falling lightly over her snowy forehead
and down to her shoulders. This lady was, at the time when Jermyn came
to England, recently married to the son of the great Clarendon. She fell
desperately in love with this unworthy being: but, happily for her
peace, he preferred the honour (or dishonour) of being the favourite of
Lady Castlemaine, and Mrs. Hyde escaped the disgrace she, perhaps,
merited.

De Grammont appears absolutely to have hated Jermyn; not because he was
immoral, impertinent, and contemptible, but because it was Jermyn's
boast that no woman, good or bad, could resist him. Yet, in respect to
their unprincipled life, Jermyn and De Grammont had much in common. The
Chevalier was at this time an admirer of the foolish beauty, Jane
Middleton; one of the loveliest women of a court where it was impossible
to turn without seeing loveliness.

Mrs. Middleton was the daughter of Sir Roger Needham, and she has been
described, even by the grave Evelyn, as a 'famous, and, indeed,
incomparable beauty.' A coquette, she was, however, the friend of
intellectual men; and it was probably at the house of St. Evremond that
the Count first saw her. Her figure was good, she was fair and delicate;
and she had so great a desire, Count Hamilton relates, to 'appear
magnificently, that she was ambitious to vie with those of the greatest
fortunes, though unable to support the expense.'

Letters and presents now flew about. Perfumed gloves, pocket
looking-glasses, elegant boxes, apricot paste, essences, and other small
wares arrived weekly from Paris; English jewellery still had the
preference, and was liberally bestowed; yet Mrs. Middleton, affected and
somewhat precise, accepted the gifts but did not seem to encourage the
giver.

The Count de Grammont, piqued, was beginning to turn his attention to
Miss Warmestre, one of the queen's maids of honour, a lively brunette,
and a contrast to the languid Mrs. Middleton; when, happily for him, a
beauty appeared on the scene, and attracted him, by higher qualities
than mere looks, to a real, fervent, and honourable attachment.

Amongst the few respected families of that period was that of Sir George
Hamilton, the fourth son of James, Earl of Abercorn, and of Mary,
grand-daughter of Walter, eleventh Earl of Ormond. Sir George had
distinguished himself during the Civil Wars: on the death of Charles I.
he had retired to France, but returned, after the Restoration, to
London, with a large family, all intelligent and beautiful.

From their relationship to the Ormond family, the Hamiltons were soon
installed in the first circles of fashion. The Duke of Ormond's sons had
been in exile with the king; they now added to the lustre of the court
after his return. The Earl of Arran, the second, was a beau of the true
Cavalier order; clever at games, more especially at tennis, the king's
favourite diversion; he touched the guitar well; and made love _ad
libitum_. Lord Ossory, his elder brother, had less vivacity but more
intellect, and possessed a liberal, honest nature, and an heroic
character.

All the good qualities of these two young noblemen seem to have been
united in Anthony Hamilton, of whom De Grammont gives the following
character:--'The elder of the Hamiltons, their cousin, was the man who,
of all the court, dressed best; he was well made in his person, and
possessed those happy talents which lead to fortune, and procure success
in love: he was a most assiduous courtier, had the most lively wit, the
most polished manners, and the most punctual attention to his master
imaginable; no person danced better, nor was any one a more general
lover--a merit of some account in a court entirely devoted to love and
gallantry. It is not at all surprising that, with these qualities, he
succeeded my Lord Falmouth in the king's favour.'

The fascinating person thus described was born in Ireland: he had
already experienced some vicissitudes, which were renewed at the
Revolution of 1688, when he fled to France--the country in which he had
spent his youth--and died at St. Germains, in 1720, aged seventy-four.
His poetry and his fairy tales are forgotten; but his 'Memoirs of the
Count de Grammont' is a work which combines the vivacity of a French
writer with the truth of an English historian.

Ormond Yard, St. James's Square, was the London residence of the Duke of
Ormond: the garden wall of Ormond House took up the greater part of York
Street: the Hamilton family had a commodious house in the same courtly
neighbourhood; and the cousins mingled continually. Here persons of the
greatest distinction constantly met; and here the 'Chevalier de
Grammont,' as he was still called, was received in a manner suitable to
his rank and style; and soon regretted that he had passed so much time
in other places; for, after he once knew the charming Hamiltons, he
wished for no other friends.

There were three courts at that time in the capital; that at Whitehall,
in the king's apartments; that in the queen's, in the same palace; and
that of Henrietta Maria, the Queen-Mother, as she was styled, at
Somerset House. Charles's was pre-eminent in immorality, and in the
daily outrage of all decency; that of the unworthy widow of Charles I.
was just bordering on impropriety; that of Katherine of Braganza was
still decorous, though not irreproachable. Pepys, in his Diary, has this
passage:--'Visited Mrs. Ferrers, and stayed talking with her a good
while, there being a little, proud, ugly, talking lady there, that was
much crying up the queene-mother's court at Somerset House, above our
queen's; there being before her no allowance of laughing and mirth that
is at the other's; and, indeed, it is observed that the greatest court
now-a-days is there. Thence to Whitehall, where I carried my wife to see
the queene in her presence-chamber; and the maydes of honour and the
young Duke of Monmouth, playing at cards.'

Queen Katherine, notwithstanding that the first words she was ever known
to say in English were '_You lie!_' was one of the gentlest of beings.
Pepys describes her as having a modest, innocent look, among all the
demireps with whom she was forced to associate. Again we turn to Pepys,
an anecdote of whose is characteristic of poor Katherine's submissive,
uncomplaining nature:--

'With Creed, to the King's Head ordinary;... and a pretty gentleman in
our company, who confirms my Lady Castlemaine's being gone from court,
but knows not the reason; he told us of one wipe the queene, a little
while ago, did give her, when she came in and found the queene under the
dresser's hands, and had been so long. "I wonder your Majesty," says
she, "can have the patience to sit so long a-dressing?"--"I have so much
reason to use patience," says the queene, "that I can very well bear
with it."'

It was in the court of this injured queen that De Grammont went one
evening to Mrs. Middleton's house: there was a ball that night, and
amongst the dancers was the loveliest creature that De Grammont had ever
seen. His eyes were riveted on this fair form; he had heard, but never
till then seen her, whom all the world consented to call 'La Belle
Hamilton,' and his heart instantly echoed the expression. From this time
he forgot Mrs. Middleton, and despised Miss Warmestre: 'he found,' he
said, that he 'had seen nothing at court till this instant.'

'Miss Hamilton,' he himself tells us, 'was at the happy age when the
charms of the fair sex begin to bloom; she had the finest shape, the
loveliest neck, and most beautiful arms in the world; she was majestic
and graceful in all her movements; and she was the original after which
all the ladies copied in their taste and air of dress. Her forehead was
open, white, and smooth; her hair was well set, and fell with ease into
that natural order which it is so difficult to imitate. Her complexion
was possessed of a certain freshness, not to be equalled by borrowed
colours; her eyes were not large, but they were lively, and capable of
expressing whatever she pleased.'[12] So far for her person; but De
Grammont was, it seems, weary of external charms: it was the
intellectual superiority that riveted his feelings, whilst his
connoisseurship in beauty was satisfied that he had never yet seen any
one so perfect.

[Illustration: DE GRAMMONT'S MEETING WITH LA BELLE HAMILTON.]

'Her mind,' he says, 'was a proper companion for such a form: she did
not endeavour to shine in conversation by those sprightly sallies which
only puzzle, and with still greater care she avoided that affected
solemnity in her discourses which produces stupidity; but without any
eagerness to talk, she just said what she ought, and no more. She had
an admirable discernment in distinguishing between solid and false wit;
and far from making an ostentatious display of her abilities, she was
reserved, though very just in her decisions. Her sentiments were always
noble, and even lofty to the highest extent, when there was occasion;
nevertheless, she was less prepossessed with her own merit than is
usually the case with those who have so much. Formed as we have
described, she could not fail of commanding love; but so far was she
from courting it, that she was scrupulously nice with respect to those
whose merit might entitle them to form any pretensions to her.'

Born in 1641, Elizabeth--for such was the Christian name of this lovely
and admirable woman--was scarcely in her twentieth year when she first
appeared at Whitehall. Sir Peter Lely was at that time painting the
Beauties of the Court, and had done full justice to the intellectual and
yet innocent face that riveted De Grammont. He had depicted her with her
rich dark hair, of which a tendril or two fell on her ivory forehead,
adorned at the back with large pearls, under which a gauze-like texture
was gathered up, falling over the fair shoulders like a veil: a full
corsage, bound by a light band either of ribbon or of gold lace,
confining, with a large jewel or button, the sleeve on the shoulder,
disguised somewhat the exquisite shape. A frill of fine cambric set off,
whilst in whiteness it scarce rivalled, the shoulder and neck.

The features of this exquisite face are accurately described by De
Grammont, as Sir Peter has painted them. 'The mouth does not smile, but
seems ready to break out into a smile. Nothing is sleepy, but everything
is soft, sweet, and innocent in that face so beautiful and so beloved.'

Whilst the colours were fresh on Lely's palettes, James Duke of York,
that profligate who aped the saint, saw it, and henceforth paid his
court to the original, but was repelled with fearless _hauteur_. The
dissolute nobles of the court followed his example, even to the
'lady-killer' Jermyn, but in vain. Unhappily for La Belle Hamilton, she
became sensible to the attractions of De Grammont, whom she eventually
married.

Miss Hamilton, intelligent as she was, lent herself to the fashion of
the day, and delighted in practical jokes and tricks. At the splendid
masquerade given by the queen she continued to plague her cousin, Lady
Muskerry; to confuse and expose a stupid court beauty, a Miss Blaque;
and at the same time to produce on the Count de Grammont a still more
powerful effect than even her charms had done. Her success in
hoaxing--which we should now think both perilous and indelicate--seems
to have only riveted the chain, which was drawn around him more
strongly.

His friend, or rather his foe, St. Evremond, tried in vain to discourage
the Chevalier from his new passion. The former tutor was, it appeared,
jealous of its influence, and hurt that De Grammont was now seldom at
his house.

De Grammont's answer to his remonstrances was very characteristic. 'My
poor philosopher,' he cried, 'you understand Latin well--you can make
good verses--you are acquainted with the nature of the stars in the
firmament--but you are wholly ignorant of the luminaries in the
terrestrial globe.'

He then announced his intention to persevere, notwithstanding all the
obstacles which attached to the suit of a man without either fortune or
character, who had been exiled from his own country, and whose chief
mode of livelihood was dependent on the gaming-table.

One can scarcely read of the infatuation of La Belle Hamilton without a
sigh. During a period of six years their marriage was in contemplation
only; and De Grammont seems to have trifled inexcusably with the
feelings of this once gay and ever lovely girl. It was not for want of
means that De Grammont thus delayed the fulfilment of his engagement.
Charles II., inexcusably lavish, gave him a pension of 1500 Jacobuses:
it was to be paid to him until he should be restored to the favour of
his own king. The fact was that De Grammont contributed to the pleasures
of the court, and pleasure was the household deity of Whitehall.
Sometimes, in those days of careless gaiety, there were promenades in
Spring Gardens, or the Mall; sometimes the court beauties sallied forth
on horseback; at other times there were shows on the river, which then
washed the very foundations of Whitehall. There in the summer evenings,
when it was too hot and dusty to walk, old Thames might be seen covered
with little boats, filled with court and city beauties, attending the
royal barges; collations, music, and fireworks completed the scene, and
De Grammont always contrived some surprise--some gallant show: once a
concert of vocal and instrumental music, which he had privately brought
from Paris, struck up unexpectedly: another time a collation brought
from the gay capital surpassed that supplied by the king. Then the
Chevalier, finding that coaches with glass windows, lately introduced,
displeased the ladies, because their charms were only partially seen in
them, sent for the most elegant and superb _calèche_ ever seen: it came
after a month's journey, and was presented by De Grammont to the king.
It was a royal present in price, for it had cost two thousand livres.
The famous dispute between Lady Castlemaine and Miss Stuart, afterwards
Duchess of Richmond, arose about this _calèche_. The Queen and the
Duchess of York appeared first in it in Hyde Park, which had then
recently been fenced in with brick. Lady Castlemaine thought that the
_calèche_ showed off a fine figure better than the coach; Miss Stuart
was of the same opinion. Both these grown-up babies wished to have the
coach on the same day, but Miss Stuart prevailed.

The Queen condescended to laugh at the quarrels of these two foolish
women, and complimented the Chevalier de Grammont on his present. 'But
how is it,' she asked, 'that you do not even keep a footman, and that
one of the common runners in the street lights you home with a link?'

'Madame,' he answered, 'the Chevalier de Grammont hates pomp: my
link-boy is faithful and brave.' Then he told the Queen that he saw she
was unacquainted with the nation of link-boys, and related how that he
had, at one time, had one hundred and sixty around his chair at night,
and people had asked 'whose funeral it was? As for the parade of coaches
and footmen,' he added, 'I despise it. I have sometimes had five or six
_valets-de-chambre_, without a single footman in livery except my
chaplain.'

'How!' cried the Queen, laughing, 'a chaplain in livery? surely he was
not a priest.'

'_Pardon_, Madame, a priest, and the best dancer in the world of the
Biscayan gig.'

'Chevalier,' said the king, 'tell us the history of your chaplain
Poussatin.'

Then De Grammont related how, when he was with the great Condé, after
the campaign of Catalonia, he had seen among a company of Catalans, a
priest in a little black jacket, skipping and frisking: how Condé was
charmed, and how they recognized in him a Frenchman, and how he offered
himself to De Grammont for his chaplain. De Grammont had not much need,
he said, for a chaplain in his house, but he took the priest, who had
afterwards the honour of dancing before Anne of Austria, in Paris.

Suitor after suitor interfered with De Grammont's at last honourable
address to La Belle Hamilton. At length an incident occurred which had
very nearly separated them for ever. Philibert de Grammont was recalled
to Paris by Louis XIV. He forgot, Frenchman-like, all his engagements to
Miss Hamilton, and hurried off. He had reached Dover, when her two
brothers rode up after him. 'Chevalier de Grammont,' they said, 'have
you forgotten nothing in London?'

'I beg your pardon,' he answered, 'I forgot to marry your sister.' It is
said that this story suggested to Molière the idea of _Le Mariage
forcé_. They were, however, married.

In 1669 La Belle Hamilton, after giving birth to a child, went to reside
in France. Charles II., who thought she would pass for a handsome woman
in France, recommended her to his sister, Henrietta Duchess of Orleans,
and begged her to be kind to her.

Henceforth the Chevalier De Grammont and his wife figured at Versailles,
where the Countess de Grammont was appointed _Dame du Palais_. Her
career was less brilliant than in England. The French ladies deemed her
haughty and old, and even termed her _une Anglaise insupportable_.

She had certainly too much virtue, and perhaps too much beauty still,
for the Parisian ladies of fashion at that period to admire her.

She endeavoured in vain, to reclaim her libertine husband, and to call
him to a sense of his situation when he was on his death-bed. Louis
XIV. sent the Marquis de Dangeau to convert him, and to talk to him on a
subject little thought of by De Grammont--the world to come. After the
Marquis had been talking for some time, De Grammont turned to his wife
and said, 'Countess, if you don't look to it, Dangeau will juggle you
out of my conversion.' St. Evremond said he would gladly die to go off
with so successful a bon-mot.

He became however, in time, serious, if not devout or penitent. Ninon de
l'Enclos having written to St. Evremond that the Count de Grammont had
not only recovered but had become devout, St. Evremond answered her in
these words:--

'I have learned with a great deal of pleasure that the Count de Grammont
has recovered his former health, and acquired a new devotion. Hitherto I
have been contented with being a plain honest man; but I must do
something more: and I only wait for your example to become a devotee.
You live in a country where people have wonderful advantages of saving
their souls: there, vice is almost as opposite to the mode as virtue;
sinning passes for ill-breeding, and shocks decency and good-manners, as
much as religion. Formerly it was enough to be wicked, now one must be a
scoundrel withal to be damned in France.'

A report having been circulated that De Grammont was dead, St. Evremond
expressed deep regret. The report was contradicted by Ninon de l'Enclos.
The Chevalier was then eighty-six years of age; 'nevertheless he was,'
Ninon says, 'so young, that I think him as lively as when he hated sick
people, and loved them after they had recovered their health;' a trait
very descriptive of a man whose good-nature was always on the surface,
but whose selfishness was deep as that of most wits and beaux, who are
spoiled by the world, and who, in return, distrust and deceive the
spoilers. With this long life of eighty-six years, endowed as De
Grammont was with elasticity of spirits, good fortune, considerable
talent, an excellent position, a wit that never ceased to flow in a
clear current; with all these advantages, what might he not have been to
society, had his energy been well applied, his wit innocent, his talents
employed worthily, and his heart as sure to stand muster as his manners?

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 8: M. de Grammont visited England during the Protectorate. His
second visit, after being forbidden the court by Louis XIV., was in
1662.]

[Footnote 9: The Earl of Dorset married Elizabeth, widow of Charles
Berkeley, Earl of Falmouth, and daughter of Hervey Bagot, Esq., of Pipe
Hall, Warwickshire, who died without issue. He married, 7th March,
1684-5, Lady Mary Compton, daughter of James Earl of Northampton.]

[Footnote 10: Lord Rochester succeeded to the Earldom in 1659. It was
created by Charles II. in 1652, at Paris.]

[Footnote 11: Mr. William Thomas, the writer of this statement, heard it
from Dr. Radcliffe at the table of Speaker Harley, (afterwards Earl of
Oxford,) 16th June, 1702.]

[Footnote 12: See De Grammont's Memoirs.]


    BEAU FIELDING.

  On Wits and Beaux.--Scotland Yard in Charles II.'s day.--Orlando of
      'The Tatler.'--Beau Fielding, Justice of the Peace.--Adonis in
      Search of a Wife.--The Sham Widow.--Ways and Means.--Barbara
      Villiers, Lady Castlemaine.--Quarrels with the King.--The
      Beau's Second Marriage.--The Last Days of Fops and Beaux.


Let us be wise, boys, here's a fool coming, said a sensible man, when
he saw Beau Nash's splendid carriage draw up to the door. Is a beau a
fool? Is a sharper a fool? Was Bonaparte a fool? If you reply 'no' to
the last two questions, you must give the same answer to the first. A
beau is a fox, but not a fool--a very clever fellow, who, knowing the
weakness of his brothers and sisters in the world, takes advantage of
it to make himself a fame and a fortune. Nash, the son of a
glass-merchant--Brummell, the hopeful of a small shopkeeper--became
the intimates of princes, dukes, and fashionables; were petty kings of
Vanity Fair, and were honoured by their subjects. In the kingdom of
the blind, the one-eyed man is king; in the realm of folly, the
sharper is a monarch. The only proviso is, that the cheat come not
within the jurisdiction of the law. Such a cheat is the beau or dandy,
or fine gentleman, who imposes on his public by his clothes and
appearance. _Bonâ-fide_ monarchs have done as much: Louis XIV. won
himself the title of Le Grand Monarque by his manners, his dress, and
his vanity. Fielding, Nash, and Brummell did nothing more. It is not a
question whether such roads to eminence be contemptible or not, but
whether their adoption in one station of life be more so than in
another. Was Brummell a whit more contemptible than 'Wales?' Or is
John Thomas, the pride and glory of the 'Domestics' Free-and-Easy,'
whose whiskers, figure, face, and manner are all superb, one atom more
ridiculous than your recognized beau? I trow not. What right, then,
has your beau to a place among wits? I fancy Chesterfield would be
much disgusted at seeing his name side by side with that of Nash in
this volume; yet Chesterfield had no objection, when at Bath, to do
homage to the king of that city, and may have prided himself on
exchanging pinches from diamond-set snuff-boxes with that superb
gold-laced dignitary in the Pump-room. Certainly, people who thought
little of Philip Dormer Stanhope, thought a great deal of the
glass-merchant's reprobate son when he was in power, and submitted
without a murmur to his impertinences. The fact is, that the beaux and
the wits are more intimately connected than the latter would care to
own: the wits have all been, or aspired to be, beaux, and beaux have
had their fair share of wit; both lived for the same purpose--to shine
in society: both used the same means--coats and bon-mots. The only
distinction is, that the garments of the beaux were better, and their
sayings not so good as those of the wits; while the conversation of
the wits was better, and their apparel not so striking as those of the
beaux. So, my Lord Chesterfield, who prided yourself quite as much on
being a fine gentleman as on being a fine wit, you cannot complain at
your proximity to Mr. Nash and others who _were_ fine gentlemen, and
would have been fine wits if they could.

Robert Fielding was, perhaps, the least of the beaux; but then, to make
up for this, he belonged to a noble family: he married a duchess, and,
what is more, he beat her. Surely in the kingdom of fools such a man is
not to be despised. You may be sure he did not think he was, for was he
not made the subject of two papers in 'The Tatler,' and what more could
such a man desire?

His father was a Suffolk squire, claiming relationship with the Earls of
Denbigh, and therefore, with the Hapsburgs, from whom the Beau and the
Emperors of Austria had the common honour of being descended. Perhaps
neither of them had sufficient sense to be proud of the greatest
intellectual ornament of their race, the author of 'Tom Jones;' but as
our hero was dead before the humourist was born, it is not fair to
conjecture what he might have thought on the subject.

It does not appear that very much is known of this great gem of the race
of Hapsburg. He had the misfortune to be very handsome, and the folly to
think that his face would be his fortune: it certainly stood him in good
stead at times, but it also brought him into a lamentable dilemma.

His father was not rich, and sent his son to the Temple to study laws
which he was only fitted to break. The young Adonis had sense enough to
see that destiny did not beckon him to fame in the gloom of a musty law
court, and removed a little further up to the Thames, and the more
fashionable region of Scotland Yard. Here, where now Z 300 repairs to
report his investigations to a Commissioner, the young dandies of
Charles II.'s day strutted in gay doublets, swore hasty oaths of choice
invention, smoked the true Tobago from huge pipe-bowls, and ogled the
fair but not too bashful dames who passed to and fro in their chariots.
The court took its name from the royalties of Scotland, who, when they
visited the South, were there lodged, as being conveniently near to
Whitehall Palace. It is odd enough that the three architects, Inigo
Jones, Vanbrugh, and Wren, all lived in this yard.

It was not to be supposed that a man who could so well appreciate a
handsome face and well-cut doublet as Charles II. should long overlook
his neighbour, Mr. Robert Fielding, and in due course the Beau, who had
no other diploma, found himself in the honourable position of a justice
of the peace.

The emoluments of this office enabled Orlando, as 'The Tatler' calls
him, to shine forth in all his glory. With an enviable indifference to
the future, he launched out into an expenditure which alone would have
made him popular in a country where the heaviest purse makes the
greatest gentleman. His lacqueys were arrayed in the brightest yellow
coats with black sashes--the Hapsburg colours. He had a carriage, of
course, but, like Sheridan's, it was hired, though drawn by his own
horses. This carriage was described as being shaped like a sea-shell;
and 'the Tatler' calls it 'an open tumbril of less size than ordinary,
to show the largeness of his limbs and the grandeur of his personage to
the best advantage.' The said limbs were Fielding's especial pride: he
gloried in the strength of his leg and arm; and when he walked down the
street, he was followed by an admiring crowd, whom he treated with as
much haughtiness as if he had been the emperor himself, instead of his
cousin five hundred times removed. He used his strength to good or bad
purpose, and was a redoubted fighter and bully, though good-natured
withal. In the Mall, as he strutted, he was the cynosure of all female
eyes. His dress had all the elegance of which the graceful costume of
that period was capable, though Fielding did not, like Brummell,
understand the delicacy of a quiet, but studied style. Those were
simpler, somewhat more honest days. It was not necessary for a man to
cloak his vices, nor be ashamed of his cloak. The beau then-a-day openly
and arrogantly gloried in the grandeur of his attire; and bragging was a
part of his character. Fielding was made by his tailor; Brummell made
his tailor: the only point in common to both was that neither of them
paid the tailor's bill.

The fine gentleman, under the Stuarts, was fine only in his lace and his
velvet doublet; his language was coarse, his manners coarser, his vices
the coarsest of all. No wonder when the king himself could get so drunk
with Sedley and Buckhurst as to be unable to give an audience appointed
for; and when the chief fun of his two companions was to divest
themselves of all the habiliments which civilization has had the ill
taste to make necessary, and in that state run about the streets.

'Orlando' wore the finest ruffles and the heaviest sword; his wig was
combed to perfection; and in his pocket he carried a little comb with
which to arrange it from time to time, even as the dandy of to-day pulls
out his whiskers or curls his moustache. Such a man could not be passed
over; and accordingly he numbered half the officers and gallants of the
town among his intimates. He drank, swore, and swaggered, and the snobs
of the day proclaimed him a 'complete gentleman.'

His impudence, however, was not always tolerated. In the playhouses of
the day, it was the fashion for some of the spectators to stand upon the
stage, and the places in that position were chiefly occupied by young
gallants. The ladies came most in masques: but this did not prevent
Master Fielding from making his remarks very freely, and in no very
refined strain to them. The modest damsels, whom Pope has described,

    'The fair sat pouting at the courtier's play,
     And not a mask went unimproved away:
     The modest fan was lifted up no more,
     And virgins smiled at what they blushed before,'

were not too coy to be pleased with the fops' attentions, and replied in
like strain. The players were unheeded; the audience laughed at the
improvised and natural wit, when carefully prepared dialogues failed to
fix their attention. The actors were disgusted, and, in spite of Master
Fielding's herculean strength, kicked him off the stage, with a warning
not to come again.

The _rôle_ of a beau is expensive to keep up; and our justice of the
peace could not, like Nash, double his income by gaming. He soon got
deeply into debt, as every celebrated dresser has done. The old story,
not new even in those days, was enacted and the brilliant Adonis had to
keep watch and ward against tailors and bailiffs. On one occasion they
had nearly caught him; but his legs being lengthy, he gave them fair
sport as far as St. James's Palace, where the officers on guard rushed
out to save their pet, and drove off the myrmidons of the law at the
point of the sword.

But debts do not pay themselves, nor die, and Orlando with all his
strength and prowess could not long keep off the constable. Evil days
gloomed at no very great distance before him, and the fear of a
sponging-house and debtors' prison compelled him to turn his handsome
person to account. Had he not broken a hundred hearts already? had he
not charmed a thousand pairs of beaming eyes? was there not one owner of
one pair who was also possessed of a pretty fortune? Who should have the
honour of being the wife of such an Adonis? who, indeed, but she who
could pay highest for it; and who could pay with a handsome income but a
well-dowered widow? A widow it must be--a widow it should be. Noble
indeed was the sentiment which inspired this great man to sacrifice
himself on the altar of Hymen for the good of his creditors. Ye young
men in the Guards, who do this kind of thing every day--that is,
every day that you can meet with a widow with the proper
qualifications--take warning by the lamentable history of Mr. Robert
Fielding, and never trust to 'third parties.'

[Illustration: BEAU FIELDING AND THE SHAM WIDOW.]

A widow was found, fat, fair, and forty--and oh!--charm greater far than
all the rest--with a fortune of sixty thousand pounds; this was a Mrs.
Deleau, who lived at Whaddon in Surrey, and at Copthall-court in London.
Nothing could be more charming; and the only obstacle was the absence of
all acquaintance between the parties--for, of course, it was impossible
for any widow, whatever her attractions, to be insensible to those of
Robert Fielding. Under these circumstances, the Beau looked about for an
agent, and found one in the person of a Mrs. Villars, hairdresser to the
widow. He offered this person a handsome douceur in case of success, and
she was to undertake that the lady should meet the gentleman in the most
unpremeditated manner. Various schemes were resorted to: with the
_alias_, for he was not above an _alias_, of Major-General Villars, the
Beau called at the widow's country house, and was permitted to see the
gardens. At a window he espied a lady, whom he took to be the object of
his pursuit--bowed to her majestically, and went away, persuaded he must
have made an impression. But, whether the widow was wiser than wearers
of weeds have the reputation of being, or whether the agent had really
no power in the matter, the meeting never came on.

The hairdresser naturally grew anxious, the douceur was too good to be
lost, and as the widow could not be had, some one must be supplied in
her place.

One day while the Beau was sitting in his splendid 'night-gown,' as the
morning-dress of gentlemen was then called, two ladies were ushered into
his august presence. He had been warned of this visit, and was prepared
to receive the yielding widow. The one, of course, was the hairdresser,
the other a young, pretty, and _apparently_ modest creature, who blushed
much--though with some difficulty--at the trying position in which she
found herself. The Beau, delighted, did his best to reassure her. He
flung himself at her feet, swore, with oaths more fashionable than
delicate, that she was the only woman he ever loved, and prevailed on
the widow so far as to induce her to 'call again to-morrow.'

Of course she came, and Adonis was in heaven. He wrote little poems to
her--for, as a gallant, he could of course make verses--serenaded her
through an Italian donna, invited her to suppers, at which the
delicacies of the season were served without regard to the purveyor's
account, and to which, coy as she was, she consented to come, and
clenched the engagement with a ring, on which was the motto, 'Tibi
Soli.' Nay, the Beau had been educated, and had some knowledge of 'the
tongues,' so that he added to these attentions the further one of a song
or two translated from the Greek. The widow ought to have been pleased,
and was. One thing only she stipulated, namely, that the marriage should
be private, lest her relations should forbid the banns.

Having brought her so far, it was not likely that the fortune-hunter
would stick at such a mere trifle, and accordingly an entertainment was
got up at the Beau's own rooms, a supper suitable to the rank and wealth
of the widow, provided by some obligingly credulous tradesman; a priest
found--for, be it premised, our hero had changed so much of his religion
as he had to change in the reign of James II., when Romanism was not
only fashionable, but a sure road to fortune--and the mutually satisfied
couple swore to love, honour, and obey one another till death them
should part.

The next morning, however, the widow left the gentleman's lodgings, on
the pretext that it was injudicious for her friends to know of their
union at present, and continued to visit her sposo and sup somewhat
amply at his chambers from time to time. We can imagine the anxiety
Orlando now felt for a cheque book at the heiress's bankers, and the
many insinuations he may have delicately made, touching ways and means.
We can fancy the artful excuses with which these hints were put aside by
his attached wife. But the dupe was still in happy ignorance of the
trick played on him, and for a time such ignorance was bliss. It must
have been trying to him to be called on by Mrs. Villars for the promised
douceur, but he consoled himself with the pleasures of hope.

Unfortunately, however, he had formed the acquaintance of a woman of a
very different reputation to the real Mrs. Deleau, and the intimacy
which ensued was fatal to him.

When Charles II. was wandering abroad, he was joined, among others, by a
Mr. and Mrs. Palmer. The husband was a stanch old Romanist, with the
qualities which usually accompanied that faith in those days--little
respect for morality, and a good deal of bigotry. In later days he was
one of the victims suspected of the Titus Oates plot, but escaped, and
eventually died in Wales, in 1705, after having been James II.'s
ambassador to Rome. This, in a few words, is the history of that Roger
Palmer, afterwards Lord Castlemaine, who by some is said to have sold
his wife--not at Smithfield, but at Whitehall--to his Majesty King
Charles II., for the sum of one peerage--an Irish one, taken on
consideration: by others, is alleged to have been so indignant with the
king as to have remained for some time far from court; and so disgusted
with his elevation to the peerage as scarcely to assume his title; and
this last is the most authenticated version of the matter.

Mrs. Palmer belonged to one of the oldest families in England, and
traced her descent to Pagan de Villiers, in the days of William Rufus,
and a good deal farther among the nobles of Normandy. She was the
daughter of William, second Viscount Grandison, and rejoiced in the
appropriate name of Barbara, for she _could_ be savage occasionally. She
was very beautiful, and very wicked, and soon became Charles's mistress.
On the Restoration she joined the king in England, and when the poor
neglected queen came over was foisted upon her as a bedchamber-woman, in
spite of all the objections of that ill used wife. It was necessary to
this end that she should be the wife of a peer; and her husband accepted
the title of Earl of Castlemaine, well knowing to what he owed it.
Pepys, who admired Lady Castlemaine more than any woman in England,
describes the husband and wife meeting at Whitehall with a cold
ceremonial bow: yet the husband _was_ there. A quarrel between the two,
strangely enough on the score of religion, her ladyship insisting that
her child should be christened by a Protestant clergyman, while his
lordship insisted on the ceremony being performed by a Romish priest,
brought about a separation, and from that time Lady Castlemaine, lodged
in Whitehall, began her empire over the king of England. That man, 'who
never said a foolish thing, and never did a wise one,' was the slave of
this imperious and most impudent of women. She forced him to settle on
her an immense fortune, much of which she squandered at the
basset-table, often staking a thousand pounds at a time, and sometimes
losing fifteen thousand pounds a-night.

Nor did her wickedness end here. We have some pity for one, who, like La
Vallière, could be attracted by the attentions of a handsome,
fascinating prince: we pity though we blame. But Lady Castlemaine was
vicious to the very marrow: not content with a king's favour, she
courted herself the young gallant of the town. Quarrels ensued between
Charles and his mistress, in which the latter invariably came off
victorious, owing to her indomitable temper; and the scenes recorded by
De Grammont--when she threatened to burn down Whitehall, and tear her
children in pieces--are too disgraceful for insertion. She forced the
reprobate monarch to consent to all her extortionate demands: rifled the
nation's pockets as well as his own; and at every fresh difference,
forced Charles to give her some new pension. An intrigue with Jermyn,
discovered and objected to by the King, brought on a fresh and more
serious difference, which was only patched up by a patent of the Duchy
of Cleveland. The Duchess of Cleveland was even worse than the Countess
of Castlemaine. Abandoned in time by Charles, and detested by all people
of any decent feeling, she consoled herself for the loss of a real king
by taking up with a stage one. Hart and Goodman, the actors, were
successively her cavalieri; the former had been a captain in the army;
the latter a student at Cambridge. Both were men of the coarsest minds
and most depraved lives. Goodman, in after-years was so reduced that,
finding, as Sheridan advised his son to do, a pair of pistols handy, a
horse saddled, and Hounslow Heath not a hundred miles distance, he took
to the pleasant and profitable pastime of which Dick Turpin is the
patron saint. He was all but hanged for his daring robberies, but
unfortunately not quite so. He lived to suffer such indigence, that he
and another rascal had but one under-garment between them, and entered
into a compact that one should lie in bed while the other wore the
article in question. Naturally enough the two fell out in time, and the
end of Goodman--sad misnomer--was worse than his beginning: such was the
gallant whom the imperious Duchess of Cleveland vouchsafed to honour.

The life of the once beautiful Barbara Villiers grew daily more and more
depraved: at the age of thirty she retired to Paris, shunned and
disgraced. After numerous intrigues abroad and at home, she put the
crowning point to her follies by falling in love with the handsome
Fielding, when she herself numbered sixty-five summers.

Whether the Beau still thought of fortune, or whether having once tried
matrimony, he was so enchanted with it as to make it his cacoëthes, does
not appear: the legend explains not for what reason he married the
antiquated beauty only three weeks after he had been united to the
supposed widow. For a time he wavered between the two, but that time was
short: the widow discovered his second marriage, claimed him, and in so
doing revealed the well-kept secret that she was not a widow; indeed,
not even the relict of John Deleau, Esq., of Whaddon, but a wretched
adventurer of the name of Mary Wadsworth, who had shared with Mrs.
Villars the plunder of the trick. The Beau tried to preserve his
dignity, and throw over his duper, but in vain. The first wife reported
the state of affairs to the second: and the duchess, who had been
shamefully treated by Master Fielding, was only too glad of an
opportunity to get rid of him. She offered Mary Wadsworth a pension of
£100 a year, and a sum of £200 in ready money, to prove the previous
marriage. The case came on, and Beau Fielding had the honour of playing
a part in a famous state trial.

With his usual impudence he undertook to defend himself at the Old
Bailey, and hatched up some old story to prove that the first wife was
married at the time of their union to one Brady; but the plea fell to
the ground, and the fine gentleman was sentenced to be burned in the
hand. His interest in certain quarters saved him this ignominious
punishment which would, doubtless, have spoiled a limb of which he was
particularly proud. He was pardoned: the real widow married a far more
honourable gentleman, in spite of the unenviable notoriety she had
acquired; the sham one was somehow quieted, and the duchess died some
four years later, the more peacefully for being rid of her tyrannical
mate.

Thus ended a petty scandal of the day, in which all the parties were so
disreputable that no one could feel any sympathy for a single one of
them. How the dupe himself ended is not known. The last days of fops and
beaux are never glorious. Brummell died in slovenly penury; Nash in
contempt. Fielding lapsed into the dimmest obscurity; and as far as
evidence goes, there is as little certainty about his death as of that
of the Wandering Jew. Let us hope that he is not still alive: though his
friends seemed to have cared little whether he were so or not, to judge
from a couple of verses written by one of them:--

    'If Fielding is dead,
       And rests under this stone,
     Then he is not alive
       You may bet two to one.

    'But if he's alive,
       And does not lie there--
     Let him live till he's hanged,
       For which no man will care.'


    OF CERTAIN CLUBS AND CLUB-WITS UNDER ANNE.

  The Origin of Clubs.--The Establishment of Coffee-houses.--The
      October Club.--The Beef-steak Club.--Of certain other
      Clubs.--The Kit-kat Club.--The Romance of the Bowl.--The Toasts
      of the Kit-kat.--The Members of the Kit-kat.--A good Wit, and a
      bad Architect.--'Well-natured Garth.'--The Poets of the
      Kit-kat.--Charles Montagu, Earl of Halifax.--Chancellor
      Somers.--Charles Sackville, Lord Dorset.--Less celebrated Wits.


I suppose that, long before the building of Babel, man discovered that
he was an associative animal, with the universal motto, '_L'union c'est
la force_;' and that association, to be of any use, requires talk. A
history of celebrated associations, from the building society just
mentioned down to the thousands which are represented by an office, a
secretary, and a brass-plate, in the present day, would give a curious
scheme of the natural tendencies of man; while the story of their
failures--and how many have not failed, sooner or later!--would be a
pretty moral lesson to your anthropolaters who Babelize now-a-days, and
believe there is nothing which a company with capital cannot achieve. I
wonder what object there is, that two men can possibly agree in
desiring, and which it takes more than one to attain, for which an
association of some kind has not been formed at some time or other,
since first the swarthy savage learned that it was necessary to unite to
kill the lion which infested the neighbourhood! Alack for human nature!
I fear by far the larger proportion of the objects of associations would
be found rather evil than good, and, certes, nearly all of them might be
ranged under two heads, according as the passions of hate or desire
found a common object in several hearts. Gain on the one
hand--destruction on the other--have been the chief motives of clubbing
in all time.

A delightful exception is to be found, though--to wit, in associations
for the purpose of talking. I do not refer to parliaments and
philosophical academies, but to those companies which have been formed
for the sole purpose of mutual entertainment by interchange of thought.

Now, will any kind reader oblige me with a derivation of the word
'Club?' I doubt if it is easy to discover. But one thing is certain,
whatever its origin, it is, in its present sense, purely English in idea
and in existence. Dean Trench points this out, and, noting the fact that
no other nation (he might have excepted the Chinese) has any word to
express this kind of association, he has, with very pardonable natural
pride, but unpardonably bad logic, inferred that the English are the
most sociable people in the world. The contrary is true; nay, _was_
true, even in the days of Addison, Swift, Steele--even in the days of
Johnson, Walpole, Selwyn; ay, at all time since we have been a nation.
The fact is, we are not the most sociable, but the most associative
race; and the establishment of clubs is a proof of it. We cannot, and
never could, talk freely, comfortably, and generally, without a company
for talking. Conversation has always been with us as much a business as
railroad-making, or what not. It has always demanded certain
accessories, certain condiments, certain stimulants to work it up to the
proper pitch. 'We all know' we are the cleverest and wittiest people
under the sun; but then our wit has been stereotyped. France has no 'Joe
Miller;' for a bon-mot there, however good, is only appreciated
historically. Our wit is printed, not spoken; our best wits behind an
inkhorn have sometimes been the veriest logs in society. On the
Continent clubs were not called for, because society itself was the
arena of conversation. In this country, on the other hand, a man could
only chat when at his ease; could only be at his ease among those who
agreed with him on the main points of religion and politics, and even
then wanted the aid of a bottle to make him comfortable. Our want of
sociability was the cause of our clubbing, and therefore the word 'club'
is purely English.

This was never so much the case as after the Restoration. Religion and
politics never ran higher than when a monarch, who is said to have died
a papist because he had no religion at all during his life, was brought
back to supplant a furious puritanical Protectorate. Then, indeed, it
was difficult for men of opposite parties to meet without bickering; and
society demanded separate meeting-places for those who differed. The
origin of clubs in this country is to be traced to two causes--the
vehemence of religious and political partisanship, and the establishment
of coffee-houses. These certainly gave the first idea of clubbery. The
taverns which preceded them had given the English a zest for public life
in a small way. 'The Mermaid' was, virtually, a club of wits long before
the first real club was opened, and, like the clubs of the eighteenth
century, it had its presiding geniuses in Shakespeare and Rare Ben.

The coffee-houses introduced somewhat more refinement and less
exclusiveness. The oldest of these was the 'Grecian.' 'One Constantine,
a Grecian,' advertised in 'The Intelligencer' of January 23rd, 1664-5,
that 'the right coffee bery or chocolate,' might be had of him 'as cheap
and as good as is anywhere to be had for money,' and soon after began to
sell the said 'coffee bery' in small cups at his own establishment in
Devereux Court, Strand. Some two years later we have news of 'Will's,'
the most famous, perhaps, of the coffee-houses. Here Dryden held forth
with pedantic vanity: and here was laid the first germ of that critical
acumen which has since become a distinguishing feature in English
literature. Then, in the City, one Garraway, of Exchange Alley, first
sold 'tea in leaf and drink, made according to the directions of the
most knowing, and travellers into those eastern countries;' and thus
established the well-known 'Garraway's,' whither, in Defoe's day,
'foreign banquiers' and even ministers resorted, to drink the said
beverage. 'Robin's,' 'Jonathan's,' and many another, were all opened
about this time, and the rage for coffee-house life became general
throughout the country.

In these places the company was of course of all classes and colours;
but, as the conversation was general, there was naturally at first a
good deal of squabbling, till, for the sake of peace and comfort, a man
chose his place of resort according to his political principles; and a
little later there were regular Whig and Tory coffee-houses. Thus, in
Anne's day, 'The Cocoa-nut,' in St. James's Street, was reserved for
Jacobites, while none but Whigs frequented 'The St James's.' Still there
was not sufficient exclusiveness; and as early as in Charles II.'s reign
men of peculiar opinions began to appropriate certain coffee-houses at
certain hours, and to exclude from them all but approved members. Hence
the origin of clubs.

The October Club was one of the earliest, being composed of some hundred
and fifty rank Tories, chiefly country members of Parliament. They met
at the 'Bell,' in King Street, Westminster, that street in which Spenser
starved, and Dryden's brother kept a grocer's shop. A portrait of Queen
Anne, by Dahl, hung in the club-room. This and the Kit-kat, the great
Whig club, were chiefly reserved for politics; but the fashion of
clubbing having once come in, it was soon followed by people of all
fancies. No reader of the 'Spectator' can fail to remember the ridicule
to which this was turned by descriptions of imaginary clubs for which
the qualifications were absurd, and of which the business, on meeting,
was preposterous nonsense of some kind. The idea of such fraternities,
as the Club of Fat Men, the Ugly Club, the Sheromp Club, the Everlasting
Club, the Sighing Club, the Amorous Club, and others, could only have
been suggested by real clubs almost as ridiculous. The names, too, were
almost as fantastical as those of the taverns in the previous century,
which counted 'The Devil,' and 'The Heaven and Hell,' among their
numbers. Many derived their titles from the standing dishes preferred at
supper, the Beef-steak and the Kit-kat (a sort of mutton-pie), for
instance.

The Beef-steak Club, still in existence, was one of the most famous
established in Anne's reign. It had at that time less of a political
than a jovial character. Nothing but that excellent British fare, from
which it took its name, was, at first, served at the supper-table. It
was an assemblage of wits of every station, and very jovial were they
supposed to be when the juicy dish had been discussed. Early in the
century, Estcourt, the actor, was made provider to this club, and wore a
golden gridiron as a badge of office, and is thus alluded to in Dr.
King's 'Art of Cookery' (1709):--

    'He that of honour, wit, and mirth partakes,
     May be a fit companion o'er beef-stakes;
     His name may be to future times enrolled
     In Estcourt's book, whose gridiron's framed of gold.'

Estcourt was one of the best mimics of the day, and a keen satirist to
boot; in fact he seems to have owed much of his success on the stage to
his power of imitation, for while his own manner was inferior, he could
at pleasure copy exactly that of any celebrated actor. He _would_ be a
player. At fifteen he ran away from home, and joining a strolling
company, acted Roxana in woman's clothes: his friends pursued him, and,
changing his dress for that of a girl of the time, he tried to escape
them, but in vain. The histrionic youth was captured, and bound
apprentice in London town; the 'seven long years' of which did not cure
him of the itch for acting. But he was too good a wit for the stage, and
amused himself, though not always his audience, by interspersing his
part with his own remarks. The great took him by the hand, and old
Marlborough especially patronized him: he wrote a burlesque of the
Italian operas then beginning to be in vogue; and died in 1712-13.
Estcourt was not the only actor belonging to the Beef-steak, nor even
the only one who had concealed his sex under emergency; Peg Woffington,
who had made as good a boy as he had done a girl, was afterwards a
member of this club.

In later years the beef-steak was cooked in a room at the top of Covent
Garden Theatre, and counted many a celebrated wit among those who sat
around its cheery dish. Wilkes the blasphemer, Churchill, and Lord
Sandwich, were all members of it at the same time. Of the last, Walpole
gives us information in 1763 at the time of Wilkes's duel with Martin in
Hyde Park. He tells us that at the Beef-steak Club Lord Sandwich talked
so profusely, 'that he drove harlequins out of the company.' To the
honour of the club be it added, that his lordship was driven out after
the harlequins, and finally expelled: it is sincerely to be hoped that
Wilkes was sent after his lordship. This club is now represented by one
held behind the Lyceum, with the thoroughly British motto, 'Beef and
Liberty:' the name was happily chosen and therefore imitated. In the
reign of George II. we meet with a 'Rump-steak, or Liberty Club;' and
somehow steaks and liberty seem to be the two ideas most intimately
associated in the Britannic mind. Can any one explain it?

Other clubs there were under Anne,--political, critical, and
hilarious--but the palm is undoubtedly carried off by the glorious
Kit-kat.

It is not every eating-house that is immortalized by a Pope, though
Tennyson has sung 'The Cock' with its 'plump head-waiter,' who, by the
way, was mightily offended by the Laureate's verses--or pretended to be
so--and thought it 'a great liberty of Mr. ----, Mr. ----, what is his
name? to put respectable private characters into his books.' Pope, or
some say Arbuthnot, explained the etymology of this club's extraordinary
title:--

    'Whence deathless Kit-kat took its name,
       Few critics can unriddle:
     Some say from pastrycook it came,
       And some from Cat and Fiddle.

    'From no trim beaux its name it boasts,
       Grey statesmen or green wits;
     But from the pell-mell pack of toasts
       Of old cats and young kits.'

Probably enough the title was hit on a hap-hazard, and retained because
it was singular, but as it has given a poet a theme, and a painter a
name for pictures of a peculiar size, its etymology has become
important. Some say that the pastry cook in Shire Lane, at whose house
it was held, was named Christopher Katt. Some one or other was certainly
celebrated for the manufacture of that forgotten delicacy, a mutton-pie,
which acquired the name of a Kit-kat.

    'A Kit-kat is a supper for a lord,'

says a comedy of 1700, and certes it afforded at this club evening
nourishment for many a celebrated noble profligate of the day. The
supposed sign of the Cat and Fiddle (Kitt), gave another solution, but
after all, Pope's may be satisfactorily received.

The Kit-kat was, _par excellence_, the Whig Club of Queen Anne's time:
it was established at the beginning of the eighteenth century, and was
then composed of thirty-nine members, among whom were the Dukes of
Marlborough, Devonshire, Grafton, Richmond, and Somerset. In later days
it numbered the greatest wits of the age, of whom anon.

This club was celebrated more than any for its _toasts_.

Now, if men must drink--and sure the vine was given us for use, I do not
say for abuse--they had better make it an occasion of friendly
intercourse; nothing can be more degraded than the solitary
sanctimonious toping in which certain of our northern brethren are known
to indulge. They had better give to the quaffing of that rich gift, sent
to be a medicine for the mind, to raise us above the perpetual
contemplation of worldly ills, as much of romance and elegance as
possible. It is the opener of the heart, the awakener of nobler feelings
of generosity and love, the banisher of all that is narrow, and sordid,
and selfish; the herald of all that is exalted in man. No wonder that
the Greeks made a god of Bacchus, that the Hindu worshipped the mellow
Soma, and that there has been scarce a poet who has not sung its praise.
There was some beauty in the feasts of the Greeks, when the goblet was
really wreathed with flowers; and even the German student, dirty and
drunken as he may be, removes half the stain from his orgies with the
rich harmony of his songs, and the hearty good-fellowship of his toasts.
We drink still, perhaps we shall always drink till the end of time, but
all the romance of the bowl is gone; the last trace of its beauty went
with the frigid abandonment of the toast.

There was some excuse for wine when it brought out that now forgotten
expression of good-will. Many a feud was reconciled in the clinking of
glasses; just as many another was begun when the cup was drained too
deeply. The first quarter of the last century saw the end of all the
social glories of the wassail in this country, and though men drank as
much fifty years later, all its poetry and romance had then disappeared.

It was still, however, the custom at that period to call on the name of
some fair maiden, and sing her praises over the cup as it passed. It was
a point of honour for all the company to join the health. Some beauties
became celebrated for the number of their toasts; some even standing
toasts among certain sets. In the Kit-kat Club the custom was carried
out by rule, and every member was compelled to name a beauty, whose
claims to the honour were then discussed, and if her name was approved,
a separate bowl was consecrated to her, and verses to her honour
engraved on it. Some of the most celebrated toasts had even their
portraits hung in the club-room, and it was no slight distinction to be
the favourite of the Kit-kat. When only eight years old, Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu enjoyed this privilege. Her father, the Lord Dorchester,
afterwards Evelyn, Duke of Kingston, in a fit of caprice, proposed 'the
pretty little child' as his toast. The other members, who had never seen
her, objected; the Peer sent for her, and there could no longer be any
question. The forward little girl was handed from knee to knee, petted,
probably, by Addison, Congreve, Vanbrugh, Garth, and many another famous
wit. Another celebrated toast of the Kit-kat, mentioned by Walpole, was
Lady Molyneux, who, he says, died smoking a pipe.

This club was no less celebrated for its portraits than for the ladies
it honoured. They, the portraits, were all painted by Kneller, and all
of one size, which thence got the name of Kit-kat; they were hung round
the club-room. Jacob Tonson, the publisher, was secretary to the club.

Defoe tells us the Kit-kat held the first rank among the clubs of the
early part of the last century, and certainly the names of its members
comprise as many wits as we could expect to find collected in one
society.

Addison must have been past forty when he became a member of the
Kit-kat. His 'Cato' had won him the general applause of the Whig party,
who could not allow so fine a writer to slip from among them. He had
long, too, played the courtier, and was 'quite a gentleman.' A place
among the exclusives of the Kit-kat was only the just reward of such
attainments, and he had it. I shall not be asked to give a notice of a
man so universally known, and one who ranks rather with the humorists
than the wits. It will suffice to say, that it was not till _after_ the
publication of the 'Spectator,' and some time after, that he joined our
society.

Congreve I have chosen out of this set for a separate life, for this man
happens to present a very average sample of all their peculiarities.
Congreve was a literary man, a poet, a wit, a beau, and--what unhappily
is quite as much to the purpose--a profligate. The only point he,
therefore, wanted in common with most of the members, was a title; but
few of the titled members combined as many good and bad qualities of the
Kit-kat kind as did William Congreve.

Another dramatist, whose name seems to be inseparable from Congreve's,
was that mixture of bad and good taste--Vanbrugh. The author of 'The
Relapse,' the most licentious play ever acted;--the builder of Blenheim,
the ugliest house ever erected, was a man of good family, and Walpole
counts him among those who 'wrote genteel comedy, because they lived in
the best company.' We doubt the logic of this; but if it hold, how is it
that Van wrote plays which the best company, even at that age,
condemned, and neither good nor bad company can read in the present day
without being shocked? If the conversation of the Kit-kat was anything
like that in this member's comedies, it must have been highly edifying.
However, I have no doubt Vanbrugh passed for a gentleman, whatever his
conversation, and he was certainly a wit, and apparently somewhat less
licentious in his morals than the rest. Yet what Pope said of his
literature may be said, too, of some acts of his life:--

    'How Van wants grace, who never wanted wit.'

And his quarrel with 'Queen Sarah' of Marlborough, though the duchess
was by no means the most agreeable woman in the world to deal with, is
not much to Van's honour. When the nation voted half a million to build
that hideous mass of stone, the irregular and unsightly piling of which
caused Walpole to say that the architect 'had emptied quarries, rather
than built houses,' and Dr. Evans to write this epitaph for the
builder--

    'Lie heavy on him, Earth, for he
     Laid many a heavy load on thee,'

Sarah haggled over 'seven-pence halfpenny a bushel;' Van retorted by
calling her 'stupid and troublesome,' and 'that wicked woman of
Marlborough,' and after the Duke's death, wrote that the Duke had left
her 'twelve thousand pounds a-year to keep herself clean and go to law.'
Whether she employed any portion of it on the former object we do not
pretend to say, but she certainly spent as much as a miser could on
litigation, Van himself being one of the unfortunates she attacked in
this way.

The events of Vanbrugh's life were varied. He began life in the army,
but in 1697 gave the stage 'The Relapse.' It was sufficiently
successful to induce him to follow it up with the 'Provoked Wife,' one
of the wittiest pieces produced in those days. Charles, Earl of
Carlisle, Deputy Earl Marshal, for whom he built Castle Howard, made
him Clarencieux King-at-arms in 1704, and he was knighted by George
I., 9th of September, 1714. In 1705 he joined Congreve in the
management of the Haymarket, which he himself built. George I. made
him Comptroller-general of the royal works. He had even an experience
of the Bastille, where he was confined for sketching fortifications in
France. He died in 1726, with the reputation of a good wit, and a bad
architect. His conversation was, certainly, as light as his buildings
were heavy.

Another member, almost as well known in his day, was Sir Samuel Garth,
the physician, 'well-natured Garth,' as Pope called him. He won his fame
by his satire on the apothecaries in the shape of a poem called 'The
Dispensary.' When delivering the funeral oration over Dryden's body,
which had been so long unburied that its odour began to be disagreeable,
he mounted a tub, the top of which fell through and left the doctor in
rather an awkward position. He gained admission to the Kit-kat in
consequence of a vehement eulogy on King William which he had introduced
into his Harveian oration in 1697.[13] It was Garth, too, who
extemporized most of the verses which were inscribed on the
toasting-glasses of their club, so that he may, _par excellence_, be
considered the Kit-kat poet. He was the physician and friend of
Marlborough, with whose sword he was knighted by George I., who made him
his physician in ordinary. Garth was a very jovial man, and, some say,
not a very religious one. Pope said he was as good a Christian as ever
lived, 'without knowing it.' He certainly had no affectation of piety,
and if charitable and good-natured acts could take a man to heaven, he
deserved to go there. He had his doubts about faith, and is said to have
died a Romanist. This he did in 1719, and the poor and the Kit-kat must
both have felt his loss. He was perhaps more of a wit than a poet,
although he has been classed at times with Gray and Prior; he can
scarcely take the same rank as other verse-making doctors, such as
Akenside, Darwin, and Armstrong. He seems to have been an active,
healthy man--perhaps too much so for a poet--for it is on record that he
ran a match in the Mall with the Duke of Grafton, and beat him. He was
fond, too, of a hard frost, and had a regular speech to introduce on
that subject: 'Yes, sir, 'fore Gad, very fine weather, sir--very
wholesome weather, sir--kills trees, sir--very good for man, sir.'

Old Marlborough had another intimate friend at the club, who was
probably one of its earliest members. This was Arthur Maynwaring, a
poet, too, in a way, but more celebrated at this time for his _liaison_
with Mrs. Oldfield, the famous but disreputable actress, with whom he
fell in love when he was forty years old, and whom he instructed in the
niceties of elocution, making her rehearse her parts to him in private.
Maynwaring was born in 1668, educated at Oxford, and destined for the
bar, for which he studied. He began life as a vehement Jacobite, and
even supported that party in sundry pieces; but like some others, he was
easily converted, when, on coming to town, he found it more fashionable
to be a Whig. He held two or three posts under the Government, whose
cause he now espoused: had the honour of the dedication of 'The Tatler'
to him by Steele, and died suddenly in 1712. He divided his fortune
between his sister and his mistress, Mrs. Oldfield, and his son by the
latter. Mrs. Oldfield must have grown rich in her sinful career, for she
could afford, when ill, to refuse to take her salary from the theatre,
though entitled to it. She acted best in Vanbrugh's 'Provoked Husband,'
so well, in fact, that the manager gave her an extra fifty pounds by way
of acknowledgment.

Poetising seems to have been as much a polite accomplishment of that age
as letter-writing was of a later, and a smattering of science is of the
present day. Gentlemen tried to be poets, and poets gentlemen. The
consequence was, that both made fools of themselves. Among the
poetasters who belonged to the Kit-kat, we must mention Walsh, a country
gentleman, member of Parliament, and very tolerable scholar. He dabbled
in odes, elegies, epitaphs, and all that small fry of the muse which was
then so plentiful. He wrote critical essays on Virgil, in which he tried
to make out that the shepherds in the days of the Roman poet were very
well-bred gentlemen of good education! He was a devoted admirer and
friend of Dryden, and he encouraged Pope in his earlier career so kindly
that the little viper actually praised him! Walsh died somewhere about
1709 in middle life.

We have not nearly done with the poets of the Kit-kat. A still smaller
one than Walsh was Stepney, who, like Garth, had begun life as a violent
Tory and turned coat when he found his interest lay the other way. He
was well repaid, for from 1692 to 1706 he was sent on no less than eight
diplomatic missions, chiefly to German courts. He owed this preferment
to the good luck of having been a schoolfellow of Charles Montagu,
afterwards Earl of Halifax. He died about 1707, and had as grand a
monument and epitaph in Westminster Abbey as if he had been a Milton or
Dryden.

When you meet a dog trotting along the road, you naturally expect that
his master is not far off. In the same way, where you find a poet, still
more a poetaster, there you may feel certain you will light upon a
patron. The Kit-kat was made up of Mæcenases and their humble servants;
and in the same club with Addison, Congreve, Vanbrugh, and the minor
poets, we are not at all surprised to find Sir Robert Walpole, the Duke
of Somerset, Halifax, and Somers.

Halifax was, _par excellence_, the Mæcenas of his day, and Pope
described him admirably in the character of Bufo:--

    'Proud as Apollo, on his forked hill,
     Sat full-blown Bufo, puff'd by every quill;
     _Fed with soft dedication_ all day long,
     Horace and he went hand in hand in song.'

The dedications poured in thickly. Steele, Tickell, Philips, Smith, and
a crowd of lesser lights, raised my lord each one on a higher pinnacle;
and in return the powerful minister was not forgetful of the douceur
which well-tuned verses were accustomed to receive. He himself had tried
to be a poet, and in 1703 wrote verses for the toasting-cups of the
Kit-kat. His lines to a Dowager Countess of ----, are good enough to
make us surprised that he never wrote any better. Take a specimen:--

    'Fair Queen of Fop-land in her royal style;
     Fop-land the greatest part of this great isle!
     Nature did ne'er so equally divide
     A female heart 'twixt piety and pride:
     Her waiting-maids prevent the peep of day,
     And all in order at her toilet lay
     Prayer-books, patch-boxes, sermon-notes, and paint,
     At once t'improve the sinner and the saint.'

A Mæcenas who paid for his dedications was sure to be well spoken of,
and Halifax has been made out a wit and a poet, as well as a clever
statesman. Halifax got his earldom and the garter from George I., and
died, after enjoying them less than a year, in 1715.

Chancellor Somers, with whom Halifax was associated in the impeachment
case in 1701, was a far better man in every respect. His was probably
the purest character among those of all the members of the Kit-kat. He
was the son of a Worcester attorney, and born in 1652. He was educated
at Trinity, Oxford, and rose purely by merit, distinguishing himself at
the bar and on the bench, unwearied in his application to business, and
an exact and upright judge. At school he was a terribly good boy,
keeping to his book in play-hours. Throughout life his habits were
simple and regular, and his character unblemished. He slept but little,
and in later years had a reader to attend him at waking. With such
habits he can scarcely have been a constant attender at the club; and as
he died a bachelor, it would be curious to learn what ladies he selected
for his toasts. In his latter years his mind was weakened, and he died
in 1716 of apoplexy. Walpole calls him 'one of those divine men who,
like a chapel in a palace, remained unprofaned, while all the rest is
tyranny, corruption, and folly.'

A huge stout figure rolls in now to join the toasters in Shire Lane. In
the puffy, once handsome face, there are signs of age, for its owner is
past sixty; yet he is dressed in superb fashion; and in an hour or so,
when the bottle has been diligently circulated, his wit will be brighter
and keener than that of any young man present. I do not say it will be
repeatable, for the talker belongs to a past age, even coarser than that
of the Kit-kat. He is Charles Sackville,[14] famous as a companion of
the merriest and most disreputable of the Stuarts, famous--or, rather,
infamous--for his mistress, Nell Gwynn, famous for his verses, for his
patronage of poets, and for his wild frolics in early life, when Lord
Buckhurst. Rochester called him

    'The best good man with the worst-natured muse;'

and Pope says he was

    'The scourge of pride, though sanctified or great,
     Of fops in learning and of knaves in state.'

Our sailors still sing the ballad which he is said to have written on
the eve of the naval engagement between the Duke of York and Admiral
Opdam, which begins--

    'To all you ladies now on land
     We men at sea indite.'

With a fine classical taste and a courageous spirit, he had in early
days been guilty of as much iniquity as any of Charles's profligate
court. He was one of a band of young libertines who robbed and murdered
a poor tanner on the high-road, and were acquitted, less on account of
the poor excuse they dished up for this act than of their rank and
fashion. Such fine gentlemen could not be hanged for the sake of a mere
workman in those days--no! no! Yet he does not seem to have repented of
this transaction, for soon after he was engaged with Sedley and Ogle in
a series of most indecent acts at the Cock Tavern in Bow-street, where
Sedley, in 'birthday attire,' made a blasphemous oration from the
balcony of the house. In later years he was the pride of the poets:
Dryden and Prior, Wycherley, Hudibras, and Rymer, were all encouraged by
him, and repaid him with praises. Pope and Dr. King were no less
bountiful in their eulogies of this Mæcenas. His conversation was so
much appreciated that gloomy William III. chose him as his companion, as
merry Charles had done before. The famous Irish ballad, which my Uncle
Toby was always humming, 'Lillibullero bullen-a-lah,' but which Percy
attributes to the Marquis of Wharton, another member of the Kit-kat, was
said to have been written by Buckhurst. He retained his wit to the last;
and Congreve, who visited him when he was dying, said, 'Faith, he
stutters more wit than other people have in their best health.' He died
at Bath in 1706.

Buckhurst does not complete the list of conspicuous members of this
club, but the remainder were less celebrated for their wit. There was
the Duke of Kingston, the father of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu;
Granville, who imitated Waller, and attempted to make his 'Myra' as
celebrated as the court-poet's Saccharissa, who, by the way, was the
mother of the Earl of Sunderland; the Duke of Devonshire, whom Walpole
calls 'a patriot among the men, a gallant among the ladies,' and who
founded Chatsworth; and other noblemen, chiefly belonging to the latter
part of the seventeenth century, and all devoted to William III., though
they had been bred at the courts of Charles and James.

With such an array of wits, poets, statesmen, and gallants, it can
easily be believed that to be the toast of the Kit-kat was no slight
honour; to be a member of it a still greater one; and to be one of its
most distinguished, as Congreve was, the greatest. Let us now see what
title this conceited beau and poet had to that position.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 13: The Kit-kat club was not founded till 1703.]

[Footnote 14: For some notice of Lord Dorset, see p. 61.]


    WILLIAM CONGREVE.

  When and where was he born?--The Middle Temple.--Congreve finds his
      Vocation.--Verses to Queen Mary.--The Tennis-court
      Theatre.--Congreve abandons the Drama.--Jeremy Collier.--The
      Immorality of the Stage.--Very improper Things.--Congreve's
      Writings.--Jeremy's 'Short Views.'--Rival Theatres.--Dryden's
      Funeral.--A Tub-Preacher.--Horoscopic Predictions.--Dryden's
      Solicitude for his Son.--Congreve's Ambition.--Anecdote of
      Voltaire and Congreve.--The Profession of Mæcenas.--Congreve's
      Private Life.--'Malbrook's' Daughter.--Congreve's Death and
      Burial.


When 'Queen Sarah' of Marlborough read the silly epitaph which
Henrietta, Duchess of Marlborough, had written and had engraved on the
monument she set up to Congreve, she said, with one of the true Blenheim
sneers, 'I know not what _happiness_ she might have in his company, but
I am sure it was no _honour_,' alluding to her daughter's eulogistic
phrases.

Queen Sarah was right, as she often was when condemnation was called
for: and however amusing a companion the dramatist may have been, he was
not a man to respect, for he had not only the common vices of his age,
but added to them a foppish vanity, toadyism, and fine gentlemanism (to
coin a most necessary word), which we scarcely expect to meet with in a
man who sets up for a satirist.

It is the fate of greatness to have falsehoods told of it, and of
nothing in connection with it more so than of its origin. If the
converse be true, Congreve ought to have been a great man, for the place
and time of his birth are both subjects of dispute. Oh! happy Gifford!
or happy Croker! why did you not--perhaps you did--go to work to set the
world right on this matter--you, to whom a date discovered is the
highest palm (no pun intended, I assure you) of glory, and who would
rather Shakespere had never written 'Hamlet,' or Homer the 'Iliad,' than
that some miserable little forgotten scrap which decided a year or a
place should have been consigned to flames before it fell into your
hands? Why did you not bring the thunder of your abuse and the
pop-gunnery of your satire to bear upon the question, 'How, when, and
where was William Congreve born?'

It was Lady Morgan, I think, who first 'saw the light' (that is, if she
was born in the day-time) in the Irish Channel. If it had been only some
one more celebrated, we should have had by this time a series of
philosophical, geographical, and ethnological pamphlets to prove that
she was English or Irish, according to the fancies or prejudices of the
writers. It was certainly a very Irish thing to do, which is one
argument for the Milesians, and again it was done in the Irish Channel,
which is another and a stronger one; and altogether we are not inclined
to go into forty-five pages of recondite facts and fine-drawn arguments,
mingled with the most vehement abuse of anybody who ever before wrote on
the subject, to prove that this country had the honour of producing her
ladyship--the Wild Irish Girl. We freely give her up to the sister
island. But not so William Congreve, though we are equally indifferent
to the honour in his case.

The one party, then, assert that he was born in this country, the other
that he breathed his first air in the Emerald Isle. Whichever be the
true state of the case, we, as Englishmen, prefer to agree in the
commonly received opinion that he came into this wicked world at the
village of Bardsea, or Bardsey, not far from Leeds in the county of
York. Let the Bardseyans immediately erect a statue to his honour, if
they have been remiss enough to neglect him heretofore.

But our difficulties are not ended, for there is a similar doubt about
the year of his birth. His earliest biographer assures us he was born in
1672, and others that he was baptized three years before, in 1669. Such
a proceeding might well be taken as a proof of his Hibernian extraction,
and accordingly we find Malone supporting the earlier date, producing,
of course, a certificate of baptism to support himself; and as we have
a very great respect for his authority, we beg also to support Mr.
Malone.

This being settled, we have to examine who were his parents: and this is
satisfactorily answered by his earliest biographer, who informs us that
he was of a very ancient family, being 'the only surviving son of
William Congreve, Esq. (who was second son to Richard Congreve, Esq., of
Congreve and Stretton in that county),' to wit, Yorkshire. Congreve
_père_ held a military command, which took him to Ireland soon after the
dramatist's birth, and thus young William had the incomparable advantage
of being educated at Kilkenny, and afterwards at Trinity, Dublin, the
'silent sister,' as it is commonly called at our universities.

At the age of nineteen, this youth sought the classic shades of the
Middle Temple, of which he was entered a student, but by the honourable
society of which he was never called to the bar; but whether this was
from a disinclination to study 'Coke upon Lyttleton,' or from an
incapacity to digest the requisite number of dinners, the devouring of
which qualify a young gentleman to address an enlightened British jury,
we have no authority for deciding. He was certainly not the first, nor
the last, young Templar who has quitted special pleading on a crusade to
the heights of Parnassus, and he began early to try the nib of his pen
and the colour of his ink in a novel. Eheu! how many a novel has issued
from the dull, dirty chambers of that same Temple! The waters of the
Thames just there seem to have been augmented by a mingled flow of
sewage and Helicon, though the former is undoubtedly in the greater
proportion. This novel, called 'Incognita; or, Love and Duty
Reconciled,' seems to have been--for I confess that I have not read more
than a chapter of it, and hope I never may be forced to do so--great
rubbish, with good store of villains and ruffians, love-sick maidens who
tune their lutes--always conveniently at hand--and love-sick gallants
who run their foes through the body with the greatest imaginable ease.
It was, in fact, such a novel as James might have written, had he lived
a century and a half ago. It brought its author but little fame, and
accordingly he turned his attention to another branch of literature, and
in 1693 produced 'The Old Bachelor,' a play of which Dryden, his friend,
had so high an opinion that he called it the 'best first-play he had
ever read.' However, before being put on the stage it was submitted to
Dryden, and by him and others prepared for representation, so that it
was well fathered. It was successful enough, and Congreve thus found his
vocation. In his dedication--a regular piece of flummery of those days,
for which authors were often well paid, either in cash or interest--he
acknowledges a debt of gratitude to Lord Halifax, who appears to have
taken the young man by the hand.

The young Templar could do nothing better now than write another play.
Play-making was as fashionable an amusement in those days of Old Drury,
the only patented theatre then, as novel-writing is in 1860; and when
the young ensign, Vanbrugh, could write comedies and take the direction
of a theatre, it was no derogation to the dignity of the Staffordshire
squire's grandson to do as much. Accordingly, in the following year he
brought out a better comedy, 'The Double Dealer,' with a prologue which
was spoken by the famous Anne Bracegirdle. She must have been eighty
years old when Horace Walpole wrote of her to that other Horace--Mann:
'Tell Mr. Chute that his friend Bracegirdle breakfasted with me this
morning. As she went out and wanted her clogs, she turned to me and
said: "I remember at the playhouse they used to call, Mrs. Oldfield's
chair! Mrs. Barry's clogs! and Mrs. Bracegirdle's pattens!"' These three
ladies were all buried in Westminster Abbey, and, except Mrs. Cibber,
the most beautiful and most sinful of them all--though they were none of
them spotless--are the only actresses whose ashes and memories are
hallowed by the place, for we can scarcely say that they do _it_ much
honour.

The success of 'The Double Dealer,' was at first moderate, although that
highly respectable woman, Queen Mary, honoured it with her august
presence, which forthwith called up verses of the old adulatory style,
though with less point and neatness than those addressed to the Virgin
Queen:

    'Wit is again the care of majesty,'

said the poet, and

    'Thus flourished wit in our forefathers' age,
     And thus the Roman and Athenian stage.
     Whose wit is best, we'll not presume to tell,
     But this we know, our audience will excell;
     For never was in Rome, nor Athens seen
     So fair a circle, and so bright a queen.'

But this was not enough, for when Her Majesty departed for another realm
in the same year, Congreve put her into a highly eulogistic pastoral,
under the name of Pastora, and made some compliments on her, which were
considered the finest strokes of poetry and flattery combined, that an
age of addresses and eulogies could produce.

    'As lofty pines o'ertop the lowly steed,
     So did her graceful height all nymphs exceed,
     To which excelling height she bore a mind
     Humble as osiers, bending to the wind.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I mourn Pastora dead; let Albion mourn,
     And sable clouds her chalkie cliffs adorn.'

This play was dedicated to Lord Halifax, of whom we have spoken, and who
continued to be Congreve's patron.

The fame of the young man was now made; but in the following year it was
destined to shine out more brilliantly still. Old Betterton--one of the
best Hamlets that ever trod the stage, and of whom Booth declared that
when he was playing the Ghost to his Hamlet, his look of surprise and
horror was so natural, that Booth could not for some minutes recover
himself--was now a veteran in his sixtieth year. For forty years he had
walked the boards, and made a fortune for the patentees of Drury. It was
very shabby of them, therefore, to give some of his best parts to
younger actors. Betterton was disgusted, and determined to set up for
himself, to which end he managed to procure another patent, turned the
Queen's Court in Portugal Row, Lincoln's Inn, into a theatre, and opened
it on the 30th of April, 1695. The building had been before used as a
theatre in the days of the Merry Monarch, and Tom Killegrew had acted
here some twenty years before; but it had again become a 'tennis-quatre
of the lesser sort,' says Cibber, and the new theatre was not very
grand in fabric. But Betterton drew to it all the best actors and
actresses of his former company; and Mrs. Barry and Mrs. Bracegirdle
remained true to the old man. Congreve, to his honour, espoused the same
cause, and the theatre opened with his play of 'Love for Love,' which
was more successful than either of the former. The veteran himself spoke
the prologue, and fair Bracegirdle the epilogue, in which the poet thus
alluded to their change of stage:

    'And thus our audience, which did once resort
     To shining theatres to see our sport,
     Now find us tost into a tennis-court.
     Thus from the past, we hope for future grace:
     I beg it----
     And some here know I have a _begging face_.'

The king himself completed the success of the opening by attending it,
and the theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields might have ruined the older
house, if it had not been for the rapidity with which Vanbrugh and
Cibber, who wrote for Old Drury, managed to concoct their pieces; while
Congreve was a slower, though perhaps better, writer. 'Love for Love'
was hereafter a favourite of Betterton's, and when in 1709, a year
before his death, the company gave the old man--then in ill health, poor
circumstances, and bad spirits--a benefit, he chose this play, and
himself, though more than seventy, acted the part of Valentine,
supported by Mrs. Bracegirdle as Angelina, and Mrs. Barry as Frail.

The young dramatist with all his success, was not satisfied with his
fame, and resolved to show the world that he had as much poetry as wit
in him. This he failed to do; and, like better writers, injured his own
fame, by not being contented with what he had. Congreve--the wit, the
dandy, the man about town--took it into his head to write a tragedy. In
1697 'The Mourning Bride' was acted at the Tennis Court Theatre. The
author was wise enough to return to his former muse, and some time after
produced his best piece, so some think, 'The Way of the World,' which
was also performed by Betterton's company; but, alas! for
overwriting--that cacoëthes of imprudent men--it was almost hissed off
the stage. Whether this was owing to a weariness of Congreve's style,
or whether at the time of its first appearance Collier's attacks, of
which anon, had already disgusted the public with the obscenity and
immorality of this writer, I do not know: but, whatever the cause, the
consequence was that Mr. William Congreve, in a fit of pique, made up
his mind never to write another piece for the stage--a wise resolution,
perhaps--and to turn fine gentleman instead. With the exception of
composing a masque called the 'Judgment of Paris,' and an opera
'Gemele,' which was never performed, he kept this resolution very
honestly; and so Mr. William Congreve's career as a playwright ends at
the early age of thirty.

But though he abandoned the drama, he was not allowed to retire in
peace. There was a certain worthy, but peppery little man, who, though a
Jacobite and a clergyman, was stanch and true, and as superior in
character--even, indeed, in vigour of writing--to Congreve, as Somers
was to every man of his age. This very Jeremy Collier, to whom we owe it
that there is any English drama fit to be acted before our sisters and
wives in the present day. Jeremy, the peppery, purged the stage in a
succession of Jeremiads.

Born in 1650, educated at Cambridge as a poor scholar, ordained at the
age of twenty-six, presented three years later with the living of
Ampton, near Bury St. Edmunds, Jeremy had two qualities to recommend him
to Englishmen--respectability and pluck. In an age when the clergy were
as bad as the blackest sheep in their flocks, Jeremy was distinguished
by purity of life; in an age when the only safety lay in adopting the
principles of the Vicar of Bray, Jeremy was a Nonjuror, and of this
nothing could cure him. The Revolution of 1688 was scarcely effected,
when the fiery little partizan published a pamphlet, which was rewarded
by a residence of some months in Newgate, _not_ in capacity of chaplain.
But he was scarcely let out, when again went his furious pen, and for
four years he continued to assail the new government, till his hands
were shackled and his mouth closed in the prison of 'The Gate-house.'
Now, see the character of the man. He was liberated upon giving bail,
but had no sooner reflected on this liberation than he came to the
conclusion that it was wrong, by offering security, to recognize the
authority of magistrates appointed by a usurper, as he held William to
be, and voluntarily surrendered himself to his judges. Of course he was
again committed, but this time to the King's Bench, and would doubtless
in a few years have made the tour of the London prisons, if his enemies
had not been tired of trying him. Once more at liberty, he passed the
next three years in retirement.

After 1693, Jeremy Collier's name was not brought before the public till
1696, when he publicly absolved Sir John Friend and Sir William Perkins,
at their execution, for being concerned in a plot to assassinate King
William. His 'Essays on Moral Subjects' were published in 1697; 2nd
vol., 1705; 3rd vol., 1709. But the only way to put out a firebrand like
this is to let it alone, and Jeremy, being, no longer persecuted, began,
at last, to think the game was grown stupid, and gave it up. He was a
well-meaning man, however, and as long as he had the luxury of a
grievance, would injure no one.

