It is only a few years since HOLMES was little known to the
general reader save as a humorist. A series of writings of the most
varied character have since appeared, displaying more fully his greatly
varied ability, so that the reader will not be surprised to find in
this, his last wreath of poetic blossoms, a rich variety of every hue,
from the lightest tints of mirth to the sombre shades of tender pathos.
The variety of _feeling_ awakened by these lyrics is remarkable--and to
say that, is to bear sympathetic testimony to the excellence of each
separate piece. Even the beautiful ballad of 'Agnes,' chronicling the
loves of Sir Harry Frankland and Agnes Surraige of the Hopkinton
Frankland mansion, and which will be deemed one of the most perfect of
new ballads of the olden school, does not seem the chief flower, after
inhaling the home sweetness and heart aroma of many of the minor lyrics
in this volume. As for the humor, is it not of HOLMES? 'The
Deacon's Masterpiece,' and 'Parson Turrell's Legacy,' are of the very
best, of the triple _est_ brand; it is only to be wished there were a
hundred of them. Of that strange blending of pathos with humor, and the
'sentiment of society,' in which HOLMES equals, or, if you
will, surpasses PRAED, there are several exquisite examples.
But buy it for yourself, reader, and you will not regret the purchase,
for the harder the times, so much the more, as we opine, does the world
need cheering poesy.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

     SOME OF THE MISTAKES OF EDUCATED MEN. A Biennial Address
     before the Phrenokosmian Society of Pennsylvania College,
     Gettysburg, Pa. By John S. Hart, M.D. Delivered Sept. 18, 1861.
     Philadelphia: C. Sherman & Son, 1861.

An excellent address, which has attracted much comment and quotation
from different journals since its publication.


     THE COTTON KINGDOM: A Traveler's Observations on Cotton
     and Slavery in the American Slave States. Based upon three former
     volumes of journeys and investigations by the same author. By
     Frederick Law Olmstead. In two volumes. New York: Mason Brothers,
     1861.

The best record extant of social or commercial facts and figures
illustrative of the entire South.


     LADY MAUD. By Pierce Egan. Philadelphia: T. B. Peterson &
     Brothers.

We learn with regret that this is the only complete and unabridged
edition of Lady Maud, since from a hasty examination of its chapters we
judge that the more the work were abbreviated the better would it be for
the public.


     RECORD OF AN OBSCURE MAN. '_Aux plus déshérités le plus
     d'amour_.' Boston: Ticknor & Fields.

A work of very decided merit, though one advancing views and sentiments
which can not fail to provoke opposition and argument from many readers.
Of its interest, as well as of the talent of the author, there can be
but one opinion.


     SPARE HOURS. By John Brown, M.D. Boston: Ticknor & Fields,
     1861.

A beautiful reprint of the _Horæ Subscivæ_, beginning with 'Rab and his
Friends,' followed by many congenial sketches, the whole forming one of
the most fascinating volumes of light reading which has appeared for
years.


     THE SOUTHERN REBELLION AND THE WAR FOR THE UNION. A
     History of the Rise and Progress of the Rebellion. New York: James
     D. Torrey, No. 13 Spruce Street.

A well written, weekly current chronicle of the events of the war,
prepared from copious sources. The arrangement of this work is
excellent.


     GREAT EXPECTATIONS. By Charles Dickens. Philadelphia: T.
     B. Peterson & Brothers, 1861.

Another addition to the excellent duo-decimo edition of
DICKENS'S complete works, published by PETERSON.


RELATION OF THE AMERICAN BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS FOR FOREIGN MISSIONS
TO SLAVERY. By Charles M. Whipple. Boston: R. T. Walcutt, No. 221
Washington Street, 1861.


WOMAN'S RIGHTS UNDER THE LAW. In three Lectures delivered in
Boston, January, 1861, by Caroline H. Dall, author of Woman's Right to
Labor, &c. Boston: Walker, Wise & Co. 1861.


THE REBELLION; its Latent Causes and True Significance, in
Letters to a Friend abroad. By Henry T. Tuckerman. New York: James G.
Gregory, 1861.


LIGHT INFANTRY DRILL in the United States Army. T. B. Peterson
& Brothers. Philadelphia, 1861. Price, 25 cents.


EDITOR'S TABLE


It was usual, of old, to characterize as _Annus Mirabilis_, or A Year of
Wonder, any twelvemonth which had been more than usually prolific in
marvels. The historian who may in future days seek a dividing point or a
date for the greatest political and social struggle of this age, can
hardly fail to indicate 1861 as the _Annus Mirabilis_ of the Nineteenth
Century in America. That heart does not beat, the brain does not throb
on earth, which is capable of feeling or appreciating the tremendous
range of consequences involved in the events of this year. We hear the
most grating thunder-peals of horror; the whole artillery of death and
disaster roars and crashes from fort and field; there is blaze and ruin,
such as this continent knew not perhaps even in the primeval times of
its vanished Golden Hordes;--and again there rise prophetic organ-tones
of solemn praise; merry bells ringing the carillon of joy; sweet voices
as in dreams singing of the purple evening peace; while mysteriously and
beautifully, beyond all, breathes the Daughter of the Voice--that
strangest of prophecies known to the Hebrew of old, softly inspiring
hopes of a fairer future America than was ever before dreamed of. For,
of a truth, above all sits and works the awful destiny of man,
proclaiming as of old, amid strange races now forgotten, that the
humanity which bravely toils and labors shall live, while the haughty
and the oppressor and the sluggard, puffed up with vanity, shall all
pass away as the mist of the morning.

It is worth while, at the conclusion of such a year, to look about us;
to see what has been done or what is now doing, and to surmise as well
as we may what great changes the future may bring forth.

A year ago this country was plagued and disgraced beyond any on the face
of the earth by swarms of professional politicians; by men who regarded
all legislation as one vast Lobby and Third House, and 'ability' as the
means of turning corruption to their own personal advantage. These
miserables, whether on the Northern or Southern side, tacitly united in
driving all legislation or congressional business from its legitimate
halls into the procrastinating by-paths, in order that they might make
speeches and magnify themselves unto Buncombe, and be glorified by the
local home press because of their devotion to--the party! The party!
That was always the word. Where are these men of froth and wind
now,--these heroes of the stump and the bar-room? Passing away into
nothing, at headlong speed, before the great storm of the times. Now and
then they 'rally'--there was one ghastly wig-and-hollow-pumpkin effort
at recovery in the trembling, rattle-jointed Peace Movement of these
last summer months. Where is it now? There answers a gay laugh and merry
stave from the corners of irreverent weekly newspapers:--

  'The piece of a party, called the party of peace,
  Like everything else which deceases,
  Has gone where the wicked from trouble shall cease,
  For the party of peace is in pieces.'

Or we may see now and then wretched election meetings, as of late in New
York, where a worn-out FERNANDO WOOD and others like him gabble
as much treason as they dare. It is all played out--Mozart, Tammany,
and all the trash. Rummy, frowsy candidates, treating Five-Point
graduates, and shoulder-hitting bravos yelling at the polls, are
beginning to be disgusting and anti-national elements. Their very
existence is an insult to these great, serious and glorious times of
manly war, when young men are beginning at last to 'think great.' A few
more gasps by the politicians and down they must go into infinite depths
of congenial darkness, to be remembered only as allied to 'the
abominable state of affairs before the war.'

It is no small thing to have driven so much of the old iniquity out; but
from this and that side come murmurs that there are but few signs of the
young genius coming in. Oh, for one hour of Dundee! Oh, for a WEBSTER in
the cabinet, whose right arm should go forth and take hold of England
and Frank-land of the East, while his left swept the isles of the South
with fearful power! Oh, for the fierce old Dandolo of America, who was
_not_ blind, but whose piercing glance at this hour would dart through
many a diabolical diplomatic difficulty--for ANDREW JACKSON! Oh, for the
trumpet tones of CLAY--of MARCY--for one brave blast of that dread horn
of olden time which rang so bravely to battle!

Friends, have patience. Remember that these men, and all like them, were
slowly born of great times, and that we must await time's gestation. In
this age there spring no longer heroes dragon-tooth born into full
fighting-life inside of 2.30. But so surely as stars shine in their
rounding life, or water runs, or God lives, so surely are these days of
storm and sorrow and tremendous travail bringing slowly on their
legitimate fruit of great ideas and great men. Young man--whoever you
are--be sacred to yourself now, and, for a season, serious and pure and
noble--for _who_ knows in these times to what he may grow? But a century
ago, this land lay buried in obscurity. Here and there young
land-surveyors and country store-keepers wondered that destiny had
buried them on Virginia farms and in Yankee backwoods. But war came,--no
greater than this of ours--one involving no grander principles of human
dignity and freedom,--and the young 'obscures' darted to the heaven and
took glorious places amid the constellations of fame. 'When the tale of
bricks is doubled,' says the Hebrew proverb, 'Moses comes.'

We hear much said of the honest, sturdy, no-nonsense virtues of the old
revolutionary stock, both male and female. The thing is plain
enough--they had passed through serious times and great thoughts,
through trials, and sorrows, and healthy privation, and come out strong.
Just such will be the stock of men and women born in spirit of this war.
It is making the old material over again. It was all here as good as
ever, but wanted a little stirring up, that was all. He who has seen in
the sturdy East and glorious West the unflinching honesty and
earnestness with which men are upholding this war to the knife and knife
to the hilt, as PALAFOX phrased it,--or, as the American hath
it in humbler phrase, 'from the wheel to the hub and hub to the
linch-pin,'--has no doubt that at this minute it was never so popular,
never so determined, never so thoroughly ingrained, entwined,
inter-twisted with the whole life-core and being of our people. 'We
suffer--but on with the war! Hurrah for battle--only give us victory! Do
you ask for money, arms, ships?--take all and everything to
superfluity--but oh, give us victory and power!' Out of such will as
this there come the greatest of men--giants of a fearfully glorious
future. When we look around and see this red-hot iron determination to
see all through to the victorious end, we may well feel assured that the
day of great ideas and of great men is not far off.

It is superb for a stranger to see how the spirit of the Revolution
still lives in New England, and is voiced and acted by men bearing
Revolutionary names--it is magnificent to behold the stream, grown to a
thunder-torrent, roaring and foaming over the broad West. Hurrah! it
still lives--that old spirit of freedom, its fires are all aflame, and
it shall not again smoulder until the whole world has seen, as it did
before, that it is the light of the world, and the pillar guiding as of
old to the promised land.

If 1861 had brought nothing else to pass it would be supremely great in
this, that amid toil and trial, foes within and without, it has seen the
American people determine that _Slavery_, the worm which gnawed the core
of its tree of life, shall be plucked out. _Out it shall go_, that is
settled. We have fought the foe too long with kid gloves, but now puss
will lay aside her mittens and catch the Southern rats in earnest. It is
the negro who sustains the South; the negro who maintains its army,
feeds it, digs its trenches, squires its precious chivalry, and is
thereby forced most unnaturally to rivet his own chains. There shall be
an end to this, and our administration is yielding to this inevitable
necessity. Here again the great year has worked a wonder, since in so
short a space it has made such an advance in discovering a basis by
which all Union men may conscientiously unite in freeing the black.
There have been hitherto two steps made towards the solution. The first
was that of the old Abolition movement, which saw only the suffering of
the slave and cried aloud for his freedom, reckless of all results. It
was humane; but even humanity is not always worldly wise, and it did
unquestionably for twenty years defeat its own aim in the Border States.
But it _worked_ most unflinchingly. Then came HELPER, who saw
that the poor white man of the South was being degraded below the negro,
and that industry and capital were fearfully checked by slavery. In his
well-known work he pointed out, by calm and dispassionate facts and
figures, that the land south of 'Mason and Dixon's' was being sacrificed
most wastefully, and the majority of its white inhabitants kept in
incredible ignorance, meanness, and poverty, simply that a few
privileged families might remain 'first and foremost.' These opinions
were most clearly sustained, and the country was amazed. People began to
ask if it was quite right, after all, to suffer this slavery to grow and
grow, when it was manifestly reacting on the poor white man, and
literally sinking him _below the level of the black_. This was the
second movement on the slave question, and its effect was startling.

But there was yet a third advance required, and it came with the past
year and the war, in the form of the now so rapidly expanding
'Emancipation' movement. HELPER had shown that slavery had
degraded the poor whites, but the events leading to the present struggle
indicated to all intelligent humanity that it was rapidly demoralizing
and ruining in the most hideous manner the minds of the _masters_ of the
slaves--nay, that its foul influence was spreading like a poison mist
over the entire continent. The universal shout of joyful approbation
which the whole South had raised years ago when a Northern senator was
struck down and beaten in the most infamously cowardly manner, had
caused the very horror of amazement at such fearful meanness, among all
true hearted and manly _men_, the world over. But when there came from
the 'first families' grinnings of delight over the vilest thievery and
forgery and perjury by FLOYD and his fellows,--when the whole
South, after agreeing in carrying on an election, refused to abide by
its results,--when the whole Southern press abounded in the vilest
denunciations of labor and poverty, and in Satanic contempt of
everything 'Yankee,' meaning thereby all that had made the North and
West prosperous and glorious,--and when, finally, it was found that this
loathsome poison was working through the North itself, corrupting the
young with pseudo-aristocratic pro-slavery sympathies,--then indeed it
became apparent that _for the sake of all, and for that of men in
comparison to whose welfare that of the negro was a mere trifle_, this
fearful disease must be in some form abated. The result was the
development of Emancipation on the broadest possible grounds,--of
Emancipation for the sake of the Union and of the white man,--to be
brought about, however, by the will of the people, subject to such
rules as discussion and expediency might determine. This was the present
Emancipation movement, first urged by that name in the New York
_Knickerbocker_ magazine, though its main principles were practically
manifesting themselves in many quarters--the most prominent being the
well-known proclamations of Generals BUTLER and FREMONT.

'Emancipation' does not, as has been urged, present in comparison to
Abolition a distinction without a difference. HELPER desired
the freedom of the slave for the sake of the poor white man in the South
and for Southern development. _Emancipation_ goes further, and claims
that nowhere on the American continent is the white laborer free from
the vile comparison and vile influences of slavery, and that it should
be abolished for the sake of the Union and for the sake of _all_ white
men. It may be dim to many now, but it is true as God's providence, that
whether it be in our Union, or out of it, we can no longer exist side by
side with a state of society in which it is shamelessly proclaimed that
labor, man's holiest and noblest attribute, is a disgrace; that the
negro is the standard of the mudsill, and that the state must be based
on an essentially degraded, sunken class, whether white or black. Yet we
might for the sake of peace have long borne with all this, and yielded
to the old lie-based 'isothermal' cant, had it not resulted, as it
inevitably must, in building up the most miserable, insolent, and
arrogant pseudo aristocracy which ever made the name of aristocracy
ridiculous, not excepting that of the court of the sable Emperor
FAUSTIN of St. Domingo. It is all very well to talk of Southern
rights; but humanity and progress, or, if you will, law and order,
industry and capital, have their rights also, aye, and their manifest
destiny too, and no one can deny that; reason as we may, or concede as
much as we will, there the facts are--the principal being the utter
impossibility of a slave-aristocracy--rotted to the core with theories
now exploded through the civilized world--existing either in or out of a
neighboring republic in which freedom

  'Careers with thunder-speed along.'

So we stand at the parting of the ways. But the problem is half solved
already. The year 1861 closes leaving it clear as noon-day that
emancipation in the Border States is a foregone conclusion, and that,
reduced to the cotton belt, it can never become a preponderating
national influence. As for the details of settlement, calmly considered,
they present no real difficulty to the man who realizes the enormous
industrial and recuperative energies of this country.

'What are we to do with one or two million of free blacks?' asks one. A
few years ago, when it was proposed to banish all free persons of color
from Maryland, a cry of alarm went up lest Baltimore alone should be
deprived of fifteen thousand of 'the best servants in the world.' 'How
shall we ever pay for those who may be offered for sale to us, if we
resolve to pay for their slaves all Southerners who may take the oath of
allegiance?' Eight days' expenses of the present war would pay more than
the market price for all the slaves in Maryland! But these objections
are childish. Right against them rises a tremendous, inevitable destiny,
which _must_ crush all before it. So much for 1861.

We would urge no measure in this or any other relation which shall not
have received the fullest endorsement of two thirds of the loyal
American people. As regards all foreign interference, let it never be
forgotten that public opinion after all prevails in all Western Europe,
and that this would long hesitate ere it committed a national reputation
to an endorsement of the Southern Confederacy. It is apparent from the
authentic and shameless avowals of the Southern press that Mr.
SLIDELL, the cut-short ambassador, was authorized to solicit a
French protectorate of LOUIS NAPOLEON,--to such incredible
baseness has slave 'independence' sunk,--and, as we write, much
discussion is waged whether England will take in ill part our arrest of
a man charged with such a monstrous mission! Let England imagine herself
dependent on such a protectorate for her cotton, and the thought may
possibly occur that it would have been better to have sided at once
openly and squarely with the North. But John Bull is strangely changed
in these times, and Yankee protection is inconceivably more awful to him
than the slavery with which he has been for twenty years so much
disgusted.

  'The heart it pincheth sore,
  But the pocket pinches more.'

And now with the New Year. Amid red-flashing war and wild strivings we
look bravely and hopefully forward into the future, and see amid these
storms blue sky rifts and golden sun gleams. Already strong and
practical advances in education, in political economy, in industry, in
all that is healthier and sounder in life, are beginning to manifest
themselves. This country can be in nothing put back by this struggle, in
no wise weakened or injured. It is our hope and will that in these
columns some share of the good work may be honestly carried out. We wish
to speak under the most vital American influences to the American
people, ambitious of being nothing more nor less than soundly national
in all things. We see a new time forming, new ideas rising, and would
give it and them a voice in such earnest and energetic tones as the
people love. We call not only for the matured thought, but also for the
young mind of the country, and beg every man and woman who entertains
vigorous and practical ideas to come out boldly and speak freely. Think
nobly, write rapidly! Remember that every letter printed in these times
will take its place in history. The forgotten comment of the moment will
rise up in after years to be honored perhaps as the right word in the
right place. The day is coming when the songs and sentences of this
great struggle will be garnered up into literary treasuries, pass into
household words, and confer honor on the children of those who penned
them. Lay hand to the work, all you who have aught to say, aid us to
become a medium for the time, and honor yourselves by your utterances.
There are a thousand reforms, innumerable ideas fit for the day, ready
to bloom forth. Write and publish; the public is listening. Now is the
time, if it ever was, to develop an American character, to show the
world what treasures of life, strength and originality this country
contains. Beyond the old conventional _belles lettres_ and æsthetic
scholarship which limited us in peace, lies a fair land, a wilderness it
may be, but one bearing beautiful, unknown flowers, and strange but
golden fruits, which are well worthy a garden. Let all who know of these
bring them in. The time has come.

