_Editor._ Well, you must have got the wrong page.

_Author._ Why, you don't mean to say there are two ARTHUR BALFOURS,
do you?

_Editor._ I do.

_Author._ Aren't you thinking of the two WINSTON CHURCHILLS?

_Editor._ No, I'm not.

_Author._ Well, perhaps I'd better begin again.

_Mr. ARTHUR BALFOUR._

Born, as one might say, with a silver niblick in his mouth and
possessed of phenomenal intellectual attainments, Mr. ARTHUR BALFOUR
(the one on the other page) was not long in settling down to his main
life-work, which has been the laying out of University golf curricula.

[Is that better?--_Editor._ Much.]

In spite of this preoccupation he has found time for a remarkable
number of hobbies, such as politics, music and the study of
refrigerating machines, though the effect of all these various
activities is sometimes a little confusing for those with whom he
works. When consulted on a burning topic of the hour he may, for
instance, be on the point of inventing a new type of ice-bucket, so
that the interviewer is forced to go out quickly and fetch his fur
overcoat before he can talk in comfort. Or he may be playing, like
_Sherlock Holmes_, on his violin, and say, "Just wait till I've
finished this sonata." And by the time it's finished the bother about
Persia or Free Trade is quite forgotten. Or, again, Mr. BALFOUR may be
closeted with Professor VARDON, Doctor RAY or Vice-Chancellor MITCHELL
at the very moment when the Nicaraguan envoy is clamouring at the
door.

It is for this reason that Mr. ARTHUR BALFOUR has sometimes been
called Mr. Arthur Baffler. Puzzling, however, though he may be in many
of his political manifestations, his writings are like a beacon in the
gloom, and some day these simple chatty little booklets will surely
gain the wide public which they deserve. "The Foundation of Bunkers,"
"A Defence of Philosophic Divots" and "Wood-wind and Brassies" should
be read by all who are interested in _belles lettres_. And his latest
volume of essays deals, I believe, with subjects so widely diverse and
yet so enthralling as "Booty and the Criticism of Booty," "Trotsky's
View of Russian World Policy," "Quizzical Research" and "The Freedom
of the Tees."

The real pity is that with all his many and wonderful gifts Mr. ARTHUR
BALFOUR has never felt the fiery enthusiasm of his Hatfield cousins.
He remains, in fact, a salamander among the Sizzles.

K.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Retired Dealer in Pork._ "HOW MUCH DO YOU WANT FOR
IT?"

_Artist._ "FIFTY POUNDS."

_Retired Dealer._ "RIGHT-O. NOW COULD YOU DO ONE OF ME IN A RECLINING
POSITION, TO MATCH?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

TRIUMPHANT VULGARITY.

    [A writer in _The Athenæum_, discussing modern songs, observes
    that in the happy days of the eighteenth century "even the vulgar
    could not achieve vulgarity; to-day vulgarity is in the air, and
    only the strongest and most fastidious escape its taint." The
    accompanying lines are submitted as a modest protest against this
    sadly undemocratic and obscurantist doctrine.]

  In days of old, when writers bold
    Betrayed the least disparity
  Between their genius and an age
    When frankness was a rarity,
  An odious word was often heard
    From critics void of charity,
    Simplicity or clarity,
    Or vision or hilarity,
  Who used to slate or deprecate
    The vices of vulgarity.

  But now disdain is wholly slain
    By wide familiarity
  Which links the unit with his age
    In massive solidarity;
  No more the word is used or heard,
    No, no, we call it charity,
    Simplicity or clarity,
    Or vision or hilarity,
  But never slate or deprecate
    The virtues of vulgarity.

       *       *       *       *       *

=An Object Lesson.=

    "Nothing is so suggestive of a faulty education than a lack of
    grammar."--_Fiji Paper._

    "The Vicar was born in Ireland, and lived there many years, and
    the problems of the Irish are no difficulty to him."

    _New Zealand Paper._

That's the man we want over here.

       *       *       *       *       *

=PRISCILLA PLAYS FAIRIES.=

Unrehearsed dramatic dialogue comes quite easily to some people, and
so does a knowledge of the ways of the fairy world, but I am not one
of those people. Also I was supposed to have a headache that afternoon
and to be recovering from a severe cold. Also I was reading a very
exciting book. I cannot help thinking therefore that the fairy
Bluebell was taking a mean advantage of my numerous disabilities in
appearing at all. She rattled the handle of the door a long time, and
when I had opened it came in by a series of little skips on her toes,
accompanied by wagglings of the arms rather in the fashion of a
penguin. Every now and then she gave a slightly higher jump and
descended flatly and rather noisily on her feet. She wore a new frock,
with frills.

_I._ What are you doing, Priscilla?

_She._ I'm the Fairy Bluebell dancing. Don't you like my dancing?

_I._ It's beautiful.

_She_ (_rapidly_). And you were a very poor old man who had a lot of
nasty work to do and you were asleep.

_I_ (_feeling it might have been much worse and composing myself to
slumber in my chair_). Honk!

_She_ (_pinching my ear and pulling it very hard_). And you woke up
and said, "I do believe there's a dear little fairy dancing."

_I_ (_emerging from repose_). Why, I do believe I heard a fairy
dancing, or (_vindictively_) can it have been another ton of coal
coming in?

_She_ (_disregarding my malice_). And you said, "Alack, alack! I do
want somefing to eat."

_I._ Alack, alack! I _am_ so hungry.

_She_ (_fetching a large cushion from the sofa and putting it on the
top of me_). Lumpetty, lumpetty, lumpetty.

_I._ What's that, Priscilla?

_She._ Bitatoes pouring out of a sack. (_Fetches another cushion and
puts it on the top of the first._) Lumpetty, lumpetty, lumpetty.

_I._ And this?

_She_ (_opening her eyes very wide_). Red plums. (_Fetches another
cushion._) Limpetty, limpetty, limpetty.

_I._ What's that?

_She._ Lovely honey.

_I_ (_affecting to simulate the natural gratification of a poor old
man suddenly smothered in vegetables, fruit and liquid preserve_). How
perfectly delicious!

_She._ And you want to go to sleep again. [_I go._

_She_ (_pulling my ear again_). And you sawed a dragon coming up the
drive, and the sofa was the dragon.

_I._ Alack, alack! I see a dragon coming up the drive. What shall I
do? I must telephone to the police.

_She_ (_quickly_). Did the police have a tuncheon?

_I._ Yes, he did.

_She._ Shall I be the police?

_I_ (_cautiously, because a "tuncheon" necessitates making a long
paper roll out of "The Times"_). I am afraid the telephone had broken
down, so the police didn't hear. How I wish the Fairy Bluebell was
about!

_She._ And so the Fairy Bluebell came and cut off the dragon's head
and gave it to you.

  [_Fetches a fourth large cushion and adds it to the pile._

_I._ But why should I have the dragon's head?

_She_ (_enigmatically_). You had to have it.

  [_The poor old man resigns himself to his increasingly glutinous
    fate._

_She_ (_fetching a waste-paper basket and returning to the sofa_).
Limpetty, limpetty, limpetty.

_I_ (_faint but inquisitive_). Whatever are you doing now, Priscilla?

_She._ Poisoning the dragon's body.

_I._ Poisoning it?

_She._ Yes, wiv a can.

_I._ How?

_She._ Down its neck.

_I_ (_feeling that the immediate peril from the dragon's assault is
now practically over and wishing to return the fairy's kindness_).
Shall we pretend that the sofa is where the Fairy Bluebell lived, and
I built her a little home with flowers, and these cushions were the
flowers, and (_rather basely_) she went to sleep in it?

_She_ (_with sparkling eyes_). Yes, yes.

  [_I remove the potatoes, the plums, the honey and the head of the
    dragon and manufacture a grotto in which the Fairy Bluebell reclines
    with closed eyes. It appears to be a suitable moment for returning to
    my book._

_She._ And suddenly the Fairy Bluebell woke up, and what do you think
she wanted?

_I_ (_disillusioned_). I can't think.

_She._ She wanted to be readen to.

_I_ (_resignedly_). And what did I do?

_She._ You said, "I'll read about Tom and the otter."

_I_ (_hopefully_). I don't know where it is.

_She._ I think it's in the dining-room, and the Fairy Bluebell
couldn't get it herself because she was only a _little_ girl really.

As I say, there are a lot of people, and many of them, doubtless,
readers of this paper, who understand all about fairies. I want to ask
them, as one poor old hard-worked man to another, whether this is
the proper way for a fairy to behave. There seems to be a lack of
delicacy--and shall I say shyness?--about it.

EVOE.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Mrs. McNicol._ "FOUND A POUN' NOTE IN THE STREET,
DONAL'? THAT'S GUID!"

_Her Husband (sadly.)_ "AY, BUT MCTAVISH SAW ME PICK IT UP, AN' I OWE
HIM TWENTY-TWO AN' SAXPENCE."]

       *       *       *       *       *

=Our Tactful Orators.=

    "At the close they asked President ----, who was in the chair, to
    present a very handsome umbrella to Mr. ----.

    In a few well-chosen words the Chairman said he trusted that
    Mr. ----, while journeying through life, would be successful in
    warding off many a shower with his umbrella, but they all hoped
    they would be showers of goodwill."--_Trade Paper._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "This is great fun and mystifies your friends. Buy a few and you
    will be the cleverest fellow in your district.

    Our leaders are 'Stink Bomb' (make bad smell when broken). Re. 1 a
    box.

    'Sneeze Powder' (makes everybody sneeze when blown in the air) Re.
    1 a bottle."

_Advt. in Indian Paper._

Who says the East has no sense of humour?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THROUGH THE GOAL-POSTS; OR, THE END OF A PERFECT
SCRUM.]

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE WHITE SPAT.=

When it is remembered how large a part has been played in history by
revolutionary and political songs it is both lamentable and strange
that at the present time only one of the numerous political faiths has
a hymn of its own--"The Red Flag." The author of the words owes a good
deal, I should say, to the author of "Rule Britannia," though I am
inclined to think he has gone one better. The tune is that gentle old
tune which we used to know as "Maryland," and by itself it rather
suggests a number of tired sheep waiting to go through a gate than a
lot of people thinking very redly. I fancy the author realised this,
and he has got over it by putting in some good powerful words like
"scarlet," "traitors," "flinch" and "dungeon," whenever the tune is
particularly sheepish. The effect is effective. Just imagine if the
Middle Classes Union could march down the middle of the Strand singing
that fine chorus:--

  "Then raise the scarlet standard high,
  Beneath its shade we'll live and die;
  Though cowards flinch and traitors sneer
  We'll keep the Red Flag flying here."

Well, I have set myself to supply some of the other parties with
songs, and I have begun with "The White Spat," which is to be the
party-hymn of the High Tories (if any). I have written it to the same
tune as "The Red Flag," because, when the lion finally does lie down
with the lamb, it will be much more convenient if they can bleat and
roar in the same metre, and I shall hope to hear Mr. ROBERT WILLIAMS
and Lord ROBERT CECIL singing these two songs at once one day. I am
not wholly satisfied with "The White Spat," but I think I have caught
the true spirit, or, at any rate, the proper inconsequence of these
things:--

THE WHITE SPAT

Air--_Maryland._

  The spats we wear are pure as snow--
  We are so careful where we go;
  We don't go near the vulgar bus
  Because it always splashes us.

  _Chorus._
  We take the road with trustful hearts,
  Avoiding all the messy parts;
  However dirty you may get
  We'll keep the White Spat spotless yet.

  At night there shines a special star
  To show us where the puddles are;
  The crossing-sweeper sweeps the floor--
  That's what the crossing-sweeper's for.

  _Chorus._
  Then take the road, etc., etc.

I know it doesn't look much, just written down on paper; but you try
singing it and you'll find you're carried away.

Of course there ought to be an international verse, but I'm afraid I
can't compete with the one in my model:--

  "Look round: the Frenchman loves its blaze,
  The sturdy German chants its praise;
  In Moscow's vaults its hymns are sung;
  Chicago swells the surging throng."

This is the best I can do:--

  From Russia's snows to Afric's sun
  The race of spatriots is one;
  One faith unites their alien blood--
  "There's nothing to be said for mud."

Now we have the song of the Wee Frees. I wanted this to be rather
pathetic, but I'm not sure that I haven't overdone it. The symbolism,
though, is well-nigh perfect, and, after all, the symbolism is the
chief thing. This goes to the tune of "Annie Laurie":--

THE OLD BLACK BROLLY.

Air--_Annie Laurie._

  Under the Old Umbrella,
    Beneath the leaking gamp,
  Wrapped up in woolly phrases
    We battle with the damp.
    Come, gather round the gamp!
  Observe, it is pre-war;
    And beneath the old Black Brolly
  There's room for several more.

  Shameless calumniators
    Calumniate like mad;
  Detractors keep detracting;
    It really is too bad;
    It really is too bad.
  To show we're not quite dead,
    We wave the old Black Brolly
  And hit them on the head.

Then we have the National Party. I am rather vague about the National
Party, but I know they are frightfully military, and they keep on
having Mass Rallies in Kensington--complete with drums, I expect.
Where all the masses come from I don't quite know, as a prolonged
search has failed to reveal anyone who knows anyone who is actually
a member of the party. Everybody tells me, though, that there is at
least one Brigadier-General (Tempy.) mixed up with it, if not two, and
at least one Lord, though possibly one of the Brigadiers is the same
as the Lord; but after all they represent the Nation, so they ought to
have a song. They have nothing but "Rule Britannia" now, I suppose.

Their song goes to the tune of "The British Grenadiers." I have
written it as a duet, but no doubt other parts could be added if the
occasion should ever arise.

THE NATIONAL.

Air--_The British Grenadiers._

  Some talk of Coalitions,
    Of Tories and all that;
  They are but cheap editions
    Of the one and only Nat.;
  Our Party has no equals,
    Though of course it has its peers,
  With a tow, row, row, row, row, row,
    For the British Brigadiers.

You have no idea how difficult it is to write down the right number of
_rows_ first time; however I daresay the General wouldn't mind a few
extra ones.

  We represent the Nation
    As no one else can do;
  Without exaggeration
    Our membership is two.
  We rally in our masses
    And give three hearty cheers,
  With a tow, row, row, row, row, row
    For the National Brigadiers.

There could be a great deal more of that, but perhaps you have had
enough.

Of course, if you don't think the poetry of my songs is good enough, I
shall just have to quote some of "The International" words to show you
that it's the _tune_ that matters.

Here you are:--

  "Arise! ye starvelings from your slumbers,
    Arise! ye criminals of want,
  For reason in revolt now thunders,
    And at last ends the age of cant."

If people can get excited singing that, my songs would send them
crazy.

Then there is the Coalition. I have had a good deal of difficulty
about this, but I think that at last I have hit the right note; all my
first efforts were too dignified. This goes to a darkie tune:--

THE PIEBALD MARE.

Air--_Camptown Ladies._

  Down-town darkies all declare,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah,
  There never was a hoss like the piebald mare,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah day!
  One half dark and the other half pale,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah,
  Two fat heads and a great big tail,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah day!

  _Chorus._
  Gwine to run all night,
    Gwine to run all day!
  I put my money on the piebald mare
    Because she run both way.

  Little old DAVE he ride dat hoss,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah,
  Where'll she be if he takes a toss?
        Doo-dah, doo-dah day!
  De people try to push him off,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah,
  De more dey push de more he scoff,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah day!

  _Chorus._
  Gwine to run, &c.

  Over the largest fence they bound,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah,
  Things exploding all around,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah day!
  One fine day dat hoss will burst,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah,
  But little old DAVE he'll _walk_ in first,
        Doo-dah, doo-dah day!

  _Chorus._
  Gwine to run, &c.

Once again, merely written down, the words do _not_ thrill, but I hope
none of the parties will definitely reject these hymns till they have
heard them actually sung; if necessary I will give a trial rendering
myself.

The other day, when we were playing charades and had to act L, we did
_Lloyd George and the Coalition_; and the people who were acting the
Coalition sang the above song with really wonderful effect. It is true
that the other side thought we were acting _Legion and the Gadarene
Swine_, but that must have been because of something faulty in our
make-up. The sound of this great anthem was sufficiently impressive to
make one long to hear the real Coalition shouting it all along Downing
Street. It is a solo with chorus, you understand, and the Coalition
come in with a great roar of excitement and fervour on _Doo-dah!
Doo-dah!_

Yes, I like that.

A. P. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Profiteer Host._ "WOT D'YER THINK OF MY OAKS?"
_Profiteer Guest._ "BIT OF ALL RIGHT. WHERE D'YER GET 'EM?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

  "MORE THAN MILLION SALE.
  Waste! Waste! Waste!"

  _Newspaper Poster._

In mercy we suppress the title of our contemporary.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The man in custody has been identified as the result of the
    efforts of the Birkenhead detective stag."--_Liverpool Paper._

A variation on the old-fashioned sleuth-hound.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the report of a speech by Admiral Sir PERCY SCOTT:--

    "He might say that when the Germans were demolarised at the Battle
    of Jutland ..."

    _Scottish Paper._

This confirms our impression that, whatever happened at Jutland, we
certainly drew the German Navy's teeth.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS.

How did mankind get to all corners of the earth? and what is the cause
of exploding suns? These are among the questions put by Professor A.
W. BICKERTON, of the London Astronomical Society, and they would
be solved, it seems, if our learned men would only band themselves
together. I have no wish to hamper the good work, but a moment's
reflection suggests a number of other questions simply asking to be
answered.

For instance, what happens when an irresistible force meets Sir ERIC
GEDDES?

And why is it that while we hear of thousands of people losing their
umbrellas we have never yet heard of a single case where a man openly
admitted that he had found one?

And is there any reason why the modern novel should not end happily,
instead of the hero and heroine always marrying at the last moment.

And how does it happen that Thanet is the best holiday-place in this
country and enjoys more sunshine than any other resort?

And could not _The Daily Mail_ extend the same sunshine privilege to
other parts?

And what makes a music-hall audience laugh when a comedian changes his
hat and mutters the mystic word, "Winston"?

And who is the gentleman referred to?

And why is it that nine-tenths of the coon-singers on the halls
are always wanting to get back to their dear old homes? And who is
stopping them in their noble desire? And is there any explanation why
all these singers seem to have their homes in distant Alabam, where
the roses keep on climbing round the door, just close to where the
cotton and the corn are growing all the year round, only later in life
to leave the dear old place to take up music-hall work here, and then
spend the remainder of their lives telling us of their passionate
determination to get away back to the old folks?

And would I be right in my surmise that very few homes in Wigan have
roses round the door or stand in fields of growing cotton and corn or
reek of new-mown hay?

And why is it that, when you tell a man there are so many million
stars in the skies, he will believe you, but the moment he sees a
notice on a gate bearing the words "Wet Paint" he puts his finger upon
it just to find out for himself?

And why did Mrs. ASQUITH----But perhaps that will be enough for the
Professor to be going on with.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Commercial Candour.=

    "My Studio is the most up-to-date and my methods of photography
    just a little bit different."--_Canadian Paper._

       *       *       *       *       *
[Illustration: _Hostess._ "WHAT--GOING ALREADY? WHY, IT'S ONLY THREE
O'CLOCK."

_Guest._ "I KNOW. BUT I'M DEAD TIRED, AND I'VE GOT TO BE UP EARLY FOR
A '_DÉJEUNER DANSANT_.'"]


       *       *       *       *       *


A NOTE ON THE DRAMA.

["_Hamlet_ was not a business man."--Mr. A. B. WALKLEY.]

  Had he but learned the useful knowledge
    And that essential grasp of things
  Which training at a business college
    (If diligently followed) brings,
      We should have had, no doubt,
  A _Hamlet_ with the "moody" Dane left out.

  He'd not have stalked in gloomy fashion
    Nor wanted to soliloquise,
  But rather, undisturbed by passion,
    He would have sat Napoleon-wise,
      Chewing an unlit weed
  And talking down the telephone (full speed).

  Planning a "book" to suit his players,
    He would have sought a theme less grim,
  For tragedies are doubtful payers;
    Revue would be the stuff for him,
      Scanty in dress and plot,
  With dancers featuring the Hammy Trot.

  He missed one glorious proposition--
    The money would have come in stacks
  If he had shown the Apparition
    For half-a-crown (including tax),
      And, though 'twas after eight,
  Added a side-line trade in chocolate.

  At other stunts we find him lacking;
    Thus, when he met _Laertes_, he
  Did not secure a proper backing
    Nor nominate the referee;
      And, what was even worse,
  Did no finessing for a bigger purse.

  Had _Hamlet_ made it his endeavour
    To seize each chance of lawful gain,
  Certain it is that there would never
    Have been a doubt that he was sane;
      And then perhaps Act Five
  Had left some people--one or two--alive.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Christmas and the Children.=

With the approach of a Festival that is dedicated to the joy of
children, Mr. Punch makes bold to plead the cause of the less
fortunate among them. The Queen's Hospital for Children, once known as
the North-Eastern Hospital for Children, is the only one of its kind
in this part of London and serves a poor district with a population
of half-a-million. Its claim upon the generosity of more favoured
Londoners is as strong as its lack of funds at the present moment is
serious. It has one hundred-and-seventy beds, and during the last
year has cared for eighteen hundred in-patients and sixty thousand
out-patients. Mr. Punch is certain that, if the children of the
West-end understood the suffering and needs of these other children of
Bethnal Green, they would want to help them by forgoing some of
their Christmas toys. Gifts should be addressed to the Secretary,
T. GLENTON-KERR, Esq., Queen's Hospital for Children, Hackney Road,
Bethnal Green, E.2.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE ROAD TO ECONOMY.

THE SHEPHERD. "I WONDER IF ANY OF YOU SHEEP COULD SHOW ME THE WAY."

("Let the Nation set the example [in economy] to the
Government."--_Mr. LLOYD GEORGE._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

=ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.=

_Monday, November 29th._--Some time ago Lord NEWTON was appointed
Chairman of a Committee on Smoke Abatement. It took enough evidence to
fill a Blue-book a couple of inches thick, and, at the request of the
Government, furnished an interim report. Supposing, not unnaturally,
that its valuable recommendations would be adopted in the Government's
housing schemes the Committee was disgusted to find that, save for an
emasculated summary in "a dismal journal called _Housing_," no notice
was taken of its report. Lord NEWTON is not a man who can safely be
invited to consume his own smoke, and he made indignant protest this
afternoon. A soft answer from Lord SANDHURST, who assured him that the
Government, far from being unmindful of the Committee's labours,
had already equipped some thousands of houses with central heating,
temporarily diverted his wrath.

Thanks to the Sinn Feiners, the Public Galleries of the House of
Commons were closed. Thus deprived of all audience save themselves and
the reporters the most loquacious Members were depressed. _Bombinantes
in gurgite vasto_, their arguments sounded hollow even to themselves.
With an obvious effort they tried to carry on what the SPEAKER
described--and deprecated--as "the usual Monday fiscal debate." This
time it turned upon the large imports from Russia in 1913. One side
seemed to think that similar imports would be forthcoming to-day but
for the obstructiveness of the British Government, while the other
was confident that Russia had nothing to export save propaganda. The
controversy was beginning to pall when by a happy inspiration Mr.
RONALD MCNEILL, with mock solemnity, inquired if the last egg in
Russia had not been eaten by a relation of the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
WAR.

[Illustration: "His conscience now quite clear."

SIR J. T. AGG-GARDNER.]

A long-standing Parliamentary tradition enjoins that the reply to any
Question addressed to the CHAIRMAN OF THE KITCHEN COMMITTEE should be
greeted with laughter. By virtue of his office he holds, as it were,
the "pass-the-mustard" prerogative. Members laughed accordingly when
he replied to a question relating to the number of ex-Service men
employed by his Committee; but they laughed much more loudly when the
hon. Member who put the original Question proceeded to inquire "if his
conscience is now quite clear," and Sir J. T. AGG-GARDNER, looking as
respectable as if he were _Mrs. Grundy's_ second husband, declared,
hand on heart, that it was.

[Illustration: THE DEFENDER OF KUT--WITH ESCORT.

SIR CHARLES TOWNSHEND.]

The House gave a rather less stentorian welcome than might have been
expected to Sir CHARLES TOWNSHEND, who was escorted up to the Table
by Mr. BOTTOMLEY and Colonel CROFT. Perhaps it was afraid that cheers
intended for the defender of Kut might be appropriated by the Editor
of _John Bull_.

