At _Amiens_, there is in the _Hotel de Ville_, a little antique god in
bronze, which was found, about four years ago, near a Roman urn, in the
earth, which is very well worthy of the notice of a _connoisseur_; but
it is such as cannot decently be described; the person in whose custody
it is, permitted me to take an impression from it in wax; but I am not
_quite so good_ a hand at waxwork as the artist mentioned above, and yet
my little houshold-god has some merit, a merit too that was not
discovered till three months after it had been fixed in the _Hotel de
Ville_; and the discovery was made by a female, not a male,
_connoisseur_.

It is said, that a Hottentot cannot be so civilized, but that he has
always a hankering after his savage friends, and _dried chitterlins_;
and, that gypsies prefer their roving life, to any other, a circumstance
that once did, but now no longer surprizes me; for I feel such a desire
to wander again, that I am impatient till the winter is past, when I
intend to visit _Geneva_, and make the tour of Italy; and if you can
find me cut a sensible valetudinarian or two, of either sex, or any
age, who will travel as we do, to see what is to be seen, to make a
little stay, where _the place_, or _the people_ invite us to do so, who
can dine on a cold partridge, in a hot day, under a shady tree; and
travel in a _landau and one_, we will keep them a _table d'hote_, that
shall be more pleasant than expensive, and which will produce more
health and spirits, than half the drugs of Apothecary's Hall.

If God delights so much in variety, as all things animate and inanimate
sufficiently prove, no wonder that man should do so too: and I have now
been so accustomed to move, though slowly, that I intend to creep on to
my _journey's end_, by which means I may live to have been an inhabitant
of every town almost in Europe, and die, as I have lately (and wish I
had always) lived, a free citizen of the whole world, slave to no sect,
nor subject to any King. Yet, I would not be considered as one wishing
to promote that disposition in others; for I must confess, that it is in
England alone, where an innocent and virtuous man can sit down and enjoy
the blessings of liberty and his own chearful hearth, in full confidence
that no earthly power can disturb it; and the best reason which can be
offered in favour of Englishmen visiting other kingdoms, is, to enable
them, upon their return, to know how to enjoy the inestimable blessings
of their own.


LETTER LVI.


For what should I cross the streight which divides us, though it were
but _half_ seven leagues? we should only meet to part again, and
purchase pleasure, as most pleasures are purchased, too dearly; I have
dropt some heavy tears, (ideally at least) over poor BUCKLE'S[J] grave,
and it is all one to a man, now with GOD! on what King's soil such a
_tribute as that_ is paid: had some men of all nations known the
goodness of his heart as we did, some men of all nations would grieve as
we do. When I frequented _Morgan's_[K] I used him as a touch-stone, to
try the hearts of other men upon; for, as he was not rich, he was out of
the walk of knaves and flatterers, and such men, who were moot
prejudiced in his favour at first sight, and coveted not his company
after a little acquaintance, I always avoided as beings made of base
metal. It was for this reason I despised that ****** ****, (you know who
I mean) for you too have seen him _snarl_, _and bite_, _and play the
dog_, even to BUCKLE!

   [J] WILLIAM BUCKLE, Esq.

   [K] MORGAN'S Coffee-House, Grove, BATH.

Our Sunday night's tea club, round his chearful hearth, is now for ever
dissolved, and SHARPE and RYE have administered their last friendly
offices with a potion of sorrow.

