The kind voice woke some bygone memory in the animal; it reminded him
perhaps of the days when he belonged to somebody, and was treated
gently.  He got up, slowly reared his poor stiff limbs into a begging
attitude, and wagged his short tail.  He soon dropped down again, for he
was evidently weak, but he looked apologetically from the old woman to
Tim, as much as to say:

"I know it was a poor performance, but it was the best I could do.  In
old days it used to please."

"See there now," said the woman, "someone must a taught him that.  Maybe
he's bin a Punch's dog."

Tim stood absorbed in thought.  He had forgotten Joshua, and the cart,
and his own important position as van-boy; one idea filled his mind.
Could he, ought he, might he take the dog home with him and have him for
his own?

He was a prudent boy, and he considered that he would have to pay a tax
for him and feed him out of his wages.  "But he could have 'arf my
dinner," he reflected; "and how useful he'd be to look after the
parcels.  And he do look so thin and poor.  I'll ask Joshua."

He looked round.  Fortunately for him, Joshua and the landlord had
entered into a discussion as to the respective merits of warm mashes,
and were still engaged upon it, so Tim had not been missed.  He went up
to the two men, and standing a little in front of them waited for a
convenient moment to make his request.  He was glad to see that Joshua
looked good-tempered just now; he had evidently had the best of the
argument which had been going on, for there was a gleam of triumph in
his eye, and he repeating some assertion in a loud voice, while the
landlord stood in a dejected attitude with his thumbs in his waistcoat
pockets.

"_That's_ where it is," said Joshua as he concluded, and then his eye
fell on Tim's eager upturned face.

"Dorg, eh?" he said, when the boy had made him understand what he
wanted.  "Where is he?"

"There," said Tim, pointing to where the dog still sat shivering near
the old chestnut woman.

Joshua gazed at the animal in silence, and sucked a straw which he had
in his mouth reflectively.  Tim looked anxiously up into his face.
Would he take a fancy to him?  The landlord had now drawn near, and also
an inquisitive ostler.  The old chestnut-seller ceased to rock herself
to and fro, and turned her head towards the group, so that the dog, so
lonely a few minutes ago, had suddenly become a centre of interest.  He
seemed to wonder at this, but he scarcely moved his eyes, with a mute
appeal in them, from his first friend, Tim.  At last, after what seemed
an immense silence, Joshua spoke.

"He ain't a beauty--not to look at," he said.

This might have sounded discouraging to anyone who did not know Joshua,
but it was rather the reverse to Tim.

"He'd be werry useful in the cart," he suggested, taking care not to
appear too anxious.

But now the landlord, feeling it time to offer his opinion, broke into
the discussion.

"There's no doubt, as the boy says, that you'd find a dog useful, but I
wouldn't have a brute of a cur like that, if I was you.  Now I could
give you as pretty a pup to bring up to the business as you could wish
to see.  A real game un.  Death to anything reasonable he'd be in a
year's time.  Them nasty mongrels is never no good."

Now this adverse opinion was, strange to say, sufficient to make up
Joshua's mind in the dog's favour; he always took a contrary view of
things to the landlord on principle, because it encouraged conversation,
and this habit was so strong that he at once began to see the special
advantages of a mongrel.

"He's a werry faithful creetur, is a mongrel, if he's properly trained,"
he said slowly and solemnly; "and as to _game_, where's the game he'd
find in a carrier's cart?  You can bring him along, mate."

Leaving the landlord in a temporarily crushed condition, he walked off
to his horses, which stamped impatiently at all this delay.  The dog
suffered Tim to take him in his arms without any resistance, though he
winced a little as if in pain, and the cart presently drove away from
the small knot of interested spectators gathered round the inn door.
Then, gently examining his new comrade, the boy found that one of his
hind-legs was injured, so that he could not put it to the ground, and
moaned when it was touched, though he licked Tim's hand immediately
afterwards in apology.

"But I don't think it's broke," said the boy encouragingly; "and when we
get home I'll bathe it and tie it up, and I dessay I can find yer a bit
o' supper."

Soothed perhaps by this prospect, and evidently feeling a sense of
comfort and protection, the dog stretched out his thin, weary limbs, and
soon, sharing the warm shelter of Tim's horse-cloth, slept profoundly.

And thus the new friends made their first journey together.


STORY TWO, CHAPTER 2.

FAITHFUL MOSES--A SHORT STORY--(CONTD).

So from this time there was a van-dog as well as a van-boy; three
"mates" travelling in the cart between Roydon and London--Joshua, Tim,
and Moses, for after much consideration that was the name given to the
dog.

It was wonderful to see how, after a few weeks of food and kindness, he
"plucked up a spirit," as Joshua said.  His whole aspect altered, for he
now held his ears and tail valiantly erect, and quite a martial gleam
appeared in his eye.  He still, it is true, limped about on three legs,
which is never a dignified attitude for a dog, but he already began to
acquire distinct views concerning the parcels and the cart, and was
ready to defend them, with hair bristling, and lips fiercely drawn back
from glistening white teeth.

"Not a beauty," Joshua had said, and decidedly a mongrel according to
the landlord.  Nobody could doubt that; but to Tim's eyes Moses wanted
no attractions, he was perfect.  Many and many a confidence was poured
into his small, upright, attentive ear, as the two sat so close together
at the back of the cart; Tim never considered whether he understood or
not, but it was such a comfort to tell him about things.  The cold
nights were comparatively easy to bear, now that he could put his arm
round Moses' hairy form and feel that he was warm and comfortable; meals
became more interesting though slighter than they used to be, now that
they must be shared by Moses, who watched every morsel with bright
expectant eyes.  Then he must be taught, and this was not difficult, for
ready intelligence and eager affection made him a good scholar; all he
wanted was to know what was really required of him.  This once
understood and successfully performed, what an ecstasy of delight
followed on the part of both master and pupil, shown by the former in
caresses, and by the latter in excited barks, and short quick rushes
among the parcels.

As his education proceeded he learnt to distinguish all the different
sounds of Tim's voice, and would sit on guard for any length of time if
once told to do so.  When on duty in this way, a more conscientious dog
could not have been found, for not even the urgent temptation of a
cat-chase could lure him from his post--although, sometimes, a short cry
of anguish would be wrung from him at being obliged to forego such a
pleasure.

Joshua he regarded with a distant respect, Tim with intense affection,
and the landlord of the Magpie and Stump with ill-concealed growls of
aversion, though the latter tried to ingratiate himself by savoury
offerings of food.  Moses would walk stiffly away from him with his tail
held very high, and the landlord would laugh sarcastically.  "You're a
nice sample, you are," he would say, "and as ugly a mongrel as ever I
see--"

As time went on, Tim began to place great reliance on the dog's
trustworthiness, and to look upon him as quite equal to another boy.  He
knew that he had only to hold up his ringer and say, "Watch, Moses!" and
the dog's vigilant attention was secure; trusting in this, therefore, he
felt it by no means so necessary as formerly to be very watchful
himself, and began to take life much more easily.  In the evening, when
Joshua stopped to deliver a parcel, Tim would rouse himself from a
comfortable nap, and just murmur, "Watch, Moses!" then woe to anyone who
ventured too near Moses and his property.

Now this division of labour, or rather this shifting of responsibility
on to another's shoulders, had its bad results, for while the dog
improved every day in sharpness and conscientious performance of duty,
the boy did the opposite.  Tim became somewhat careless and lazy, and
though Joshua knew nothing of it, he did not really fill his post half
so well as before the dog came; he allowed things to get slack.  Now,
whether one is a van-boy or a lord-chancellor this is bad, for slackness
leads to neglect, and neglect to worse things.  You shall hear what
happened in Tim's case.

One evening the carrier's cart was standing in a little back street in
the Borough waiting for Joshua; he had matters to settle, he told Tim,
which might take him an hour or more, and he added:

"Look alive, now, for it's a nasty neighbourhood to be standing about
in, and there's some smallish parcels in the cart easy made off with.
Don't you let your eye off 'em."

Tim promised, and, taking his seat on the edge of the cart with his legs
swinging, whistled to Moses, who was examining the neighbourhood in an
interested manner; he at once jumped up beside his master and assumed a
gravely watchful and responsible air.

It was not an amusing street, but poor and squalid, full of small
lodging-houses, and little dingy shops; very few people were about, and
in spite of Joshua's warning no one seemed even to notice the carrier's
cart.

Presently there walked slowly by, whistling carelessly, a boy about
Tim's own age; he was quite respectably, though poorly dressed, and wore
his cap very much on one side with an air of smartness which Tim thought
becoming.  He stopped and looked at the boy and the dog, and they looked
at him, Moses ready to be suspicious, and Tim to be conversational if
required.

For some minutes the group remained in silent contemplation, then the
new-comer said inquiringly:

"Fer dog?"

"Ah," said Tim, nodding his head.

"Up to snuff, ain't he?" said the other boy.

Tim nodded again, this time in a more friendly manner.

"Wot's his name?"

"Moses."

"Yer give it him?"

"Ah."

"Where's yer boss?"  (meaning master).

"Yonder," with a backward movement of the head.

The boy leant his back against a lamp-post near, and seemed in no hurry
to pursue his journey; Tim was not sorry, for a little conversation
beguiled the time, and his remark about Moses showed this to be an
intelligent and discerning youth.

"Wot can he do?" he asked presently, still with his eye on the dog.

Tim ran through a list of Moses' acquirements eagerly, and finished up
with: "And he can watch the parcels as well as a Christian--he wouldn't
let no one but me or Joshua come nigh 'em, not for anything."

"Wouldn't he now?" said the boy admiringly.

"You try," suggested Tim, anxious to show off Moses' talents.

The stranger came a little nearer, and stretched out his hand as if to
touch one of the parcels; he quickly withdrew it, however, for Moses'
bristling mane and angry growl were sufficient warnings of his further
intentions.  Both boys laughed, Tim triumphantly, and he patted the dog
with an air of proud proprietorship.

"There's a Punch and Judy playin' in the next street," remarked the
stranger, "and they've got a dorg some'at like yours, he's a clever un
he is--wouldn't you like to see him?"

"I've seen 'em--scores o' times," said Tim loftily.

