To part with Darnford was indeed cruel.--It was to feel most painfully
alone; but she rejoiced to think, that she should spare him the care and
perplexity of the suit, and meet him again, all his own. Marriage, as at
present constituted, she considered as leading to immorality--yet, as the
odium of society impedes usefulness, she wished to avow her affection to
Darnford, by becoming his wife according to established rules; not to be
confounded with women who act from very different motives, though her
conduct would be just the same without the ceremony as with it, and her
expectations from him not less firm. The being summoned to defend herself
from a charge which she was determined to plead guilty to, was still
galling, as it roused bitter reflections on the situation of women in
society.

FOOTNOTES:

[138-A] The name in the manuscript is by mistake written Cæsar.

EDITOR.


CHAP. XVII.


SUCH was her state of mind when the dogs of law were let loose on her.
Maria took the task of conducting Darnford's defence upon herself. She
instructed his counsel to plead guilty to the charge of adultery; but to
deny that of seduction.

The counsel for the plaintiff opened the cause, by observing, "that his
client had ever been an indulgent husband, and had borne with several
defects of temper, while he had nothing criminal to lay to the charge of
his wife. But that she left his house without assigning any cause. He
could not assert that she was then acquainted with the defendant; yet,
when he was once endeavouring to bring her back to her home, this man
put the peace-officers to flight, and took her he knew not whither. After
the birth of her child, her conduct was so strange, and a melancholy
malady having afflicted one of the family, which delicacy forbade the
dwelling on, it was necessary to confine her. By some means the defendant
enabled her to make her escape, and they had lived together, in despite
of all sense of order and decorum. The adultery was allowed, it was not
necessary to bring any witnesses to prove it; but the seduction, though
highly probable from the circumstances which he had the honour to state,
could not be so clearly proved.--It was of the most atrocious kind, as
decency was set at defiance, and respect for reputation, which shows
internal compunction, utterly disregarded."

A strong sense of injustice had silenced every emotion, which a mixture
of true and false delicacy might otherwise have excited in Maria's bosom.
She only felt in earnest to insist on the privilege of her nature. The
sarcasms of society, and the condemnation of a mistaken world, were
nothing to her, compared with acting contrary to those feelings which
were the foundation of her principles. [She therefore eagerly put herself
forward, instead of desiring to be absent, on this memorable occasion.]

Convinced that the subterfuges of the law were disgraceful, she wrote a
paper, which she expressly desired might be read in court:

