All the warriors were now in the hall.  Folker and Hagen fell on them,
for they had sworn to spare none save the one man.  Their hands struck
blood from the helmets.  Right grim was the clash of swords!  Many a
shield-plate sprang in sunder, and the precious stones were scattered
among the blood.  So fiercely none will fight again.  The prince of
Bechlaren hewed a path right and left, as one acquainted with battle.
Well did Rudeger approve him that day a bold and blameless knight.
Gunther and Gernot smote many heroes dead.  Giselher and Dankwart laid
about them, fearing naught, and sent many a man to his doom.

Rudeger approved him stark enow, bold and well armed.  Ha! many a knight
he slew!  One of the Burgundians saw this, and was wroth; whereat
Rudeger's death drew nigh.

Gernot cried out to the Margrave, "Noble Rudeger; thou leavest none of my
men alive.  It irketh me sore; I will bear it no longer.  I will turn thy
gift against thee, for thou hast taken many friends from me.  Come
hither, thou bold man.  What thou gavest me I will earn to the uttermost."

Or the Margrave had fought his way to him, bright bucklers grew dim with
blood.  Then, greedy of fame, the men ran at each other, and began to
ward off the deadly wounds.  But their swords were so sharp that nothing
could withstand them.  Rudeger the knight smote Gernot through his flint-
hard helmet, that the blood brake out.  Soon the good warrior was
avenged.  He swung Rudeger's gift on high, and, albeit he was wounded to
the death, he smote him through his good shield and his helmet, that
Gotelind's husband died.  So rich a gift was never worse requited.  So
they fell in the strife - Gernot and Rudeger - slain by each other's hand.

Thereat Hagen waxed grimmer than afore.  The hero of Trony said, "Great
woe is ours.  None can ever make good to their folk and their land the
loss of these two knights.  Rudeger's men shall pay for it."  They gave
no quarter.  Many were struck down unwounded that had come to, but that
they were drowned in the blood.

"Woe is me for my brother, fallen dead!  Each hour bringeth fresh dole.
For my father-in-law, Rudeger, I grieve also.  Twofold is my loss and my
sorrow."

When Giselher saw his brother slain, they that were in the hall suffered
for it.  Death lagged not behind.  Of the men of Bechlaren there was left
not a living soul.

Gunther and Giselher, and eke Hagen, Dankwart and Folker, the good
knights, went where the two warriors lay, and there the heroes wept
piteously.

"Death hath despoiled us sore," said Giselher the youth.  "Stop your
weeping, and go out to the air, that we strife-weary ones may cool our
harness.  God will not let us live longer, I ween."

They that were without saw them sitting, or leaning and taking their
rest.  Rudeger's men were all slain; the din was hushed.  The silence
endured so long that Etzel was angered, and the king's wife cried, "Woe
is me for this treason.  They speak too long. The bodies of our foemen
are left unscathed by Rudeger's hand.  He plotteth to guide them back to
Burgundy.  What doth it profit us, King Etzel, that we have shared all
our wealth with him?  The knight hath done falsely.  He that should have
avenged us cometh to terms with them."

But Folker, the valiant warrior, answered her, "Alack! it is not so,
noble queen.  If I might give the lie to one so high-born as thou art,
thou hast foully slandered Rudeger.  Sorry terms have he and his knights
made with us.  With such good will he did the king's bidding, that he and
his men all lie dead.  Look round thee for another, Kriemhild, to obey
thee.  Rudeger served thee till his death.  If thou doubtest, thou mayest
see for thyself."

To her grief they did it.  They brought the mangled hero where Etzel saw
him.  Never were Etzel's knights so doleful.  When the dead Margrave was
held up before them, none could write or tell all the bitter wailing
whereby women and men alike uttered their heart's dole.  Etzel's woe was
so great that the sound of his lamentation was as a lion's roar.  Loud
wept his wife.  They mourned good Rudeger bitterly.


Thirty-Eighth Adventure
How Dietrich's Knights Were All Slain

So loud they wept on all sides, that palace and towers echoed with the
sound.  One of Dietrich's men of Bern heard it, and hasted with the news.

He said to the prince, "Hearken, Sir Dietrich.  Never in my life heard I
such wail as this.  Methinketh the king himself hath joined the
hightide.  How else should all the folk make such dole.  Either the king
or Kriemhild - one of them at the least - have the guests killed through
hate.  The valiant warriors weep bitterly."

The prince of Bern answered, "Judge not so hastily, my good men.  What
the stranger knights have done, sore peril hath constrained them to.  Let
it boot them now that I sware peace to them."

But bold Wolfhart said, "I will go and ask what they have done, and will
tell thee, dear master, when I know the truth."

Sir Dietrich answered, "When a knight is wroth, if one question him
roughly, his anger is soon kindled.  I would not have thee meddle
therein, Wolfhart."

He bade Helfrich haste thither, and find out from Etzel's men, or from
the guests, what had happed, for he had never heard folk wail so loud.

The messenger asked, "What aileth you all?"

One among them answered, "Joy is fled from the land of the Huns.  Rudeger
lieth slain by the men of Burgundy.  Of them that entered in with him,
not one is left alive."

Helfrich was sore grieved.  He had never told so sad a tale, and went
back weeping.

"What news?" cried Dietrich.  "Why weepest thou so bitterly, Sir
Helfrich?"

The knight answered, "I may well mourn.  The Burgundians have slain
Rudeger."

But the prince of Bern said, "God forbid!  That were stark vengeance and
devil's sport.  What had Rudeger done to deserve it?  Well I know he was
their friend."

Wolfhart answered, "If they have done this, their life shall pay for it.
It were shameful to endure it.  For oft hath Rudeger's hand served us."

The prince of Amelung bade them inquire further.  He sat down at a window
sore troubled, and bade Hildebrand go to the guests, and ask them what
had happened.

Master Hildebrand, bold in strife, took with him neither shield nor
sword, and would have gone to them on peaceful wise.  But his sister's
child chid him.  Grim Wolfhart cried, "Why goest thou naked?  If they
revile thee, thou wilt have the worst of the quarrel, and return shamed.
If thou goest armed, none will withstand thee."

The old man armed him as the youth had counselled.  Or he had ended, all
Dietrich's knights stood in their harness, sword in hand.  It irked the
warrior, and he had gladly turned them from their purpose.  He asked
their intent.

"We would follow thee," they answered.  "What if Hagen of Trony, as his
wont is, mock thee?"  Whereupon Hildebrand consented.

When bold Folker saw the knights of Bern, Dietrich's men, girt with
swords, and coming armed, with shields in their hands, he told his
masters of Burgundy.  He said, "Dietrich's men draw nigh like foemen,
armed, and in helmets.  They come to defy us.  I ween it will go hard
with us forlorn ones."

Hildebrand came up while he spake.  He laid his shield at his feet, and
said to Gunther's men, "Alack! ye good knights!  What have ye done to
Rudeger?  Dietrich, my master, sent me hither to ask if any here slew the
good Margrave, as they tell us.  We could ill endure such loss."

Hagen of Trony answered, "The news is true.  Glad were I had the
messenger lied to thee, for Rudeger's sake, and that he lived still.
Both men and women must evermore bewail him."

When they heard he was dead in sooth, all the warriors wept, as was
meet.  Down beard and chin ran the tears of Dietrich's men.  Right heavy
were they and doleful.

A duke of Bern that hight Siegstab, cried, "Now is ended all the loving
kindness wherewith Rudeger cheered our sad days.  Ye have slain, in
Rudeger, the friend of all homeless knights."

Sir Wolfwine of Amelung said, "I had not grieved more this day to see my
father dead.  Woe is me!  Who will comfort the good Margravine?"

Sir Wolfhart cried angrily, "Who will lead the warriors forth to battle
now, as Rudeger so oft hath done.  Woe is me for brave Rudeger!  We have
lost him!"

Wolfbrand and Helfrich and eke Helmnot wept for his death with all their
friends.  Hildebrand could ask no more for grief.  He said, "Grant now,
ye warriors, that for which my master sent me.  Give us dead Rudeger from
out the hall, with whom all our joy hath perished, and let us requite him
for all the kindness he hath shown to us and many another.  Like him we
are homeless.  Why tarry ye?  Let us bear him hence, and serve him dead,
as we had gladly served him living."

Then said King Gunther, "No service is better than that of friends to a
dead friend.  I approve the true hearth of him that doeth it.  Ye have
cause to praise him.  He hath shown you much love."

"How long shall we entreat?" cried Wolfhart.  "Sith ye have slain our
joy, and we can have him no more, let us bear him hence to bury him."

But Folker answered, "Ye shall get him from none here.  Come and take him
out of the house, where he lieth with his death-wounds in the blood.  So
shall ye serve Rudeger truly."

Cried bold Wolfhart, "God knoweth, sir fiddler, thou dost wrong to
provoke us further; thou hast done us hurt enow.  If I dared before my
master, it would go hard with thee.  We may not fight; he hath forbidden
it."

The fiddler said, "He that avoideth all that is forbidden is over
fearful.  He hath not the right hero's heart."

Hagen approved the word of his comrade.  But Wolfhart cried, "Give over
mocking, or I will put thy fiddle-strings out of tune, that thou mayest
have somewhat to tell, if ever thou ridest again to Burgundy.  I can no
longer, with honour, endure thine insolence."

The fiddler answered, "If thou spoilest my strings, my hand will dim thy
helmet afore I ride back to Burgundy."

Wolfhart would have run at him, but his uncle, Hildebrand, held him fast
and would not let him.  "Thou art mad in thy foolish wrath.  We should
come in disgrace forever with my master."

"Let loose the lion that is so grim, sir knight.  But if he fall into my
hand," said Folker, "I will slay him, though he had laid the whole world
dead.  There will be an end of his hot answers."

Wolfhart fell in a fury thereat.  He lifted his shield and sprang at him
like a wild lion.  His friends followed after.  But, quick though he was,
old Hildebrand came before any to the stair-way, that he might not be
second in the fight.  They found plenty to meet them among the strangers.

Hagen leapt upon Master Hildebrand.  The weapons rang loud in their
hands, for it was well seen they were wroth.  A fire-red wind blew from
their swords.  But they were parted in the fray by the knights of Bern,
that pressed in amain.  So Master Hildebrand turned away from Hagen.

