Produced by V. L. Simpson, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.


VOL. 98.


January 18th, 1890.


AMONG THE AMATEURS.

No. III.--REALISATION.

    SCENE--_Theatre Royal, Blankbury, on the first night of
    the performance of the well-known Comedy of_ "Heads or
    Tails?" _by the "Thespian Perambulators." Time_, 7:50
    P.M. _A "brilliant and fashionable assemblage" is
    gradually filling the house. In the Stalls are many
    distinguished Amateurs of both Sexes, including_ Lady
    SURBITON, _who has brought her husband_ and Mrs.
    GAGMORE (Lady SURBITON'S _particular friend_). _The
    rest of the Stalls are occupied by the immediate
    friends and relations of the Actors. A few professional
    Critics are to be seen. They are addressed with much
    politeness by the Amateurs in front of the House, and
    "played to" with feverish anxiety by the Amateurs on
    the Stage. The Orchestra is composed of excellent
    Amateur Musicians. The Curtain has not yet risen._

_Lady Surbiton_ (_to_ Mrs. GAGMORE). My dear, it's a wonder we ever got
here. CHARLES of course forgot the date, and told me only yesterday he'd
invited some men to stay for a shoot. He had to listen to reason, though,
and so we spent all yesterday sending telegrams to put them off. I've been
at every performance of The Thespians for years, and it wouldn't do to
begin missing them now, would it?

    [Illustration]

_Mrs. Gagmore._ Certainly not, dear, it would have been quite a calamity.
There's the Duchess of MIDDLESEX nodding to you.

_Lady S._ So it is. (_Smiles sweetly at the Duchess, who is sitting three
rows off._) I call it scandalous of her to come out like this when both her
twins have got the measles. Did I tell you I lent Mr. SPINKS my pet parrot,
Penelope, for this performance?

_Mrs. G._ No, dear. I didn't know they ever played it with a parrot.

_Lady S._ Well, they don't usually, but Mr. SPINKS told me that, after
studying the piece very very carefully, he had come to the conclusion that
there ought to be a parrot in _Lady Shorthorn's_ drawing-room, and he
begged me to lend him mine. Fortunately it scarcely ever talks. Oh, there's
Mr. PENFOLD! How old he's getting to look. He never seems to have a good
word to say for anyone in his critiques. They're very late in beginning. I
hope nothing has happened to Penelope. Ah! at last.

    _The Orchestra strikes up. After a few minutes the
    Curtain rises on "the Drawing-room at Bullivant Court."
    Sc. 1, Act 1._ HARRY HALL, _in livery as_ JOHN _the
    Footman, is reclining on a sofa, reading a magazine.
    Penelope, in her cage, is a conspicuous object on the_
    O.P. _side_.

_John_ (_yawning_). "Nothink in the _Fortnightly_, as per usual. Heigh-ho!
This is slow work. Who's that?"

    _Enter_ BELINDA, _the Nursery-maid. The usual amatory
    scene follows. They both disappear, as_ TIFFINGTON
    SPINKS _enters made up as_ "Colonel DEBENHAM," _with a
    saffron complexion, a grey moustache, a red tie and an
    iron-grey wig. He shivers. A great deal of preliminary
    applause. He bows with dignity, conscious of his fame,
    and proceeds._

_Col. Debenham._ "Ugh! how horribly cold this is. I shall have to speak
seriously to SHORTHORN about the state of his fires."

_Penelope the Parrot_ (_suddenly and with terrible distinctness_). "Old
fool!" [_A titter from the irreverent._ SPINKS _pays no heed to the
interruption._

_Lady Surbiton._ How awful! I declare I haven't heard Penelope speak for
six months. I hope to heaven she won't do it again.

_Mrs. Gagmore._ I thought it sounded so natural.

_Lord S._ So it did, that's why it was so out of place. He's getting on all
right now, though.

