The fees for seeing _Chantilly_, including the hire of a carriage,  24

Inns on the road, four days and four nights, about         200
                                                             ------
                                                      _£._ 540

This, at 40 livres per guinea, amounts to thirteen guineas and a half;
to which must be added, for the hire of the two chaises to Paris, three
_Louis_ in money, adequate to three pounds sterling, which altogether
does not amount to four guineas each person, travelling post above two
hundred miles, and faring sumptuously on the road, drinking Burgundy and
Champagne, and being as well received at the inns as if the expences had
been quadrupled. One hot meal a day, at three _livres_ a head, one
_livre_ for each bed, and the wine paid for apart, was the customary
allowance. After this manner I have travelled several times all over
France, to _Bourdeaux_, _Toulouse_, _Montpelier_, _Marseille_, _Toulon_,
_Hieres_, _Avignon_, _Lyon_, _&c._

Had the exchange been at par, the expence would have been doubled, in
English money; but even then would have been very reasonable, compared
to the cost of a similar journey in England.

At Paris I received 42 livres 15 sous for each guinea; soon after which
I was paid forty-two livres for every pound sterling which I drew on
London: on my return to Calais I found the exchange to be forty-four
livres per guinea, and once it was as high as forty-nine. This, of
course, very much injures the trade between England and France; but, for
the same reason, English families residing in France at present, more
than double their income, by drawing bills on London for such income,
and it will probably be many years before the exchange will be at _par_
again.


MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. CHESSMEN. TREE OF LIBERTY.
CRUCIFIXES,VIRGINS. SAINTS. BISHOPS. OLD WOMEN, &C.


THE whole way from Calais to Paris the land was in the highest state of
cultivation.

The sandy soil near the gates of Calais abounded with the _Chelidonium
Glaucium_, or common yellow horned poppy.

The first vines on this road are about a mile on this side of Breteuil.

Between St. Just and Clermont is a magnificent _château_ and garden
belonging to the _ci-devant Duc de Fitzjames_: this seat has never been
described; it is not shewn to strangers at present, as the proprietor is
emigrated.

The country all around Chantilly, consists of cornfields; formerly it
appeared barren, because the immense quantity of game which infested and
over-ran it devoured all the crops and ruined the farmers, who were sent
to the gallies if they shot a bird.

I passed this way in 1783 and 1784, and saw vast numbers of pheasants,
partridges, and hares cross the road, and feed by the side of it, as
tame as poultry in a farm-yard; but at present the game is all
destroyed; neither are there any more wild boars in the forest, which is
of 7600 acres. These animals still inhabit the forest of
_Fontainebleau_. This forest (which covers almost four times as much
ground as that of _Chantilly_)[2] contains a greater number of trees, of
a more enormous size, than I have seen in any other part of Europe,
growing amongst rocks and stones equally remarkable for their
dimensions. I know not of any parallel to the _sublime-beautiful_, and
to the wild and romantic grandeur of the scenery here displayed. The
landscapes of _Salvator Rosa_ appear to have been taken from natural
objects, similar to those which are here seen. It is only forty miles
from Paris.

[Note 2: It is about five square miles, or rather, eight miles in
length from two to four miles in breadth.]

In the treasury of the Abbey at _St. Denis_ were formerly preserved the
Chess-men of _Charlemagne_; these I described in the first volume of
_Chess_, published in 1787; they are now either _stolen or strayed_, and
will probably never more be heard of.

All the horses (many of which were stone-horses) we had occasion to make
use of along this road were very gentle, and so were the cattle which
were feeding on the grass growing on the borders of the cornfields,
(without any inclosure) which they were prevented from entering by a
string tied to their horns, one end of which was sometimes held by a
child of five or six years old. The people here are very merciful and
kind to their beasts. I have seen droves of oxen walking leisurely
through the green markets in the cities, smelling at the vegetables, and
driven to the slaughter-house by children. There are no instances here
of mad oxen, mad dogs, or run-away horses.

In every one of the towns between Calais and Paris a full-grown tree
(generally a poplar) has been planted in the market-place, with many of
its boughs and leaves; these last being withered, it makes but a dismal
appearance; on the top of this tree or pole is a red woollen or cotton
night-cap, which is called the _Cap of Liberty_, with streamers about
the pole, of red, blue and white ribbands.

I saw several statues of saints, both within and without the churches
(and in Paris likewise) with similar caps, and several crucifixes with
the national cockade of ribbands tied to the left arm of the image on
the cross, but not one with the cockade in its proper place; the reason
of which I know not.

I was both surprised and sorry to see the wooden images, many of them as
large as the life, on crosses, painted with the natural colours, to the
amount of perhaps twenty between _Calais_ and _Paris_, still suffered to
remain nuisances on the side of the road. The _perpendicular_ of each
cross being seasoned, by having been exposed many years to the open air,
might make a couple of excellent pike staves;[3] but the remainder
would, as far as I know, be of no other use than for fuel.

[Note 3: This was written after I had become familiarized to pikes.]

Another absurdity which has not been attended to as yet is, that most of
the almanacks, even that which is prefixed to Mr. _Rabaut's_ Account of
the Revolution, contains against every day in the year, the name of some
saint or other, male or female; some of them martyrs, and others not,
others archangels, angels, arch-bishops, bishops, popes, and virgins, to
the number of twenty-four, and of these, four were martyrs into the
bargain; and this at a time when churches are selling by auction and
pulling down, when the convents are turned into barracks, when there is
neither monk nor nun to be seen in the kingdom, nor yet any _Abbe_, and
when no priest dares appear in any sacerdotal garment, or even with any
thing which might mark him as an ecclesiastic. It must however be
acknowledged, that the saints have lost all their credit in France, and
of course so have the _Bienheureux_, or _Blessed_. In order to arrive at
saint-hood, the candidate must first have died _en odeur de Sainteté_,
which, were it not too ludicrous, might be translated _smelling of
holiness_; he was then created a _Bienheureux_, and after he had been
dead a century, the pope might canonize him if he pleased; after which
he, the saint, might work miracles if he could, or let it alone.

France formerly contained eighteen arch-bishopricks, and one hundred and
thirteen bishopricks; the _Arch ones_ are all abolished, and likewise
forty-seven of the others; there are, however, plenty remaining, no less
than seventy-three, which includes seven new ones, and one in _Corsica_.

The churches in Paris are not much frequented on the week days, at
present; I found a few old women on their knees in some of them, hearing
mass; and, at the same time, at the other end of one of these churches
commissaries were sitting and entering the names of volunteers for the
army.

The iron rails in the churches which part the choir from the nave, and
also those which encompass chapels and tombs, are all ordered to be
converted into heads for pikes.

On Sundays, before the 19th of August, the churches were still resorted
to, but by no means crowded; I know not whether this be the case now.

All the _jours de fête_, holidays, are very judiciously abolished, and
likewise _les jours gras, et maigres_, (Flesh and meagre days.)

All shops are allowed to be open, and every trade carried on on Sundays,
notwithstanding which, few are open excepting those where provisions are
sold; the inhabitants choosing to have one day's relaxation in seven, to
take a little fresh air, and to appear well dressed.


WALL ROUND PARIS. NEW BRIDGE. FIELD OF THE FEDERATION. BASTILLE.


THERE is a Wall which encompasses Paris, of about twelve feet high and
two feet thick, about nine miles long on the North side, and five on
the South side; this was built just before the Revolution, and was
intended to prevent goods from being smuggled into Paris. On the North
side are thirty-six barriers, and on the other side eighteen; of these
fifty-four I saw only ten. They were intended for the officers of the
customs; at present they are used as guardrooms. Most of them are
magnificent buildings, of white stone, some like temples, others like
chapels; several of these are described in the new _Paris Guides_; but
views of none of them have as yet been engraven.[4]

[Note 4: The _Rotunda D'Orleans_, in this wall, at the back of the
gardens of the _ci-devant_ Duke of that name is worthy of observation.]

A bridge of white stone was just finished and opened for the passage of
carriages; it was begun in 1787, it is of five arches, the centre arch
is ninety-six feet wide, the two collateral ones eighty-seven feet each,
and other two seventy-eight, each of these arches forms part of a
circle, whose centre is considerably under the level of the water; it is
thrown over the river from the _Place de Louis XV._ to the _Palais
Bourbon_.

The _Champ de la Federation_, formerly _Champ de Mars_, is a field which
served for the exercises of the pupils of the Royal Military School; it
is a regular parallelogram of nine hundred yards long, and three hundred
yards broad, exclusive of the ditches by which it is bounded, and of the
quadruple rows of trees on each side; but if these are included the
breadth is doubled. At one extremity is the magnificent building
above-mentioned,[5] and the river runs at the foot of the others. In
this field is formed the largest _Circus_ in the world, being eight
hundred yards long and four hundred broad; it is bordered by a slope of
forty yards broad, and of which the highest part is ten feet above the
level ground; the lower part is cut into thirty rows, gradually elevated
above each other, and on these rows or ridges a hundred and sixty
thousand persons may fit commodiously; the upper part may contain about
a hundred and fifty thousand persons standing, of which every one may
see equally well what is doing in the _Circus_. The National
confederation was first held here, 14th July, 1790, and at that time a
wooden bridge was thrown on boats over the river for convenience.

[Note 5: In 1788 the school was suppressed, the scholars were placed
in the army, or in country colleges, and the building is intended, when
the necessary alterations are completed, to be one of the four hospitals
which are to replace that of the _Hôtel-Dieu_. This hospital is in such
a bad situation, being in the midst of Paris, that a quarter of the
patients die. It contains only two thousand beds; each of the four new
hospitals is to contain twelve hundred beds.]

Of the _Bastille_ nothing remains but the foundations; it was demolished
and levelled with the ground in about eleven months; the expences at the
end of the first three months amounted to about twenty thousand pounds
sterling. The materials were sold for half that sum, and the nation paid
the remainder. And on the 14th of July, 1790, the anniversary of the day
of its having been taken, a long mast was erected in the middle of the
place where it stood, crowned with flowers and ribbands, and bearing
this simple and expressive inscription; _Ici on Danse_. Here is
dancing.


COINS AND TOKENS.


IN the _Hôtel de la Monnoye_ (the Mint) I procured some new coins. The
silver crown piece of six livres has on one side the king's head in
profile, round which is _Louis XVI. Roi des François_, 1792; over this
date is a small lion passant, being a Mint mark. The reverse, is a human
figure with an enormous pair of wings,[6] holding a book in its left
hand, which book rests on an altar, and with its other is represented as
if writing in it; the word _Constitution_ is already seen there. The
figure is naked, except a slight drapery on the left arm; behind the
figure is a bundle of staves, like the Roman Fasces, surmounted by the
cap of liberty, and behind the altar is a cock standing on one leg; the
inscription is _Regne de la Loi_. _L'An 4 de la Liberté._ Besides this,
there are two other Mint marks, one a small lyre, and the other the
letter A; at the foot of the altar is _Dupre_, the name of the person
who engraved the die; and on the edge is _La Nation_, _La Loi_, _et le
Roi_, in _Relievo_.

[Note 6: There is to be a new coinage without the king's profile,
and it is to be hoped these wings, or rather the whole figure, will be
left out.]

There are no new half crowns. The dies of the new thirty and fifteen sol
pieces are just like that of the crown, except that their value is
stamped on them 30 _Sols_, 15 _Sols_, and that there is no inscription
on the edge.

There are two other coins, made of a sort of bell-metal; one of two
_Sols_, with the king's profile; inscription and date like those on the
silver coin, and on the reverse the _Fasces_ and cap, between two oak
branches, and the inscription, _La Nation, Le Loi, Le Roi. L'an_ 4 _de
la Liberté. 2 S_. The other of half this size, and with the same
impressions, except that its value is specified thus, 12 D. or
_Deniers_, equal to one _Sol_.

I have not seen any new Louis. No paper money or assignats is known in
the Mint; I bought some coins here, and paid for them in guineas, which
are currant for twenty-five livres. There are twelve or fourteen mills,
which were all at work in coining crown pieces, and likewise several
hammering machines, one of which was coining 2 _Sols_ pieces.

Besides the national coins, several tradesmen have been permitted to
fabricate silver and copper medals or _tokens_, for public convenience,
the most beautiful of which are those of _M. Monneron_. The largest is
of almost pure copper, exactly of the size and thickness of the crown
piece; in an oval is represented a female figure with a helmet on,
sitting on an elevated place, on which is _Dupre f._ (or fecit) holding
a book, inscribed _Constitution des François_; at her side is a shield
with the arms of France, and at her feet an altar, on one side of which
is the profile of the king; several soldiers are represented extending
their right arms, as if taking the oath; at top is _Pacte Federatif_; at
bottom 14 _Juillet_, 1790; round the oval _vivre libres ou mourir_,
which is repeated in one of the banners carried by a soldier. On the
reverse, in a circle, is _Medaille de confiance de cinq-sols
remboursable en assignats de_ 50L _et au dessus_. _L'An IV. de la
Liberté_; round this is _Monneron Freres Negocians à Paris_, 1792; and
on the edge is cut _Departemens de Paris_, _Rhone et Loire_. _Du Gard_.

I have another of these pieces, not quite so large nor so well executed;
one of the sides is similar to that already described; on the other is
_Medaille qui se vend_ 5 _Sols à Paris chez Monneron patenté_. _L'An IV.
de la Liberté_. Round this is, _Revolution Française_, 1792; and on the
edge, _Bon pour les_ 83 _Departemens_. I am told this was made at
Birmingham.

The other token of the same merchant is rather larger and thicker than
our halfpenny. On one side is a woman sitting, with a staff in her right
hand with the cap of liberty; her left arm leans on a square tablet, on
which are the words, _Droits de l'Homme. Artic. V._[7] the sun shines
just over her head, and behind her is a cock perched on half a fluted
column; round the figure, _Liberté sous la Loi_, and underneath, _L'An
III. de la Liberté_. On the reverse, _Medaille de confiance de deux sols
à echanger contre des assignats de 50L et au dessus. 1791_. Round
this the merchant's name, as in the first; and on the edge, _Bon pour
Bord. Marseil. Lyon. Rouen. Nant. et Strasb_.

[Note 7: This article is, "The law has the right of prohibiting only
those actions which are hurtful to society."]

I have seen a silver token almost as big as a shilling. On one side is
represented a woman sitting, leaning with her left arm on a large open
book, at her right is a cock perched on half a fluted column; and the
inscription round these figures is, _Le Fevre, Le Sage et Compie.
ngt. à Paris_. On the reverse is _B.P._ (bon pour) 20 _Sols à
echanger en assignats_ de 50L and round this, _et au dessus l'an 4 me
de la Liberté_, 1792.[8]

[Note 8: This and the former _echanger_, &c. and _remboursable_, &c.
appear to be superfluous.]

In this Hôtel is the cabinet of the royal school of mineralogy, which
Mr. Le Sage has been four and twenty years in forming and analyzing; it
is contained in a magnificent building, with a dome and gallery almost
entirely of marble.


THEATRES.


AT this time there were ten regular theatres open every evening. The
first and most ancient of which is the Opera, or Royal Academy of Music.
The old house which was in the Palais Royal, was burnt in 1781, and the
present house, near St. Martin's Gate, was built in seventy-five days.
The number of performers, vocal and instrumental, dancers, &c. employed
in this theatre is about four hundred and thirty. The price of admission
to the first boxes is seven livres ten sous, about six shillings and
eight pence, (or three shillings and four pence as the exchange then
was.)

2. The _French_ playhouse is at present called _Theatre de la Nation_.
In the vestibule or porch is a marble statue of _Voltaire_, sitting in
an arm chair; it is near the Luxembourg.

3. The Italian theatre behind the _Boulevart Richelieu_. Notwithstanding
the name, nothing but French pieces, and French music, are performed
here.

4. Theatre _de Monsieur_. _Rue Feydeau_. Comedies and operas are
performed here, three times a week in the Italian, and the other days in
the French language; for which purpose two sets of players are engaged
at this house.

5. Theatre Français. Rue de Richelieu. At these four theatres the price
of admission into the boxes was a crown.

6. Theatre de la Rue de Louvois.

7. Theatre Français. Rue de Bondy.

8. Theatre de la Demoiselle Montansier, au Palais Royal. The box price
of these three last was half a crown.

9. Theatre du Marais, quartier St. Antoine.

10. Theatre de Moliere. Rue St. Martin.

To these must be added about five and twenty more; the best of which is
the _Theatre de l'ambigu comique_, on the _North Boulevarts_;[9] the
box price was half a crown. The others were rope dancers, and such kind
of spectacles as _Sadler's Wells, &c._ and the prices were from two
shillings down to sixpence. The French themselves, laughing at the great
increase of their theatres, said, "We shall shortly have a public
spectacle per street, an actor per house, a musician per cellar, and an
author per garret."

[Note 9: These _Boulevarts_ were made in 1536, and planted with four
rows of trees in 1668; these beautiful walks are too well known to be
described here; they are 2400 _Toises_ (4800 yards, or almost three
miles) long. The South Boulevarts are planted in the same manner, were
finished in 1761, and are 3683 _Toises_, or fathom (above four miles) in
length.]


PANTHEON. JACOBINS. QUAI VOLTAIRE. RUE ROUSSEAU. COCKADES.


THE new church of _Sainte Genevieve_ was begun in 1757; but the building
was discontinued during the last war; in 1784 it was resumed, and is at
present almost finished. The whole length of the front is thus inscribed
in very large gilt capitals: _Aux grands hommes: la Patrie
reconnoissante_. To great men: their grateful country. And over the
entrance: _Pantheon Français. L'An III de la Liberté_.

As to the size of Paris, I saw two very large plans of that city and of
London, on the same scale, on which it was said, that Paris covered
5,280,000 square _Toises_, and London only 3,900,000. A _Toise_ is two
yards; and from the plan it appeared to be near the truth.

The new buildings which surround the garden of the Palais Royal form a
parallelogram, that for beauty is not to be matched in Europe. They
consist of shops, coffee-houses, music rooms, four of which are in
cellars, taverns, gaming-houses, &c. and the whole square is almost
always full of people. The square is 234 yards in length, and 100 in
breadth; the portico which surround it consists of 180 arches.

The celebrated _Jacobins_ are a club, consisting at present of about
1300 members, and so called, because the place of meeting is in the
hall which was formerly the library of the convent of that name, in the
_Rue St. Honoré_, about 300 yards distant from the National Assembly.
The proper name of the club is, _Society of the Friends of the
Constitution_. There are three or four other societies of less note.

The _Quai_, which was formerly called _des Theatins_ is at present named
_Quai Voltaire_, in honor of that philosopher, who died there in the
house of the Marquis de _Villette_, in 1778.

The street which was formerly called _Platriere_, and in which the
general post-office is situated, is called _Rue Jean Jaques Rousseau_,
in honour of this writer, who resided some time in this street. I found
him here in 1776, and he copied some music for me; he had no other books
at that time than an English _Robinson Crusoe_ and an Italian _Tasso's
Jerusalem_. He died 1st July, 1778, very soon after Voltaire, at the
country seat of le Marquis _de Girardin_ about ten leagues from Paris;
and is buried there, in a small island.

And the street which was formerly called _Chaussée d'Antin_ is now named
_Rue de Mirabeau_, in honour of the late patriot of that name.

The church _des Innocens_ was pulled down in 1786, and the vast
_cimetiére_ (burying ground) was filled up. Every night, during several
months, carts were employed in carrying the bones found there, to other
grounds out of Paris; it is now a market for vegetables. Very near this
place was a fountain, which is mentioned in letters patent so long ago
as 1273. It was rebuilt with extraordinary magnificence in 1550,
repaired in 1708, and at last, in 1788, carefully removed to the center
of the market, where it now stands.

The new _Quai de Gesvres_ was constructed in 1787, and all the shops
which formed a long narrow alley for foot passengers only, were
destroyed.

At this time no person was permitted to walk in any other part of the
_Tuileries_ gardens than in the terrace of the _Feuillans_, which is
parallel to the _Rue St. Honoré_, and under the windows of the _National
Assembly_; the only fence to the other part of the garden was a blue
ribband extended between two chairs.

Hitherto cockades of silk had been worn, the _aristocrats_ wore such as
were of a paler blue and red, than those worn by the _democrats_, and
the former were even distinguished by their carriages, on which a cloud
was painted upon the arms, which entirely obliterated them, (of these I
saw above thirty in the evening _promenade_, in the _Bois de Boulogne_:)
but on the 30th of July, every person was compelled by the people to
wear a linen cockade, without any distinction in the red and blue
colours.


EXECUTION OF TWO CRIMINALS, WITH A BEHEADING MACHINE.


ON the 4th of August a criminal was beheaded, in the _Place de Grêve_. I
did not see the execution, because, as the hour is never specified, I
might have waited many hours in a crowd, from which there is no
extricating one's self. I was there immediately after, and saw the
machine, which was just going to be taken away. I went into a
coffee-house and made a drawing, which is here engraven. It is called
_la Guillotine_, from the name of the person who first brought it into
use in Paris: that at _Lisle_ is called _le Louison_, for a similar
reason. In English it is termed a maiden.[10]

[Note 10: Mr. Pennant, in the second volume of his Tour in Scotland,
has given a long account of such a machine, from which the following
particulars are taken. "It was confined to the limits of the forest of
Hardwick, or the eighteen towns and hamlets within its precincts. The
execution was generally at Halifax; Twenty five criminals suffered
during the reign of Queen Elizabeth; the records before that time were
lost. Twelve more were executed between 1623 and 1650, after which it is
supposed the privilege was no more exerted.----This machine is now
destroyed, but there is one of the same kind, in a room under the
Parliament house, at Edinburgh, where it was introduced by the Regent
Morton, who took a model of it as he passed through Halifax, and at
length suffered by it himself. It is in form of a painters easel, and
about ten feet high: at four feet from the bottom is a cross-bar, on
which the felon laid his head, which was kept down by another placed
above. In the inner edges of the frame are grooves; in these is placed a
sharp axe, with a vast weight of lead, supported at the summit by a peg;
to that peg is fastened a cord, which the executioner cutting, the axe
falls, and beheads the criminal. If he was condemned for stealing a
horse or a cow, the string was tied to the beast, which pulled out the
peg and became the executioner."]

I have seen the following seven engravings of such an instrument. The
most ancient is engraven on wood, merely outlines, and very badly drawn;
it is in _Petrus de Natalibus Catalogus Sanctorum, 1510_.

There was a German translation of some of _Petrarch's_ Works, published
in 1520; this contains an engraving in wood, representing an execution,
with a great number of figures, correctly drawn.

_Aldegrever_, in 1553, published another print on this subject.

The fourth is in _Achillis Bocchii Quæstiones Symbolicæ_, 1550.

There is one in _Cats's_ Dutch Emblems, 1650.

And the two last are in _Golfrieds's_ Historical Chronicles, in German,
folio, 1674. These five last are engraven on copper.

In all these representations the axe is either straight or semicircular,
but always horizontal. The sloping position of the French axe appears to
be the best calculated for celerity.

Machines of this kind are at present made use of for executions
throughout all France, and criminals are put to death in no other
manner.

The following is the account of an execution, which I had from an
eye-witness.

The crowd began to assemble at ten in the morning, and waited, exposed
to the intense heat of the sun in the middle of July, till four in the
afternoon, when the criminals, a Marquis and a Priest, were brought, in
two coaches; they were condemned for having forged _assignats_.

The Marquis ascended the scaffold first; he was as pale as if he had
already been dead, and he endeavoured to hide his face, by pulling his
hair over it; there were two executioners, dressed in black, on the
scaffold, one of which immediately tied a plank of about 18 inches
broad, and an inch thick, to the body of the Marquis, as he stood
upright, fastening it about the arms, the belly, and the legs; this
plank was about four feet long, and came almost up to his chin; a priest
who attended, then applied a crucifix to his mouth, and the two
executioners directly laid him on his belly on the bench, lifted up the
upper part of the board which was to receive his neck, adjusted his
head properly, then shut the board and pulled the string which is
fastened to the peg at the top of the machine, which lifted up a latch,
and down came the axe; the head was off in a moment, and fell into a
basket which was ready to receive it, the executioner took it out and
held it up by the hair to show the populace, and then put it into
another basket along with the body: very little blood had issued as yet.

The Priest was now taken out of the coach, from which he might have seen
his companion suffer; the bloody axe was hoisted up and he underwent the
same operation exactly. Each of these executions lasted about a minute
in all, from the moment of the criminal's ascending the scaffold to that
of the body's being taken away. It was now seen that the body of the
Marquis made such a violent expiration that the belly raised the lid of
the basket it was in, and the blood rushed out of the great arteries in
torrents.

The windows of the _Place de Grêve_ were, as usual on such occasions,
filled with ladies.[11] Many persons were performing on violins, and
trumpets, in order to pass the time away, and to relieve the tediousness
of expectation.

[Note 11: Mrs. Robinson tells me, that when she was at Paris, a few
years ago, her _valet de place_, came early one morning, informing her
there would be a _grand spectacle_, and wanted to know if he should hire
a place for her. This superb spectacle was no other than the execution
of two murderers, who were to be broken alive on the wheel, in the Place
de Grêve, on that day. She however says, that she declined going.]

I have on several other days seen felons sitting on stools on this
scaffold, with their hands tied, and their arms and bodies fastened to a
stake by a girth, bareheaded, with an inscription over their heads,
specifying their crimes and punishment; they are generally thus exposed
during five or fix hours, and then sent to prison, or to the gallies
according to the sentence.


VERSAILLES. BOTANY. SOUNDING MERIDIANS.


I went once to Versailles; there is hardly any thing in the palace but
the bare walls, a very few of the looking-glasses, tapestry, and large
pictures remaining, as it has now been near two years uninhabited. I
crossed the great canal on foot; there was not a drop of water in it.

In the _Menagerie_ I saw the Rhinoceros, which has been 23 years there;
there is likewise a lion, with a little dog in the same den, as his
companion, and a zebra.

The collection of orange trees cannot be matched in any country where
these trees do not grow naturally; the number is about six hundred, the
largest trunk is about fifteen inches in diameter, and the age of the
most ancient of these trees exceeds three centuries.

The _Jardin Potager_, or kitchen garden, is of fifty acres, divided into
about five or six and twenty small gardens, of one, two, or three acres,
walled round, both for shelter to the plants, and for training fruit
trees against. One of these gardens, of two acres, was entirely allotted
to the culture of melons, and these were all of the warty _rock
cantalupe_ kind, and were growing under hand-glasses, in the manner of
our late cucumbers for pickling.

The season had been so unfavourable for wall-fruit, that (as the
gardener told me) all these gardens had yielded less than a dozen
peaches and nectarines.

The fruit was sent regularly to the Royal Family in Paris.

There is a botanical garden at the _Petit Trianon_ in the park of
Versailles, but the person who shews it was out of the way, so that I
did not see it.

I passed several mornings in the Botanical National Garden, (_ci-devant
Jardin du Roi_.) That part of the garden which contains the botanical
collection is separated from the other part, which is open to the public
at large, by iron palisades. The names of the plants are painted on
square plates of tin, stuck in the ground on the side of each plant. I
saw a _Strelitzia_, which was there called _Ravenala_, (probably from
some modern botanist's name) _Mr. Thouin_, who superintends this garden,
said to me, "We will not have any aristocratic plants, neither will we
call the new Planet by any other name than that of its discoverer,
_Herschel_." I neglected to ask him why the plant might not retain its
original and proper name of _Heliconia Bihai_?

[Illustration: ANASTATICA or ROSE of JERICHO]

I here found the _Anastatica Hierochuntica_ or _Rose of Jericho_, which
I sought for in vain for several years, and advertised for in the
_Gentleman's Magazine_, for January 1791, and in the newspapers. Many
descriptions and figures of this plant are to be found in old books, and
the dried plants are frequently to be met with. Old _Gerard_ very justly
says, "The coiner spoiled the name in the mint, for of all plants that
have been written of, there is not any more unlike unto the rose." The
annexed figure represents a single plant; it had been transplanted into
a deep pot, which had been filled with earth, so as to make it appear
like two plants. The stalks are shrubby, the leaves are fleshy, and of a
glaucous or sea-green colour. The _corolla_ consists of four very small
white petals. Its scientific description may be found in _Linnæus_[12].
One of the _silicles_ is drawn magnified.

[Note 12: _Genera plantarum_, 798.]

Mr. Thouin pointed out to me a new and very beautiful species of
_Zinnia_, of which the flower is twice the size of that of the common
sort, and of a deep purple colour: a new _verbascum_, from the Levant;
it was about four feet high, the leaves were almost as woolly as those
of the _Stachys lanata_, and terminated in a point like a spur; it had
not yet flowered. And a new _solanum_, with spines the colour of gold.

He recommended the flower of the _spilanthus brasiliana_, which our
nurserymen call _Verbesina_ _acmella_ as an excellent dentifrice.

I also found here the _amethystea, coerulea_: this annual has been lost
in England above twenty years.[13]

[Note 13: The seeds which are sold in the London shops, for those of
this plant, are those of the _hyssopus bracteatis_.]

The _datura fastuosa_, the French call _Trompette du jugement à trois
fleurs l'une dans l'autre_; I have myself raised these with triple
flowers, both purple and white, though some of our nurserymen pretended
the flowers were never more than double. The _anthemis arabica_, a very
singular and pretty annual. A _zinnia hybrida_, which last has not yet
been cultivated in England. Twenty-two sorts of _medicago polymorpha,
(snails and hedgehogs_) of these I had seen only four in England.

