It was to be anticipated that Dr. Koch's discovery of the tubercle
bacillus would lead him on to the discovery of a cure for
tuberculosis. Very naturally his thought on this subject was borne in
the direction of inoculation. That method had been used by Pasteur and
by himself in the case of other infectious diseases. Why should it not
be employed in consumption? If the "domestication," so-called, of the
virus of splenic fever and the use of the modified poison as an
antiseptic preventive of the disease was successful, as it had been
proved to be, why should this not be done with the attenuated virus of
consumption?

The last five years of the ninth decade were spent by Dr. Koch in
experimentation on this subject. He found that the tubercular poison
might be treated in the same manner as the poison of other infectious
diseases. He experimented with methods for domesticating the bacillus
of consumption, and reached successful results. On the fourteenth of
November, 1890, he published in a German medical magazine at Berlin a
communication on a possible remedy for tuberculosis. He had prepared a
sort of lymph suitable for hypodermic injection, and with this had
experimented on a form of _external_ tuberculosis called lupus. This
disease is a consumption of the skin and adjacent tissues. It is a
malady almost as dreadful as consumption of the lungs, but is by no
means frequent in its occurrence. It is found only at rare intervals
by the medical practitioner.

Dr. Koch had demonstrated that lupus is a true tuberculosis--that the
germ which produces it is the same bacillus which produces consumption
of the lungs. He accordingly directed his effort to cases of lupus,
treating the patients with hypodermic injections which he had prepared
from the modified form of the tubercular poison. He was successful in
the treatment, and was able to announce, to the joy of the world, that
he had discovered a cure for lupus; and the announcement went so far
as to express a belief in the salutary character of the remedy in the
treatment of consumption of the lungs.

Dr. Koch, however, with the usual caution of the true men of science,
did not announce his tuberculin, or lymph, as a cure for pulmonary
consumption. He did not even declare that it was positively a remedy
for the other forms of tuberculosis, but did announce his cure of
cases of lupus by the agent which he had prepared. The world, after
its manner, leaped at conclusions, and the newspapers of two
continents, in their usual office of disseminating ignorance,
trumpeted Koch's discovery as the end of tubercular consumption.

In January of 1891, Dr. Koch published to the world the composition of
his remedy. It consists of a glycerine extract prepared by the
cultivation of tubercle bacilli. The lymph contains, as it were, the
poisonous matter resulting from the life and activity of the tubercle
bacterium. The fluid is used by hypodermic injection, and when so
administered produces both a general and local reaction. The system is
powerfully affected. A sense of weariness comes on. The breathing is
labored. Nausea ensues; and a fever supervenes which lasts for twelve
or fifteen hours. It is now known that the action of the remedy is not
directly against the tubercle bacilli, but rather against the affected
tissue in which they exist. This tissue is destroyed and thrown off by
the agency of the lymph; being destroyed, it is eliminated and cast
out, carrying with it the bacteria on which the disease depends.

The results which have followed the administration of Koch's lymph for
consumption of the lungs have not met the expectation of the public;
but something has been accomplished. Ignorant enthusiasm has meanwhile
subsided, and scientific men in both Europe and America are pressing
the inquiry in a way which promises in due time the happiest results.


ACHIEVEMENTS IN SURGERY.

It will not do to disparage the work of the ancients. The old world,
long since fallen below the horizon of the past, had races of men and
individuals who might well be compared with the greatest of to-day. In
a general way, the ancients were great as thinkers and weak as
scientists. They were great in the fine arts and weak in the practical
arts. This is true of the Hindus, the Egyptians, the Greeks, the
Romans, even of the Aztecs and the Peruvians.

The art work of these old peoples, whether in sculpture, painting or
poetry, surpassed, if it did not eclipse, corresponding periods of
modern times. In some of the practical arts the old races were
proficient. In architecture, which combines the æsthetic and
practical elements, the man of antiquity was at least the equal of the
man of the present. In one particular art--a sort of humanitarian
profession based on natural science and directed to the preservation
of life--the ancients had a measure of proficiency. This art was
surgery. The surgeon was even from the beginning, and he will no doubt
be even to the end.

The great advance which has been made in surgical science and practice
is shown in two ways: first, in a great increase of courage, by which
the surgeon has been led on to the performance of operations that were
hitherto considered rash, audacious or impossible; and secondly, by
the immunity which the surgeon has gained in the treatment of wounds
through the increased knowledge he possesses of putrefaction and the
means of preventing it. It were hard to say whether the surgeon's
increase of skill and courage in performing operations has equalled
his increased skill in the after treatment of wounds.

These improvements have all proceeded from scientific investigation.
They have come of the application of scientific methods to the
treatment of surgical diseases. With the investigations of Pasteur and
the development of the science of bacteriology, it was seen at a
glance how large an influence such investigation must have in the
work of the surgeon. The publication of Tyndall's "Essays on the
Floating Matter of the Air in Relation to Putrefaction and Infection,"
in 1881, gave a great impulse to the new practice; but that practice
had been already confirmed by the great and original work of Sir
Joseph Lister, an English surgeon who as early as 1860 had introduced
the antiseptic method of bandaging.

It is within the last forty years that the greatest marvels of modern
surgery have been performed. It would seem that no part of the human
body is now beyond the reach of surgical remedy. Almost every year has
witnessed some new and daring invasion of the fortress of life with a
view to saving it. Old opinions with respect to what parts of the
human economy are really vital have been abolished; and a new concept
of the relation of life to organism has prevailed.

Until recently it was supposed that the peritoneal cavity and the
organs contained therein, such as the stomach, the liver, the bowels,
etc., could not be entered by the surgeon without the certain result
of death. To do so at the present time is the daily experience in
almost every great hospital. The complexity of civilization has
inflicted all manner of hurts on the human body, and the malignity of
disease has spared no part. It was supposed that the cranial cavity
could not be entered or repaired without producing fatal results. It
was taken for granted that certain organs could not be touched, much
less treated capitally, without destroying the subject's life. But one
exploration has followed another and one successful adventure has been
succeeded by another still more successful until the surgeon's work is
at the present time performed within a sphere that was until recently
supposed to be entirely beyond his reach.

As to the liver, that great organ is freely examined and is treated
surgically with considerable freedom. This is true also of the
stomach, which until recently was supposed to be entirely beyond the
surgeon's touch. Within the last two decades sections of the stomach
have been made and parts of the organ removed. Not a few cases are
recorded in which subjects have fully recovered after the removal of a
part of the stomach. Sections of the intestinal canal have also been
made with entire success. Several inches of that organ have in some
cases been entirely removed, with the result of recovery! The spleen
has been many times removed; but it has been recently noted that a
decline in health and probably death at a not distant date generally
follow this operation.

The disease called appendicitis has either in our times become
wonderfully frequent or else the improved methods of diagnosis have
made us acquainted with what has long been one of the principal
maladies of mankind. The _appendix vermiformis_ seems to be a useless
remnant of anatomical structure transmitted to us from a lower animal
condition. At least such is the interpretation which scientists
generally give to this hurtful and dangerous tube-like blind channel
in connection with the bowels. That it becomes easily inflamed and is
the occasion of great loss of life can not be doubted. Its removal by
surgical operation is now regarded as a simple process which even the
unlearned surgeon, if he be careful and talented, may safely perform.
The surgical treatment of appendicitis has become so common as to
attract little or no notice from the profession. Even the country
neighborhood no longer regards such a piece of surgery as sensational.

The use of surgical means in the cure, that is the removal, of tumors,
both external and internal, has been greatly extended and perfected.
The surgeon now carries a quick eye for the tumor and a quick remedy
for it. In nearly all cases in which it has not become constitutional
he effects a speedy cure with the knife. The cancerous part is cut
away. It has been observed that as the recent mortality from
consumption has decreased cancerous diseases have become more
frequently fatal. Whether or not there be anything vicarious in the
action of these two great maladies we know not; but statistics show
that since the beginning of Pasteur's discoveries the one disease has
diminished and the other increased in almost a corresponding ratio.
Meanwhile, however, surgery has opposed itself not only to cancers but
to all kinds of tumors, until danger from these sores has been greatly
lessened. The removal of internal tumors such as the ovarian, is no
longer, except in complicated and neglected cases, a matter of serious
import. Such work is performed in almost every country town, and the
amount of human life thus rescued from impending death is very great.
The work of lithotomy is not any longer regarded with the dread which
formerly attended it. In fact, every kind of disease and injury which
in its own nature is subject to surgical remedy has been disarmed of
its terror. The eye and the ear and all of the more delicate organs
have become subject to repair and amendment to a degree that may well
excite wonder and gratify philanthropy.

But it is not only in the actual processes of surgery that this great
improvement in human art may be noted. The treatment of wounds with
respect to their cure by preserving them from bacterial and other
poisons has been so greatly improved that it is now regarded almost as
a crime to permit suppuration and other horrible processes which were
formerly supposed to be the necessary concomitants of healing. The
hospital, whether military or civil, was formerly a scene that might
well horrify and make sick a visitant. It was putrefaction everywhere.
It was stench and poisonous effluvia. The conditions were such as to
make sick if not destroy even those who were well. How then could the
injured sufferers escape?

It is one of the crowning glories of our time that no such scene now
exists in any civilized country. No such will ever exist again, unless
science should lose its grip on the human mind and the civilized life
subside into barbarism. The surgeon would now be held in ill-repute
that should permit to any considerable degree the processes of
putrefaction to take place in a wound of which he has had the care.
The introduction of antiseptic and aseptic methods has made him a
master in this respect. The skillful surgeon bids defiance to the
microbes that hover in swarming millions ravenous for admission to
every hurt done to the human body. To them a wound is a festival. To
them a sore is a royal banquet to which through the invisible realm a
proclamation goes forth, "Come ye! Come to the banquet which death is
preparing out of life!" All this the modern surgeon disappoints with a
smile and a wave of his hand. The invisible swarms of invading
animalculæ are swept back. Not a single bacterium can any longer enter
the most inviting wound while the surgeon stands ready with drawn
sword to defend the portals of life.


Great Religious Movements.


DEFENCE ON NEW LINES.

In a period so intensely active and progressive as the nineteenth
century has been, in politics, science and literature, it would have
been surprising if the church had remained inert, wrapped like a mummy
in the cerements of the past. At the beginning of the century, there
were voices on all hands loudly proclaiming that it was dead; that it
was antiquated and obsolete; that it had lost touch with the life of
the time, that it was a relic of exploded superstition; and as a great
writer said, had fallen into a godless mechanical condition, standing
as the lifeless form of a church, a mere case of theories, like the
carcass of a once swift camel, left withering in the thirst of the
universal desert. That in certain circles there was ground for such
reproach is sufficiently proved. Materialism had crept into its
colleges, sapping away their spiritual life and driving young men
either into Atheism or into the Roman Catholic Communion. Such
activity as it had, was in the evangelical circles only The common
people still listened eagerly to Wesley's successors and were
intensely in earnest in the Christian life and work. It was at the top
that the tree was dying, where the currents of the philosophy of
Voltaire struck the branches, and where Hume's scorching radicalism
blighted its leaves. In the universities, and the clubs, not in the
workshops, was religion scorned and contemned.

There was soon, however, to be a quickening of the dry bones. The
spirit of the time--the zeit-geist--began to move in the Church. It
was the spirit of investigation, of scientific inquiry, of rigorous
test. The older preachers and religious authorities still droned about
the duty of defending the faith "once for all" delivered to the
saints. In spite of their protests, the younger men would go down into
the crypt of the Church, and examine the foundations of the building.
They could not be kept back by authoritative assurances that the
stones were sound, and were well and truly laid. The hysterical
protests against the irreverence of examination fell on deaf ears. The
answer was the simple insistance on investigation. The very reluctance
to permit it was an indication that it would not bear investigation.

At the opening of the century, this idea, expressed in varying forms,
was rapidly becoming prevalent. The citadel of the Church was
assaulted, by some with ferocity, and by others with scorn and
contempt. The defence was on the old lines of denunciation of the
wickedness of the assailants, of vituperative epithets, and of the
assumption of special and divine illumination. The issue of the
conflict would not have been doubtful, had it been continued with
these tactics. The Church would have been relegated to the limbo of
superstition and the hide-bound pedantry of ecclesiasticism, if new
defenders on new principles had not entered the lists. Reinforcement
came from a band of philosophic thinkers of whom Wordsworth and
Coleridge were the pioneers. The influence of both these men was
underestimated at the time. They appeared weak and ineffective, but
the ideas to which they gave expression, entered the minds of stronger
men, who applied them with more vigorous force. The Church, Coleridge
declared, as Carlyle interprets him, was not dead, but tragically,
asleep only. It might be aroused and might again become useful, if
only the right paths were opened. Coleridge could not open the paths,
he could but vaguely show the depth and volume of the forces pent up
in the Church; but he insisted that they were there, that eternal
truth was in Christianity, and that out of it must come the light and
life of the world. As his little band of hearers listened to him, they
saw the first faint gleams of the light which was to illumine the
world and make the darkness and degradation of the materialistic
philosophy an impossibility to the devout mind. Thus he stood at the
beginning of the nineteenth century, as Erasmus stood at the beginning
of the sixteenth, perceiving and proclaiming the existence of truths
which others were to apply to the needs of the time.

To ascertain precisely in what form the forces of Christianity existed
and how they might be applied to nineteenth century life, became early
in the nineteenth century the problem on which the best thought of the
time was concentrated. Coleridge's unshaken conviction that it was
solvable, inspired many with courage. Whately, Arnold, Schleiermacher,
Bunsen, Ewald, Newman, Hare, Milman, Thirlwall and many others,
approached it from different directions. The spirit of scientific
investigation that was in the air was applied with reverent hands, but
with unsparing resolve to ascertain the exact truth. The investigation
was no longer confined to dogma; a proof text from the Bible was no
longer sufficient to close a controversy. The Bible itself must be
subjected to investigation. This was indeed going to the foundations.
There was a wild outcry against rationalism and iconoclasm, but the
search for truth and fact went on. As in a siege, the garrison must
sometimes destroy with their own hands outworks which cannot be
successfully defended, and may be made a vantage ground for the enemy,
so the defenders of Christianity set themselves to the task of finding
out how much of the current theology was credible and tenable, and how
much might wisely be abandoned, to insure the safety of the remainder.
The discoveries of Geology, Astronomy and of Biology could not be
denied, yet their testimony was contrary to Christian doctrine. "The
world was made in six natural days," said the old Christian preacher.
"The world was thousands of years in the making," said the geologist.
The preacher appealed to his Bible, the geologist appealed to the
rocks. The issue was fairly joined, and in the early years of the
century it seemed as if there was no alternative but that of believing
the Bible and denying science, or believing science and giving up the
Bible; it seemed impossible to believe both. When the scientific
theologian ventured to suggest that the word "day," might mean age, or
period, there was another outcry that the Bible was being surrendered
to the enemy. But it was realized that the message of the Bible to the
world was not scientific, and that its usefulness was not impaired by
the suggested mode of understanding its record of creation; and
gradually the surrender was accepted. It is true that to this day
there are some who will not accept it, as there is at least one
preacher who insists, on the authority of the Bible, that "the sun do
move," but the number diminishes in every generation. A beginning was
made in attaining the true view of the Bible which led further and has
not yet reached its limits. Having admitted that the Bible was not
given to teach science the Church has to decide whether it can admit
the theory of evolution and whether its records of history are
authoritative. These questions are so fundamental that the strife of
Calvinism and Arminianism and the question of the double procession of
the Holy Spirit, which seemed vital to our fathers have faded into
relative insignificance.

EVANGELICAL ACTIVITY.

While these storms were agitating the upper air, and the thunderous
echoes reverberated through the mountains, the work on the plain went
rapidly forward. However the scholars and the theologians might decide
the questions at issue between them, the working forces were
profoundly convinced that the Gospel was the great need of the world,
and they put out new energy and applied all the powers of the mind to
devising new methods for its propagation. The increased facilities of
travel, the improved means of communication and, above all, the power
of the printing-press, were all seized and harnessed to service in the
dissemination of the Gospel. No characteristic of this century is so
prominent as this intense activity and aggressive energy. From every
secular movement, the church has taken suggestions for its own
advancement. Trade-unionism has suggested Christian Endeavor and the
Evangelical Alliance; the public school system has developed the
International Lesson system in the Sunday School; the political
convention has taught the advantages of great religious conferences;
the principles of military organization have been utilized in the
Salvation Army. If in some circles religion seems to have been a fight
over doctrines and theories, in others it has seemed a ceaseless,
untiring struggle for converts. In no century since the first century
of the Christian era has the zeal of propagation, with no element of
proselytism in it, taken so strong a hold of the followers of Christ.
To translate the Bible into every tongue, to carry the Gospel message
to every people, and to evangelize the masses at home, prodigious
efforts have been put forth, and enormous sums of money have been
expended. Mental activity, uncompromising veracity, indefatigable
energy, have characterized the Church through the century, and its
closing years show no abatement in any of these characteristics. A
brief sketch of some of the more prominent of these developments can
render the fact only more, obvious.


BIBLE REVISION.

One of the most important events of the century to the English
speaking world is the Revision of the Bible. Its full effect is not
yet felt, as the book which was the product of the Revisers' labors is
but slowly winning its way into use in the Church and the home. Like
its predecessor, the Authorized Version now in general use, it has to
encounter the prejudice which comes from long familiarity with the
book in use and from the veneration for the phraseology in which the
precious truths, are expressed. Yet from the beginning of the century
the need of an improved translation was felt and several persons,
undertook to supply it, but with very objectionable results. The
principal bases of the need were serious. One was that many words and
phrases have in the nineteenth century a meaning entirely different
from the one they had in the early part of the seventeenth century
when the Authorized Version was issued. One case in point is Mark vi.
22, in which Salome asks that the head of John the Baptist be given
her "by and by in a charger." In 1611 the expression by and by meant
immediately or forthwith, and was a correct translation, while with us
it means a somewhat indefinite future and is therefore an incorrect
translation. With the noun, too, the meaning has changed. Our idea of
a charger is of a war-horse, not of a dish, which the original
conveys. A second reason for the revision was that there were in the
libraries in this century several manuscripts of the original, much
older than those to which the translators of the Authorized Version
had access when they undertook their work. A third reason was that a
notable advance had been made in scholarship in the interval, and
learned men were much better acquainted with the Hebrew and Greek
idiom than were any of the scholars of the King James period. For
these three, among other reasons, a revision was necessary, that the
unlearned reader might have, as nearly as was possible, the exact
equivalent in English of the words of the Bible writers. The project,
after being widely discussed for several years, finally took shape in
England in 1870, when the Convocation of Canterbury appointed two
committees to undertake the work. The ablest scholars in Hebrew and
Greek literature in the country were assigned to the committees, of
which one was engaged on the Old, and the other on the New Testament.
They were empowered to call to their aid similar committees in
America, who might work simultaneously with them. Stringent
instructions were given to them to avoid making changes where they
were not clearly needed for the accuracy of translation, and to
preserve the idiom of the Authorized Version. Only with these
safeguards and with not a little reluctance, the commission was
issued. One hundred and one scholars on both sides of the Atlantic
took part in the work. The committees commenced their labors early in
1871. On May 17, 1881, the Revised New Testament was issued, and on
May 21, 1885, the Revised Old Testament was in the hands of the
public. All that scholarship, strenuous labor and exhaustive research
could do to give a faithful translation had been done within the
somewhat narrow and conservative limits under which the revisers were
commissioned.


BIBLES BY THE MILLION.

With this improvement, there was at the same time a marked impetus in
Bible circulation. The nineteenth century has been eminently a
Bible-reading and a Bible-studying period. In no previous century have
efforts on so gigantic a scale been made to put the Book in the hands
of every one who could read it. The price was brought so low by the
decrease in the cost of production, that the very poorest could
possess a copy. The British and Foreign Bible Society, founded in
1804, and the American Bible Society, founded in 1816, have largely
contributed to this result. Both societies were organized to issue the
Bible without note or comment, and both have faithfully labored to
promote its circulation. In spite of all that has been said against
the Book and in spite of the fact that so large a number of persons
must have been supplied, the circulation has increased from year to
year. In the year ending March, 1896, the American Society alone
issued 1,750,000 copies, and the British two and a half million.
During its existence the American Society has sent out over sixty-one
million copies and the British Society over one hundred and forty
millions. The work of translation has kept pace with the demand. At
the beginning of the century the Bible had been translated, in whole
or in part, into thirty-eight languages. It is now translated into
three hundred and eighty-one, and translators are engaged on nearly a
hundred others. Nor must it be supposed that the supply was in excess
of the demand. There is abundant evidence of the desire of the public
to possess the Word of God. One fact alone is a conspicuous proof of
this demand. In 1892 the proprietor of the _Christian Herald_ of New
York offered an Oxford Teacher's Bible as a premium with his journal.
The offer was accepted with such avidity that edition after edition
was exhausted, and it has been renewed every year since with increased
demand. Through this journal alone, by this means, over three hundred
and two thousand copies have been put into the hands of the people
during the past five years.

With the increase in the circulation of the Word of God there has been
a costly and thorough effort to gain new light on its pages. Never
before have labor and money been expended so lavishly in endeavors to
learn from exploration and research, historical facts which would
contribute to an intelligent understanding of its history and
literature. In 1865 a society called the Palestine Exploration Society
was organized for the special purpose of thoroughly examining the Holy
Land, investigating and identifying ancient sites and making exact
maps of the country. In twenty-seven years the society, though working
with the utmost economy, expended $425,000. The result of its labors
has been to let a flood of light on the ancient places and the ancient
customs of its people, explaining many allusions in the sacred
history, poetry and prophecy that were previously dark. The Egypt
Exploration Fund has also added materially to our knowledge of that
country which is associated with the early history of the Chosen
People. But the most valuable aid to Bible study came from the
discovery of the Assyrian Royal Library, a series of clay tablets and
cylinders covered with cuneiform inscriptions which were deciphered by
Mr. George Smith of the British Museum. From these and from the
records on the monuments of Egypt historical information has been
derived of inestimable value in the study of the Bible.


A GREAT MISSIONARY ERA.

One of the most prominent characteristics of the Church of Christ in
this century has been its phenomenal missionary activity. Its zeal in
this cause, the devotion and courage of its missionaries and the
amount of money expended have had no parallel in the previous history
of the Church. Already a beginning had been made when the century
dawned. In 1701 King William III. of England had granted a charter to
the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. In
1714 Frederick IV. of Denmark established a College of Missions and
two Danish missionaries were laboring in India. In 1721 the famous
Danish missionary, Hans Egede, began a work in Greenland. In 1732 the
Moravian missionaries, Dober and Nitschmann, went to St. Thomas, and
in the following year the Moravian Church sent missionaries to
Labrador, the West Indies, South America, South Africa and India. But
it was not until the last decade of the eighteenth century that the
spirit which was to distinguish the next century really manifested
itself. In 1792 the devotion and consecration of William Carey led to
the formation of the Baptist Missionary Society, and in the following
year he sailed for India as its first missionary.

In 1795 the London Missionary Society was organized, a missionary ship
was purchased and the first band of missionaries sailed for the South
Sea Islands. Two years later, another party sailed for South Africa,
among whom were the veterans, Vanderkemp and Kitchener. Two Scottish
societies were founded in 1796 and a Dutch Society in 1797. In the
closing year of the century the famous Church Missionary Society was
formed in the Church of England. Thus the nineteenth century opened
with organizations for work in existence and pioneers few in number,
but intensely in earnest in several fields of labor.

