Mr. Lowell says, in big short preface: 'The greater part of this volume
was printed ten years ago in _Putnam's Monthly_ and _Graham's Magazine_.
The additions (most of them about Italy) have been made up, as the
original matter was, from old letters and journals written on the spot.
My wish was to describe not so much what I went to see, as what I saw
that was most unlike what one sees at home. If the reader find
entertainment, he will find all I hoped to give him.'

And a churl he surely were if he find it not; for a right pleasant book
it is to read--genial and full of the real Lowell humor, almost as
characteristic as Jean Paul's, _der einzige_. 'Cambridge Thirty Years
Ago' will carry many of our most distinguished men back to the sunny
days of youth, while the boys of to-day will be delighted to know how it
fared with them then and there. Contents: Cambridge Thirty Years Ago; A
Moosehead Journal; Leaves from My Journal in Italy and Elsewhere; At
Sea; In the Mediterranean; Italy; A Few Bits of Roman Mosaic.

There is no use in praising a book of Lowell's; everybody knows, reads,
and loves him.

     SIMONSON'S CIRCULAR ZOOLOGICAL CHART. A Directory to the Study of
     the Animal Kingdom. Published by Schermerhorn, Bancroft & Co., 130
     Grand street, New York, and 25 North Fourth street, Philadelphia.

This chart must prove a valuable guide to the teacher, and a great aid
to the student of Natural History. It appears to have been carefully
compiled from modern standard works, and is divided and subdivided as
accurately as the limited space allows. It is a vast aid to the memory,
showing at a glance the classification of the animal kingdom; and,
bringing together the various groups of animals on one page, it stamps
its complicated lesson on the mind through the rapid power of the eye.
When the enormous number of species is considered, the advantage of such
a chart may be readily imagined. It may be used as an introduction by
the teacher, or side by side with any text book. We heartily recommend
it to notice.


     PERCE'S MAGNETIC GLOBES. A very ingenious invention is here offered
     to the public through Mr. J. F. Trow, of 50 Greene street, New York.
     It consists of a hollow Globe made of soft iron, and Magnetic
     Objects, representing the races of mankind, animals, trees,
     light-houses, are supplied with it, which, _adhering to the
     surface_, illustrate clearly the attraction of gravitation, the
     rotundity of the earth, its diurnal motion, the changes of day and
     night, and many other things very difficult to make intelligible to
     children. Teachers will find this globe and its magnetic objects of
     incalculable value in affording facilities for striking
     illustrations of principles, problems, and various terrestrial
     phenomena.

SIZES AND PRICES.

  No. 1. Library, 12 inches in diameter, revolving
  brass meridian                                    $22.00

  No. 2. Library, 12 inches, plain stand             16.00

  No. 3. Student's, 5 inches, revolving brass
  meridian                                            5.00

  No. 4 Student's, 5 inches, plain stand              3.50

  No. 5. Primary, 3 inches,   "    "                  2.50

Suitable Magnetic Objects accompany each Globe.


     CHRISTUS JUDEX. A Traveller's Tale. By EDWARD ROTH. Philadelphia:
     Frederick Leypoldt. 1864.

A singular romance, interwoven of the art life of the Old, and the
forest life of the New World. The main character is the _Great Stone
Face_, already immortalized by the lamented Hawthorne. It is here
presented to us under a new aspect, and while we think that even those
grand old rocks fail to embody the glorious ideal of a Christus Judex,
we must acknowledge the pleasure we have derived from the fanciful
descriptions and pleasant associations offered us in this dainty little
volume.


EDITOR'S TABLE.


Christmas is again upon us, dear readers; we may almost hear the
gathering chime of its happy bells upon the frosty air. It is a time
when even strangers may hold commune; let us take advantage of it, and
learn to know something of each other. But are we indeed strangers? It
is true that we stand as abstract impersonalities, as disembodied
spirits, unknown even by name to one another. Yet have we held relations
which we cannot shake off even if we would. 'The most obscure of
literary men' we may be, yet has your kind smile often cheered us as we
labored to place before you the wants, wishes, tastes, views, hopes, and
aims of our common country. Caterer as we are for you, through us and
the handywork of our skilful printer have our able writers spun their
golden threads through heart, mind, and soul. Contributors, readers, and
editor are alike linked in these glittering spiritual meshes, and can
never be quite the same as if the web had never held them for its
passing moment in its light zone of thought. For ideas generate duties,
knowledge stimulates action, and to act in a world of doubt may well be
onerous. We frankly confess to you that a dread responsibility has cast
a deep shadow upon all our moments since the commencement of our
intercourse with you. Our butterfly hours were then past: we grew into
work-a-day bees--if only we have stored some honey in your hives to pay
us for the lost idlesse of our dreamy summers! If it 'is greatly wise to
talk with our past hours, and ask them what report they bear to Heaven'
when spent only for ourselves, it is a solemn thing to call them back,
and ask them what report they bear to Heaven for the thousands to whom
they have ministered. We spread the table lovingly before you: what if
there should be something in yourselves to turn our healthful food to
poison? On marches THE CONTINENTAL with its light and heavy freight of
winged words and thoughts, striding from _monthly_ stepping-stone to
stepping-stone on the long route of Time. Stepping-stones in Time are
they now truly, but as we gaze they seem to grow into Eternity, and the
buds which twine their glow around them ripen slowly into ever-living
fruit in the strange clime of the Everlasting Now to which we are all
hastening.

  How clear that Christmas chime upon the frosty air!

Reader, is it too much to hope that in spite of all our short-comings,
we have yet been loyal to your better hours, and faithful in the field
given us to sow for the heavenly Reapers? We have labored to interest,
amuse, and instruct you for the last eighteen months: have you learned
in that time to _trust_ us as we have learned to care for you? Do you
know us loyal patriots and true Christians, even if of a broad and
all-unsectarian faith? If we are too frank, it is because we are certain
that truth can never contradict itself, that nature must be one with
revelation, that he errs who fears the crucible of the savant or would
hold science in leading strings. THE CONTINENTAL seeks the light,
condemns to silence no new Galileo, tortures no creative Kepler, has no
fires for heretics, and nothing worse than an incredulous smile for the
shivering witches and mediums, the muscular demons of modern
spiritualism. It rejects no scientific investigation honorably pursued,
for all paths lead back to the Maker of the Universe, and the honest
seeker must find Him at the end of his route. That God is our Father,
that we are made in His triune image, that Christ is our elder Brother,
the great Regenerator of our race, is surely the ever open, ever mystic
secret of the universe!

We have travelled on together through a gloomy year. The air has been
sad with sighs, dim with tears, restless with great sobs of human
anguish. But we are drifting into calmer swells on the great Time-Ocean,
and the _crimson_ year of '64 is almost past. The dwellers of the Valley
already look for the morning star, while those upon the Hilltop hail the
auroral light of '65. Enshrined in and sparkling through its golden
glow two mystic figures gleam; the star of the morning pales before
their splendor. The one is godlike in her majesty, sublime through
conquered suffering, the awful smile of the Crucified seems shining
through the features transfigured since He wore them, and the cross
glitters in all the glory of Self-sacrifice on her broad breast. She
wears a girdle blue as if woven from the depths of heaven, and as we
gaze we see great opals with veiled hearts of fire form into quaint old
runic letters upon it, and the God-word LOVE flashes down the secret of
her inner life upon us. She is still young as when she woke in Paradise,
and, seeing the End, is not yet weary with her long journey of Exile.
Brighter gates than those of Eden stand unbarred before her! In her
right hand she holds unrolled, that all may read, the great Magna Charta
of universal Human Rights, and even at this distance we may see
EMANCIPATION upon its broad margin. We know the once sad spirit now, no
longer _sad_, the _radiant_ Genius of Humanity.

Her vigorous arm is round a younger and less solemn form, a form of
wildering beauty, whose gold hair glitters like a nimbus in the level
rays of morning; with an irresistible impulse we take her into the
innermost folds of our hearts, we feel her to be _our own_; our banner
in her right hand sways and tosses on the fresh breeze, its stars, round
which new suns are ever clustering, throw their dazzling light upon her,
and the young eagles turning from the sun throng around her to drink the
splendor from her brighter brow. The long streamers from her girdle
float athwart the sky, their wavy lines, red, white, and blue, quiver
with delight as the wild zephyrs caress them, thrilling the air with
shifting play of passionate color. Ha! what miracle is this?--whatsoever
light may fall upon them, under what angle soever we may see them, as
were it magically woven into their warp and woof, we read the word now
graven on our hearts--UNION! Her left hand holds closely clasped to her
heart a great urn, glowing as it were an immense ruby--ah! we need no
words to tell us what the young spirit clasps so fondly to her
breast--we _feel_ it is the dust of the holy dead, who gave their lives
on the red battle field that she might live: their very ashes glow with
living fire! Her white feet rest on the sacred graves of Shiloh,
Antietam, Murfreesboro', Gettysburg, Vicksburg, Lookout Mountain, the
Wilderness, Atlanta, Winchester, and Cedar Creek, from which she has
newly risen in her young strength and ever-growing glory.

She is the brilliant Spirit of our Nation! the new hope of all People!
Her career is ever onward with the Genius of Humanity into the enchanted
realm of the happy Future. No chains are in her white hands now. The
tired laborer rests as she smiles upon him; the bay of the bloodhound
and sharp crack of the lash cease in the white cotton field; the Indian
buries his tomahawk, no longer wounding the still ear of the forest with
his shrill war whoop; the maiden walks fearlessly free, for all men are
now her brothers; shielding her sanctity; the wife is happy, for the
husband has won her esteem, and it is no shame to crown him with her
love; and cherub-children sport around, lovely and happy as the
heaven-seraphs.

Peace to our glorious dead! Eternal honor to the martyrs of freedom!
From the sharp agonies of their true hearts springs now first to
_conscious_ birth the vigorous Spirit of our Nation. We never knew
aright how very dear to us she was until the traitors tried to tear her
limb from limb because her heart was open to all made in the image of
their God--because she knew the sacred worth of man.

  How near those Christmas chimes peal on the frosty air!

And if we will but think of it, a Nationality is always of slow growth,
of gradual development. It, like man himself, is born in pain and
anguish. It is indeed a living member of the Grand Man of which Humanity
is composed. Since the forty years wandering of the children of Israel
in the desert, how much suffering has been endured to hold it sacred!
The history of the present time is but a record of fierce struggles to
achieve or hold a Nationality. Poland has hung on the cross of her great
enemy for centuries rather than yield its sanctity. He has torn and
scattered its quivering members, blotted it out in blood from the names
known on earth, it has been murdered, and fed upon by three great
Christian Powers ('Oh, the pity of it!')--Catholic Austria, Protestant
Prussia and Greek-Churched Russia--but it is not dead: it lives in all
the energy of self-abnegating suffering on the mountains of Causasus,
the steppes of Asia, the frozen plains of Siberia, in the depths of
Russian mines, the darkness of Russian prisons, and it still will live
until the last Pole is laid in the last grave of his heroic but
unfortunate race. Such is its vitality when once truly born. Denmark
turns pale and shivers as she feels it may be torn from her; 'Italia,
with the fatal gift of beauty for her dower,' the fair land where fairer
Juliets breathe the enamored air, art--crowned and genius-gifted,
writhes in agony until it may be her own; Greece long bled for it; and
the brave and haughty Magyar, to whom a courser fleet and the free air
are necessities of daily life, braves and bears prisons, chains, and
poverty, in the hope of its attainment. What is this precious
Nationality? Like all basic elements, it is difficult to define. It is
not a State, a Constitution, nor is it made by man at all. An able
writer in _The North American Review_ for October says: 'It may be
said, in general, to be the sum of the differences, geographical,
historical, political, and moral, which separate a people as a community
from every other--of those differences which modify the character of
each individual, and the results of which are combined in the traits of
national character. The consciousness of its existence is developed
slowly, and it is long before the sentiment of Nationality--the true
foundation of patriotism--gains force over the hearts and convictions of
a people. But this sentiment, when it has once taken root, is one of the
_most powerful_ of those by which human conduct is affected. It is a
sentiment of the highest order, lifting men out of narrow and selfish
individualism into a region where they behold their duties as members
one of another, as partakers of the general life of humanity--the
inheritors of the past, the trustees of the future.'

'What is planetary humanity?' says Krasinski. 'It is the entirety and
unity of all the powers and capacities of the human spirit expressed
visibly on the earth through harmony and concord, the love of its
members, that is of the various nationalities. As all the members of the
human body are the visible and various parts of the invisible human I,
which connects and rules them all, so the visible nationalities must in
their variety and harmonious unity become in some future time the living
members of a universal humanity. The world knows to-day to what point
its history is tending: it knows it is governed by the wisdom of God,
and that its end is the Humanity, the entire universality brought into
perfect accord with the will of God, knowing and executing the laws
given it by God. But the means to this end, the instruments, the living
members, are the _Nationalities_, in which all the varieties of the
human race have their fairest bloom, their most precious flower. What
the tones are in the musical chord they are in humanity, eternal variety
in eternal harmony and concord. It is impossible to conceive Humanity
without them; it would then be unity without variety, consequently no
_proper unity_ at all, a mere lifeness _oneness_. States are of human
creation, an aggregative collection of small parts; but nationalities
are made by God alone, and therefore not states without nationalities,
but states forming nationalities, belong to the coming union of
universal humanity, and pass into the Christian order. States have risen
before this to destroy a nationality, dividing and quartering it for the
profit of some selfish ideal, tearing asunder a living, palpitating
organism, murdering a visible member of the Universal Humanity. He is
but a child who calls this merely a political crime: it is a crime of
the very deepest dye, a crime against the Humanity itself, against
religion, where the daring criminals, striding over all lower spheres,
break into the circles of the living God. To tear asunder a state of
merely human creation, generated only by human interests and passions,
would be a political crime, but to wish to dismember and murder a
God-given nationality, when the realization of the idea of humanity on
the planet cannot be filled without it, is a rebellion against the
eternal truth of God--it is a sacrilege! The recognition of such
violation were participation; opposition to such impiety is religion!'

Our very origin teaches us union. We have sprung from so many races that
it is throbbing in our very life-pulse, and is written on the red
tablets of our hearts. It runs and dances in our blood, tingles along
our nerves, colors our thoughts, tones our emotions, and determines our
affections. All the old and bitter European animosities die in us, for
its Peoples are fused in our _one_ life pulse. A little child of our own
household now unites in the sacred oneness of American life, English,
Scotch, Irish, Welsh, Dutch, German, French, Saxon, Bohemian, and Polish
nationalities. What lessons we have in our multiform descent, if we will
but heed them; what inner teachings of sympathy and love, if we will but
learn them! Distinctive nationalities, giving such beautiful variety to
the _earth_, here join in the individual, imparting the greatest
complexity and variety to internal _character_. Such nationalities,
still existing unimpaired abroad, are here formed into _one_ of
unequalled breadth and grandeur; their scattered rays of light are here
concentrated into _one_ great focus; the blood of the various Peoples
pours through _one_ great heart, and the common gifts, hopes, creeds of
the separated and warring nations meet in the holy mystery of _one_
grand national life. Here, indeed, is the widest variety in the closest
unity, the life of the warring Past melting into that of the
myriad-pulsed Present, the certain hope of a harmonious Future.

The maturity and highest powers of other nations being necessary as its
germs, what wonder that our nationality should be the latest born on
earth, or that in view of the broad love stirring in its soul, because
of its manifold descent, its first articulate accents should be ALL MEN
ARE BORN FREE AND EQUAL! This is a union in the laboratory of
assimilative nature, such as has never before been dreamed of, vital and
all embracing, weaving into one palpitating mesh the very fibres of
being itself. The union of long-jarring nations is consummated,
perfected in us, and shall not we, the children of all climes, be _one_
in our own marvellous nationality? 'Divide and conquer' is old strategy,
but despots and tyrants strike in vain at this wondrous mingling of all
Peoples in one great PEOPLE, where the People are the Sovereigns; for
this UNION is spun in the loom of Eternal Destiny, throbs in each
linking life-pulse, is knit into our very nature, and kindles in the
close unity and sanctity of our national life under the creative breath
of God himself. Palsied be the hand armed to strike the multitudinously
mingled life of Humanity as it circles through our glorious Union!

'Peace on earth, good will to men,' chime out the Christmas bells from
old Trinity!

It is this struggle to preserve our nationality intact which has
sanctified our war, from the red heart of which has grown a patriotism
which, glowing like a central sun, burns away all the dross of our
earlier materialism, gives as self-reliance, and frees us at last from
our long tutelage to the Old World. And never had patriotism a more
solid ground than ours, since the power, growth, and safety of our
nationality are the progress, happiness, and prosperity of humanity
itself. Everything that breathes the breath of human life, however
opposed to it now, is _really_ benefited by our growth. As a Government
we stand first upon the earth; the first utterance of our brave lips
being--all men are born free and equal. Sublime, bold, and living words;
blessed be the lips which uttered them! And we are beginning to fulfil
the inspired ideal. Alas! we have suffered too much from permitting an
evil germ to grow up side by side with this great annunciation, to fall
speedily again into a like error. It has taken down into the dust our
best and dearest, saddened almost every hearthstone in the land, and,
saddest of all, wrought ruin on the Southern soul, maddening our
brethren there into modern Cains, armed against the sacred life of their
and our nationality. For what cause did Cain kill his brother?
'Because,' says St. John, 'his own works were evil, and his brother's
just.' We will surely save it, but that done, we have an arduous task
before us. Christianity and love must take the place of expediency,
machiavelism, and cunning diplomacy in the sphere of politics. We see
the smile of scorn upon the lips of the doubter; he deems the thing
impossible. So he would have pronounced our noble record of the last
three years, three years ago. Nay, it is already half accomplished,
since we now know it must be done. The black man free, the red man must
at last receive attention. The protection of our laws must be thrown
around him; justice must guide our future dealings with him, and sorrow
for all the fearful ills we have wrought upon him must awaken larger
sympathy, and elicit tender mercy. The race are dying out among us: let
us at least soothe their parting hours. And let the Government look well
to its avaricious agents. Our people are generous, and mean to be just;
that is not enough: they must take the proper means, and see that their
beneficent intentions are carried out with regard to this wretched
remnant. It is not possible that a race so full of wild natural
eloquence, of graceful imagery, of tender metaphor, of stern endurance,
can be _utterly_ lost and depraved. Be it our noble task to try to save
these wild children of the forest, while throwing the most complete
protection around our brave frontier population. Our nationality is now
fully born--on our banner is inscribed the equal rights of humanity. Our
mission is revealed to us--it is that labor shall be elevated, and that
equal justice be the law of _actual life_. 'That the human race is in a
real sense one--that its efforts are common, and tend to a joint result,
that its several members may stand in the eye of their Maker, not only
as _individual_ agents, but as contributors to this joint result--is a
doctrine which our reason, perhaps, finds something to support, and
which our heart readily accepts.' This Christmas peal rings to us as it
has never rung before: let it awaken our consciousness of what God means
us to be upon this planet, and touch our heart. It has at last reached
the ear of the emancipated African, after pealing nearly nineteen
hundred years for the more favored part of humanity; and, thanks to the
mercy of God and our own manhood, the most oppressed of the brethren of
Christ may now feel themselves men. The dark wife, in her new right to
be faithful, is at last a woman; her dusky children are now her own, and
cannot be torn from her arms at the dictates of one who has bought at
the human auction block the right to torture the body and soul. Is not
humanity newborn among us? Is the negro of the accursed race of Ham? It
is we who curse, not God, whose very name is Love! Well may our
Christmas bells ring on so merrily, for our age is great and glorious.
It is a pupil of the entire Past, the heir of all its knowledge, the
inheritor of all its wisdom. The Future is its own. _The sphere of
politics must be redeemed from the demons of expediency and interest
which have so long ruled there; it is to be vitalized and purified from
all iniquity._ It is an Augean stable we have to clean, but Hercules was
one, and we are many. The People are at last sovereign. Every man who
works for humanity has God upon his side; he cannot fail, for the might
of Omnipotence is with his puny arm. This is the task now set before us:
it lies directly in our onward path--we cannot take a step really in
advance until it is achieved. If we fail now, all is lost. Our dead
heroes will not rest in their graves until the task is done, and their
young lives will have been a vain sacrifice. This crimson year is dying
fast; bury with it all past wickedness! May our long civil war die out
with its knell, the corpse of Slavery be laid in its bloody grave, and
the vain attempts of assembled despots to destroy our glorious
nationality perish forever! Bury with this blood-red year all malice and
uncharitableness, all sectarian suspicion and distrust, all partisan
political violence and hatred, and let the new year ring in one faith,
one hope, one country undivided and _indivisible_. Our Union means all
this, and a great many things more which it has not yet entered into the
heart of man to conceive. We can effect wonders if we will, for the
_individual_ effort makes the _universal_ all. Who would prove recreant
in such a cause? Come! it is pleasant to work for humanity; fatigue
itself seems sweet, the strength of the race nerves the individual arm,
labor grows into prayer, human sympathy and communion become godlike and
open heaven. We are none of us so little that we can do nothing; we are
all necessary to the good of the whole. The highest individuality and
freedom should generate the widest social love and charity. No labor is
really irksome that helps the masses of our fellow men. If we have the
Promethean fire, let it burn to light and warm them. The race is one,
nor can we be happy while its members suffer. The moment we have done
one duty faithfully, another and a higher awaits us. To be condemned to
work only for ourselves were the true hell, the self-kindled fire of
everlasting torture! We are the children of the nineteenth century, have
been nourished upon the humane laws of this noble country, we are sons
of God, brothers of Christ, heirs of glory, immortals. Let us assume the
majesty of our being, drape ourselves in our heaven-woven robes of love,
open our hearts to the poor and wretched, instruct the ignorant, reclaim
the vicious, bear each other's burdens, frown on vice, give up our petty
vanities, cease our frivolous excuses that, we have no influence, when
every one of us has an immortal in charge, use our strength to forbid
oppression, whether of individuals or nationalities. Then might the day
seen by the prophets, sung by poets, and believed in by devout hearts,
dawn upon this planet before the blessed '65 were tolled to rest.

"A man shall be more precious than gold, ay, than the finest of gold."

"The fool shall no more be called prince, nor the deceitful great."

"And He shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar
off; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their
spears into spades; nation shall not take sword against nation; neither
shall they learn war any more.

"And every man shall sit under his own vine and fig tree, and there
shall be none to make them afraid."

"I will give my laws into their mind, and I will write them in their
heart; and I will be their God; and they shall be my people."

Peace on earth, good will toward men, still peal the Christmas bells,
until the frosty air seems quivering with the new joy of humanity.

Fair voyage through the realms of Space, the universe of stars, the
passionate throbs of Time, with thy precious human freight, O lovely
Planet, cradling our dead in thy green bosom, and uniting the living in
one great nation; and may the brightest sunshine fall upon thy flowers
until thy young Immortals are all landed in the Port of Heaven!


'COR UNUM, VIA UNA.'

GOD BLESS OUR NATIVE LAND!


  From every clime, and name, and race,
    The thronging myriads came,
  A mighty Empire's bounds to trace,
    A wilderness to tame!

  _Chorus_--From mountain peak to sear-girt shore,
    Let Freedom's noble band
  Uplift the song thrills each heart's core:
    God bless our native land!

  Columbia's plains are broad and fair,
    Each coast an ocean laves,
  Vast lakes and streams fleet navies bear
    Upon their sun-lit waves.

  _Chorus._

  Her mountains towering meet the skies,
    Her vales are clad in green,
  Her leafy forests proudly rise,
    Pure gold her grain's bright sheen.

  _Chorus._

  United flows our mingled blood,
    And Freedom guards the land,
  While linked in closest brotherhood,
    Invincible we stand!

  _Chorus._

  Unfurl our banner! Let it wave
    From every plain and crag!
  Its beacon light our fathers gave,--
    All hail! our glorious flag!

  _Chorus_--From mountain peak to sea-girt shore,
    Let Freedom's noble band
  Uplift the song thrills each heart's core:
    God bless our native land!