Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

{493} NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 186.]
Saturday, May 21, 1853.
[Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition 5d.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                            Page
    Lord Bacon's "Advancement of Learning"                             493
    Erection of Forts at Michnee and Pylos, by C. Forbes               495
    Hoveden's Annals: Bohn's "Antiquarian Library," by
      James Graves                                                     495
    FOLK LORE:--Raven Superstition--African Folk Lore
      --Funeral Custom                                                 496
    Shakspeare Readings, No. VII.                                      496
    MINOR NOTES:--Portrait of Luther--Randle Wilbraham
      --Unpublished Epigram by Sir W. Scott--Crassus'
      Saying                                                           498

  QUERIES:--
    Bees and the Sphynx atropos, by Sydney Smirke                      499
    "The Craftsman's Apology," by James Crossley                       499
    Palissy and Cardinal Wiseman                                       499
   MINOR QUERIES:--Polidus--St. Paul's Epistles to
      Seneca--Meaning of "folowed"--Roman Catholic
      Registers--St. Alban's Day--Meigham, the London
      Printer--Adamsoniana--Canker or Brier Rose--
      "Short red, god red"--Overseers of Wills--Lepel's
      Regiment--Vincent Family--Passage in the First
      Part of Faust--Lady Anne Gray--Continental Brasses
      --Peter Beaver--Cremonas--Cranmer and Calvin                     499
    MINOR QUERIES WITH ANSWERS:--"A Letter to a Convocation
      Man"--Prester John--Homer's Iliad in a
      Nut--Monogram of Parker Society--The Five Alls--
      Corvizer                                                         502

  REPLIES:--
    English Comedians in Germany                                       503
    A Gentleman executed for whipping a Slave to Death,
      by Henry H. Breen                                                503
    Longevity                                                          504
    Derivation of Canada, by Robert Wright                             504
    Setantiorum Portus                                                 505
    PHOTOGRAPHIC CORRESPONDENCE:--Stereoscopic Queries
      --Photographic Portraits of Criminals, &c.--Photography
      applied to Catalogues of Books--Application
      of Photography to the Microscope                                 505
    REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES:--Discovery At Nuneham
      Regis--Eulenspiegel, or Howleglas--Parochial Libraries
      --Painter--Pepys's "Morena"--Pylades and
      Corinna--Judge Smith--Grindle--Simile of the Soul
      and the Magnetic Needle--English Bishops deprived
      by Queen Elizabeth--Borrowed Thoughts--Dr. South
      _v._ Goldsmith, Talleyrand, &c.--Foucault's Experiment
      --Passage in "Locksley Hall"--Lake of
      Geneva--"Inter cuncta micans"--"Its"--Gloves
      at Fairs--Astronomical Query--Tortoiseshell Tom
      Cat--Sizain on the Pope, the Devil, and the Pretender
      --Wandering Jew--Hallett and Dr. Saxby--
      "My mind to me a kingdom is"--Claret--Suicide at
      Marseilles--Etymology of Slang--Scanderbeg's Sword
      --Arago on the Weather--Rathe--Carr Pedigree--
      Banbury Cakes--Detached Belfry Towers, &c.                       507

  MISCELLANEOUS:--
    Notes on Books, &c.                                                513
    Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                       514
    Notices to Correspondents                                          514
    Advertisements                                                     514

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

LORD BACON'S "ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING."

Considering the large number of quotations from previous writers which
occur in Lord Bacon's works, and especially in his most popular and
generally read works--his _Essays_ and his _Advancement of Learning_--it is
remarkable how little his editors have done for the illustration of his
text in this respect. The French editors of Montaigne's _Essays_, who is
likewise a writer abounding in quotations, have bestowed much care on this
portion of their author's text. The defect in question has, however, been
to a great extent supplied in a recent edition of the _Advancement of
Learning_, published by Mr. Parker in West Strand; and it is to be hoped
that the beginning, so usefully made, may be followed up by similar
editions of other of Bacon's works.

The edition in question, though it traces the great majority of Bacon's
quotations, has left some gleanings to its successors; and I propose now to
call attention to a few passages of the _Advancement of Learning_ which,
after the labours of the late editor, seem still to require further
elucidation. My references are to the pages of the new edition:--

    P. 25. "Then grew the flowing and watery vein of Osorius the Portugal
    bishop to be in price."

The editor prints _Orosius_ for _Osorius_, and adds this note:

    "All the editions have _Osorius_, which, however, must be a mere
    misprint. He was not a Portuguese, but a Spaniard, born at Tarragona,
    nor indeed ever a bishop. He was sent by St. Augustine on a mission to
    Jerusalem, and is supposed to have died in Africa in the earlier part
    of the fifth century."

The text of Bacon is quite right. The allusion is not to Paulus Orosius, a
Spaniard, who flourished at the beginning of the fifth century; but to
Jerome Osorio, who was born at Lisbon in 1506, afterwards became Bishop of
Silves, and died in 1580. His works were published at Rome in 1592, in 4
vols. folio. His principal work, _De rebus Emanuelis Virtute et Auspicio
gestis_, which first appeared in 1571, was several times reprinted, and was
translated into French and English. {494}

    P. 31. "Time, which is the author of authors."

In _Nov. Org._, i. 84., Time is called "Auctor auctorum, atque adeo omnis
auctoritatis."

    P. 34. "But of these conceits Aristotle speaketh seriously and wisely,
    when he saith, 'Qui respiciunt ad pauca de facili pronunciant."

The editor does not attempt to trace this passage. Query, If it is not in
Aristotle, where is it to be found?

    P. 60. "Ulysses, 'Qui vetulam prætulit immortalitati' is a figure of
    those which prefer custom and habit before all excellency."

The editor refers to _Cic. de Orat._, i. 44., where it is said that such is
the love of country,

    "Ut Ithacam illam, in asperrimis saxulis, tanquam nidulum, affixam,
    sapientissimus vir immortalitati anteponeret."

Another application of the saying is made by Bacon in his Essay VIII., "On
Marriage and Single Life:"

    "Grave natures, led by custom, and therefore constant, are commonly
    loving husbands, as was said of Ulysses, 'vetulam suam prætulit
    immortalitati.'"

The passage in Cicero does not agree with the dictum quoted by Bacon, which
seems to be a reference to the _Odyssey_, v. 136. 208-10.

    P. 62. "Claudus in vià antevertit cursorem extra viam."

The same proverb is quoted in _Nov. Org._, i. 61.

    P. 85. "Omnia mutantur, nil interit"--

from Ovid, _Met._, xv. 165.

Several passages are cited by Bacon from Seneca, which the editor does not
trace. Thus, in p. 146., it is said,--

    "Nocet illis eloquentia, quibus non rerum cupiditatem facit, sed sui."

Page 147.,--

    "Vere magnum habere fragilitatem hominis, securitatem Dei."

The same passage is also quoted by Bacon in Essay V., "On Adversity," and
in the treatise _De Sap. Vet._, vol. x. p. 343., edit. Montagu.

Again, p. 159.:

    "De partibus vitæ quisque deliberat, de summâ nemo."

Page 152.,--

    "Cogita quamdiu eadem feceris," &c.,

repeated in part in the "Essay on Death."

This last passage is taken, with considerable verbal variations, from
Epist. 77. § 6.

    "Therefore Aristotle, when he thinks to tax Democritus, doth in truth
    commend him, where he saith, _If we shall indeed dispute, and not
    follow after similitudes_," &c.

The passage referred to is in _Eth. Nic._, vi. 3.; but it contains no
allusion to Democritus, who is not even named in the _Ethics_; and the word
which Bacon renders _dispute_ ([Greek: akribologeisthai]) means _to speak
with precision_.

    P. 163. "For as the ancient politiques in popular states were wont to
    compare the people to the sea, and the orators to the winds."

The allusion is to a couplet of Solon:

 "[Greek: ex anemôn de thalassa tarassetai? ên de tis autên]
      [Greek: mê kinêi, pantôn esti dikaiotatê.]"
                  _Fragm._ i. 8., ed. Gaisford.

And to a passage of Livy (xxviii. 27.):

    "Multitudo omnis, sicut natura maris, per se immobilis est, venti et
    auræ cient."

Compare Babrius, fab. 71.

    P. 165. "Did not one of the Fathers, in great indignation, call poesy
    _vinum dæmonum_?"

The same citation recurs in Essay I., "On Truth:"

    "One of the Fathers, in great severity, called poesy _vinum dæmonum_."

Query, Who is the Father alluded to?

Page 177., the sayings, "Faber quisque fortunæ propriæ" is cited; and
again, p. 178., "Faber quisque fortunæ suæ." In Essay XL., "On Fortune," it
is quoted, with the addition, "saith the poet." The words are to be found
in Sallust, _Ad Cæsar. de Rep. Ord._, ii. 1.:

    "Sed res docuit, id verum esse, quad in carminibus Appius ait, fabrum
    suæ esse quemque fortunæ."

The Appius alluded to is Appius Claudius the Censor.

Bacon proceeds to say:

    "This conceit or position [viz. 'Faber quisque,' &c.], if it be too
    much declared and professed, hath been thought a thing impolitic and
    unlucky, as was observed in Timotheus the Athenian, who, having done
    many great services to the estate in his government, and giving an
    account thereof to the people, as the manner was, did conclude every
    particular with this clause, 'And in this Fortune had no part.' And it
    came so to pass, that he never prospered in anything he took in hand
    afterwards."

The anecdote is as follows:--Timotheus had been ridiculed by the comic
poets, on account of the small share which his own management had had in
his successes. A satirical painting had likewise been made, in which he was
represented sleeping, while Fortune stood over him, and drew the cities
into his net. (See Plutarch, _Reg. et Imp. Apophth._, vol. ii. p. 42., ed.
Tauchnitz; Ælian, V. H. xiii. 42.) On one occasion, however, having
returned from a successful expedition, he remarked to the Athenians, in
allusion to the previous sarcasms, that in this campaign at least Fortune
had no share. Plutarch, who relates the latter {495} anecdote in his _Life
of Sylla_, c. 6., proceeds to say, that this boast gave so much offence to
the deity, that he never afterwards prospered in any of his enterprises.
His reverse of luck, in consequence of his vainglorious language against
Fortune, is also alluded to by Dio Chrysost. _Orat._, lxiv. § 19., edit.
Emper. It will be observed that Plutarch refers the saying of Timotheus to
a single expedition; whereas Bacon multiplies it, by extending it over a
series of acts.

    P. 172. "Cicero reporteth that it was then in use for senators that had
    name and opinion for general wise men, as Coruncanius, Curius, Lælius,
    and many others, to walk at certain hours in the Place," &c.

The passage alluded to is _De Orat._, iii. 83. The persons there named are
Sex. Ælius, Manius Manilius, P. Crassus, Tib. Coruncanius, and Scipio.

    P. 179. "We will begin, therefore, with this precept, according to the
    ancient opinion, that the sinews of wisdom are slowness of belief, and
    distrust."

The precept adverted to is the verse of Epicharmus:

    "[Greek: naphe kai memnas' apistein? arthra tauta tôn phrenôn.]"

    P. 180. "Fraus sibi in parvis fidem præstruit, ut majore emolumento
    fallat."

Query, Where does this passage occur, as well as the expression "alimenta
socordiæ," which Demosthenes, according to Bacon, applies to small favours.

L.

       *       *       *       *       *


ERECTION OF FORTRESS AT MICHNEE AND PYLOS.

Mr. Dartnell, Surgeon of H. M. 53rd regiment, gives the following account
of the building of a fort which has lately been erected at Michnee to check
the incursions of the Momunds into the Peshawur Valley:

    "There was little to be done, except to build a fort, and here the
    officers had to superintend and direct the working parties which were
    daily sent out.... Laborers from far and near, Cashmerees, Caboolees,
    men from the Hindoo Koosh, Afreedees, Khyberees, &c., all working
    together with hearty goodwill, and a sort of good-humoured rivalry....
    It is only when working by contract, however, that the Cashmeree
    displays his full physical powers, and it is then perfectly refreshing,
    in such a physically relaxing and take-the-world-as-it-goes sort of a
    country as this, to observe him.... And then to see him carry a burden!
    On his head? No. On his back? Yes, but after a fashion of his own,
    perfectly natural and entirely independent of basket, or receptacle of
    any kind in which to place it. I have now in my garden some half-dozen
    of these labourers at work, removing immense masses of clay, which are
    nearly as hard as flint, and how do they manage? My friend Jumah Khan
    reverts his arms, and clasping his hands together behind his back,
    receives the pyramidal load, which generally overtops his head, and
    thus he conveys it to its destination," &c.--Colburn's _United Service
    Magazine_, December, 1852, pp. 514, 515.

Thucydides tells us that as soon as the crews of the Athenian ships,
weatherbound at Pylos in the spring of the year B.C. 425, had made up their
minds to kill time by fortifying their harbour of refuge,--

    "They took the work in hand, and plied it briskly.... The mud that was
    anywhere requisite, for want of vessels, they carried on their
    shoulders, bending forwards as much as possible, that it might have
    room to stick on, and holding it up with both hands clasped fast behind
    that it might not slide down."--Book iv. chap. 4. (Smith's
    Translation.)

C. FORBES.

Temple.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOVEDEN'S ANNALS--BOHN'S "ANTIQUARIAN LIBRARY."

Considering the cheap issue of all standard works of reference a great boon
to the general student, I was predisposed to welcome heartily Mr. Bohn's
_Antiquarian Library_. If, however, _cheapness_ be accompanied by
_incorrectness_, the promised boon I conceive to be worthless; even one or
two glaring errors rendering the student distrustful of the entire series.
I was led to form the first of these conclusions on receiving vol. i. of a
translation of the _Annals of Roger de Hoveden_, by Henry T. Riley, Esq.,
barrister-at-law; who introduces the work by a flourish of trumpets in the
Preface, on the multifarious errors of the London and Frankfort editions,
and the labour taken to correct _his own_; to the second by observing,
whilst cutting the leaves, the following glaring errors, put forward too as
_corrections_:--Vol. i. p. 350., Henry II. is stated by the _Annalist_ to
have landed in Ireland, A.D. 1172, "at a place which is called _Croch_,
distant _eight miles_ from the city of Waterford." Here Mr. Riley, with
perfect gravity, suggests _Cork_[1] as the true reading!! Can it be, that a
barrister-at-law, with an ominously Irish-sounding name, is ignorant that
the city of Cork is somewhat more distant than _eight miles_ from the _urbs
intacta_, as Waterford loves to call herself? The fact is, however, that
Hoveden and his former editors were nearly correct: on {496} old maps of
the harbour of Waterford, Crook Castle is laid down inside Creden Head, on
the Waterford side of the harbour; and Crook is still the name of a place
at the point indicated, somewhat more however than eight miles from
Waterford.

Again, at p. 351. occurs Hoveden's well-known and valuable enumeration of
the Irish episcopal sees at the same period, of which Mr. Riley observes:
"Nearly all these are mis-spelt ... they are in a state of almost hopeless
confusion." And then, to make confusion worse confounded, his note on the
Bishop of Ossory (p. 352.) says "In the text, 'Erupolensis' is perhaps a
mistake for 'Ossoriensis.'" Now, _Erupolensis_ happens to be a correct
_alias_ of Ossoriensis: the former characterising the diocese from
Kilkenny, the cathedral city, which being seated on the Nore, or
Neor--Hibernicè _Eoir_, Latinè _Erus_, was sometimes called Erupolis--the
latter from the territory with which the see was and is co-extensive, the
ancient kingdom of Ossory.

How many more errors there may be in the first volume of the work, I cannot
say: but, at all events, what the reader has to complain of is, _not_ that
the translator was unable to tell all about "Croch" and "Erupolis," but
that, not knowing, he has made matters worse by his hardy elucidations.
Truly, at this rate, it were better that no cheap edition of Hoveden were
vouchsafed to the public.

JAMES GRAVES.

Kilkenny.

[Footnote 1: This geographical _morceau_ was nearly equalled by a scribe in
the _Illustrated London News_, who stated that her Gracious Majesty's
steam-yacht, with its royal freight and attendant squadron, when coasting
round from Cork to Dublin in the year 1849, had entered Tramore Bay, and
thence steamed up to Passage in the Waterford Harbour! A truly _royal road_
to safety; and one that, did it exist, would have saved many a gallant crew
and ship, which have met their fate within the landlocked, but ironbound
and shelterless, jaws of Tramore Bay.]

       *       *       *       *       *


FOLK LORE.

_Raven Superstition._--On a recent occasion, at an ordinary meeting of the
guardians of the poor, an application was made by the relieving officer on
behalf of a single woman residing in the church village at Altarnun. The
cause of seeking relief was stated to be "grief," and on asking for an
explanation, the officer stated that the applicant's inability to work was
owing to depressed spirits, produced by the flight of a croaking raven over
her dwelling on the morning of his visit to the village. The pauper was by
this circumstance, in connexion with its well-known ominous character,
actually frightened into a state of wretched nervous depression, which
induced physical want.

S. R. P.

_African Folk Lore._--The following curious piece of folk lore is quoted
from an extract in _The Critic_ (of April 1, 1853, p. 172.), in the course
of a review of Richardson's _Narrative of a Mission to Central Africa,
&c._:

    "To avert the evil eye from the gardens, the people (of Mourzak) put up
    the head of an ass, or some portion of the bones of that animal. The
    same superstition prevails in all the oases that stud the north of
    Africa, from Egypt to the Atlantic, but the people are unwilling to
    explain what especial virtue there exists in an ass's skull."

W. SPARROW SIMPSON, B.A.

_Funeral Custom._--In some parts (I believe) of Yorkshire, and perhaps
elsewhere, it is customary to send, immediately after a death, a paper bag
of biscuits, and a card with the name, &c. of the deceased, to his friends,
be they many or few. Can any of your readers explain the matter? I have
more than once seen the card, but not the biscuits.

ABHBA.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHAKSPEARE READINGS, NO. VII.

"What are 'Aristotle's checks?'"

This is the question that MR. COLLIER proposed in support of the alteration
of _checks_ into _ethics_, at p. 144. of his _Notes and Emendations_. He
terms _checks_ "an absurd blunder," and in the preface he again introduces
it, passing upon it the same unqualified sentence of excommunication, as
upon "bosom multiplied," viz. "it can never be repeated." In this opinion
he is backed by most of the public scribes of the day, especially by the
critic of the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for April, who declares "we should be
very sorry to have to discover what the editors have understood by the
_checks_ of Aristotle." Furthermore, this critic thinks that "it is
extremely singular that the mistake should have remained so long
uncorrected;" and he intimates that they who have found any meaning in
_checks_, have done so only because, through ignorance, they could find no
meaning in _ethics_.

Hence it becomes necessary for those who do find a meaning in _checks_, to
defend that meaning; and hence I undertake to answer MR. COLLIER'S
question.

Aristotle's _checks_ are those _moral adjustments_ that form the
distinguishing feature of his philosophy.

They are _the eyes of reason_, whereby he would teach man to avoid
divergence from the straight path of happiness.

They are his moderators, his mediocrities, his metriopathics.

They are his philosophical steering-marks, his moral guiding-lines, whereby
the passions are to be kept in the _via media_; as much removed from total
abnegation on the one hand, as from immoderate indulgence on the other.

Virtue, according to Aristotle, consists in checked or _adjusted_
propensities. Our passions are not in themselves evil, except when
unchecked by reason. And inasmuch as we may overeat, or underfeed ourselves
(the check being temperance), so may we suffer our other propensities to
deviate from the _juste milieu_, either in the direction of indulgence or
of privation. {497}

The art of adjusting the passions requires an apprenticeship to virtue. The
end to be attained is the establishment of good habits. These good habits,
like any other skill, can only be attained by practice. Therefore the
practice of virtue is the education of the passions.

_Ethics_ is the doctrine of _habits_; but habits may be good or bad. When
good, they constitute virtue; when bad, licentiousness.

The doctrine of _checks_ is that branch of _ethics_ which teaches moral
adjustment and restraint.

Therefore _checks_ and _licentiousness_ are in better antithesis to each
other, than _ethics_ can be to either, because ethics includes both.

The Aristotelian idea of _adjustment_, rather than _denial_, of the
passions, is well illustrated in the following passage from Plutarch's
_Morall Vertue_, by Philemon Holland, a contemporary of Shakspeare:

    "For neither do they shed and spill the wine upon the floure who are
    afraide to be drunke, but delay the same with water: nor those who
    feare the violence of a passion, do take it quite away, but rather
    temper and qualifie the same: like as folke use to breake horses and
    oxen from their flinging out with their heeles, their stiffenes and
    curstnes of the head, and stubburnes in receiving the bridle or the
    yoke, but do not restraine them of other motions of going about their
    worke and doing their deede. And even so, verily, reason maketh good
    use of these passions, when they be well tamed, and, as it were,
    brought to hand: without overweakening or rooting out cleane that parte
    of the soule which is made for to second reason and do it good
    service.... Whereas let passions be rid cleane away (if that were
    possible to be done), our reason will be found in many things more dull
    and idle: like as the pilot and master of a ship hath little to do if
    the winde be laid and no gale at all stirring ... as if to _the
    discourse of reason_ the gods had adjoined passion as a pricke to
    incite, and a chariot to set it forward."

Again, in describing the "Meanes," he says--

    "Now to begin with Fortitude, they say it is the meane between
    Cowardise and rash Audacitie; of which twaine the one is a defect, the
    other an excesse of the yrefull passion: Liberalitie, betweene
    Nigardise and Prodigalitie: Clemencie and Mildnesse, betweene
    senselesse Indolence and Crueltie: Justice, the meane of giving more or
    lesse than due: Temperance, a mediocritie betweene the blockish
    stupiditie of the minde, moved with _no touch of pleasure_, and all
    unbrideled loosenes, whereby it is abandoned to all sensualitie."--
    _The Philosophie of Plutarch_, fol. 1603.

It really does appear to me that there could not be a happier or more
appropriate designation, for a philosophy made up in this way of "meanes"
and adjustments, so as to steer between the _plus_ and _minus_, than a
system of _checks_--not fixed, or rigid rules, as they are sometimes
interpreted to be, but nice allowances of excess or defect, to be
discovered, weighed, and determined by individual reason, in the audit of
each man's conscience, according to the strength or weakness of the
passions he may have to regulate.

I therefore oppose the substitution of _ethics_--

1. Because we have the _primâ facie_ evidence of the text itself, that
_checks_ was Shakspeare's word.

2. Because we have internal evidence, in the significance and excellence of
the phrase, that it was Shakspeare's word.

_Ethics_ was the patent title by which Aristotle's moral philosophy was
universally known; therefore any ignoramus, who never dipped beyond the
title, might, _and would_, have used it. But no person, except one well
read in the philosophy itself, would think of giving it such a designation
as _checks_; which word, nevertheless, is most happily characteristic of
it.

3. Because, as before stated, Aristotle's _checks_, being the restrictive
and regulating portion of Aristotle's _Ethics_, is necessarily a more
diametrical antithesis to Ovid (and his _laxities_).

4. Because I look upon the use of this phrase as one of those nice and
scarcely perceptible touches by which Shakspeare was content rather to hint
at, than to disclose his knowledge,--one of those effects whereby he makes
a single word supply the place of a treatise.

With these opinions, I cannot but look upon this threatened change of
_checks_ into _ethics_, as wholly unwarrantable, and I now protest against
it as earnestly as, upon a former occasion, I did against the alteration of
_sickles_ into _shekels_, or, still worse, into _cycles_ or into _circles_.
It is with great satisfaction I compare four different views taken of this
word by MR. COLLIER, viz.--in the note to the text of his octavo edition of
Shakspeare;--in an additional note in vol. i., page cclxxxiv. of that
edition;--in the first announcement of his annotated folio in the
_Athenæum_ newspaper, Jan. 31st, 1852,--and finally (after my remarks upon
the word in "N. & Q."), his virtual reinstatement of the original _sickle_
(till then supposed a palpable and undeniable misprint) at page 46. of
_Notes and Emendations_, together with the production, _suo motu_, of an
independent reference in support of my position.

To return to this present substitution of _ethics_ for _checks_, a very
singular circumstance connected with it is the ignoring, by both MR.
COLLIER and by the critic in the _Gentleman's Magazine_, of Sir William
Blackstone's original claim to the suggestion, by prior publication of
upwards of half a century. At that time, notwithstanding the great learning
and acuteness of the proposer, the alteration was rejected! And shall we
now be less wise than our fathers? Shall we--misled by the prestige of a
few drops of rusty ink fashioned into letters of formal cut--place implicit
credence in emendations whose only claim to faith, like that of the Mormon
scriptures, is that nobody knows whence they came? {498}

In the passage I have quoted from Philemon Holland, there may be observed
two peculiarities which are generally supposed to be exclusively
Shakspearian: one is the beautiful application of the word "touch"--the
other the phrase "discourse of reason." Where this last expression occurs
in _Hamlet_, it narrowly escaped _emendation_ at the hands of Gifford! (See
Mr. Knight's note, in his illustrated edition of _Shakspeare_.) It is the
true Aristotelian [Greek: dianoia].

There is also a third peculiarity of expression in the same quotation, in
the use of the word _delay_ in the sense of _diluere_, to dilute, temper,
allay. There are at least two passages in Shakspeare's plays where the word
is used in this sense, but which appear to have been overlooked by his
glossarists. The first is in _All's Well that Ends Well_, Act IV. Sc. 3.,
where the French locals are moralising upon Bertram's profligate pursuit of
Diana:

    "Now God _delay_ our rebellion--as we are ourselves, what are we?"

The second is in _Cymbeline_, Act V. Sc. 4., where Jupiter tempers his love
with crosses, in order to make his gifts--

 "The more _delayed_, delighted."

A. E. B.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Notes.

_Portrait of Luther._--A portrait of Luther, perhaps original, certainly
nearly cotemporary with the Reformer, possessing many excellent qualities,
was some time since shown me. It is in the possession of Mr. Horne, of
Morton in Marsh, Gloucestershire: it was received by him from an elderly
gentleman still living in London, who purchased it many years since at a
sale of pictures. The picture is very dark, on canvass, with a black frame
having a narrow gilt moulding. As the existence of this portrait is perhaps
not known, mention of the fact might interest some of your readers. The
picture, including frame, is perhaps in size thirty inches by twenty-four;
and the age of the sitter, whose features are delineated with remarkable
effects is probably under fifty years.

B. H. C.

_Randle Wilbraham._--Randle Wilbraham, Esq., the grandfather of Lord
Skelmersdale, who died upon the 3rd of April last, was a lawyer of great
eminence, and held the office of treasurer of Lincoln's Inn. The university
of Oxford conferred, by diploma, the degree of D.C.L. upon him in these
notable terms:

    "Placuit nobis in Convocatione die 14 mensis Aprilis 1761, solenniter
    convocatis spectatissimum Ranulphum Wilbraham, Arm. Coll. Ænæi Nasi
    quondam commensalem, in agendis causis pro diversis Tribunalibus per
    multos retro annos hodieque versatissimum, Subsenescallum nostrum et
    Consiliarium fidissimum, Gradu Doctoris in Jure Civili insignire. Cujus
    quidem hæc præcipua ac prope singularis et est, et semper fuit, quod
    propriis ingenii et industriæ suæ viribus innixus Aulici favoris nec
    appetens, nec particeps, sine ullo magnatum patrocinio, sine turpi
    Adulantium aucupio, ad summam tamen in Foro, in Academia, in Senatu,
    tum gloriam, tum etiam authoritatem facilem sibi et stabilem munivit
    viam, Fortunæ suæ si quis alius Deo Favente vere Faber", &c.

The above is copied from the original diploma, which Mr. Randle Wilbraham
gave to his nephew, the late Dr. William Falconer of Bath. On the death of
Mr. R. Wilbraham, Chief Justice Wilmot wrote "I have lost my old friend Mr.
Wilbraham: he died in the seventy-seventh year of his age, and has not left
a better lawyer, or an honester man behind him."

ANON.

_Unpublished Epigram by Sir W. Scott._--

 "Earth walks on Earth,
      Glittering in gold:
  Earth goes to Earth,
      Sooner than it wold:
  Earth builds on Earth,
      Palaces and towers:
  Earth says to Earth:
      Soon, all shall be ours."

The above, by Sir W. Scott, I _believe_, has never appeared in print to my
knowledge. It was recited to me by a friend of Sir W. Scott.

R. VINCENT.

_Crassus' Saying._--I find in the Diary of the poet Moore (in Lord John
Russell's edition), vol. ii. p. 148., a conversation recorded with Dr.
Parr, in which the Doctor quotes "the witticism that made Crassus laugh
(the only time in his life): 'Similes habent labra lactucas.'"

It appears (see the quotations in Facciolati) that this sage and
laughter-moving remark of Crassus was made on seeing an ass eating a
thistle; whereon he exclaimed, "Similes habent labra lactucas."

In Bailey's edition of Facciolati it is said, "Proverbium habet locum ubi
similia similibus contingunt,... quo sensu Angli dicimus, 'Like lips like
lettuce: like priest like people.'"

Out of this explanation it is difficult to elicit any sense, much less any
"witticism."

I suggest that Crassus' saying meant, "His (the ass's) lips hold thistles
and lettuces to be both alike;" wanting the discrimination to distinguish
between them. Or, if I may put it into a doggerel rhyme:

 "About a donkeys taste why need we fret us?
  To lips like his a thistle is a lettuce."

WM. EWART.

University Club.

       *       *       *       *       * {499}


Queries.

BEES AND THE SPHYNX ATROPOS.

Huber, in his _Observations on the Natural History of Bees_, avers that the
moth called the _Sphynx atropos_ invades and plunders with impunity a hive
containing thousands of bees, notwithstanding the watchfulness, pugnacity,
and formidable weapons of those insects. To account for this phenomenon, he
states that the queen bee has the faculty of emitting a certain sound which
instantly strikes the bees motionless; and he conjectures that this
burglarious moth, being endowed with the same property, uses it to produce
a similar effect, first on the sentinels at the entrance of the hive, and
then on the bees within.

In another part of his book (2nd edit. 1808, p. 202.) he relates what he
himself witnessed on introducing a strange queen into a hive. The bees,
greatly irritated, pulled her, bit her, and chased her away; but on her
emitting the sound and assuming an extraordinary attitude, "the bees all
hung down their heads and remained motionless." On the following day he
repeated the experiment, and the intrusive queen was similarly maltreated;
but when she emitted her sound, and assumed the attitude, from that moment
the bees again became motionless.

Have more modern observers verified this curious fact? Is it not a case of
mesmerism?

SYDNEY SMIRKE.

       *       *       *       *       *


"THE CRAFTSMAN'S APOLOGY."

When Bolingbroke published his _Final Answer to the Remarks on the
Craftsman's Vindication, and to all the Libels which have come, or may come
from the same quarter against the Person last mentioned in the Craftsman of
the 22nd May, 1731_, he was answered in five Poetical Letters to the King,
which in keenness of wit, polished satire, and flowing ease of
versification, have not been since surpassed. The title of the tract in
which they are contained is _The Craftsman's Apology, being a Vindication
of his Conduct and Writings in several Letters to the King_, printed for T.
Cooper, 1732, 8vo. pages 32. By whom were these very clever and amusing
letters written? Lord Hervey or Sir Charles Hanbury Williams are the
parties one would think most likely to have written them; but they do not
appear in the list of Lord Hervey's works given by Walpole, or amongst
those noticed by Mr. Croker, or in Sir C. H. Williams's _Collected Works_,
in three volumes. Independently of which, I question whether the
versification is not, in point of harmony, too equal for either of them. If
they be included in the collected works of any other writer of the time,
which I have no immediate recollection of, some of your correspondents will
no doubt be able to point him out. Should it appear that they have not been
reprinted, I shall be disposed to recur again to the subject, and to give
an extract from them, as, of all the attacks ever made upon Bolingbroke,
they seem to me the most pleasant, witty, and effective.

JAS. CROSSLEY.

       *       *       *       *       *


PALISSY AND CARDINAL WISEMAN.

On April 28, Cardinal Wiseman, at the Manchester Corn Exchange, delivered a
lecture "On the Relation of the Arts of Design to the Arts of Production."
It occupies thirteen columns of _The Tablet_ of May 7, which professes to
give it "from _The Manchester Examiner_, with corrections and additions." I
have read it with pleasure, and shall preserve it as one of the best
discourses on Art ever delivered; but there is a matter of fact, on which I
am not so well satisfied. In noticing Bernard Palissy, the cardinal is
reported to have said:

    "For sixteen years he persevered in this way; and then was crowned with
    success, and produced the first specimens of coloured and beautiful
    pottery, such as are to this day sought by the curious; and _he
    received a situation in the king's household, and ended his days in
    comfort and respectability_."

In the review of "Morley's Life of Palissy the Potter," _Spectator_, Oct.
9, 1852, it is said:

    "The period of the great potter's birth is uncertain. Mr. Morley fixes
    it, on probable data, at 1509; but with a latitude of six years on
    either side. _Palissy died in 1589 in the Bastile, where he had been
    confined four years as a Hugenot; the king and his other friends could
    defer his trial, but dared not grant him liberty._"

All the accounts which I have read agree with Mr. Morley and the
_Spectator_. Are they or the cardinal right, supposing him to be correctly
reported?

H. B. C.

U. U. Club.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries.

_Polidus._--Can you tell me where the scene of the following play is laid,
and the names of the _dramatis personæ_?--_Polidus, a Tragedy_, by Moses
Browne, 8vo. 1723. The author of this play, who was born in 1703, and died
in 1787, was for some time the curate of the Rev. James Harvey, author of
_Meditations_, and other works. Mr. Browne was afterwards presented to the
vicarage of Olney, in Bucks, where the Rev. John Newton was his curate for
several years.

A. Z.

Glasgow.

    [Moses Browne was subsequently Chaplain of Morden College. The
    piscatory brotherhood are indebted to him for having revived Walton's
    _Complete Angler_, after it had lain dormant for upwards of eighty
    years; and this task, he tells us, was undertaken at the request of Dr.
    Samuel Johnson.--ED.]

{500}

_St. Paul's Epistles to Seneca._--It has frequently been affirmed that
Seneca became, in the last year of his life, a convert to Christianity--his
canonisation by St. Jerome is undoubted and there was stated to be a MS. of
the above epistle in Merton College. May I ask any of your contributors
whether this MS. has ever been printed?

J. M. S.

Hull.

