    [10] The Chinese will not admit a foreign nation to trade at two
        places; for instance, the Russians are excluded from Canton
        because they enjoy an overland trade at Kiachia, which is 4,
        311 miles from St. Petersburgh, and 1,014 miles distant from
        Pekin.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOX-HUNTING.


The following are the items of expenses, laid down by Colonel Cooke, in
his "Observations on Fox-hunting," published a few years since. The
calculation supposes a four-times-a-week country; but it is generally
below the mark; we should say, at least one-half:--

  Fourteen horses ................................. £700
  Hounds' food, for fifty couples .................. 275
  Firing ............................................ 50
  Taxes ............................................ 120
  Two whippers-in, and feeder ...................... 210
  Earth stopping .................................... 80
  Saddlery ......................................... 100
  Farriery, shoeing, and medicine .................. 100
  Young hounds purchased, and expenses at walks..... 100
  Casualties ....................................... 200
  Huntsman's wages and his horses .................. 300
                                                   -----
                                                   £2235

Of course, countries vary much in expense from local circumstance; such as
the necessity for change of kennels, hounds sleeping out, &c. &c. In those
which are called hollow countries, consequently abounding in earths, the
expense of earth-stopping often amounts to 200_l_. per annum, and
Northamptonshire is of this class. In others, a great part of the foxes
are what is termed stub-bred (bred above ground), which circumstance
reduces the amount of this item.--_Quarterly Review._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GATHERER.


Curious Epitaph._--In Nichols's _History of Leicestershire_, is inserted
the following epitaph, to the memory of Theophilus Cave, who was buried in
the chancel of the church of Barrow on Soar:

  "Here in this Grave there lies a Cave;
  We call a Cave a Grave;
  If Cave be Grave, and Grave be Cave,
  Then reader, judge, I crave,
  Whether doth Cave here lye in Grave,
  Or Grave here lye in Cave:
  If Grave in Cave here bury'd lye,
  Then Grave, where is thy victory?
  Goe, reader, and report here lyes a Cave
  Who conquers death, and buryes his own Cave."

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Equality._--All men would necessarily have been equal, had they been
without wants; it is the misery attached to our species, which places one
man in subjection to another: Inequality is not the real grievance, but
dependence. It is of little consequence for one man to be called his
highness, and another his holiness; but it is hard for one to be the
servant of another.--_Voltaire._

       *       *       *       *       *

The famous Duke of Cumberland showed more cleverness as a boy, than he
ever did as a general. Having displeased his mother one day, she sent him
to his chamber, and when he appeared again, she asked him what he had been
doing. "Reading," replied the boy.--"Reading what?"--"The
Scriptures."--"What part of the Scriptures?"--"That part where it is
written, 'Woman! what hast thou to do with me?'" After the loss of a
battle, an English prisoner observing to a French officer, that they might
have taken the duke himself prisoner; "Yes," replied the Frenchman, "but
we took care not to do that--he is of far more use to us at the head of
your army."--_Georgian Era._

       *       *       *       *       *

