As though in answer to his appeal, or perhaps that merely the sound
of a human voice had broken the last shreds of her swoon, the girl
moved slightly.  Galen Albret did not stir.  Slowly Virginia turned
her head, until finally her wandering eyes met his, fixed on her
with passionate intensity.  For a moment she stared at him, then
comprehension came to her along with memory. She cried out, and sat
upright in one violent motion.

"He! He!" she cried. "Is he gone?"

Instantly Galen Albret had her in his arms.

"It is all right," he soothed, drawing her close to his great
breast.  "All right. You are my own little girl."


Chapter Eighteen

For perhaps ten minutes Ned Trent lingered near the door of the
Council Room until he had assured himself that Virginia was in no
serious danger.  Then he began to pace the room examining minutely
the various objects that ornamented it.  He paused longest at the
full length portrait of Sir George Simpson, the Company's great
traveller, with his mild blue eyes, his kindly face, denying the
potency of his official frown, his snowy hair and whiskers.  The
painted man and the real man looked at each, other inquiringly.
The latter shook his head.  "You travelled the wild country far,"
said he, thoughtfully.  "You knew many men of many lands.  And
wherever you went they tell me you made friends.  And yet, as you
embodied this Company to all these people, and so made for the
fanatical loyalty that is destroying me, I suppose you and I are
enemies!"  He shrugged his shoulders whimsically and turned away.

Thence he cast a fleeting glance out the window at the long reach
of the Moose and the blue bay gleaming in the distance.  He tried
the outside door.  It was locked.  Taken with a new idea he
proceeded at once to the third door of the apartment.  It opened.

He found himself in a small and much-littered room containing a
desk, two chairs, a vast quantity of papers, a stuffed bird or so,
and a row of account-books.  Evidently the Factor's private office,

Ned Trent returned to the main room and listened intently for
several minutes.  After that he ran back to the office and began
hastily to open and rummage, one after another, the drawers of the
desk.  He discovered and concealed several bits of string, a
desk-knife, and a box of matches.  Then he uttered a guarded
exclamation of delight.  He had found a small revolver, and with it
part of a box of cartridges.

"A chance!" he exulted: "a chance!"

The game would be desperate.  He would be forced first of all to
seek out and kill the men detailed to shadow him--a toy revolver
against rifles; white man against trained savages.  And after that
he would have, with the cartridges remaining, to assure his
subsistence.  Still it was a chance.

He closed the drawers and the door, and resumed his seat in the
arm-chair by the council table.

For over an hour thereafter he awaited the next move in the game.
He was already swinging up the pendulum arc.  The case did not
appear utterly hopeless.  He resolved, through Me-en-gan, whom he
divined as a friend of the girl's, to smuggle a message to Virginia
bidding her hope.  Already his imagination had conducted him to
Quebec, when in August he would search her out and make her his own.

Soon one of the Indian servants entered the room for the purpose of
conducting him to a smaller apartment, where he was left alone for
some time longer.  Food was brought him.  He ate heartily, for he
considered that wise.  Then at last the summons for which he had
been so long in readiness.  Me-en-gan himself entered the room, and
motioned him to follow.

Ned Trent had already prepared his message on the back of an
envelope, writing ft with the lead of a cartridge.  He now pressed
the bit of paper into the Indian's palm.

"For O-mi-mi," he explained.

