Produced by John Bickers


THE MEMORABILIA

Recollections of Socrates

By Xenophon


Translated by H. G. Dakyns


     Xenophon the Athenian was born 431 B.C. He was a
     pupil of Socrates. He marched with the Spartans,
     and was exiled from Athens. Sparta gave him land
     and property in Scillus, where he lived for many
     years before having to move once more, to settle
     in Corinth. He died in 354 B.C.

     The Memorabilia is a recollection of Socrates in
     word and deed, to show his character as the best
     and happiest of men.


  PREPARER'S NOTE

  First Published 1897 by Macmillan and Co.
  This was typed from Dakyns' series, "The Works of Xenophon," a
  four-volume set. The complete list of Xenophon's works (though
  there is doubt about some of these) is:

  Work                                   Number of books

  The Anabasis                                         7
  The Hellenica                                        7
  The Cyropaedia                                       8
  The Memorabilia                                      4
  The Symposium                                        1
  The Economist                                        1
  On Horsemanship                                      1
  The Sportsman                                        1
  The Cavalry General                                  1
  The Apology                                          1
  On Revenues                                          1
  The Hiero                                            1
  The Agesilaus                                        1
  The Polity of the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians   2

  Text in brackets "{}" is my transliteration of Greek text into
  English using an Oxford English Dictionary alphabet table. The
  diacritical marks have been lost.


THE MEMORABILIA

or

Recollections of Socrates


BOOK I


I

I have often wondered by what arguments those who indicted (1) Socrates
could have persuaded the Athenians that his life was justly forfeit to
the state. The indictment was to this effect: "Socrates is guilty of
crime in refusing to recognise the gods acknowledged by the state,
and importing strange divinities of his own; he is further guilty of
corrupting the young."

 (1) {oi grapsamenoi} = Meletus (below, IV. iv. 4, viii. 4; "Apol." 11,
    19), Anytus ("Apol." 29), and Lycon. See Plat. "Apol." II. v. 18;
    Diog. Laert. II. v. (Socr.); M. Schanz, "Plat. Apol. mit deutschen
    Kemmentar, Einleitung," S. 5 foll.

In the first place, what evidence did they produce that Socrates refused
to recognise the gods acknowledged by the state? Was it that he did not
sacrifice? or that he dispensed with divination? On the contrary, he was
often to be seen engaged in sacrifice, at home or at the common altars
of the state. Nor was his dependence on divination less manifest. Indeed
that saying of his, "A divinity (2) gives me a sign," was on everybody's
lips. So much so that, if I am not mistaken, it lay at the root of
the imputation that he imported novel divinities; though there was no
greater novelty in his case than in that of other believers in oracular
help, who commonly rely on omens of all sorts: the flight or cry
of birds, the utterances of man, chance meetings, (3) or a victim's
entrails. Even according to the popular conception, it is not the mere
fowl, it is not the chance individual one meets, who knows what things
are profitable for a man, but it is the gods who vouchsafe by such
instruments to signify the same. This was also the tenet of Socrates.
Only, whereas men ordinarily speak of being turned aside, or urged
onwards by birds, or other creatures encountered on the path, Socrates
suited his language to his conviction. "The divinity," said he, "gives
me a sign." Further, he would constantly advise his associates to do
this, or beware of doing that, upon the authority of this same divine
voice; and, as a matter of fact, those who listened to his warnings
prospered, whilst he who turned a deaf ear to them repented afterwards.
(4) Yet, it will be readily conceded, he would hardly desire to present
himself to his everyday companions in the character of either knave
or fool. Whereas he would have appeared to be both, supposing (5) the
God-given revelations had but revealed his own proneness to deception.
It is plain he would not have ventured on forecast at all, but for his
belief that the words he spoke would in fact be verified. Then on whom,
or what, was the assurance rooted, if not upon God? And if he had faith
in the gods, how could he fail to recognise them?

 (2) Or, "A divine something." See "Encyc. Brit." "Socrates." Dr. H.
    Jackason; "The Daemon of Socrates," F. W. H. Myers; K. Joel, "Der
    echte und der Xenophontische Sokrates," i. p. 70 foll.; cf.
    Aristot. "M. M." 1182 a 10.

 (3) See Aesch. "P. V." 487, {enodious te sombolous}, "and pathway
    tokens," L. Campbell; Arist. "Birds," 721, {sombolon ornin}:
    "Frogs," 196, {to sometukhon exion}; "Eccl." 792; Hor. "Od." iii.
    27, 1-7.

 (4) See "Anab." III. i. 4; "Symp." iv. 48.

 (5) Or, "if his vaunted manifestations from heaven had but manifested
    the falsity of his judgment."

But his mode of dealing with his intimates has another aspect. As
regards the ordinary necessities of life, (6) his advice was, "Act as
you believe (7) these things may best be done." But in the case of those
darker problems, the issues of which are incalculable, he directed his
friends to consult the oracle, whether the business should be undertaken
or not. "No one," he would say, "who wishes to manage a house or city
with success: no one aspiring to guide the helm of state aright, can
afford to dipense with aid from above. Doubtless, skill in carpentering,
building, smithying, farming, of the art of governing men, together with
the theory of these processes, and the sciences of arithmetic,
economy, strategy, are affairs of study, and within the grasp of human
intelligence. Yet there is a side even of these, and that not the least
important, which the gods reserve to themselves, the bearing of which is
hidden from mortal vision. Thus, let a man sow a field or plant a farm
never so well, yet he cannot foretell who will gather in the fruits:
another may build him a house of fairest proportion, yet he knows not
who will inhabit it. Neither can a general foresee whether it will
profit him to conduct a campaign, nor a politician be certain whether
his leadership will turn to evil or good. Nor can the man who weds a
fair wife, looking forward to joy, know whether through her he shall not
reap sorrow. Neither can he who has built up a powerful connection in
the state know whether he shall not by means of it be cast out of his
city. To suppose that all these matters lay within the scope of human
judgment, to the exclusion of the preternatural, was preternatural
folly. Nor was it less extravagant to go and consult the will of Heaven
on any questions which it is given to us to decide by dint of learning.
As though a man should inquire, "Am I to choose an expert driver as my
coachman, or one who has never handled the reins?" "Shall I appoint a
mariner to be skipper of my vessel, or a landsman?" And so with respect
to all we may know by numbering, weighing, and measuring. To seek advice
from Heaven on such points was a sort of profanity. "Our duty is plain,"
he would observe; "where we are permitted to work through our natural
faculties, there let us by all means apply them. But in things which are
hidden, let us seek to gain knowledge from above, by divination; for the
gods," he added, "grant signs to those to whom they will be gracious."

 (6) Or, "in the sphere of the determined," {ta anagkaia} = certa,
    quorum eventus est necessarius; "things positive, the law-ordained
    department of life," as we might say. See Grote, "H. G." i. ch.
    xvi. 500 and passim.

 (7) Reading {os nomizoien}, or if {os enomizen}, translate "As to
    things with certain results, he advised them to do them in the way
    in which he believed they would be done best"; i.e. he did not
    say, "follow your conscience," but, "this course seems best to me
    under the circumstances."

Again, Socrates ever lived in the public eye; at early morning he was to
be seen betaking himself to one of the promenades, or wrestling-grounds;
at noon he would appear with the gathering crowds in the market-place;
and as day declined, wherever the largest throng might be encountered,
there was he to be found, talking for the most part, while any one who
chose might stop and listen. Yet no one ever heard him say, or saw him
do anything impious or irreverent. Indeed, in contrast to others he set
his face against all discussion of such high matters as the nature of
the Universe; how the "kosmos," as the savants (8) phrase it, came into
being; (9) or by what forces the celestial phenomena arise. To trouble
one's brain about such matters was, he argued, to play the fool. He
would ask first: Did these investigators feel their knowledge of
things human so complete that they betook themselves to these lofty
speculations? Or did they maintain that they were playing their proper
parts in thus neglecting the affairs of man to speculate on the concerns
of God? He was astonished they did not see how far these problems lay
beyond mortal ken; since even those who pride themselves most on their
discussion of these points differ from each other, as madmen do. For
just as some madmen, he said, have no apprehension of what is truly
terrible, others fear where no fear is; some are ready to say and do
anything in public without the slightest symptom of shame; (10) others
think they ought not so much as to set foot among their fellow-men; some
honour neither temple, nor altar, nor aught else sacred to the name
of God; others bow down to stocks and stones and worship the very
beasts:--so is it with those thinkers whose minds are cumbered with
cares (11) concerning the Universal Nature. One sect (12) has discovered
that Being is one and indivisible. Another (13) that it is infinite in
number. If one (14) proclaims that all things are in a continual flux,
another (15) replies that nothing can possibly be moved at any time.
The theory of the universe as a process of birth and death is met by the
counter theory, that nothing ever could be born or ever will die.

 (8) Lit. "the sophists." See H. Sidgwick, "J. of Philol." iv. 1872; v.
    1874.

 (9) Reading {ephu}. Cf. Lucian, "Icaromenip." xlvi. 4, in imitation of
    this passage apparently; or if {ekhei}, translate "is arranged."
    See Grote, "H. G." viii. 573.

 (10) See "Anab." V. iv. 30.

 (11) See Arist. "Clouds," 101, {merimnophrontistai kaloi te kagathoi}.

 (12) e.g. Xenophanes and Parmenides, see Grote, "Plato," I. i. 16
    foll.

 (13) e.g. Leucippus and Democritus, ib. 63 foll.

 (14) e.g. Heraclitus, ib. 27 foll.

 (15) e.g. Zeno, ib. ii. 96.

