MY DEAR BURLINGAME, - Herewith Chapters IX. and X., and I am left 
face to face with the horrors and dilemmas of the present regimen:  
pray for those that go down to the sea in ships.  I have promised 
Henley shall have a chance to publish the hurricane chapter if he 
like, so please let the slips be sent QUAM PRIMUM to C. Baxter, 
W.S., 11 S. Charlotte Street, Edinburgh.  I got on mighty quick 
with that chapter - about five days of the toughest kind of work.  
God forbid I should ever have such another pirn to wind!  When I 
invent a language, there shall be a direct and an indirect pronoun 
differently declined - then writing would be some fun.


DIRECT     INDIRECT

  He         Tu
  Him        Tum
  His        Tus


Ex.:  HE seized TUM by TUS throat; but TU at the same moment caught 
HIM by HIS hair.  A fellow could write hurricanes with an 
inflection like that!  Yet there would he difficulties too.

Do what you please about THE BEACH; and I give you CARTE BLANCHE to 
write in the matter to Baxter - or telegraph if the time press - to 
delay the English contingent.  Herewith the two last slips of THE 
WRECKER.  I cannot go beyond.  By the way, pray compliment the 
printers on the proofs of the Samoa racket, but hint to them that 
it is most unbusiness-like and unscholarly to clip the edges of the 
galleys; these proofs should really have been sent me on large 
paper; and I and my friends here are all put to a great deal of 
trouble and confusion by the mistake. - For, as you must conceive, 
in a matter so contested and complicated, the number of corrections 
and the length of explanations is considerable.

Please add to my former orders -

LE CHEVALIER DES TOUCHES  } by Barbey d'Aurevilly.
LES DIABOLIQUES . . .     }
CORRESPONDANCE DE HENRI BEYLE (Stendahl).

Yours sincerely,

R. L. STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO T. W. DOVER


VAILIMA PLANTATION, UPOLU, SAMOA, JUNE 20TH, 1892.

SIR, - In reply to your very interesting letter, I cannot fairly 
say that I have ever been poor, or known what it was to want a 
meal.  I have been reduced, however, to a very small sum of money, 
with no apparent prospect of increasing it; and at that time I 
reduced myself to practically one meal a day, with the most 
disgusting consequences to my health.  At this time I lodged in the 
house of a working man, and associated much with others.  At the 
same time, from my youth up, I have always been a good deal and 
rather intimately thrown among the working-classes, partly as a 
civil engineer in out-of-the-way places, partly from a strong and, 
I hope, not ill-favoured sentiment of curiosity.  But the place 
where, perhaps, I was most struck with the fact upon which you 
comment was the house of a friend, who was exceedingly poor, in 
fact, I may say destitute, and who lived in the attic of a very 
tall house entirely inhabited by persons in varying stages of 
poverty.  As he was also in ill-health, I made a habit of passing 
my afternoon with him, and when there it was my part to answer the 
door.  The steady procession of people begging, and the expectant 
and confident manner in which they presented themselves, struck me 
more and more daily; and I could not but remember with surprise 
that though my father lived but a few streets away in a fine house, 
beggars scarce came to the door once a fortnight or a month.  From 
that time forward I made it my business to inquire, and in the 
stories which I am very fond of hearing from all sorts and 
conditions of men, learned that in the time of their distress it 
was always from the poor they sought assistance, and almost always 
from the poor they got it.

Trusting I have now satisfactorily answered your question, which I 
thank you for asking, I remain, with sincere compliments,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO E. L. BURLINGAME


VAILIMA, SUMMER 1892.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME, - First of all, YOU HAVE ALL THE CORRECTIONS ON 
'THE WRECKER.'  I found I had made what I meant and forgotten it, 
and was so careless as not to tell you.

Second, of course, and by all means, charge corrections on the 
Samoa book to me; but there are not near so many as I feared.  The 
Lord hath dealt bountifully with me, and I believe all my advisers 
were amazed to see how nearly correct I had got the truck, at least 
I was.  With this you will receive the whole revise and a 
typewritten copy of the last chapter.  And the thing now is Speed, 
to catch a possible revision of the treaty.  I believe Cassells are 
to bring it out, but Baxter knows, and the thing has to be crammed 
through PRESTISSIMO, A LA CHASSEUR.

You mention the belated Barbeys; what about the equally belated 
Pineros?  And I hope you will keep your bookshop alive to supplying 
me continuously with the SAGA LIBRARY.  I cannot get enough of 
SAGAS; I wish there were nine thousand; talk about realism!

All seems to flourish with you; I also prosper; none the less for 
being quit of that abhorred task, Samoa.  I could give a supper 
party here were there any one to sup.  Never was such a 
disagreeable task, but the thing had to be told. . . .

There, I trust I am done with this cursed chapter of my career, bar 
the rotten eggs and broken bottles that may follow, of course.  
Pray remember, speed is now all that can be asked, hoped, or 
wished.  I give up all hope of proofs, revises, proof of the map, 
or sic like; and you on your side will try to get it out as 
reasonably seemly as may be.

Whole Samoa book herewith.  Glory be to God. - Yours very 
sincerely,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO CHARLES BAXTER


VAILIMA PLANTATION, UPOLU, SAMOAN ISLANDS, 18TH JULY 1892.

MY DEAR CHARLES,- . . . I have been now for some time contending 
with powers and principalities, and I have never once seen one of 
my own letters to the TIMES.  So when you see something in the 
papers that you think might interest the exiles of Upolu, do not 
think twice, out with your saxpence, and send it flying to Vailima.  
Of what you say of the past, eh, man, it was a queer time, and 
awful miserable, but there's no sense in denying it was awful fun.  
Do you mind the youth in Highland garb and the tableful of coppers?  
Do you mind the SIGNAL of Waterloo Place? - Hey, how the blood 
stands to the heart at such a memory! - Hae ye the notes o't?  
Gie's them. - Gude's sake, man, gie's the notes o't; I mind ye made 
a tune o't an' played it on your pinanny; gie's the notes.  Dear 
Lord, that past.

Glad to hear Henley's prospects are fair:  his new volume is the 
work of a real poet.  He is one of those who can make a noise of 
his own with words, and in whom experience strikes an individual 
note.  There is perhaps no more genuine poet living, bar the Big 
Guns.  In case I cannot overtake an acknowledgment to himself by 
this mail, please let him hear of my pleasure and admiration.  How 
poorly - compares!  He is all smart journalism and cleverness:  it 
is all bright and shallow and limpid, like a business paper - a 
good one, S'ENTEND; but there is no blot of heart's blood and the 
Old Night:  there are no harmonics, there is scarce harmony to his 
music; and in Henley - all of these; a touch, a sense within sense, 
a sound outside the sound, the shadow of the inscrutable, eloquent 
beyond all definition.  The First London Voluntary knocked me 
wholly. - Ever yours affectionately, my dear Charles,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Kind memories to your father and all friends.


Letter:  TO W. E. HENLEY


VAILIMA PLANTATION, UPOLU, SAMOA, AUGUST 1ST, 1892.

MY DEAR HENLEY, - It is impossible to let your new volume pass in 
silence.  I have not received the same thrill of poetry since G. 
M.'s JOY OF EARTH volume and LOVE IN A VALLEY; and I do not know 
that even that was so intimate and deep.  Again and again, I take 
the book down, and read, and my blood is fired as it used to be in 
youth.  ANDANTE CON MOTO in the VOLUNTARIES, and the thing about 
the trees at night (No. XXIV. I think) are up to date my 
favourites.  I did not guess you were so great a magician; these 
are new tunes, this is an undertone of the true Apollo; these are 
not verse, they are poetry - inventions, creations, in language.  I 
thank you for the joy you have given me, and remain your old friend 
and present huge admirer,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

The hand is really the hand of Esau, but under a course of 
threatened scrivener's cramp.

For the next edition of the Book of Verses, pray accept an 
emendation.  Last three lines of Echoes No. XLIV. read -


'But life in act?  How should the grave
Be victor over these,
Mother, a mother of men?'


The two vocatives scatter the effect of this inimitable close.  If 
you insist on the longer line, equip 'grave' with an epithet.

R. L. S.


Letter:  TO E. L. BURLINGAME


VAILIMA, UPOLU, AUGUST 1st, '92.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME, - Herewith MY GRANDFATHER.  I have had rather a 
bad time suppressing the old gentleman, who was really in a very 
garrulous stage; as for getting him IN ORDER, I could do but little 
towards that; however, there are one or two points of interest 
which may justify us in printing.  The swinging of his stick and 
not knowing the sailor of Coruiskin, in particular, and the account 
of how he wrote the lives in the Bell Book particularly please me. 
I hope my own little introduction is not egoistic; or rather I do 
not care if it is.  It was that old gentleman's blood that brought 
me to Samoa.

By the by, vols. vii., viii., and ix. of Adams's HISTORY have never 
come to hand; no more have the dictionaries.

Please send me STONEHENGE ON HORSE, STORIES AND INTERLUDES by Barry 
Pain, and EDINBURGH SKETCHES AND MEMOIRS by David Masson.  THE 
WRECKER has turned up.  So far as I have seen, it is very 
satisfactory, but on pp. 548, 549, there has been a devil of a 
miscarriage.  The two Latin quotations instead of following each 
other being separated (doubtless for printing considerations) by a 
line of prose.  My compliments to the printers; there is doubtless 
such a thing as good printing, but there is such a thing as good 
sense.

The sequel to KIDNAPPED, DAVID BALFOUR by name, is about three-
quarters done and gone to press for serial publication.  By what I 
can find out it ought to be through hand with that and ready for 
volume form early next spring. - Yours very sincerely,

R. L. S.


Letter:  TO ANDREW LANG


[VAILIMA, AUGUST 1892.]

MY DEAR LANG, - I knew you would prove a trusty purveyor.  The 
books you have sent are admirable.  I got the name of my hero out 
of Brown - Blair of Balmyle - Francie Blair.  But whether to call 
the story BLAIR OF BALMYLE, or whether to call it THE YOUNG 
CHEVALIER, I have not yet decided.  The admirable Cameronian tract 
- perhaps you will think this a cheat - is to be boned into DAVID 
BALFOUR, where it will fit better, and really furnishes me with a 
desired foothold over a boggy place.

LATER; no, it won't go in, and I fear I must give up 'the 
idolatrous occupant upon the throne,' a phrase that overjoyed me 
beyond expression.  I am in a deuce of a flutter with politics, 
which I hate, and in which I certainly do not shine; but a fellow 
cannot stand aside and look on at such an exhibition as our 
government.  'Taint decent; no gent can hold a candle to it.  But 
it's a grind to be interrupted by midnight messengers and pass your 
days writing proclamations (which are never proclaimed) and 
petitions (which ain't petited) and letters to the TIMES, which it 
makes my jaws yawn to re-read, and all your time have your heart 
with David Balfour:  he has just left Glasgow this morning for 
Edinburgh, James More has escaped from the castle; it is far more 
real to me than the Behring Sea or the Baring brothers either - he 
got the news of James More's escape from the Lord Advocate, and 
started off straight to comfort Catriona.  You don't know her; 
she's James More's daughter, and a respectable young wumman; the 
Miss Grants think so - the Lord Advocate's daughters - so there 
can't be anything really wrong.  Pretty soon we all go to Holland, 
and be hanged; thence to Dunkirk, and be damned; and the tale 
concludes in Paris, and be Poll-parrotted.  This is the last 
authentic news.  You are not a real hard-working novelist; not a 
practical novelist; so you don't know the temptation to let your 
characters maunder.  Dumas did it, and lived.  But it is not war; 
it ain't sportsmanlike, and I have to be stopping their chatter all 
the time.  Brown's appendix is great reading.


My only grief is that I can't
Use the idolatrous occupant.


Yours ever,

R. L. S.

Blessing and praising you for a useful (though idolatrous) occupant 
of Kensington.


Letter:  TO THE COUNTESS OF JERSEY


AUGUST 14, 1745.

TO MISS AMELIA BALFOUR - MY DEAR COUSIN, - We are going an 
expedition to leeward on Tuesday morning.  If a lady were perhaps 
to be encountered on horseback - say, towards the Gasi-gasi river - 
about six A.M., I think we should have an episode somewhat after 
the style of the '45.  What a misfortune, my dear cousin, that you 
should have arrived while your cousin Graham was occupying my only 
guest-chamber - for Osterley Park is not so large in Samoa as it 
was at home - but happily our friend Haggard has found a corner for 
you!

The King over the Water - the Gasi-gasi water - will be pleased to 
see the clan of Balfour mustering so thick around his standard.

I have (one serious word) been so lucky as to get a really secret 
interpreter, so all is for the best in our little adventure into 
the WAVERLEY NOVELS. - I am your affectionate cousin,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Observe the stealth with which I have blotted my signature, but we 
must be political A OUTRANCE.


Letter:  TO THE COUNTESS OF JERSEY


MY DEAR COUSIN, - I send for your information a copy of my last 
letter to the gentleman in question.  'Tis thought more wise, in 
consideration of the difficulty and peril of the enterprise, that 
we should leave the town in the afternoon, and by several 
detachments.  If you would start for a ride with the Master of 
Haggard and Captain Lockhart of Lee, say at three o'clock of the 
afternoon, you would make some rencounters by the wayside which 
might be agreeable to your political opinions.  All present will be 
staunch.

The Master of Haggard might extend his ride a little, and return 
through the marsh and by the nuns' house (I trust that has the 
proper flavour), so as a little to diminish the effect of 
separation. - I remain, your affectionate cousin to command,

O TUSITALA.

P.S. - It is to be thought this present year of grace will be 
historical.


Letter:  TO MRS. CHARLES FAIRCHILD


[VAILIMA, AUGUST 1892.]

MY DEAR MRS. FAIRCHILD, - Thank you a thousand times for your 
letter.  You are the Angel of (the sort of) Information (that I 
care about); I appoint you successor to the newspaper press; and I 
beg of you, whenever you wish to gird at the age, or think the bugs 
out of proportion to the roses, or despair, or enjoy any cosmic or 
epochal emotion, to sit down again and write to the Hermit of 
Samoa.  What do I think of it all?  Well, I love the romantic 
solemnity of youth; and even in this form, although not without 
laughter, I have to love it still.  They are such ducks!  But what 
are they made of?  We were just as solemn as that about atheism and 
the stars and humanity; but we were all for belief anyway - we held 
atheism and sociology (of which none of us, nor indeed anybody, 
knew anything) for a gospel and an iron rule of life; and it was 
lucky enough, or there would have been more windows broken.  What 
is apt to puzzle one at first sight in the New Youth is that, with 
such rickety and risky problems always at heart, they should not 
plunge down a Niagara of Dissolution.  But let us remember the high 
practical timidity of youth.  I was a particularly brave boy - this 
I think of myself, looking back - and plunged into adventures and 
experiments, and ran risks that it still surprises me to recall.  
But, dear me, what a fear I was in of that strange blind machinery 
in the midst of which I stood; and with what a compressed heart and 
what empty lungs I would touch a new crank and await developments!  
I do not mean to say I do not fear life still; I do; and that 
terror (for an adventurer like myself) is still one of the chief 
joys of living.

But it was different indeed while I was yet girt with the priceless 
robes of inexperience; then the fear was exquisite and infinite.  
And so, when you see all these little Ibsens, who seem at once so 
dry and so excitable, and faint in swathes over a play (I suppose - 
for a wager) that would seem to me merely tedious, smile behind 
your hand, and remember the little dears are all in a blue funk.  
It must be very funny, and to a spectator like yourself I almost 
envy it.  But never get desperate; human nature is human nature; 
and the Roman Empire, since the Romans founded it and made our 
European human nature what it is, bids fair to go on and to be true 
to itself.  These little bodies will all grow up and become men and 
women, and have heaps of fun; nay, and are having it now; and 
whatever happens to the fashion of the age, it makes no difference 
- there are always high and brave and amusing lives to be lived; 
and a change of key, however exotic, does not exclude melody.  Even 
Chinamen, hard as we find it to believe, enjoy being Chinese.  And 
the Chinaman stands alone to be unthinkable; natural enough, as the 
representative of the only other great civilisation.  Take my 
people here at my doors; their life is a very good one; it is quite 
thinkable, quite acceptable to us.  And the little dears will be 
soon skating on the other foot; sooner or later, in each 
generation, the one-half of them at least begin to remember all the 
material they had rejected when first they made and nailed up their 
little theory of life; and these become reactionaries or 
conservatives, and the ship of man begins to fill upon the other 
tack.

Here is a sermon, by your leave!  It is your own fault, you have 
amused and interested me so much by your breath of the New Youth, 
which comes to me from so far away, where I live up here in my 
mountain, and secret messengers bring me letters from rebels, and 
the government sometimes seizes them, and generally grumbles in its 
beard that Stevenson should really be deported.  O, my life is the 
more lively, never fear!

It has recently been most amusingly varied by a visit from Lady 
Jersey.  I took her over mysteriously (under the pseudonym of my 
cousin, Miss Amelia Balfour) to visit Mataafa, our rebel; and we 
had great fun, and wrote a Ouida novel on our life here, in which 
every author had to describe himself in the Ouida glamour, and of 
which - for the Jerseys intend printing it - I must let you have a 
copy.  My wife's chapter, and my description of myself, should, I 
think, amuse you.  But there were finer touches still; as when 
Belle and Lady Jersey came out to brush their teeth in front of the 
rebel King's palace, and the night guard squatted opposite on the 
grass and watched the process; or when I and my interpreter, and 
the King with his secretary, mysteriously disappeared to conspire. 
- Ever yours sincerely,

R. L. STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO GORDON BROWNE


VAILIMA, SAMOA, AUTUMN 1892.
TO THE ARTIST WHO DID THE ILLUSTRATIONS TO 'UMA.'

DEAR SIR, - I only know you under the initials G. B., but you have 
done some exceedingly spirited and satisfactory illustrations to my 
story THE BEACH OF FALESA, and I wish to write and thank you 
expressly for the care and talent shown.  Such numbers of people 
can do good black and whites!  So few can illustrate a story, or 
apparently read it.  You have shown that you can do both, and your 
creation of Wiltshire is a real illumination of the text.  It was 
exactly so that Wiltshire dressed and looked, and you have the line 
of his nose to a nicety.  His nose is an inspiration.  Nor should I 
forget to thank you for Case, particularly in his last appearance.  
It is a singular fact - which seems to point still more directly to 
inspiration in your case - that your missionary actually resembles 
the flesh-and-blood person from whom Mr. Tarleton was drawn.  The 
general effect of the islands is all that could be wished; indeed I 
have but one criticism to make, that in the background of Case 
taking the dollar from Mr. Tarleton's head - head - not hand, as 
the fools have printed it - the natives have a little too much the 
look of Africans.

But the great affair is that you have been to the pains to 
illustrate my story instead of making conscientious black and 
whites of people sitting talking.  I doubt if you have left 
unrepresented a single pictorial incident.  I am writing by this 
mail to the editor in the hopes that I may buy from him the 
originals, and I am, dear sir, your very much obliged,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO MISS MORSE


VAILIMA, SAMOAN ISLANDS, OCTOBER 7TH, 1892.

DEAR MADAM, - I have a great diffidence in answering your valued 
letter.  It would be difficult for me to express the feelings with 
which I read it - and am now trying to re-read it as I dictate 
this.

You ask me to forgive what you say 'must seem a liberty,' and I 
find that I cannot thank you sufficiently or even find a word with 
which to qualify your letter.  Dear Madam, such a communication 
even the vainest man would think a sufficient reward for a lifetime 
of labour.  That I should have been able to give so much help and 
pleasure to your sister is the subject of my grateful wonder.

That she, being dead, and speaking with your pen, should be able to 
repay the debt with such a liberal interest, is one of those things 
that reconcile us with the world and make us take hope again.  I do 
not know what I have done to deserve so beautiful and touching a 
compliment; and I feel there is but one thing fit for me to say 
here, that I will try with renewed courage to go on in the same 
path, and to deserve, if not to receive, a similar return from 
others.

You apologise for speaking so much about yourselves.  Dear Madam, I 
thought you did so too little.  I should have wished to have known 
more of those who were so sympathetic as to find a consolation in 
my work, and so graceful and so tactful as to acknowledge it in 
such a letter as was yours.

Will you offer to your mother the expression of a sympathy which 
(coming from a stranger) must seem very airy, but which yet is 
genuine; and accept for yourself my gratitude for the thought which 
inspired you to write to me and the words which you found to 
express it.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO E. L. BURLINGAME


VAILIMA PLANTATION, SAMOAN ISLANDS, OCT. 10TH, 1892.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME, - It is now, as you see, the 10th of October, 
and there has not reached the Island of Upolu one single copy, or 
rag of a copy, of the Samoa book.  I lie; there has come one, and 
that in the pocket of a missionary man who is at daggers drawn with 
me, who lends it to all my enemies, conceals it from all my 
friends, and is bringing a lawsuit against me on the strength of 
expressions in the same which I have forgotten, and now cannot see.  
This is pretty tragic, I think you will allow; and I was inclined 
to fancy it was the fault of the Post Office.  But I hear from my 
sister-in-law Mrs. Sanchez that she is in the same case, and has 
received no 'Footnote.'  I have also to consider that I had no 
letter from you last mail, although you ought to have received by 
that time 'My Grandfather and Scott,' and 'Me and my Grandfather.'  
Taking one consideration with another, therefore, I prefer to 
conceive that No. 743 Broadway has fallen upon gentle and 
continuous slumber, and is become an enchanted palace among 
publishing houses.  If it be not so, if the 'Footnotes' were really 
sent, I hope you will fall upon the Post Office with all the vigour 
you possess.  How does THE WRECKER go in the States?  It seems to 
be doing exceptionally well in England. - Yours sincerely,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO J. M.  BARRIE


VAILIMA PLANTATION, SAMOAN ISLANDS, NOVEMBER 1ST, 1892.

DEAR MR. BARRIE, - I can scarce thank you sufficiently for your 
extremely amusing letter.  No, THE AULD LICHT IDYLS never reached 
me - I wish it had, and I wonder extremely whether it would not be 
good for me to have a pennyworth of the Auld Licht pulpit.  It is a 
singular thing that I should live here in the South Seas under 
conditions so new and so striking, and yet my imagination so 
continually inhabit that cold old huddle of grey hills from which 
we come.  I have just finished DAVID BALFOUR; I have another book 
on the stocks, THE YOUNG CHEVALIER, which is to be part in France 
and part in Scotland, and to deal with Prince Charlie about the 
year 1749; and now what have I done but begun a third which is to 
be all moorland together, and is to have for a centrepiece a figure 
that I think you will appreciate - that of the immortal Braxfield - 
Braxfield himself is my GRAND PREMIER, or, since you are so much 
involved in the British drama, let me say my heavy lead. . . .

Your descriptions of your dealings with Lord Rintoul are 
frightfully unconscientious.  You should never write about anybody 
until you persuade yourself at least for the moment that you love 
him, above all anybody on whom your plot revolves.  It will always 
make a hole in the book; and, if he has anything to do with the 
mechanism, prove a stick in your machinery.  But you know all this 
better than I do, and it is one of your most promising traits that 
you do not take your powers too seriously.  The LITTLE MINISTER 
ought to have ended badly; we all know it did; and we are 
infinitely grateful to you for the grace and good feeling with 
which you lied about it.  If you had told the truth, I for one 
could never have forgiven you.  As you had conceived and written 
the earlier parts, the truth about the end, though indisputably 
true to fact, would have been a lie, or what is worse, a discord in 
art.  If you are going to make a book end badly, it must end badly 
from the beginning.  Now your book began to end well.  You let 
yourself fall in love with, and fondle, and smile at your puppets.  
Once you had done that, your honour was committed - at the cost of 
truth to life you were bound to save them.  It is the blot on 
RICHARD FEVEREL, for instance, that it begins to end well; and then 
tricks you and ends ill.  But in that case there is worse behind, 
for the ill-ending does not inherently issue from the plot - the 
story HAD, in fact, ENDED WELL after the great last interview 
between Richard and Lucy - and the blind, illogical bullet which 
smashes all has no more to do between the boards than a fly has to 
do with the room into whose open window it comes buzzing.  It MIGHT 
have so happened; it needed not; and unless needs must, we have no 
right to pain our readers.  I have had a heavy case of conscience 
of the same kind about my Braxfield story.  Braxfield - only his 
name is Hermiston - has a son who is condemned to death; plainly, 
there is a fine tempting fitness about this; and I meant he was to 
hang.  But now on considering my minor characters, I saw there were 
five people who would - in a sense who must - break prison and 
attempt his rescue.  They were capable, hardy folks, too, who might 
very well succeed.  Why should they not then?  Why should not young 
Hermiston escape clear out of the country? and be happy, if he 
could, with his -  But soft!  I will not betray my secret of my 
heroine.  Suffice it to breathe in your ear that she was what Hardy 
calls (and others in their plain way don't) a Pure Woman.  Much 
virtue in a capital letter, such as yours was.

Write to me again in my infinite distance.  Tell me about your new 
book.  No harm in telling ME; I am too far off to be indiscreet; 
there are too few near me who would care to hear.  I am rushes by 
the riverside, and the stream is in Babylon:  breathe your secrets 
to me fearlessly; and if the Trade Wind caught and carried them 
away, there are none to catch them nearer than Australia, unless it 
were the Tropic Birds.  In the unavoidable absence of my 
amanuensis, who is buying eels for dinner, I have thus concluded my 
despatch, like St. Paul, with my own hand.

And in the inimitable words of Lord Kames, Faur ye weel, ye bitch. 
- Yours very truly,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


Letter:  TO E. L. BURLINGAME


VAILIMA PLANTATION, NOV. 2ND, 1892.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME, - In the first place, I have to acknowledge 
receipt of your munificent cheque for three hundred and fifty 
dollars.  Glad you liked the Scott voyage; rather more than I did 
upon the whole.  As the proofs have not turned up at all, there can 
be no question of returning them, and I am therefore very much 
pleased to think you have arranged not to wait.  The volumes of 
Adams arrived along with yours of October 6th.  One of the 
dictionaries has also blundered home, apparently from the Colonies; 
the other is still to seek.  I note and sympathise with your 
bewilderment as to FALESA.  My own direct correspondence with Mr. 
Baxter is now about three months in abeyance.  Altogether you see 
how well it would be if you could do anything to wake up the Post 
Office.  Not a single copy of the 'Footnote' has yet reached Samoa, 
but I hear of one having come to its address in Hawaii.  Glad to 
hear good news of Stoddard. - Yours sincerely,

R. L. STEVENSON.

P.S. - Since the above was written an aftermath of post matter came 
in, among which were the proofs of MY GRANDFATHER.  I shall correct 
and return them, but as I have lost all confidence in the Post 
Office, I shall mention here:  first galley, 4th line from the 
bottom, for 'AS' read 'OR.'

Should I ever again have to use my work without waiting for proofs, 
bear in mind this golden principle.  From a congenital defect, I 
must suppose, I am unable to write the word OR - wherever I write 
it the printer unerringly puts AS - and those who read for me had 
better, wherever it is possible, substitute OR for AS.  This the 
more so since many writers have a habit of using AS which is death 
to my temper and confusion to my face.

R. L. S.


Letter:  TO LIEUTENANT EELES


VAILIMA PLANTATION, UPOLU, SAMOAN ISLANDS, NOVEMBER 15TH, 1892.

DEAR EELES, - In the first place, excuse me writing to you by 
another hand, as that is the way in which alone all my 
correspondence gets effected.  Before I took to this method, or 
rather before I found a victim, it SIMPLY didn't get effected.

