Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Internet Archive: Canadian
Libraries, Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net and the booksmiths at
http://www.eBookForge.net


_Frontispiece._

[Illustration: _Photo: Underwood & Underwood._

  LT.-COL. N. C. KING, T.D.,  LT.-COL. G. R. TOD,  LT.-COL. A. S. BATES,
    Comdg. 3rd Battn.          Comdg. 2nd Battn.         D.S.O.,
                                                    Comdg. 1st Battn.]


SHORT HISTORY

OF THE

LONDON RIFLE BRIGADE

       *       *       *       *       *

_Compiled Regimentally_

       *       *       *       *       *

          ALDERSHOT:
          PRINTED BY GALE & POLDEN LTD.,
          WELLINGTON WORKS.

       *       *       *       *       *

1916.

[Blank Page]


NOTE


Pending the full pre-war history, which is to be written by better
hands, the very sketchy outline in Part I. is given in order to form the
connecting link between the Regiment in peace, since its formation, and
the present time.

It does not attempt to give the smallest idea of the hard work, often
accomplished under disadvantageous circumstances, carried out by all
ranks, which made possible the work done in the war.

That the Regiment even now exists is solely due to Lieut.-Colonel Lord
Bingham (now Brigadier-General the Earl of Lucan), whose cheery optimism
through the dark times previous to the birth of the Territorial Force
was such a great tower of strength.

       *       *       *       *       *

Any profits which may accrue from this pamphlet will be given to the
London Rifle Brigade Prisoners' Aid Fund.

_October, 1916._


CONTENTS


                                   PAGE

  Part I                              1

  Part II                             7

  Second Battalion                   30

  Third Battalion                    31

  Administrative Centre              33

  Appendix A                         35

  Appendix B                         39

  Appendix C                         40

  Appendix D                         45

  Appendix E                         46

  Appendix F                         47


SHORT HISTORY

OF THE

LONDON RIFLE BRIGADE


PART I.


[Sidenote: =Formation.=]

The London Rifle Brigade, formerly the 1st London Volunteer Rifle Corps
(City of London Rifle Volunteer Brigade), and now, officially, the 5th
(City of London) Battalion, The London Regiment, London Rifle Brigade,
familiarly known to its members and the public generally by the
sub-title or the abbreviation "L.R.B.," was founded July 23rd, 1859, at
a meeting convened by the Lord Mayor. It has always been intimately
associated with the City of London, its companies being under the
patronage of the various Wards.

Within a week of its formation the muster of the Regiment exceeded
1,800; two battalions were formed and headquarters were taken at No. 8,
Great Winchester Street, where they remained for 34 years, and
subsequently in Finsbury Pavement.

In 1893 the Regiment entered its present headquarters in Bunhill Row.
These were designed by the late Lieut.-Colonel Boyes, erected entirely
from regimental funds, supplemented by contributions from members of the
Brigade, from various City Companies and other friends of the Regiment,
and constitute the finest building of its kind in London.

Since the formation of the Territorial Force these headquarters have
been shared with the Post Office Rifles.

[Sidenote: =Honorary Colonel.=]

Mr. Alderman Carter was at first appointed Honorary Colonel, but in 1860
it was suggested that a military Honorary Colonel would be more
appropriate than a civilian one, and Mr. Carter (then Lord Mayor)
approached H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge, who, in response to the
unanimous wish of the Regiment, accepted the appointment, which he held
until his death in 1904. During this period he rarely missed attending
the annual inspection.

[Sidenote: =Commanding Officers.=]

In 1862 a resolution was passed at a meeting "that Regimental Commanding
Officers should now and always be Officers of professional experience
and ability." This tradition has been departed from on only two
occasions prior to the war, as shown in the list given on the following
page.

                 NAME.                  FROM.              TO.

  G. M. Hicks (late 41st Regiment)     30/12/59          January, 1862.
  G. Warde (late 51st Regiment)        February, 1862    Early, 1876.
  Sir A. D. Hayter, Bt. (late          Early, 1876       1881.
    Grenadier Guards)
  W. H. Haywood (Ex London Rifle       1881              1882.
    Brigade)
  Lord Edward Pelham-Clinton           June, 1882        1890.
    (late Rifle Brigade)
  H. C. Cholmondeley (late Rifle       1890              February, 1901.
    Brigade)
  Edward Matthey (Ex London Rifle      February, 1901    4/6/01.
    Brigade)
  Lord Bingham (late Rifle Brigade)    June, 1901        1913.
  Earl Cairns (late Rifle Brigade)     1913              1915.
  Norman C. King (Ex London Rifle      1915
    Brigade)


  _1st Battalion._

  Earl Cairns                          4/8/14            16/3/15.
  A. S. Bates (Ex London Rifle         16/3/15           15/8/16.
     Brigade)
  R. H. Husey (Ex London Rifle         15/8/16
     Brigade)


  _2nd Battalion._

  G. R. Tod (late Seaforth             September, 1914
     Highlanders)


  _3rd Battalion._

  H. C. Cholmondeley                   30/11/14          1915.
  Norman C. King                       4/6/15

[Sidenote: =South African War.=]

Colonel Cholmondeley was appointed to command the Mounted Infantry
Section of the C.I.V., to which regiment the London Rifle Brigade
contributed 2 officers (Captain C. G. R. Matthey and Lieutenant the Hon.
Schomberg K. McDonnell) and 78 other ranks.

When the Volunteer Active Service Companies were raised, 17 members were
accepted for service with the Royal Fusiliers, and an additional 76
joined the Imperial Yeomanry and R.A.M.C.

The total death roll of the Regiment was seven.

Colonel Cholmondeley, Lieutenant E. D. Johnson (Imperial Yeomanry), and
Colour-Sergeant T. G. Beeton (C.I.V. Infantry) were mentioned in
despatches.

[Sidenote: =Honours.=]

Colonel Cholmondeley received the C.B. for his services in South Africa,
and Lieutenant the Hon. Rupert Guinness was made a C.M.G. for his work
with the Irish Hospital.

When the Coronation honours were announced in 1902, Colonel Edward
Matthey, V.D., received the C.B., a fitting award for his long services
to the Volunteer Force. Before joining the L.R.B. in 1873 as a private
he had already been 13 years in the Victoria Rifles. He retired in 1901,
having served in every rank. His interest in the Regiment has been, and
still is, without limit.

_To face page 4._

[Illustration: THE CONVENT.

_8th to 16th November, 1914._]

The work he has done for its welfare, while still serving, and since
retirement, cannot be chronicled here, but, when the full history of the
Regiment is written, Colonel Matthey's name will be found writ large on
its pages.

_To face page 5._

[Illustration: PLOEGSTEERT.

_The Brewery--The Battalion's First Bath house._]

[Sidenote: =Battle Honours.=]

In January, 1905, the Regiment was given the right to bear upon its
"Colours and appointments" the words "South Africa, 1900-1902."

[Sidenote: =Shooting.=]

The London Rifle Brigade has always been distinguished as a shooting
regiment. In the very first year of its existence its co-operation was
sought in connection with the formation of the National Rifle
Association. In 1907 it had no less than a dozen International marksmen
in its ranks.

The earliest notable individual success was that of Private J. Wyatt,
who won the Queen's Prize in 1864.

On two more occasions has the Blue Riband of the shooting world been won
by members of the Regiment--in 1902 by Lieutenant E. D. Johnson, and in
1909 by Corporal H. G. Burr.

Regimental teams have been very successful both at the National Rifle
Association and the London district meetings. At the latter the "Daily
Telegraph" Cup was won two years in succession (1897 and 1898).

[Sidenote: =School of Arms.=]

This was second to none in the Territorial Force. Its Annual
Assault-at-Arms provided as stirring a spectacle as could be witnessed
anywhere. For many years past the Brigade achieved notable successes at
the Royal Military Tournament and in the competitions of the
Metropolitan Territorial School of Arms Association.

[Sidenote: =Athletics.=]

The Battalion always took part in the various contests between the
Territorial Regiments with considerable success. The most notable of
late were the following:--The "Marathon" Race in the Territorial
Championship of the London District, 1913, when Captain Husey and the
London Rifle Brigade team won it in the record time of 1 hr. 33 min. 37
sec.; the distance was 12 miles, from Ewell to Stamford Bridge. The
national contest at Newport did not produce such a good time, the London
Rifle Brigade team winning it in 1 hr. 48 min. 14 sec.

The march to Brighton of 52½ miles for a team of sixty of all ranks, in
full marching order, was accomplished in 1914 by a London Rifle Brigade
team, under Captain Husey and Lieutenant Large, in the record time of 14
hrs. 23 min. The war has not given any other battalion a chance to lower
the latter record, and it will assuredly take "some doing."


PART II.


[Sidenote: =Mobilisation.=]

The Battalion mobilised on the outbreak of war. It had actually gone
into camp at Eastbourne, but was brought back to London within a few
hours of its arrival.

A second and third Battalion were soon formed. (See pp. 30, 31.)


FIRST BATTALION.

Making stays of varying duration en route at Wimbledon, Hersham, and
Bisley (for three weeks), the 1st Battalion finally reached Crowborough,
where it remained under canvas until ordered abroad.

It embarked on November 4th, 1914. The following were the officers:--

          Lieut.-Col. W. D. Earl Cairns (Commanding).

          Lieut.-Col. (Hon. Col.) C. G. R. Matthey, V.D.
          (Second-in-Command).

          Major.--N. C. King, T.D.

          Captains.--A. S. Bates, M. H. Soames, R. H. Husey,
          C. H. F. Thompson, H. F. MacGeagh, J. R.
          Somers-Smith, A. L. Lintott, and Hon. Major C. D.
          Burnell.

          Lieutenants.--R. E. Otter, J. G. Robinson, G. H.
          Morrison, E. L. Large, P. A. Slessor, H. B. Price,
          A. G. Kirby, G. H. Cholmeley.

          Second-Lieutenants.--K. Forbes, G. H. G. M.
          Cartwright, W. L. Willett, H. L. Johnston, C. W.
          Trevelyan, H. G. Vincent, G. E. S. Fursdon, G. C.
          Kitchin.

          Adjutant.--Captain A. C. Oppenheim, K.R.R.C.

          Quartermaster.--Lieutenant J. R. S. Petersen.

          Medical Officer.--Major A. D. Ducat, T.D.

The following short account is written in constant remembrance of the
censorship regulations, and with a view to giving a faint outline of its
doings to those who were not out with the 1st Battalion in France. It
will be an aid to memory to those who were with it, and are fortunate in
being able to look back on a time when the 1st Battalion undoubtedly
reached its zenith.

Never can any Battalion of the Regiment be better than was the 1st
London Rifle Brigade in 1914-15. That all will endeavour to be as good
is quite certain.

[Sidenote: =1914. Nov. 5th.=]

The Battalion arrived in France. Disembarkation was a tedious business,
and the progress through the town to the rest camp at the top of the
hill was one of the worst forms of route march the Battalion had ever
experienced. Frequent checks, but no halts, taught the true weight of
packs and kit; and a perfunctory inspection on arrival at the camp
completed the exhaustion.

For the next three weeks the history of the Battalion was one common to
those Territorial units which were sent out as lone Battalions about
that time. It comprised a glorious uncertainty, which troops coming out
earlier and later in complete divisions cannot have experienced. For
instance, on landing it was learnt, quite by accident, but on excellent
authority, that officers no longer wore Sam Browne belts or carried
swords. A frantic rush at the last moment procured web equipment just
before the parade to entrain. Swords and belts were left at the base.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 6th.=]

There was much to learn about entrainment in France. An advance party
had been sent forward some two hours earlier, and the rest of the
Battalion and the transport were at the station by 4 p.m. The train was
not due to leave until 9 p.m. French trains and the French railway
system became familiar later on in all their ramifications, but at first
"Hommes 40 Chevaux (en long) 8" aroused suspicions that were only too
well justified in the next 21½ hours before the train reached its
destination. The experience was not a unique one.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 7th.=]

On arrival at General Headquarters it was found that the Battalion was
not even expected, and no arrangements had been made for the night.
After a wait of three hours in the train, the Battalion moved off into
some old artillery barracks, which were destined to become more familiar
later on. The quarters were, at that time, about as dismal and dirty as
can be imagined.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 8th.=]

The Battalion marched out some three and a half miles to a large
unfurnished and unfinished convent, which accommodated the entire
strength.

There was no water laid on, no light, no method of heating or of drying
clothes, no furniture, and no possibility of supplementing rations. The
only bright spot was the first introduction to the rum ration.

Training, which consisted chiefly of trench digging and artillery
formation, was carried out daily regardless of the weather.

The Battalion was apparently considered to be up to the required
standard of efficiency and hardness, or else the authorities had not the
heart to keep it there longer, for on the 15th orders were received to
march the next day.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 16th.=]

The distance was 17½ miles, and the roads _pavée_ almost the whole way.
There was also some rain. In spite, however, of the absence of other
Battalions to keep them on their mettle, not a single man fell out of
the column.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 17th.=]

Except for bruised feet, the march next day, about 11 miles, was not
very trying. Two nights were spent at this town, where the Artists and
Honourable Artillery Company were also in billets.

While on the march it had been possible, for the first time, to see
aeroplanes being shelled, and, while in these billets, the Battalion
learnt what it meant to see the remnants of a Brigade come out of
action.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 19th.=]

The Battalion moved one stage nearer to the firing line in a snow-storm.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 20th.=]

Brigadier-General Hunter Weston paid the Battalion a visit, and
addressed the Officers. He gave a short account of the 11th Infantry
Brigade, which he commanded, and to which the London Rifle Brigade was
attached, and outlined the scheme of training. Half-companies were to be
attached to Regular Battalions for a spell in the trenches, the men
being scattered amongst the Regulars. As soon as their worth had been
proved, half-companies were to be put in the line intact, and later
whole companies.

At dusk on this date half the Battalion proceeded viâ Ploegsteert to the
trenches.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 21st.=]

For some unknown reason the Battalion had not been permitted to adopt
the "double company system" in England, but on this date the change was
made with half the Battalion absent in the trenches.

"A" and "D" Companies became No. 1, under Major King.

"E" and "O" Companies became No. 2, under Captain Soames.

"G" and "P" Companies became No. 3, under Major Burnell.

"H" and "Q" Companies became No. 4, under Captain Bates.

_To face page 12._

[Illustration: PLOEGSTEERT.

_Experimenting with a Rifle Grenade._

From Left to Right:--LIEUT.-COL. EARL CAIRNS, C.M.G., COL.-SGT. OVER,
STAFF-SGT. (NOW REGTL. SGT.-MAJ.) ADAMS, AND CAPT. OPPENHEIM, D.S.O.]

For the purposes of reference, these companies will be referred to as A,
B, C, and D respectively, though, owing to the confusion that might have
arisen with the old letters, this nomenclature was not actually adopted
till after the second battle of Ypres.

Up to December 18th the trench training of the London Rifle Brigade
continued. Platoons and whole companies, gradually working more and more
on their own, were attached to the Regulars. When not actually in the
line, the whole day was invariably taken up with "fatigues" of all
kinds.

A support line in the wood was remade and named Bunhill Row.

It was during this period that the Battalion gained the nicknames
"London fatigue party" or "Fatigue Fifth," and other affectionate titles
which would not look well in print.

The Battalion also learnt what it meant to have the "dripping swung on
it."

The 11th Infantry Brigade was composed of the following Battalions:--

          1st Somerset Light Infantry.
          1st East Lancashire Regiment.
          1st Hampshire Regiment.
          1st Rifle Brigade.

[Sidenote: =Dec. 19th.=]

The object of the attack by the 11th Infantry Brigade in front of
Ploegsteert Wood on this date was to clear its edges, including
German House, and, if possible, establish a line in front in the part
afterwards known as the "birdcage."

_To face page 13._

[Illustration: PLOEGSTEERT WOOD.]

The Somerset Light Infantry and Rifle Brigade attacked. The London Rifle
Brigade was in support. The weather could not have been worse, and the
ground was impossible. The result was that the wood was cleared, and
German House remained in No Man's Land.

The London Rifle Brigade was not called upon to continue the attack.
This was the first experience the Battalion had of anything like heavy
artillery fire, and also of the difficulty of consolidating at night in
an unknown bit of ground. Two half-companies were engaged in assisting
in this work, while the rest of the Battalion spent a miserable night in
the marshes in the wood.

[Sidenote: =Dec. 23rd.=]

Each of the four companies was definitely attached, as a fifth company,
to one of the Regular Battalions--"A" to the East Lancs, "B" to the
Somerset Light Infantry, "C" to the Hants, and "D" to the Rifle Brigade.

All four companies of the London Rifle Brigade being in the front line
on the same night, it so happened that before the end of 1914 a
Territorial Battalion held the whole of a Regular Brigade's front with
the exception of half a company on the extreme left.

[Sidenote: =1915.=]

[Sidenote: =Jan. 5th.=]

The London Rifle Brigade was taken out of the trenches preparatory to
taking over a bit of line of its own on the right of the 11th Brigade.

Owing to the incursions of the river Warnave, this trench was in a very
poor state of repair and badly flooded.

The dispositions of the Battalion were--one company in the front trench,
one in London Farm and its environs (this supplied the night-carrying
and working parties), one company, which was used for general fatigues
for the Brigade, in reserve in Ploegsteert, and one company resting,
washing, and cleaning in billets at Armentières. Every company spent
three days in each place, and in many ways this was the most comfortable
tour of duty the Battalion ever had.

The men made themselves thoroughly at home in the cottages of the
village, while the three days' rest in Armentières owed much of its
enjoyment to the initiative shown by the 4th Division in organising both
divisional baths and divisional Follies.

Headquarters and various details, which included for the first time a
permanent working and wiring party, were, of course, always "in action"
in Ploegsteert.

[Sidenote: =Mar. 11th--20th.=]

This was a period of "standing by" and various small moves, but
eventually, after three days in the East Lancashires' trenches in front
of the Convent, the Battalion took over the centre section in the wood
on the 21st March.

Lieut.-Colonel Earl Cairns, C.M.G., owing to ill-health, left the
Battalion on March 16th, and Major A. S. Bates took over command.

[Sidenote: =Mar. 21st--Apl. 17th.=]

The section was held with three companies in the wood, and the fourth in
reserve in the village. The other battalions of the 11th Brigade went
into rest on the 16th, and the London Rifle Brigade came out last on the
next day. The 11th Infantry Brigade was relieved by a brigade of the
South Midland Division.

The following extract from a letter shows the change of conditions
between the first and second sojourn of the Battalion in the wood:--

"We are back again in the wood, and really almost glad, though I expect
you will hardly believe it. Our quota of work in the winter no doubt did
a good deal towards the transformation, and spring is now helping
matters. The corduroy no longer stops at the worst parts, where we used
to hold our breaths and make a dive for it. Hunter Avenue, and right
beyond it to the end of the wood, is now quite a pleasant walk. Rations
and carrying parties, though they have developed a rather peculiar gait,
can progress at a reasonable pace, and have no need to wade so long as
they keep to the boards. On either side, however, we still have a
reminder of the nightmare that is past. The possibility of getting
material up has a corresponding effect on the work in the trenches. The
trench we were in on December 9th, which we could not conceive ever
being anything but a drain, has now found its proper use. It has a new
C.T. behind, and breastworks pushed out in front into the hedge, with
little bridges across to each; so that altogether everything in the
garden is as near lovely as can be."

The Bishop of London, the Senior Chaplain to the Regiment, during his
visit to the front, came to Ploegsteert on April 3rd, and celebrated
Holy Communion for the Battalion on Easter Sunday. He also consecrated
the Battalion's graveyard in the village.

His regret at not being allowed to see the members of the Battalion in
the trenches was shared by all ranks.

[Sidenote: =April 17th.=]

Two brigades had been withdrawn to the neighbourhood of Steenwerck by
this date, and the 4th Division started its first period of rest since
the Retreat.

[Sidenote: =April 24th.=]

Orders were received on the 22nd for these brigades to be ready to move
at an hour's notice. The London Rifle Brigade actually entrained at
mid-day on the 24th, and spent the night in billets outside Poperinghe,
moving off at 5.30 a.m. next morning to the outskirts of Vlamertinghe.
It stopped there till 6 p.m., when it paraded with the rest of the
Brigade (less the East Lancashires) to go into the Salient.

[Sidenote: =Second Battle of Ypres.=]

Since the first gas attack on the evening of April 22nd, little definite
information had been available as to the situation between the left of
the 28th Division (some 1,000 yards N.N.E. of Zonnebeke) and along the
whole north side of the Salient down to the canal near Boesinghe. The
Canadians had held on with the grimmest determination in the
neighbourhood of St. Julian, while what became to be known as Geddes'
force held the line from the canal up to the Canadians. Geddes' force
consisted originally of the supports and reserves (isolated companies
and battalions) from the south and east sides of the Salient. By the
night of the 25th this force had been supplemented by the 10th Brigade,
the Northumbrian Territorial Division, the Lahore Division, and the 13th
Brigade from the 5th Division.


[Sidenote: =April 25th.=]

The 11th Brigade was ordered on this night to join up the left of the
28th Division with the right of the 10th Brigade, and so relieve the
Canadians, who were still holding out in the neighbourhood of St.
Julian.

No information was forthcoming as to the location of either of these
forces, and it would seem that, instead of one continuous line, there
were many small parties holding out in isolated groups.

Two officers from each Battalion had been sent up in advance (Captain
Husey and Lieutenant Johnston from the London Rifle Brigade), but no
available information could be collected, except that there was
apparently a gap.

_To face page 18._

[Illustration: BATTALION HEADQUARTERS.

_11th May, 1915._]

That night the Hants joined up with the 28th Division, and prolonged the
line nearly to the junction of the Zonnebeke-St. Julian and
Ypres-Passchendale roads. There was, however, still a gap of nearly
1,000 yards between its left and the rest of the Brigade which had
prolonged the line from the right of the 10th Brigade and part of the
Northumbrian Division.

The London Rifle Brigade, being in support, had been instructed to dig
itself in 600 yards south-east of Fortuin.

[Sidenote: =April 26th.=]

The Battalion did not reach this position until 1.45 a.m., but, thanks
to an early morning mist, it was able to secure fairly good cover by
daylight.

On this day, and daily for the next seven days, the Battalion was
heavily shelled, and suffered a high percentage of casualties, chiefly
from enfilade fire.

Orders were received for a company to move early in the afternoon and
take up a position that would join up the gap existing between the
Somerset Light Infantry and the Hants. "C" Company was detailed, but a
personal reconnaissance by the Officer Commanding the Company (Major
Burnell) convinced higher authority that it was not only impossible to
move the men by day, but that the Hants' left could not be found. Orders
were accordingly received for the whole Battalion to move at dusk into
the gap. Moving by a somewhat circuitous route, it arrived at its
position, and dug in for the second night in succession. Owing to the
darkness, most, if not all, of the rules as to "artillery formation"
were of necessity transgressed on this occasion.

_To face page 19._

[Illustration: YSER CANAL.]

The left of its line joined the Somersets, and the right an isolated
party on the Zonnebeke-St. Julian road, which was supporting the Hants'
left some 500 yards further forward to the right front.

[Sidenote: =April 28th.=]

It was not until this night that the Rifle Brigade finally dug across
and joined up with the Hants, so that there was once more a continuous
line.

[Sidenote: =April 29th.=]

The London Rifle Brigade, having now become the second line, was moved
up on this night to relieve the 4th East Yorks. The latter, with the 4th
Yorks, were split up among the Battalions of the 11th Brigade, two
companies of the latter being attached to the London Rifle Brigade. (The
East Lancs had rejoined the Brigade by this time.)

[Sidenote: =May 2nd.=]

About 5 p.m., under cover of very heavy shell fire and gas, the Germans
advanced from the ridge beyond the Haanebeke stream into the dead ground
on the near side of the stream, where they dug in some 300 yards away,
though on the left they got up much closer under cover of the houses.

The London Rifle Brigade casualties were very heavy, especially on the
right, where the ground was more open.

Though the Battalion was affected by the gas for about 10 minutes, there
was sufficient wind to dissipate it before any serious damage was done.

_To face page 20._

[Illustration: MAJOR A. S. BATES.

_20th May, 1915._]

There is no doubt that, during their advance from about 1,000 yards till
they got into dead ground, the Germans suffered fairly heavy casualties
from the rifle fire of the two companies on the right, and this may
possibly have deterred them from trying to leave the dead ground. With
the assistance of the two companies of the 4th Yorks and one company of
the East Lancs, which was also attached to the Battalion, the damage to
the trenches was almost all repaired during the night, and all the
wounded were evacuated.

[Sidenote: =May 3rd.=]

On this night the line was readjusted, and the whole Brigade retired
through the new line in rear without a single casualty.

[Sidenote: =May 4th.=]

The actual withdrawal commenced at 12.45 a.m., commencing from the right
of Battalions. Wieltje was timed to be reached at 1.45 a.m.

The casualties over the period April 25th to May 4th were 16 officers
and 392 other ranks.

[Sidenote: =May 4th--8th.=]

These days were spent at various places in the woods behind Vlamertinghe
resting, reorganising, and dealing with accumulations of mail.

[Sidenote: =May 9th.=]

The Battalion moved early in the morning to the grounds of the Chateau
at Vlamertinghe. On this night and the next one it had to dig on the
east side of the canal on the north of La Brique.

_To face page 21._

[Illustration: OFFICERS.

_20th May, 1915._]

[Sidenote: =May 11th.=]

The Battalion moved up to the canal bank, and occupied some very
insanitary dug-outs, which had not been previously inhabited by British
troops.

[Sidenote: =May 12th.=]

The London Rifle Brigade took over from the Dublins a section of the
front line, and was on the extreme right of the 4th Division. A Cavalry
Division was on its immediate right.

[Sidenote: =May 13th.=]

Extract from Sir John French's despatch:--

          "On the 13th May the heaviest bombardment yet
          experienced broke out at 4.30 a.m., and continued
          with little intermission throughout the day. . . .
          The 5th London Regiment, despite very heavy
          casualties, maintained their position
          unfalteringly."

Extract from John Buchan's "History of the War," Vol. VII.:--

          "Early in the morning of Thursday, May 13th, a day
          of biting north winds and drenching rains, a
          terrific bombardment began. . . . The infantry on
          the left of the cavalry were fiercely attacked,
          but contrived to hold their own. . . . The London
          Rifle Brigade had lost most of its men in the
          earlier fighting. It began the day 278 strong, and
          before evening 91 more had gone. One piece of
          breastwork was held by Sergeant Douglas Belcher
          with four survivors and two Hussars, whom he had
          picked up, and though the trench was blown in,
          and the Germans attacked with their infantry, he
          succeeded in bluffing the enemy by rapid fire, and
          holding the ground until relief came. That gallant
          stand, for which the Victoria Cross was awarded,
          saved the right of the 4th Division. . . ."

_To face page 22._

[Illustration: LIEUT. TREVELYAN AND "A" COMPANY.

_20th May, 1915._]

"A" and part of "B" Companies were in the front line. "C" Company
garrisoned three fortified supporting points. The rest of "B" Company
and "D" were in support. The reinforcement of the front line commenced
at about 8 a.m. (the shelling on the Battalion's sector had started at 4
a.m.). The distance between the front line and the supports was about
900 yards.

The shelling did not cease till 6 p.m. Later in the evening the
Battalion was withdrawn to the second line.

Captain Oppenheim, D.S.O., was wounded on this date, and Lieutenant H.
L. Johnston took over the duties of Adjutant. He was subsequently
confirmed in the appointment, and held it till April 7th, 1916, when he
took over command of a company, being succeeded by Captain F. H. Wallis.

[Sidenote: =May 14th.=]

This evening the Battalion moved into the trenches in front of La
Brique, which it had dug less than a week before.

[Sidenote: =May 15th.=]

The Battalion moved further forward into the second line, and two
companies of the 6th Battalion Northumberland Fusiliers were attached
to it.

_To face page 23._

[Illustration: CAPTAIN OTTER AND "B" COMPANY.

_20th May, 1915._]

[Sidenote: =May 16th.=]

The Battalion was withdrawn to the canal bank.

[Sidenote: =May 19th.=]

Orders were received that the London Rifle Brigade was to be withdrawn
and sent the next day to General Headquarters. The Battalion marched
that evening to Vlamertinghe, and was billeted there.

[Sidenote: =May 20th.=]

The Battalion marched past the Divisional Commander after he had
inspected it, and expressed his deep appreciation of all it had done
since April 25th. It boarded the motor-buses, and proceeded to General
Headquarters.

The London Rifle Brigade thus left the 4th Division after six months.

The Brigade, Divisional, and Corps Commanders had all personally thanked
the Battalion for the work it had done, and congratulated it on its
behaviour under the most trying circumstances. But perhaps even more
valued were the farewell letters from the Battalions of the 11th
Brigade, showing, as they did, that they really felt the London Rifle
Brigade to have become part of their Regular Brigade.

The London Rifle Brigade arrived at Tatinghem, and enjoyed ten days'
complete rest during perfect weather.

The Rangers and Kensingtons had also been withdrawn from the line.

_To face page 24._

[Illustration: SEC.-LIEUT. F. D. CHARLES AND "C" COMPANY.

_20th May, 1915._]

[Sidenote: =June 1st.=]

These three Battalions were amalgamated for work on lines of
communications. This entailed the handing over of all the active service
equipment, and also all transport. The latter was a bitter blow, as the
work of the transport, personnel, and animals had been beyond all
praise. It is worth noting that in spite of the very heavy work of the
previous four weeks the transport had actually accomplished the
thirty-mile trek from the Salient in under 20 hours.

[Sidenote: =Lines of Communication.=]

[Sidenote: =June 1st--Oct. 1st.=]

This period calls for no detailed treatment. Headquarters, and the
balance of the men not employed at the different railheads, remained at
St. Omer, first in the artillery barracks, and from July 1st under
canvas.

The numbers at the various railheads altered very considerably from time
to time, e.g., on June 6th 210 other ranks were scattered over fifteen
stations, and on September 24th there were 374 other ranks at twenty-one
different stations.

In addition to these details, the Battalion was called upon to furnish
escorts and large parties for detraining work.

During the battle of Loos the Kensingtons and London Rifle Brigade
between them furnished all the escorts for German prisoners, every
available man, including grooms and officers' servants, being used.

The variety of the work on lines of communication provided scope for
every type of individual--clerks to R.T.O.'s, telephone operators,
guards, shell fuse setters, navvies on coal wharves, caretakers of a
horse rest camp, hospital orderlies--while from time to time at small
stations non-commissioned officers were left in complete charge.

_To face page 25._

[Illustration: SEC.-LIEUT. WALLIS AND "D" COMPANY.

_20th May, 1915._]

From September 2nd to 30th the following four officers were lent to the
Gas Brigade, and took part in the battle of Loos:--Captain R. E. Otter,
Lieutenant F. H. Wallis, and Sec.-Lieutenants A. B. White and F. D.
Charles.

On August 9th the composite Battalion was broken up, and each unit
regained its individuality. This did not make any practical difference
until October 2nd, when the London Rifle Brigade was transferred from
the lines of communication to General Headquarters troops, and marched
to Blendecques, the band of the Artists being kindly lent by their
Commanding Officer to play it out.

While the Battalion was under canvas at General Headquarters, the
officers messed in the Salle d'Honneur of the 8th Regiment of Infantry.
On leaving, a present of a glass inkpot, with the regimental crest of
the London Rifle Brigade, was sent to this French regiment as a small
memento of the occasion. A most cordial and charming reply was received
by Colonel Bates from Colonel Roubert, in which the latter looked
forward to seeing the London Rifle Brigade once again in his barracks
after victory had crowned the Allies' arms.

[Sidenote: =Oct. 2nd--25th.=]

The stay at Blendecques was intended to be a period of training before
being sent back to the front. The actual period was 23 days, but, as it
took more than a week to collect all the details from the various
railheads, little more than a fortnight's full training was possible.

The reluctance of the authorities at these railheads to part with their
London Rifle Brigade detachments, even after their reliefs had arrived,
although complimentary, was not a little annoying, but the grateful
letters received by the Commanding Officer in some measure compensated
for the delay.

These three weeks were a period of remobilisation. Most of the
non-commissioned officers who had survived Ypres had taken commissions.
All the specialists had to be retrained. The transport and detailed
equipment had to be indented for. The essentials were received by
degrees, and actually completed a few days before the Battalion moved.

[Sidenote: =Oct. 25th.=]

The London Rifle Brigade moved by motor-bus in pouring rain to join the
3rd Division, which was resting east of Cassel. It relieved the
Honourable Artillery Company in the 8th Infantry Brigade. The latter
Battalion returned in the same buses. The transport had marched on the
previous day.

Incessant rain and frequent inspections, combined with training on the
lines laid down by the new Division, employed the time up to November
23rd.

_To face page 26._

[Illustration: SEC.-LIEUT. BARKER AND M.G. TEAM.

_20th May, 1915._]

_To face page 27._

[Illustration: THE BARRACKS, GENERAL HEADQUARTERS.]

[Sidenote: =Nov. 23rd.=]

The Battalion marched to Poperinghe. For the first time it now had a
bombing section of 2 officers and 70 other ranks; a sniping detachment
was also organised.

[Sidenote: =Nov. 29th.=]

The Battalion relieved the Liverpool Scottish in the front line. The
trenches were in a desperate state, with very few traverses, no complete
communication trenches or second line, and mud quite indescribable. They
were also overlooked, and enfiladed by the enemy. The tour was normally
seven days, with two companies in the front line and two in reserve near
Battalion Headquarters.

Work was rendered very difficult owing to the water-logged nature of the
ground.

Ration parties took as much as seven hours to accomplish one round
journey.

On the whole, the Battalion was amazingly fortunate while in these
trenches. It suffered casualties from occasional shelling and sniping,
but on certainly two occasions the enemy bombarded the trenches and blew
in fifty yards of parapet without inflicting a single casualty.

The march to and from the trenches was an exceedingly trying one. Only
once was part of the Battalion able to use motor-buses, but, after the
first tour, use was made of the "Ypres Express," to whose Commanding
Officer the London Rifle Brigade will ever remain indebted.

