The most northern library in the world is that of Reikiarik, the capital
of Iceland, containing about 3,600 volumes. That of the Faro Islands has
been recently considerably augmented. Another is establishing at
Eskefiorden, in the north of Iceland.--_Foreign Q. Rev._

       *       *       *       *       *


FRENCH-ENGLISH.


All recent works of fiction exhibit the deplorable corruption of the
vernacular English. You cannot open a novel or book of travels printed
within the present year without stumbling on French or Italian words,
and so frequent is their occurrence, that they are often printed in the
same type as the rest of the page, not in italic, as of old. In short,
some of the authors of the present day seem to have "worn their language
to rags, and patched it up with scraps and ends of foreign." This, in
great measure proceeds from "some far-journeyed gentlemen, who, at their
return home, powder their talk with over-sea language. He that cometh
lately out of France, will talk French-English, and never blush at the
matter."

       *       *       *       *       *


DEBAUCHERIES OF PARIS.


We see daily instances giving us cause to lament protracted residence
abroad, and also the haunts of incessant transit across the channel,
which makes our young men more familiar with the passages, arcades, and
cafes of the Palais Royal, than with the streets of our own metropolis.
We have seen many who could name each single quay along the borders of
the Seine; but who were totally ignorant of those great works of art,
the bridges, docks, and warehouses of their native Thames, otherwise
than as they were hurried past them in the Calais steam-boat.

_Quarterly Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have been somewhat amused with the oddity of a few similes in the
article in Phillips's _State Trials_, in the last No. of the _Edinburgh
Review_. Thus an ordinary reader would lose his way in _Howell's State
Trials_, at the second page, "from the number of volumes, smallness of
print, &c." "A Londoner might as well take a morning walk through an
Illinois prairie, or dash into a back-settlement forest, without a
woodman's aid." Mr. Phillips has "enclosed but a corner of the waste,
swept little more than a single stall in the Augean stable;" "holding a
candle to the back-ground of history," &c.

       *       *       *       *       *


LORD COLLINGWOOD


Went to sea when eleven years old. He used, himself, to tell as an
instance of his simplicity at this time, "that as he was sitting crying
for his separation from home, the first lieutenant observed him; and
pitying the tender years of the poor child, spoke to him in terms of
such encouragement and kindness, which, as Lord C. said, so won upon his
heart, that taking this officer to his box, he offered him in gratitude
a large piece of plum cake, which his mother had given him."

       *       *       *       *       *


CHANGES OF SOCIETY.


The circumstances which have most influence on the happiness of mankind,
the changes of manners and morals, the transition of communities from
poverty to wealth, from knowledge to ignorance, from ferocity to
humanity--these are, for the most part, noiseless revolutions. Their
progress is rarely indicated by what historians are pleased to call
important events. They are not achieved by armies, or enacted by
senates. They are sanctioned by no treaties, and recorded in no
archives. They are carried on in every school, in every church, behind
10,000 counters, at 10,000 fire-sides. The upper current of society
presents no certain criterion by which we can judge of the direction in
which the under current flows.--_Edinburgh Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *


BATTLE OF THE HEADS.


_Phrenologists--Anti-Phrenologists_.

_Phrenologists_. The bantling which but a few years since we ushered
into the world, is now become a giant; and as well might you attempt to
smother him as to entangle a lion in the gossamer, or drown him in the
morning dew.

_Anti-Phrenologists_. Your giant is a butterfly; to-day he roams on
gilded wings, to-morrow he will show his hideousness and be forgotten.

       *       *       *       *       *

Apf, a Norwegian prince, is stated to have had sixty guards, each of
whom, previous to being enrolled, was obliged to lift a stone which lay
in the royal courtyard, and required the united strength of ten men to
raise. They were forbidden to seek shelter during the most tremendous
storms, nor were they allowed to dress their wounds before the
conclusion of a combat. What would some of our "Guards" say to such an
ordeal?

       *       *       *       *       *


PORTRAIT PAINTING.


No picture is exactly like the original; nor is a picture good in
proportion as it is like the original. When Sir Thomas Lawrence paints a
handsome peeress, he does not contemplate her through a powerful
microscope, and transfer to the canvass the pores of the skin, the
bloodvessels of the eye, and all the other beauties which Gulliver
discovered in the Brobdignagian maids of honour. If he were to do this,
the effect would not merely be unpleasant, but unless the scale of the
picture were proportionably enlarged, would be absolutely false. And,
after all, a microscope of greater power than that which he had
employed, would convict him of innumerable omissions.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is calculated that Rome has derived from Spain, for matrimonial
briefs, and other machinery of the Papal court, since the year 1500--no
less than 76,800,000_l_. or about three millions and a half per Pope!
This is preachee and payee too!

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BACHELOR'S VADE-MECUM.


To obviate the difficulties and remove the perplexing doubts of cautious
men, myself and a party of friends, who have a large acquaintance in
London and its vicinity, propose publishing a work in monthly parts,
which we mean to entitle "The Bachelor's Vade-mecum, or a sure guide to
a good match." It will contain a list of all genuine and undoubted
heiresses in the metropolis, and within ten miles around it, and of
those ladies whose fortune depends on contingencies: as our
correspondence and information increase, we shall hope to extend the
circle of our inquiries, and we solicit those communications and
assistances which the extent and utility of our plan require and
deserve. Notices will be given of all who drop off by death and
marriage, and of those whose value may be unexpectedly increased by a
legacy, or a sister or brother's decease. Particular attention will be
paid to rich widows.--The first part of this truly useful work is nearly
ready for the press; and we flatter ourselves that its arrangement and
execution will excite universal applause. The particulars concerning
each lady will be distributed under four heads; the first will be
devoted to her fortune and expectations; the second to a description of
her person; the third to non-essentials; and under the fourth will be
found hints as to the readiest means of approach, cautions against
offending peculiar tastes or prejudices, and much interesting and
valuable information.--A more clear idea, however, of our scheme will be
conveyed by subjoining a few specimens taken at random from our first
number, which will contain about seventy-five articles.

No. 14.

_Fortune_.--10,000_l_. certain, left by a grandfather; two brothers have
the same, one of whom is likely to die before he is of age, which would
produce 5,000_l_. more. The father in business, supposed to live up to
his income. A rich, single aunt, but not on terms, on account of No.
14's love of waltzing. A prudent husband might easily effect a
reconciliation.

_Person_.--Fair, with red hair, and freckled, nose depressed, brow
contracted, figure good, two false teeth.

_Non-essentials_.--Bad-tempered, economical almost to parsimony. Sings a
great deal, but has no voice. Dances well; a Roman Catholic.

_Miscellaneous Information_.--Fond of winning at cards. A particular
dislike to large whiskers; disapproves of hunting; makes her own gowns,
and likes to have them admired.

No. 26.

_Fortune_.--16,000_l_. from her father, who is dead, and 10,000_l_. more
certain on the death of her mother, who is at present ill. It is hoped
that her complaint is dropsy, but more information on this point shall
be given in our next Number.

_Person_.--Fair, with fine blue eyes, good teeth, beautiful light hair.
Tall and well made. Hands and feet bad.

_Non-essentials_.--Weak in understanding, and rather ungovernable in
temper. Has been taught all fashionable accomplishments; plays well on
the harp; sings Italian. Bites her nails, cannot pronounce her h's, and
misplaces her v's and w's. Her father was a butcher.

_Miscellaneous Information_.--Keeps a recipe-book, and is fond of
prescribing for colds and tooth-aches. Has a great dislike to lawyers.
Eats onions. Fond of bull-finches and canary-birds. Collects seals.
Attends lectures on chemistry. Sits with her mouth open.

No. 43.

_Fortune_.--60,000_l_. in her own disposal.

_Person_.--Aquiline nose, large dark eyes, tall and thin. Fine teeth and
hair, supposed false; but the lady's-maid has high wages, and has not
yet been brought to confess.

_Non-essentials_.--Plays well on the piano. Good-tempered. Aged
sixty-three. Evangelical, and a blue-stocking.

_Miscellaneous Information_.--Dislikes military and naval men. Fond of
hares and trout. Has a great objection to waltzing. Aunt to No. 14. A
prudent man might easily widen the breach between them. Attends
Bible-meetings and charity-schools. Lame of one leg.

No. 61.

_Fortune_.--An only child; father a widower, with landed property to the
amount of 1,500_l_. per annum, and 40,000_l_. in the Three per Cents. It
is possible he may marry again, but it is hoped that this may not occur.
The daughter lives with a maternal aunt.

_Person_.--A decidedly handsome brunette. Tall, and well made.

_Non-essentials_.--Charitable almost beyond her means; from which, and
her wishing her father to marry, she is supposed to be extremely weak.
Temper excellent; said to be well educated, but of too retiring a
disposition to allow of our discovering the fact without more trouble
than the matter is worth.

_Miscellaneous Information_.--Fond of the country. Goes twice to church
on Sundays; but this affords no opportunity to a lover, as she never
looks about her. Has an uncle a bishop, which may recommend her to a
clergyman.

