"During the past month, Okewood," he said, "a new organization
has cropped up. The objective of every spy operating in this
country is, as you may have surmised, naval matters, the
movements of the Fleet, the military transports, and the food
convoys. This new organization has proved itself more efficient
than any of its predecessors. It specializes in the movement of
troops to France, and in the journeys of the hospital ships
across the Channel. Its information is very prompt and extremely
accurate, as we know too well. There have been some very
disquieting incidents in which, for once in a way, luck has been
on our side, but as long as this gang can work in the dark there
is the danger of a grave catastrophe. With its thousands of miles
of sea to patrol, the Navy has to take a chance sometimes, you
know! Well, on two occasions lately, when chances were taken, the
Hun knew we were taking a chance, and what is more, when and
where we were taking it!"

The Chief broke off, then looking Desmond squarely in the eyes,
said:

"This is the organization that you're going to beak up!"

Desmond raised his eyebrows.

"Who is at the head of it?" he asked quietly.

The Chief, smiled a little bitterly.

"By George!" he cried, slapping his thigh, "you've rung the bell
in one. Okewood, I'm not a rich man, but I would gladly give a
year's pay to be able to answer that question. To be perfectly
frank with you, I don't know who is at the back of this crowd,
but..." his mouth set in a grim line, "I'm going to know!"

He added whimsically:

"What's more, you're going to find out for me!"

Desmond smiled at the note of assurance in his voice.

"I suppose you've got something to go on?" he asked. "There's
Nur-el-Din, for instance. What about her?"

"That young person," replied the Chief, "is to be your particular
study. If she is not the center of the whole conspiracy, she is,
at any rate, in the thick of it. It will be part of your job to
ascertain the exact role she is playing."

"But what is there against her?" queried Desmond.

"What is there against her? The bad company she keeps is against
her. 'Tell me who your friends are and I'll tell you who you are'
is a maxim that we have to go on in our profession, Okewood. You
have met the lady. Did you see any of her entourage? Her business
manager, a fat Italian who calls himself Lazarro, did you notice
him? Would you be surprised to hear that Lazarro alias Sacchetti
alias Le Tardenois is a very notorious international spy who
after working in the Italian Secret Service in the pay of the
Germans was unmasked and kicked out of Italy... that was before
the war? This pleasant gentleman subsequently did five years in
the French penal settlements in New Caledonia for robbery with
violence at Aix-les-Bains... oh, we know a whole lot about him!
And this woman's other friends! Do you know, for instance, where
she often spends the week-end? At the country-place of one Bryan
Mowbury, whose name used to be Bernhard Marburg, a very old hand
indeed in the German Secret Service. She has identified herself
right and left with the German espionage service in this country.
One day she lunches with a woman spy, whose lover was caught and
shot by the French. Then she goes out motoring with..."

"But why in Heaven's name are all these people allowed to run
loose?" broke in Desmond. "Do you mean to say you can't arrest
them?"

"Arrest 'em? Arrest 'em? Of course, we can arrest 'em. But what's
the use? They're all small fry, and we have to keep out a few
lines baited with minnows to catch the Tritons. None of 'em can
do any harm: we watch 'em much too closely for that. Once you've
located your spy, the battle's won. It's when he--or it may be a
she--is running loose, that I get peeved!"

The Chief sprang impatiently to his feet and strode across the
smoking-room, which was all but empty by this time, to get a
match from a table. He resumed his seat with a grunt of
exasperation.

"I can't see light, Okewood!" he sighed, shaking his head.

"But is this all you've got against Nur-el-Din?" asked Desmond.

"No," answered the other slowly, "it isn't. If it were, I need
not have called you in. We would have interned or deported her.
No, we've traced back to her a line leading straight from the
only member of the new organization we have been able to lay by
the heels."

"Then you've made an arrest?"

The Chief nodded.

"A fortnight ago... a respectable, retired English business man,
by name of Basil Bellward... taken with the goods on him, as the
saying is..."

"An Englishman, by Jove!"

"It's hardly correct to call him an Englishman, though he's posed
as an English business man for so long that one is almost
justified in doing so. As ,a matter of fact, the fellow is a
German named Wolfgang Bruhl and it is my belief that he was
planted in this country at least a dozen years ago solely for the
purpose of furnishing him with good, respectable credentials for
an emergency like this."

"But sorely if you found evidence of his connection with this
gang of spies, it should be easy to get a clue to the rest of the
crowd?"

"Not so easy as you think," the Chief replied. "The man who
organized this system of espionage is a master at his craft. He
has been careful to seal both ends of every connection, that is
to say, though we found evidence of Master Bellward-Bruhl being
in possession of highly confidential information relating to the
movements of troops, we discovered nothing to show whence he
received it or how or where he was going to forward it. But we
did find a direct thread leading straight back to Nur-el-Din."

"Really," said Desmond, "that rather complicates things for her,
doesn't it?"

"It was in the shape of a letter of introduction, in French,
without date or address, warmly recommending the dancer to our
friend, Bellward."

"Who is this letter from?"

"It is simply signed 'P.', but you shall see it for yourself when
you get the other documents in the case."

"But surely, sir, such a letter might be presented in perfectly
good faith..."

"It might, but not this one. This letter, as an expert has
ascertained beyond all doubt, is written on German manufactured
note-paper of a very superior quality;, the writing is stiff and
angular and not French: and lastly, the French in which it is
phrased, while correct, is unusually pompous and elaborate."

"Then..."

"The letter was, in all probability, written by a German!"

There was a moment's silence. Desmond was thinking despairingly
of the seeming hopelessness of untangling this intricate webwork
of tangled threads.

"And this murder, sir," he began.

The Chief shrugged his shoulders.

"The motive, Okewood, I am searching for the motive. I can see
none except the highly improbable one of Miss Mackwayte being my
confidential secretary. In that case why murder the father, a
harmless old man who didn't even know that his daughter is in my
service, why kill him, I ask you, and spare the girl? On the
other hand, I believe the man Barney's story, and can see that
Marigold does, too. When I first heard the news of the murder
over the telephone this morning, I had a kind of intuition that
we should discover in it a thread leading back to this mesh of
espionage. Is it merely a coincidence that a hair, resembling
Nur-el-Din's, is found adhering to the straps with which Barbara
Mackwayte was bound? I can't think so... and yet..."

"But do you believe then, that Nur-el-Din murdered-old Mackwayte?
My dear Chief, the idea is preposterous..."

The Chief rose from his chair with a sigh.

"Nothing is preposterous in our work, Okewood," he replied. "But
it's 3.25, and my French colleague hates to be kept waiting."

"I thought you were seeing Strangwise, at two?" asked Desmond.

"I put him off until six o'clock," replied the Chief, "he knows
Nur-el-Din, and he may be able to give Marigold some pointers
about this affair. You're off to see Miss Mackwayte now, I
suppose. You know where she's staying? Good. Well, I'll say
good-bye, Okewood. I shan't see you again..."

"You won't see me again? How do you mean, sir?"

"Because you're going back to France!"

"Going back to France? When?"

"By the leave-boat to-night!"

Desmond smiled resignedly.

"My dear Chief," he said, "you must be more explicit. What am I
going back to France for?"

"Why, now I come to think of it," replied the Chief, "I never
told you. You're going back to France to be killed, of course!"

"To be killed!"

Desmond looked blankly at the other's blandly smiling face.

"Two or three days from now," said the Chief, "you will be killed
in action in France. I thought of making it a shell. But we'll
have it a machine gun bullet if you like. Whichever you prefer;
it's all the same to me!"

He laughed at the dawn of enlightenment in Desmond's eyes.

"I see," said Desmond.

"I hope you don't mind," the Chief went on more seriously, "but I
know you have no people to consider except your brother and his
wife. She's in America, and Francis can't possibly hear about it.
So you needn't worry on that score. Or do you?"

Desmond laughed.

"No-o-o!" he said slowly, "but I'm rather young to die. Is it
absolutely necessary for me to disappear?"

"Absolutely!" responded the Chief firmly.

"But how will we manage it?" asked Desmond.

"Catch the leave-boat to-night and don't worry. You will receive
your instructions in due course."

"But whey shall I see you again?"

The Chief chuckled.

"Depends entirely on yourself, Okewood," he retorted. "When
you're through with your job, I expect. In the meantime, Miss
Mackwayte will act between us. On that point also you will be
fully instructed. And now I must fly!"

"But I say, sir," Desmond interposed hastily. "You haven't told
me what I am to do. What part am I to play in this business
anyway?"

"To-morrow," said the Chief, buttoning up his goat, "you become
Mr. Basil Bellward!"


CHAPTER VIII. THE WHITE PAPER PACKAGE

A taxi was waiting in Pall Mall outside the club and Desmond
hailed it, though secretly wondering what the driver would think
of taking him out to Seven Kings. Rather to his surprise, the man
was quite affable, took the address of the house where Barbara
was staying with her friends and bade Desmond "hop in."
Presently, for the second time that day, he was heading for the
Mils End Road.

As they zigzagged in and out of the traffic, Desmond's thoughts
were busy with the extraordinary mission entrusted to him. So he
was to sink his own identity and don that of an Anglo-German
business man, his appearance, accent, habits, everything. The
difficulties of the task positively made him cold with fear. The
man must have relations, friends, business acquaintances who
would be sufficiently familiar with his appearance and manner to
penetrate, at any rate in the long run, the most effective
disguise. What did Bellward look like? Where did lie live? How
was he, Desmond, to disguise himself to resemble him? And, above
all, when this knotty problem of make-up had been settled, how
was he to proceed? What should be his first step to pick out from
among all the millions of London's teeming populace the one
obscure individual who headed and directed this gang of spies?

Why hadn't he asked the Chief all these questions? What an
annoying man the Chief was to deal with to be sure! All said and
done, what had he actually told Desmond? That there was a German
Secret service organization spying on the movements of troops to
France, that this man, Basil Bellward, who had been arrested, was
one of the gang and that the dancer, Nur-el-Din, was in some way
implicated in the affair! And that was the extent of his
confidence! On the top of all this fog of obscurity rested the
dense cloud surrounding the murder of old Mackwayte with the
unexplained, the fantastic, clue of that single hair pointing
back to Nur-el-Din.

Desmond consoled himself finally by saying that the would be able
too get some light on his mission from Barbara Mackwayte, whom he
judged to be in the Chief's confidence. But here he was doomed to
disappointment. Barbara could tell him practically ;nothing save
what he already knew, that they were to work together in this
affair. Like him, she was waiting for her instructions.

Barbara received him in a neat little suburban drawing-room in
the house of her friends, who lived a few streets away from the
Mackwaytes. She was wearing a plainly-made black crepe de chine
dress which served to accentuate the extreme pallor of her face,
the only outward indication of the great shock she had sustained.
She was perfectly calm and collected, otherwise, and she stopped
Desmond who would have murmured some phrases of condolence.

"Ah, no, please," she said, "I don't think I can speak about it
yet."

She pulled a chair over for him arid began to talk about the
Chief.

"There's not the least need for you to worry," she said with a
little woeful smile, like a sun-ray piercing a rain-cloud, "if
the Chief says 'Go back to France and wait for instructions,' you
may be sure that everything is arranged, and you will receive
your orders in due course. So shall I. That's the Chief all over.
Until you know him, you think he loves mystery for mystery's
sake. It isn't that at all. He just doesn't trust us. He trusts
nobody!"

"But that hardly semis fair to us..." began Desmond.

"It's merely a precaution," replied Barbara, "the Chief takes no
risks. I've not the least doubt that he has decided to tell you
nothing whatsoever about your part until you are firmly settled
in your new role. I'm perfectly certain that every detail of your
part has already been worked out."

"Oh, that's not possible," said Desmond. "Why, he didn't know
until an hour ago that I was going to take on this job."

Barbara laughed.

"The Chief has taught me a lot about judging men by their looks,"
she said: "Personally, if I'd been in the Chief's places I should
have gone ahead without consulting you, too."

The girl spoke with such directness that there was not the least
suggestion of a compliment in her remark, but Desmond blushed to
the roots of his hair. Barbara noticed it and added hastily:

"I'm not trying to pay you a compliment: I'm just judging by your
type. I believe I can always tell the man that will take on any
job, however dangerous, and carry it through to the end."

Desmond blushed more furiously than ever.

He made haste to divert the conversation into a safer channel.

"Well," he said slowly, "seeing that you and I were intended to
work together, it seems to me to be a most extraordinary
coincidence our meeting like that last night..."

"It was more than a coincidence," said Barbara, shaking her dark
brown head. "Forty-eight hours ago I'd never heard of you, then
the Chief gave me a telegram to send to your Divisional General
summoning you home, after that he told me that we were to work
together, and a few hours later I run into you in Nur-el-Din's
dressing-room..."

She broke off suddenly, her gray eyes big with fear. She darted
across the room to an ormolu table as which her handbag was
lying. With astonishment, Desmond watched her unceremoniously
spill out the contents on to the table and rake hastily amongst
the collection of articles which a pretty girl carries round in
her bag.

Presently she raised herself erect and turning, faced the
officer. She was trembling as though with cold and when she
spoke, her voice was low and husky.

"Gone!" she whispered.

"Have you lost anything" Desmond asked anxiously.

"How could I have forgotten it?" she went on as though he had not
spoken, "how could I have forgotten it? Nearly twelve hours
wasted, and it explains everything. What will the Chief think of
me!"

Slowly she sank down on the sofa where she had been sitting,
then, without any warning, dropped her head into her hands and
burst into tears.

Desmond went over to her.

"Please don't cry," he said gently, "you have borne up so bravely
against this terrible blow; you must try and not let it overwhelm
you."

All her business-like calm had disappeared now she was that most
distracting of all pictures of woman, a pretty girl overwhelmed
with grief. She crouched curled upon the sofa, with shoulders
heaving, sobbing as though her heart would break.

"Perhaps you would like me to leave you?" Desmond asked. "Let me
ring for your friends... I am sure you would rather be alone!"

She raised a tear-stained face to his, her long lashes
glittering.

"No, no," she said, "don't go, don't go! I want your help. This
is such a dark and dreadful business, more than I ever realized.
Oh, my poor daddy, my poor daddy!"

Again she hid her face in her hands and cried whilst Desmond
stood erect by her aide, compassionate but very helpless.

After a little, she dabbed her eyes with a tiny square of
cambric, and sitting up, surveyed the other.

"I must go to the Chief at once," she said, "it is most urgent.
Would you ring and ask the maid to telephone for a taxi?"

"I have one outside," answered Desmond. "But won't you tell me
what has happened"

"Why," said Barbara, "it has only just dawned on me why our house
was broken into last night and poor daddy so cruelly murdered!
Whoever robbed the house did not come after our poor little bits
of silver or daddy's savings in the desk in the dining room. They
came after something that I had!"

"And what was that" asked Desmond.

Then Barbara told him of her talk with Nur-el-Din in the dancer's
dressing-room on the previous evening and of the package which
Nur-el-Din had entrusted to her care.

"This terrible business put it completely out of my head," said
Barbara. "In the presence of the police this morning, I looked
over my bedroom and even searched my hand-bag which the police
sent back to me this afternoon without finding that the burglars
had stolen anything. It was only just now, when we were talking
about our meeting in Nur-el-Din's room last night, that her
little package suddenly flashed across my mind. And then I looked
through my handbag again and convinced myself that it was not
there."

"But are you sure the police haven't taken it?"

"Absolutely certain," was the reply. "I remember perfectly what
was in my hand-bag this morning when I went through it, and the
same things are on that table over there now."

"Do you know what was in this package!" said Desmond.

"Just a small silver box, oblong and quite plain, about so big,"
she indicated the size with her hands, "about as large as a
cigarette-box. Nur-el-Din said it was a treasured family
possession of hers, and she was afraid of losing it as she
traveled about so much. She asked me to say nothing about it and
to keep it until the war was over or until she asked me for it."

"Then," said Desmond, "this clears Nur-el-Din!"

"What do you mean," said Barbara, looking up.

"Simply that she wouldn't have broken into year place and killed
your father in order to recover her own package..."

"But why on earth should Nur-el-Din be suspected of such a
thing?"

"Have you heard nothing about this young lady from the Chief?"

"Nothing. I had not thought anything about her until daddy
discovered an old friend in her last night and introduced me."

The Chief's infernal caution again! thought Desmond, secretly
admiring the care with which that remarkable man, in his own
phrase, "sealed both ends of every connection."

"If I'm to work with this girl," said Desmond to himself, "I'm
going to have all the cards on the table here and now," so
forthwith he told her of the Chief's suspicions of the dancer,
the letter recommending her to Bellward found when the cheese
merchant had been arrested, and lastly of the black hair which
had been discovered on the thongs with which Barbara had been
fastened.

"And now," Desmond concluded, "the very next thing we must do is
to go to the Chief and tell him about this package of
Nur-el-Din's that is missing." Barbara interposed quickly.

"It's no use your coming, " she said. "The Chief won't see you.
When he has sent a man on his mission, he refuses to see him
again until the work has been done. If he wishes to send for you
or communicate with you, he will. But it's useless for you to try
and see him yourself. You can drop me at the office!"

Desmond was inclined to agree with her on this point and said so.

"There is one thing especially that puzzles me, Miss Mackwayte,"
Desmond observed as they drove westward again, "and that its, how
anyone could have known about your having this box of
Nur-el-Din's. Was there anybody else in the room when she gave
you the package?"

"No," said Barbara:, "I don't think so. Wait a minute, though,
Nur-el-Din's maid must have come in very shortly after for I
remember the opened the door when Captain Strangwise came to tell
me daddy was waiting to take me home."

"Do you remember if Nur-el-Din actually mentioned the package in
the presence of the maid!"

"As far as I can recollect just as the maid opened the door to
Captain Strangwise, Nur-el-Din was impressing on me again to take
great care of the package. I don't think she actually mentioned
the box but I remember her pointing at my bag where I had put the
package."

"The maid didn't see Nur-el-Din give you the box?"

"No, I'm sure of that. The room was empty save for us two. It was
only just before Captain Strangwise knocked that I noticed Marie
arranging Nur-el-Din's dresses. She must have come in afterwards
without my seeing her."

"Well then, this girl, Marie, didn't see the dancer give you the
box but she heard her refer to it. Is that right?"

"Yes, and, of course, Captain Strangwise..."

"What about him?"

"He must have heard what Nur-el-Din was saying, too!"

Desmond rubbed his chin.

"I say, you aren't going to implicate old Strangwise, too, are
you?" he asked.

Barbara did not reflect his smile.

"He seems to know Nur-el-Din pretty well," she said, "and I'll
tell you something else, that woman's afraid of your friend, the
Captain!"

"What do you mean?" asked Desmond.

"I was watching her in the glass last night as he was talking to
her while you and I and daddy were chatting in the corner. I
don't know what he said to her, but she glanced over her shoulder
with a look of terror in her eyes. I was watching her face in the
glass. She looked positively hunted!"

The taxi stopped. Desmond jumped out and helped his companion to
alight.

"Au revoir." she said to him, "never fear, you and I will meet
very soon again!"

With that she was gone. Desmond looked at his watch. It pointed
to a quarter to six.

"Now I wonder what time the leave-train starts tonight," he said
aloud, one foot on the sideboard of the taxi.

"At 7.45, sir," said a voice.

"Desmond glanced round him. Then he saw it was the taxi-driver
who had spoken.

"7.45, eh?" said Desmond. "From Victoria, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir," said the taxi-man.

By Jove, I haven't much time," ejaculated the officer "and there
are some things I want to get before I go back across the
Channel. And I shall have to see the Railway Transport Officer
about my pass."

"That's all right, sir," said the taxi-man, "I have your papers
here"; he handed Desmond a couple of slips of paper which he took
from his coat-pocket; "those will take yon back to France all
right, I think you'll find!"

Desmond looked at the papers: they were quite in order and
correctly filled up with his name, rank and regiment, and date.

The taxi-man cut short any further question by saying:

"If you'll get into the cab again, sir, I'll drive you where you
want to go, and then wait while you have your dinner and take you
to the station. By the way, your dinner's ordered too!"

"But who the devil are you?" asked Desmond in amazement.

"On special service, the same as yon, sir!" said the man with a
grin and Desmond understood.

Really, the Chief was extremely thorough.

They went to the stores in the Haymarket, to Fortnum and Mason's,
and lastly, to a small, grubby shop at the back of Mayfair where
Desmond and his brother had bought their cigarettes for years
past. Desmond purchased a hundred of their favored brand, the
Dionysus, as a reserve for his journey back to France, and stood
chatting over old times with the fat, oily-faced Greek manager as
the latter tied up his cigarettes into a clean white paper
parcel, neatly sealed up with red sealing wax.

Then Desmond drove back to the Nineveh Hotel where he left his
taxi-driving colleague in the courtyard on the understanding that
at 7.25 the taxi would be waiting to drive him to the station.

Desmond went straight upstairs to his room to put his kit
together. In the strong, firmly woven web spread by the Chief, he
felt as helpless as a fly caught in a spider's mesh. He had no
idea of what his plans were. He only knew that he was going back
to France, and that it was his business to get on the leave-boat
that night.

As he passed along the thickly carpeted, silent corridor to his
room, he saw the door of Strangwise's room standing ajar. He
pushed open the door and walked in unceremoniously. A suitcase
stood open on the floor with Strangwise bending over it. At his
elbow was a table crowded with various parcels, a case of razors,
different articles of kit, and some books. Desmond halted at the
door, his box of cigarettes dangling from his finger.

"Hullo, Maurice," he said, "are you off, too?"

Strangwise spun round sharply. The blood had fished to his face,
staining it with a dark, angry flush.

"My God, how you startled me!" he exclaimed rather testily. "I
never heard you come in!"

He turned rather abruptly and went on with his packing. He struck
Desmond as being rather annoyed at the intrusion; the latter had
never seen him out of temper before.

"Sorry if I butted in," said Desmond, sliding his box of
cigarettes off his finger on to the littered table and sitting
down on a chair. "I came in to say good-bye. I'm going back to
France to-night!"

Maurice looked round quickly. He appeared to be quite his old
self again and was all smiles now.

"So soon?" he said. "Why, I thought you were getting a job at the
War Office!"

Desmond shook his head.

"Not good enough," he replied, "it's back to the sandbags for
mine. But where are you off to?"

"Got a bit of leave; the Intelligence folk seem to be through
with me at last, so they've given me six weeks!"

"Going to the country" asked Desmond.

Strangwise nodded.

"Yep," he said, "down to Essex to see if I can get a few duck or
snipe on the fens. I wish you were coming with me!"

"So do I, old man," echoed Desmond heartily. Then he added in a
serious voice:

"By the way, I haven't seen you since last night. What a shocking
affair this is about old Mackwayte, isn't it? Are there any
developments, do you know?"

Strangwise very deliberately fished a cigarette out of his case
which was lying open on the table and lit it before replying.

"A very dark affair," he said, blowing out a cloud of smoke and
flicking the match into the grate. "You are discreet, I know,
Okewood. The Intelligence people had me up this morning... to
take my evidence..."

Strangwise's surmise about Desmond's discretion was perfectly
correct. With Desmond Okewood discretion was second nature, and
therefore he answered with feigned surprise: "Your evidence about
what? About our meeting the Mackwaytes last night?"

After he had spoken he realized he had blundered. Surely, after
all, the Chief would have told Strangwise about their
investigations at Seven Kings. still...

"No," replied Strangwise,, "but about Nur-el-Din!"

The Chief had kept his own counsel about their morning's work.
Desmond was glad now that he had dissimulated.

"You see, I know her pretty well," Strangwise continued, "between
ourselves, I got rather struck on the lady when she was touring
in Canada some years ago, and in fact I spent so much more money
that I could afford on her that I had to discontinue the
acquaintance. Then I met her here when I got away from Germany a
month ago; she was lonely, so I took her about a bit. Okewood,
I'm afraid I was rather indiscreet."

"How do you mean?" Desmond asked innocently.

"Well," said Strangwise slowly, contemplating the end of his
cigarette, "it appears that the lady is involved in certain
activities which considerably interest our Intelligence. But
there, I mustn't say any more!"

"But how on earth is Nur-el-what's her name concerned in this
murder, Maurice?"

Strangwise shrugged his shoulders.

"Ah, you'd better ask the police. But I tell you she'll be
getting into trouble if she's not careful!"

Throughout this conversation Desmond seemed to hear in his ears
Barbara's words: "That woman's afraid of your friend!" He divined
that for some reason or other, Strangwise wanted to create a bad
impression in his mind about the dancer. He scanned Maurice's
face narrowly. Its impenetrability was absolute. There was
nothing to be gleaned from those careless, smiling features.

"Well," said Desmond, getting up, "nous verrons. I shall have to
make a bolt for it now if I don't want to miss my train.
Good-bye, Maurice, and I hope you'll get some birds!"

"Thanks, old man. Au revoir, and take care of yourself. My
salaams to the General!".

They shook hands warmly, then Desmond grabbed his box of
cigarettes in its neat white wrapper with the bold red seals and
hurried off to his room.

Strangwise stood for a moment gazing after him. He was no longer
the frank, smiling companion of a minute before. His mouth was
set hard and his chin stuck out at a defiant angle.

He bent over the table and picked up a white paper package sealed
with bold red seals. He poised it for a moment in his hands while
a flicker of a smile stole into the narrow eyes and played for an
instant round the thin lips. Then, with a quick movement, he
thrust the little package into the side pocket of his tunic and
buttoned the flap.

Whistling a little tune, he went on with his packing.


CHAPTER IX. METAMORPHOSIS


It was a clear, cold night. A knife-edge icy wind blew from the
north-east and kept the lanyards dismally flapping on the
flag-mast over the customs house. The leave train lay in the
station within a biscuit's throw of the quayside and the black,
blank Channel beyond, a long line of cheerfully illuminated
windows that to those returning from leave seemed as the last
link with home.

The Corporal of Military Police, who stood at the gangway
examining the passes, stopped Desmond Okewood as the latter held
out his pass into the rays of the man's lantern.

"There was a message for you, sir," said the Corporal. "The
captain of the Staff boat would h-esteem it a favor, sir, if you
would kindly go to his cabin immediately on h-arriving on board,
sir!"

"Very good, Corporal!" answered the officer and passed up the
gang plank, enviously regarded by the press of brass-hats and
red-tabs who, for the most part, had a cramped berth below or
cold quarters on deck to look forward to.

A seaman directed Desmond to the Captain's cabin. It was built
out just behind the bridge, a snug, cheery room with bright
chintz curtains over the carefully screened portholes, a couple
of comfortable benches with leather seats along the walls, a
small bunk, and in the middle of the floor a table set out with a
bottle of whiskey, a siphon and some glasses together with a box
of cigars.

The Captain was sitting there chatting to the pilot, a short,
enormously broad man with a magenta face and prodigious hands
which were folded round a smoking glass of toddy.

"Pick 'em up? Rescue 'em?" the pilot ejaculated, as Desmond
walked in, "I'd let 'em sink, every man Jack o' them, the
outrageous murderin' scoundrels. I don't like to hear you
a-talking of such nonsense, Cap'en!"

On Desmond's entrance the Captain broke off the conversation. He
proved to be a trimly-built man of about fifty with a grizzled
beard, and au air of quiet efficiency which is not uncommonly
found in seamen. The pilot drained his glass and, scrambling to
his feet, nodded to Desmond and stumped out into the cold night
air.

"Jawin' about the U boats!" said the Captain, with a jerk of his
head towards the cabin door, "I don't know what the feelings of
your men in the trenches are towards Fritz, Major, but I tell you
that no German will dare set foot in any coast port of the United
Kingdom in my life-time or yours, either! Accommodation's a bit
narrow on board. I thought maybe you'd care to spend the night up
here!"

"Any orders about me?" asked Desmond.

The Captain went a shade deeper mahogany in the face.

"Oh no," he replied, with an elaborate assumption of innocence.
"But won't you mix yourself a drink? And try one of my cigars, a
present from a skipper friend of mine who sailed into Tilbury
from Manila last week."

"Desmond sat in the snug cabin, puffing a most excellent cigar
and sipping his whiskey and soda while, amid much shouting of
seamen and screaming of windlasses, the staff boat got clear.
Presently they were gliding past long low moles and black,
inhospitable lighthouses, threading their way through the dark
shapes of war craft of all kinds into the open Channel. There was
a good deal of swell, but the sea was calm, and the vessel soon
steadied down to regular rise and fall.

They had been steaming for nearly an hour when, through the open
door of the cabin, Desmond saw a seaman approach the captain on
the bridge. He handed the skipper a folded paper.

"From the wireless operator, sir!" Desmond heard him say.

The skipper scanned it. Then the engine telegraph rang sharply,
there was the sound of churning water, and the vessel slowed
down. The next moment the Captain appeared at the door of the
cabin.

"I'm afraid we're going to lose you, Major," he said pleasantly,
"a destroyer is coming up to take you off. There was a wireless
from the Admiral about you."

"Where are they going to take me, do you know?" asked Desmond.

The Captain shook his head.

"I haven't an idea. I've only got to hand you over!"

He grinned and added:

"Where's your kit?"

"In the hold, I expect!" answered Desmond. "The porter at
Victoria told me not to worry about it, and that I should find it
on the other side. And, oh damn it!--I've got a hundred
cigarettes in my kit, too! I bought them specially for the
journey!"

"Well, take some of my cigars," said the skipper hospitably, "for
your traps'll have to go to France this trip, Major. There's no
time to get 'em up now. I'll pass the word to the Military
Landing Officer over there about 'em, if you like. He'll take
care of 'em for you. Now will you come with me?"

Desmond scrambled into his coat and followed the Captain down the
steps to the deck. A little distance away from the vessel, the
long shape of a destroyer was dimly visible tossing to and fro in
the heavy swell. A ladder had been let down over the side of the
steamer, and at its foot a boat, manned by a number of heavily
swathed and muffled forms, was pitching.

A few officers stood by the rail watching the scene with
interest. The skipper adroitly piloted Desmond past them and
fairly thrust him out on to the ladder.

Desmond took the hint and with a hasty "Good night" to the
friendly captain, staggered down the swaying ladder and was
helped into the boat. The boat shoved off, the bell of the engine
telegraph on the steamer resounded sharply, and the vessel
resumed her interrupted voyage whilst the rowing boat was headed
towards the destroyer. On board the latter vessel an officer met
Desmond at the rail and piloted him to the ward-room. Almost
before they got there, the destroyer was under way.

The officer who had welcomed him proved to be the second in
command, a joyous person who did the honors of the tiny ward-room
with the aplomb of a Commander in a super-Dreadnought. He mixed
Desmond a drink and immediately started to converse about life at
the front without giving the other a chance of asking whither
they were bound.

The suspense was not of long duration, however, for in about half
an hour's time, the destroyer slowed down and Desmond's host
vanished. When he reappeared, it was to summon Desmond on deck.

They lay aside a mole by some steps cut in the solid concrete.
Here Desmond's host took leave of him.

"There should be a car waiting for you up there," he said.

There on top of the mole, exposed to the keen blast of the wind,
a large limousine was standing. A chauffeur, who looked blue with
cold, got down from his seat as Desmond emerged from the stairs
and touched his cap.

"Major Okewood?" he asked.

"That's my name!" said Desmond.

"If you'll get in, sir, we'll start at once!" the man replied.

Befogged and bewildered, Desmond entered the car, which
cautiously proceeded along the breakwater, with glimpses of black
water and an occasional dim light on either hand. They bumped
over the railway-lines and rough cobblestones of a dockyard,
glided through a slumbering town, and so gradually drew out into
the open country where the car gathered speed and fairly raced
along the white, winding road. Desmond had not the faintest idea
of their whereabouts or ultimate destination. He was fairly
embarked on the great adventure now, and he was philosophically
content to let Fate have its way with him. He found himself
wondering rather indolently what the future had in store.

The car slowed down and the chauffeur switched the headlights on.
Their blinding glare revealed some white gate-posts at the
entrance of a quiet country station. Desmond looked at his watch.
It was half-past one. The car stopped at the entrance to the
booking-office where a man in an overcoat and bowler was waiting.

"This way, Major, please," said the man in the bowler, and led
the way into the dark and silent station. At the platform a short
train consisting of an engine, a Pullman car and a brakesman's
van stood, the engine under steam. By the glare from the furnace
Desmond recognized his companion. It was Matthews, the Chief's
confidential clerk.

Matthews held open the door of the Pullman for Desmond and
followed him into the carriage. A gruff voice in the night
shouted:

"All right, Charley!" a light was waved to and fro, and the
special pulled out of the echoing station into the darkness
beyond.

In the corner of, the Pullman a table was laid for supper. There
was a cold chicken, a salad, and a bottle of claret. On another
table was a large tin box and a mirror with a couple of electric
lights before it. At this table was seated a small man with gray
hair studying a large number of photographs.

"If you will have your supper, Major Okewood, sir," said
Matthews, "Mr. Crook here will get to work. We've not got too
much time."

The sea air had made Desmond ravenously hungry. He sat down
promptly and proceeded to demolish the chicken and make havoc of
the salad. Also he did full justice to the very excellent St.
Estephe.

As he ate he studied Matthews, who was one of those undefinable
Englishmen one meets in tubes and 'buses, who might be anything
from a rate collector to a rat catcher. He had sandy hair
plastered limply across his forehead, a small moustache, and a
pair of watery blue eyes. Mr. Crook, who continued his study of
his assortment of photographs without taking the slightest notice
of Desmond, was a much more alert looking individual, with a
shock of iron gray hair brushed back and a small pointed beard.

"Matthew's," said Desmond as he supped, "would it be indiscreet
to ask where we are?"

"In Kent, Major," replied Matthews.

"What station was that we started from?"

"Faversham."

"And where are we going, might I inquire?"

"To Cannon Street, sir!"

"And from there?"

Mr. Matthews coughed discreetly.

"I can't really say, sir, I'm sure! A car will meet you there and
I can go home to bed."

The ends sealed again! thought Desmond. What a man of caution,
the Chief!

"And this gentleman here, Matthews?" asked Desmond, lighting one
of the skipper's cigars.

"That, sir, is Mr. Crook, who does any little jobs we require in
the way of make-up. Our expert on resemblances, if I may put it
that way, sir, for we really do very little in the way of
disguises. Mr. Crook is an observer of what I may call people's
points, sir, their facial appearance, their little peculiarities
of manner, of speech, of gait. Whenever there is any question of
a disguise, Mr. Crook is called in to advise as to the
possibilities of success. I believe I am correct in saying,
Crook, that you have been engaged on the Major here for some
time. Isn't it so?"

Crook looked up a minute from his table.

"That's right," he said shortly, and resumed his occupation of
examining the photographs.

"And what's your opinion about this disguise of mine?" Desmond
asked him.

"I can make a good job of you, Major," said the expert, "and so I
reported to the Chief. You'll want to do your hair a bit
different and let your beard grow, and then, if you pay attention
to the lessons I shall give you, in a week or two, you'll be this
chap here," and he tapped the photograph in his hand, "to the
life."

So saying he handed Desmond the photograph. It was the portrait
of a man about forty years of age, of rather a pronounced
Continental type, with a short brown beard, a straight, rather
well-shaped nose and gold-rimmed spectacles. His hair was cut en
brosse, and he was rather full about the throat and neck. Without
a word, Desmond stretched out his hand and gathered up a sheaf of
other photos, police photos of Mr. Basil Bellward, front face and
profile seen from right and left, all these poses shown on the
same picture, some snapshots and various camera studies. Desmond
shook his head in despair. He was utterly unable to detect the
slightest resemblance between himself and this rather commonplace
looking type of business man.

"Now if you'd just step into the compartment at the end of the
Pullman, Major," said Crook, "you'll find some civilian clothes
laid out. Would you mind putting them on? You needn't trouble
about the collar and tie, or coat and waistcoat for the moment.
Then we'll get along with the work."

The train rushed swaying on through the darkness. Desmond was
back in the Pullman car in a few minutes arrayed in a pair of
dark gray tweed trousers, a white shirt and black boots and
socks. A cut-away coat and waistcoat of the same tweed stuff, a
black bowler hat of rather an old-fashioned and staid pattern,
and a black overcoat with a velvet collar, he left in the
compartment where he changed.

He found that Crook had opened his tin box and set out a great
array of grease paints, wigs, twists of tow of various colors,
and a number of pots and phials of washes and unguents together
with a whole battery of fine paint brushes. In his hand he held a
pair of barber's clippers and the tips of a comb and a pair of
scissors protruded from his vest pocket.

Crook whisked a barber's wrap round Desmond and proceeded, with
clippers and scissors, to crop and trim his crisp black hair.

"Tst-tst" he clicked with his tongue. "I didn't realize your hair
was so dark, Major. It'll want a dash of henna to lighten it."

The man worked with incredible swiftness. His touch was light and
sure, and Desmond, looking at his reflection in the glass,
wondered to see what fine; delicate hands this odd little expert
possessed. Matthews sat and smoked in silence and watched the
operation, whilst the special ran on steadily Londonwards.

When the clipping was done, Crook smeared some stuff on a towel
and wrapped it round Desmond's head.

"That'll brighten your hair up a lot, sir. Now for a crepe beard
just to try the effect. We've got to deliver you at Cannon Street
ready for the job, Mr. Matthews and me, but you won't want to
worry with this nasty messy beard once you get indoors. You can
grow your own beard, and I'll pop in and henna it a bit for you
every now and then."

There was the smart of spirit gum on Desmond's cheeks and Crook
gently applied a strip of tow to his face. He had taken the
mirror away so that Desmond could no longer see the effect of the
gradual metamorphosis.

"A mirror only confuses me," said the expert, breathing hard as
he delicately adjusted the false beard, "I've got this picture
firm in my head, and I want to get it transferred to your face.
Somehow a mirror puts me right off. It's the reality I want."

As he grew more absorbed in his work, he ceased to speak
altogether. He finished the beard, trimmed the eyebrows, applied
a dash of henna with a brush, leaning backwards continually to
survey the effect. He sketched in a wrinkle or two round the eyes
with a pencil, wiped them out, then put them in again. Then he
fumbled in his tin box, and produced two thin slices of grey
rubber.

"Sorry," he said, "I'm afraid you'll have to wear these inside
your cheeks to give the effect of roundness. You've got an oval
face and the other man has a round one. I can get the fullness of
the throat by giving you a very low collar, rather open and a
size too large for you."

Desmond obediently slipped the two slices of rubber into his
mouth and tucked them away on either side of his upper row of
teeth. They were not particularly uncomfortable to wear.

"There's your specs," said Crook, handing him a spectacle case,
"and there's the collar. Now if you'll put on the rest of the
duds, we'll have a look at you, sir."

Desmond went out and donned the vest and coat and overcoat, and,
thus arrayed, returned to the Pullman, hat in hand.

Crook called out to him as he entered

"Not so springy in the step, sir, if you please. Remember you're
forty-three years of age with a Continental upbringing. You'll
have to walk like a German, toes well turned out and down on the
heel every time. So, that's better. Now, have a look at
yourself!"

He turned and touched a blind. A curtain rolled up with a click,
disclosing a full length mirror immediately opposite Desmond.

Desmond recoiled in astonishment. He could scarcely credit his
own eyes. The glass must be bewitched, he thought for a moment,
quite overwhelmed by the suddenness of the shock. For instead of
the young face set on a slight athletic body that the glass was
wont to show him, he saw a square, rather solid man in ugly,
heavy clothes, with a brown silky beard and gold spectacles. The
disguise was baffling in its completeness. The little wizard, who
had effected this change and who now stood by, bashfully twisting
his fingers about, had transformed youth into middle age. And the
bewildering thing was that the success of the disguise did not
lie so much in the eternal adjuncts, the false beard, the
pencilled wrinkles, as in the hideous collar, the thick padded
clothes, in short, in the general appearance.

For the first time since his talk with the Chief at the United
Service Club, Desmond felt his heart grow light within him. If
such miracles were possible, then he could surmount the other
difficulties as well.

"Crook," he said, "I think you've done wonders. What do you say,
Matthews?"

"I've seen a lot of Mr. Crook's work in my day, sir," answered
the clerk, "but nothing better than this. It's a masterpiece,
Crook, that's what it is."

"I'm fairly well satisfied," the expert murmured modestly, "and I
must say the Major carries it off very well. But how goes the
enemy, Matthews?"

"It's half past two," replied, the latter, "we should reach
Cannon Street by three. She's running well up to time, I think."

"We've got time for a bit of a rehearsal," said Crook. "Just
watch me, will you please, Major, and I'll try and give you an
impression of our friend. I've been studying him at Brixton for
the past twelve days, day and night almost, you might say, and I
think I can convey an idea of his manner and walk. The walk is a
very important point. Now, here is Mr. Bellward meeting one of
his friends. Mr. Matthews, you will be the friend!"

Then followed one of the most extraordinary performances that
Desmond had ever witnessed. By some trick of the actor's art, the
shriveled figure of the expert seemed to swell out and thicken,
while his low, gentle voice deepened into a full, metallic
baritone. Of accent in his speech there was none, but Desmond's
ear, trained to foreigners' English, could detect a slight
Continental intonation, a little roll of the "r's," an unfamiliar
sound about those open "o's" of the English tongue, which are so
fatal a trap for foreigners speaking our language. As he watched
Crook, Desmond glanced from time to time at the photograph of
Bellward which he had picked up from the table. He had an
intuition that Bellward behaved and spoke just as the man before
him.

Then, at Crook's suggestion, Desmond assumed the role of
Bellward. The expert interrupted him continually.

"The hands, Major, the hands, you must not keep them down at your
sides. That is military! You must move them when you speak! So
and so!"

Or again:

"You speak too fast. Too... too youthfully, if you understand me,
sir. You are a man of middle age. Life has no further secrets for
you. You are poised and getting a trifle ponderous. Now try
again!"

But the train was slackening speed. They were running between
black masses of squalid houses. As the special thumped over the
bridge across the river, Mr. Crook gathered up his paints and
brushes and photographs and arranged them neatly in his black tin
box.

To Desmond he said:

"I shall be coming along to give you some more lessons very soon,
Major. I wish you could see Bellward for yourself: you are very
apt at this game, and it would save us much time. But I fear
that's impossible."

Even before the special had drawn up alongside the platform at
Cannon Street, Crook and Matthews swung themselves out and
disappeared. When the train stopped, a young man in a bowler hat
presented himself at the door of the Pullman.

"The car is there, Mr. Bellward, sir!" he said, helping Desmond
to alight. Desmond, preparing to assume his new role, was about
to leave the carriage when a sudden thought struck him. What
about his uniform strewn about the compartment where he had
changed? He ran back. The compartment was empty. Not a trace
remained of the remarkable scenes of their night journey.

"This is for you," said the young man, handing Desmond a note as
they walked down the platform.

Outside the station a motor-car with its noisy throbbing awoke
the echoes of the darkened and empty courtyard. Desmond waited
until he was being whirled over the smooth asphalt of the City
streets before he opened the letter.

He found a note and a small key inside the envelope.

"On reaching the house to which you will be conveyed," the note
said, "you will remain indoors until further orders. You can
devote your time to studying the papers you will find in the desk
beside the bed. For the present you need not fear detection as
long as you do not leave the house." Then followed a few rough
jottings obviously for his guidance.

"Housekeeper, Martha, half blind, stupid; odd man, John Hill,
mostly invisible, no risk from either. You are confined to house
with heavy chill. Do not go out until you get the word."

The last sentence was twice underlined.

The night was now pitch-dark. Heavy clouds had come up and
obscured the stars and a drizzle of rain was falling. The car
went forward at a good pace and Desmond, after one or two
ineffectual attempts to make out where they were going, was
lulled by the steady motion into a deep sleep. He was dreaming
fitfully of the tossing Channel as he had seen it but a few hours
before when he came to his senses with a start. He felt a cold
draught of air on his face and his feet were dead with cold.

A figure stood at the open door of the car. It was the chauffeur.

"Here we are, sir," he said.

Desmond stiffly descended to the ground. It was so dark that he
could distinguish nothing, but he felt the grit of gravel under
his feet and he heard the melancholy gurgle of running water. He
took a step forward and groped his way into a little porch
smelling horribly of mustiness and damp. As he did so, he heard a
whirr behind him and the car began to glide off. Desmond shouted
after the chauffeur. Now that he stood on the very threshold of
his adventure, he wanted to cling desperately to this last link
with his old self. But the chauffeur did not or would not hear,
and presently the sound of the engine died away, leaving Desmond
to the darkness, the sad splashing of distant water and his own
thoughts.

And then, for one brief moment, all his courage seemed to ooze
out of him. If he had followed his instinct, he would have turned
and fled into the night, away from that damp and silent house,
away from the ceaseless splashing of waters, back to the warmth
and lights of civilization. But his sense of humor, which is very
often better than courage, came to his rescue.

"I suppose I ought to be in the devil of a rage," he said to
himself, "being kept waiting like this outside my own house!
Where the deuce is my housekeeper? By Gad, I'll ring the place
down!"

The conceit amused him, and he advanced further into the musty
porch hoping to find a bell. But as he did so his ear caught the
distant sound of shuffling feet. The shuffle of feet drew nearer
and presently a beam of light shone out from under the door. A
quavering voice called out:

"Here I am, Mr. Bellward, here I am, sir!"

Then a bolt was drawn back, a key turned, and the door swung
slowly back, revealing an old woman, swathed in a long shawl and
holding high in her hand a lamp as she peered out into the
darkness.

"Good evening, Martha," said Desmond, and stepped into the house.

Save for Martha's lamp, the lobby was in darkness, but light was
streaming into the hall from the half open door of a room leading
off it at the far end. While Martha, wheezing asthmatically,
bolted the front door, Desmond went towards the room where the
light was and walked in.

It was a small sitting-room, lined with bookshelves, illuminated
by an oil lamp which stood on a little table beside a
chintz-covered settee which had been drawn up in front of the
dying fire.

On the settee Nur-el-Din was lying asleep.


CHAPTER X. D. O. R. A. IS BAFFLED

When Barbara reached the Chief's ante-room she found it full of
people. Mr. Marigold was there, chatting with Captain Strangwise
who seemed to be just taking his leave; there was a short, fat,
Jewish-looking man, very resplendently dressed with a large
diamond pin in his cravat and a small, insignificant looking
gentleman with a gray moustache and the red rosette of the Legion
of Honor in his button-hole. Matthews came out of the Chief's
room as Barbara entered the outer office.

"Miss Mackwayte," he said, "we are all so shocked and so very,
sorry..."

"Mr. Matthews," she said hastily in a low voice, "never mind
about that now. I must see the Chief at once. It is most urgent."

Matthews gesticulated with his arm round the room.

"All these people, excepting the officer there, are waiting to
see him, Miss, and he's got a dinner engagement at eight..."

"It is urgent, Mr. Matthews, I tell you. If you won't take my
name in, I shall go in myself!"

"Miss Mackwayte, I daren't interrupt him now. Do you know who's
with him...?"

Strangwise crossed the room to where Barbara was standing.

"I can guess what brings you here, Miss Mackwayte," he said
gently. "I hope you will allow me to express my condolences'...?"

The girl shrank back, almost imperceptibly, yet Strangwise, whose
eyes were fixed on her pale face, noticed the spontaneous recoil.
The sunshine seemed to fade out of his debonair countenance, and
for a moment Barbara Mackwayte saw Maurice Strangwise as very few
people had ever seen him, stern and cold and hard, without a
vestige of his constant smile. But the shadow lifted as quickly
as it had fallen. His face had resumed its habitually engaging
expression as he murmured:

"Believe me, I am truly sorry for you!"

"Thank you, thank you!" Barbara said hastily and brushed past
him. She walked straight across the room to the door of the
Chief's room, turned the handle and walked in.

The room was in darkness save for an electric reading lamp on the
desk which threw a beam of light on the faces of two men thrust
close together in eager conversation. One was the Chief, the
other a face that Barbara knew well from the illustrated papers.

At the sound of the door opening, the Chief sprang to his feet.

"Oh, it's Miss Mackwayte," he said, and added something in a low
voice to the other man who had risen to his feet. "My dear," he
continued aloud to Barbara, "I will see you immediately; we must
not be disturbed now. Matthews should have told you."

"Chief," cried Barbara, her hands clasped convulsively together,
"you must hear me now. What I have to say cannot wait. Oh, you
must hear me!"

The Chief looked as embarrassed as a man usually looks when he is
appealed to in a busy moment by an extremely attractive girl.

"Miss Mackwayte," he said firmly but with great courtesy, "you
must wait outside. I know how unnerved you are by all that you
have gone through, but I am engaged just now. I shall be free
presently."

"It is about my father, Chief," Barbara said in a trembling
voice, "I have found out what they came to get!"

"Ah!" said the Chief and the other man simultaneously.

"We had better hear what she has to say!" said the other man,
"but won't you introduce me first?"

"This is Sir Bristowe Marr, the First Sea Lord," said the Chief,
bringing up a chair for Barbara, "Miss Mackwayte, my secretary,
Admiral!"

Then in a low impassioned voice Barbara told her tale of the
package entrusted to her by Nur-el-Din and its disappearance from
her bedroom on the night of the murder. As she proceeded a deep
furrow appeared between the Chief's bushy eyebrows and he stared
absently at the blotting-pad in front of him. When the girl had
finished her story, the Chief said:

"Lambelet ought to hear this, sir: he's the head of the French
Intelligence, you know. He's outside now. Shall we have him in?
Miss Mackwayte shall tell her story, and you can then hear what
Lambelet has to say about this versatile young dancer."

Without waiting for further permission, he pressed a bell on the
desk and presently Matthews ushered in the small man with the
Legion of Honor whom Barbara had seen in the ante-room.

The Chief introduced the Frenchman and in a few words explained
the situation to him. Then he turned to Barbara:

"Colonel Lambelet speaks English perfectly," he said, "so fire
away and don't be nervous!"

When she had finished, the Chief said, addressing Lambelet:

"What do you make of it, Colonel?"

The little Frenchman made an expressive gesture.

"Madame has become aware of the interest you have been taking in
her movements, mon cher. She seized the opportunity of this
meeting with the daughter of her old friend to get rid of
something compromising, a code or something of the kind, qui
sait? Perhaps this robbery and its attendant murder was only an
elaborate device to pass on some particularly important report of
the movements of your ships... qui sait?"

"Then you are convinced in your own mind, Colonel, that this
woman is a spy?" The clear-cut voice of the First Sea Lord rang
out of the darkness of the room outside the circle of light on
the desk.

"Mail certainement!" replied the Frenchman quietly. "Listen and
you shall hear! By birth she is a Pole, from Warsaw, of good,
perhaps, even, of noble family. I cannot tell you, for her real
name we have not been able to ascertain... parbleu, it is
impossible, with the Boches at Warsaw, hein? We know, however,
that at a very early age, under the name of la petite Marcelle,
she was a member of a troupe of acrobats who called themselves
The Seven Duponts. With this troupe she toured all over Europe.
Bien! About ten years ago, she went out to New York as a singer,
under the name of Marcelle Blondinet, and appeared at various
second-class theatres in the United States and Canada. Then we
lose track of her for some years until 1913, the year before the
war, when the famous Oriental dancer, Nur-el-Din, who has made a
grand success by the splendor of her dresses in America and
Canada, appears at Brussels, scores a triumph and buys a fine
mansion in the outskirts of the capital. She produces herself at
Paris, Bordeaux, Lyons, Marseilles, Madrid, Milan and Rome, but
her home in Brussels, always she returns there, your understand
me, hein? La petite Marcelle of The Seven Duponts, Marcelle
Blondinet of the cafe chantant, has blossomed out into a star of
the first importance."

The Colonel paused and cleared his throat.

"To buy a mansion in Brussels, to run a large and splendid
troupe, requires money. It is the men who pay for these things,
you would say. Quite right, but listen who were the friends of
Madame Nur-el-Din. Bischoffsberg, the German millionaire of
Antwerp, von Wurzburg, of Berne... ah ha! you know that
gentleman, mon cher?" he turned, chuckling, to the Chief who
nodded his acquiescence; "Prince Meddelin of the German Embassy
in Paris and administrator of the German Secret Service funds in
France, and so on and so on. I will not fatigue you with the
list. The direct evidence is coming now.

"When the war broke out in August, 1914, Madame, after finishing
her summer season in Brussels, was resting in her Brussels
mansion. What becomes of her? She vanishes."

"She told Samuel, the fellow who runs the Palaceum, that she
escaped from Brussels!" interposed the Chief.

The Frenchman threw his hands above his head.

"Escaped, escaped? Ah, oui, par exemple, in a German Staff car.
As I have told my colleague here," he went on, addressing the
Admiral, "she escaped to Metz, the headquarters of the Army Group
commanded by the... the... how do you say? the Prince Imperial?"

"The Crown Prince," rectified the Chief.

"Ah, oui,--the Crown Prince. Messieurs, we have absolute
testimony that this woman lived for nearly two years either in
Metz or Berlin, and further, that at Metz, the Crown Prince was a
constant visitor at her house. She was one of the ladies who
nearly precipitated a definite rupture between the Crown Prince
and his wife. Mon Admiral," he went on, addressing the First Sea
Lord again, that this woman should be at large is a direct menace
to the security of this country and of mine. It is only this
morning that I at length received from Paris the facts which I
have just laid before you. It is for you to order your action
accordingly!"

The little Frenchman folded his arms pompously and gazed at the
ceiling.

"How does she explain her movements prior to her coming to this
country" the First Sea Lord asked the Chief.

For an answer the Chief pressed the bell.

"Samuel, who engaged her, is outside. You shall hear her story
from him," he said.

Samuel entered, exuding business acumen, prosperity, geniality.
He nodded brightly to the Chief and stood expectant.

"Ah, Mr. Samuel," said the Chief, " I wanted to see you about
Nur-el-Din. You remember our former conversation on the subject.
Where did she say she went to when she escaped to Brussels?"

"First to Ostend," replied the music-hall proprietor, "and then,
when the general exodus took place from there, to her mother's
country place near Lyons, a village called Sermoise-aux-Roses."

"And what did she say her mother's name was?"

"Madame Blondinet, sir!"

The Frenchman rapped smartly on a little pocketbook which he had
produced and now held open in his hand.

"There, is a Madame Blondinet who has a large farm near
Sermoise-aux-Roses," he said, "and she has a daughter called
Marcelle, who went to America."

"Why then...?" began the First Sea Lord.

"Attendez un instant!"

The Colonel held up a plump hand.

"Unfortunately for Madame Nur-el-Din, this Marcelle Blondinet
spent the whole of her childhood, in fact, the whole of her life
until she was nineteen years of age, on her mother's farm at a
time when this Marcelle Blondinet was touring Europe with The
Seven Duponts. The evidence is absolute. Mademoiselle here heard
the dancer herself confirm it last night!"

"Thank you, Mr. Samuel," said the Chief, "we shan't require you
any more. But I'm afraid your Nur-el-Din will have to break her
contract with you."

"She's done that already, sir!" said Samuel ruefully.

The Chief sprang to his feet excitedly.

"Broken it already?" he cried. "What do you mean? Explain
yourself! Don't stand there staring at me!"

Mr. Samuel looked startled out of his life.

"There was a bit of a row between her and the stage manager last
night about her keeping the stage waiting again," he said; "and
after lunch today she rang up to say she would not appear at the
Palaceum to-night or any more at all! It's very upsetting for us;
and I don't mind telling you, gentlemen, that I've been to my
solicitors about it..."

"And why the blazes didn't you come and tell me?" demanded the
Chief furiously.

"Well, sir, I thought it was only a bit of pique on her part, and
I hoped to be able to talk the lady round. I know what these
stars are!"

"You've seen her then?" the Chief snapped out.

"No, I haven't!" Mr. Samuel lamented. "I've been twice to the
Nineveh--that's where she's stopping--and each time she was out!"

The Chief dismissed him curtly.

When the door had closed behind him, the Chief said to the First
Sea Lord:

"This is where D.O.R.A. steps in, I think, sir!"

"Decidedly!" replied the Admiral. "Will you take the necessary
steps"

The Chief nodded and pressed the bell. Matthews appeared.

"Anything from the Nineveh?" he asked.

"The lady has not returned, sir!"

"Anything from Gordon and Duff?"

"No, sir, nothing all day!"

The telephone on the desk whirred. The Chief lifted the receiver.

"Yes. Oh, it's you, Gordon? No, you can say it now: this is a
private line."

He listened at the receiver for a couple of minutes. The room was
very still.

"All right, come to the office at once!"

The Chief hung up the receiver and turned to the Admiral.

"She's given us the slip for the moment!" he said. "That was
Gordon speaking. He and Duff have been shadowing our lady friend
out of doors for days. She left the hotel on foot after lunch
this afternoon with my two fellows in her wake. There was a bit
of a crush on the pavement near Charing Cross and Duff was pushed
into the roadway and run over by a motor-'bus. In the confusion
Gordon lost the trail. He's wasted all this time trying to pick
it up again instead of reporting to me at once."

"Zut!" cried the Frenchman.


CHAPTER XI. CREDENTIALS

The sight of Nur-el-Din filled Desmond with alarm. For a moment
his mind was overshadowed by the dread of detection. He had
forgotten all about Mr. Crook's handiwork in the train, and his
immediate fear was that the dancer would awake and recognize him.
But then he caught sight of his face in the mirror over the
mantelpiece. The grave bearded man staring oddly at him out of
the glass gave him a shock until he realized the metamorphosis
that had taken place in his personality. The realization served
instantly to still his apprehension.

Nur-el-Din lay on her side, one hand under her face which was
turned away from the fire. She was wearing a big black musquash
coat, and over her feet she had flung a tweed overcoat,
apparently one of Mr. Bellward's from the hatstand in the hall.
Her hat, a very dainty little affair of plain black velvet, was
skewered with a couple of jewelled hatpins to the upholstery of
the settee.

Desmond watched her for a moment. Her face looked drawn and tired
now that her eyelids, with their long sweeping black lashes, were
closed, shutting off the extraordinary luminosity of her eyes. As
he stood silently contemplating her, she stirred and moaned in
her sleep and muttered some word three or four times to herself.
Desmond was conscious of a great feeling of compassion for this
strangely beautiful creature. Knowing as he did of the
hundred-eyed monster of the British Secret Service that was
watching her, he found himself thinking how frail, how helpless,
how unprotected she looked, lying there in the flickering light
of the fire.

A step resounded behind him and old Martha shuffled into the
room, carefully shading the lamp she still carried so that its
rays should not fall on the face of the sleeper.

"I don't know as I've done right, sir," she mumbled, "letting the
pore lady wait here for you like this, but I couldn't hardly help
it, sir! She says as how she must see you, and seeing as how your
first tellygram said you was coming at half-past nine, I lets her
stop on!"

"When did she arrive" asked Desmond softly.

"About six o'clock," answered the old, woman. "Walked all the way
up from Wentfield Station, too, sir, and that cold she was when
she arrived here, fair blue with the cold she was, pore dear.
D'reckly she open her lips, I sees she's a furrin' lady, sir. She
asks after you and I tells her as how you are away and won't be
back till this evening. 'Oh!' she says, I then I wait!' And in
she comes without so much as with your leave or by your leave.
She told me as how you knew her, sir, and were expecting to see
her, most important, she said it was, so I hots her up a bit o'
dinner. I hopes as how I didn't do wrong,, Mr. Bellward, sir!"

"Oh, no, Martha, not at all!" Desmond replied--at random. He was
sorely perplexed as to his next move. Obviously the girl could
not stay in the house. What on earth did she want with him? And
could he, at any rate, get at the desk and read the papers of
which the note spoke and which, he did not doubt, were the
dossier of the Bellward case, before she awoke? They might, at
least, throw some light on his relations with the dancer.

"She had her dinner here by the fire," old Martha resumed her
narrative, "and about a quarter past nine comes your second
tellygram, sir, saying as how you could not arrive till five
o'clock in the morning."

Desmond glanced at the clock on the mantelpiece. The hands
pointed to a quarter past five! He had lost all count of the time
in his peregrinations of the night.

"I comes in here and tells the young lady as how you wouldn't be
back last night, sir," the old woman continued, "and she says,
'Oh,' she says, 'then, where shall I go?' she says. 'Why don't
you go home, my dear?' says I, 'and pop round and see the master
in the morning,' I says, thinking the pore young lady lives about
here. And then she tells me as how she come all the way from
Lunnon and walked up from the station. As well you know, sir, the
last train up leaves Wentfield Station at five minutes to nine,
and so the pore young lady couldn't get back that night. So here
she had to stop. I got the spare room ready for her and lit a
nice fire and all, but she wouldn't go to bed not until she had
seen you. I do hope as how I've not done wrong, sir. I says to
Mr. Hill, I says..."

Desmond held up his hand to restrain her toothless babble.
Nur-el-Din had stirred and was sitting up, rubbing her eyes. Then
she caught sight of Desmond and scrambled rather unsteadily to
her feet.

"Monsieur Bellward?" she said in French, "oh, how glad I am to
see you!"

"All right, Martha," said Desmond, "see that the spare room is
ready for this lady, and don't go to bed just yet. I shall want
you to take this lady to her room."

The old woman hobbled away, leaving the two alone. As soon as the
door had closed behind her, Nur-el-Din exclaimed:

"You know me; hein!"

Desmond bowed in the most correct Continental manner.

"Who does not know the charming Nur-el-Din?" he replied.

"No!" Nur-el-Din commanded with flashing eyes, "no, not that
name! I am Madame Le Bon, you, understand, a Belgian refugee,
from Termonde!"

Rather taken aback by her imperious manner, Desmond bowed again
but said nothing.

"I received your letter," the dancer resumed, "but I did not
answer it as I did not require your assistance. But now I wish
your help. It is unfortunate that you were absent from home at
the very time I counted upon your aid."

She flashed a glance at him as though awaiting an apology.

"I am extremely sorry," said Desmond, "if I had but known..."

Nur-el-Din nodded carelessly.

"I wish to pass the night here," she went on, "in fact, I may be
here for several days. They are becoming inconvenient in London,
you understand."

"But the theatre, your professional engagements?"

"Bah, I have left the theatre. I have had enough of these stupid
English people... they know nothing of art!"

Desmond reflected a moment. Nur-el-Din's manner was most
perplexing. What on earth could induce her to adopt this tone of
condescension towards him? It nettled him. He resolved to try and
find out on what it was based.

"I am only too happy to be of assistance to you," he said,
"especially in view of the letter of introduction you sent me,
but I must tell you plainly that what you ask is impossible."

"Impossible?" repeated Nur-el-Din, stamping her feet.
"Impossible? Do you know what you are saying?"

"Perfectly," replied Desmond negligently. "Obviously, you must
stay here for the rest of the night since you cannot return to
London until the trains start running, but to stay here
indefinitely as you propose to do is out of the question. People
would talk!"

"Then it is your business to see that they don't!"

"Your letter of introduction came from one whom I am always
anxious to oblige," Desmond went on. "but the service he is
authorized to claim from me does not entitle him to jeopardize my
other activities."

He drew a breath. It was a long shot. Would it draw her?

It did. Nur-el-Din fumbled in her bag, produced a leather
pocket-book and from it produced a slip of paper folded in two.

"Read that!" she cried, "and then you shall apologize!"

Desmond took the paper. It was a sheet torn from a book of German
military field messages. "Meldedienst" (Message Service) was
printed in German at the top and there were blanks to be filled
in for the date, hour and place, and at the bottom a printed form
of acknowledgment for the recipient to sign.

In a large ostentatious, upright German handwriting was written
what follows:

"To All Whom it May Concern.

"The lady who is the bearer of this, whose description is set out
overleaf, is entitled to the full respect and assistance of the
German forces on land and sea and in the air, wherever it may be.
Her person and property are inviolate.

"Given At Our Headquarters at Metz                        
"Friedrich Wilhelm                             "Kronprinz des     
                                           "Deutschen Reiches."

Across the signature was the impress of a green stamp,
lozenge-shaped, inscribed "Headquarters of the Fifth Army,
General Staff, 21st September, 1914."

On the back of the slip was a detailed description of Nur-el-Din.

Desmond bowed and handed the paper back to its owner.

"Madame must accept my humble excuses," he murmured, hardly
knowing what he was saying, so great was his surprise, "my house
and services are at Madame's disposal!"

"The other letter was from Count Plettenbach, the Prince's
A.D.C., whom I think you know!" added the dancer in a mollified
voice as she replaced the slip of paper in its pocketbook and
stowed it away in her hand-bag. Then, looking up archly at
Desmond, she said:

"Am I so distasteful, then, to have in your house?"

She made a charming picture. Her heavy fur coat had fallen open,
disclosing her full round throat, very brown against the V-shaped
opening of her white silk blouse. Her mouth was a perfect cupid's
bow, the upper lip slightly drawn up over her dazzlingly white
teeth. Before Desmond could answer her question, if answer were
needed, her mood had swiftly changed again. She put her hand out,
a little brown hand, and laying it on his shoulder, looked up
appealingly into his eyes.

"You will protect me," she said in a low voice, "I cannot bear
this hunted life. From this side, from that, they, are closing in
on me, and I am frightened, so very frightened. Promise you will
keep me from harm!"

Desmond gazed down into her warm, expressive eyes helplessly.
What she asked was impossible, he knew, but he was a soldier, not
a policeman, he told himself, and under his breath he cursed the
Chief for landing him in such a predicament. To Nur-el-Din he
said gently:

"Tell me what has happened to frighten you. Who is hunting you?
Is it the police?"

She withdrew her hand with a gesture of contempt.

"Bah!" she said bitterly. "I am not afraid of the police."

Then she sank into a reverie, her gaze fixed on the dying embers
of the fire.

"All my life has been a struggle," she went on, after a moment,
"first with hunger, then with men, then the police. I am used to
a hard life. No, it is not the police!"

"Who is it, then" asked Desmond, completely nonplused.

Nur-el-Din let her eyes rest on his face for a moment.

"You have honest eyes," she said, "your eyes are not German...
pardon me, I would not insult your race... I mean they are
different from the rest of you. One day, perhaps, those eyes of
yours may persuade me to answer your question. But I don't know
you well enough yet!"

She broke off abruptly, shaking her head.

"I am tired," she sighed and all her haughty manner returned,
"let the old woman show me to my room. I will take dejeuner with
you at one o'clock."

Desmond bowed and stepping out into the hall, called the
housekeeper. Old Martha shuffled off with the girl, leaving
Desmond staring with vacant eyes into the fire. He was conscious
of a feeling of exultation, despite his utter weariness and
craving for sleep. This girl, with her queenly ways, her swiftly
changing moods, her broad gusts of passion, interested him
enormously. If she were the quarry, why, then, the chase were
worth while! But the end? For a brief moment, he had a vision of
that frail, clinging figure swaying up against some blank wall
before a file of levelled rifles.

Then again he seemed to see old Mackwayte lying dead on the
landing of the house at Seven Kings. Had this frail girl done
this unspeakable deed? To send her to the gallows or before a
firing-squad--was this to be the end of his mission? And the
still, small voice of conscience answered: " Yes! that is what
you have come here to do! "

Old Martha came shuffling down the staircase. Desmond called to
her, remembering that he did not yet know where his bedroom was.

"Will you light me up to my room, Martha?" he said, "I want to be
sure that the sheets are not damp!"

So saying he extinguished the lamp on the table and followed the
old woman upstairs.


CHAPTER XII. AT THE MILL HOUSE

Clad in a suit of Mr. Basil Bellward's pyjamas of elaborate
blue-flowered silk, Desmond lay propped up in bed in Mr.
Bellward's luxuriously fitted bedroom, sipping his morning
coffee, and studying with absorbed interest a sheet of blue
foolscap. A number of papers lay strewn about the eiderdown
quilt. At the head of the bed a handsome Sheraton bureau stood
open.

As the French say, Mr. Bellward had refused himself nothing. His
bedroom was most tastefully furnished. The furniture was
mahogany, every piece carefully chosen, and the chintz of
curtains and upholstery was bright and attractive. A most
elaborate mahogany wardrobe was fitted into the wall, and
Desmond, investigating it, had found it to contain a very large
assortment of clothes of every description, all new or nearly so,
and bearing the name of a famous tailor of Cork Street. Folding
doors, resembling a cupboard, disclosed, when open, a marble
basin with hot water laid on, while a curtained door in the
corner of the room gave access to a white tiled bathroom. Mr.
Bellward, Desmond had reflected after his tour of the room on his
arrival, evidently laid weight on his personal comfort; for the
contrast between the cheerful comfort of his bedroom and the
musty gloom of the rooms downstairs was very marked.

A bright log fire hissed on the open hearth and the room was
pleasantly warm. Old Martha's coffee was excellent, and Desmond,
very snug in Mr. Bellward's comfortable bed, noted with regret
that the clock on the mantel-shelf marked a quarter to twelve.
But then he thought of the tete-a-tete luncheon that awaited him
at one o'clock and his face cleared. He didn't mind getting up so
much after all.

He fell again to the perusal of the documents which he had found,
as indicated in the note from headquarters, in the desk by the
bed. They were enclosed in two envelopes, one large, the other
small, both without any superscription. The large envelope
enclosed Mr. Bellward 's dossier which consisted of a fairly
detailed account of his private life, movements, habits and
friends, and an account of his arrest. The small envelope
contained Desmond's eagerly expected orders.

Desmond examined the papers in the large envelope first. From
them he ascertained that the house in which he found himself was
called The Mill House, and was situated two and a half miles from
the station of Wentfield on the Great Eastern Railway in Essex.
Mr. Bellward had taken the place some eight years before, having
moved there from the Surrey hills, but had been wont to spend not
more than two months in the year there. For the rest of the time
he traveled abroad, usually passing the winter months on the
Riviera, and the spring in Switzerland or Italy. The war had
brought about a change in his habits, and Harrogate, Buxton and
Bath had taken the place of the Continental resorts which he had
frequented in peace time.

When in residence at The Mill House, Mr. Bellward had gone up to
London nearly every morning, either walking or going by
motor-cycle to the station, and not returning until dinner-time
in the evening. Sometimes he passed the night in London, and on
such occasions slept at a small hotel in Jermyn Street. His
dossier included, a long and carefully compiled list of the
people he knew in London, mostly men of the rich business set,
stockbrokers, manufacturers, solicitors, and the like. Against
every name was set a note of the exact degree of intimacy
existing between Bellward and the man in question, and any other
information that might serve Bellward's impersonator in good
stead. Desmond laid this list aside for the moment, intending to
study it more closely at his leisure.

Of intercourse with his neighbors in, the country, Mr. Bellward
apparently had none. The Mill House stood in a lonely part of the
country, remote from the more thickly populated centres of
Brentwood and Romford, on the edge of a wide tract of
inhospitable marshland, known as Morstead Fen, intersected by
those wide deep ditches which in this part of the world are known
as dykes. At this stage in the report there was a note to the
effect that the rector of Wentfield had called twice at The Mill
House but had not found Mr. Bellward at home, and that his visits
had not been returned. There were also some opinions apparently
culled locally regarding the tenant of the Mill House, set out
something in this wise:--

"Landlord of the Red Lion, Wentfield: The gentleman has never
been to the Red Lion, but sometimes orders my Ford car and always
pays regularly.

"The Stationmaster at Wentfield: A gentleman who keeps himself to
himself but very liberal with his money.

"Sir Marsham Dykes, of The Chase, Stanning: A damned unsociable
churlish fellow.

"Mr. Tracy Wentfield, of the Channings, Home Green: A very rude
man. He slammed the front door of the house in my face when I
went to ask him for a contribution to our Cottage Hospital. It is
not my habit to repeat idle gossip, but they do say he is a heavy
drinker.

There was a lot more of this sort of thing, and Desmond turned
from it with a smile to take up the account of Bellward's arrest.
It appeared that, about a fortnight before, on the eve of the
departure for France of a very large draft of troops, a telegram
was handed in at the East Strand telegraph office addressed to
Bellward. This telegram ran thus:

"Bellward, Bellward Hotel, Jermyn Street.
"Shipping to you Friday 22,000 please advise correspondents.      
                               "Mortimer."

The authorities were unable to deliver this telegram gram as no
such an hotel as the Hotel Bellward was found to exist in Jermyn
Street. An examination of the address showed clearly that the
sender had absent mindedly repeated the addressee's name in
writing the name of the hotel. An advice was therefore addressed
to the sender, Mortimer, at the address he had given on the back
of the form, according to the regulations, to inform him that his
telegram had not been delivered. It was then discovered that the
address given by Mortimer was fictitious.

Suspicion being thus aroused, the telegram was forwarded to the
Postal Censor's department whence it reached the Intelligence
Authorities who promptly spotted the connection between the
wording of the telegram and the imminent departure of the drafts,
more especially as the dates tallied. Thereupon, Mr. Bellward was
hunted up and ultimately traced by his correspondence to The Mill
House. He was not found there, but was eventually encountered at
his London hotel, and requested to appear before the authorities
with a view to throwing some light on Mortimer. Under
cross-examination Bellward flatly denied any knowledge of
Mortimer, and declared that a mistake had been made. He cited
various well known city men to speak for his bona-fides and
protested violently against the action of the authorities in
doubting his word. It was ultimately elicited that Bellward was
of German birth and had never been naturalized, and he was
detained in custody while a search was made at The Mill House.

The search was conducted with great discretion, old Martha being
got out of the way before the detectives arrived and a careful
watch being kept to avoid any chance of interruption. The search
had the most fruitful results. Hidden in a secret drawer of the
Sheraton desk in Bellward's bedroom, was found a most elaborate
analysis of the movements of the transports to France, extremely
accurate and right up to date. There was absolutely no
indication, however, as to whence Bellward received his reports,
and how or to whom he forwarded them. It was surmised that
Mortimer was his informant, but an exhaustive search of the post
office files of telegrams despatched showed no trace of any other
telegram from Mortimer to Bellward save the one in the possession
of the authorities. As for Mortimer, he remained a complete
enigma.

That, summarised, was the gist of the story of Bellward's arrest.
The report laid great stress on the fact that no one outside half
a dozen Intelligence men had any knowledge (a) of Bellward being
an unnaturalized German, (b) of his arrest."

Desmond's orders, which he reserved to the last ere short and to
the point. They consisted of five numbered clauses.

"1. You will have a free hand. The surveillance of the house was
withdrawn on your arrival and will not be renewed.

"2. You will not leave the house until further orders.

"3. You will keep careful note of any communication that may be
made to you, whether verbal or in writing, of whatever nature it
is. When you have anything to be forwarded, ring up 700 Slanning
on the telephone and give Bellward's name. You will hand your
report to the first person calling at the house thereafter asking
for the letter for Mr. Elias.

"4. If help is urgently required, ring up 700 Stanning and ask
for Mr. Elias. Assistance will be with you within 15 minutes
after. This expedient must only be used in the last extremity.

"5. Memorize these documents and burn the lot before you leave
the house."

"Handy fellow, Mr. Elias," was Desmond's commentary, as he sprang
out of bed and made for the bathroom. At a quarter to one he was
ready dressed, feeling very scratchy and uncomfortable about the
beard which he had not dared to remove owing to Nur-el-Din's
presence in the house. Before he left the bedroom, he paused a
moment at the desk, the documents of the Bellward case in his
hands. He had a singularly retentive memory, and he was loth to
have these compromising papers in the house whilst Nur-el-Din was
there. He took a quick decision and pitched the whole lot into
the fire, retaining only the annotated list of Mr. Bellward's
friends. This he placed in his pocket-book and, after watching
the rest of the papers crumble away into ashes, went downstairs
to lunch.

Nur-el-Din was in the drawing-room, a long room with two high
windows which gave on a neglected looking garden. A foaming,
churning brook wound its way through the garden, among stunted
bushes and dripping willows, obviously the mill-race from which
the house took its name. The drawing-room was a bare,
inhospitable room, studded here and there with uncomfortable
looking early Victorian armchairs swathed in dust-proof cloths. A
fire was making an unsuccessful attempt to burn in the open
grate.

Nur-el-Din turned as he entered the room. She was wearing a gray
cloth tailor-made with a white silk, blouse and a short skirt
showing a pair of very natty brown boots. By contrast with her
ugly surroundings she looked fresh and dainty. Her eyes were
bright and her face as smooth and unwrinkled as a child's.

"Bon jour," she cried gaily, "ah! but I am 'ungry!  It is the air
of the country!  I love so the country!"

"I hope you slept well, Madame!" said Desmond solicitously,
looking admiringly at her trim figure.

"Like a dead man," she replied with a little laugh, translating
the French idiom. "Shall we make a leetle promenade after the,
dejeuner? And you shall show me your pretty English country,
voulez-vous? You see, I am dressed for le footing!"

She lifted a little brown foot.

They had a delightful luncheon together. Old Martha, who proved
to be quite a passable cook, waited on them. There was some
excellent Burgundy and a carafe of old brandy with the coffee.
Nur-el-Din was in her most gracious and captivating mood. She had
dropped all her arrogance of their last interview and seemed to
lay herself out to please. She had a keen sense of humor and
entertained Desmond vastly by her anecdotes of her stage career,
some not a little risque, but narrated with the greatest
bon-homie.

But, strongly attracted as he was to the girl, Desmond did not
let himself lose sight of his ultimate object. He let her run on
as gaily as she might but steadily, relentlessly he swung the
conversation round to her last engagement at the Palaceum. He
wanted to see if she would make any reference to the murder at
Seven Kings. If he could only bring in old Mackwayte's name, he
knew that the dancer must allude to the tragedy.

Then the unexpected happened. The girl introduce the old
comedian's name herself.

"The only pleasant memory I shall preserve of the Palaceum," she
said in French, "is my meeting with an old comrade of my youth.
Imagine, I had not seen him for nearly twenty years. Monsieur
Mackwayte, his name is, we used to call him Monsieur Arthur in
the old days when I was the child acrobat of the Dupont Troupe.
Such a charming fellow; and not a bit changed!  He was doing a
deputy turn at the Palaceum on the last night I appeared there!
And he introduced me to his daughter! Une belle Anglaise! I shall
hope to see my old friend again when I go back to London!"

Desmond stared at her. If this were acting, the most hardened
criminal could not have carried it off better. He searched the
girl's face. It was frank and innocent. She ran on about
Mackwayte in the old days, his kindliness to everyone, his pretty
wife, without a shadow of an attempt to avoid an unpleasant
topic. Desmond began to believe that not only did the girl have
nothing to do with the tragedy but that actually she knew nothing
about it.

"Did you see the newspapers yesterday?" he asked suddenly.

"My friend," said Nur-el-Din, shaking her curls at him. "I never
read your English papers. There is nothing but the war in them.
And this war!"

She gave a little shudder and was silent.

At this moment old Martha, who had left them over their coffee
and cigarettes, came into the room.

"There's a gentleman called to see you, sir!" she said to
Desmond.

Desmond started violently. He was scarcely used to his new role
as yet.

"Who is it, Martha?" he said, mastering his agitation.

"Mr. Mortimer!" mumbled the old woman in her tired voice, "at
least that's what he said his name was. The gentleman hadn't got
a card!"

Nur-el-Din sprang up from her chair so vehemently that she upset
her coffee.

"Don't let him come in!" she cried in French.

"Did you say I was in?" Desmond asked the old housekeeper, who
was staring at the dancer.

"Why, yes, sir," the woman answered.

Desmond made a gesture of vexation.

"Where is this Mr. Mortimer?" he asked

"In the library, sir!"

"Tell him I will be with him at once."

Martha hobbled away and Desmond turned to the girl.

"You heard what my housekeeper said? The man is here. I shall
have to see him."

Nur-el-Din, white to the lips, stood by the table, nervously
twisting a little handkerchief.

"Non, non," she said rapidly, "you must not see him. He has come
to find me. Ah! if he should find out what I have done... you
will not give me up to this man?"

"You need not see him," Desmond expostulated gently, "I will say
you are not here! Who is this Mortimer that he should seek to do
you harm?"

"My friend," said the dancer sadly, "he is my evil genius. If I
had dreamt that you knew him I would never have sought refuge in
your house."

"But I've never set eyes on the man in my life!" exclaimed
Desmond.

The dancer shook her head mournfully at him.

"Very few of you have, my friend," she replied, "but you are all
under his orders, nest-ce pas?"

Desmond's heart leaped. Was Mortimer's the guiding hand of this
network of conspiracy?

"I've trusted you, Monsieur," Nur-el-Din continued in a pleading
voice, "you will respect the laws of hospitality, and hide me
from this man. You will not give me up! Promise it, my friend?"

Desmond felt strangely moved. Was this a callous murderess, a
hired spy, who, with her great eyes brimming over with tears,
entreated his protection so simply, so appealingly?

"I promise I will not give you up to him, Mademoiselle!" he said
and hated himself in the same breath for the part he had to play.
Then he left her still standing by the table, lost in thought.

Desmond walked through the hall to the room in which he had found
Nur-el-Din asleep on his arrival. His nerves were strung up tight
for the impending encounter with this Mortimer, whoever, whatever
he was. Desmond did not hesitate on the threshold of the room. He
quietly opened the door and walked in.

A man in a black and white check suit with white gaiters stood on
the hearthrug, his hands tucked behind his back. He had a
curiously young-old appearance, such as is found in professors
and scientists of a certain type. This suggestion was probably
heightened by the very strong spectacles he wore, which magnified
his eyes until they looked like large colored marbles. He had a
heavy curling moustache resembling that affected by the late Lord
Randolph Churchill. There was a good deal of mud on his boots,
showing that he had come on foot.

The two men measured one another in a brief but courteous glance.
Desmond wondered what on earth this man's profession was. He was
quite unable to place him.

"Mr. Bellward?" said Mortimer, in a pleasant cultivated voice, "I
am pleased to have this opportunity of meeting you personally."

Desmond bowed and muttered something conventional. Mortimer had
put out his hand but Desmond could not nerve himself to take it.
Instead he pushed forward a chair.

"Thanks," said Mortimer sitting down heavily, "I've had quite a
walk across the fen. It's pleasant out but damp! I suppose you
didn't get my letter?"

"Which letter was that" asked Desmond.

"Why the one asking you to let me know when you would be back so
that we might meet at last!"

Desmond shook his head.

"No," he said, "I didn't get that one. It must have gone astray.
As a matter of fact," he added, "I only got back this morning."

"Oh, well then, I am fortunate in my visit," said Mortimer. "Did
everything go off all right?"

"Oh, yes," Desmond hastened to say, not knowing what he was
talking about, "everything went off all right."

"I don't in the least grudge you the holiday," the other
observed, "one should always be careful to pay the last respects
to the dead. It makes a good impression. That is so important in
some countries!"

He beamed at Desmond through his spectacles.

"Was there anything left in your absence?" he asked, "no, there
would be nothing; I suppose!"

Desmond took a firm resolution. He must know what the man was
driving at.

"I don't know what you mean," he said bluntly.

"God bless my soul!" ejaculated Mortimer turning round to stare
at him through his grotesque glasses. And then he said very
deliberately in German:

"War niemand da?"

Desmond stood up promptly.

"What do you want with me?" he asked quietly, "and why do you
speak German in my house?" Mortimer gazed at him blankly.

"Excellence, most excellent," he gasped. "I love prudence. My
friend, where are your eyes?"

He put a large, firm hand up and touched the upper edge of the
left lapel of his jacket. Desmond followed his gesture with his
eyes and saw the other's first finger resting on the shiny glass
head of a black pin. Almost instinctively Desmond imitated the
gesture. His fingers came into contact with a glassheaded pin
similarly embedded in the upper edge of the lapel of his own
coat.

Then he understood. This must be the distinguishing badge of this
confraternity of spies. It was a clever idea, for the black pin
was practically invisible, unless one looked for it, and even if
seen, would give rise to no suspicions. It had obviously escaped
the notice of the Chief and his merry men, and Desmond made a
mental resolve to rub this omission well into his superior on the
first opportunity. He felt he owed the Chief one.

Mr. Mortimer cleared his throat, as though to indicate the
conclusion of the episode. Desmond sat down on the settee.

"Nothing came while I was away!" he said.

"Now that you are back," Mortimer remarked, polishing his glasses
with a bandanna handkerchief, "the service will be resumed. I
have come to see you, Mr. Bellward," he went on, turning to
Desmond, "contrary to my usual practice, mainly because I wished
to confirm by personal observation the very favorable opinion I
had formed of your ability from our correspondence. You have
already demonstrated your discretion to me. If you continue to
show that your prudence is on a level with your zeal, believe I
shall not prove myself ungrateful."

So saying he settled his glasses on his nose again.

The action woke Desmond from a brown study. During the operation
of wiping his spectacles, Mr. Mortimer had given Desmond a
glimpse of his eyes in their natural state without the protection
of those distorting glasses. To his intense surprise Desmond had
seen, instead of the weak, blinking eyes of extreme myopia, a
pair of keen piercing eyes with the clear whites of perfect
health. Those blue eyes, set rather close together, seemed dimly
familiar. Someone, somewhere, had once looked at him like that.

"You are too kind," murmured Desmond, grappling for the thread of
the conversation.

Mortimer did not apparently notice his absentmindedness.

"Everything has run smoothly," he resumed, "on the lines on which
we have been working hitherto, but more important work lies
before us. I have found it necessary to select a quiet rendezvous
where I might have an opportunity of conferring in person with my
associates. The first of these conferences will take place very
shortly. I count upon your attendance, Bellward!"

"I shall ,not fail you," replied Desmond. "But where is this
rendezvous of yours, might I ask?"

Mortimer shot a quick glance at him.

"You shall know in good time," he answered drily. Then he added:

"Do you mind if I have a few words with Nur-el-Din before I go!"

The unexpected question caught Desmond off his guard.

"Nur-el-Din?" he stammered feebly.

"She is staying with you, I believe," said Mortimer pleasantly.

Desmond shook his head.

"There must be some mistake," he averred stoutly, "of course I
know who you mean, but I have never met the lady. She is not
here. What led you to suppose she was?"

But even as he spoke, his eyes fell on a black object which lay
near his arm stretched out along the back of the settee. It was a
little velvet hat, skewered to the upholstery of the settee by a
couple of jewelled hat-pins. A couple of gaudy cushions lay
between it and Mortimer's range of vision from the chair in which
the latter was sitting. If only Mortimer had not spotted it
already!

Desmond's presence of mind did not desert him. On the pretext of
settling himself more comfortably he edged up another cushion
until it rested upon the other two, thus effectively screening
the hat from Mortimer's view even when he should get up.

"I wish she were here," Desmond added, smiling, "one could not
have a more delightful companion to share one's solitude, I
imagine."

"The lady has disappeared from London under rather suspicious
circumstances;" Mortimer said, letting his grotesque eyes rest
for a moment on Desmond's face, "to be quite frank with you, my
dear fellow, she has been indiscreet, and the police are after
her."

"You don't say!" cried Desmond.

"Indeed, it is a fact," replied the other, "I wish she would take
you as her model, my dear Bellward. You are the pattern of
prudence, are you not?"

He paused perceptibly and Desmond held his breath.

"She has very few reputable friends," Mortimer continued
presently, "under a cloud as she is, she could hardly frequent
the company of her old associates, Mowbury and Lazarro and Mrs.
Malplaquet, you doubtless know whom I mean. I know she has a very
strong recommendation to you, so I naturally thought--well, no
matter!"

He rose and extended his hand.

"Au revoir, Bellward," he said, "you shall hear from me very
soon. You've got a snug little place here, I must say, and
everything in charming taste. I like your pretty cushions."

The blood flew to Desmond's face and he bent down, on pretense of
examining the cushions, to hide his confusion.

"They aren't bad," he said, "I got them at Harrod's!"

He accompanied Mortimer to the front door and watched him
disappear down the short drive and turn out of the gate into the
road. Then feeling strangely ill at ease, he went back to join
Nur-el-Din in the dining-room. But only the housekeeper was
there, clearing the table.

"If you're looking for the young lady, sir," said old Martha,
"she's gone out!"

"Oh!" said Desmond, with a shade of disappointment in his voice,
"will she be back for tea?"

"She's not coming back at all," answered the old woman, "she told
me to tell you she could not stop, sir. And she wouldn't let me
disturb you, neither, sir."

"But did she leave no note or anything for me?" asked Desmond.

"No, sir," answered old Martha as she folded up the cloth.

Gone! Desmond stared gloomily out at the sopping garden with an
uneasy feeling that he had failed in his duty.


CHAPTER XIII. WHAT SHAKESPEARE'S COMEDIES REVEALED

In a very depressed frame of mind, Desmond turned into the
library. As he crossed the hall, he noticed how cheerless the
house was. Again there came to him that odor of mustiness--of all
smells the most eerie and drear--which he had noticed on his
arrival. Somehow, as long as Nur-el-Din had been there, he had
not remarked the appalling loneliness of the place.

A big log fire was blazing cheerfully in the grate, throwing out
a bright glow into the room which, despite the early hour, was
already wreathed in shadows. Wearily Desmond pulled a big
armchair up to the blaze and sat down. He told himself that he
must devote every minute of his spare time to going over in his
mind the particulars he had memorized of Mr. Bellward's habits
and acquaintanceships. He took the list of Bellward's friends
from his pocket-book.

But this afternoon he found it difficult to concentrate his
attention. His gaze kept wandering back to the fire, in whose
glowing depths he fancied he could see a perfect oval face with
pleading eyes and dazzling teeth looking appealingly at him.

Nur-el-Din! What an entrancing creature she was! What passion
lurked in those black eyes of hers, in her moods, swiftly
changing from gusts of fierce imperiousness to gentle airs of
feminine charm! What a frail little thing she was to have fought
her way alone up the ladder from the lowest rung to the very top!
She must have character and grit, Desmond decided, for he was a
young man who adored efficiency: to him efficiency spelled
success.

But a spy needs grit, he reflected, and Nur-el-Din had many
qualities which would enable her to win the confidence of men.
Hadn't she half-captivated him, the would-be spy-catcher,
already?

Desmond laughed ruefully to himself. Indeed, he mused, things
looked that way. What would the Chief say if he could see his
prize young man, his white-headed boy, sitting sentimentalizing
by the fire over a woman who was, by her own confession,
practically an accredited German agent? Desmond thrust his chin
out and shook himself together. He would put the feminine side of
Nur-el-Din out of his head. He must think of her henceforth only
as a member of the band that was spotting targets for those
sneaking, callous brutes of U-boat commanders.

He went back to the study of the list of Mr. Bellward's friends.
But he found it impossible to focus his mind upon it. Do what he
would, he could not rid himself of the sensation that he had
failed at the very outset of his mission. He was, indeed, he told
himself, the veriest tyro at the game. Here he had had under his
hand in turn Nur-el-Din and Mortimer (who, he made no doubt, was
the leader of the gang which was so sorely troubling the Chief),
and he had let both get away without eliciting from either even
as much as their address. By the use of a little tact, he had
counted on penetrating something of the mystery enveloping the
dancer and her relationship with the gang; for he thought he
divined that Nur-el-Din was inclined to make him her confidant.
With the information thus procured, he had hoped to get on to the
track of the leader of the band.

But that ugly brute; Mortimer, with his goggle eyes, had spoiled
everything. His appearance had taken Desmond completely by
surprise: to tell the truth, it had thrown our young man rather
off his guard. " If only I might have had a little longer
acquaintance with my part," he reflected bitterly as $e sat by
the fire, "I should have been better able to deal with that
pompous ass!"

Afterwards, when thinking over the opening events of this
extraordinary episode of his career, Desmond rather wondered why
he had not followed Mortimer out of the house that afternoon and
tracked him down to his hiding place. But, as a matter of fact,
the idea did not occur to him at the time. His orders were
positive not to leave the house, and he never even thought of
breaking them--at any rate, not then.

His orders, also, it is true, were to report to headquarters any
communication that might be made to him; but these instructions,
at least as far as Nur-el-Din's and Mortimer's visits were
concerned, he resolved to ignore.

For one thing, he felt angry with the Chief who, he argued rather
irrationally, ought to have foreseen and prevented Mortimer thus
taking him by surprise. The Chief liked secrets--well, for a
change, he should be kept in the dark and the laugh would be on
Desmond's side. For a few minutes after Mortimer's departure,
Desmond had felt strongly inclined to go to the telephone which
stood on the desk in the library and ring up Mr. Elias, as he
should have done, but he resisted this impulse. Now, thinking
things over in the firelight, he was glad he had refrained. He
would ferret out for himself the exact part that Nur-el-Din and
Mortimer were playing in this band of spies. Nothing definite had
come of his interviews with them as yet. It would be time enough
to communicate with Headquarters when he had something positive
to report.

Then Desmond thrust the paper he had been studying back in his
pocket-book and jumped up. He felt that the inaction was stifling
him. He determined to go for a walk round the garden. That, at
least, was in the spirit of his orders.

Remembering that he was supposed to be suffering from a chill he
donned a heavy Ulster of Bellward's which was hanging in the hall
and wound a muffler round his neck. Then cramming a soft cap on
his head (he noted with satisfaction that Bellward's hats fitted
him remarkably well) he opened the front door and stepped
outside.

The rain had stopped, but the whole atmosphere reeled of
moisture. Angry-looking, dirty-brown clouds chased each other
across the lowering sky, and there was a constant sound of water,
trickling and gurgling and splashing, in his ears.

An untidy-looking lawn with a few unkempt and overgrown
rhododendron bushes dotted here and there ran its length in front
of the house and terminated in an iron railing which separated
the grounds from a little wood. A badly water-logged drive, green
with grass in places, ran past the lawn in a couple of short
bends to the front gate. On the other side the drive was bordered
by what had once been a kitchen garden but was now a howling
wilderness of dead leaves, mud and gravel with withered bushes
and half a dozen black, bare and dripping apple trees set about
at intervals. At the side of the house the kitchen garden stopped
and was joined by a flower garden--at least so Desmond judged it
to have been by a half ruined pergola which he had noticed from
the drawing-room windows. Through the garden ran the mill-race
which poured out of the grounds through a field and under a
little bridge spanning the road outside.

Desmond followed the drive as far as the front gate. The
surrounding country was as flat as a pancake, and in almost every
field lay great glistening patches of water where the land had
been flooded by the incessant rain. The road on which the house
was built ran away on the left to the mist-shrouded horizon
without another building of any kind in sight. Desmond surmised
that Morstead Fen lay in the direction in which he was looking.
To the right, Desmond caught a glimpse of a ghostly spire
sticking out of some trees and guessed that this was Wentfield
Church. In front of him the distant roar of a passing train
showed where the Great Eastern Railway line lay.

More depressed than ever by the utter desolation of the scene,
Desmond turned to retrace his steps to the house. Noticing a path
traversing the kitchen garden, he followed it. It led to the back
of the house, to the door of a kind of lean-to shed. The latch
yielded on being pressed and Desmond entered the place.

He found himself in a fair-sized shed, very well and solidly
built of pitch-pine, with a glazed window looking out on the
garden, a table and a couple of chairs, and a large cupboard
which occupied the whole of one side of the wall of the house
against which the shed was built. In a corner of the shed stood a
very good-looking Douglas motor-cycle, and on a nail ,on the wall
hung a set of motor-cyclist's overalls. A few petrol cans, some
full, some empty, stood against the wall.

Desmond examined the machine. It was in excellent condition,
beautifully clean, the tank half full of spirits. A little dry
sand on the tires showed that it had been used fairly recently.

"Old man Bellward's motor-bike that he goes to the station on,"
Desmond noted mentally. "But what's in the big cupboard, I
wonder? Tools, I expect!"

Then he caught sight of a deep drawer in the table. It was
half-open and he saw that it contained various tools and spare
parts, neatly arranged, each one in its appointed place.

He went over to the cupboard and tried it. It was locked. Desmond
had little respect for Mr. Bellward's property so he went over to
the tool drawer and selected a stout chisel with which to burst
the lock of the cupboard. But the cupboard was of oak, very
solidly built, and he tried in vain to get a purchase for his
implement. He leant his left hand against the edge of the
cupboard whilst with his right he jabbed valiantly with the
chisel.

Then an extraordinary thing happened. The whole cupboard
noiselessly swung outwards while Desmond, falling forward, caught
his forehead a resounding bang against the edge of the recess in
which it moved. He picked himself up in a very savage frame of
mind--a severe blow on the head is not the ideal cure for
hypochondria--but the flow of objurgatives froze on his lips. For
he found himself looking into Mr. Bellward's library.

He stepped into the room to see how the cupboard looked from the
other side. He found that a whole section of bookshelves had
swung back with the cupboard, in other words that the cupboard in
the toolshed and the section of bookshelves were apparently all
of one piece.

He carefully examined the walls on either side of the recess in
the library to see how the mechanism worked. The bookshelves were
open, made of mahogany, the sides elaborately carved with leaves
and flowers. Desmond ran his hand down the perpendicular section
immediately on the right of the recess. About halfway down--to be
exact, it was in line with the fifth shelf from the floor--his
fingers encountered a little knob which gave under pressure--the
heart of a flower which released the section of bookshelves.
Going back to the shed, Desmond examined the place against which
his hand had rested as he sought to force the lock of the
cupboard. As he expected, he found a similar catch let into the
surface of the oak, but so cunningly inlaid that it could scarce
be detected with the naked eye.

Before proceeding further with his investigations, Desmond softly
turned the lock of the library door. He also shot forward a bolt
he found on the inside of the door of the shed. He did not want
to be interrupted by the housekeeper or the odd man.

Then he went back to the library and pulled the cupboard to
behind him. It moved quite easily into place. He wanted to have a
look at the bookshelves; for he was curious to know whether the
cupboard was actually all of one piece with the section of
bookshelves as it seemed to be. He was prepared to find that the
books were merely library dummies, but no! He tried half a dozen
shelves at random, and every book he pulled out was real.

Desmond was not easily baled, and he determined to scrutinize
every shelf, of this particular section in turn. With the aid of
one of those step-ladders folding into a chair which you
sometimes see in libraries, he examined the topmost shelves but
without result. He took down in turn Macaulay 's History of
England, a handsome edition of the works of Swift, and a set of
Moliere without getting any nearer the end of his quest.

The fourth shelf from the top was devoted to a library edition of
Shakespeare, large books bound in red morocco. Desmond, who, by
this time was getting cramp in the arms from stretching upwards
and had made his hands black with dust, pulled out a couple of
volumes at hazard from the set and found them real books like the
rest.

"Oh, damn!" he exclaimed, and had half a mind to abandon the
search and have a go with hammer and chisel at the cupboard in
the shed. By this time it was almost dusk in the library, and
Desmond, before abandoning the search, struck a match to have a
final rapid glance over the shelves. The light showed him a
curious flatness about the backs of the last six volumes of
Shakespeare. He dropped the match and laid hold of a volume of
the Comedies. It resisted. He tugged. Still it would not come.
Exerting all his strength, he pulled, the gilt-lettered backs of
the last six volumes came away in his hands in one piece and he
crashed off the ladder to the ground.

This time he did not swear. He picked himself up quickly, lit the
lamp on the table by the window, and brought it over to the
bookcase. Where Shakespeare's Comedies had stood was now a gaping
void with a small key stuck in a lock, above a brass handle.
Desmond mounted on the steps again and eagerly turned the key.
Then he grasped the handle and puled, the section of bookshelves
swung back like a door, and he found himself face to face with a
great stack of petrol cans. They lay in orderly piles stretching
from the floor to the top of the bookshelves near the railing,
several tiers deep. At a rough computation there must have been
several hundred cans in the recess. And they were all full.

In a flash Desmond realized what his discovery signified. The
motor-cycle in the shed without was the connecting link between
Bellward and the man with whom he was co-operating in the
organization. Under pretext of reading late in his library
Bellward would send old Martha to bed, and once the house was
quiet, sally forth by his secret exit and meet his confederate.
Even when he was supposed to be sleeping in London he could still
use the Mill House for a rendezvous, entering and leaving by the
secret door, and no one a bit the wiser. In that desolate part of
Essex, the roads are practically deserted after dark. Bellward
could come and go much as he pleased on his motor-cycle. Were he
stopped, he always had the excuse ready that he was going to--or
returning from the station. The few petrol cans that Desmond had
seen openly displayed in the shed without seemed to show that
Bellward received a small quantity of spirit from the Petrol
Board to take him to and from the railway.

The cache, so elaborately concealed, however, pointed to long
journeys. Did Bellward undertake these trips to fetch news or to
transmit it? And who was his confederate? Whom did he go to meet?
Not Mortimer; for he had only, corresponded with Bellward. Nor
was it Nur-el-Din; for she had never met Bellward, either.

Who was it, then?


CHAPTER XIV. BARBARA TAKES A HAND

"No luck, Mr. Marigold," said the Assistant Provost Marshal, "I'm
sorry, but there it is! We've made every possible inquiry about
this Private... er..." he glanced at the buff-colored leave pass
in his hand, "... this Gunner Barling, but we can't trace him so
far. He should have gone back to France the afternoon before the
day on which you found his pass. But he hasn't rejoined his unit.
He's been posted as an absentee, and the police have been warned.
I'm afraid we can't do any more than that!"

The detective looked at the officer with mild reproach in his
eyes.

"Dear, dear," he replied, "and I made sure you'd be able to trace
him with that pass!"

He clicked his tongue against his teeth and shook his head.

"Dear, dear!" he said again.

"What's the feller been up to?" asked the A.P.M. Detectives have
a horror of leading questions, and Mr. Marigold shrank visibly
before the directness of the other's inquiry. Before replying,
however, he measured the officer with his calm, shrewd eye. Mr.
Marigold was not above breaking his own rules of etiquette if
thereby he might gain a useful ally.

"Well, Captain Beardiston," he answered slowly,

I'll tell you because I think that you may be able to help me a
little bit. It's part of your work to look after deserters and
absentees and those sort o' folk, isn't it?"

The A.P.M. groaned.

"Part of my work?" he repeated, "it seems to be my whole life
ever since I came back from the front."

"If you want to know what this young fellow has been up to," said
Mr. Marigold in his even voice, "it's murder, if I'm not
mistaken!"

"Murder?" echoed the other in surprise. "Why, not the Seven Kings
murder, surely?"

The detective gave a brisk nod.

"That's it," he replied, "I'm in charge of that case, if you
follow me. I found that pass in the front garden of the
Mackwayte's house in Laleham Villas, half trodden into the earth
of the flower-bed by a heavy boot, a service boot, studded with
nails. There had been a lot of rain in the night, and it had
washed the mosaic-tiled pathway up to the front door almost
clean. When I was having a look round the garden, I picked up
this pass, and then I spotted the trace of service boots, a bit
faint, on the beds. You know the way the nails are set in the
issue boots?"

The officer nodded:

"I ought to know that foot-print," he said. "It's all over the
roads in northern France."

"We made inquiries through you," the detective resumed, "and when
I found that this Gunner Barling, the owner of the pass, was
missing, well, you will admit, it looked a bit suspicious."

"Still, you know," the A.P.M. objected, this man appears to have
the most excellent character. He's got a clean sheet; he's never
gone absent before. And he's been out with his battery almost
since the beginning of the war."

"I'm not making any charge against him as yet," answered the
detective, picking up his hat, "but it would interest me very
much, very much indeed, Captain Beardiston, to have five minutes'
chat with this gunner. And so I ask you to keep a sharp lookout
for a man answering to his description, and if you come across
him, freeze on to him hard, and give me a ring on the telephone."

"Right you are," said the officer, "I'll hold him for you, Mr.
Marigold. But I hope your suspicions are not well-founded."

For a brief moment the detective became a human being.

"And so do I, if you want to know," he said. "One can forgive
those lads who are fighting out there almost anything. I've got a
boy in France myself!"

A little sigh escaped him, and then Mr. Marigold remembered "The
Yard."

"I'll bid you good-day!" he added in his most official voice and
took his leave.

He walked down the steps by the Duke of York's column and through
the Horse Guards into Whitehall, seemingly busy with his own
thoughts. A sprucely dressed gentleman who was engaged in the
exciting and lucrative sport of war profiteering turned color and
hastily swerved out towards the Park as he saw the detective
crossing the Horse Guards' Parade. He was unpleasantly reminded
of making the acquaintance of Mr. Marigold over a bucketshop a
few years ago with the result that he had vanished from the eye
of his friends for eighteen months. He congratulated himself on
thinking that Mr. Marigold had not seen him, but he would have
recognized his mistake could he but have caught sight of the
detective's face. A little smile flitted across Mr. Marigold's
lips and he murmured to himself:

"Our old friend is looking very prosperous just now. I wonder
what he's up to?"

Mr. Marigold didn't miss much.

The detective made his way to the Chief's office. Barbara
Mackwayte, in a simple black frock with white linen collar and
cuffs, was at her old place in the ante-room. A week had elapsed
since the murder, and the day before, Mr. Marigold knew, the
mortal remains of poor old Mackwayte had been laid to rest. He
was rather surprised to see the girl back at work so soon.

She did not speak to him as she showed him into the Chief, but
there was a question lurking in her gray eyes.

Mr. Marigold looked at her and gravely shook his head.

"Nothing fresh," he said.

The Chief was unusually exuberant. Mr. Marigold found him
surrounded, as was his wont, by papers, and a fearsome collection
of telephone receivers. He listened in silence to Mr. Marigold's
account of his failure to trace Barling.

"Marigold," he said, when the other had finished, "we must
undoubtedly lay hold of this fellow. Let's see now... ah! I have
it!"

He scribbled a few lines on a writing-pad and tossed it across to
the detective.

"If your friend's innocent," he chuckled, "that'll fetch him to a
dead certainty. If he murdered Mackwayte, of course he won't
respond. Read it out and let's hear how it sounds!"

The Chief leaned back in his chair and lit a cigarette while the
detective read out:

"If Gunner Barling, etcetera, etcetera, will communicate with
Messrs. Blank and Blank, solicitors, he will hear of something to
his advantage. Difficulties with the military can be arranged."

"But I say, sir," objected Mr. Marigold, "the military
authorities will hardly stand for that last, will they?"

"Won't they, by Jove" retorted the Chief grimly. "They will if I
tell 'em to. No official soullessness for me; thank you! And now,
Marigold, just ask Matthews to fill in Barling's regimental
number and all that and the name and address of the solicitors
who do this kind of thing for us. And tell him we'll insert the
ad. daily until further notice in the Mail, Chronicle, Daily
News, Sketch, Mirror, Evening News..."

"And Star," put in Mr. Marigold who had Radical tendencies.

"The Star, too, by all means. That ought to cover the extent of
your pal's newspaper reading, I fancy, eh, Marigold! Right!"

He held out a hand in farewell. But Mr. Marigold stood his
ground. He was rather a slow mover, and there were a lot of
things he wanted to discuss with the Chief.

"I was very sorry to see poor Major Okewood in the casualty list
this morning, sir," he said. "I was going to ask you..."

"All terrible, terrible!" said the Chief. Then he added:

"Just tell Miss Mackwayte I want her as you go out, will you?"

The detective was used to surprises but the Chief still bowled
him out occasionally. Before he knew what he was doing, Mr.
Marigold found himself in the ante-room doing as he was bid.

As soon as her father's funeral was over; Barbara had insisted on
returning to work. The whole ghastly business of the murder and
the inquest that followed seemed to her like a bad dream which
haunted her day and night. By tacit consent no one in the office
had made any further allusion, to the tragedy. She had just
slipped back into her little niche, prompt, punctual, efficient
as ever.

"No, it's not for the letters," the Chief said to her as she came
in with her notebook and pencil. "I'm going to give you a little
trip down to the, country this afternoon, Miss Mackwayte... to,
Essex... the Mill House, Wentfield... you know whom it is you are
to see, eh? I'm getting a little restless as we've had no reports
since he arrived there. I had hoped, by this, to have been able
to put him on the track of Nur-el-Din, but, for the moment, it
looks as if we had lost the scent. But you can tell our friend
all we know about the lady's antecedents--what we had from my
French colleague the other day, you know? Let him have all the
particulars about this Barling case--you know about that, don't
you? Good, and, see here, try and find out from our mutual friend
what he intends doing. I don't want to rush him... don't let him
think that... but I should rather like to discover whether he has
formed any plan. And now you get along. There's a good train
about three which gets you down to Wentfield in just under the
hour. Take care of yourself! See you in the morning!"

Pressing a bell with one hand and lifting up a telephone receiver
with the other, the Chief immersed himself again in his work. He
appeared to have forgotten Miss Mackwayte's very existence.

At a quarter to five that evening, Barbara unlatched the front
gate of the Mill House and walked up the drive. She had come on
foot from the station and the exercise had done her good. It had
been a deliciously soft balmy afternoon, but with the fall of
dusk a heavy mist had come creeping up from the sodden, low-lying
fields and was spreading out over the neglected garden of Mr.
Bellward's villa as Barbara entered the avenue.

The damp gloom of the place, however, depressed her not at all.
She exulted in the change of scene and the fresh air; besides,
she knew that the presence of Desmond Okewood would dispel the
vague fears that had hung over her incessantly ever since her
father's murder. She had only met him twice, she told herself
when this thought occurred to her, but there was something
bracing and dependable about him that was just the tonic she
wanted.

A porter at the station, who was very intelligent as country
porters go, had told her the way to the Mill House. The way was
not easy to find for there were various turns to make but, with
the aid of such landmarks as an occasional inn, a pond or a barn,
given her by the friendly porter, Barbara reached her
destination. Under the porch she pulled the handle of the bell,
all dank and glistening with moisture, and heard it tinkle loudly
somewhere within the house.

How lonely the place was, thought Barbara with a little shiver!
The fog was growing thicker every minute and now seemed suspended
like a vast curtain between her and the drive. Somewhere in the
distance she heard the hollow gurgling of a stream. Otherwise,
there was no sound.

She rang the bell again rather nervously and waited. In her bag
she had a little torch-light (for she was a practical young
person), and taking it out, she flashed it on the door. It
presented a stolid, impenetrable oaken front. She stepped out
into the fog and scanned the windows which were already almost
lost to view. They were dark and forbidding.

Again she tugged at the bell. Again, with a groaning of wires,
responded the hollow tinkle. Then silence fell once more. Barbara
began to get alarmed. What had happened to Major Okewood? She had
understood that there was no question of his leaving the house
until the Chief gave him the word. Where, then, was he? He was
not the man to disobey an order. Rather than believe that, she
would think that something untoward had befallen him. Had there
been foul play here, too?"

A sudden panic seized her. She grasped the bell and tugged and
tugged until she could tug no more. The bell jangled and pealed
and clattered reverberatingly from the gloomy house, and then,
with a jarring of wires, relapsed into silence. Barbara beat on
the door with her hands, for there was no knocker; but all
remained still within. Only the dank mist swirled in ever denser
about her as she stood beneath the dripping porch.

"This won't do!" said Barbara, pulling herself together. "I
mustn't get frightened, whatever I do! Major Okewood is very well
capable of defending himself. What's happened is that the man has
been called away and the servants have taken advantage of his
absence to go out! Barbara, my dear, you'll just have to foot it
back to the station without your tea!"

She turned her back on the door and torch in hand, plunged
resolutely into the fog-bank. The mist was bewilderingly thick.
Still, by going slow and always keeping the gravel under her
feet, she reached the front gate and turned out on the road.

Here the mist was worse than ever. She had not taken four paces
before she had lost all sense of her direction. The gate, the
railways, were gone. She was groping in a clinging pall of fog.

Her torch was worse than useless. It only illuminated swirling
swathes of mist and confused her, so she switched it out. In vain
she looked about her, trying to pick up some landmark to guide
her. There was no light, no tree, no house visible, nothing but
the dank, ghostly mist.

To some temperaments, Nature has no terrors. Barbara, to whose
imagination an empty house at dusk had suggested all kinds of
unimaginable fears, was not in the least frightened by the fog.
She only hoped devoutly that a motor-car or a trap would not come
along behind and run her down for she was obliged to keep to the
road; the hard surface beneath her feet was her only guide.

She smiled over her predicament as she made her way along. She
frequently found herself going off the road, more than once into
patches of water, with the result that in a few minutes her feet
were sopping. Still she forged ahead, with many vain halts to
reconnoitre while the fog, instead of lifting, seemed to thicken
with every step she took.

By this time she knew she was completely lost. Coming from the
station there had been, she remembered, a cross-roads with a
sign-board set up on a grass patch, about a quarter of a mile
from the Mill House. She expected every minute to come upon this
fork; again and again she swerved out to the left from her line
of march groping for the sign-post with her hands but she never
encountered it.

Few sounds came to break in upon the oppressive silence of the
mist. Once or twice Barbara heard a train roaring along in the
distance and, at one of her halts, her ear caught the high rising
note of a motor engine a long way off. Except for these
occasional reminders of the proximity of human beings. she felt
she must be on a desert island instead of less than two score
miles from London.

Her wrist watch showed her that she had walked for an hour when
she heard a dog barking somewhere on the left of the road.
Presently, she saw a blurred patch of radiance apparently on the
ground in front of her. So deceptive are lights seen through a
fog that she was quite taken aback suddenly to come upon a long
low house with a great beam of light streaming out of the door.

The house was approached by a little bridge across a broad ditch.
By the bridge stood a tall, massive post upon which a sign
squeaked softly as it swayed to and fro. The inn was built round
three sides of a square, the left-hand side being the house
itself, the centre, the kitchen, and the right-hand side a
tumble-down stable and some sheds.

The welcome blaze of light coming from the open door was very
welcome to Barbara after her, long journey through the mist. She
dragged her wet and weary feet across the little bridge and went
up to the inn-door.

She stood for a moment at the entrance dazzled by the effect of
the light on her eyes, which were smarting with the fog. She
found herself looking into a long, narrow, taproom, smelling of
stale beer and tobacco fumes, and lit by oil lamps suspended in
wire frames from the raftered ceiling. The windows were curtained
in cheerful red rep and the place was pleasantly warmed by a
stove in one corner. By the stove was a small door apparently
leading into the bar, for beside it was a window through which
Barbara caught a glimpse of beer-engines and rows of bottles.
Opposite the doorway in which she stood was another door leading
probably to the back of the house. Down the centre of the room
ran a long table.

The tap-room was empty when Barbara entered but as she sat down
at the table, the door opposite opened, and a short,
foreign-looking woman came out. She stepped dead on seeing the
girl: Her face seemed familiar to Barbara.

"Good evening" said the latter, "I've lost my way in the fog and
I'm very wet. Do you think I could have my shoes and stockings
dried and get some tea? I..."

"A moment! I go to tell Meester Rass," said the woman with a very
marked foreign accent and in a frightened kind of voice and
slipped out by the way she came.

"Where have I met that woman before?" Barbara asked herself, as
she crossed to tile stove to get warm. The woman's face seemed to
be connected in her mind with something unpleasant, something she
wanted to forget. Then a light dawned on her. Why, it was...

A shrill cry broke in upon her meditations, a harsh scream of
rage. Barbara turned quickly and saw Nur-el-Din standing in the
centre of the room. She was transfigured with passion. Her whole
body quivered, her nostrils were dilated, her eyes flashed fire,
and she pointed an accusing finger at Barbara.

"Ah! miserable!" she cried in a voice strangled with rage, "ah!
miserable! Te voile enrol."

A cold chill struck at Barbara's heart. Wherever she went, the
hideous spectre of the tragedy of her father seemed to follow
her. And now Nur-el-Din had come to upbraid her with losing the
treasure she had entrusted to her.

"Nur-el-Din," the girl faltered in a voice broken with tears.

"Where is it I Where is the silver box I gave into your charge?
Answer me. Mais reponds, donc, canaille!"

The dancer stamped furiously with her foot and advanced
menacingly on Barbara.

An undersized; yellow-faced man came quickly out of the small
door leading from the bar and stood an instant, a helpless
witness of the scene, as men are when women quarrel.

Nur-el-Din rapped out an order to him in a tongue which was
unknown to Barbara. It sounded something like Russian. The man
turned and locked the door of the bar, then stepped swiftly
across the room and bolted the outer door.

Barbara recognized the threat that the action implied and it
served to steady her nerves. She shrank back no longer but drew
herself up and waited calmly for the dancer to reach her.

"The box you gave me," said Barbara very quietly, "was stolen
from me by the person who... who murdered my father!"

Nur-el-Din burst into a peal of malicious laughter.

"And you?" she cried, "you are 'ere to sell it back to me, hein,
or to get your blood money from your accomplice? Which is it?"

On this Barbara's self-control abandoned her.

"Oh, how dare you! How dare you!" she exclaimed, bursting into
tears, "when that wretched box you made me take was the means of
my losing the dearest friend I ever had!"

Nur-el-Din thrust her face, distorted with passion, into
Barbara's. She spoke in rapid French, in a low, menacing voice.

"Do you think this play-acting will deceive me? Do you think I
don't know the value of the treasure I was fool enough to entrust
to your safe keeping? Grand Dieu! I must have been mad not to
have remembered that no woman could resist the price that they
were willing to pay for it! And to think what I have risked for
it! Is all my sacrifice to have been in vain?"

Her voice rose to a note of pleading and the tears started from
her eyes. Her mood changed. She began to wheedle.

"Come, ma petite, you will help me recover my little box,
n'est-ce pas? You will find me generous. And I am rich, I have
great savings. I can..."

Barbara put up her hands and pushed the dancer away from her.

"After what you have said to me to-night," she said, "I wouldn't
give you back your box even if I had it."

She turned to the man.

"Will you tell me the way to the nearest station" she went on,
"and kindly open that door!"

The man looked interrogatively at Nur-el-Din who spoke a few
words rapidly in the language she had used before. Then she cried
to Barbara:

"You stay here until you tell me what you have done with the
box!"

Barbara had turned to the dancer when the latter spoke so that
she did not notice that the man had moved stealthily towards her.
Before she could struggle or cry out, a hand as big as a spade
was clapped over her mouth, she was seized in an iron grip and
half-dragged, half-carried out of the taproom through the small
door opposite the front entrance.

The door slammed behind them and Barbara found herself in
darkness. She was pushed round a corner and down a flight of
stairs into some kind of cellar which smelt of damp straw. Here
the grip on her mouth was released for a second but before she
could utter more than a muffled cry the man thrust a handkerchief
into her mouth and effectually gagged her. Then he tied her hands
and feet together with some narrow ropes that cut her wrists
horribly. He seemed to be able to see in the dark for, though the
place was black as pitch, he worked swiftly and skillfully.
Barbara felt herself lifted and deposited on a bundle of straw.
In a little she heard the man's heavy foot-step on the stair,
there was a crash as of a trap-door falling to, the noise of a
bolt. Then Barbara fainted.


CHAPTER XV. MR. BELLWARD IS CALLED TO THE TELEPHONE

A knocking at the door of the library aroused Desmond from his
cogitations. He hastened to replace the volumes of Shakespeare on
their shelf and restore all to its former appearance. Then he
went to the door and opened it. Old Martha stood in the hall.

"If you please, sir," she wheezed, "the doctor's come!"

"Oh," said Desmond, rather puzzled, "what doctor?"

"It's not Dr. Haines from the village, Mr. Bellward, sir," said
the housekeeper, "It's a genel'man from Lunnon!"

Then Desmond remembered Crook's promise to look him up and
guessed it must be he. He bade Martha show the doctor in and
bring tea for two.

Desmond's surmise was right. The old woman ushered in Crook,
looking the very pattern of medical respectability, with Harley
Street written all over him from the crown of his glossy top-hat
to the neat brown spats on his feet. In his hand he carried a
small black bag.

"Well," he said, surveying Desmond, "and how do we find ourselves
to-day? These chills are nasty things to shake off, my dear sir!"

"Oh, stow that!" growled Desmond, who was in little mood for
joking.

"Voice inclined to be laryngeal," said Crook putting down his hat
and bag on a chair, "we shall have to take care of our bronchial
tubes! We are not so young as we were!"

"You can drop all that mumming, Crook!" snapped Desmond
irascibly.

"Voice rotten," replied Crook calmly surveying him through his
pince-nez. "Really, Major--I should say, Mr. Bellward--you must
take more pains than that. You are talking to me exactly as
though I were a British Tommy. Tut, tut, this will never do, sir!
You must talk thicker, more guttural-like, and open the vowels
well."

He had dropped his jesting manner altogether and spoke with the
deep earnestness of the expert airing his pet topic. He was so
serious that Desmond burst out laughing. It must be said,
however, that he laughed as much like a German as he knew how.
This appeared to mollify Crook who, nevertheless, read him a long
lecture against ever, for a moment, even when alone, quitting the
role he was playing. Desmond took it in good part; for he knew
the soundness of the other's advice.

Then old Martha brought' tea, and over the cups and saucers Crook
gave Desmond a budget of news. He told of the warrant issued for
the arrest of Nur-el-Din and of the search being made for her.

Desmond heard the news of Nur-el-Din's disappearance from London
with some consternation. He began to realize that his failure to
detain Nur-el-Din that afternoon might have incalculable
consequences. Sunk in thought, he let Crook run on. He was
wondering whether he ought to give him a message for the Chief,
telling him of Nur-el-Din's visit and of her flight on the
arrival of Mortimer.

Now, Desmond had a good deal of pride, and like most proud
people, he was inclined to be obstinate. To confess to the Chief
that he had let both Nur-el-Din and Mortimer slip through his
fingers was more than he could face. He could not bear to think
that the Chief might believe him capable of failure, and take
independent measures to guard against possible mistakes. Also, in
his heart of hearts, Desmond was angry with the Chief. He thought
the latter had acted precipitately in getting out a warrant for
Nur-el-Din's arrest before he, Desmond, had had time to get into
the skin of his part.

So Desmond heard Crook out and made no comment. When the other
asked him if he had anything to tell the Chief, he shook his
head. He was not to know then the consequences which his
disobedience of orders was destined to have. If he had realized
what the result of his obstinacy would be, he would not have
hesitated to send a full report by Crook--and this story might
never have been written!

But if youth followed reason instead of impulse, the world would
stand still. Desmond was still at an age at which a man is
willing to take on anything and anybody, and he was confident of
bringing his mission to a successful conclusion without any
extraneous aid. So Crook, after changing Desmond's make-up and
giving him a further rehearsal of his role, packed up his pots
and paints and brushes in his black bag and returned to London
with "nothing to report" as the communiques say.

He repeated his visit every day for the next four days. Crook's
arrival each afternoon was the only break in the monotony of a
life which was rapidly becoming unbearable to Desmond's mercurial
temperament. He found himself looking forward to the wizened
little man's visits and for want of better employment, he threw
himself wholeheartedly into the study of his role under the
expert's able direction. Desmond's beard had sprouted
wonderfully, and Crook assured him that, by about the end of the
week, the tow substitute, which Desmond found a most unmitigated
nuisance, would be no longer necessary. He also showed his pupil
how to paint in the few deft lines about the eyes which completed
the resemblance between Bellward and his impersonator.

The time hung terribly heavily on Desmond's hands. He had long
since memorized and destroyed the list of Mr. Bellward's friends.
Every morning he spent at least an hour before the mirror in his
bedroom working up the role. With every day he felt more
confident of himself; with every day he grew more anxious to go
to London, and, taking the bull by the horns, boldly visit one of
Mr. Bellward's acquaintances and test the effect of his disguise.

But no orders came from Headquarters to release him from his
confinement. Moreover, no word arrived from Nur-el-Din nor did
Mortimer send any message or call again at the Mill House. The
silence of the two conspirators made Desmond uneasy. Suppose
Mortimer, who, he felt sure, had caught him out lying about
Nur-el-Din's presence in the house at the time of his visit, had
grown suspicious! What if Nur-el-Din had succeeded in making good
her escape to the Continent? He had had his chance of laying hold
of both suspects and he had failed. Would that chance come again?

Desmond doubted it. Every morning he awoke long before the dawn
and lay awake until daylight, his mind racked by these
apprehensions. He chafed bitterly at his inaction and he plied
Crook with questions as to whether he had any orders for him.
Each time Crook replied in the negative.

In the library Desmond found an Ordnance map of Essex. His
military training had given him a good schooling in the use of
maps, and he spent many hours studying the section of the country
about the Mill House, seeking to impress it upon his mind against
future emergencies.

He was surprised to find how remote the Mill House lay from other
habitations. Between it and Wentfield station, once Wentfield
village was passed, there were only a few lonely farms; but to
the south there was an absolutely uninhabited tract of fen
traversed by the road running past the front gate of the Mill
House. The Mill House was duly marked on the map; with a little
blue line showing the millrace which Desmond traced to its
junction with one of the broad dykes intersecting Morstead Fen.
The only inhabited house to the south of the Bellward villa
appeared to be a lonely public house situated on the far edge of
the fen, a couple of hundred yards away from the road. It was
called "The Dyke Inn."

One afternoon--it was the fifth day after Desmond's arrival at
Bellward's--Mr. Crook announced that this was to be his last
visit.

"I go abroad to-night, Mr. Bellward," he said (he always insisted
on addressing Desmond by his assumed name), "a little job o' work
in Switzerland; at Berne, to be precise. Urgent, you might call
it, and really, sir, you've made so much progress that I think I
can safely leave you. And I was to say that you will be able to
go out very soon now."

"Good!" exclaimed Desmond, rubbing his hands together. "And you
think I'll do, Crook, eh?"

Crook rubbed his nose meditatively.

"I'll be quite frank with you, Mr. Bellward," he said: "With a
superficial acquaintance, even with an intimate friend, if he's
as unobservant as most people are, you'll pass muster. But I
shouldn't like to guarantee anything if you were to meet, say,
Mrs. Bellward, if the gentleman has got a wife, or his mother.
Keep out of a strong light; don't show your profile more than you
can help, and remember that a woman is a heap more observant than
a man.

"That's my advice to you, sir. And now I'll take my leave! You
won't want that tow beard any more after to-day."

That night Desmond slept well and did not awake until the
sunshine was streaming in between the Venetian blinds in his
bedroom. He felt keen and vigorous, and he had an odd feeling
that something was going to happen to him that day.

It was a delicious morning, the air as balmy as spring. As he
brushed his hair in front of the window, Desmond saw the peewits
running about in the sunshine on the fields by the road. He made
an excellent breakfast and then, lighting a pipe, opened the
Times which lay folded by his plate.

He turned first, as was his daily habit, to the casualty list.
There it was! Under the names of the "Killed in Action," he read:
"Okewood, Major D. J. P.," followed by the name of his regiment.
It gave him an odd little shock, though he had looked for the
announcement every day; but the feeling of surprise was quickly
followed by one of relief. That brief line in the casualty list
meant the severing of all the old ties until he had hunted down
his quarry.

Now he was ready to start.

He spent the morning in the garden. Here, for the first time, he
met Mr. Hill, the odd man, who, on seeing him, became intensely
busy picking up handfuls of leaves and conveying them to a fire
which was smouldering in a corner. Desmond essayed to enter into
conversation with him but the man was so impenetrably deaf that
Desmond, tiring of bawling, "It's a fine day!" in Mr. Hill's ear,
left him and strolled over to the shed where the motor-cycle was
stored. Here he amused himself for more than an hour in taking
the machine to pieces and putting it together again. He satisfied
himself that the bike was in working order and filled up the
tank. He had an idea that this means of conveyance might come in
useful.

The day was so mild that he lunched by the open window with the
sunshine casting rainbows can the tablecloth through the
wine-glasses. He was just finishing his coffee when the
housekeeper came in and told him he was wanted on the telephone.

Desmond sprang from his chair with alacrity. His marching orders
at last! he thought, as he hurried across the hall to the
library.

"Hullo!" he cried as he picked up the receiver.

"Is that Mr. Bellward?" answered a nasal voice.

"Bellward speaking!" said Desmond, wondering who had called him
up. The voice was a man's but it was not the abrupt clear tones
of the Chief nor yet Mr. Matthews' careful accents.

"Madame Le Bon wishes to see you!"

Madame Le Bon? thought Desmond. Why, that was the name that
Nur-el-Din had given him. "I am Madame Le Bon, a Belgian
refugee," she had said.

"Do you know whom I mean?" the voice continued.

"Certainly," replied Desmond.  "You will come alone. Otherwise,
Madame will not see you. You understand? If you do not come
alone, you will waste your time!"

"Where are you speaking from?" Desmond asked.

"If you will turn to the left on leaving your front gate," the
voice resumed, "and follow the road, a messenger will meet you
and take you to the lady."

"But..." Desmond began.

"Will you come at once? And alone?" the nasal voice broke in
sharply.

Desmond took a moment's thought. To go was to disobey orders; not
to go was to risk losing a second chance of meeting Nur-el-Din.
To telephone to 700 Stanning for assistance would bring a
hornets' nest about his ears; yet he might only see the dancer if
he went alone. He lost no time in making up his mind. The Chief
must allow him latitude for meeting emergencies of this kind. He
would go.

"I will come at once," said Desmond.

"Good," said the voice and the communication ceased.

Somewhere aloft there sits a sweet little cherub whose especial
job is to look after the headstrong. It was doubtless this
emissary of providence that leant down from his celestial seat
and whispered in Desmond's ear that it would be delightful to
walk out across the fen on this sunny afternoon. Desmond was in
the act of debating whether he would not take the motor-bike, but
the cherub's winning way clinched it and he plumped for walking.

In the hall he met the housekeeper who told him she wanted to go
into Stanning to do some shopping that afternoon. Desmond told
her that he himself was going out and would not be back for tea.
Then, picking a stout blackthorn out of the hallstand, he strode
down the drive and out into the road.

It was still beautifully fine, but already the golden sunshine
was waning and there were little wisps and curls of mist stealing
low along the fields. Desmond turned to the left, on leaving the
Mill House, as he was bid and saw the road running like a khaki
ribbon before him into the misty distance.

Swinging his stick, he strode on rapidly. The road was neglected,
broken and flinty and very soft. After he had gone about a mile
it narrowed to pursue its way between two broad ditches lined
with pollard willows and brimful of brown peaty water. By this
time he judged, from his recollection of the map, that he must be
on Morstead Fen. An interminable waste of sodden, emerald green
fields, intersected by ditches, stretched away on either hand.

He had walked for half an hour when he made out in the distance a
clump of trees standing apart and seemingly in the middle of the
fields. Then in the foreground he descried a gate. A figure was
standing by it.

As he approached the gate he saw it was a small boy. On remarking
the stranger, the urchin opened the gate and without looking to
right or left led off down the road towards the clump of trees:
Desmond followed at his leisure.

As they neared the trees, the low red roof of a house detached
itself. By this time the sun was sinking in a smear of red across
a delicately tinted sky. Its dying rays held some glittering
object high up on the side of the house.

At first Desmond thought it was a window, but presently the light
went out, kindled again and once more vanished. It was too small
for a window, Desmond decided, and then, turning the matter over
in his mind, as observant people are accustomed to do even with
trifles, he suddenly realized that the light he had seen was the
reflection of the sun on a telescope or glasses.

They were now within a few hundred yards of the house. The road
had made a right angle turn to the left, but the diminutive guide
had quitted it and struck out along a very muddy cart track.
Shading his eyes, Desmond gazed at the house and presently got a
glimpse of a figure at a window surveying the road through a pair
of field glasses. Even as he looked, the figure bobbed down and
did not reappear.

"They want to be sure I'm alone," thought Desmond, and
congratulated himself on having had the strength of mind to break
his orders.

The cart-track led up to a little bridge over a ditch. By the
bridge stood a tall pole, on the top of which was a blue and gold
painted sign-board inscribed, "The Dyke Inn by J. Rass." The
urchin led him across the bridge and up to the door of the inn.

An undersized, yellow-faced man, wearing neither collar nor tie,
came to the door as they approached. Although of short stature,
he was immensely broad with singularly long arms. Altogether he
had something of the figure of a gorilla, Desmond thought on
looking at him.

The man put a finger up and touched his forelock.

"Madame Le Bon is upstairs waiting for you!" he said in a nasal
voice which Desmond recognized as that he had heard on the
telephone. "Please to follow me!"

He led the way across a long low tap-room through a door and past
the open trap-door of a cellar to a staircase. On the first
landing, lit by a window looking out on a dreary expanse of fen,
he halted Desmond.

"That's her room," he said, pointing to a door opposite the head
of the staircase, half a dozen steps up, and so saying, the
yellow-faced man walked quickly downstairs and left him. Desmond
heard his feet echo on the staircase and the door of the tap-room
slam.

He hesitated a moment. What if this were a trap? Suppose
Mortimer, growing suspicious, had made use of Nur-el-Din to lure
him to an ambush in this lonely place? Why the devil hadn't he
brought a revolver with him?

Then Desmond's Irish blood came to his rescue. He gave his head a
little shake, took a firm hold of his stick which was a stoutish
sort of cudgel and striding boldly up to the door indicated,
tapped.

"Entrez!" said a pretty voice that made Desmond's heart flutter.


CHAPTER XVI. THE STAR OF POLAND

The room in which Desmond found Nur-el-Din was obviously the
parlor of the house. Everything in it spoke of that dreary period
in art, the middle years of the reign of Victoria the Good. The
wall-paper, much mildewed in places, was an ugly shade of green
and there were dusty and faded red curtains at the windows and
draping the fireplace. Down one side of the room ran a hideous
mahogany sideboard, almost as big as a railway station buffet,
with a very dirty tablecloth. The chairs were of mahogany,
upholstered in worn black horsehair and there were two pairs of
fly-blown steel engravings of the largest size on the wall. In
the centre of the apartment stood a small round table, covered
with a much stained red tablecloth and there was a door in the
corner.

The dainty beauty of Nur-el-Din made a very forlorn picture amid
the unmatched savagery of this English interior. The dancer, who
was wearing the same becoming gray tweed suit in which Desmond
had last seen her, was sitting sorrowfully at the table when
Desmond entered. At the sight of him she sprang up and ran to
meet him with outstretched hands.

"Ah!" she cried, "comme je suis heureuse de vows voir! It is good
of you to come!"

And then, without any warning, she burst into tears and putting
her hands on the man's shoulders, hid her head against his chest
and sobbed bitterly.

Desmond took one of her hands, small and soft and warm, and
gently disengaged her. His mind was working clearly and rapidly.
He felt sure of himself, sure of his disguise; if this were an
exhibition of woman's wiles, it would find him proof; on that he
was resolved. Yet, dissolved in tears as she was, with her long
lashes glistening and her mouth twitching pitifully, the dancer
seemed to touch a chord deep down in his heart.

"Come, come," said Desmond gutturally, with a touch of bonhomie
in his voice in keeping with his ample girth, "you mustn't give
way like this, my child! What's amiss? Come, sit down here and
tell me what's the matter."

He made her resume her seat by the table and pulled up one of the
horsehair chairs for himself. Nur-el-Din wiped her eyes on a tiny
lace handkerchief, but continued to sob and shudder at intervals.

"Marie, my maid," she said in French in a broken voice, "joined
me here to-day. She has told me of this dreadful murder!"

Desmond stiffened to attention. His mind swiftly reverted to the
last woman he had seen cry, to Barbara Mackwayte discovering the
loss of the package entrusted to her charge by the woman who sat
before him.

"What murder?" he asked, striving to banish any trace of interest
from his voice. He loathed the part he had to play. The dancer's
distress struck him as genuine.

"The murder of Monsieur Mackwayte," said Nur-el-Din, and her
tears broke forth anew.

"I have read of this in the newspapers," said Desmond. "I
remember you told me he was a friend of yours."

Briefly, with many sobs, the dancer told him of the silver box
which she had entrusted to Barbara Mackwayte's charge.

"And now," she sobbed, "it is lost and all my sacrifice, all my
precautions, have been in vain!"

"But how?" asked Desmond. "Why should you think this box should
have been taken? From what I remember reading of this case in the
English newspapers there was a burglary at the house, but the
thief has been arrested and the property restored. You have only
to ask this Miss--what was the name? ah! yes, Mackwayte for your
box and she will restore it!"

"No, no!" Nur-el-Din answered wearily, "you don't understand.
This was no burglary. The man who murdered Monsieur Arthur
murdered him to get my silver box."

"But," objected Desmond, "a silver box! What value has a trifling
object like that? My dear young lady, murder is not done for a
silver box!"

"No, no," Nur-el-Din repeated, "you don't understand! You don't
know what that box contained!"

Then she relapsed into silence, plucking idly at the shred of
cambric she held between her fingers.

Already dusk was falling and the room was full of shadows. The
golden radiance of the afternoon had died and eerie wraiths of
fog were peering-in at the window.

Desmond held his peace. He felt he was on the threshold of a
confession that might rend the veil of mystery surrounding the
murder at Seven Kings. He stared fixedly at the ugly red
tablecloth, conscious that the big eyes of the girl were
searching his face.

"You have honest eyes," she said presently. "I told you that once
before... that night we met.at your house... do you remember?
Your eyes are English. But you are a German, hein?"

"My mother was Irish," said Desmond and felt a momentary relief
that, for once, he had been able to speak the truth.

"I want a friend," the girl resumed wearily, "someone that I can
trust. But I look around and I find no one. You serve the German
Empire, do you not?"

Desmond bowed.

"But not the House of Hohenzollern?" the girl cried, her voice
trembling with passion.

"I am not of the Emperor's personal service, if that is what you
mean, madame," Desmond returned coldly.

"Then, since you are not altogether an iron Prussian," Nur-el-Din
resumed eagerly, "you can differentiate. You can understand that
there is a difference between working for the cause of Germany
and for the personal business of her princes."

"But certainly," answered Desmond, "I am not an errand boy nor
yet a detective. I regard myself as a German officer doing his
duty on the front. We have many fronts besides the Western and
the Eastern. England is one.

"Ah," exclaimed the girl, clasping her hands together and looking
at him with enraptured eyes, "I see you understand! My friend, I
am much tempted to make a confidant of you!"

Desmond looked at her but did not speak. Again he felt that
silence was now his only role. He tried hard to fix his mind on
his duty; but the man in him was occupied with the woman who
looked so appealingly at him.

"... but if I do," the girl went on and her voice was hurried and
anxious, "you must swear to me that you will respect my
confidence, that you will not betray me to the others and that
you will, if need be, protect me."

Seeing that Desmond remained silent, she hastened to add:

"Believe me, what I ask you to do is not in opposition to your
duty. My friend, for all my surroundings, I am not what I seem.
Pate has drawn me into the system of which you form part; but,
believe me, I know nothing of the service to which you and
Mortimer and the rest belong!"

She spoke with painful earnestness and in a tone so mournful that
Desmond felt himself profoundly moved. "If only she is not
acting!" he thought, and sought to shake himself free from the
spell which this girl seemed able to cast about him at will.

"Promise me that you will respect my confidence and help me!" she
said and held out her hand.

Desmond's big hand closed about hers and he felt an odd thrill of
sympathy with her as their hands met.

"I promise!" he said and murmured to himself something very like
a prayer that he might not be called upon to redeem his word.

She let her eyes rest for a moment on his.

"Be careful!" she urged warningly, while the ghost of a smile
flitted across her face. "Very soon I may call upon you to make
good your words!"

"I promise!" he repeated--and his eyes never left hers.

"Then," she cried passionately, "find out who has stolen for the
Crown Prince the Star of Poland at the price of the life of a
harmless old man!"

"The Star of Poland!" repeated Desmond. "What is the Star of
Poland"

The girl drew herself up proudly and there was a certain dignity
about her manner as she answered.

"I am a Pole," she said, "and to us Poles, the Star of Poland has
stood for centuries as a pledge of the restoration of our
long-lost kingdom. It was the principal jewel of the Polish
Coronation sword which vanished many hundreds of years ago--in
the thirteenth century, one of my compatriots once told me--and
it was one of the most treasured national possessions in the
Chateau of our great king, John Sobieski at Villanoff, outside
Warsaw. My friend, I am not religious, and since my childhood I
have renounced the ancient faith of my fathers, but, when I think
of the extraordinary chain of circumstances by which this
treasure came into my possession, I almost believe that God has
chosen me to restore this gem to the King of an independent
Poland.

"Four years ago I was in the United States, a very humble dancer
in vaudeville of the third or fourth class. When I was appearing
at Columbus, Ohio, I met a German, a man who had been an officer
in the Prussian Guard but had come to grief and had been forced
to emigrate.

"This man's name was Hans von Schornbeek. Like so many German
officers who go to America, in his time he had been
everything--waiter, lift-man, engine-driver and heaven knows what
else, but when I met him he was apparently well-off. It was only
later on that I knew he was one of your principal secret agents
in America.

"He praised my talents highly and offered to furnish the capital
to start me as an Oriental dancer with a large company of my own.
There was only one condition attaching to his offer, a condition,
ma foi! which was not disagreeable to me. It was that, after six
months tour in the States and Canada, I should go to Brussels and
settle down there in a house that Herr von Schornbeek would
present me with.

"Mon ami, in those days, I understood nothing at all of
diplomacy. I knew only that I was often hungry and that I had a
little talent which, were it given a chance, might keep me from
want. Herr von Schornbeek fulfilled his promises to me. I had my
company, I did my tour of America and Canada with great success
and finally I came to Europe and made my debut at Brussels.

"I knew Brussels already from the old days. As a half-starved,
unhappy child with a troupe of acrobats, I had often appeared
there. But now I came to Brussels as a conqueror. A beautiful
villa in the suburb of Laeken was ready to receive me and I found
that a large credit had been opened in my name at one of the
principal banks so that I could keep open house.

"I think I scarcely realized then the role that I was destined to
fill by the German Secret Service. In all my life before, I had
never been happy, I had never ceased to struggle for my bare
existence, I had never had pretty clothes to wear, and motor-cars
and servants of my own."

She paused and glanced around her. The room was almost dark; the
fog outside hung like a veil before the window.

"Light the lamp!" she begged, "I do not like the dark!"

Desmond struck a match and kindled an oil lamp, which stood on
the sideboard.

"Ah! my friend," the girl resumed. "I took my fill of life with
both hands. The year was 1913. Now I know that I was one of the
German agents for the penetration of Belgium in preparation of
what was coming. My mission was to make friends among the
Belgians and the French and the cosmopolitan society of Brussels
generally, and invite them to my house where your people were
waiting to deal with them.

"My pretty villa became the rendezvous for half the rascals of
Europe, men and women, who used to meet there with all kinds of
mysterious Germans. Sometimes there was a scandal. Once a Belgian
Colonel was found shot in the billiard-room; they said it was
suicide and the thing was hushed up, but dame! now that I know
what I know...

"Enfin! I shut my eyes to it all... it was none of my business...
and I revelled in my robes, my dancing, my new life of luxury!

"And then the war came. I was at Laeken, resting after a visit to
Rome. There was a lot of talk about the war amongst the people
who came to my house, but I did not see how it could affect me,
an artiste, and I never read the newspapers. My German friends
assured me that, in a little while, the German army would be at
Brussels; that, if I remained quietly at home, all would be well.
They were very elated and confident, these German friends of
mine. And rightly; for within a few weeks the Germans entered the
city and a General quartered himself in my villa. It was he who
brought the Crown Prince to see me.

"Mon cher, you know this young man and his reputation. I am not
excusing myself; but all my life had been spent up to then in the
bas-fonds of society. I had never known what it was to be courted
and admired by one who had the world at his feet. Parbleu! one
does not meet a future Emperor every day!

"Enfin! the Prince carried me with him back to Metz, where he had
his headquarters. He was very epris with me, but you know his
temperament! No woman can hold him for more than a few weeks,
vain and weak and arrogant as he is. But pardon! I was forgetting
that you are a good German. I fear I offend your
susceptibilities..."

Desmond laughed drily.

"Madame," he said, "I hope I have preserved sufficient liberty of
judgment to have formed my own opinion about our future
sovereign. Most Germans have..."

"Alors," she broke in fiercely, her voice shaking with passion,
"you know what an ignoble canaille is this young man, without
even enough decency of feeling to respect the troops of whom he
has demanded such bloody sacrifices. At Metz we were near enough
to the fighting to realize the blood and tears of this war. But
the Prince thought of nothing, but his own amusement. To live as
he did, within sound of the guns, with parties every night, women
and dancing and roulette and champagne suppers--bah! c'etait trop
fort! It awakened in me the love of country which lies dormant in
all of us. I wanted to help my country, lest I might sink as low
as he..."

"One day the Prince brought a young officer friend of his to dine
with me. This officer had come from the Eastern front and had
been present at the capture of Warsaw. After dinner he took a
leather case out of his pocket and said to the Prince: "I have
brought your Imperial Highness a little souvenir from Poland!" As
he spoke he touched a spring and the case flew open, displaying
an enormous diamond, nearly as big as the great Orloff diamond
which I have seen at Petrograd, surrounded by five other
brilliants, the whole set like a star.

"'The Star of Poland,' said the young officer (the Prince called
him 'Erich;' I never heard his full name), 'it comes from the
long-lost Coronation sword of the Polish kings. I took it for
your Imperial Highness from the Chateau of John Sobieski at
Villanoff.

"I could not take my eyes off the gem. As the Prince held it down
under the lamp to study it, it shone like an electric light. I
had met many of my fellow countrymen in America and I had often
heard of this jewel, famous in our unhappy history.

"The Prince, who was gay with champagne, laughed and said:

"'These lousy Poles will have no further use for this pretty
trinket, thanks to our stout German blows, will they, Erich?'

"And his friend replied:

"'We'll give them a nice new German constitution instead, your
Imperial Highness!'

"The Prince, as I have said, was very merry that night. He let me
take the jewel from its case and hold it in my hands. Then I
fastened it in my hair before the mirror and turned to show
myself to the Prince and his companion.

"'Donnerwetter! said Willie. 'It looks wonderful in your hair,
Marcelle!'

"Then, as if struck by a sudden thought, he cried:

"'Erich! What do you say, Marcelle is a Pole. She shall have the
Star of Poland and wear it in memory of me!'

"The other thought this a famous idea, and so the jewel passed
into my hands. That same evening I resolved that it should be a
sacred duty on my part to keep it in safety until I could hand it
back to the lawful sovereign of an independent Poland.

"I was very unhappy at Metz until the Star of Poland came to
comfort me. When I was alone, I used to take it from its case and
feast my eyes upon it. I made many attempts to get away, but the
Prince would never let me go, though he had long since tired of
me and I was merely one of his harem of women. Pfui!"

She gave an exclamation of disgust.

"It was the Crown Princess who eventually came to my rescue," she
continued. "Long-suffering wife as she is, the stories that came
to her ears from Metz were such that she went to the Emperor and
declared that she would insist upon a divorce. There was a great
scandal. The Prince's headquarters were moved and at length I got
my release.

"I had no money. This was a detail which the Prince overlooked.
But I wanted to resume my stage work, so, with great difficulty,
through the influence of the Prince, I obtained a passport to
Holland and from there got across to England.

"I had hoped to turn my back once and for all on my connection
with the Prince. But your German Secret Service had been warned
about me. The Imperial Authorities were obviously afraid that I
might tell tales out of school. Scarcely had I arrived in London
when a man who called himself Bryan Mowbury, but who looked and
spoke like a German, came to see me and said he had been
instructed to 'look after me.' What that meant, I was soon to
discover. In a very few days I found that I was under the
supervision of your Secret Service here. In fact, Mowbury gave me
to understand that any indiscretion on my part as to my stay at
Metz would result in my immediate denunciation to the English
police as a spy.

"My friend, I had no alternative. I am not German; I am not
English; I am a Pole. I have good friends in Germany, I have good
friends in England, and their quarrels are not mine. I held my
peace about the past and submitted to the incessant watch which
Mowbury and his friends kept on my movements.

"And then one day I had a letter. It was from Count Plettenbach,
the Crown Prince's aide-de-camp, as I knew by the hand-writing,
for it was signed with an assumed name. In this letter the Count,
'on behalf of a mutual friend,' as he put it, requested me to
hand back to a certain Mr. Mortimer, his accredited
representative, 'Erich's present.' There were cogent reasons, it
was added, for this unusual request.

"I sent no reply to that letter, although an address in
Switzerland was given to which an answer might be despatched. I
was resolved, come what may, not to part with the Star of Poland.
When Mortimer came, five days later, I told him the jewel was not
mine to hand over, that it was part of the regalia of Poland and
that I would never give it up.

"Mortimer replied that the German and Austrian Governments had
decided to restore the independence of Poland, that probably an
Austrian Archduke would be made king and that it was essential
that the Star of Poland should be restored in order to include it
in the regalia for the Coronation. But I knew what this
Austro-German kingdom of Poland was to be, a serf state with not
a shadow of that liberty for which every Pole is longing. Since I
have been in England, I have kept in touch with the Polish
political organizations in this country. Rass, as he calls
himself, the landlord of this inn, is one of the most prominent
of the Polish leaders in England.

"Mortimer reasoned with me in vain and finally went away
empty-handed. But he did not abandon hope. Four successive
attempts were made to get the jewel away from me. Twice my
apartments at the Nineveh Hotel were rifled; once my
dressing-room at the theatre was entered and searched whilst I
was on the stage. But I wore the jewel day and night in a little
bag suspended by a chain from my neck and they never got it from
me.

"Two days before I came down to your house--it was the day before
the murder--I was hustled by a group of men as I came out of the
theatre. Fortunately the stage-door keeper came up unexpectedly
and the men made off. But the encounter frightened me, and I
resolved to break my contract with the Palaceum and bury myself
down here in the country.

"But somehow Mortimer learnt of my intention. The next night--it
was the night of the murder--he came to the theatre and warned me
against trying to elude his vigilance by flight. I have never
forgotten his words.

"'I can afford to wait,' he said, 'for I shall get what I want: I
always do. But you have chosen to set yourself against me and you
will bitterly repent it!"

As though the recollection proved too much for her, Nur-el-Din
broke off her narrative and covered her face with her hands.

"And do you think that Mortimer did this murder?" asked Desmond
gently.

Wearily the girl raised her head.

"Either he or one of his accomplices, of whom this girl is one!"
she answered.

"But why not have put the jewel in a bank or one of the safe
deposits? Surely it was risky to have entrusted it to a girl of
whom you knew nothing"

"My friend,", said the dancer, "I was desperate. Mortimer sees
and knows all. This unexpected meeting with the daughter of my
old friend seemed at the moment like a heaven-sent chance to
place the jewel, unknown to him, in safe hands. I felt that as
long as I carried it on me, my life was in constant danger. It
was only to-day, when I heard of the murder, that it dawned on me
how indiscreet I had been. I might have guessed, since Miss
Mackwayte knew Mortimer--"

"Miss Mackwayte knows Mortimer?" echoed Desmond in stupefaction.

"But certainly," replied Nur-el-Din. "Was it not I myself--" She
broke off suddenly with terror in her eyes.

"Ah, no!" she whispered. "It is enough. Already I have said too
much..."

Desmond was about to speak when the door opened and a
foreign-looking maid, whom Desmond remembered to have seen in the
dancer's dressing-room, came in. She went swiftly to her mistress
and whispered something in her ear.

The dancer sprang to her feet.

"A little moment... you will excuse me..." she cried to Desmond
and ran from the room. The maid followed her, leaving Desmond
alone.

Presently, the sound of Nur-el-Din's voice raised high in anger
struck on his ears. He stole softly to the door and opened it.
Before him lay the staircase deserted. He tiptoed down the stairs
to the first landing and listened. The murmur of voices reached
him indistinctly from the room below. Then he heard Nur-el-Din
crying out again in anger.

He craned his ear over the well of the staircase, turning his
face to the window which stood on the landing. The window gave on
a small yard with a gate over which a lamp was suspended and
beyond it the fen now swathed in fog. The dancer's maid stood
beneath the lamp in earnest conversation with a man in rough
shooting clothes who held a gun under his arm. As Desmond looked
the man turned his head so that the rays of the lamp fell full
upon his face. To his unspeakable consternation and amazement,
Desmond recognized Strangwise.


CHAPTER XVII. MR. BELLWARD ARRANGES A BRIDGE EVENING

Oblivious of the voices in the room below, Desmond stood with his
face pressed against the glass of the window. Was Strangwise
staying at "The Dyke Inn"? Nothing was more probable; for the
latter had told him that he was going to spend his leave shooting
in Essex, and Morstead Fen must abound in snipe and duck.

But he and Strangwise must not meet. Desmond was chary of
submitting his disguise to the other's keen, shrewd eyes.
Strangwise knew Nur-el-Din: indeed, the dancer might have come to
the inn to be with him. If he recognized Desmond and imparted his
suspicions to the dancer, the game world be up; on the other
hand, Desmond could not take him aside and disclose his identity;
for that would be breaking faith with the Chief. There was
nothing for it, he decided, but flight.

Yet how could he get away unobserved? There was no exit from the
staircase by the door into the tap-room where Nur-el-Din was, and
to go through the tap-room was to risk coming face to face with
Strangwise.

So Desmond remained where he was by the window and watched.
Presently, the woman turned and began to cross the yard,
Strangwise, carrying his gun, following her. Desmond waited until
he heard a door open somewhere below and then he acted.

Beside the window ran an old lead water-pipe which drained the
roof above his head. On a level with the sill of the landing
below, this pipe took a sharp turn to the left and ran diagonally
down to a tall covered-in water-butt that stood on the fiat roof
of an outhouse in the little yard.

Desmond raised the window very gently and tested the pipe with
his hand. It seemed rather insecure and shook under his pressure.
With his eye he measured the distance from the sill to the pipe;
it was about four feet. Desmond reckoned that, if the pipe would
hold, by getting out of the window and hanging on to the sill, he
might, by a pendulum-like motion, gain sufficient impulse to
swing his legs across the diagonally-running pipe, then transfer
his hands and so slide down to the outhouse roof.

He wasted no time in debating the chances of the pipe collapsing
under his weight. All his life it had been his practice to take a
risk, for such is the Irish temperament--if the object to be
attained in any way justified it; and he was determined to avoid
at all costs the chance of a meeting with Strangwise. The latter
had probably read the name of Okewood in that morning's casualty
list, but Desmond felt more than ever that he distrusted the man,
and his continued presence in the neighborhood of Nur-el-Din
gravely preoccupied him.

He stood a moment by the open window and listened. The murmur of
voices went on in the taproom, but from another part of the house
he heard a deep laugh and knew it to be Strangwise's. Trusting to
Providence that the roof of the outhouse would be out of sight of
the yard door, Desmond swung his right leg over the window-sill
and followed it with the other, turning his back on the yard. The
next moment he was dangling over the side of the house.

Then from the yard below he heard Strangwise call:

"Rufus! Rufus!"

A heavy footstep sounded on the flags. Desmond remained perfectly
still. The strain on his arms was tremendous. If Strangwise
should go as far as the gate, so as to get clear of the yard, he
must infallibly see that figure clinging to the window-sill.

"Where the devil is that doggy" said Strangwise. Then he
whistled, and called again:

"Rufus! Rufus!"

Desmond made a supreme effort to support the strain on his
muscles. The veins stood out at his temples and he felt the blood
singing in his ears. Another minute and he knew he must drop. He
no longer had the power to swing himself up to the window ledge
again.

A bark rang out in the courtyard, followed by the patter of feet.
Desmond heard Strangwise speak to the dog and reenter the house.
Then silence fell again. With a tremendous effort Desmond swung
his legs athwart the pipe, gripped it with his right hand, then
his left, and very gently commenced to let himself down. The pipe
quivered beneath his weight, but it held fast and in a minute he
was standing on the roof of the outhouse, cautiously peering
through the dank fog that hung about the yard.

Screening himself from view behind the tall waterbutt, he
reconnoitred the back of the inn. The upper part of the house was
shrouded in darkness, but a broad beam of light from a half-open
door and a tall window on the ground floor cleft the pall of fog.
The window showed a snug little bar with Strangwise standing by
the counter, a glass in his hand. As Desmond watched him, he
heard a muffled scream from somewhere within the house.
Strangwise heard it too, for Desmond saw him put his glass down
on the bar and raise his head sharply. There followed a dull
crash from the interior of the inn and the next moment the
yellow-faced man, whom Desmond judged to be Rass, stepped into
the circle of light inside the window. He said something to
Strangwise with thumb jerked behind him, whereupon the latter
clapped him, as though in approval, on the shoulder, and both
hurried out together.

Puzzled though he was by the scene he had just witnessed, Desmond
did not dare to tarry longer. The roof of the outhouse was only
some ten feet from the ground, an easy drop. He let himself
noiselessly down and landing on his feet without mishap, darted
out of the yard gate. As he did so, he heard the inn door open
and Strangwise's voice cry out:

"Who's that?"

But Desmond heeded not. He dashed out upon the fen. Before he had
gone a dozen paces the fog had swallowed up inn and all. Out of
the white pall behind him he heard confused shouts as he skirted
swiftly round the house and reached the road.

Once he had gained the freedom of the highway; Desmond breathed
again. The dense fog that enveloped him, the hard road beneath
his feet, gave him a sense of security that he had missed as long
as he was in the atmosphere of that lonely, sinister place. He
struck out at a good pace for home, intent upon one thing,
namely, to send an immediate summons for help to surround the
Dyke Inn and all within it. Nur-el-Din, it was clear, whether a
spy or no (and Desmond believed her story), was the only person
who could throw any light on the mysterious circumstances
surrounding old Mackwayte's murder. Besides, her arrest would
safeguard her against further machinations on the part of
Mortimer, though Desmond suspected that the latter, now that he
had secured the jewel, would leave the dancer in peace. As for
Strangwise, it would be for him to explain as best he could his
continued association with a woman for whose arrest a warrant had
been issued.

Desmond let himself in with his key. The housekeeper had returned
and was laying the dinner-table. In the library the curtains were
drawn and a fire burned brightly in the grate. The room looked
very snug and cosy by contrast with the raw weather outside.

Desmond shut and locked the door and then went to the telephone
at the desk. "Ring up 700 Stanning"--he repeated his instructions
to himself "and ask for Mr. Elias. Assistance'll be with you
within fifteen minutes afterwards."

By the clock on the mantelpiece it was a quarter to seven. If aid
arrived promptly, with a car they could be at the Dyke Inn by a
quarter past seven.

The telephone gave no sign of life. Desmond impatiently jerked
the receiver hook up and down. This time, at least, he would not
fail, he told himself. Before he went to bed that night
Nur-el-Din, her maid, Rass, and if needs be, Strangwise (who
needed a lesson to teach him discretion), should be in custody.

Still no reply.

"Hullo! Hullo!" cried Desmond, depressing the hook repeatedly.
"Hullo, Exchange!"

But there was no answer. Then it struck Desmond that the line was
dead: his ear detected none of that busy whirr which is heard in
the telephone when one is waiting to get a number.

He spent five minutes in vain attempts to obtain a reply, then
abandoned the endeavor in disgust.

"I shall have to take the motor-bike and go over to Stunning," he
said to himself, "how I shall find my way there in this fog, the
Lord only knows! And I don't know whom to apply to when I get
there. The police-station, I suppose!"

He unlocked the door and rang for Martha.

"I have to go over to Stunning, Martha," he said, "I will try and
be back for dinner at eight!"

He had no intention of accompanying the party to the Dyke Inn. He
must preserve his incognito until Mortimer, the main quarry, had
been run down.

He filled his case from the box of cigarettes on the table and
thrust a box of matches into his pocket to light his head-lamp.
Then, taking a cap from the hat-stand, he opened the front door.
Even as he did so a big open car slowed down throbbing outside
the porch. A man sprang out and advanced into the light streaming
from the front door into the eddying mist. It was Mortimer.

"Fortune," thought Desmond, "has broken her rule. She has given
me a second chance! "

"Well met, Bellward!" cried Mortimer, blinking at the other
through his thick glasses. "Tut, tut! What a night! You were
never going out, I swear."

Already Desmond had decided in his mind the course of action he
would pursue. For the moment he must let the party at the Dyke
Inn slide in favor of the bigger catch. He must slip away later
and have another try at the telephone and if it were still out of
order, he must endeavor to overpower Mortimer and then go for
assistance himself. On a night like this it was useless to think
of employing a half-blind old dolt like Martha to take a message.
As for the odd man, he lived at Wakefield, and went away at dusk
every evening.

So Desmond muttered some plausible lie about wanting to have a
look at the weather and cordially invited Mortimer in.

"You will stay for dinner" he said.

"Gladly," replied the other, sinking with aunt into the settee.
"And I should be glad if we might dine early."

Desmond raised his eyebrows.

"... Because," Mortimer resumed, "I have ventured to ask a few
friends round here to... to have an evening at bridge. Doubtless,
you have cards, eh?"

Desmond pointed to a card-table standing in the corner with
several packs of cards and markers. Then he rang and told the
housekeeper that they would dine as soon as possible.

"The coming fortnight," said Mortimer, tucking his napkin into
his collar as they sat at the dinner table, "is pregnant with
great events. No less than ten divisions are, I understand, to be
transferred to the other side. I have waited to communicate with
you until I had confirmation of this report. But now that the
matter has been decided, it only remains for us to perfect our
arrangements for communicating these plans to our friends beyond
the North Sea. Therefore, I thought a friendly bridge evening at
the hospitable home of our dear colleague Bellward would be in
place."

He smiled affably and bent over his soup-plate.

"I shall be delighted to receive our friends," Desmond replied,
"a glass of sherry?"

"Thank you," said Mortimer.

"I shall have to provide a few refreshments," said Desmond. "May
I ask how many guests I may expect?"

Mortimer reckoned on his fingers.

"Let's see," he answered, "there's Max, that's one, and Madame
Malplaquet, that's two. No. 13 and Behrend makes four and myself,
five!"

"And Madame Nur-el-Din?" queried Desmond innocently, but inwardly
quaking at his rashness.

Mortimer genially shook a finger at him.

"Sly dog!" he chuckled, "you're one too many for me in that
quarter, I see! I know all about your tete-a-tete with our
charming young friend this afternoon!"

Desmond felt the blood rush to his face. He thought of
Nur-el-Din's words: "Mortimer sees and knows all." He picked up
his sherry glass and drained it to cover his confusion.

"... It was hardly gallant of you to bolt so suddenly and leave
the lady!" Mortimer added.

How much did this uncanny creature know?

Without waiting for him to reply, Mortimer went on.

"I suppose she told you a long story of my persecution, eh,
Bellward? You needn't shake your head. I taxed her with it and
she admitted as much."

"I had no idea that you were staying at the Dyke Inn!" said
Desmond at a venture.

"My friend," replied Mortimer, lowering his voice, "your fair
charmer is showing a decided inclination to make a nuisance of
herself. I have had to keep an eye on her. It's been a very
serious inconvenience to my plans, I can assure you. But you
haven't answered my question. What sent you away in such a hurry
this afternoon? and in so romantic a fashion? By the window, was
it not?"

Through sheer apprehension, Desmond was now keyed up to a kind of
desperate audacity. The truth is sometimes a very effective
weapon in the game of bluff, and Desmond determined to employ it.

"I saw someone I didn't want to meet," he replied.

"Ah!" said Mortimer, "who was that, I wonder? The Dyke Inn could
hardly be described as a frequented resort, I imagine!"

The entry of old Martha to change the plates prevented Desmond
from replying. He used the brief respite to review the situation.
He would tell Mortimer the truth. They were man to man now and he
cared nothing even if the other should discover the fraud that
had been practised upon him. Come what might, Mortimer, dead or
alive, should be delivered up to justice that night.

The housekeeper left the room and Desmond spoke.

"I saw an officer I knew in the courtyard," he said.

"Oh, Strangwise, I suppose!" said Mortimer carelessly. "There's
nothing to fear from him, Bellward. He's of the beef and beer and
no brains stamp of British officer. But how do you know
Strangwise?"

"I met him at the Nineveh Hotel in town one night," replied
Desmond. "I don't care about meeting officers, however, and
that's a fact!"

Mortimer looked at him keenly for a brief instant. "What
prudence!" he cried. "Bellward, you are the very model of what a
secret agent should be! This pheasant is delicious!"

He turned the conversation into a different channel but Desmond
could not forget that brief searching look. His mind was in a
turmoil of half-digested facts, of semi-completed deductions. He
wanted to go away somewhere alone and think out this mystery and
disentangle each separate web of this baffling skein of intrigue.

He must focus his attention on Mortimer and Nur-el-Din. If
Mortimer and Strangwise were both staying at the Dyke Inn, then
they were probably acquainted. Strangwise knew Nur-el-Din, too,
knew her well; for Desmond remembered how familiarly they had
conversed together that night in the dancer's dressing-room at
the Palaceum. Strangwise knew Barbara Mackwayte also. Nur-el-Din
had introduced them, Desmond remembered, on that fateful night
when he had accompanied Strangwise to the Palaceum. Strange, how
he was beginning to encounter the man Strangwise at every turn in
this sinister affair.

And then, with a shock that struck him like a blow in the face,
Desmond recalled Barbara's parting words to him in the taxi. He
remembered how she had told him of seeing Nur-el-Din's face in
the mirror as the dancer was talking to Strangwise that night at
the Palaceum, and of the look of terror in the girl's eyes.
Nur-el-Din was terrified of Mortimer; for so much she had
admitted to Desmond that very afternoon; she was terrified of
Strangwise, too, it seemed, of this Strangwise who, like
Mortimer, kept appearing at every stage of this bewildering
affair. What confession had been on Nur-el-Din's lips when she
had broken off that afternoon with the cry:

"Already I have said too much!"

Thereafter Desmond's eyes were never long absent from Mortimer's
face, scrutinizing each feature in turn, the eyes, set rather
close together, grotesquely shielded by the thick spectacles, the
narrow cheeks, the rather cynical mouth half hidden by the heavy,
drooping moustache, the broad forehead broken by a long lock of
dark hair brushed out flat in a downward direction from an
untidy, unkempt crop.

They talked no more of Strangwise or of Nur-el-Din. The rest of
dinner was passed in conversation of a general order in which Mr.
Mortimer showed himself to great advantage. He appeared to be a
widely traveled, well-read man, with a fund of dry, often rather
grim humor. And all the time Desmond watched, watched,
unobtrusively but unceasingly, looking out for something he was
confident of detecting through the suave, immobile mask of this
brilliant conversationalist.

Skillfully, almost imperceptibly, Desmond edged the talk on to
the war. In this domain, too, Mortimer showed himself a man of
broad views, of big, comprehensive ideas. Towards the strategy
and tactics of the two sides, he adopted the attitude of an
impartial onlooker, but in his comments he proved himself to have
a thorough grasp of the military situation. He talked freely and
ably of such things as tanks, the limited objective in the attack
and the decentralization of responsibility in the field.

Encouraged by his volubility, for he was a man who delighted in
conversation, Desmond gradually gave the talk a personal turn.
But willing as Mortimer showed himself to discuss the war
generally, about his personal share he was as mute as a fish. Try
as he would Desmond could get nothing out of him. Again and
again, he brought the conversation round to personal topics; but
every time his companion contrived to switch it back to general
lines.

At last Desmond risked a direct question. By this time a pint of
Pommery and Greno was tingling in his veins and he felt he didn't
care if the roof fell in.

"Ever since Nur-el-Din told me yon were of the Crown Prince's
personal service," he said, "I have been devoured with curiosity
to know what you were doing before you came to England. Were you
at Metz with his Imperial Highness? Did you see the assault at
Verdun? Were you present at the capture of the Fort of
Douaumont?" '

Mortimer shook his head, laughing, and held up a deprecating
hand.

"Professional discretion, my dear fellow, professional
discretion!" he retorted. "You know what it is!"

Then lowering his voice, he added:

"Between ourselves the less said about my connection with Master
Willie the better. Our colleagues are already restless at what
they consider my neglect of my professional work. They attribute
it to the wiles of Nur-el-Din. They may if they like and I don't
propose to disillusion them. You understand, Bellward?"

His voice was commanding and he bent his brows at Desmond, who
hastened to protest that his discretion in the matter would be
absolute.

When they had had their coffee and Mortimer was contentedly
puffing one of Bellward's excellent double Coronas, Desmond rose
from the table.

"If you will excuse me a minute," he said, "I will just go across
to the library and see if my housekeeper has put all in order for
our guests!"

Instantly Mortimer got up from the table.

"By all means," he said, and emptied his glass of brandy, "so, I
will come with you!"

Mortimer meant to stick to him, thought Desmond; that was
evident. Then an idea struck him. Why should he not telephone in
Mortimer's presence? To ask for Mr. Elias was in no way
incriminating and if help came promptly, Mortimer could be
secured and the other spies pounced upon in their turn as they
arrived.

Therefore, as soon as they reached the library, Desmond walked
over to the desk and picked up the telephone receiver from its
hook.

"Excuse me," he said to Mortimer, "I had forgotten I had to ring
up Stanning!"

"Oh, dear," said Mortimer from his place on the hearth rug where
he was warming his coat tails in front of the fire, "isn't that
unfortunate? I wish I had known! Tut, tut, how annoying for you!"

The telephone seemed quite dead.

"I don't understand!" said Desmond to Mortimer. "What's
annoying?"

"The telephone, my dear Bellward,"--Mortimer spoke in a pompous
voice--"the telephone is the symbol of the age in which we live,
the age of publicity but also of indiscretion. It is almost as
indiscreet to have a telephone in your house as to keep a diary.
Therefore, in view of our little party here this evening, to
prevent us from being disturbed in any way, I took the liberty
of... of severing the connection... temporarily, mind you, only
temporarily; it shall be restored as soon as we break up. I have
some small acquaintance with electrical engineering."

Desmond was silent. Disappointment had deprived him for the
moment of the power of speech. It was to be man to man then,
after all. If he was to secure Mortimer and the rest of the gang
that night, he must do it on his own. He could not hope for aid.
The prospect did not affright him. If Mortimer could have seen
the other's eyes at that moment he might have remarked a light
dancing in them that was not solely of Messrs. Pommery and
Greno's manufacture.

"If I had known you wanted to use the instrument, my dear
fellow," Mortimer continued in his bland voice, "I should
certainly have waited until you had done your business!"

"Pray don't mention it," replied Desmond, "you do well to be
prudent, Mr. Mortimer!"

Mortimer shot a sudden glance at him. Desmond met it with a
frank, easy smile.

"I'm a devil for prudence myself!" he observed brightly.


CHAPTER XVIII. THE GATHERING OF THE SPIES

Action, or the promise of action, always acted on Desmond Okewood
like a nerve tonic. His visit to the inn, followed by the fencing
with Mortimer at dinner, had galvanized his nerves jaded with the
inaction of the preceding days. He averted his eyes from the
future, he put the past resolutely away. He bent his whole
attention on the problem immediately before him--how to carry off
the role of Bellward in front of four strangers, one of whom, at
least, he thought, must know the man he was impersonating; how to
extract as much information as possible about the gang and its
organization before uncovering his hand; finally, how to
overpower the four men and the one woman when the moment had come
to strike.

Mortimer and he were in the library. By Desmond's direction old
Martha had put out two bridge tables and cards. A tantalus stand
with siphons and glasses, an assortment of different colored
liqueurs in handsome cut-glass carafes and some plates of
sandwiches stood on a side-table. At Mortimer's suggestion
Desmond had told the housekeeper that, once the guests had
arrived, she might go to bed.

The library was very still. There was no sound except for the
solemn ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece or the occasional
rustle of the evening paper in Mortimer's hand as he stood in
front of the fire. Desmond was sitting on the settee, tranquilly
smoking, studying Mortimer and thinking out the problem before
him.

He measured Mortimer with his eye. The latter was a bigger man
than Desmond in every way and Desmond suspected that he was even
stronger than he looked. Desmond wondered whether he should try
and overpower him then and there. The other was almost certain to
carry a revolver, he thought, while he was unarmed. Failure, he
knew, would ruin everything. The gang would disperse to the four
winds of heaven while as for Mr. Bellward--well, he would
certainly be "for it," as the soldiers say.

No, he must hold his hand until the meeting had taken place. This
was the first conference that Mortimer had summoned, and Desmond
intended to see that it should be the last. But first he meant to
find out all there was to know about the working of the gang.

He resolved to wait and see what the evening would bring forth.
The telephone was "a washout": the motor-cycle was now his only
chance to summon aid for he knew it was hopeless to think of
tackling single-handed odds of four to one (to say nothing of the
lady in the case). It must be his business to make an opportunity
to slip away on the motor-bike to Stanning. Ten minutes to get
there, five minutes to deliver his message at the police station
(if the Chief's people made their headquarters there), and ten
minutes to get back if they had a car. Could he leave the meeting
for 25 minutes without arousing suspicions? He doubted it; but it
must be. There was no other way. And then with a shock that made
him cold with fear he remembered Mortimer's motor-car.

If, during his absence, anything occurred to arouse their
suspicions, the whole crowd could pile into the car and be away
long before Desmond could be back with help. The fog had lifted
and it was a clear night outside. The car would have to be got
rid of before he left the house, that was all about it. But how?
A means to that end must also be discovered as the evening
progressed. By the way, what had Mortimer done with his car?

A very faint throbbing somewhere outside answered Desmond's
unspoken question.

Mortimer flung aside his paper.

"Isn't that a car?" he asked, "that'll be they. I sent Max to
Wentfield station to meet our friends!"

There was the sound of voices, of bustle in the hall. Then the
door opened and a man came in. Desmond had a brief moment of
acute suspense. Was he supposed to know him?

He was a short, ugly fellow with immensely broad shoulders, a
heavy puffy face, a gross, broad nose, and a tooth-brush
moustache. He might have been a butcher to look at. In the top
edge of his coat lapel, he wore a small black pin with a glass
head.

"Well, Max," said Mortimer. "Have you brought them all?"

The man was mustering Desmond with a suspicious, unfriendly
stare.

"My friend, Bellward!" said Mortimer, clapping Desmond on the
shoulder. "You've heard of Bellward, Max!"

And to Desmond's surprise he made some passes in the air.

The man's mien underwent a curious change. He became cringing;
almost overawed.

"Reelly," he grunted, "reelly now! You don't siy! Glad to know
yer, mister, I'm shore!"

He spoke with a vile snuffing cockney accent, and thrust out his
hand to Desmond. Then he added to Mortimer:

"There's three on 'em. That's the count, ain't it? I lef' the car
outside on the drive!"

At this moment two more of the guests entered: One was a tall,
emaciated looking man of about fifty who seemed to be in the last
stages of consumption; the other a slightly built young fellow
with a shock of black hair brushed back and an olive complexion.
He wore pince-nez and looked like a Russian revolutionary. They,
too, wore the badge of the brotherhood--the black pin in the coat
lapel.

"Goot efening, Mr. Mortimer," said the tall man in a guttural
voice, "this is Behrend"--he indicated the young man by his
side--"you haft not meet him no?"

Then, leaving Behrend to shake hands with Mortimer, he literally
rushed at Desmond and shook him by the hand exactly as though he
were working a pump handle.

"My tear Pellward," he cried, "it is a hondred year since I haf
see you, not? And how are the powers!"

He lowered his voice and gazed mysteriously at him.

Desmond, at a loss what to make of this extraordinary individual,
answered at random:

"The powers? Still fighting, I believe!"

The tall man stared open-mouthed at him for a moment. Then,
clapping his hands together, he burst into a high-pitched cackle
of laughter.

"A joke," he yelled, "a mos' excellent joke! I must tell this to
Minna. My vriend, I haf not mean the great Powers."

He looked dramatically about him, then whispered:

"I mean, the oggult!"

Desmond, who was now quite out of his depth, wagged his head
solemnly at the other as though to indicate that, his occult
powers were something not to be lightly mentioned. He had no fear
of the tall man, at any rate. He placed him as a very ordinary
German, a common type in the Fatherland, simple-minded, pedantic,
inquisitive,, and a prodigious bore withal but dangerous, for of
this stuff German discipline kneads militarists.

But the door opened again to admit the last of the guests. A
woman entered. Desmond was immediately struck by the contrast she
presented to the others, Mortimer with his goggle eyes and untidy
hair, Max, gross and bestial, Behrend, Oriental and shifty, and
the scarecrow figure of the tall man.

Despite her age, which must have been nearly sixty, she still
retained traces of beauty. Her features were very regular, and
she had a pair of piercing black eyes of undimmed brightness. Her
gray hair was tastefully arranged, and she wore a becoming black
velvet gown with a black lace scarf thrown across the shoulders.
A white silk rose was fastened to her bodice by a large black pin
with a glass head.

Directly she appeared, the tall man shouted to her in German.

"Sag' mal, Minna..." he began.

Mortimer turned on him savagely.

"Hold your tongue, No. 13," he cried, "are you mad? What the
devil do you mean by it? You know the rules!"

By way of reply, "No. 13" broke into a regular frenzy of coughing
which left him gasping for breath.

"Pardon! I haf' forgot!" he wheezed out between the spasms.

The woman went over to Mortimer and put out tier gloved hand.

"I am Mrs. Malplaquet," she said in a pleasant voice. "And you
are Mr. Mortimer, I think!"

Mortimer bowed low over her hand.

"Madame, I am charmed to meet one of whom I have heard nothing
but praise," he said.

"Verry pretty!" replied Mrs. Malplaquet smiling. "They tell me
you have a great way with the ladies, my dear sir!"

"But," she went on, "I am neglecting our host, my dear Mr.
Bellward. How are you, my friend? How well you are looking... so
young... so fresh! I declare you seem to have got five years
younger!"

The keen black eyes searched Desmond's face. He felt horribly
uncomfortable. The woman's eyes were like gimlets boring right
into him. He suddenly felt that his disguise was a poor one. He
remembered Crook's warning to be wary of women, and he inwardly
quailed.

"I am so glad to meet you again!" he murmured. He didn't like
Mrs. Malplaquet's eyes. They assorted strangely with the rest of
her gentle and refined appearance. They were hard and cruel,
those black eyes. Thy put him in mind of a snake.

"It is so long since I've seen you," she said, "that positively
your voice seems to have changed."

"That's because I have a cold," said Desmond.

"Fiddlesticks!" retorted the lady, "the timbre is quite
different! Bellward, I believe you're in love! Don't tell me
you've been running after that hank of hair that Mortimer is so
devoted to!" She glanced in Mortimer's direction, but that
gentleman was engaged in earnest conversation with Behrend and
the tall man.

"Whom do you meant" asked Desmond.

"Where are your eyes, man?" rapped out Mrs. Malplaquet. "The
dancer woman, of course, Nur-el-what-do-you-call-it. There's the
devil of a row brewing about the way our friend over there is
neglecting us to run after the minx. They're getting sharp in
this country, Bellward--I've lived here for forty years so I know
what I'm talking about--and we can't afford to play any tricks.
Mortimer will finish by bringing destruction on every one of us.
And I shall tell him so tonight. And so will No. 13! And so will
young Behrend! You ought to hear Behrend about it!"

Mrs. Malplaquet began to interest Desmond. She was obviously a
woman of refinement, and he was surprised to find her in this odd
company. By dint of careful questioning, he ascertained the fact
that she lived in London, at a house on Campden Hill. She seemed
to know a good many officers, particularly naval men.

"I've been keeping my eyes open as I promised, Bellward," she
said, "and I believe I've got hold of a likely subject for you--a
submarine commander he is, and very psychic. When will you come
and meet him at my house?"

Mortimer's voice, rising above the buzz of conversation, checked
his reply.

"If you will all sit down," he said, "we'll get down to
business."

Despite all distractions, Desmond had been watching for this
summons. He had marked down for himself a chair close to the
door. For this he now made, after escorting Mrs. Malplaquet to
the settee where she sat down beside Behrend. Max took the
armchair on the left of the fireplace; while No. 13 perched
himself grotesquely on a high music-stool, his long legs curled
round the foot. Mortimer stood in his former position on the
hearth, his back to the fire.

A very odd-looking band! Desmond commented to himself but he
thought he could detect in each of the spies a certain ruthless
fanaticism which experience taught him to respect as highly
dangerous. And they all had hard eyes!

When they were seated, Mortimer said:

"About the 14th of this month the British Admiralty will begin
the work of shipping to France ten divisions of American troops
now training in this country. The most extraordinary precautions
are being taken to complete this huge undertaking with success.
It seems to me that the moment has come for us to demonstrate the
efficiency of our new organization."

He looked round at his audience but no one said a word. Desmond
felt very distinctly that there was a hostile atmosphere against
Mortimer in that room.

"I asked you to come here to-night," Mortimer went on, "to
discuss the plans for sending prompt and accurate information
regarding the movements of these transports to the other side. I
warn you that this time our mode of procedure will have to be
radically different from the methods we have pursued on former
occasions. To expend our energies in collecting information at
half a dozen different ports of war will be waste of time. The
direction of the whole of this enterprise lies in the hands of
one man at the Admiralty."

Behrend, who had struck Desmond as a rather taciturn young man,
shook his head dubiously.

"That makes things very difficult," he remarked.

"Wait," replied Mortimer. "I agree, it is very difficult, the
more so as I have reason to believe that the authorities have
discovered the existence of our organization."

Mrs. Malplaquet and Behrend turned to one another simultaneously.

"What did I say?" said Behrend.

"I told you so," said the lady.

"Therefore," Mortimer resumed, "our former activities on the
coast will practically be paralyzed. We shall have to confine our
operations to London while Max and Mr. Behrend here will be
entrusted with the task of getting the news out to our
submarines."

No. 13 broke in excitedly.

"Vork in London, vork in London!" he cried. "It is too dangerous,
my vriend. Vot do I know of London? Portsmouth" (he called it
Portsmouse), Sout'ampton, the Isle of Vight... good... it is my
province. But, London... it is senseless!"

Mortimer turned his gig-lamps on the interrupter.

"You will take your orders from me as before," he said quietly.

Behrend adjusted his pince-nez.

"No. 13 is perfectly right," he remarked, "he knows his
territory, and he should be allowed to work there."

"You, too," Mortimer observed in the same calm tone as before,
"will take your orders from me!"

With a quick gesture the young man dashed his long black hair out
of his eyes.

"Maybe," he replied, "but only as long as I feel sure that your
orders are worth following.

"Do you dare..." began Mortimer, shouting.

"... At present," the other continued, as though Mortimer had not
spoken. "I don't feel at all sure that they are."

The atmosphere was getting a trifle heated, thought Desmond. If
he judged Mortimer aright, he was not the man to let himself be
dictated to by anybody. He was wondering how the scene would end
when suddenly something caught his eye that took his mind right
away from the events going forward in the room.

Opposite him, across the library, was a French window across
which the curtains had been drawn. One of the curtains, however,
had got looped up on a chair so that there was a gap at the
bottom of the window showing the pane.

In this gap was a face pressed up against the glass. To his
astonishment Desmond recognized the weather-beaten features of
the odd man, Mr. John Hill. The face remained there only for a
brief instant. The next moment it was gone and Desmond's
attention was once more claimed by the progress of the
conference.

"Do I understand that you refuse to serve under we any longer?"
Mortimer was saying to Behrend, who had risen from the settee and
stood facing him.

"As long as you continue to behave as you are doing at present,"
replied the other, "you may understand that!"

Mortimer made a quick dive for his pocket. In an instant Max had
jumped at him and caught his arm.

"Don't be a fool!" he cried, "for Gawd's sake, put it away,
carn't yer? D 'you want the 'ole ruddy plice abart our ears?"

"I'll have no disobedience of orders," roared Mortimer,
struggling with the other. In his fist he had a big automatic
pistol. It was a prodigious weapon, the largest pistol that
Desmond had ever seen.

"He threatened him, he threatened him!" screamed No. 13 jumping
about on his stool.

"Take it away from him, Max, for Heaven's sake!" cried the lady.

Everybody was talking at once. The noise was so loud that Desmond
wondered whether old Martha would hear the din. He sat in his
chair by the door, a silent witness of the scene. Then suddenly,
at the height of the hubbub, he heard the faint humming of a
motor-car. It lasted for perhaps thirty seconds, then gradually
died away.

"What did it mean?" he asked himself. The only living being he
knew of outside was John Hill, the odd man, whose face he had
just seen; the only car was Mortimer's. Had the odd man gone off
in Mortimer's car? He was thankful to note that, in the din, none
save him seemed to have heard the car.

By this time Mortimer had put up his pistol and Mrs. Malplaquet
was speaking. Her remarks were effective and very much to the
point. She upbraided Mortimer with his long and mysterious
absences which she attributed to his infatuation for Nur-el-Din
and complained bitterly of the dancer's imprudence in consorting
openly with notorious folk like Lazarro and Bryan Mowbury.

"I went to the girl myself," she said, "and begged her to be more
circumspect. But Madame would not listen to advice; Madame was
doubtless sure of her position with our revered leader, and
thought she could reject the friendly counsel of one old enough
to be her mother. Behrend and Max and No. 13 there--all of
us--are absolutely agreed that we are not going on with this sort
of thing any longer. If you are to remain in charge of our
organization, Mr. Mortimer, we want to know where you are to be
found and how you spend your time. In short, we want to be sure
that you are not playing a game that most of us have at different
times played on subordinate agents... I mean, that when the
crisis comes, we fall into the trap and you walk away. You had
better realize once and for all that we are too old hands for
that sort of trick."

Here Max took up the thread. "Mrs. Malplaquet had put it very
strite, so she 'ad, and wot he wanted to know was what Mortimer
'ad to siy?"

Mortimer was very suave in his reply; a bad sign, thought
Desmond, for it indicated that he was not sure of himself. He was
rather vague, spoke about a vitally important mission that he had
had to fulfil but which he had now brought to a successful
conclusion, so that he was at length free to devote his whole
attention once more to the great task in hand.

Behrend brought his fist crashing down on the arm of the settee.

"Words, words," he cried, "it won't do for me. Isn't there a man
in the room besides me? You, Bellward, or you, Max, or you,
No.13? Haven't you got any guts any of You? Are you going to sit
here and listen to the soft soap of a fellow who has probably
sent better men than himself to their death with tripe of this
kind? It may do for you, but by the Lord, it won't do for me!"

Mortimer cleared his throat uneasily.

"Our host is silent," said Mrs. Malplaquet, "what does Mr.
Bellward think about it?"

Desmond spoke up promptly.

"I think it would be very interesting to hear something further
about this mission of Mortimer's," he observed:

Mortimer cast him a glance of bitter malice.

"Well," he said, after a pause, "you force my hand. I shall tell
you of this mission of mine and. I shall show you the evidence,
because it seems essential in the interests of our organization.
But I assure you I shall not forget this want of confidence you
have shown in me; and I shall see that you don't forget it,
either!"

As he spoke, he glared fiercely at Desmond through his glasses.

"Let's hear about the precious mission," jeered Behrend, "let's
see the evidence. The threats'll keep!"

Then Mortimer told them of how the Star of Poland came into
Nur-el-Din's possession, and of the Crown Prince's embarrassment
when the German authorities claimed it for the regalia of the new
Kingdom of Poland.

"The Crown Prince," he said, "summoned me to him in person and
gave me the order to make my way to England immediately and
recover the gem at all costs and by any means. Did I whine or
snivel about being sent to my death as some of you were doing
just now? No! That is not the way of the Prussian Guard..."

The Prussian Guard?" cried No. 13 in an awed voice. "Are you also
of the Prussian Guard, comrade?"

He had risen from his seat and there was something almost of
majesty about his thin, ungainly figure as he drew himself to his
full height.

"Ay, comrade, I was," replied Mortimer.

"Then," cried No. 13, "you are..."

"No names, comrade," warned Mortimer, "no names, I beg!"

"No names, no names!" repeated the other and relapsed into his
seat in a reverie.

"How I got to England," Mortimer continued, "matters nothing; how
I fulfilled my mission is neither here nor there. But I recovered
the gem and the proof..."

He thrust a hand into the inner pocket of his coat and plucked
out a white paper package sealed up with broad red seals.

Desmond held his breath. It was the white paper package, exactly
as Barbara had described.

"Look at it well, Behrend," said Mortimer, holding it up for the
young man to see, "it cost me a man's life to get that. If it had
sent twenty men to their death, I should have had it just the
same!"

Mrs. Malplaquet clapped her hands, her eyes shining.

"Bravo, bravo!" she exclaimed, "that's the spirit! That's the way
to talk, Mortimer!"

"Cut it out," snarled Behrend, "and let's see the goods!"

All had left their seats and were gathered in a group about
Mortimer as he began to break the gleaming red wag seals. One by
one he burst them, the white paper slipped off and disclosed... a
box of cigarettes.

Mortimer stood gazing in stupefaction at the gaudy green and gold
lettering of the box. Then, running his thumb-nail swiftly along
the edge of the box, he broke the paper wrapping, the box burst
open and a shower of cigarettes fell to the ground.

"So that's your Star of Poland, is it?" cried Behrend in a
mocking voice.

"Wot 'ave yer done wiv' the sparklers, eh?" demanded Max,
catching Mortimer roughly by the arm.

But Mortimer stood, aimlessly shaking the empty box in front of
him, as though to convince himself that the gem was not there.
Behrend fell on his knees and raked the pile of cigarettes over
and over with his fingers.

"Nothing there!" he shouted angrily, springing to his feet. "It's
all bluff! He's bluffing to the end! See, he doesn't even attempt
to find his famous jewel! He knows it isn't there!"

But Mortimer paid no heed. He was staring straight in front of
him, a strangely woe-begone figure with his thatch of untidy hair
and round goggle eyes. Then the cigarette box fell to the floor
with a crash as Mortimer's hands dropped, with, a hopeless
gesture, to his sides.

"Barbara Mackwayte!" he whispered in a low voice, not seeming to
realize that he was speaking aloud, "so that's what she wanted
with Nur-el-Din!"

Desmond was standing at Mortimer's elbow and caught the whisper.
As he heard Mortimer speak Barbara's name, he had a sudden
premonition that his own unmasking was imminent, though he
understood as little of the purport of the other's remark as of
the pile of cigarettes lying on the carpet. As Mortimer turned to
look at him, Desmond nerved himself to meet the latter's gaze.
But Mortimer's face wore the look of a desperate man. There was
no recognition in his eyes.

Not so with Desmond. Perhaps the bitterness of his disappointment
had made Mortimer careless, perhaps the way in which he had
pronounced Barbara's name struck a familiar chord in Desmond's
memory. The unkempt hair brushed down across the forehead, the
thick glasses, the heavy moustache still formed together an
impenetrable mask which Desmond's eyes failed to pierce. But now
he recalled the voice. As Mortimer looked at him, the truth
dawned on Desmond and he knew that the man standing beside him
was Maurice Strangwise, his comrade-in-arms in France.

At that very moment a loud crash rang through the room, a cold
blast of damp air came rushing in and the lamp on the table
flared up wildly, flickered an instant and went out, leaving the
room in darkness save for the glow of the fire.

A deep voice cried:

"May I ask what you are all doing in my house?"

The secret door of the bookshelves had swung back and there,
framed in the gaping void, Desmond saw the dark figure of a man.


CHAPTER XIX. THE UNINVITED GUEST

There are moments in life when the need for prompt action is so
urgent that thought, decision and action must be as one operation
of the brain. In the general consternation following on the
dramatic appearance of this uninvited guest, Desmond had a brief
respite in which to think over his position.

Should he make a dash for it or stay where he was and await
developments?

Without a second's hesitation; he decided on the latter course.
With the overpowering odds against him it was more than doubtful
whether he could ever reach the library door. Besides, to go was
to abandon absolutely all hope of capturing the gang; for his
flight would warn the conspirators that the game was up. On the
other hand, the new-comer might be an ally, perhaps an emissary
of the Chief's. The strange behavior of the odd man had shown
that something was afoot outside of which those in the library
were unaware. Was the uninvited guest the deus ex machina who was
to help him, Desmond, out of his present perilous fix?

Meanwhile the stranger had stepped into the room, drawing the
secret door to behind him. Desmond heard his heavy step and the
dull thud of the partition swinging into place. The sound seemed
to break the spell that hung over the room.

Mortimer was the first to recover his presence of mind. Crying
out to No. 13 to lock the door leading into the hall, he fumbled
for a moment at the table. Desmond caught the noise of a match
being scratched and the next moment the library was again bathed
in the soft radiance of the lamp.

Picking up the light, Mortimer strode across to the stranger.

"What do you want here" he demanded fiercely, "and who the
devil..."

He broke off without completing his sentence, drawing back in
amazement. For the rays of the lamp fell upon the pale face of a
stoutish, bearded man, veering towards middle age standing in
front of Mortimer. And the face was the face of the stoutish,
bearded man, veering towards middle age, who stood in the shadow
a few paces behind Mortimer. Each man was a complete replica of
the other, save that the face of the new arrival was thin and
haggard with that yellowish tinge which comes from long
confinement.

As Mortimer staggered back, the uninvited guest recoiled in his
turn. He was staring fixedly across the room at his double who
met his gaze firmly, erect, tense, silent. The others looked in
sheer stupefaction from one to the other of the two Mr.
Bellwards. For nearly a minute the only sound in the room was the
deep ticking of the clock, counting away the seconds separating
him from eternity, Desmond thought.

It was Mrs. Malplaquet who broke the silence. Suddenly her nerves
snapped under the strain, and she screamed aloud.

"A--ah!" she cried, "look! There are two of them! No, no, it
can't be!"

And she sank half fainting on the sofa.

Behrend whipped out a pistol from his hip pocket and thrust it in
Mortimer's face.

"Is this another of your infernal surprise packets?" he demanded
fiercely.

All the spies seemed on a sudden to be armed, Desmond noted, all,
that is, save Mrs. Malplaquet who lay cowering on the settee.
Mortimer had pulled out his super-Mauser; No. 13, who was
guarding the door, had a revolver in his hand, and Behrend, as
has been stated, was threatening Mortimer with his Browning.

Now Max advanced threateningly into the room, a long seaman's
knife in his hand..

"Put that blarsted shooting-iron awiy!" he snarled at Mortimer,
"and tell us wot's the little gime, will yer! Come on, egpline!"

With absolute self-possession Mortimer turned from the stranger
to Desmond.

"I think it is up to the twins to explain," he said almost
nonchalantly, "suppose we hear what this gentleman, who arrived
so surprisingly through the book-shelves, has to say?"

Though threatened with danger from two sides, from the gang and
possibly, as far as he knew, from the stranger, Mortimer was
perfectly calm. Desmond never admired Maurice Strangwise more
than in that moment. All eyes now turned questioningly towards
the new arrival. As for Desmond he drew back as far as he dared
into the shadow. He knew he was in the direst peril; but he was
not afraid for himself. He was crushed to the ground by the
sickening feeling that he was going to be beaten, that the gang
were going to slip through his fingers after all... and he was
powerless to prevent it.

He guessed at once what had happened. Bellward must have escaped
from custody; for there was no disguise about this pale,
flustered creature who had the cowed look of a hunted man in his
eyes. He must have come to the Mill House to get his motorcycle;
for he surely would have known that the villa would be the first
place to which the police would follow him up.

