I like this city very much--it is so clean. The buildings in the upper
part of the town are new, and in pleasant contrast to the lower portion,
which looks so very old. I think, from walking about a great deal, that
there must be many English people here; for they carry their country in
their dress and manner. We spent a morning at the various shops, and
principally at the lace and print stores. We purchased some very
beautiful engravings, lithographs, and illustrated works, which will
remind us of our pleasant days in Brussels, and which I hope may amuse
our friends. The lacework executed here is uncommonly rich, and, you
know, is very famous; but, I am sorry to say, also very expensive. A
person may soon get rid of large amounts of money here. We made some
purchases for the ladies at home; but no doubt, if they had been with
us, the bills would have been heavier than they were.

The way we manage for getting money while we are travelling is by a
circular letter from Baring & Brothers. On this we are introduced to
houses in the great cities through which our route lies, and the letter
states our credit at London; then from these houses we obtain what we
need, and have each house indorse the amount; so that, as we go from
place to place, our financial position in London still appears. In
Brussels we found the banker, or, at least, his agent,--for whether the
banker or his clerk we did not know,--a perfect specimen of vulgarity
and rudeness. He was the most uncivil fellow that we have yet seen in
Europe. His most pleasant words were grunts, and his motions and
attitudes were almost threats. He looked like a Jew, but he acted like a
wild Arab; and his manoeuvres would have been a godsend to the comic Dr.
Valentine, if he had witnessed their display. His gray hairs did not
command respect; and what made his rudeness so hard to bear, was the
fact that nothing occurred to call it out. We probably met him at an
unhappy moment.

The Museum is in the old palace of the Spanish governors of the Low
Countries, and long before their day it was the ducal residence of the
Brabants. The building was begun in 1346, and completed in 1502.

The pictures of Europe are one of my great objects of interest, and here
we begin to find them. We have left the London and Paris collections for
examination as we return. From the catalogue, we found there were about
six hundred pictures here, and some statuary. The chief attraction of
this gallery is found in the few early Flemish paintings which it
boasts. I think a Gerard Dow will long be remembered by me. It is an
interior, and the effect of the light in the room is admirable. Many of
the paintings are styled Gothic; that means they were painted previous
to the time of Van Eyck. An interior of the Antwerp Cathedral, by Neefs,
is very fine; and I was much pleased with some large pictures by
Philippe Champagne, some' of whose portraits I have seen in New York.
Here are four pictures by Paul Veronese. No. 285 is the Marriage of
Cana. I think I never saw a picture in which I was so impressed with the
magnificence of the coloring. The table is richly spread, and the light
appears on it, coming down the columns; the rich colors of the fruits
contrasting strongly with the white table and gay dress of one of the
figures. The management of light, by introducing various colors in the
dresses, is wonderful, and the blue sky produces the happiest effect. I
never before understood how much a picture depended on the arrangement
of color. The drapery of this composition struck me greatly; and
although I know little of great paintings, yet I do know what I like,
and this picture, as a whole, seems to me wonderfully fine.

In 1695, when this town was bombarded by the French, fourteen churches
were destroyed, some of which contained the best pictures of Rubens,
Vandyke, and other great painters of that century. I observed here a
good portrait of Henrietta, queen of Charles I., who seems to have been
a favorite with painters. I have seen a score of her faces by Vandyke at
Windsor, Paris, and elsewhere. This was by Mignard. All make her very
beautiful.

The Adoration of the Magi, by Van Eyck, the inventor of oil painting, is
curious; and a Descent from the Cross, by Hemling, who flourished about
1450, interested me. Amongst the pictures by unknown masters I saw some
good ones. I thought the portraits in this class very spirited. One of
Bloody Mary was quite a picture.

In this building, too, the doctor found a treat in the great Burgundy
Library, where are nearly twenty thousand MSS., some of which are the
most richly-illuminated vellums that are known. Some of the miniatures
of the early fathers and saints are of exquisite beauty. This precious
collection has twice, I learn, been stolen by the French, as were also
the best pictures. The library consists of about two hundred thousand
volumes. I saw some glorious specimens of Russian malachite.

You would, I am sure, Charley, hardly forgive me if I had had so little
of your love of the curious as to go away from Brussels without a look
at the world-renowned fountain--the _Manekin._ One day, when upon a
tramp, we inquired it out. The dirty dog is a little bronze figure, made
by the famous Duquesnoy in 1648. It stands at the corner of the Rue du
Chêne and the Rue de l'Etuve. He still maintains his ground; and there
seems no danger of his losing his occupation.

The Botanical Garden lies on the side of the hill leading from the city
towards Antwerp, and is apparently kept in fine order. It is about six
hundred and fifty yards long, and I should think nearly two hundred
wide.

To-morrow we are to spend at Waterloo; and George is well nigh
distracted. We have heard very little from him, since we reached
Brussels, but about Napoleon, Wellington, Ney, and Grouchy. The
last-named marshal finds no favor at his hands, as he regards him as a
traitor to the emperor at the critical moment. One thing is certain; he
knows more about the battle than most persons, and will feel quite at
home when he once makes out his stand-point. We all anticipate his
transports with interest. We are to start early; so good-night.

Yours,

WELD.


Letter 33.


BRUSSELS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

I am thoroughly tired out with a day at Waterloo; and, though I should
be glad to retire at an early hour, yet, as to-morrow's mail takes all
letters for the next steamer, we are all hard at the duty and pleasure
of correspondence with our friends. I shall give you but a hurried
account of our visit to the great battle field of Europe. We were all up
early in the morning, and, after an excellent breakfast, we engaged a
carriage and pair of horses for the day. The distance is about twelve
miles. After riding about two miles, we found the road touched the
Forest of Soignies, so well known in consequence of Byron's description
of the march of the army from Brussels to Waterloo. On the way we met
several guides, who commended their services to our notice, backed up by
testimonials of former travellers. We selected Pirson, and he took his
place beside the driver, and we arrived in two hour at the village.
Passing by what is called a museum, we addressed ourselves at once to a
survey of the field. There are no signs of the past, excepting in
monuments and houses that are famous for their being occupied by the
hostile parties during the battle. We turned our attention first to the
Château of Hougomont, because, from our knowledge of the transactions of
the great day, we regarded it as the grand point of attraction, and the
central one for our observations. This farm is an old-looking affair,
with out-buildings--a small chapel, twelve or fifteen feet long, and the
garden and orchard, having a strong stone wall around them. This was the
strong point of the British army; and if Napoleon could have gained it,
he would have turned the flank of the enemy. To this he directed all his
power, and the marks of the conflict are yet very apparent. All day the
attack was made, upon the farm by thousands, under the command of Jerome
Bonaparte. The wall was pierced with loopholes, and through these the
English Coldstream Guards kept up a most destructive fire upon the
French troops. The exterior of the wall still shows what a terrific
onset was made. We went into the house, obtained some refreshment,
bought some relics, and, among other things, a neat brass crucifix,
which hung against the wall. We then, went to look at the farms La Belle
Alliance and La Haye Sainte--the famous mound where the dead were
interred, and which is surmounted by the Belgic lion. This is an immense
work, two hundred feet high; and from the summit we saw the entire
field. Of course, we all had our feelings excited at standing on a spot
where the two greatest soldiers of Europe measured swords, and had a
continent for spectators of the conflict.

When the French army marched through Waterloo, on their way to Antwerp,
in 1831, they looked savagely at the Belgian monument, and one man fired
his musket at the lion, and the mark is still visible upon his chin.

We were much gratified at the farm-house of Hougomont; and the hour we
spent in its orchard and gardens will long be remembered by us all. I
have read an account of the attack upon the house, which says, "The
Belgian yeoman's garden wall was the safeguard of Europe, whose
destinies hung upon the possession of this house." The garden wall is
covered on the inside with ivy; and here we secured several roots of the
plant, and, having bought a basket at the farm-house, we planted them in
earth taken from beside the grave of a British officer, who fell in the
orchard; his tombstone bears the name of J.L. Blackman. These plants
will give us trouble to carry; but Dr. Choules has determined upon
carrying them home for Mr. Hall, whose stone house needs ivy on the
walls, and he intends obtaining roots from various places of interest in
Europe, to serve as mementoes of other lands.

The church is a small affair, but is full of the testimonies of love and
affection from fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, wives, children, and
friends, to those who fell in the bloody conflict.

We were annoyed by urchins, who beset our steps, eager to sell us
genuine relics of the field, which are likely to increase in number as
long as there is a demand for them. George, of course, was in his
element, and he did little but plant the different sites in his memory,
for the purpose of comparing notes, by and by, with Gleig, Headley, &c.,
&c.

I do not attempt to give you any thing like a description of the place,
or an account of the battle, as you have books which are devoted to
these points.

It is a circumstance worthy of notice that, in 1705, the Duke of
Marlborough came very near fighting a battle with the French, on this
ground, but was prevented by the Dutch commissioners who were with him.

We obtained some good engravings of the buildings that are famous for
their connection with the battle, but they are nothing like as fine as
the folio illustrated volume of colored engravings which we have so
often looked over with interest. I tried to get a copy in London at any
price, and would have given any thing in reason; but the work is out of
print and the market, and can only be gotten at the sale of a collector.

On returning to Brussels, and enjoying our dinner at a late hour, we
passed the evening in the Arcades, where we saw some beautiful goods
exposed for sale, and again examined some lacework. You will smile at
the idea of pocket handkerchiefs which cost from one hundred to one
thousand dollars each. The embroidery of letters upon lacework is
costly; and we saw single letters which had required a week's work.

We like this city, and, if time allowed us, should certainly pass a week
here. I should not forget to say that we saw the king in the Park, near
to his palace. He looks like a man of fifty-five, and, I thought, had a
melancholy air.

Yours,

JAMES.


Letter 34.


ANTWERP.

DEAR CHARLEY:--


In company still with our friends from Bristol on a wedding tour, we
took the rail for Antwerp. The arrangements of the railroad in Belgium
seem to me as perfect as they can be made. All is order, civility, and
comfort. On starting for this place, we had the curiosity to inquire as
to the number of passengers, and found thirteen first class, seventy-one
second class, and one hundred and three third class. The road we took
lay through a level country, but cultivated to a great degree; and the
produce was chiefly clover, beans, potatoes, grain, and turnips. On
leaving Brussels, we noticed the fine botanical gardens on our right,
and the Allée Verte, a noble avenue of trees which reaches to Laeken, a
pretty village, dating as far back as the seventh century, and
containing a fine palace, where Leopold frequently resides. Napoleon
once occupied this palace, and here it is said that he planned his
Russian campaign. The park is spacious, and the village has a celebrated
cemetery; and here Madame Malibran reposes. The first stopping-place is
at about six miles from Brussels, at Vilvorde--a very ancient town,
having a population of not quite three thousand. It is known in history
as Filfurdum, and was a place of some consequence in 760. It was here
that Tindal, who was the first translator of the New Testament into
English, suffered martyrdom, in 1536, being burnt as a heretic. The
Testament was a 12mo. edition. It was published in 1526, and probably
was printed at Antwerp, where he then resided. Fifteen hundred copies
were printed, and they were mostly bought up by Bishop Tonstall, and
destroyed. The only copy known to exist is in the library of the Baptist
College at Bristol. This copy belonged to Lord Oxford, and he valued the
acquisition so highly that he settled twenty pounds a year upon the
person who obtained it for him. Both Tindal's assistants in this great
work--Fryth and Roye--suffered martyrdom before his death. I am sorry to
find, by history, that Sir Thomas More employed one Phillips to go over
to Antwerp and decoy Tindal into the hands of the emperor. The last
words of the martyr were, "Lord! open the King of England's eyes." Sir
Thomas More was a bitter persecutor, and he was "recompensed in his own
ways." Not far from Vilvorde are the remains of the chateau of Rubens;
and in the same vicinity is the house where Teniers is said to have
lived. Mechlin, or Malines, is a fine-looking town, with twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, and it is spelt by early writers ways without
number. The railroad just touches on its skirts, and, of course, we
could only look at it. Its cathedral church loomed up; and we longed to
see its interior, where Vandyke's greatest picture--the Crucifixion--is
found in the altar. The tower shows well at a distance. The other
churches have some pictures of great merit, by Rubens. After passing
Mechlin, we saw at our right a large town, lying, perhaps, two miles
off, and then a still smaller one to the left, and a fine old castle,
which looked in good preservation. The road led us through some fine
country residences; and, just before entering Antwerp, we passed
Berchem, a sweet little village. And I would not omit to say that the
small place called Vieux Dieu, before we came to Berchem, is famous for
being one of the last places where heathenism retained its hold in this
port of Europe, and here was formerly an idol.

Antwerp--or, as the French write it, Anvers--is a noble city on the
River Scheldt, and is about twenty-seven miles from Brussels. The
population is rather more than eighty thousand. The city is laid out in
the shape of a bow, and the river forms the string. The river here is
one hundred and ninety yards wide. The tide rises about fifteen feet.
This place is of very ancient origin, and its legends are mixed up with
the fabulous. Early in the sixteenth century it was an important town.
It was fortified, and became one of the chief places of trade for the
north of Europe. In 1520, the population was over two hundred thousand.
Five hundred vessels daily came into and left the port, and two thousand
others were always lying in the river and basins of the port. The death
blow to this place was the treaty of Munster, which stipulated that
every vessel entering the Scheldt should discharge her cargo in Holland,
so that it had to be conveyed to Antwerp by land. The abolition of the
Spanish power was severely felt at Antwerp. You know, I suppose, that
this is regarded as one of the strongest fortifications in Europe, and
has been the scene of repeated sieges. The last and most celebrated one
was in 1832, when it was captured by the French, after a brave defence
of two months.

You cannot easily fancy what a charming old city this is; but I shall
try to give you some account of it and our employments here. We put up
at the Hotel St. Antoine, in the Place Verte, nearly opposite the
cathedral, and it certainly is one of the best houses we have seen any
where. The court yard is spacious, and has fine orange-trees around it.
Our rooms are very elegant, and on the first floor. The coffee-room is
admirably attended, and the _table d'hôte_ is the best we have yet set
down to. A large part of our anticipated pleasure arose from the fact
that here are the great works of Rubens; and in the city of Rubens,
Vandyke, Teniers, Jordaens, and Quentin Matsys, we felt that we could
not be disappointed. In the Place Verte we find a colossal statue of
Rubens by Geefs; and passing on a few steps, at the corner we come to
the Cathedral of Notre Dame, which is so celebrated all over Europe as
one of the grandest specimens of the Gothic order of architecture. There
is much dispute as to the exact date of this church, but the evidence is
in favor of 1422, and it is known to have been finished in 1518. This
church is four hundred and sixty-six feet high, five hundred feet long,
and two hundred and fifty wide. The nave is thought to be the most
superb in Europe; and the side naves are double, forming two hundred and
thirty arches, supported by one hundred and twenty-five magnificent
pillars, and some of these are twenty-seven feet in circumference. Here
Philip II., in 1555, held a chapter of the Golden Fleece, at which
nineteen knights and nine sovereign princes were present. In 1559, Paul
IV. made this church a cathedral; but, in 1812, Pius VII. issued a bull
by which it was made dependent on the diocese of Malines. The effect of
the evening sun upon the painted windows is the production of a glory
which no pen can describe. Charles V. was once an actor here, for he
stood godfather at the baptism of the great bell. The pulpit is carved
work, and done by Verbruggen. It represents the four quarters of the
world, and, though elaborate, is not as beautiful as the one in St.
Gudule, at Brussels. The glory of the church is the "breathing scroll"
of Rubens, so often seen upon the walls of its solemn aisles. Here is
Rubens's great picture,--the Descent from the Cross. To this picture
pilgrimages have been made by all the lovers of art from other lands,
and all concede the grandeur of idea and the simplicity of the style.
There is quite a story about this picture, in which Rubens and the
crossbow-men of Antwerp both figure, but which I have no time to tell
you at present. Nearly opposite is the Elevation of the Cross. The
Savior's face and figure are not to be forgotten by any one who
carefully gazes on this canvas. Both these pictures were carried off by
the French, and also the Assumption of the Virgin, which is the high
altar-piece, and were restored by the allied sovereigns in 1815. This
last-named picture is said to have been executed in sixteen days, and
his pay was one hundred florins a day. I like it exceedingly; and _the_
figure of the picture is more spiritual than any other I have seen of
the Virgin. Its date is 1642. I advise you to read Sir Joshua Reynolds's
Lectures, where you will find a critical description of these immortal
pictures.

The steeple or tower is regarded as unrivalled, and is one of the
highest in the world. It is four hundred and sixty-six feet high; and
from the top we could see Brussels, Ghent, Malines, Louvain, and
Flushing, and the course of the Scheldt lies beautifully marked out. I
hardly dare tell you how many bells there are. Our valet said
ninety-nine; one local book of facts says eighty-eight; but I suppose
there are eighty or ninety; and every fifteen minutes they do chime the
sweetest music: Charles V. wished the exquisite tower could be kept from
harm in a glass case. The tracery of this tower is like delicate
lacework, and no one can imagine half its beauty. After we came down, we
examined, at the base, the epitaph of Quentin Matsys, once a
black-smith, and then, under the force of the tender passion, he became
a painter. The iron work over the pump and well, outside the church, is
his handiwork.

All round the cathedral are the finest old gabled houses I ever saw,
Charley. I never tire in looking at them. They were the great houses of
the time when the Duke of Alva made Antwerp the scene of his cruel
despotism, and when the Inquisition carried death and misery into men's
families. The oppressions of the Spaniards in this city sent many of the
best manufacturers from the Low Countries to England; and Queen
Elizabeth received them gladly.

Yours, &c.,

WELD.


Letter 35.


ANTWERP.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

I believe the lads have told you what they have seen in Belgium; and as
they are just now busily employed, I shall endeavor to tell you our
doings and enjoyments for the last day in this noble old city. We have
been to see St. James's Church, where the great attraction is the tomb
of Rubens. The altar is exquisitely fine, and was the work of Duquesnoy.
Rubens brought it from Italy. Over the tomb is the famous Holy Family,
in which Rubens has introduced himself as St. George, his father as
Jerome, his wives as Martha and Magdalene, his grandfather as old Time,
and his son as the Angel. This wonderful creation of art was carried off
by Napoleon to the Louvre, but was restored to the church in 1815. From
hence we repaired to St. Paul's Church. It was built in 1679. It has a
noble appearance, and retains its cloisters. In this building we noticed
the Flagellation, by Rubens; Jesus bearing the Cross, by Vandyke; the
Crucifixion and Resurrection, by Jordaens; and the Adoration of the
Shepherds, by Rubens. As we left the church, we visited the Calvary,
which is at the entrance, or, rather, off from it, at the right. It is
meant to represent the place of Christ's death. There are several
statues of prophets and apostles, and a sort of grotto. At the end is
Mount Calvary, and the summit is the scene of the Savior's crucifixion.
Beneath is the tomb, the body, and the stone rolled away; and at the
left are bars and flames, and poor creatures in purgatorial fires. A
more wretched-looking burlesque was never placed in the vicinage of art
and the productions of genius. Popery employs such trickery unblushingly
in Papal countries, but withholds their exhibition from the common sense
of England and America, waiting till our education shall fit us for the
simple, unalloyed system of delusion.

We find the number of priests in Belgium much greater than in France. We
see them in the cars, at the stations, and in every street. At one
station, on our way to Antwerp, we saw a most strangely-dressed man. He
wore a cloak, and the cape formed a sort of hat. His head was shaved,
and his feet were bare. We learnt that he was a monk of La Trappe. He
was as noble a looking man as I have seen in Europe.

We devoted the morning to the Museum, which is so famous for containing
the richest productions of Rubens, Vandyke, Jordaens, and a host of
other great Flemish artists. As we entered, we saw, with interest, the
chair of Rubens, which he used in his studio. It bears his name, and the
date of 1638. It is in a glass case. Rubens has sixteen pictures here,
of high character, and Vandyke several. We were all delighted with No.
215--a Dead Christ on a stone table, and the Virgin mourning at his
side. No. 212 is a wonderful composition--Christ crucified between the
Thieves. The look of the dying penitent at his Savior is not to be
forgotten. The Magdalene of this picture is a creation of beauty indeed.
I have purchased a fine engraving of this picture, and several others by
Rubens, and I hope, by looking at them long, to retain the impression I
had made on my mind as I gazed upon the originals. No. 221--the
Trinity--is a profane and ungracious representation of a Dead Christ in
the arms of a stern old man, who is intended for the Father. This
picture is wonderfully fine, as regards the foreshortening of the dead
body; and I never saw such an exhibition in this respect. No. 218---
Christ showing his Wounds to Thomas--is fine; but the picture has
suffered from damp.

Quentin Matsys has several of his productions here, and we looked with
interest at a fine Sir Thomas More, by Holbein; the Flight into Egypt,
by Memling; Mater Dolorosa, by Albert Durer; and many interiors, by
Flemish artists. I was greatly pleased with No. 382--the Death of
Rubens, by Van Brée, who died in 1839. This is large, and I think a most
effective picture. The two sons, the priest, the wife fainting, and the
two scribes, are admirably disposed; and the open window, through which
the cathedral spire is seen, seems to me exceedingly clever; but I fancy
I admired it more than artists have done. On leaving this noble
collection, we stopped at St. Andrew's Church to see a portrait of Mary,
Queen of Scots, over a monument to the two Ladies Curl, one of whom
waited on her at her execution at Fotheringay Castle. After dinner we
sallied out to see the Exchange, or Bourse, and from which the first
London one was copied. Of course, this gave it an interest to us, as we
could fancy we saw the royal building in which Queen Bess made such a
display, and of which Gresham had so much reason to be proud. It is a
piazza of iron arches and granite pillars, surrounding a square two
hundred feet long by one hundred and sixty wide. It was built in 1531.

On returning home, we accidentally met with Mr. Vesey, the American
consul. He invited us to his drawing-room, and we had a very pleasant
half hour. But when he found we were to leave next day, he insisted on
taking us to the outskirts and showing us the citadel and
fortifications. In a few minutes he had us in a carriage, and became our
kind and efficient guide till the loss of daylight rendered it useless
to look around. I think we shall never forget the very great attention
and friendship which we all met with from this gentleman; and I was
gratified to hear him say that here, in Europe, nothing seemed to
interest him in relation to mere party strife at home; while the honor
and union of the country seemed to him all and every thing. Mr. Vesey
has a good library and some fine paintings. He is a man of taste, and
marked by energy of character; and is just such a representative of his
country as she needs at such points as Antwerp and other large cities.

Yours truly,

J.O.C.


Letter 36.


HAGUE.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

I assure you we felt sorry to leave Antwerp; it is such a thoroughly
fine old place, has so much of old Spanish history still bound up with
its present aspect, and is so decidedly foreign in its appearance,
language, &c. I have only time left to say a word about the docks of
Antwerp, which were a favorite project of Napoleon Bonaparte. They were
constructed at an enormous outlay; and the emperor expected to make this
place the great rival of London. At the peace of 1814, the dock yards
were demolished; but the great basins still exist, and are used for
purposes of commerce. They are useful in winter, to preserve vessels
from the ice which floats in the Scheldt.

It was a lovely morning when, having parted with our English friends,
who proceeded to Bruges, we entered on board an iron steamer for a
passage of about eight hours to Rotterdam. The boat was neat and clean,
though small, and the cabin was adorned with baskets and pots of flowers
of various kinds. The view of the city and its fortifications was fine,
as the boat receded from the shore. On our way we passed Dort, one of
the finest towns of Holland, and from appearances, I think, one of much
trade. Its population is twenty thousand. Here, in 1618, was held the
famous Synod of Dort, the great labor of which was to settle the claims
of the rival systems of Calvin and Arminius. At this synod, Bishop Hall
was a delegate from the English church; and he, good man, never dreamed
of denying the validity of the ordination of his brethren in that
council. We felt interested, as we sailed along this town, in
remembering that here, in 1421, seventy-two villages and more than one
hundred thousand persons were drowned by the incursion of water from the
dike. The river stretches far away, and looks much like a lake.

If any one looks at the face of the country, he will at once understand
why these regions have been termed the Low Countries. We passed, as you
may see on the map, Gravendeel, Willeinstadt, and the far-famed
fortress of Bergen op Zoom, which is one of the strongest places in
Holland. You know that Antwerp stood a long siege in 1831, when it
suffered severely; and, as we passed Fort St. Laurent, we were pointed
out the spot where a most gallant occurrence happened at that time. A
gun boat, belonging to Holland, got on shore, and the Belgians hastened
to capture her, when her captain, a young man named Van Speyk, rushed
into the magazine, put his cigar upon an open keg of powder, and, in the
explosion, perished, with twenty-eight of his crew out of thirty-one. He
was an orphan, who had been educated at Amsterdam. He has a fine
monument next to Admiral De Ruyter's, and a fine ship of the Dutch navy
bears his name. On board our boat we found two young gentlemen, of about
fifteen or sixteen, belonging to Rotterdam, who were going home for
vacation.. They are pupils at a boarding school in Brussels. They spoke
English very well, and gave us a great deal of pleasing information. The
dinner on the boat was very excellent. On reaching Rotterdam, we merely
rode through it to take the cars for the Hague. It is a fine-looking
town, has seventy-five thousand inhabitants, and some noble East
Indiamen were lying at the wharves. Many of the houses were like those
at Antwerp, and told a Spanish origin. I here noticed looking-glasses
at the windows, so that any one in the parlor can see the reflection up
and down the streets. I was glad to be able to see the bronze statue of
Erasmus, who was born here in 1467. We were delayed by the absence of
the authorities to sign our passports, but were in time to reach the
ears, and then started for the Hague, which is thirteen miles from
Rotterdam; and we were forty minutes on the way. The road is excellent.
We passed through Delft, and here we could not fail to admire the
gardens and country-houses. It was dark as we entered the town; and we
took up our quarters at the Doelen, which is a name indicating that
archers have resorted thither. Whoever goes to this house will be sure
to do well. We obtained capital rooms. Early next morning we called on
Mr. George Folsom, our _chargé d'affaires_. This gentleman is an old
friend of mine; and he gave us a most cordial welcome, taking entire
possession of our party for the day. Mr. Folsom resides in very handsome
style upon the Voorhout, the best street of the city, and which, like
every other part of the place, is adorned with noble trees. It seems
strange to call this place a city, it is so thoroughly rural in its
appearance. It hardly shows like a town of sixty-five thousand people on
account of being concealed in shrubbery, cut up by canals, and
overshadowed with forest-trees.

Very early in the day we were kindly provided with carriages, and taken
to Scheveningen, a village about three miles off. Our road lay through a
fine avenue of trees. This is a great fishing-place, and a great
watering-place. It has a large hotel, which we went to for lunch. It is
the great rendezvous of the fashionable part of society in Germany
during the heat of summer. We could not help drawing a contrast between
Scheveningen and Newport, and not much to the advantage of the Dutch
beach. This spot has some celebrity, as the port whence Charles II.
embarked for England at his restoration. On our way back we saw the
residence of the queen dowager, sister to the Emperor of Russia, and of
whom Mr. Folsom speaks highly, as a very excellent and sensible lady.
Mrs. Folsom and the ladies of our party had visited the queen the day
before. The house looked quite snug, and very unpretending. On
returning, we at once repaired to the Museum, which is supposed to be,
in many respects, the finest in Europe. Here, too, is the famous picture
gallery, in which are the best productions of the Flemish and Dutch
schools. You are aware that Holland has had extensive trade with China
and Japan, through her colonies; hence the richness of this museum,
which, so far as Japan is concerned, is unrivalled. I have a catalogue
of this wonderful collection, and to that I must refer you; for, as to
description of what I saw, it would be impossible to tell you a
hundredth part. The Oriental curiosities are very rich and fine. A plan
of Jeddo, the capital of Japan, is very curious--made by natives. The
historical treasures are rich and numerous. Here we saw the armor of De
Ruyter, and that of Van Tromp, well scored with bullets; the sword of
Van Speyk; a part of Czar Peter's bed; the dress of William of Orange
when he was murdered at Delft; the pistol and bullets by which he fell,
&c., &c. We all expected much pleasure from the gallery of paintings,
and I believe we experienced no disappointment; and how could we, with
such treasures of art and genius? Here we noticed with most interest
Rembrandt's Surgeon and Pupils dissecting a dead Body. This is No. 127.
The body is admirable, and the legs are thrown into shadow. The
portraits are lifelike. The portraits of Rembrandt's wives are fine
specimens of coloring. No. 123 is the world-renowned Bull, by Paul
Potter. The glory of this work is its minute adherence to nature. The
leaves and plants, and every appearance of vegetation, impresses the
spectator with the idea of reality. This was carried off to the Louvre,
although the Dutch offered twenty thousand pounds sterling to redeem it.
I liked the pictures of De Ruyter and Van Tromp; but the treat of all to
me was the show of small Dutch pictures, by Gerard Dow, thirty-five in
number; a Battle Field and Hay Cart, by Wouvermans, and many others from
his studio; Flight into Egypt, by Vanderwerp; Fruits and Flowers, by
Breughels; Interiors of Cottages, by A.V. Ostades; a Kitchen, by
Teniers; and a very large Hunting-piece by Snyders, whom I greatly
admire. As to portraits, they are in any number, and some are very fine.
One of Laurence Coster, by Durer, is curious.

We went to see the late King's Palace, and here we found only the relics
of the splendid gallery which was once to be seen. An auction had
recently disposed of more than half the paintings. The late monarch was
a man of taste, but had sadly involved himself in its gratification.
Many of the paintings here are exceedingly fine, and will be disposed of
in a public sale next October. After leaving this palace, we went with
Mr. Folsom to see the Brimenhoff. This is the place where the Dutch
parliament meets. We went into the second chamber and heard the debates,
which were not very edifying. The appearance of the members was very
much like that of a New England assembly of legislators.

The fine Gothic Hall here is said to be the oldest building in the city.
It was on a scaffolding in front of it that Barneveldt, the grand
pensionary of Holland, was beheaded, in 1618, at the age of seventy-two.
We also saw the gateway of the tower in which Cornelius De Witt was
confined, in 1672, on the ridiculous charge of conspiracy against the
Prince of Orange. The populace feared his acquittal, and they by a
manoeuvre induced his brother John De Witt, the grand pensionary, to
visit him in prison. They then broke in, dragged them forth, and tore
them to pieces under the gateway. We went to look at De Witt's
residence, which is plain and unpretending.

I do wish you could have been with us in our ride through the Bosch, a
fine park of forest-trees near to the town. The forest never looked more
pleasant to me than here. May is a sweet month, and especially when,
with all her verdant beauty, she is just about to rush into the arms of
June. We all talked of you in the charming drive, and Mr. Folsom made
kind inquiries after you. On reaching home, we went with our kind guide
to see the house which was occupied by John Adams when he was at this
court negotiating a treaty with Holland in aid of our independence.

We are to spend to-morrow and next day at Harlem, on our way to
Amsterdam; and the boys will tell you what we see there.

Affectionately yours,

J.O.C.


Letter 37.


AMSTERDAM.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

In order that we might enjoy an opportunity to hear the great organ at
Harlem to advantage, Mr. Folsom advised us to spend a Sabbath day there,
which we did, in company with his family. We took the rail to Leyden,
ten miles. Here we saw the Dunes, or Sand Hills, which guard the Dutch
coast, and which are from one to four miles in width, and are from
thirty to fifty feet high. These immense piles would soon be scattered
by the strong winds if they were not regularly sown with reed grass, the
roots of which often spread from twenty to thirty feet, binding the
banks, and the decayed vegetation furnishing good soil for potatoes. The
existence of Holland and its population is only insured by perpetual
strife maintained against the sea and winds of heaven. We could not look
at Leyden and forget that the Pilgrim Fathers of New England were once
exiles at this place. They called it a "goodly and pleasant city," and
here they spent twelve years; and we looked at the scenery with interest
as we thought of their wanderings, and how much preparation was expended
in establishing the glorious foundations of our own New England. The
city has about forty thousand inhabitants. Its University is still
famous, and the hall of the institution is rich in portraits of the
great and good. The Museum of Natural History is very large, and is
quite curious in Oriental and Egyptian relics. In Japanese curiosities,
the Dutch museums are far more affluent than any others of Europe, as
they maintain almost exclusive traffic with Japan.

The history of Leyden is very interesting. In 1573-4, this town suffered
an awful siege from the Spaniards for four months, and lost more than
five thousand inhabitants by war and famine. At last the elements
conspired in their favor, and an incursion of the sea destroyed the
Spaniards and brought succor to the Dutch. Rembrandt the painter was
born at Leyden, in a wind mill. By the way, there are literally
thousands of wind mills in this country, and some of them are very
pretty objects. The sails of these mills are immensely large, and I
think I saw some that were quite one hundred feet long. Many of the best
men of England have studied at Leyden; and if you read the lives of
Evelyn and Goldsmith, you will find they were much attached to this
place. Boerhaave, the great physician, was a professor here, and go were
Arminius and his rival Gomarus. Gerard Dow or Douw, Jan Steen, and
Vandervelde, the artists, were born here. Near Leyden the Rhine enters
the sea, by the aid of a canal and sluice gates; and here are great salt
works, carried on by evaporation. From Leyden we took the rail to
Harlem, eighteen miles; and we found the road very good, and the
first-class cars perfectly luxurious. We noticed on our right hand the
Warmond Catholic Seminary for Popish priests, and saw the young men in
large numbers, walking about. The road runs through a sandy tract of
country, and much of it is made land. Approaching Harlem, we found the
cottages and country-houses very numerous and exceedingly pretty; and we
were pointed to the castle of the unfortunate Jacqueline, whose history,
you know, has been so charmingly written by our friend Mr. T.C. Grattan.
We made our home at the Golden Lion, and found the place comfortable and
very thoroughly Dutch. The landlady is a brisk, bustling body, and
speaks English tolerably well. Harlem has about twenty-fire thousand
inhabitants. On Sunday morning we went to the Church of St. Bavon. We
found a large congregation, and they sung most heartily. The dominie had
a cocked hat hanging up behind him in the pulpit; and he was, beyond
doubt, a very eloquent man. The great organ, built in 1738, was long
deemed _the_ organ of Europe, but is now supposed to be excelled at
Friburg. We heard it during service several times, and in a voluntary.
It unquestionably is an instrument of great sweetness as well as power.
It has five thousand pipes. The church is lofty, and looks plain enough
after what we have seen in Antwerp. Of course, we went to see the
statue of Coster, who is said to have been the inventor of printing in
1420-28, twelve years before Guttemberg made his experiments. The Dutch
are strong advocates for their inventor; but I think evidence in favor
of metal type lies with the man of Mayence.

You may be sure that, when we were so fortunate as to be here early in
June, we did not fail to go into the nurseries and gardens, and see the
hyacinths, tulips, narcissuses, anemones, ranunculuses, &c. We went to
the extensive grounds of Mr. Krelage, the first florist of Holland, No.
146 Kleine Houtweg; and here we were greatly delighted. The tulips were
exceedingly fine, and under cover they receive as much attention as if
they were babies. The hyacinths surpassed in beauty and variety any
thing we are accustomed to. I noticed a double blue, called Gloria
Mundi; Van Speyk, L'Importante, same color; Goethe, double yellow;
L'Eclair, crimson; and Emicus, white, which were particularly beautiful.
But we were all, perhaps, most pleased with the extensive beds of
anemones and ranunculuses, which rarely do well in our hot climate, and
here flourish in a humid atmosphere. Certainly they are the prettiest
flowers I ever saw; but they lack perfume. Here we saw them by
thousands. The exquisite order and condition of these large gardens
pleased us much. The young gentleman who kindly devoted three hours to
us spoke English well, and was very courteous and attentive. I have
brought away a catalogue of the flowers, with the prices. The soil of
Harlem is every where a deep sand, and every thing appears to flourish.

The vicinage of this place is very pleasant; and we rode for two hours
through a noble wood, fringed with sweet villas, and made a visit to a
palace built by the great banker, Hope, of Amsterdam, and which was the
residence of King Louis Bonaparte. It is now a picture gallery, and
contains some good historical pictures, and many fine small ones, of the
best artists of Holland. I think the boys forgot to tell you that, at
the Hague, we found the annual exhibition of paintings by the living
artists of Holland, just opened, and the treat was very great. It is
quite clear that the art is not lost here, and that rare excellence is
still to be found among the Dutch painters. We were all delighted with a
picture of Charles IX. of France, and his surgeon, Ambrose Paré. The
time is just before the Bartholomew massacre; and Catharine is in the
room, plotting with her wretched son. Some of the portraits were
remarkable productions, and evince a power rarely seen in this
department. Some of the interiors of houses and churches were quite in
the style of Ostade, Neefs, and Gerard Dow. A picture of the Virgin,
and Jesus and John, by Schwartze, of Amsterdam, received general praise.
Of this artist I shall have more to say.

The great Lake of Harlem, which is thirty miles in circumference, is to
be drained; and for several years operations have been in progress to
this end. The immense works employed for this purpose are worthy of
notice.

After leaving Harlem, and taking leave of our kind friend the minister
at the Hague, with his amiable family, we again entered the cars, and,
after riding twelve miles, reached Amsterdam. The chief feature on the
way was the everlasting wind mill, employed here to grind wheat, &c. We
went to the Hotel Doelen, and found it all that Mr. Folsom had said.
This is a great city, of two hundred and twenty-five thousand
inhabitants. The canals are immense affairs, and the ships and vessels
of all sorts give it a very active appearance. All round the city is a
wide fosse; and there are four great canals inside, with many minor
cuts. Some of these canals are more than one hundred and twenty-five
feet wide, and are edged with very fine houses; and the intercourse of
the city is kept up by some two hundred and fifty bridges. The city is
about eight miles round. Every one seems actively employed.

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 38.


AMSTERDAM.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

The next morning after reaching this fine, but queer city, we called on
the American consul, and he gave us a very friendly reception. He is
quite a young man, but seems to be full of energy. At his house we met a
Mr. J. G. Schwartze, a native of Philadelphia, but who came to Holland
very young, and has made this city his residence. He is highly
distinguished as an artist; and we saw a fine production of his at the
exhibition at the Hague. Mr. Schwartze is a charming companion--full of
enthusiasm; and when he found that I was fond of pictures, he at once
volunteered to be our guide to the galleries here; and in all our
movements here our kind friend has been with us. The most imposing
building here is the Stadhuis, or Palace. It was finished in 1655, and
used to be the seat of the town councils. Louis Bonaparte used it as his
residence; and the king occupies it when he comes here. The marble hall
is esteemed one of the noblest rooms in Europe, and is one hundred and
twenty feet long, fifty-seven wide, and nearly one hundred feet high.
From the top of this building you get a capital view of the town, cut up
into artificial islands by the intersection of canals, &c. In this
building is much fine statuary, and a few historical paintings.

The churches are large, but look barn-like. The organ of the old church
is very rich in its decorations; and here, as at Harlem, men sit in
church with their hats on, if they choose. The clergy wear a short,
black cloak, and deep white ruffs on the neck. The Jews are quite
numerous, and have several synagogues. They live mostly in one part of
the city. I do not think we shall any of us forget our visit to the
picture gallery at Amsterdam. Our attention was directed by Mr. S. to
the best paintings, and the particular merits of the artists were kindly
explained to us. The sight of a great picture is an event; and I think
that the day on which I first saw Rembrandt's Night Watch will long be
regarded by me with pleasurable feelings. It is a company of archers,
who are going out with their captain. The lights and shades are
wonderfully introduced. The City Guards of Amsterdam, by Vanderhelst, is
a large picture, with twenty-five portraits, and is esteemed as the
finest portrait picture in the world. But my favorite here is a small
picture called the Night School, by Gerard Dow. I would cheerfully go a
hundred miles on foot to see such a picture. The management of the
lights upon the interior and figures is beyond any thing I have
imagined. His Hermit and Crucifix is another gem. The picture of
Officers plundered by Peasants, by Wouvermans, and several landscapes of
his, are still in my mind's eye; and several pictures by the two
Ostades, Teniers, and Both are quite sufficient to make me understand
how it is that some men have found such fascination in collecting a
gallery. The best specimens of Jan Steen are in this city, and his Fête
of St. Nicholas would take wonderfully well with our good old
Knickerbockers at home. A Landscape, with cattle and figures, by Albert
Cuyp, is strikingly beautiful; and how I wish you could see a Fat Boy,
the son of a burgomaster, by Bartholomew Helst, dated 1648. Vandyke,
whose portraits have never been equalled, has some of his best in this
museum; and his Burgomaster of Antwerp, Vander Brocht, is as bold a
picture as you could wish to gaze at.

Hondekoeter's flowers and fruits, and Snyder's game pieces, are among
the best of their kind in the world. Some of the finest things I have
seen in Holland, in the way of painting, are the little gems descriptive
of life as it lay about the artist--interiors of domestic abodes, and
out-door scenes at the roadside. These, the patient, plodding Dutchmen
have worked up most elaborately. One or two of Nicholas Maes's pictures
are wonderful. I saw one in a private collection, and it was a glorious
thing, though only a Kitchen, with two or three figures. O, how poor are
the things we often hear spoken of as fine pictures! The eye, it seems
to me, obtains its education rapidly in such a gallery as this. I am
sure I shall look at works of art in future with new feelings.

There was a most beautiful Jew boy, about eleven years old, that used to
stand at our hotel door to sell matches, who regularly beset us with his
wares. His face was as striking as any fancy picture you can meet with,
and his beauty and impudence made him a pretty successful merchant.

Mr. Schwartze took us to a noble mansion belonging to a merchant prince,
to see his great picture of Columbus before the Council explaining his
theory. This is a first-class execution. The coloring is very fine, and
the drawing good; and we all felt pride in seeing such a picture from
the easel of our countryman. I wish we had some good painting of his in
America. His portraits are excellent, and one of his wife has earned him
his high reputation in Holland. Through the kindness of this gentleman
we were introduced to the Artists' Club, and spent our evenings there in
very pleasant society. The artists belonging to it are probably about
fifty, and the other gentlemen who mainly support it are about two
hundred. I was much surprised to find nearly every gentleman we were
introduced to speaking excellent English. We met here a very gentlemanly
and accomplished lawyer, Mr. Van Lennep, whose father is a man of great
wealth. His attentions were very friendly. While here, James was quite
poorly with some slight attack of fever; and both our friends and the
consul were unremitting in their services.

The water is very poor; rain water is valuable indeed. The best drinking
water is brought from Utrecht in stone demijohns. The bad water is often
used, however, flavored with Schiedam. We saw several of the
floating-houses, in which whole families reside, and carry articles from
place to place. The herring fishery, in its season, is a great matter in
the commerce of Amsterdam. Every thing here impresses the stranger with
the idea of activity, wealth, and great comfort; and I fancy that a
person would very soon become attached to the city as a place of
residence. To-morrow, if James is better, we resume our journey, and
start for Cologne.

Yours affectionately,

WELD.


Letter 39.


COLOGNE.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We are strangely favored with weather; every day is fine; and we begin
to think that the climate has been abused, for we have had an
uninterrupted spell of bright, sunny weather. We started, after
breakfast, for our journey to Cologne, and took the oars for Utrecht,
which is twenty-three miles from Amsterdam. Our road was not one of
much interest, beyond the pretty gardens of the suburban residences.
Breukelen and Maarsen we thought pleasant little places. Utrecht is a
large town, and has, I think, nearly sixty thousand inhabitants; and of
these, one half are Catholics. It is rather on an ascent, and so is
unlike any other place we have seen in Holland. The place is famous for
the treaty of 1713. Here is a university, and some very fine private
residences; and the fortifications have been laid out in fine walks. The
Mall, or public walk, is a noble avenue of trees,--limes, I think,--and
they are in six or eight rows. In this place is a cathedral, which we
only saw. From its tower is the best view of the country; and it is said
you can see more than twenty towns from it.

From Utrecht we continued, by railroad, to Arnheim, a distance of
thirty-three miles; and we saw more forest-trees than we had before
noticed. In the cars were several Catholic priests, who smoked
incessantly. Arnheim is on the banks of the Rhine, and is a pretty
little place, of about sixteen thousand inhabitants. We were, of course,
reminded by Dr. C. that here Sir Philip Sidney died, in 1586, of his
wound received in the battle of Zutphen. The entire vicinity seemed to
us a delightful spot, and we have seen no place where the houses appear
so English and American. The scenery is very attractive; and we would
have liked to stay over a day, but the steamer for Ruhrort was ready to
start, and we had only time to get our tickets and go on board. We found
a neat, comfortable boat, and met pleasant society. The Rhine here is
bounded by flat shores, and has no points of interest, and affords no
promise of what it is so soon to be. We entered Prussia at Lobith, and
had a very thorough examination of our trunks by officers who came on
board. At Wesel--a town, I think, of some twelve thousand inhabitants,
and having a very strong fortress--we stopped half an hour, and a crowd
came round the boat. Rapin, who wrote the History of England, lived here
while engaged in the task. How singular it is that all the histories of
England, of any note, have been written by men not born in England! They
have been French, Scotch, Irish, &c. We reached Ruhrort in the
afternoon, and left the boat. This is the great central depot where the
coal of the Ruhr is deposited. Here we crossed in a ferry boat, rode a
mile or two in an omnibus, and then took the cars for Cologne, after
waiting some hour or two, in consequence of a delay--the first we have
met with on any railroad on the continent. It was dark when we passed
through Dusseldorf; and we felt sorry not to stay here and see the
water-color drawings that remain in this collection, once so famous; but
we were told at Paris that the best of the drawings and pictures have
gone to Munich. In the cars we met a gentleman and his lady who were
evidently Americans. We entered into conversation, and found they were
from Nashville, Tennessee. They bad been travelling very extensively in
Europe, and had been through Egypt, crossed the desert, and visited
Syria and the Holy City. I quite respected a lady, Charley, who had
travelled hundreds of miles upon a camel. The journey had been very
beneficial to her health. We reached Cologne at about ten o'clock, after
crossing over a bridge of boats fourteen hundred feet long, and went to
the Hotel Holland, on the banks of the river, and found it a very good
house, with a grand view of the Rhine; and the chambers are as good as
can be desired. Few places are more fruitful in the reminiscences which
they furnish than this old city. Cologne has a Roman origin, and was
settled by a colony sent by Nero and his mother, who was born here, in
her father's camp, during the war. It still retains the walls of its
early fortifications, built as long ago as the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. In Cologne Caxton lived, in 1470, and learnt the new art of
printing, which he carried to England and introduced there. Its present
population is about ninety thousand, having increased latterly, and, no
doubt, will rapidly increase, in consequence of its connection with
Paris, Strasburg, Berlin, Antwerp, and other cities, by railroads.

We turned our steps very early to the Cathedral, and here we expected
nothing less than a treat; but much as we had heard of it, and often as
the doctor had described it, we found it far beyond all our
anticipations. The church was commenced in 1248, and is still far from
completed. It is always thought to be one of the grandest Gothic piles
in the world. The name of the architect is not known. Gerhard is the
earliest builder whose name is associated with this church, in 1252. The
plan was to build the two towers five hundred feet high; but the
loftiest has only attained the height of about one hundred and
eighty-five feet. Much of the external work is in decay; but great pains
and cost have been given to repair the stone work, and the work is going
on with vigor and success. It is supposed that it will require three
millions of dollars to carry out the design. The form of the church is a
cross, and "the arches are supported by a quadruple row of sixty-four
columns; and, including those of the portico, there are more than one
hundred. The four columns in the middle are thirty feet in
circumference, and each of the one hundred columns is surmounted by a
chapiter different from the others." On one tower still exists the old
crane which raised the stones that came from Drachenfels. The only part
of the cathedral yet finished is the choir. This is one hundred and
sixty-one feet high; and, whether you look at it outside, or gaze on
its interior, you are lost in admiration. The stained windows are really
beyond all others I have seen. All round the choir stand colossal
statues of the Apostles, the Virgin, and the Savior. In a chapel not far
from the altar is the renowned shrine of the Three Kings, or Magi, who
came from the East with gifts to the infant Savior. These bones once
rested at Milan; but Frederic Barbarossa, in 1162, gave them to an
archbishop of Cologne. So here they are in a case, silver gilt, and
arcades on pillars all round; and, inside the pillars, little gold
prophets and apostles. The jewelry at this shrine has been formerly
valued at six millions of francs; but in some of its transportations in
troublous times, it has met with spoliations; but it is still radiant
with gold and pearls, and gems of all descriptions. The restoration of
the shrine is going on, and costly offerings are frequently made in aid
of the undertaking. The skulls of these worthies are crowned with gold,
and look ghastly enough, in spite of diamonds and rubies. Their names
are Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar. We paid a heavy fee to see the rare
show; but it is well enough to understand the mummery that there is in
the world. We went the entire round of the little chapels, and saw some
fine monuments to the great ones of church and state. I was much pleased
with a bronze statue of Archbishop Conrad, of Hocksteden, who died in
1261, and some exceedingly old paintings. We also saw the library and
sacristy, and the sacred vestments, some of which were splendid enough.
Here we saw a bone of St. Matthew some saint's shrine in silver, and the
state cross of the archbishop, with several of the very finest ivory
carvings that we have fallen in with. A look at the vast workshop where
the stone carvings for restoration are made was quite interesting.

While wandering through the aisles of the Cathedral, we met with a very
pleasant family from New York; and, after introduction, we agreed to
make the passage of the Rhine together; and, as there are young people
in the party, this will be very agreeable to us. We have rather a
limited time to pass here, and so have concluded to neglect the Virgin's
bones, at St. Ursula's Church, of which we have read all the legends.
Men and women trained up to worship these odds and ends are the people
who are flocking by thousands to our country; and there is a great deal
for such folks to learn before they will value and understand our
privileges. We next turned our steps to St. Peter's Church, where Rubens
was baptized; and we saw the brass font, which is still there, and also
his father's tomb. It was to this church that the great painter
presented his famous Crucifixion of Peter, which he thought the best he
ever painted; but artists differ with him in this estimate. The picture
now exposed to view is only a copy, which was made in Paris when the
original was in the Louvre; but the man in charge turns the picture,
which is on a pivot, and you have the original before you. Peter's head
is very fine, and much more striking than the rest of the body. The
little garden in the cloisters of this church is very sweet, and there
are some good bits of sculpture. The beautiful Church of the Apostles we
could not see, excepting outside, and its appearance is quite singular.
The styles of architecture I thought strangely mixed up. Of course, we
got some cologne water at the genuine fountain head in Julich's Place;
and in the evening we made an examination of a curiosity shop, where we
found a fine old engraving of Rubens's head, and two excellent
engravings of Ostades's interiors. They are gems in their way, and,
though very old, are perfect. We saw the house where the unfortunate
Queen of France died, in 1644, respecting whose last days so interesting
a fiction has been written; and we were told that it was also the very
house in which Rubens was born. At all events, it is a very plain
establishment for such celebrity as it possesses. We have also seen a
military review here; but the discipline was poor, and only the music
good.

A gentleman here from America, engaged in the wine trade, has amused us
all by his facts in relation to champagne, which is here manufactured
in large quantities, and is fabricated from a mixture of some ten or
twelve different wines. A very superior brand is the result, which the
good people of America will pay well for, with an appropriate brand duly
furnished to order.

On the roof of our hotel is a sort of room, or garden, called the
Belvedere. In it are a variety of fine plants, in healthy condition. The
roses were very fragrant. The view across the river from this place is
charming; and the village of Deutz looks prettily, with its large hotel
and plenty of smaller houses of resort. To-morrow we go up the Rhine;
and we are all hoping for a fine day, and then we expect a pleasant one.

Yours truly,

JAMES.


Letter 40.


FRANKFORT.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

It was on the Rhine that we all wanted you with us, and other friends,
too, who were far away. This is no common, every-day stream, but one
whose name and renown have been associated with ten thousand pages of
history, song, and legend. We have read of the Rhine, listened to its
songs, drank its wines, dreamed of its craggy, castled banks,--and at
last we found ourselves upon its waters, rushing down from their homes
in Alpine steeps and regions of eternal snow. The deposits of this river
have made Holland what she is; and the rich plains of the Low Countries
have been formed by the alluvial deposits of this noble river. The
enthusiasm of the Germans towards this stream is well known. They call
it Father Rhine, and King Rhine; and well may they be proud of its
beauty and its historic fame. We took our passage in a fine steamer, on
a lovely morning, and it took us about eight hours to reach Coblentz.
Leaving Cologne, we passed an old tower on the edge of the river, and,
for some miles, the prospect was every day enough; and it was not till
we approached Bonn that we were much impressed with the banks. We passed
several villages, which appeared to have pleasant localities. I name
only Surdt, Urfel, Lulsdorf, and Alfter. Bonn is an old city, of Roman
date, and has figured largely in the wars of the Rhine. Its population
is about sixteen thousand. Bonn has a minster, which shows itself finely
to the voyager on the river, and is a Gothic structure of the twelfth
century. The University here is famous for its library, and the great
names formerly associated with this institution--Schlegel and Niebuhr.
Both filled chairs in the college. Prince Albert was educated at this
place. Beethoven was born here. If we could have spent a day at the
Seven Mountains, I should have been glad; but we were only able to look
at them. They vary in height from one thousand and fifty to fourteen
hundred and fifty-three feet. The most picturesque of the group is
Drachenfels; and the beautiful lines of Byron you will recollect, where
he speaks of "the castled crag of Drachenfels." From this place the
stone was taken for the Cathedral at Cologne. The summits of these seven
mountains are crested with ruined castles. Their sides are well wooded,
and around them are spread fruitful vineyards. You know how famous they
are in the legendary lore of the Rhine. The view from Drachenfels is
said to be one of the finest on the river. After leaving Bonn and the
ruins of Godesberg, we soon came to Rolandseck, a lofty eminence, where
are the remains of a baronial fortress and a celebrated ruin of an arch.
I should judge that the access to this place was by a charming road. The
ruins of Rolandseck are immortalized by the ballad of Schiller.
Tradition relates that the castle was destroyed by the Emperor Henry V.,
in the twelfth century. At the foot of the mountain is the sweet little
Island of Nonnenwörth, of about one hundred acres, and the ruins of a
convent. The rock here is basaltic, and the production of volcanic
action. Never did Nature present a fairer picture than we gazed upon at
this spot. The villages around are pictures of happiness and content,
and the scenery such as only the Rhine can exhibit. Passing by the
charming, rural-looking Oberwinter, we soon came upon a woody height,
where stands the Gothic Church of St. Apollinarisberg. Here is, or was,
the saint's head; and it was formerly a shrine of great resort. Close by
is the little tower Of Remagen, and opposite are basaltic rocky heights
of six or eight hundred feet, on the sides of which are vineyards--the
vines growing in baskets filled with earth and placed in the crevices of
the rocks. No square foot of soil seems to be wasted; and, to improve
the ground, you will find the plots for vines laid out like potato
patches,--some running this way, and others that,--making the sides of
the hills and banks look very much like basket work.

We now came, on our left hand, to the ruins of Okenfels and the pretty
town of Linz. The ruins are very dark, and look as if they were past
redemption; whereas, some of these castles retain fine outlines. The red
roofs of the town are in pleasing contrast with the green woods. This
town seemed quite a business place; and I noticed several sloops and
queer-looking vessels at the piers. On the opposite side the Aar falls
into the Rhine. Just back is a town called Sinzig, and story tells that
here Constantine and Maxentius fought the battle which resulted in the
downfall of paganism. Here it was that, the evening previous,
Constantine saw in the heavens the figure of a cross, with the
inscription, [Greek: "_En toutô nika_."] But other
legends give the battle place on the banks of the Tiber.

We were all pleased with a beautiful, modern, castellated building,
erected out of the ruins of an ancient castle, of which a single
venerable tower remains at a small distance. The name is the Castle of
Reineck. It was built for Professor Bethman Holweg, of Bonn, and he
reads his lines in pleasant places. It must have cost much money to rear
such an edifice. Nearly opposite are the ruins of Hammerstein Castle,
where, in 1105, Henry IV. found an asylum. We next came to Andernach.
This is an ancient city, and here you see towers and ruins standing
amidst a wide amphitheatre of basaltic mountains. The place is spoken of
by various old historians, and under several names. The great trade of
the place is in millstones, which find their way even to America. Here
is a celebrated Roman arched gate; but the lancet form would indicate a
later date. On our left, we came to a pleasantly-situated town, called
Neuwied, with some five thousand inhabitants. The streets lie wide; the
houses looked bright, and very much like those in an American town. Here
is a Moravian settlement. On our right is a cheerful little place,
called Weisenthurm, and an ancient tower stands near it. It is said that
here the Romans first made the crossing of this river. This was the spot
where General Hoch passed in 1797; and on a height, at this village, is
a monument to celebrate Hoch's achievement. Here we met with an enormous
raft; and I assure you, Charley, it was a sight. We had seen two or
three small ones before, but here was a monster. These rafts come from
the woods on the tributary rivers--the Moselle, Neckar, Maine, &c. These
prodigious flotillas are bound to Dordrecht, and are there broken up.
This one looked like a town. It had at least twenty-five huts, and some
of them tolerably large shanties; and I should think there were all of
three hundred and fifty persons upon it. On the raft were women,
children, cows, pigs, and sheep. This one was thought to be seven
hundred feet long and two hundred wide, at the least. On our left, as we
ascended the river, we now saw Sain and Mühlhofen, just at the point
where two small rivers enter the Rhine; and on a hill top are the ruins
of a castle of the Counts of Sain. Farther up is the quiet-looking
hamlet of Engers; and we pass the islands of Niederwörth and Graswörth.
On the former is a ruined convent, founded in 1242, and a population of
nearly seven hundred. They seem to have a fine old church. I very much
admired the village of Kesselhein, and I think it must be a charming
spot. Close by it is the Palace of Schönbornhest, where the Bourbon
family retreated at the revolution in the last century. It is now sadly
dilapidated. Just as we were looking at Nuendorf, on our right, we were
all called, by a bend in the river, to gaze on the giant rock of
Ehrenbreitstein, bristling to its very summit with fortifications. O,
how it towers up, and smiles or frowns--which you please--upon Coblentz,
sweetly reposing on the banks of the Rhine and the Moselle! I think the
view from the deck of the steamer, up and down the river, and on each
side, is the noblest panoramic view that I have seen. Just before us is
a bridge of boats, which connects the fortress with Coblentz; and,
looking up the Moselle, is a fine stone bridge. We had our dinner on the
deck of the boat--a good arrangement, because we lost none of the
scenery. This dinner was about midway between Cologne and Coblentz; and
it would have amused you to have noticed the order of the various
courses--soup, boiled beef, raw fish, ducks, roast pork, fowls, pudding,
baked fish, roast beef, and mutton. Every thing was well cooked, and I
never saw people appear more disposed to do justice to a meal. There was
not half the hurry and indecorum that you so often see in an American
boat. One thing I observed--and that was, that no one used the left hand
for the management of his knife. If any thing annoys me, it is to see
persons carve and eat at table with this wretched habit. I always
imagine that they were so unhappy as to have grown up without father or
mother to watch over them. This may be my weakness; but I cannot help
it. We went to the Trois Suisses, a fine house on the river bank, and
from our windows are looking, by moonlight, on the glorious fortress.

Yours truly,

J.O.C.


Letter 41.


FRANKFORT.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We had no more pleasant day in our excursion than from Cologne to
Coblentz. It would be long before I grew tired of the scenery at that
fine old place. We walked about, in the evening, with our New York
friends; and, though some parts of Coblentz are very filthy, there are
some exquisite plots in it, and all the vicinage is beautiful. We took a
pleasant stroll to the bridge which spans the blue Moselle with fourteen
arches. The city stands on a point of land formed by the two rivers, and
hence was known to the Romans by the name of _Confluentes_. Drusus
fortified this place and Ehrenbreitstein thirteen years before Christ.
Its population is short of twenty thousand; but there are also four
thousand five hundred Prussian troops at the fortress. This is one of
the strongest military posts in Europe. Its fortifications have been the
labor of long years; and the works here, united with those across the
river, are deemed impregnable. I believe Ehrenbreitstein is called the
Gibraltar of Germany. It mounts four hundred cannon, and the magazines
will contain provisions for eight thousand men for ten years. The former
Electoral Palace is now the Government House, and presents a very noble
appearance from the river. It is either stone, or stuccoed, with an
Ionic portico; and, with its wings, is five hundred and forty feet
front. All round this city, the heights are strongly fortified; and,
look where you may, you see means of defence.

We here determined upon an excursion to Stolzenfels, which is about four
miles from Coblentz, and our party went in two carriages--the family of
Mr. B. in one, and ourselves in the other. The ride was very pleasant
along the banks of the Rhine, and through orchards and vineyards--the
heights towering away over us all the way. We came to the village of
Capellen, which is a poor little hamlet at the base of the lofty
mountain on which stood the noble ruins of Stolzenfels Castle, which has
been most admirably restored, and is now the summer palace of the King
of Prussia. The ascent is very steep, but the road is admirable.
Carriages are not allowed to go up, and travellers are supplied with
donkeys, of which we found plenty in waiting. Our party all obtained
these patient beasts of burden, and I assure you that we made a funny
cavalcade. I do think it would have amused you to see ladies, gentlemen,
and boys, all escorted by ragged urchins, mounting the hill. The road
has been made at immense expense, and winds along in the most romantic
manner--giving you, at every turn, the finest views and catches of the
river, up and down; while the walls are frequently at the edges of
precipices, from fifty to two hundred feet over the ravines below. The
woods were in all their glory, and I never saw a finer day. On arriving
at the castle, we rang a bell, and the servant in livery appeared--a
fine, civil fellow he was. On entering, we were all furnished with felt
slippers, so that, in walking through the apartments, we might not
injure the polished oak floors. This castle was the residence of
Archbishop Werner, who, at the close of the fourteenth century, was
devoted to alchemy. The old tower is an immense affair, and still
remains, and is likely to remain for ages. The new parts of the palace
have all been restored with constant reference to the original
architectural style. We wandered from one apartment to another, perhaps
going into twenty or thirty apartments, none of which were very large,
and many of them quite small and cosy. We saw the bed-room of the king.
Every thing was plain, and the furniture generally made of oak or black
walnut. His study table had pen and ink and paper upon it, just as if
he had stepped out of the room. The queen's apartments were very
elegantly plain, and her oratory is as pretty a little thing as you can
imagine. In all these apartments are fine pictures, and one is superbly
frescoed with allegory and history. The room in which the Queen of
England and Prince Albert lodged, in 1845, was shown us, and the state
bed was still in it. The dining hall was finely ornamented with
carvings, old armor, &c. But a room devoted to antiquities pleased us
the best of all. Here were cups, bottles, and glass goblets of the
earliest dates,--some as far back as the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries,--which had belonged to emperors and electors whom I cannot
recollect, they were so many. On the walls were the most precious
mementoes; and here we saw the swords of Marshal Tilly, Napoleon
Bonaparte,--the one used at Waterloo,--Blucher, and Murat, and the knife
and fork belonging to the brave Hofer, the Tyrolese patriot, who was
shot at Mantua. From all the windows of this gem of a palace we had the
finest views of the river, and could see, from the gateway and platform,
Coblentz, Ehrenbreitstein, and eleven different ruins of castles and
convents. Directly in front of us, on a bend of the river, almost making
a peninsula, was Lahnstein and its ruined castle; off to its right,
Braubach, and the Castle of Marksburg and Martin's Chapel; and, on our
own side, the pretty village of Rheus, where was once "the royal seat,"
and where the electors of the Rhine used to meet, to elect or depose the
emperors of Germany. All round the castle of Stolzenfels are the
choicest flowers and shrubs; and I wish some of my horticultural friends
could have seen the moss roses and fuchias in such luxuriance. We were
sorry to leave the place; but the steamboat on the Rhine is as punctual
as a North River boat; and we had to resume our donkeys, descend to the
carriages, drive briskly, and were just in time to get on board a boat
bound to Mayence. In going up the river, we saw the palace again to
great advantage; and, whatever else I forget, this locality I shall keep
in memory, I assure you. We again looked at Lahnstein, and the ruins of
St. John's Church, built in 1100, and saw a curious ferry, from the
mouth of the Lahn over to Stolzenfels. It is made by five or six boats
anchored off, and the ferry boat goes over, wafted by the tide. We then
came upon Bopart, an old place, but strongly fortified, and having three
or four thousand inhabitants. A gentleman on board, who had been there,
said it was quite an interesting place. Nearly opposite we were
delighted with the ruined towers of the Brothers, as Sternberg and
Liebenstein are called. They occupy the two summits of a rock, every
inch of whose sides is sacred to vines. The story of the brothers who
lived here you are acquainted with. Our next point of interest was the
ruin of Thurnberg, or the Mouse; while not far above is another, called
the Cat. The view here grows more sublime, and the river grows narrower;
and we had a fine prospect of Rheinfels and the town of St. Goar.
Rheinfels grows up from the river's edge, and is, indeed, _the_ rock of
the Rhine. The fortifications were immense, and this is the most
wonderful ruin on the river. A confederacy of German and Rhenish cities
broke up this fortress at the close of the thirteenth century, and long
afterwards it was made a modern defence. Here the river seems pent up,
almost; and just above St. Goar there rises from the water a lofty
precipice, called the Lurley Rock. Nearly opposite, a man lives, who,
when the boat passes, fires a pistol, and a very singular echo follows,
as we can testify. Not far above are seven rocks, seen at low water,
called the Seven Sisters. The legend says that they were hard-hearted
girls,--the Ladies Schonberg,--who trifled with the affections of nice
young men, and so got their deserts by being turned into stones. Still,
at the right, we came to Oberwesel, and we all thought it among the
sweetest spots of the river. Salmon are caught in nets here, from the
rocks. A bend in the river shows us Schonberg, a fine ruin. This was the
family spot whence the Marshal Schomberg, of the Boyne, originated. Just
over the river is the noble Gutenfels. It was spared by the French, and
occupied till 1807, but is now roofless. Caub, on the left, is the place
where Marshal Blucher crossed the river with his army, January 1, 1814.
In the centre of the river is a castle called Pfalz, built about 1320,
which was used as a toll-house by the Duke of Nassau. I think it has
been used as a state prison. On our right lies Bacharach, with its many
towers, and the fine old ruins of Stahleck Castle. Off this place is a
large rock, the Altar of Bacchus; and when the rock is exposed, it is
thought to be the pledge of a good vintage. The region is celebrated for
its wines; and the grapes of the slaty rocks have a highly musky
perfume. A gentleman told me that Bacharach resembles Jerusalem in its
aspect. Of course, it must be in miniature that the resemblance exists.
Here we noticed St. Werner's Church, a most superb ruin of the florid
Gothic. Those lancet-arched windows are the admiration of all who pass
by. Lorchausen is a small place, and just away from it are the ruins of
the Castle of Nollingen. On the other side, or right bank, are the ruins
of the old Keep Tower of Fürstenberg, destroyed in 1689. Here we enter
on the region where the best Rhenish wine is produced. The Rheingau, or
valley of the river, is divided into upper and lower departments; and
from about Lorch, on the left bank, up to Biberich, are the choicest
vineyards. On our right lay the ruins of Heimberg, and the restored
Castle of Sonneck. Then comes old Falkenberg, and near to it is the
splendid Gothic Church of St. Clement. All these fortresses were the
abodes of wholesale highwaymen, and then might made right. Most of them
became such nuisances that, at the close of the thirteenth century, they
were hurled down, and their places made desolate. Here, too, is
Rheinstein, on the very bank of the river. Its early owner was hanged by
the Emperor Rudolph. One of the Prussian princes has fitted up the
fortress in magnificent style; and I learn that there is no palace in
Europe that can boast of such mediæval splendor. Every thing that can
serve to illustrate the dark ages is carefully collected for this
charming spot, which seems a rival to Stolzenfels.

Just across, on the opposite bank, is Assmanshausen, famous for hot
baths and red wine. Here you see terrace upon terrace, up to the summits
of the hills; and some of these, the guide books say, are one thousand
or twelve hundred feet. You will often see fifteen or twenty of these
terraces supported by brick and stone fences, and the terrace is often
not more than six feet wide; and the soil and manure have all to be
carried up on the shoulders of the vine-dressers. The value of this
region-arises from its aspect, owing to the bend of the river, which
gives _this left bank, as you ascend_, a direct exposure to the sun at
midday.

The vintage of the Rhine, I am told, is generally gathered in during
October and November, but it is put off as late as possible. Grapes were
introduced here by the Romans.

We now came to Ehrenfels, in its venerable decay, the beautiful tower of
Rosel, and the ruins of Bromseberg; while on our right are the ruins of
Vautsberg, and just beyond we come upon "Bingen of the Rhine," at the
mouth of the Nahe; and close by is the celebrated Mausetherm, or Mouse
Tower, said to have been built by Hatto, the Archbishop of Mayence, in
the tenth century. Southey's fine ballad has immortalized the legend.
Never did town present sweeter aspect than Bingen, at the foot of a
pyramidical hill, which is crowned by the ruined Castle of Klopp. In a
church here lies Bartholomew of Holshausen, who prophesied the fatality
of the Stuarts and Charles II.'s restoration, warning him not to restore
Popery. Bingen has, I think, some five or six thousand inhabitants, and
has a great trade in wine, which is collected here from all the
vineyards around. Rudesheim lies on the other bank, and its famous wine
comes from grapes growing close to Ehrenfels. Next comes Geisenheim,
also famous for wine, and soon comes the renowned village and vineyard
of Johannisberg, or Mountain of St. John. Here the river is wide
again,--perhaps two thousand fire hundred feet,--and we begin to see
fine meadows. This is where Prince Metternich has his seat, where once
was a priory, and various have been its vicissitudes. In 1816, it was
given to Metternich by the Emperor of Austria. The mountain contains
only seventy-five acres, and the choicest wine comes only from vines
growing near the castle, on the crown of the bill. The wine of the
village is very inferior to that of this estate. The place has but few
inhabitants--say five or eight hundred. The house is white, and not very
castle-like. The grape is called the _Riesslingen_.

[Illustration: VINEYARD ON THE RHINE.--Pp. 175.]

Here we found several islands. Erbach and Hattenheim are both famous for
vineyards, and between them grows the famous Marcobrünner; and the
Steinberg vineyard, a fortune to the Duke of Nassau, lies upon a slope
of the hill close to the convent, of Eberbach or Erbach. This convent
was founded in 1131, but is now a lunatic asylum. The churches here are
very fine. Opposite the shore lies Rhine Island, and forms a noble park.
Walluff, with few inhabitants, is regarded as the commencement of the
Rheingau, or wine district, along which we had coasted. Biberich, on the
duchy of Nassau, now comes upon our view; and the noble château of the
duke presents one of the finest mansions on the river. Here some of our
passengers left for Frankfort, and took the rail; but we wished to see
Mayence, and so went in the boat. The city looks finely, and its red
towers and steeples make quite a show. This city belongs to the Duke of
Hesse Darmstadt, and is garrisoned by Austrians and Prussians, in equal
force, generally eight or ten thousand. Exclusive of these, the
population is nearly forty thousand. We walked about, and looked at the
fine Cathedral, which was sadly shut up by houses and shanties. It was
too late to enter it. You may be sure, Charley, that we found out the
monument to John Guttemberg, the inventor of movable types. It is of
bronze, and was designed by Thorwaldsen, and stands in front of the
Theatre, once a university. After perambulating the town till weary, we
came to the bridge of boats, sixteen hundred and sixty-six feet long,
and which connects Mayence with Cassel, a strongly fortified place,
where the railroad depot is located. At this bridge are several boat
mills, or tide mills, where grain is ground by the tidal action. They
look strangely, but work well. On the bridge we met many Austrian
officers in rich uniforms, most of them young, and, I thought, very
aristocratical in their bearing. Our dinner on board the boat was as
profuse as the day before; and I must not forget to tell you that we had
an English lordling, son of a former premier, on board, with his lady,
on their matrimonial tour. He was the worst-mannered young man that I
have seen in Europe; and when he had ogled the company sufficiently with
his glass, and manifested his contempt pretty plainly, he and his betook
themselves to the interior of his carriage. He was quite young, and may
grow better behaved. We took the ears at dark, and after riding
twenty-two miles found ourselves at Frankfort, having passed through
Hochheim, where the vineyards are so costly that the railroad company
had to pay well for the passage-way. Here we put up at the Hotel
Angleterre. Forgive this long letter; but I could not well shorten it,
and I want you to know just what we saw.

Always yours,

JAMES.


Letter 42.


STRASBURG.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

James's long letter gave you a pretty correct view of our passage from
Coblentz to Frankfort. You will recollect that we went up the Rhine,
which gave us more time to look about; but I fancy that in going down
stream the shores would show to better advantage, if possible, than in
the ascent. From Coblentz to Mayence the river is narrower than before;
and every rock more precipitous than its neighbor, has a castle. How
some of these towers were built, or could be got at, seems a mystery. I
had no idea of the number of these robbers' nests, for such they were.
Much as I love the Hudson, yet I cannot help saying that the Rhine is
_the_ river of the world, so far as I have seen the watery highways.
Frankfort is one of the free towns of Germany, and lies on the Maine. It
has about sixty-five thousand inhabitants, of whom seven thousand are
Jews. I like the city much, and think a residence here would be very
agreeable. Some of the modern streets are very handsome, and the
dwellings are fine. The old part of the town is old enough. At our hotel
we found a sentinel on guard, in honor of an Austrian general staying at
the house. The house is a capital one, like all the other great hotels
we have yet seen on the continent. We all went to see the Römer, or Town
Hall, which was built about 1425, and which is quite famous for its
historical associations. Here the German emperors were formerly elected
and inaugurated. We saw the great hall where they were entertained and
had crowned heads for waiters. Here, on its walls, are all the portraits
of the series of emperors from Conrad I. to Francis II., and each
emperor has his motto underneath. Some of these are quaint enough.
Directly in front of this building is the Römerberg, or Market-place, in
which the carousing incident to coronation used to occur; and it is
large enough to accommodate a vast assembly. We rode along the banks of
the river, to see a pretty little palace belonging to Duke Somebody, and
especially to see the grounds and hothouses. They were exquisitely
beautiful. As we were here upon a holiday of the church, the Museum was
closed, and we lost the sight of some good pictures. We were much
pleased with a visit to the garden of Mr. Bethman, a banker, where we
saw a pretty little collection of statuary, the gem of which is
Dannecker's statue of Ariadne. The building in which these are placed is
neat. We, of course, went to see No. 74 in the Hersch-Graben, where
Goethe was born, in 1749. In the corner house of the Dom Platz, Luther
once dwelt We rode through the Jews' quarters; and, of all the
wretched-looking streets, I think the worst and filthiest is that in
which Baron Rothschild was born. As we passed a Sabbath here, we
attended the English Episcopal Church, a neat building. The service was
well read by the chaplain, and an excellent sermon was preached by a
stranger. After service I spoke to the chaplain, who was quite anxious
to hear about the prospects of Popery in America. He seemed to have very
just views of the system, and anxiously deprecated its influence in our
Country.

We visited many shops, and found the richest collections of curiosities
and antiquities. Here we met with several American friends upon their
tour; and at Frankfort we took leave of our New York friends, whose
kindness and agreeable company we had been favored with for a few days.

We took the rail for Heidelberg, on our way to Strasburg. The whole of
the first few miles was through a very flat-looking country, and our
interest was not called out till we came to Darmstadt, a fine town, with
thirty thousand inhabitants. We saw a tall column, but could not find
out its historical allusion. This is the capital of the grand duchy of
Hesse Darmstadt. In passing through Odenwald, we saw a tract of woody
country; and off to our left we were quite sure that the scenery must be
very beautiful. The hills in the distance form the boundary on the
eastern part of the valley of the Rhine; and the mountain ranges are
richly covered with vineyards and castles all the way, parallel with the
railroad. This beautiful region is called the Bergstrasse, and I am sure
a week or two on these hills would amply repay the pedestrian. It is in
these wild regions of romance that the Castle of Rodenstein is found,
some ten miles from Erbach; and not far from it Castle Schnellert, where
the wild Jager is supposed to live, who haunts the forests and gives
spectral forewarnings of battles. Off to our left there was a constantly
shifting panoramic view of hill top and ruins.

Heidelberg is sweetly situated on the bank of the Neckar--a beautiful
river, and one that I long to trace by its course through wood and hill.
This town is famous for its university and castle. It has about seven
hundred and fifty students. We could only see the castle, and admire its
exterior. The college was founded in 1386, and is very distinguished as
a law school. The library is very large and excellent. The barbarian
Tilly is said to have provided litter for his cavalry from books and
MSS. out of this then magnificent collection. The ruin of this glorious
old castle dates from 1764, when it was burnt by lightning. It is built
of red stone. If I live, I hope to visit this place again, and make a
thorough exploration of this stupendous ruin. It is here, in a cellar,
that the largest wine butt in the world is found, and it will contain
eight hundred hogsheads. It has long been empty, however. I never longed
to follow a river more than I do this same Neckar--it is so clear, and
all my glimpses of it have been so filled up with quiet beauty and wild
scenery. We saw a hill, near the town, which affords the finest view, we
are told, in Germany, and even takes in Strasburg Cathedral spire, which
is quite ninety miles off!

From Heidelberg we again took the cars for Kehl, about four miles from
Strasburg, a distance of nearly ninety miles. The first-class cars are
very luxurious and reasonable; second class, excellent, and very
genteel-looking persons using them. Lord Cowley, father of Lady Bulwer,
wife of the minister from England at Washington, was in the cars with
us, and two of his children--one a beautiful little girl. They were
going to Baden, and were accompanied by a governess.

We found no more of the extraordinary beauty that had made our morning
ride so charming. Bruchsal seemed a dull place, as seen from the
station; and Durlach had not much greater attractions. Carlsruhe is
quite a place, has some repute for its baths, and is the capital of the
grand duchy of Baden. Off to the south of this town we saw the skirts of
the Black Forest. All around we saw a fine growth of poplars. Passing
Etlingen and Muggensturm, we come to Rastadt--rather a pretty station,
and the town is fortified. At Oos our passengers for Baden took a branch
train, which, after three miles' ride, brought them into the famous
Baden-Baden. We reached Kehl, which is a mere village on the Rhine, but
has seen enough of war. Here we took an omnibus and started for
Strasburg, distant some four miles. When we reached the French
custom-house, over the river, we had quite a searching time; and even a
flask of cologne was taxed some twenty cents. We were weary enough, and
glad to get into quarters, which we established at the Ville de Paris,
a very superior house, with excellent rooms and elegant furniture, while
the cookery was perfect. To-morrow we have enough to see and to do.
To-night we shall retire early; but, go where we may, we shall furnish
you the promised account of our wanderings.

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 43.


STRASBURG.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Long before we entered this city, we obtained a fine view of its great
glory, the Cathedral spire. What an object! It does not seem as if
hammer and chisel had had any thing to do here. I can almost fancy that
this spire was thought out and elaborated by mere intellect. It would be
long ere I grew weary of looking at this wondrous work of man. The more
you examine this edifice, the more you are impressed with its
magnificence. Let me tell you about this same minster, as it is called.
The spire is four hundred and seventy-four feet high--one hundred and
forty feet higher than St. Paul's, and twenty-four feet higher than the
Pyramids of Egypt. The architect was Erwin of Steinbach, and his plans
survived him. He died in 1318, when the work was carried on by his son.
The tower was not finished till four hundred and twenty-five years
after the commencement of the building, and then Hültz, from Cologne,
came to effect the undertaking. The tracery of this lofty pinnacle is
inimitably beautiful. We ascended the spire, and I can assure you that
the prospect amply repays the trouble. We saw the winding, silvery
Rhine, the Black Forest, and the long line of the Vosges Mountains. I
never felt more keenly my inability to describe a place than when I
walked through this gorgeous sanctuary. You must see it, to form an
adequate idea of its grandeur. The nave was begun in 1015, and completed
in 1275. The choir is yet older, and is thought to belong to the times
of Charlemagne. The large rose window, over the front entrance, is
thought to be the finest specimen of stained glass now existing. The
stone pulpit of 1486 is the grandest we have yet seen, and in better
taste than some of the carved wood pulpits in Belgium. The columns are
very massive. One of the chief attractions in this church is the
mechanical clock, which occupies a large space at the left hand as you
enter the building. The true time to see it is at twelve o'clock, when
Death strikes the hour, the apostles all pass before you, a large cock
up above flaps his wings and crows admirably three times, flags are
waved, and the affair ends. Here, close by, is the architect Erwin's
effigy, in stone.

We next went to St. Thomas's Church, to see the superb tomb of Marshal
Saxe, which is a work of great merit. In a vault we saw the remains of a
Count of Nassau and his daughter, who had been coffined down for--I
forget how long, but I think more than two centuries. It was here that
Guttemburg began his experiments in printing, which he perfected at
Mayence. We made some purchases here of embroidery, which we thought
very beautiful, and also cheap. General Kleber's tomb and monument are
in the Place d'Armes. Of course, we did not visit Strasburg and forget
that it furnishes _pâté's des fois gras_. We obtained some good
engravings of the churches and other points of interest, and, on a fine
afternoon, took the railroad for Basle.

Yours affectionately,

GEORGE.


Letter 44.


BASLE.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We took the cars from Strasburg in the afternoon for this place. The
distance is eighty-six miles; and, owing to some twenty way stations, we
were nearly five hours on the rail; but the beauty of the scenery
reconciled us to a prolongation of the time usually spent on such a
journey. The general route was over a flat country, with sundry bridges
over small streams; but, off to our right, we were close to the Vosges
Mountains, which kept us company nearly every mile of the journey. I
suppose you know that Strasburg is very strongly fortified. We saw its
works to great advantage when leaving the city by the train. We were
much assisted in our knowledge of places on the mountains by a fine
panoramic volume of engravings which we bought at Strasburg, and which
really gives a capital idea of the entire scene of travel. I will just
name the principal places that we passed by and through, that you may
trace on the map and read about them, for some are important towns. St.
Erstein is a place of four thousand inhabitants; Benfield is very pretty
indeed; and close by is a fine-looking town, with a fine situation. We
saw a noble spire off to our left. Schlestadt has ten thousand
inhabitants, and is fortified. From it chimneys, we supposed it must be
a manufacturing place. The view of the Vosges here is very imposing.
They are generally with rolling summits; and upon some eminence, jutting
out, stands a castle. The Hoher Königsberg is the largest castle of the
range, and it was destroyed during the thirty years' war, in 1633. Here
we saw fine vineyards. Colmar looks like a very prosperous place. Its
manufactories make quite a show, and all around we saw well-built cotton
factories; and the entire spot had a Rhode Island look. Dr. C. turned
our attention to the village of Turckheim, about three miles off, where
Marshal Turenne beat the Imperialists in 1675. Egnisheim and its
three-towered castle is a small affair. Bolwiller is a perfect vineyard
all around, and the wines of this region are excellent. Nothing, hardly,
seems to be cultivated but the vine. Opposite to this place is the
loftiest of the Vosges; and my panorama makes it four thousand seven
hundred feet above the sea. Mühlhausen is a very active, busy-looking
town, with a population of nearly thirty thousand. Here the fine cotton
prints of France are fabricated. Much of the property is owned at Basle,
we were afterwards told. This place has to obtain its cotton from Havre
and Marseilles; and even coal has to come from a distance.

It was dark when we took an omnibus at the terminus; and, after riding
over an old bridge, we were very soon established at a princely hotel
known as the Trois Rois. This house is on the banks of the Rhine, and
its windows command a very fine view. The historical reminiscences of
Basle are interesting, and its position very commanding. Here the Rhine
is bounded by the hills of the Black Forest and the Jura range.

Next morning we took a stroll to see the lay of the land; and we found
ourselves on a terrace overlooking the Rhine, and forming a part of the
cathedral ground. O, it was glorious to look at, Charley. There,
stretched away on the other side, were the hills of the Black Forest,
whose legends we have so often pored over. This terrace is finely-wooded
with linden and chestnut-trees. We walked back to town, and called upon
our consul, Mr. Burchardt, and found him very kind and friendly. He gave
himself up to us for the entire day, and became our guide to all the
objects of interest. He dined with us; and then we all went to his
charming country-house, about one and a half miles from town, and took
tea with his family. Our first object was the Cathedral. This is a red
sandstone church, with two steeples, and was consecrated in 1019. The
crypt, no doubt, is as ancient as this date. Here is the tomb of the
empress, wife of Rudolph of Hapsburg. Here, too, we saw the tombstone of
Erasmus, who died in 1536. In the cloisters, which are very noble, are
the monuments of OEcolampadius, Grynæus and Myer, the reformers. This
church is Protestant. It is plain, but venerable. In the chapter-house,
which we visited, was held the Council of Basle, which lasted from 1436
to 1444. The room is just as it then appeared, and the very cushions on
the seats are still preserved. Our next visit was to the Holbein
Gallery, where the largest collection of paintings by this master is to
be seen. Here we saw the fragments of the Dance of Death, but which
some say are of an earlier date than Holbein's day. I liked his
portraits better than his other pieces. One sketch of Sir Thomas More's
family is very fine. We also saw the library, and a large collection of
Roman antiquities. The portraits are very fine at the library; and we
saw those of Euler and Bernouilli, the mathematicians. At the university
we saw the building, and received polite attentions from the librarian
and Latin professor. We also saw the professor of chemistry, renowned
for his discovery of gun cotton. The collection of MSS. is very large
and rich; and we had the gratification to have in our hands the
handwriting of several letters by Melancthon, Calvin, Luther, Erasmus,
&c., &c. I think this is a good place to live in for purposes of study.
At Basle there is a large missionary seminary; and a great many of the
best missionaries in India and Africa were educated here. We also
visited the private reading-room of a club, and found a very good
library there. On the table were several American papers--the New York
Herald, Express, and the Boston Mercantile Journal. After dinner we took
a carriage and repaired to St. Jacob, a quiet village, about one mile
from Basle. Here we found a neat little church, and, at the junction of
two roads, a Gothic cross, to commemorate the famous battle of St.
Jacob, in 1444, when sixteen hundred Swiss fought the French army under
the dauphin for a whole day. The French were over sixteen thousand
strong. Only ten Swiss escaped the slaughter. Lest you should think me
at fault upon the numbers in this battle, I would say that I know
Watteville calls the Swiss twelve hundred, and the French thirty
thousand; but I quote from Swiss historians, who are deemed good
authority. We went into the little tavern and drank some red wine, which
goes by the name of Swiss blood. We then ascended an eminence commanding
a fine view of the city, the river, and the Jura Mountains. At the
summit we found a church; and the parsonage next to it looked very cosy
and comfortable. The pastor's children were running about, and were very
noble-looking boys. We learnt that while the stipend of the pastor was
very small,--as is the case in Switzerland,--yet he was a man of wealth.

We were quite amused with the market day here. Droves of country people
were in the streets--the women in country costume; and on the ground
there were vast collections of crockery, which seemed one of the chief
articles of traffic.

A charming drive, late in the afternoon, took us to the consul's
hospitable abode; and there, with his lady, we had a thoroughly Yankee
tea-time. In the evening we walked back to the city, crossing the old
bridge.

Yours affectionately,

WELD.


Letter 45.


LAUSANNE.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We left Basle on a bright morning, at six o'clock, having places in the
_coupé_ of the diligence for Berne, a distance of seventy-six miles. We
took this route in order to enjoy the remarkable scenery which marks the
Moutiers Valley, which is the most romantic in the Jura Mountain range.
This journey entirely takes the palm, for enjoyment, of any in our tour;
and I think I am more surprised and gratified than I was on the Rhine.
Certainly the prospect was more constantly grand and awe inspiring. We
started with six horses,--three abreast,--and jogged on, at about six
miles the hour, over as good roads as I ever travelled. They are, also,
the cleanest you ever saw. All along, at intervals, we saw men with
badges on their hats, who appeared to have charge of the highway. Every
thing on the road is scraped up; and at every quarter of a mile, or
less, there is at the wayside an enclosure for manure, into which every
thing is turned. On all the line of travel in Switzerland, we were
struck with the careful way in which heaps of manure are protected by
large bands of corded hay, twisted around. Then, too, in the villages
and towns we were all interested with the enormous stone troughs for
watering cattle. Some of these appeared to me full twenty feet long,
and two or three deep. On our way from Basle we passed the battle ground
of St. Jacob; and some way farther on we saw the battle field of
Dornach, at which place the Swiss obtained a victory over the Austrians
in 1499. A little before reaching Tavannes we ascended a hill, and came
to a wonderful archway across the road--perhaps natural. On it is a
Roman inscription. The arch is, I should think, nearly fifty feet high
and fifteen feet in depth. We then went on to Bienne; and a
pretty-looking place it is. We left it on our right, and our road was
very hilly, really mountainous, and the air was sharp. As we walked for
two or three miles to help the horses, we found the wild strawberries
offered for sale very pleasant. We reached Berne late in the evening;
and the entrance to the town, through a noble avenue of trees called the
Engæ, was very pleasant. We repaired to the Faucon, and enjoyed the
repose of a long night.

Berne is a large town, with a population of nearly thirty thousand. It
lies on the banks of the Aar, which goes almost round the city. The
great elevation of the city--seventeen hundred feet above the sea--gives
it quite an appearance on approaching it. Then the houses are all built
upon arched pathways, and they form arcades, very much like the old city
of Chester, in England. We noticed several watch towers, evidently very
ancient; and one in the town, near our hotel, has a queer clock, which,
like that at Strasburg, is mechanical. On striking, out comes a cock and
flaps away with his wings, and then little images appear, and bears pass
by a puppet, seated on a throne. Bears seem to be the guardian angels of
the place, and are the arms of the town. We were very much pleased with
an extensive prospect of the Bernese Alps, from a terrace overhanging
the rapid river. I cannot tell you how many peaks we saw covered with
snow. Our panorama, purchased here, enumerates more than a dozen; and
among these are the Wetterhorn, Stockhorn, and Jungfrau. We greatly
enjoyed a fine sunset from this spot. The Cathedral is a noble
structure, built between 1421 and 1573, and from designs by the son of
the architect of the Cathedral at Strasburg. Some of the work here is
exceedingly fine. The great entrance is very imposing, and has rich
sculptures. Here, too, are some beautifully-painted windows--one
describing the pope grinding the four evangelists in a mill, out of
which comes wafers, is very curious. The organ is very fine, and the
case one of the richest in Europe. It has four rows of keys and
sixty-six stops. The font is of black granite, and has the date of 1525,
which is three years previous to the church reformation in this canton.
It has some finely-sculptured images of the Trinity, Virgin Mary, and
St. Vincent, the patron saint of the church. We were pointed out the
communion table, of marble, which is an immense block, and before the
reformation it was an altar at Lausanne. There are some fine monuments,
having great antiquity.

In the choir we were delighted with the old prebendal stalls, over which
were figures of Christ and his apostles, and on the opposite side
prophets, all in carved wood. One of the prophets was a capital likeness
of Luther.

As we were leaving this noble edifice, we met a minister coming in; he
wore a short, black gown, and had a deep white ruff on his shoulders.

The library of the town embraces about forty-five thousand volumes--and
well assorted, too. What a reproach it is to us that, excepting in
Providence, hardly any small city has what can be called a library!

The Museum we could not examine. I spoke of bears: well, the town keeps
several of these fellows at a place called the Bärengraben.

Much did we long to take a trip into the Bernese Oberland, but it was
not practicable; so we started for Lausanne by diligence, a distance of
fifty-six miles, and were eleven hours on the way. We saw much fine
scenery, but nothing that would compare with the Munster Thal or Valley
of Moutiers, and which I think would pay any lover of nature to come
from America to look at and travel through. The places we went through
were Morat, famous for its battle in 1476; Avenches, the Roman
Aventicum; Payerne, &c. The last few miles were of great labor in
ascent; and as it was pitch dark for some miles, I cannot tell much
about what is said to be beautiful.

At Lausanne we went to the Hotel Gibbon, and a lovelier spot than the
rear of this mansion eye never rested upon. Again we were weary, and
found good beds very inviting.

Yours, &c.,

JAMES.


Letter 46.


LAUSANNE AND GENEVA.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We are staying in one of the most romantic and beautiful spots that I
ever had the pleasure to visit. The population is seventeen thousand,
and on the increase. It is the favorite resort of the English; and no
wonder, for here are displays of the glory and of the power of the
Creator rarely to be seen. The town stands on a mount, and descends
gradually to the lake. On every side are most precipitous ravines; and
the streets are the most break-neck-looking highways I ever saw.
Putnam's Leap would be thought nothing of at Lausanne.

Our hotel overlooks Gibbon's garden, and we saw his trees and seat.
Here he composed his eloquent work on the Roman empire. His portrait is
in the hotel dining-room. The prospect surpasses in richness all that I
had fancied. Before us lie the Alps, with snowy tops; between us and
these is the glassy lake, and on its waters we notice a regatta, the
boats all adorned with flags and the crews with ribbons. There are, I
should think, from fifty to seventy-five boats in sight. Up in the Alps
there is a fire in the woods; and the volume of smoke and flashing of
flame form a fine addition to the scene.

The temperature of the climate is very favorable to health; and now, in
June, it reminds us of our finest clear days at Newport.

On Sabbath morning we repaired to a charming little Episcopal church,
near the lake; and the walk of a mile down hill was delightful. On both
sides of the road were fine villas, and on the left one estate had its
long wall defended by a hedge of roses in full bloom; such a hedge is
rarely to be witnessed. We heard a prosy sermon from the old gentleman
who has officiated there for some years. I noticed a lady and four sweet
little girls who sat in the next pew to us, and was convinced that she
was an English lady; and when we overtook her ascending the hill, on our
return, I took the liberty to ask a question about the church. She very
politely gave me the information, and a conversation commenced. She told
me, as a stranger, what I ought to see; and when we were leaving her,
she politely offered us an invitation to join her family in the evening,
to take a walk to the mountain overhanging Lausanne, known as the
Signal, and from whence, in olden time, the watch-fire used to be
kindled when the cantons were called to arm for liberty, or danger was
expected. This kindness we accepted; and when she gave me her address, I
found I had to call at the Hotel de Ville. Well, at half past six, the
lads and I repaired to the mansion, a very venerable pile, and we found
that our kind friend was no less a personage than the wife of the
syndic, or mayor of the city. We were most kindly received and
introduced to his honor--a fine-looking, elderly gentleman, who spoke no
English; but his family conversed generally in our language. We sallied
forth, and took a walk up, up, up,--never will the boys forget that
tramp; indeed, Charley, it was the hardest affair I ever went through;
but after the ascent was achieved, the recompense was ample. Such a
survey of lake, shore, Alps, city, villages, vineyards, cannot be
enjoyed elsewhere. It was very cold in these upper regions; and as we
descended, the shades of night were over us, and a beautiful moon made
its appearance. When parting from our friends, they urged our joining
them at seven o'clock to visit the Cathedral, with the mayor as our
guide. I accepted the polite offer, but the boys were frightened at the
thought of another ascent; for the minster is perched upon a cliff, and
you ascend some hundreds of steps to reach the platform.

At seven we were on hand, and with the syndic and his sweet little girl
we visited the finest Gothic pile in Switzerland, which was built in
1275, and consecrated by Gregory X. The form is that of the Latin cross.
Formerly it had two towers; but one was destroyed by lightning, in 1825.
Here are several fine monuments and tombs of interest; one an effigy in
mail armor of Otho of Grandeson, and another of Pope Felix V., who
resigned the papacy and became a monk, and a very beautiful one to the
wife of Stratford Canning; the figures of which are eight in number, and
two of them are by Canova; also the tomb of Bernard de Menthon, founder
of the St. Bernard Hospice.

We returned to the Hotel de Ville and took breakfast with Madame Gadaud,
for whom and her kind family we shall long cherish grateful
recollections.

From Lausanne we took boat for Vevay. The port of Lausanne is the little
village of Ouchy. I ought to tell you that John Philip Kemble, the great
tragedian, is buried two miles from this place. We found the excursion
on the lake very agreeable, and passed many pretty villages on the left
shore till we came to Vevay, a sweet little town, of five thousand
inhabitants, and is embowered in vineyards. It is about one mile and a
quarter from the foot of the Alps. Here we had a view of the Castle of
Chillon, and Byron was on our tongues at once. My great object in coming
here was to see St Martin's Church, for here are buried Ludlow, the
regicide, and Broughton, who read the sentence of Charles I. Charles II.
could never get the Swiss to deliver these patriots into his hands. In
the afternoon we took another boat and went to Geneva in about five
hours, and stopped at Ouchy, Morges, Rolle, Nyon, and Coppet. At Morges
is a fine old castle, in good condition. Nearly opposite Rolle we saw
the hoary head of Mont Blanc, towering above the giant brotherhood of
Alpine heights. We did not see Lake Leman in a storm, and though
certainly beautiful in its adjuncts, not more so than Lake Erie. At
Coppet was the residence of Madame De Staël.

We reached Geneva in the evening at seven, and went to the Hotel L'Eou.
Here we were delighted to meet again with the Rev. Dr. Murray and Dr.
Chetwood, and also to find the Rev. Mr. Chickering and Rev. Mr. Jacobus,
with his family, and other valued friends.

The approach to Geneva from the lake is very imposing; but I was less
pleased with the town itself than I expected to be. Its position is very
grand. Its history is every thing, however. The Cathedral Church of St.
Peter is a fine specimen of the Gothic of the eleventh century. The
sounding board is the same under which Calvin preached.

The population is about forty thousand, including the suburbs, and
thousands of tourists are every year residents for a few days. We had a
pleasant morning at the Museum, where are some good pictures and many
curiosities. In the library are Calvin's letters in MS., forty or fifty
volumes of MS. sermons, &c. This same Calvin and this old town of Geneva
have had much to do with our own blessed country; and we feel the agency
of this man and this town in all our ten thousand joys and comforts.

I could not forget that here was the home of Merle D'Aubigné, the
historian of the Protestant reformation, and that here, too, is the
residence of the learned Gaussen, the author of Theopneusty, and of the
venerable Cæsar Malan. Calling upon this last-named gentleman, I was
delighted to find that the Evangelical Association of Geneva was in
annual session. This is the great Protestant body with which the
American Evangelical Union is in alliance, and for whose operations our
friend Dr. Baird has awakened so lively an interest. I went to the
church where the meeting was convened, and was introduced to Count
George, a very pious Frenchman of fortune, who resides here and devotes
himself to the cause of the Protestant religion. He is a Baptist, but is
connected with the church which embraces several evangelical
denominations. The count presided with great ability; he is a very
elegant man, about thirty-four, I should imagine.

I had the pleasure to hear D'Aubigné give a report of his visit to Great
Britain. He spoke for two hours. He is quite the orator, and had entire
command of the audience, who wept and laughed as he proceeded. The
historian is a very noticeable man, and strongly reminded us all of
President Wayland, to whom his resemblance is very striking.

Dr. Murray made a few remarks on behalf of his brethren, and we were all
invited to a _soirée_ at the assembly-rooms in the evening. Perhaps two
hundred and fifty ladies and gentlemen were present. Several addresses
and prayers were made. I was announced for an address, but came late on
the list; and having no fancy to be translated by a man at my elbow, I
quietly withdrew at the fitting time. I was much pleased with Professor
Gaussen, who is a very accomplished gentleman. He looks about
forty-five, but told me he was very much older.

The clergy present at this convocation were from various parts of France
and all the Swiss cantons, and I never saw a finer set of men in any
clerical assembly. Pastor Malan is exceedingly venerable in his
appearance. He is about sixty-eight years of age, his hair gray, and
worn long in the neck, with a good deal of curl to it. His gait is
quick, and he has much the manner of the venerable Dr. Beecher. This
patriarch of Geneva is very cheerful, knows every one, and has a word
for every one. He told me that he loved Americans, but that they had
spoiled his habitation by stealing two of his daughters, who, he
explained to me, were married to excellent clergymen in the United
States.

We met with great kindness in this city from Mr. Delorme, a gentleman
who once resided in New York. He invited us to accompany his family on
an excursion to the summit of the Salève, a mountain in Savoy, which is
three thousand one hundred and fifty feet above the lake. We went in two
carriages, and stopped at a village on the mountain side, where we had
cakes, coffee, and wine. Here, in a sweet little arbor, surrounded with
roses, we gazed at Mont Blanc, and on a near summit could very clearly
trace the profile of Napoleon. He looks "like a warrior taking his
sleep." The illusion surpasses in accuracy of expression any thing that
I know of that is similar; there are chin, nose, eye, and the old cocked
hat, while the eternal vapor over the summit of the peak forms the
feather.

We looked down in a ravine and saw the Aar with its icy stream. The
carriages went round to meet the party, and the ascent was made. The
mountain seems to hang over Geneva, though several miles off. We were
greatly pleased with a few good houses, in fine positions; but Savoy is
not Switzerland. Here Popery is rampant and pauperism evident. Beggars
beset our carriages, and the people looked squalid.

[Illustration: Swiss Cottage.]

I forgot to tell you how much we were pleased with the cottages in
Switzerland; they are quite cheerful looking,--some very fine
affairs,--but many are not very unlike our western log-houses.

We returned to Geneva at about ten, and found at our friend's house a
most sumptuous repast provided for our entertainment. I never sat down
at a more elegant supper table. Every luxury seemed placed before us,
including the richest wines of the Rhine.

The Roman salad, a peculiar kind of lettuce, which we saw in France, and
here again, seemed to us all as quite different from our ordinary kinds;
and I have at Genera obtained four or five varieties of the seed for
home cultivation.

While at this city we procured some good specimens of wooden ware, Swiss
cottages, &c., and the boys bought watches, jewelry, &c., for presents.

We were all delighted with a little island in the centre of a bridge
which goes across the lake; it was a favorite retreat of Rousseau, and
there is a statue to his memory.

Calvin's residence is still to be seen, No. 116 Rue des Chanoins. We saw
the place where Servetus was burnt. The place and prospect were too
beautiful for such a foul desecration. But Calvin's virtues were his
own, and the faults he fell into belonged to the influence of the age.
It was much so with those greatest and best of men, the New England
Pilgrim Fathers. I know they had faults, but they were only spots upon
the polished mirror. God reared them up, a rare race of men, for a rare
purpose; and I do not like to hear them abused because they were not
perfect. If Laud had come to Plymouth Rock instead of Brewster, Bonner
instead of Carver, what kind of a community would have been established
and handed down?

In Geneva, too, we had the pleasure to meet a valued friend, Mr. B.,
from Providence, who has been travelling extensively, and gathering up
the treasures of other cities to enrich the one of his birth.

To-morrow we are off for Paris, and go by diligence to Dijon; thence by
railroad.


Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 47.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We started from Geneva in the diligence for Dijon, a long drag of one
hundred and twenty miles. The weather was oppressively hot, and
certainly the roads could not well be more dusty. We had two very
gentlemanly companions, Swiss, who were going to London to visit the
exhibition. We entered France about four miles on our way, and came to
Ferney, where Voltaire so long resided. We passed Gex, and ascended the
Jura; then to La Vattay. The view from the mountain of the lake and Mont
Blanc, together with the Alpine range, is never to be forgotten by one
who has the good fortune to see it. I feel that I am acquiring new
emotions and gathering up new sources of thought in this journey, and
that I cannot be a trifler and waster away of life in such a world as
that I live in. I find in every place so much to read about, and study
over, and think upon, that I now feel as if life itself would not be
long enough to do all I should like to effect. One thing is certain,
Charley; I cannot be indolent without feeling that, with the motives and
stimulus of this tour pressing upon me, I shall be very guilty.

The scenery of this journey has set me thinking; and so I have written
rather sentimentally, but truly.

At St. Laurent we came to the French custom-house, and a pretty thorough
overhauling they made. I believe the fellows hooked some of our
engravings, which they carried out of the room.

Still up, till we reached Morez, the Jura's greatest elevation. The last
half was travelled in the night; so I cannot give you the line of march.
We got to Dijon about eight in the morning, and only had time to get a
hasty breakfast at the railroad station; but we had quite a look at the
city before entering the cars for Paris.

Dijon is the capital town of the old Burgundy, and is a fine old place,
with nearly thirty thousand inhabitants. Here is a great show of
churches, and they seem built for all ages. The Cathedral is a
noble-looking edifice. We had no time to see the old ducal palace, which
has so many historical events connected with it. We saw some beautiful
promenades, but only glanced at them. Bossuet was born here, and St.
Bernard only a mile outside the walls, in a castle yet standing.

The new railroad had just been opened to Paris, and is one hundred and
ninety-six miles and a half of most capital track. We went through
Verrey, Montbard, Nuits, Tonnerre, La Roche, Joigny, Sens, Montereau,
Fontainebleau, Melun, to Paris. Montbard gave birth to Buffon, the
naturalist. Nuits is famous for the vintage of its own name, Romanée,
and other choice wines of Burgundy. Near Tonnerre is the château of
Coligny d'Audelot, brother to the admiral massacred on St. Bartholomew's
night. Sens is famous for its Cathedral, which is apparently very
splendid; and here are the vestments of Thomas à Becket, and the very
altar at which he knelt, all of which I wanted to see. Fontainebleau is
beautifully placed in the midst of a forest. Here is a palace, and at
this place Napoleon bade farewell to the Old Guard, in 1814. This place
is celebrated for its grapes, raised in the vicinity. Melun was known
in Cæsar's time, and in 1520 was taken by Henry V., of England, and held
ten years. We reached Paris on the evening of Saturday, and again
occupied our old quarters at the Hotel Windsor. I went off to my
favorite bathing-house at the Seine, and felt wondrously refreshed after
the heat and dust of more than three hundred miles and two days'
journeying.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 48.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We have again arrived at this charming city, and hope to pass a few
pleasant days, which will be chiefly devoted to purchases of clothing
and some of the beautiful articles which are so abundant in the shops of
this metropolis. Besides, we have some few places to visit before we
return to England. On Sabbath day we went to the Methodist Chapel, near
the Church of the Madeleine, and heard a capital sermon from Dr.
Ritchie, the president of the Canadian Conference. In the evening I
preached. The congregations were very good, and the preacher of the
chapel seems a very gentlemanly and pleasant man. In the congregation I
had the pleasure to meet with our eloquent countryman and my old
friend, the Rev. James Alexander, D.D., of New York, and I announced
that he would preach on Wednesday evening. We went into the Madeleine
and spent nearly an hour. The house is very splendid; but it does not
appear devotional, or likely to inspire suitable feelings. I prefer the
Gothic pile, or a plainer temple. It is all painting, gilding, flowers,
and form. Here Popery shows her hand, and outdoes every thing that she
dares yet show in New England. The music was exquisite, and the voices
of the boys very sweet. Many of the people seemed in earnest. The
priests appeared to me devoid of interest. We went one morning to the
Pantheon. This noble church was formerly known as St. Genevieve, and was
rebuilt, in 1764, by a lottery under the auspices of Louis XV. The
portico is an imitation of the one at Rome on its namesake, and consists
of Corinthian columns nearly sixty feet high, and five feet in diameter.
The interior form is that of a Greek cross. Every thing here is grand
and majestically simple. Above the centre of the cross rises a dome of
great beauty, with a lantern above. In this building are one hundred and
thirty columns. The church is three hundred and two feet by two hundred
and fifty-five. In this building are the tombs and monuments of some of
the great men of France. Voltaire, Rousseau, Mirabeau, and Marat were
here buried, but were taken up by the Bourbons, at the restoration. La
Grange and Lannes also rest here. Here we saw seven copies of the famous
frescoes of Angelo and Raphael, in the Vatican, and several pieces of
statuary. The vaults extend beneath the church to a great length. I
believe this is the highest spot in Paris. On leaving the place, I
looked again at the dome, which greatly pleased me. It is three hundred
feet above the floor of the church; and the painting, by Gros, is very
fine. I think we have seen nothing of the kind that is so beautiful. It
is principally historical; and among the figures are Clovis, Clotilda,
Charlemagne, St. Louis, Louis XVIII., and the Duchess d'Angoulême, with
the infant Duke of Bourdeaux; and above all these, as in heaven, are
Louis XVI., Marie Antoinette, Louis XVII., and Madame Elizabeth.

We were all thankful enough to find that the Louvre is at last open. We
walked there, looking with interest at the Tuileries, which I cannot
help admiring, although some think it devoid of architectural merit. Its
wide-spread pavilions of one thousand feet, looming up with
time-darkened walls, always please me. The palace of the Louvre is an
older edifice than the Tuileries; the newer portion was the work of the
reign of Louis XIV. The quadrangle is very fine, and the proportions of
the entire building admirable. Our business was with that part called
the Musée Royal, and here are the paintings and statues which have
given such a renown to Paris. You must recollect, my dear fellow, that
we cannot tell you all about these pictures, for the gallery is nearly
one third of a mile in length, and each side is filled up with canvas,
and the rooms are lofty. There was a time when almost all that
continental Europe thought exquisite in art was to be found here.
Bonaparte levied contributions on all the capitals he conquered, and
here he deposited his ill-gotten spoils. Once were seen in this place
the great masterpieces of Raphael, Guido, Titian, Domenichino, Murillo,
Rubens, Rembrandt, Potter, and a host of other artists who created
beauty; but when right overcame might, these pictures were returned to
their original owners. The catalogue we bought was a volume of five
hundred pages, and was only of statuary; and what could we do but walk,
wonder, and admire? To examine would be a task and pleasure for three
months. The department of statuary is very large; and here we saw
surprising fragments of the Grecian and Roman schools. The paintings by
Rubens here are numerous, but by no means as fine as those we saw at
Antwerp and in the museums of Holland. All the great masters are here,
and their works are finely arranged. We saw some of Claude Lorraine's
that were beautiful; and some pictures that I missed, since I was here
in 1836, have been transferred, I learn, by Louis Philippe, to
Versailles and other palaces. The gallery has been thoroughly painted
and beautified; and I never saw a place more radiant with gilding and
frescoes. The ceilings are very gorgeous.

We selected a fine day for an excursion to Versailles; and, that we
might have our pleasure consulted as to sight-seeing, we preferred a
private carriage to the railroad. Versailles is about twelve miles from
Paris, and has some twenty-five or thirty thousand inhabitants. Henry
IV. used to resort here for hunting. Louis XIII. had a lodge here for
his comfort when following the chase. Louis XIV. turned the lodge into a
palace, and began operations in 1664. In 1681, he removed with his court
to this place. The Chapel was begun in 1699, and finished in 1710. The
Theatre was inaugurated at the marriage of Louis XVI., in 1770. A new
wing was built by Louis XVIII. Louis Philippe made great additions, and
devoted the palace to the noble purpose of a national depot of all that
is glorious in the history of France. What Louis Philippe did here you
may imagine, when I tell you that on the restoration and improvement of
Versailles he expended fifteen millions of francs. Why, Charley, the
stables are like mansions, and fine ones, too. The grand court is three
hundred and eighty feet wide, and the Place d'Armes, which leads to it,
is eight hundred feet wide. The iron railings which divide these are
very richly gilt. On either side the court are ranges of buildings
intended for the ministers of the king; and here are sixteen colossal
marble statues, which I well remember, at the Pont de la Concorde, in
Paris. They are great names of old and modern renown. In the centre of
the court is a colossal equestrian statue of Louis XIV. Now comes
another court devoted to royalty; and north and south are wings and
pavilions, one built by Louis XV., and the other by Louis Philippe. Next
we see the Cour de Marbre, around which is the old palace of Louis
XIII., crowned with balustrades, vases, trophies, and statues. South of
the Cour Royale is a small court called Cour des Princes, and divides
the wing built by Louis XVIII. from the main body of the southern wing.
The Grand Commun is a vast square edifice, enclosing a court. It has one
thousand rooms; and when Louis XIV. lived here, three thousand people
lodged: in this building. The chapel is exceedingly beautiful. It is in
Corinthian style, and is one hundred and forty-eight feet by
seventy-five, and ninety feet high. The front of the palace is
magnificent in the highest degree. "It presents a large projecting mass
of building, with two immense wings, and consists of a ground floor,
first floor of the Ionic style, and attic. The wings exceed five hundred
feet in length. The central front is three hundred and twenty feet
long, and each of its retiring sides two hundred and sixty feet. The
number of windows and doors _of this front_ are three hundred and
seventy-five." To describe the paintings and statuary would require a
volume. Let me say that here on the walls is all the history of France
that conduces to her glory. Every battle by land or sea, that she ever
won, is here; but not an allusion to her defeats. I looked hard for
Agincourt and Cressy; to say nothing of later conflicts, but they were
not to be seen. Some of these pictures have great merit, while others
are coarsely designed and executed. The historical series begins with
the Baptism of Clovis, in 495, and comes down to the present period,
with the illustration of about eleven hundred subjects. Then there are
about one hundred views of royal palaces, and series as follows:
Portraits of the kings of France, of French admirals, of constables of
France, and of marshals of France, to the number of some two hundred and
fifty; of French warriors, of personages who became celebrated in
different ways, which amount to nearly eighteen hundred; and here we
found several Americans. We noticed the likeness of Mr. Webster, by
Healy; but the canvas is too small, and the picture has faded. It is not
equal to the noble painting by Harding, which we saw just before we left
home. These last portraits afforded us a great treat; and here we saw
fine likenesses of the great ones of the earth. All the old pictures
have dates of death, and many of birth. The sculpture gallery is very
rich. There are more than six hundred figures, some of them exceedingly
expressive and beautiful. I should think that more than two hundred and
fifty of the historical paintings relate to events and persons connected
with the power of Napoleon.

A very conspicuous feature is the series illustrating the conquest of
Algiers. These are four in number, and are immense as to size--I should
think thirty or forty feet in length. They are by Horace Vernet, and are
very effective. The apartments of the palace are perfectly regal. They
quite come up to one's preconceived ideas of the days of Louis le Grand.
I looked with interest at the door through which Marie Antoinette made
her escape, and whence she was dragged by the mob. The chamber of Louis
XIV. is just as it was in his time. Here the grand monarch died upon
that bed. There is the balustrade which fenced off the bed of majesty.
The ceiling of this room has the noblest painting in France. It is Jove
launching his bolts against the Titans, and was done by Paul Veronese.
Napoleon brought it from Venice. There seemed no end to the apartments.
We saw those of Madame Maintenon, the royal confessional, and the
dining-room of Louis XIV., which was the cabinet of Louis XVI. In this
room Louis XIV. entertained Molière when he had been ill treated or
neglected by his ministers and courtiers. "I am told that the officers
of my household do not find that you were made to eat with them. Sit
down at this table, and let them serve us up breakfast." This was his
language to the great poet, when he had called him to his presence. The
king then helped him to a fowl's wing, and treated him in the most
gracious manner. He knew the worth of genius. The king could make a
marshal, but he could not make a poet. All the innumerable rooms have
beautiful paintings and works of art. One room, called the Saloon of the
Crusades, was delightfully interesting; and the great pictures of that
apartment did much to impress the events of the holy wars upon our
minds.

George was in ecstasies with the _souvenirs_ of his idol the emperor;
and as we shall leave him for five or six months in Paris, I expect
that, in addition to the vast amount of knowledge which he really
possesses of the history of Napoleon, he will return home posted up with
all the _on dits_ of the worshippers of the emperor.

The Theatre is very fine. It is quite large, and would be admired in any
capital. It was built by Louis XV., at the instance of Madame Pompadour.
It was Used by Louis Philippe, and we saw his seat.

The gardens are world renowned; so we _must_ admire them. They did not
quite come up to my notions. The fountains, statuary, ponds,
orange-trees, are all very grand; but I cannot say that I was as pleased
as the boys were. Perhaps I was weary; I know I was anxious. I had an
old and valued friend living in Versailles, and was unable to ascertain
her residence.

We went to the Grand and Petit Trianon. The great Trianon is a palace
with one story, and having two wings. The little Trianon has two
stories. Here royalty has loved to loiter when tired of the splendors of
the stupendous palace close by. Here are some exquisite paintings,
brought by Louis Philippe from the Louvre.

We repaired to a good _café_ close by the palace, had a satisfactory
dinner with Mr. Hodgson and his family, and then took our carriage for
Paris.

Our route to Versailles was through Passy, where our Dr. Franklin lived
in 1788, at No. 40 Rue Bass. Beranger resides in this village. It seems
a favorite resort for genius; for here have resided the Chancellor
D'Aguesseau, Boileau, Molière, and Condorcet.

We passed through Sèvres, where the beautiful china is manufactured, and
drove through the Park of St. Cloud, the palace being in sight.

On our return, we drove leisurely through the Bois de Boulogne. These
woods afford a fine opportunity to the Parisians for exercise, either on
horseback or in carriages, and it is to Paris what Hyde Park is to
London and the avenues are to New York, and much pleasanter than either.
Here have been fought most of the duels which, in other days, have been
so numerous in Paris, but which, I am glad to say, are getting into
disrepute. The boys will write you before we leave Paris.

Yours always,

J.O.C.


Letter 49.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Our stay here at our present visit will be several days longer than we
expected. We have to get clothing and various articles which can be
obtained here to more advantage than in England or at home. We have been
to some large jewelry establishments and made selections of presents for
our absent but remembered friends. One morning we spent very pleasantly
at a celebrated depot of glass manufactures. The display was very large,
and also brilliant, and we made some pretty selections. The taste of the
French is very great, and a large part of this population must live by
furnishing the rest of the world with mere matters of _bijouterie_.

We have had the pleasure to meet several of the doctor's acquaintances
from America; and among others whom we have often met have been Rev. Dr.
Alexander, Rev. Dr. Ritchie, Hon. H.J. Raymond, Mr. G.P. Putnam, Mr.
Bunting, Mr. Herring, Mr. Howard, &c. I have been much gratified in
getting acquainted with Mr. Raymond, whom I have met several times. He
is quite a young-looking man for one who holds his important position of
speaker of the New York House of Assembly. I should not think him to be
more than twenty-six or twenty-seven, though perhaps he is thirty. Mr.
Putnam is the author of my favorite book, "The World's Progress,"--the
book of dates,--and one which I recommend you, Charley, always to keep
on your table, within reach, for reference.

If I live to return home, I have much to do that never before appeared
to me of so great importance. I want to become thoroughly conversant
with English and French history; for, in a certain sense, these
countries embody the history of the world. Not to know what happened
before we were born, is always to be children; and if my journey has
done me no other good, it has very clearly shown me how little I know,
and how very much I ought to understand, and must, if I would take my
place among intelligent, well-educated men. I am sure, too, that I have
acquired on this journey a desire to make improvement. Every where I
find the records of intellect and genius, and I cannot, for very shame,
be willing to go through life and enjoy the means of improvement,
without deriving profit. We have met with very kind attentions from Mr.
Hector Bossange, the great bookseller, who invited us to dinner. He is a
gentleman of great activity, and seems always engaged; and yet I have
noticed that such persons seem to have time for every one and every
thing. I have noticed this at home, as well as abroad. Some of these men
who have so much to do, and so many persons to see and be polite to,
must work very hard at times, or else they understand the way to get
through business in a patent method. These busy men seem to have read
every thing; and even in new books they keep up with the times. They
must do it, I guess, by remembering our old copy, that "spare minutes
are the golden sands of life."

George is going to stay here for four or five months, and the doctor is
busy in finding him a suitable home and getting him an outfit.

You would perhaps like to hear a little about the Hospital des
Invalides, where the old soldiers of France bring up when past labor. It
is a vast building, and covers sixteen acres, which, however, enclose
fifteen various courts. It is governed and managed by the senior marshal
of France, a lieutenant general, commandant of the hotel, a colonel
major, three adjutant majors, three sub-adjutant majors, one almoner,
two chaplains, one apothecary and ten assistants, twenty-six sisters of
charity, and two hundred and sixty servants. There are about one hundred
and seventy officers, and about three thousand fire hundred invalids in
all. This is a truly magnificent building, both architecturally
considered and in its interior arrangements. The council chamber is very
fine, and here are some admirable portraits and the best statue of
Napoleon that is extant. The dome is very grand, but is at present
invisible, on account of the alterations going on to complete the tomb
of Napoleon. This will be the grandest tomb, probably, in the world. The
sarcophagus is to rest on a platform, to which the access is by steps of
green marble.

[Illustration: Sarcophagus at Napoleon's Tomb, and Key]

Here is a good library and some MSS. of the two prime ministers, Sully
and Colbert; a good picture of Napoleon and Louis Philippe; the cannon
ball which killed Marshal Turenne, and his equestrian statue in gold and
silver.

My favorite stroll here is in the Garden of the Tuileries. I am never
weary of this place. Here are the finest flowers, the best walks, the
gayest company, the prettiest children, and the densest shade, if you
please to go into it, in Paris. Then, too, there are groups of statuary,
and fountains with lofty jet, and proud swans in the reservoirs. I
would like to have you walking in that thick forest growth; there is no
underbrush; I can see from one side to the other. After a long walk, you
come to the noble portals, guarded by lions couchant, and just beyond is
the spot where Louis XVI. was guillotined. I do not believe there is a
nobler view in Europe than now opens to the spectator. There before me
is the Obelisk of Luxor, which was brought from Egypt, and now stands in
the Place de la Concorde, its history, its removal, its present
position, all serve to delight me. In itself it is a noble object, and
my eye ever rests on it with pleasure.

Just think, Charley, that you are at my side: turn round, and look at
the gardens we have left. There, see the long, low Tuileries, the palace
of the Bourbons, the home of Napoleon, the residence of the citizen
king, and now the Palace National. Off to the right is the Seine and its
long line of quays; here is the bridge; and just across it is the
Chamber of the Assembly, with twelve Corinthian columns, I like this
building exceedingly. To our left is a long, stately range, known as the
Rue Rivoli, in which we reside; it has an arched arcade in front; for
foot passengers, and some hundreds of columns to support and adorn it.
At this end of it are public offices. Now turn and look at our left; and
see, a street cuts through this noble row, and at its end you see the
pride of the city, the Madeleine. There it is, all white, and its
stately columns tell of Greece. Now, if you turn your back upon the
Tuileries, you will gaze upon the open space of the Champs Elysées, and
look down along through that splendid avenue, and there see the finest
thing in France--Bonaparte's triumphal arch. One word about this arch.
It is the work of the emperor, who ordered its erection in 1806, when
the foundation was laid. In 1814 it was suspended, but in 1823 it was
resumed in honor of the Duke d'Angoulême's victories in Spain. In 1830
its original intention was adopted, and in 1836 it was completed, and
its cost was nearly eleven millions of francs. It is a vast arch, ninety
feet high and forty-five feet wide, with entablature and attic. Its
total height is one hundred and fifty-two feet, breadth one hundred and
thirty-seven feet, depth sixty-eight feet. On the fronts are colossal
groups, in which the figures are eighteen feet. All these are
historical, and tell of the great man in his fields of glory. You ascend
this wonderful work of art by two hundred and sixty steps, and get the
best view of Paris. Close by is the Hippodrome, of which some of us have
told you, I suppose, during our last visit.

At less than a mile from this place is the Chapel of St. Ferdinand,
built on the spot where the Duke of Orleans died, by a fall from his
carriage, in 1842. It is a small building of stone, fifty feet long, and
is of Gothic style. Here are many interesting objects--the marble group
descriptive of the dying prince, and at his head an angel in
supplication; this angel was the sculpture of his sister, the Princess
Marie. The painted windows are exquisite representations of the patron
saints of the royal family. Behind the altar is the room in which the
duke died, now used as the sacristy of the chapel. Here, too, is a
picture of the death bed. I am glad that I saw this, as the rest of the
party were not able to be there.

The great National Library is in the Rue Vivienne. The building is a
dark-looking affair, five hundred and forty feet long and one hundred
and thirty feet wide. Inside is a court three hundred feet by ninety,
and that is flanked with buildings. The library is in five sections:
first, manuscripts; second, printed books; third, engravings; fourth;
medals, &c.; fifth, marbles. Perhaps the best collection of early
printing that Europe can show is in this place. You will be surprised
when I tell you that there are here one million five hundred thousand
works. I cannot attempt to tell you the curiosities that are to be seen
here--gems, cameos, antiques, swords, armors, models, portraits, busts;
and then, as for autographs, why, a collector could not fail to break
the tenth commandment when he looked at the letters of this collection
in glass cases. The engravings alone are a study for months.

I have to see my tailor, Mr. Woodman, who is a capital one; and then I
must go to Forr, the boot-maker, of whom let me tell you a story. The
doctor went to be measured, when we first arrived, and the man told him
it was not necessary, as he had his measure. "How so?" he inquired.
"Why, sir," replied the man, "I remember you fifteen years ago, at the
Hotel Windsor;" and taking down his book, showed him his name, number of
his room, &c. This I think a pretty considerable proof of memory, and
equal to what we are told of some of our American landlords, who are
said never to forget a face.

These engagements discharged, and I am ready to pack up. We all feel sad
at leaving George, who has been a kind and amiable companion; but we
hope soon to see him again.

Let me tell you that we are to have a new teacher. Dr. C. has engaged M.
Oudin, a graduate of the University of Paris, to return with us. This
gentleman is married; and we are all pleased with him and expect, of
course, to profit under his instructions.

M. Oudin has taken us to see a very curious manufactory of fruits,
fishes, &c. They certainly are lifelike. Then, too, there is a branch
of this establishment devoted to the preparation of medical
representations of disease, and the skill exhibited is very great. Our
next letter will, I fancy, be from Old England. I feel sad at leaving
France, for I do like her capital; and then I cannot help a fear that
she has dark days not very far off. She talks of liberty at all her
corners, but she seems to have none in her conduct of the daily press.
There are too many soldiers here to please an American. At home we have
all the blessings of government, and do not see the machinery. We have
no soldiers to keep us moving along. I shall always think with pleasure
of our month in this city; and if I ever come again, I have work chalked
out for three months, at least.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 50.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We had a pleasant time from Paris to Calais; and here we determined to
pass a day, and look at a city which has been so celebrated both in the
history of France and England. We put up at Quillac's. The population is
about thirteen thousand. The town is strongly fortified, and has very
few external attractions. The gate built by Richelieu in 1685, and
delineated by Hogarth, still stands. You know that England held this
town from 1347 to 1558; and, as a result, you can find several specimens
of English Tudor architecture, especially the Hotel de Guise. The walks
upon the fortifications are fine, and afford commanding views of the
cliffs of the south coast of England. The place generally has some three
or four thousand English, many of whom are refugees on account of debt.
At eleven at night we went on board a French steamer for Dover; and the
_instant_ that she got outside the pier, she jumped like a mad thing. O,
Charley, that was a horrid night! We were all sick, very sick indeed. It
took us about three hours to get over, and we were thankful to land and
take refuge for three or four hours in the quiet of our bedrooms. At
eight we took the cars for London, and were at the Golden Cross, quietly
settled down in our old quarters, by twelve o'clock. I ought to tell you
that we hurried over in order to be here at the great entertainment
which Mr. George Peabody gives to his excellency Abbott Lawrence and his
lady, on the evening of the 4th of July. We were invited, and felt
anxious to be there; as, in addition to the other notable characters,
"the duke" was to be present. All that day the subject of the evening
was the great topic with Americans; and as more than nine hundred
acceptances were received to invitations issued, it was expected that
the party would be interesting, and that many, who failed to obtain
tickets, would be disappointed. The entertainment was given at Almack's,
Willis's Room, St. James's, and upon a scale of great magnificence. It
consisted of a concert at half past nine, a ball at eleven, and supper
at one. The idea of celebrating our national independence in London,
under the peculiar circumstances which London presents at this moment,
was a happy one; and though some wise men doubted the wisdom of the
measure, yet the result proved the prudence and practical good sense of
its originator; and perhaps few men possess more of this admirable
quality than Mr. Peabody. The rooms at Almack's are very spacious, so
that there was ample space for the one thousand who proved to be
present. At one end of the room were seen the portraits of the queen and
Washington, surrounded by the flags of England and the United States;
and around were placed busts of her majesty, Washington, Prince Albert,
Franklin, Webster, and other celebrated men of both countries. Each lady
was presented, on her entrance, with a fine bouquet. At half past nine
the seats for the concert were entirely filled. The _programme de
concert_ was as follows:--

     CONDUCTOR, SIGNOR ALARY.

     PARTE PRIMA.

     GLEE,      Messrs. Lee, Geuge, Hill, Smith, and Howe.

     DUO,       "Al perigli."         {Signor Gardoni,    }
                                      {Signor F. Lablache,}  _Donizetti_.

     SOLO,      Violin.                Signor Sivori,        _Sivori_.

     MELODIE,   "Jusqu'a toi."         Signor Gardoni        _Schubert_.

     ARIA,      "Non più audrai."      Signor Lablache,      _Mozart_.

     ROMANCE,   "Ah, mon fils."        Miss C. Hayes,        _Meyerbeer_.

     DUO,       "Ah t inebria nell'   {Ma'mselle Cruvelli,}
                  amplesso."          {Signor Gardoni,    }  _Verdi_.


     PARTE SECUNDA.

     TRIO,      "Qual volutta."      {Miss Hayes,     }
                                     {Signor Gardoni, }
                                     {Signor Lablache,}      _Verdi_.

     ARIA,      "Nel dolce incanto."  Mademoiselle Cruveli   _De Beriot_.

     SOLO,      Violin.               Signor Sivori,         _Sivori_.

     SERENADE,  "Qual Suon."         {Miss C. Hayes, }
                                     {Signor Gardoni,}       _Alary_.

     DUO,       "Un Segreta."        {Signor Lablache,}
                                     {F. Lablache,}          _Rossini_.

     TRIO,      "Zitti, Zitti."      {Miss C. Hayes,  }
                                     {Signor Gardoni, }
                                     {Signor Lablache,}      _Rossini_.

        PIANO FORTE,                  Signor Alary.

The glees and madrigals were by the first-named artists; and the pieces
were, "Spring's Delight," "Come, let us join the Roundelay," "Foresters
sound the cheerful Horn," and "The Winds whistle cold."

The band for the ball was Coote & Tinney's. The concert was very fine. I
was most pleased with Miss Hayes,--and next with Lablache, whose voice
is the finest I ever heard. The duke came just at the close of the
concert, as the seats were being removed for the dancing. Mr. Peabody
met him in the reception-room, and led him to the upper end of the
ball-room, where he was cordially greeted by Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence. The
band struck up, "See, the conquering hero comes," and I really felt that
such a reception to such a man, and under such circumstances, was
something for an American boy to see; and, if I live thirty or forty
years, it will be something to tell about. There were but few
comparatively who danced. The company were in groups, in the different
rooms, taking refreshments. At one, supper was announced on the ground
floor of the house; and here the press was felt to be greater than up
stairs. The tables were most gorgeously laid out with every delicacy
that unlimited outlay of expense could secure. Perhaps you would like to
know some of the company who were present, belonging to England, and who
certainly were present for the first time to celebrate the anniversary
of American independence. There were the Duke of Wellington, Marquises
of Ely and Clanricarde, Lord Glenelg, Lord Charles Manners, Lord Charles
Russell, Lord Mayor of London and Lady Mayoress, Viscount Canning, Lord
and Lady Dormer, Lord Hill, Lord Stuart, Baron and Lady Alderson, the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Lady Mary Wood; Mr. Justice and Lady
Coleridge, the Governor of the Bank of England, Joseph Hume, M.P., and
family, Lady Morgan, Miss Burdett Coutts, Admiral Watkins, the Countess
of Eglinton, Countess Powlett, Lady Talbot Mala hide, and a very long
_et cetera_. Mr. Peabody could not have served his country better than
by affording an opportunity for the great and distinguished of England
to meet a large party of his countrymen on an occasion dear to
Americans, and especially dear when they are far away from their
country, and feel that, under the broad flag of the stars and stripes
they are every where as safe as if they were in New York or Boston. It
was very clear that hostile feeling had ceased, and that the great
Anglo-Saxon family can now meet any where and display the brotherhood
which they ought ever to feel. Such a meeting could not have taken place
twenty years ago; and perhaps this beautiful demonstration would never
have been afforded, if the thought had not presented itself to our host,
who had the means to carry out the idea with a nobleness that did honor
to himself and his country. We left the rooms on a bright, starlight
morning, just as day was opening her eye, and were soon comfortably
housed at our pleasant home. I write in haste, for we have much to do
before we leave London.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 51.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We have had one of the most agreeable days that I have spent in England.
We received a kind invitation from his excellency Baron Vanderweyer, the
Belgian minister, to attend a party given by his lady to the young
nobility. The invitations were for five o'clock. We found the finest
collection of children and young people, from about four years old up to
sixteen, that I ever saw gathered together. I should think there were
two hundred and fifty. More beautiful children cannot probably be found;
and they were dressed in fine taste, and some very richly. One little
fellow, about six years old, was, I think, the noblest-looking boy my
eyes ever rested upon. Dr. C. inquired of two or three persons whom he
knew, who the lad was; and just then an elegant and fashionable-looking
lady expressed how much she felt flattered by the kind things said of
the little fellow, and told him that it was her son, the eldest son of
the Marquis of O----d, and then called him out of the dance, and
introduced the little Lord Ossory to him. Among the illustrious
juveniles was the future Duke of Wellington, and grandson of the Iron
Duke. He is now about four or five years old. I think the sight was one
of the prettiest I ever had the pleasure to witness. A few of the
parents and older friends of the children were present; and in the
company was Mr. Bates, whose kindness to us has been very great.

One evening this week Dr. Choules preached at Craven Chapel, near Regent
Street, where he had been requested to speak about America, and he took
up Education--the voluntary principle--and Slavery. On the last topic he
gave some truths that were probably very unpalatable. He stated that the
good people here knew next to nothing of the subject; that its treatment
amongst us could not be suffered by strangers; and that all interference
with it by this nation was as impolitic, and in as bad taste, as it
would be for an American to visit England and commence a crusade against
the expenditures of the royal household, as a crying sin, while there
was misery among the masses in many parts of the kingdom. He spoke of
the extreme prejudice which he had met upon the subject, and the
rudeness's into which he had found men fall, who seemed to have
forgotten every courtesy of life. He gave them many facts, which, though
perfectly correct, yet he said he supposed would be interpreted as a
special plea on behalf of slavery--although nothing could be more
untrue. The prejudice existing here is amusing. They seem to take it for
granted that every American raises cotton, sugar, and tobacco, and,
therefore, is a slaveholder. However, I find most persons of candor
ready to acknowledge that it is questionable whether any good can
possibly result from sending English agents to agitate the slavery
question in the United States.

There are a great many things which we have seen in London that are less
worthy of note than those we have written you about, and yet in
themselves are very useful and interesting; and we hope the remembrance
of them will be of service to us hereafter. I have been much struck with
the prevalence of the same names in the streets as those which are so
familiar to me on our signs and boards. We have most clearly a common
origin, and there are no two nations in the world between whom there is
of necessity so much sympathy on all great questions.

We have visited the exhibition several times since our return, with
fresh pleasure on every occasion. In point of show and splendor, we are
doing little in competition with the English, French and Belgian
exhibitors; but we have a wonderful deal here that proves Jonathan to be
a smart chap at invention, and no slouch at labor-saving operations. We
cannot afford to spend the labor of freemen, who own their houses and
farms and gardens, upon single pieces of furniture that would take six
months to complete. Our time is too valuable for this. The pauper labor
of Europe will, I hope, long continue to be cheaper, than the toil of
American mechanics. I do not want to see a man working for thirty cents
a day. The people of England must laugh in their sleeves when they see
every steamer bringing out our specie from America, and when they see us
sacrificing our true interests to aid the destructive policy of free
trade. I have never thought so much about the tariff as since I have
been here, and I am now convinced that we ought to give suitable
encouragement to all kinds of manufactures in our country, and so afford
a regular market for the products of the agriculturist. The English
agents that flood our country are placing the land under a constant
drain; and our specie must go abroad, instead of circulating at home. It
is only in times of great scarcity that England will want much of our
wheat or corn; and the English very freely avow that they hope to be
able, ere long, to get their cotton from the East. It seems to me that
our Southern States will need their New England constant market, and
that our true policy is to take care of ourselves. Certainly there is a
great variety of opinion here about free trade, and I hear gentlemen
debate strongly against it. The reciprocity of England is a queer thing.
All this yarn, Charley, grows naturally out of my starting-point about
the exhibition.

We go to-night to Bristol, to visit our kind friends once more; thence
we run into South Wales, and afterwards set our faces homeward.

Yours, &c.,

WELD.


Letter 52.


BRISTOL

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We have been here with the doctor's friends for several days, and had a
most delightful time. Nothing can be more kind than their attentions to
us; and the young men--I wish you knew them--have been constantly doing
every thing in their power to make our visit here agreeable.

We were glad to find Mr. W---- recovering from his accident; and as the
family were at Western Super Mare, a watering-place about seven miles
off, for his health, we went and passed a couple of days with them. This
place is on the banks of the Bristol Channel; the air is thought to be
the finest on the western coast of England, and is, we thought, very
much like our Newport air. When the tide is in the scenery is pretty,
and the Welsh hills; at sunset are beautiful. Off in the Bristol Channel
are two islands, called the Flat and Steep Holmes.

The houses here are neat, and the best are lodging-houses. Some of the
rows are very pretty, and are sufficiently cosy to accommodate small
families.

The true way to enjoy the seaside is to have your own snug quarters.
Here the people are wise enough to build close to the sea, and rows of
houses are found all round the bay.

We had a charming ride to a lofty hill, about two miles off, and the
prospect was very fine.

Here, as on the continent, we found large numbers of donkeys, with
drivers, and ladies use them in their little excursions; and many of
them are attached to Bath chairs, a small gig, and a very comfortable
conveyance, too, as we proved. The vehicle is made for one person.

I cannot say much for the bathing, which is greatly admired here, but
was far too muddy for our taste, after an acquaintance with the noble
beach at home.

The museum of the Baptist College in Bristol is very fine, and the
library is large and one of great value. The collection of Bibles is the
best in the kingdom, and here is the only copy of Tindal's New
Testament. The miniature of Oliver Cromwell, by Cooper, is valuable, and
has been often engraved.

We have several times attended worship at a very beautiful Gothic chapel
at Bristol, called Highbury Chapel. It is a perfect gem, built in the
Gothic style of the fifteenth century. The edifice is of stone, the
roof and wood-work of oak, the pulpit freestone, and over it is a fine
painted window. It is one of the prettiest churches we have seen in
England; and what gives great interest to the building is the fact that
it stands upon the spot where five martyrs were burnt, in the days of
Popery, when Queen Mary was on the throne. This burning of Protestants
only happens when Catholics have power; they do not advocate the measure
in America, although their boast is that their system knows no change.
Inquisitions and martyrs' fires are the adult growth of Popery. If I
wanted to know how liberal institutions worked, I would look at them
where they were established and flourished without hinderance; and if I
wanted to know what Popery is, I would go and look at it in its proper
territories--Spain, Italy, and Austria. There Popery is intolerant. In
France the wings of Romanism are clipped; and if the patronage of the
state were withdrawn, as very likely it may before long, the crumbling
edifice would fall.

The Rev. Mr. Thomas, the pastor of Highbury Chapel, is a man of superior
intellect, and we heard a very fine sermon from him.

I never was in a place where there are so many local charities as I find
at Bristol. Every ailment of man seems here to be provided with its
needed cure; and as for orphan asylums and refuges for the aged, blind,
strangers, &c., they are every where to be found. The Infirmary is a
noble institution, and always has two hundred patients in the wards; two
thousand were received last year, and eight thousand out-door cases
received treatment. A refuge for the houseless poor, opened in winter at
eight o'clock, and supported by subscription, has been very useful. I
think there are at least thirty different almshouses for the aged and
indigent of both sexes; and some of these places are as neat as any
thing can be, as to their accommodation.

We like Bristol--its fine old houses, its streets, that tell so plainly
of other days, its beautiful environs, and its generous citizens. I wish
you could see the prospect from the drawing-room window at a house where
we have often visited, and always with pleasure. The house stands on a
very high hill; the drawing-room has a large bay window, and outside a
balcony. You look down into a charming garden, with fine trees and
fountains,--the ground being on a great declivity, I should think a
slope of fifty degrees,--and then from the balcony you have the entire
city laid out before you, down, down in the valley; while before you,
and on either hand, stretch away the hills which adorn this noble city.
The towers and steeples of the glorious old churches make the prospect,
of a fine, clear summer evening, one never to be forgotten. Go where I
may, that room, and the kind faces of those who meet in it will often
rise in memory.

I have never had my feelings so enlisted by strangers as at Bristol; and
we all feel quite at home here.

We are to go off to-morrow on an excursion to Monmouthshire, and see
Chepstow, Tintern Abbey, and Ragland Castle, and expect that this last
of our wanderings will be very gratifying.

I have not told you how much we have enjoyed the fruit in England and on
the continent. Cherries and strawberries have been daily on our tables,
and of the best kinds. I do not think we ever enjoyed a fruit season so
much as this summer. In this humid climate the strawberry grows to an
immense size; and the gooseberry, which is here in high favor, is a far
finer fruit than with us.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 53.


BRISTOL.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Let me tell you of a charming trip which we have had this week to
Chepstow Castle and its neighborhood. We have told you all about the
beautiful scenery of Clifton, and the Hot Wells at this place, and the
fine old rooks. Well, now we took passage in a little steamer, and went
down the Avon between these lofty rocks, and had a new and enlarged view
of this wondrous formation. The boat was well filled with tourists, as
this is a fashionable trip. The Avon for four miles is quite Rhenish in
its aspect; and one or two old castled towers on its crags afford a sort
of reminiscence of what we lately saw on the river of rivers.

We soon got out of the Avon into King Road, and there met the tide
setting strongly from the Severn--a large river, which divides
Monmouthshire from Gloucestershire. We then stretched across the
estuary, and were in the Wye--one of the most romantic rivers in the
country, the scenery of which will occupy much of this letter.

After going up the river a little way, we saw a town upon the left bank
and a noble castle. This is Chepstow. It is finely ensconced in a
hollow. The town is irregular, and depends for its prosperity on its
commerce. The castle is really a noble ruin and crowns a high bluff
which rises from the river. I do not know how any one can ask for a
lovelier landscape than is opened to the view off the bridge which spans
the river.

The castle was built by a relation of William the Conqueror. Its style
is Norman, with more modern additions. The tide rises here to an
elevation of from fifty to sixty feet. This is owing to rooks which
stretch into the Severn near the mouth of the Wye, and, by hindering the
tide, turn it into this small river.

On landing, we engaged a carriage and pair of horses for the excursion,
and were soon off. We stopped for lunch at St. Arvan's, a village one
mile off, and a beautiful place it is--a perfect gem of a country
street. But the glorious scenery of the region calls off attention from
the modest hamlet. How I should like, as in my boyish days, to make
head-quarters here for a week, and then strike out for daily
explorations.

We passed by the fine mansion at Piercefield, and devoted our time to
the glorious points of natural scenery on the banks of this most
charming stream--for Americans can hardly call it a river. We walked now
about two miles through an oak wood, in which is a sprinkling of ash and
elm, till we came to the very edge of a cliff called the "Lover's Leap."
It overhangs an awful abyss, the depth of which is softened down by the
woods which cover the neighboring rooks. A little off from this we came
to the famous Wynd Cliff. Its summit is fringed with wood, and covers
its declivities down to the river. To describe the scenery, my dear boy,
from this spot, is quite beyond my ability. I wish that Sir Walter Scott
had attempted it, and made this region the scene of one of his
beautiful creations. From this spot you see all the course of the Wye,
with its numerous sinuosities--in one place cutting out a few acres into
a horse-shoe peninsula. As the eye follows down the river, you gaze on
perpendicular, rocky cliffs, and can hardly persuade yourself that you
do not look at the immense fortifications of a town. But that peaceful
little peninsula at my feet; it is called Llanicut. Such a farm! such
elms! all forming a landscape unrivalled. But look beyond the Wye, and,
just away there, is the noble Severn. Ay, that is a river. There it
rolls and foams down through the rich county of Gloucestershire, and
empties into the Bristol Channel. Then away, beyond to the right are the
bold, swelling hills of Somersetshire. I cannot but wish that Claude had
seen the Wye and Severn; the noblest of his pictures would have been
illustrative of this region.

When we had sufficiently delighted ourselves with the far-spread scene,
we descended by a winding path through the woods and down the almost
perpendicular rock. The road was a very zigzag. We came down three
hundred and sixty steps, and, passing a rustic bridge, entered a moss
cottage, the small windows of painted glass, the table the base of a
mighty oak, sawn off and polished. The walls are lined with moss. Here
we got refreshments, and talked of those who had been here with us on
former visits--some in America, others farther off; and yet perhaps
not; for we know not how, or where, some of our best friends exist; but
we know and feel that they do greatly live.

In approaching Tintern, we passed the iron works, which at night throw a
solemn glow over the entire village. The cottages around are very humble
residences. The inn is a small but cosy affair, and is not destitute of
much real comfort. There is the abbey at the water side, and opposite
the rocky hill bank and hanging wood. The access to the abbey is poor,
but this is quite forgotten as you enter this glorious sanctuary of
other days. There are few ancient edifices in Great Britain, now in
ruins, which attract so much attention from the curious traveller as
Tintern Abbey, on the Wye.

The beauty of the river is proverbial, yet has never been adequately
described; but the best idea of its diversified charms may be gathered
from "Gilpin's Picturesque Scenery and Observations upon the Wye."

Tintern was a Cistercian abbey, and was founded in 1131, by Walter de
Clare, and dedicated to St. Mary on its completion in 1287. The dress of
the Cistercians was a white cassock, with a narrow scapulary, and over
that a black gown, when they went abroad, but a white one when they went
to church. They were called white monks, from the color of their habit.

The dimensions of this church are as follows: length, two hundred and
twenty-eight feet, and the transept one hundred and fifty feet long;
breadth of the aisles, each eighteen feet. There are in the sides ten
arches; between each column fifteen feet, which is the span of the
arches.

The interior of this monastery presents the best specimen of Gothic
architecture in England. The east window is a most magnificent affair,
sixty-four feet high, and calls forth universal admiration. The very
insignificant doorway was, no question, intended by the architect to
form a strong contrast with the elevation of the roof. The abbey is
cruciform; its ruins are perfect as to the grand outline; and I am sure
we should like to pass the entire day within this venerable fane. The
walls of the tower are seventy-two feet high, and covered with ivy,
moss, and lichens, but show no indications of decay.

Very few Americans visit this region; but I think that they can see
nothing in England at all comparable to this ruin.

Among the relics that are to be seen here is the effigy of a knight in
chain mail, the remains of a virgin and child, and the head of a shaven
friar. Here, too, are several monkish tombstones.

We were obliged to resume our places in the carriage, and ride some
twelve miles, in order to visit the finest baronial ruins in the
kingdom. We reached the quiet little village of Ragland, and, putting
up our horses, gave orders for dinner, and then repaired to the castle,
which we found near by, crowning a slight eminence with its stately
towers. We approached through a grove of truly venerable oaks and elms,
and all at once we were at the warder's gate; and entering into the
terrace, formerly the eastern court, a most splendid vision burst upon
our sight. Here are three pentagonal towers, with machicolated
battlements, and showing all the marks of war. This is the most perfect
part of the ruin, and seems likely to stand for ages. The ivy clusters
over the towers most gracefully. Off to the left, insulated by a moat,
stands the remains of a tower, once the citadel. We advance through the
Gothic portal into the second court, and here are shafts and arches, and
grooves through which the portcullis used to present itself to the
besiegers. Next is the paved court, where once were the men at arms with
iron tread; now a velvet lawn is seen, and many a vigorous tree is
spreading its roots. Here we get a fine view of the majestic window of
the hall of state. Through an arch is the way to the kitchen. The
fireplace has a span of thirteen feet, and is made of two stones. Then
we come to the baron's hall, of noble dimensions. On the walls are the
stone sculptured arms of the Marquis of Worcester. The chapel was a
narrow room; and, nearly concealed by ivy, are two effigies. The
south-west tower contained the apartments occupied by Charles I. after
the battle of Naseby, in 1645. The grand terrace is in tolerable order,
and you proceed to it by a bridge. We ascended the towers and gazed on
majesty in ruins. We saw nothing on the continent finer than Ragland
Castle. The prospect from the great tower is the finest that can be
imagined, and I almost fear to tell you its extent.

You may imagine that we felt unusually interested at this place, from
the fact that here the Marquis of Worcester invented the steam engine.

The castle was devastated by the parliamentary troops under Fairfax,
having surrendered in 1646. The defence was gallant, but unavailing.

The warder of the castle is a very gentlemanly man. He took us into his
apartments in one of the towers, and we found that he was a very
respectable amateur in painting. Some of his oil paintings were very
creditable. An infant girl, of great beauty, his daughter, answered to
the name of Blanche Castle May, and was the first-born child under that
roof since its desolation.

Here, as well as at Tintern Abbey, I obtained ivy roots for Mr. Hall,
and hope to see them flourishing on the walls of his beautiful stone
house in Rhode Island.

We retired slowly from this romantic ruin, and at the hotel found an
excellent dinner. One dish was fit for a king--sewen, young salmon, or a
species of salmon, for there is much dispute among naturalists as to the
identity of these fish. Any how, they are fine beyond any fish. They
were about two and a quarter pounds each, and are so delicate that they
do not well bear transportation.

We returned to Chepstow that evening, having a fine ride through a new
piece of scenery, and were quite ready for a sound night's rest. In the
morning we looked at the castle in Chepstow, which is remarkably fine,
and is of extreme antiquity; some of the arches of the castle chapel
indicating clearly a Saxon origin. One of the priestly legends is that
this chapel was built by Longinus, a Jew, and father of the soldier who
pierced the side of Christ. This was the belief of the ancient
population of this charming region.

All around this town Roman coins are frequently turned up; and I
obtained from a gentleman a very well-preserved Cæsar silver coin, dug
up a day or two before.

This castle was for more than twenty years the prison home of Henry
Marten, one of the regicides. He is buried in the parish church, and in
the north transept is the following acrostical epitaph which he composed
for his monument:--

     Here, September 9, 1680,

     was buried

     A TRUE-BORN ENGLISHMAN,

     Who in Berkshire was well known
     To love his country's freedom 'bove his own;
     But being immured full twenty year,
     Had time to write, as doth appear.

     HIS EPITAPH.

     Here or elsewhere (all's one to you, to me)
     Earth, air, or water gripes my ghostly dust
     None know how soon to be by fire set free;
     Reader, if you an old-tried rule will trust,
     you will gladly do and suffer what you must.

     My time was spent in serving you, and you,
     And death's my pay, it seems, and welcome, too;
     Revenge destroying but itself, while I
     To birds of prey leave my old cage, and fly;
     Examples preach t' the eye; care then, (mine says,)
     Not how you end, but how you spend your days.

Colonel Henry Marten was one of the noble assertors of English liberty
who dared to oppose a weak, but cruel and capricious tyrant. If ever a
monarch was a tyrant and despot, it was the first Charles. No American
citizen who thinks that Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, John Hancock,
Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and George Washington were praiseworthy
for the resistance which they offered to the aggressions of George III.,
can for one moment fail to reverence Eliot, Hampden, Marten, Whalley,
Ludlow, Pym, and Cromwell for their noble opposition to Charles and his
tormentor general, that incarnation of sanctimonious cruelty, Archbishop
Laud. It is one of the signs that a "good time is coming" that public
opinion in England, as well as in America, is fast setting in favor of
Cromwell and his noble coadjutors. They opposed measures rather than
men; and what proves that they were right in expelling the Stuarts from
power is the fact that when, by infatuation, "the fated race" was
restored, and again played over former pranks, the people had to oust
the family in 1688, and thus by another national verdict confirm the
wisdom and patriotism of the men who had formerly dared to teach a
tyrant the rights of freemen. Marten was a noble spirit, but his morals
were not as correct as those of his political associates.

The game now played by the advocates of high church and state notions in
England and America is to represent the republican party as illiterate
and narrow minded. A viler falsehood was never sworn to at the Old
Bailey. The leading men of the party who opposed the royal tyrant were
scholars, and ripe ones. If any man doubts it, let him read their
speeches, peruse their lives, and study their writings. Prynne did not
lose his acquirements nor his brains when Charles and Laud cropped his
ears, and, loving the sport, came back for a second harvest, and
"grubbed out the stumps" remaining from the first operation. Read his
folios, quartoes, and octavoes, and from one of these men estimate the
others. If you want to know the real character of Cromwell and his
party, as to their knowledge and love of good letters, look at the
patronage which the government gave to learning. Owen was chancellor of
Oxford, Milton and Thurlow were secretaries, and their friends were
called into public life. Were these men barbarians and enemies to
learning? The men who were educated at Oxford and Cambridge at this
period were the ornaments of learning and religion for the next forty
years. The day has gone by forever when Cromwell's name can be used as
synonymous with fraud, ignorance, and hypocrisy. Kings and prelates may
hate him, but a liberty-loving world will enshrine his character in the
sanctuary of grateful hearts and faithful memories.

After crossing the Severn at the old Passage, or Aust, where it is two
miles wide, we took carriage to Bristol. This parish of Aust gave a
church living to the immortal Wickliffe, who received the appointment
from Edward III.

The drive to the city was a rich enjoyment. Every acre is in the highest
cultivation, and the charming villas of the merchant princes of Bristol
make the eleven miles an entire garden scene.

Four miles from the city we came to Henbury, regarded by the citizens as
their finest suburban spot. It is indeed beautiful. There are here about
a dozen exquisite cottages, built in 1811, by Mr. Harford, who lives in
Blaize Castle. The founder's object was purely benevolent--to provide a
comfortable asylum for aged females, who had income enough to support
them, if only relieved from house rent. The forms of these cottages are
all different, but they were the earliest specimens in our times of the
adoption of the old Elizabethan style. They are perfect _bijoux_, and
the taste displayed in the shrubberies is very great.

Blaize Castle is a fine building, and surrounded by noble woods. The
castle is a circle, flanked With three round towers.

I ought not to omit that we had on this trip the pleasure of being
accompanied by a gentleman from Bristol, whose taste and perfect
knowledge of the ground afforded us much gratification. I allude, to Mr.
Dix, author of "Pen and Ink Sketches," which formerly appeared in the
Boston Atlas. Mr. Dix was with us at Windsor Castle, and when he heard
from Weld French or George Vanderbilt that Robinson's birthday would
occur shortly, he noted it, and sent James the following pretty lines,
which reached him May 15th, in Paris. I think you will be pleased with
them.


TO JAMES A. ROBINSON.

    When wandering neath old Windsor's towers
    We laughed away the sunny hours,
    You asked me for a simple rhyme;
    So now accept this birthday chime.
    No poet I--the "gift divine"
    Ne'er was, and never will be, mine;
    But take these couplets, which impart
    The anxious wishes of my heart,
    In place of more aspiring lay,
    To greet you on your natal day.

    Boy of that country of the brave,
    Beyond the Atlantic's western wave,
    I, dweller in the motherland,
    A welcome give with heart and hand;
    And on your birthday breathe a prayer
    That you may every blessing share;
    That your world journey may be blest
    With all that may prepare you best
    For the approaching eve of age--
    The end of mortal pilgrimage.

    Upon your brow of youthful bloom
    I would not cast a shade of gloom;
    Yet did I say that life will ever
    Flow onward like a placid river,
    With only sunshine on its breast,
    That ne'er 'twill be by storms distressed,
    I should but flatter to deceive,
    And but a web of falsehood weave.
    Yet, checkered though life's path may seem,
    Life's pleasures are not _all_ a dream.

    What shall I wish you? I would fain
    That earthly greatness you may gain;
    But if that guerdon is not sent,
    Be with some humble lot content;
    And let this truth be understood--
    Few can be great, _all may_ be good.
    Power, pomp, ambition, envy, pride,
    Wrecked barks adown life's stream may glide,
    Ruined by some fierce passion throe,
    E'er, reckless, o'er Time's brink they go;
    But if fair virtue grasps the helm,
    Nor storm nor wave can overwhelm.

    That many happy years be yours:
    Seek truth which every good insures;
    Press on, though clouds may intervene
    And for a moment veil the scene.
    Think of the great ones of your land,
    And, like them, strive with heart and hand
    To leave a name, when you depart,
    Which shall be dear to many a heart.
    Determine in life's early morn
    All good to prize, all ill to scorn,
    And aim to live and die as one
    Worthy the land of Washington!

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 54.


LIVERPOOL.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Well, this looks like the back track; and here we are at the Adelphi,
ready to take our passage in the noble Atlantic, which is as good as new
again, and will sail on the twenty-third. We left Bristol with much
regret, for we there have formed acquaintances which we shall often
remember with affection and gratitude; and I wish we could meet them in
America, and have an opportunity to reciprocate some of the many
kindnesses we met with at their hands. We took the railroad for
Cheltenham, and passed through some charming country before we reached
the old city of Gloucester. On our left were the flint towers of
Berkeley Castle, where the second Edward was so savagely murdered by his
wife's command.

Cheltenham is about forty miles from the city of Bristol, and we found
it all that Dr. C. had described it--a very nice modern town indeed. It
is like our Saratoga, but much more beautiful. The population is about
thirty thousand, and the strangers who resort there in the season are
probably five thousand more. The waters are in high repute, and are
regarded as strongly cathartic. The buildings are very fine, and the
entire air of the place is unlike any thing we have seen in England.
Other places seem old. This is new, and looks fresh and American in that
respect, but vastly more elegant and permanent than our towns usually
are. We had very kind attentions here from the Rev. Mr. Gilby, the
rector of the parish church, and who strongly urged us to stay over the
day; but we resumed the cars, got to Birmingham at ten o'clock, and went
to our old quarters at the Hen and Chickens. The next day we devoted to
the survey of this vast toy shop. Our greatest gratification was at the
royal _papier maché_ and japan works of Jennens & Bettridge. To this
firm we had introductions, and we went through every department of the
establishment. When we came to the show-rooms we were all tempted by the
beauty of the finished wares, and made several purchases. Here, too, are
other manufactories for pins and pens; but I must pass them by. We
called on the Rev. John Angell James, who has lived here so long, and
made a world-wide reputation. He looks very hearty and vigorous, and
shows no signs of age. He has lived in his house forty-five years. We
obtained his autograph. We also called on Rev. Mr. Swan, an old friend
of the doctor in early days, and had a pleasant chat. Mr. Swan was once
a professor in the college at Serampore, in India. He is full of life
and animation; and it seems to me that people here are more vivacious
and sprightly than with us--old folks and middle-aged ones certainly
are. We took dinner with Mr. Vanwart, brother-in-law to Washington
Irving, and shall not soon forget the elegant hospitality of his
mansion. He resides about two miles from the town; and his lawn gave us
a fine view of the English thrush and blackbird, of which birds there
were plenty on the grass. It was so cold that we had to have fires,
although the 19th of July. Mr. Vanwart was one of the saved, when the
Atlantic was lost in the Sound, November 26, 1846; and he made the
kindest inquiries after you and the family, and said that when he next
visited America he should find you out. That evening we reached
Liverpool, and had a quiet Sabbath, but a very stormy one. It rained
harder than any day since we have been abroad. We attended church in the
morning, and heard a very eloquent sermon from Mr. Birrel, and Dr. C.
preached for him at night. The Europa arrived on this day, and we met
friends from Boston--among others the Rev. Dr. Peck. On Monday we went
to Chester, the finest old city in England, with a population of
twenty-four thousand. It claims an antiquity equal to any city in the
world; for they say it was founded by the grandson of Japhet, two
hundred and forty years after the flood! Any how, it was great in Roman
days--great in the days of Alfred. No town in the country has a more
thorough history; and we have two very interesting octavoes filled with
it, and richly illustrated with antique engravings. It is a walled city,
and has undergone many sieges and blockades. The castle has great
celebrity, and is of Norman origin. Its walls are one mile and three
fourths in length, and there are four great gates. The bridge over the
Dee has seven arches, and is as old as the Norman conquest. The
cathedral was built in the days of Henry VII. and Henry VIII. It is
composed of red stone, and has a fine front. The chapter-house in the
cloisters is universally admired by antiquarians. We went into one very
old church, which was undergoing restoration. The town, like Berne, has
rows in front of the houses, supported by pillars so that, in shopping,
you walk under covered galleries.

We returned to Liverpool, and dined with a gentleman who has been very
polite to us--Mr. Thomas Davies, a celebrated maker of gold watches.
From him I obtained one, preferring an English to a Swiss timepiece.
Here we saw the cultivation of plants in the house in greater perfection
than I recollect elsewhere.

To-morrow we are to take our departure; and, though very glad to return
home, yet I feel sorry at leaving a country where there is so much that
is excellent and noble and beautiful. I have learnt, certainly, that
England and America have too much in common to justify the indulgence
of hatred and prejudice; and I find the tone of feeling here, among wise
and-good people, very kind towards America. I have rarely heard a
reflection upon our country, excepting upon our slavery. That they _must
talk_ about; and they are a little like the man who, having just got rid
of the irritable affection supposed to trouble the North Britons, could
not for his life help speaking of sulphur. An Englishman is sure to tell
you that he is free from this sin--yes, washed, but scarcely dry.

Our hotel is filling up with Americans, and, we expect to meet many
friends on board the Atlantic. I am much pleased with the appearance of
Captain West; he looks every inch an admiral. And now, my dear fellow, I
shall see you, perhaps, before you read my letter; but I have kept my
promise to tell you what we saw and did. Of course many things will
occur to our memories when we get home, and will furnish matter for
chitchat which I hope soon to have with you, as in days of old. Well,
you are now at the business of life, and I am yet a little longer to
spend my time in preparation for it. I wonder how we shall come out,
Charley? But time will tell, and let us do our best.

Yours affectionately,

WELD.

P.S. I must not forget to tell you that, while at Bristol, the doctor
and I ran up to Windsor to see the royal agricultural exhibition, held
this year in the Home Park. James stopped with our friends, and we were
anxious to see the great show of England in her farming interest. The
display was very great, and the cattle were wonderfully fine in all the
departments--Durham, Hereford, Devons, and Channel Island. The last are
very nice animals for a paddock, and give good milk. The horses were
good; and I longed to bring home one or two that I saw, and felt
strongly tempted. But the sheep and swine were the most remarkable
things there. Really, we know little about sheep. They are monstrous,
and yet very symmetrical and beautiful; whilst there are pigs, strange
as you may think it, that have established high claims to beauty and
perfection. I greatly preferred the Sussex breed to any other. Never was
a town so crowded as this same Windsor. Thousands upon thousands were
flocking into it; and how and where they fed I cannot divine. Money
seemed useless, and waiters hardly looked at half crowns for retaining
fees.


Letter 55.


NEW YORK, August 3,1851.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We are, through the goodness of Providence, safely returned. We had a
good voyage, in a capital ship, and under the charge of as good a
captain as ever sailed the ocean. Our passengers were about one hundred
and thirty in number, and very agreeable--some few were our old
voyagers in the Arctic. With an exception or two, our way was as
pleasant as it could have been; and there were some cheerful spirits
that knew how to create sunshine at all hours. I cannot tell what
travellers can desire in a steamer which they will not find in the
Collins line. It seems to us that we have had the full worth of the
money paid for passage. How different it is to come to New York in ten
days, instead of being on the ocean for sixty-four days, as I have in a
sailing packet! Well, this saving of time and feelings is worth the
difference of the passage price. I am at a loss to understand how
Americans who have to cross the ocean should think of supporting the
English steamers in preference to our own superior ships. The influence
of every English agent, of course, goes out in behalf of the old line;
and all sorts of stories are told about winter passages, the importance
of boats especially built for strength, and the advantages of
experience. Now, the history of the American line is a perfect
refutation of all this twaddle. The truth is, that all voyaging is
connected with exposedness to some danger; and up to this moment the
Americans have had, in all their ocean steam voyages, the full measure
of success. They have lost no boat, they have sacrificed no lives, and
they present a fleet of steamships the like of which the world cannot
equal. Whenever an American citizen takes his passage in a foreign
steamer, and an American one is at hand, he tacitly confesses the
superiority of other lands, in ocean navigation, to his own country, and
he contributes his full share to depress American enterprise, and aids
so far as he can to insure its failure. The eyes of the English nation
are upon our ships; and if we desire the spread of our national fame, we
should, every man of us, labor to sustain our own steamers and
propellers. And the government of our country should strenuously guard
the interests of this available arm of national defence; and the country
at large, would certainly sustain Congress in liberal support of this
truly American enterprise.

Perhaps, Charley, you are ready to say to us, "Well, what do you think,
after all you have been seeing in other lands?". I reply: We think that
we return home with all our hearts more warmly attached to our beloved
land than when we left her shores. We have seen lands, as fair, and
fields as fertile, as our own. We have seen monarchies and republics;
but nowhere have we seen man as erect and self-respecting as at home.
Here we have equal laws, civil and religious liberty, no bishop to
intimidate a day laborer who prefers to pass by his cathedral gates and
worship his Maker in a humbler temple. Here our streets are not labelled
with "_Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité_," but the things signified are
_known_ and _felt_ by every man that traverses these avenues of
business. Here we have not thousands of armed men in this great city to
preserve liberty; but every man enjoys it, and sees nothing of the
government, which, though unseen, is all-powerful in the affections of
the country.

We come home grateful that we have such a country; and though we love
and admire much, very much, in England, yet we rejoice that we can call
the United States our land. We hope we are better prepared than before
we started to do her service. I am quite satisfied, Charley, that God
has not done for any other people what he has for us. We know nothing of
the restless anxiety which depresses men in England as to the means of
procuring the necessaries of life. We have our chief anxieties called
out in reference to the obtaining the _luxuries_ and _embellishments_ of
life; the _necessaries_ are almost certain to every man who has health
and character. But in England, toil is poorly requited; and a father
and husband may, after unremitting labor, have to find his refuge, and
his only one, in that petition of the Lord's Prayer, which you and I
never employed _in pure faith_, "Give me this day my daily bread." We
_say so_; but _we know whence it is coming to us. He_ knows not; and
what he knows not, he asks God after.

A thoughtful and humane American cannot travel in Europe without having
his sympathies daily called out in behalf of the sufferings of man. I am
no apologist for slavery; I deeply lament its existence; but I believe
that there is as much suffering in coal pits and manufacturing districts
of England as in our southern slave states. In regard to England, I feel
encouraged. In an absence of fifteen years I see marked improvement. Man
is more respected, as man, than he once was; the masses are coming up;
and the wealthy and the noble are more considerate. It is a great folly
and a wickedness to think that the nobility of England are weak,
vicious, unfeeling, proud, and self-indulgent. Some of the noblest
characters of England are to be found in the peerage--men who "fear God
and work righteousness." Their homes are often centres of diffusive
blessedness; and were the nobility of England what too many here suppose
them, the state could not last a twelvemonth. The queen is popular, and
is clearly a woman of great tact. She would do at a crisis. Prince
Albert is everything to her. He is a profoundly wise and prudent man,
highly educated, and has very superior powers of mind. He is continually
making speeches, but they are all marked by _adaptation_. I have never
heard one disrespectful word uttered in England in regard to him. His
labors for the exhibition, have been remarkable, and but for the prince
the palace never would have been reared. England is happy indeed in
having such a man to counsel and support the sovereign.

Europe looks as though a storm were once more about to gather over her
old battle fields. France is not in her true position. She would like to
see her armies employed; and I shall not be surprised to hear of his
holiness clearing out from Rome and seeking protection from Austria. If
that happens, France will sustain liberal views in the Eternal City, and
the contest will be severe.

Popery has lost its hold upon the continent, and is seeking to regain
its influence in England, and plant it in America. The people of England
are Protestant to the heart's core. The folly of a few scholastics at
Oxford has created all the hue and cry of Puseyism, and invigorated the
hopes of Rome. These men at Oxford have poisoned the minds of a few of
their pupils, and in the upper walks of life some sympathy is seen with
views that seem at least semi-Papistical. But the great body of the
people is sound. More than half the population is made up of dissenters
and they, to a man, hate "the beast;" and there is about as much danger
of Popery being established in England as there is of absolute monarchy
being embraced as our form of government.

Popery in America must spread by immigration. We have Ireland virtually
in America; but here the Irish will gradually merge into Americans, and
the power of the priesthood will be less and less regarded by their
children. I have no apprehensions from the coming of Catholics to our
country. Let them come, and we must get Bibles ready for them, and Bible
readers to visit them, and schools to teach their children; and if
cardinal, or archbishop, or priest tell us that Popery is the friend of
science, and that it never persecuted genius, imprisoned learning, nor
burnt God's saints, we will tell the deceiver that he lies in the face
of God and man and the world's history.

I am not, my dear fellow, uncharitable; a man may be better than his
creed; and I believe that some priests who have sung the song of the
mass will hereafter sing the song of Moses and the Lamb. But of Popery,
_as it is seen in Italy, and Austria, and other parts of the old world,_
I cannot but pronounce it a curse to the human family, a system all
unworthy of God, and blasting to the happiness of man.

The boys are in the enjoyment of health, and will soon see you. They
have been constant sources of pleasure to me, by their thoughtful
kindness and consideration; and nothing has transpired, to cause us to
look back with pain on any part of our wanderings from home.

Yours, very truly,

JNO. O. CHOULES.


To Mr. CHARLES W. DUSTAN,

Stapleton; Staten Island, New York.