The poor fellow promised to do what he could, assured his friends that
he would not be idle, and that if he could not reflect upon them any
extraordinary credit, he would certainly do them no disgrace. Herbert
Knowles had taken an accurate measure of his strength and capabilities,
and soon gave proof that he spoke at the bidding of no uncertain monitor
within him. Two months after his letter to Southey he was laid in his
grave. The fire consumed the lamp even faster than the trembling lad
suspected.

A poem by him, _The Three Tabernacles_, though perhaps familiar to most
of our readers, is so beautiful that we reprint it here:


THE THREE TABERNACLES.

    Methinks it is good to be here,
       If thou wilt let us build,--but for whom?
    Nor Elias nor Moses appear;
       But the shadows of eve that encompass the gloom,
       The abode of the dead, and the place of the tomb.

    Shall we build to Ambition? Ah! no:
       Affrighted, he shrinketh away;
    For see, they would pin him below
       To a small narrow cave; and, begirt with cold clay,
       To the meanest of reptiles a peer and a prey.

    To Beauty? Ah! no: she forgets
       The charms that she wielded before;
    Nor knows the foul worm that he frets
       The skin which but yesterday fools could adore,
       For the smoothness it held, or the tint which it wore.

    Shall we build to the purple of Pride,
       The trappings which dizen the proud?
    Alas! they are all laid aside;
       And here's neither dress nor adornment allowed,
       But the long winding-sheet, and the fringe of the shroud.

    To Riches? Alas! 'tis in vain:
       Who hid, in their turns have been hid;
    The treasures are squandered again;
       And here, in the grave, are all metals forbid,
       But the tinsel that shone on the dark coffin-lid.

    To the pleasures which Mirth can afford,
       The revel, the laugh and the jeer?
    Ah! here is a plentiful board,
       But the guests are all mute as their pitiful cheer,
       And none but the worm is a reveller here.

    Shall we build to Affection and Love?
       Ah! no: they have withered and died,
    Or fled with the spirit above.
       Friends, brothers, and sisters, are laid side by side,
       Yet none have saluted, and none have replied.

    Unto Sorrow? The dead cannot grieve;
       Nor a sob, nor a sigh meets mine ear,
    Which compassion itself could relieve:
       Ah! sweetly they slumber, nor hope, love, or fear;
       Peace, peace, is the watchword, the only one here.

    Unto Death, to whom monarchs must bow?
       Ah! no: for his empire is known,
    And here there are trophies enow;
       Beneath the cold dead, and around the dark stone,
       Are the signs of a sceptre that none may disown.

    The first tabernacle to Hope we will build,
       And look for the sleepers around us to rise;
    The second to Faith, which insures it fulfilled;
       And the third to the Lamb of the Great Sacrifice,
       Who bequeathed us them both when he rose to the skies.

There are in his works several other pieces not less remarkable for the
best qualities of poetry; and they all appear to be the echoes of
genuine feeling.


THE COUNT MONTE-LEONE: OR, THE SPY IN SOCIETY.[M]

TRANSLATED FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE FROM THE FRENCH OF H.
DE ST. GEORGES.

_Continued from page 511, vol. II._


PART SECOND--BOOK FIRST.

THE DUCHESS.

On the very day on which the marriage had been celebrated at the town of
Sorrento, a man descended from a carriage that, from the dust on its
wheels, seemed to have travelled far, at the town of Ceprano, situated
on the frontier of the Roman States and the kingdom of Naples. People
call Ceprano a city; it is, however, in fact, only a large town of the
Abruzzi, very ugly and very dirty, to which leads one of the worst and
most romantic roads in Italy. Ceprano would scarcely merit the
traveller's notice, but for many curiosities which it contains, worthy
of particular attention. These curiosities are neither the charms of
nature, for the scenery is without interest, nor palaces, nor monuments.
They are neither archeologic nor artistic, but the greatest of earthly
rarities--curiosities of humanity. The women of Ceprano are, perhaps,
the most beautiful in Italy. Their stature, their regular and noble
features, their magnificent black hair, twined around their charming
faces, a graceful carriage, truly antique, their picturesque costume,
partaking of the characters of both modern Greece and Italy, form the
most admirable and pleasant combination. The women of Ceprano display,
also, a peculiar coquetry, by their graceful and bold air; they carry on
their heads etruscan amphoræ, in which, like Rachel, they bring water
from the spring. At the fountain, therefore, strangers assemble to
admire these nymphs. The traveller of whom we speak had gone thither,
according to the well established custom, while his horses were being
changed. He had, however, been preceded by another man, whose strange
appearance soon attracted attention. The latter was about sixty years of
age, of middle height, and well made. He had been handsome, if one could
judge from the purity of the lines of his features, which time had not
entirely effaced. His _coiffure_ alone would have made him appear
whimsical and ridiculous, had not his head been noble and distinguished.
He wore powder; and locks such as once were known as _a l'aille de
pigeon_, were on each side of his face. A cloak of light silk was
buttoned over his breast, so as to conceal a blue coat on which a cross
of Saint Louis rested, being suspended to a broad blue ribbon. Sitting
between two of the prettiest girls of Ceprano, he talked to them in an
Italian, very little of which they understood; for his _patois_ called
forth from the volatile creatures bursts of laughter.

"Bah!" said he in French; "this is the consequence of not studying
foreign tongues. I cannot turn the _indigenes_ to profit. Pity, too,
when they are beautiful as these are."

"Signor, may I be your interpreter?" said the last comer, who had heard
only the latter portion of the old man's words.

"Thanks, Signor," said he; "heaven has sent you to the aid of a
barbarian who was pitilessly murdering the mother tongue of Tasso.
Formerly," continued he, "pantomime answered to talk with women as well
as language; now, however, I must explain myself in another manner. I
cannot, therefore, ask you to be the interpreter of my request of these
girls!"

"What, Signor, did you ask them?" said he.

"Nothing, but permission to write two signs on my tablets. A habit I
imported from London, a peculiar kind of statistics to introduce some
variety into the tedious stories travellers spin. I indicate the region
through which I pass by a single phrase or word which recalls to me what
they have most agreeable to the heart, mind, or senses. See," said he,
taking a rich pocket-book on which was a prince's coronet in gold, "all
Italy will occupy but two pages. Florence? _Flowers and museums._
Bologna? _Hams._ Milan? _La scala._ Leghorn? _Nothing._ Rome? _Every
thing. Et cætera._ I wished to write Ceprano? _kisses_: to prove that
here I touched the lips of the two prettiest women of Italy."

"If that is all," said the person to whom the old man spoke, "and for
the purpose of advocating so useful a cause," said she, with a laugh, "I
will procure you the pleasure you desire."

"Indeed, Signor, I do not know how I can recompense you for such a
service."

"Signor, I deserve no recompense from you, as I merely advance the art
of travelling, which through your exertions is about to become so
attractive----"

"_Signorine_," said he to the beautiful girls of Ceprano, in the pure
Roman dialect; "an old man's kiss always brings prosperity to the
youthful; and this, Signor," he pointed to the old man with powdered
hair, "wishes you to be happy."

The two young girls, with the most natural grace possible, offered their
brows to the old man, who kissed them paternally as possible.

"I thank you, sir," said he to his interpreter. "I am indebted solely
for this chapter to your politeness, and can express my pleasure only by
dedicating it to you. To do so, however, it is necessary that I should
know your name----"

"Write then, Ceprano, dedicated to Count Monte-Leone. But, Signor, shall
not I know the name of the author of a work so interesting as that to
which I have contributed?"

"The name of the writer who is indebted to you for the best chapter of
his book, is the Prince de Maulear."

The Count made a brusque movement of surprise, and saluting the Prince
coldly, left him. A quarter of an hour after, two carriages in different
directions left Ceprano. Monte-Leone's took the road to Rome, the Prince
de Maulear's that to Naples. The former, however, did not go to Rome;
for, when he had come to the foot of a wooded mountain, he left the
carriage, and accompanied by a man in a long cloak, who had hitherto sat
in the carriage, Monte-Leone went into a thick underwood, and proceeding
up a rocky path almost to the top of the mountain, went to the little
town of Frenona, which is on the very brow. The night was near at hand,
and the trees with their leaves, too early for the season, increased the
darkness of the mountain path. Suddenly, at a distance of two hundred
feet from them, a bright and sparkling light was seen approaching
Monte-Leone and his companion. The Count uttered a sharp whistle, and
the light went to the middle of the wood, and hurried like a
will-o'-the-wisp towards the travellers. The light was a torch, borne by
a man, dressed as a peasant and wrapped in a large cloak, which suffered
nothing but his two sparkling eyes to be seen, which were scarcely less
brilliant than the torch.

"_Buon Giorno, Signor Pignana_," said the Count to the new comer; "you
see I have kept the appointment at San Paolo."

"The brothers await your excellency," said Pignana, bowing to the
ground; "be pleased to follow me."

"I have come hither to do so," said the Count.

The three men continued to ascend the mountain, and after a while turned
to the right and stopped in front of an old building partially in ruins.
Following a path around the ruin, they came to the place where the wall
was highest, and stopped in front of a door. Pignana pulled a rope. A
bell sounded, and the door was opened by a man in the costume Pignana
wore. The three then crossed a long paved court, and through a vestibule
entered a corridor leading into a vast hall, which had been the
refectory of the monastery of San Paolo. A few torches lit up the room;
around a table in the centre of which were thirty men all dressed like
those we have described. They arose when Monte-Leone entered, and bowed
with respect. The Count took his seat and spoke thus:

"You desired, Signori, to see me once more among you, and to accede to
your wish I have braved every danger; for you know that Rome and Naples
make common cause against us. For a long time I have wished to see you,
and been anxious to ascertain your views, by putting, as your supreme
chief, two questions to you."

"Speak, Monsignore," said the _Carbonari_.

"Have the _Vente_ of all Italy," said the Count, "those of Rome, Venice,
Milan, Parma, Verona, Turin, and the other principal cities of Italy,
the chiefs of which I see here, ever doubted me?"

"No, Monsignore; but they have feared lest being a victim to the unhappy
fate which has befallen you, it might be your intention to leave us."

"And betray you, Signori," said the Count, with bitterness; "sell you
like a spy and informer?"

"_Never!_" said all the company; "Monte-Leone can be no spy."

"Thank you, Signori, for the good opinion you have of me," said the
Count in an ironical tone; "why then did you demand that foolish
manifestation in the theatre of San Carlo? Do you not see that I have
given you sufficient pledges by risking my life at the _Venta_ of
Pompeia, where I, who had every gratification that fortune could bestow
on me, risked every thing by declaring myself your chief? Let me tell
you, Signori, two powerful motives led me--my convictions and my
father's blood, which yet calls to me for vengeance. The following is my
second question:--Do the _Vente_ of Italy promise to obey my orders
without giving any to me?"

"Monsignore, you in this demand perfect submission!"

"Perfect, Signori; I will make my demand more explicit. I demand
obedience, to act by my orders, and never without them; to think as I
do, and to be the body of an association of which I am the soul."

The _Carbonari_ were silent.

"Decide!" said the Count, taking out his watch. "I had but two hours to
devote to you, to settle all, and only a few minutes remain."

The _Carbonari_ consulted together. Their conversation was animated as
possible. The Count looked again at his watch, and all turned towards
him.

"Your excellency," said the one who seemed to be the most important,
"may rely on our faith, conscience, and trust in you. We would, though,
think we exceeded our powers, and implicate the brothers who have
confided in us too deeply, if we were to consent to be passive, as you
wish us and the Italian _Vente_ to become.

"Then there is nothing more to be said, Signori," and Monte-Leone arose.
"Perhaps I have confided too implicitly in my audacity, resolution, and
the power over myself, which never has deserted me. I deceived myself,
perhaps, when too proudly I fancied I could inspire you with confidence
equal to my own. I thought by risking life, fortune, and all, I won the
right to hold the dice myself. But you do not think thus, and I submit.
Faithful to my oaths, and to our principles, I am always ready to keep
and to defend them. Acting, henceforth, alone, I shall do as I please,
and be accountable to myself alone. Now, Signori, adieu! I shall leave
Italy, and perhaps Europe, in search of a country, the institutions of
which recognize the true principles of national happiness. Wherever,
though, I may be, I will be _mute as to your secrets, and devoted to
your principles_. You had just now a chief in Count Monte-Leone. He is
so no more, but is still your brother."

Bowing to them with that noble dignity which he never laid aside, he
bade the man who had accompanied him to take a torch and lead the way.
Monte-Leone descended the mountain at Frepinond, and regained the
carriage that waited for him, in which he proceeded to the Eternal City.
Wounded at what, when he remembered how much he had done, seemed
ingratitude, he said to himself, "Henceforth Monte-Leone commands--he
cannot obey."

About evening, on the night after the _Venta_ at San Paola, the Count
got out of his carriage, and, as his sadness increased as he left
Naples, sought to revive himself by walking. He walked through
Ferentino, a little town of the Roman States, and as he passed by the
church he heard the sound of the organ. Monte-Leone had a heart piously
inclined, and the sentiment of religion was always aroused by the sight
of the church. He went into the church, which was brilliantly lighted. A
few of the faithful here and there prayed; the half tints of the light
on the walls giving them the appearance of statues on tombs. Before the
principal altar two persons knelt. A priest was about to unite their
fate. Monte-Leone approached the altar, but the seclusion of the
position of the couple as they bent to the ground before the priest, who
was blessing them, made it impossible for him to distinguish their
features. A strange curiosity took possession of him, for this was
evidently no ordinary village marriage. The rich dress of the young
woman, the noble air of the young man to whom she was about to be
married, all announced one of those secret unions not contracted beneath
the vaulted arches of a cathedral, but in the oratory of some palace, or
the chapel of some secluded hamlet. The ceremony was over, and the newly
married couple left the altar and walked down the nave to the door of
the church of Ferentino, where a magnificent carriage was waiting. Just
as they were about leaving the church, the bride lifted up her veil and
saw a man standing near the vase of holy water. The light of the lamp
fell directly on his face. The young woman, astonished, trembling and
confused, felt her strength give way, and could scarcely suppress an
exclamation of agony. She saw Count Monte-Leone. He also had recognized
in the bridegroom the Duke of Palma, minister of police of Naples. In
the new duchess he had also recognized the primadonna of San Carlo da
Felina. Thus the two angels, which in his ecstatic vision at his
father's tomb the Count had seen, and who appeared to contend for
him--Aminta and La Felina--the two women, one of whom he adored, while
he was himself adored by the other, were no longer free. Aminta had
married from duty, La Felina from reason.


II.--THE FATHER.

Eight days after the meeting of the Prince de Maulear and Count
Monte-Leone at Ceprano, a post-chaise, accompanied by a kind of
travelling forge, entered Naples by the Roman road, and after having
crossed the city at a rapid rate, the postillions cracking their whips
the while, stopped at the French embassy. The powdered head of the old
man appeared at the window of the chaise, and the Swiss of the embassy
replied, in execrable French, to a question put to him thus:

"Monsieur, the Marquis de Maulear does not stop in the embassy. His
apartments were too small for two."

The Swiss, enchanted by this reply, which he thought eminently witty,
bowed to the traveller, and was about to return to his chair, when the
old man again called him:

"But, my fine fellow," said he to the Helvetian, "you have not yet told
me where the Marquis does live."

"The Marquis de Maulear," said the Swiss, "is in the palace of
Cellamare, where he rented a pavilion near the gardens of the
Villa-Reale."

"To the palace Cellamare," said the traveller to the postillion; and the
latter drove off at a gallop.

After about five minutes the same powdered head appeared at the door,
and the traveller said, "Hollo! postillion, stop; do you hear, rascal;
pull up."

"What does your excellency, sir?" asked the postillion.

"Take my excellency to the best Hotel in Naples."

"The best is _la Vittoria_, between the bay and Villa Reale."

The postillion lied, for _le Crocelle_ was better; but at _la Vittoria_
they received two piastres a piece for travellers, and at _le Crocelle_
got nothing. The _Vittoria_, then, was the best hotel in Naples for
postillions, but not for travellers. The apartments of the Marquis de
Maulear, the witty Swiss had told him, were too small for two; and this
information had induced him thus suddenly to change his plan. The
traveller thought the Marquis might have yielded to some tender
influence, and contracted a _quasi morganatique_ marriage as a prelude
to more serious ties. "If that be so," said the stranger, "it would be
wrong to go to the Marquis's house. I do not wish to surprise him by a
simple visit which would not have the effect of a solemn interview."

The chaise stopped at _la Vittoria_. Two servants and an intendant came
to the carriage, and the postillion received eight piastres for his
human freight. The Marquis de Maulear had really taken his young wife to
the palace of Cellamare, a portion of which was rented to wealthy
strangers a few days after his marriage. The Marquis had acted decidedly
in writing to his father that he had married without consulting him.
Henceforth it was of no importance whether the world knew it or not;
besides, the Signora Rovero and Aminta, having thought that the Prince
had authorized his son to marry whomsoever he pleased, secrecy would not
have seemed proper or justifiable. The Marquis, who grew every day more
in love, and whose ardor continually increased as he discovered new
qualities to adore in the young heart confided to him, sought to expel
the terrors which he apprehended would result from his father's
surprise, but was unable to satisfy himself that the latter would not be
completely enraged. The Marquis possessed an honorable fortune from his
deceased mother. He therefore was not at all disturbed, in a pecuniary
point of view, in relation to Aminta's fate. The distress, the
humiliation to which his young wife would be exposed, should she be
repelled by his father and family, made him tremble whenever that idea
presented itself to his mind. Aminta had perceived these clouds
occasionally on the brow of her husband, but had attributed it to his
apprehensions that she did not love him as much as he adored her. She
had striven to restore his confidence; and with that gentle voice, never
heard by any one without emotion, said, "Henri, I was frank with you,
when before marriage my heart asked time to return all the passion you
felt. I know I love you now, and was wrong to be so timid; for," added
she, "I deprived myself of happiness by delay." Maulear clasped her in
his arms and forgot his troubles, as all do who love and are loved.

One morning, about ten o'clock, he had left her to go to the French
embassy, whither he was called by important business. The young Marquise
had gone into the garden of Cellamare, and sat beneath an arbor of
jasmin, reading her favorite poet Tasso. Love of Maulear now interpreted
these passionate mysteries, which hitherto she had not understood. Her
soul, illumined by the flame enkindled in it, did not admire, as it
formerly did, the form and gentle harmony of the poem alone. The meaning
of the verses touched her heart, and she seemed for the first time to
open this book, which is so filled with burning inspirations. The
tenderness of Maulear had begun to dissipate the sad presentiments which
had so long agitated her: she felt arising in her a gentle return of
that deep affection she had inspired; and though she had been alone but
two hours, it seemed to her that the Marquis had been absent a much
longer time. Looking in the direction she expected Henri to come, she
examined the burning horizon beyond the avenue of plane-trees beneath
which she sat, until she saw a human form coming down it. The person who
advanced walked slowly, and looked around him carefully, as if he was in
search of something. For a while he examined curiously the hedge on the
principal alley; nor, until he stood within a few paces of Aminta, did
he see that this white figure was a woman; its graceful immobility
having made him fancy it a statue. The stranger bowed to her politely as
possible, and spoke to her with an air half way between respect and
familiarity, impertinence and consideration. Aminta arose and recognized
him, and as she did so, exhibiting a constraint and embarrassment she
could not account for. The person who had spoken to Aminta was dressed
so strangely, that the young woman was struck by it. Having been
accustomed to all the fashions of the epoch, to the elegance of the
young men who visited her mother's house, to the good taste of the
Marquis de Maulear, she had never seen such a costume as that of the
stranger. A coat of Prussian blue, with a straight collar and large wide
skirts, enveloped a thin, delicate frame. A waistcoat of white silk, cut
square in front, with two immense pockets, from one of which hung a
watch, with an immense chain and multitude of seals, beating against
breeches of buff cassimer, the legs of which were inserted in vast
boots. A rich frill of English point lace, with ruffles to match, gave
an air of magnificence to this toilet; the whole being surmounted with a
powdered head-dress with open wings, like those of a sea-gull in a
desperate storm. The result of all this toilette was such, that no one
felt inclined to laugh, or even if the inclination arose, the noble air
of which we have spoken soon repressed it. Aminta felt as Count
Monte-Leone had at Ceprano, when the latter made the acquaintance of the
Prince de Maulear, whom our readers have beyond doubt recognized.

"Excuse me, beautiful lady, for thus disturbing your reveries," said the
Prince, bowing again to Aminta, "but I am come to visit the Marquis de
Maulear, who must return ere long, as one of his servants told me. I
however learned, that in addition to the pleasure of roaming through
this paradise, I would find _Madame_. I could not resist the pleasure of
presenting you my homage."

In the manner the Prince pronounced the word _Madame_, there was a
shadow of fine irony, which Aminta could not but observe. She blushed
slightly, for she thought the stranger alluded to her recent marriage;
and though shocked at his familiarity, Aminta was satisfied with
replying politely, that she would be happy if the visitor would remain
until the Marquis de Maulear should return with her.

The Prince sat on a rustic chair, which Aminta offered him, and said, as
he looked at her with admiration, "The Marquis may stay away as long as
he pleases; and while with you I will not complain."

"But, Signor," said Aminta, "something of importance has brought you
hither."

"No," said the visitor, "I come merely to see the Marquis; and to do so
have travelled the four hundred leagues between Paris and Naples.
Nothing more!"

"Ah, Signor," said Aminta, delighted, "then you love him?"

"Devotedly," continued the Prince, "though I suspect him rather of
ingratitude. Do not be afraid," added he; "I believe him to be an
ingrate in friendship, but not in love. _Madame_ (and he looked
anxiously at her) has every charm to prevent his being so."

Any person less delicately organized than Aminta, and less
impressionable, would have had no suspicion of the elegant _abandon_
which was the foundation of this compliment. By means of her instinct,
however, she had guessed that there was a kind of contempt of _bon ton_
in what was said to her, altogether unbecoming in a conversation with a
person of her rank and station. She replied, then, that she thought she
had sufficient claims on the Marquis's love for him never to forget them
... that if such a misfortune should befall her, she would find in her
heart and conscience no reason for reproaching herself, and would be
able to support indifference, and be bold enough to pardon it.

"Very well, very well," said the Prince gayly. "Pretty women are always
generous; they, however, are least worthy of commendation on that
account, when they resemble you."

"Signor," said Aminta to the Prince, "I know not to whom I have the
honor to speak. You have, however, told me you come from France, and I
will thank you to tell me if men are volatile there, as I have heard."

"Signora, I do not think I slander my countrymen, when I say their
hearts are not easily fixed for a long time. Were they more faithful,
they would not, perhaps, be so amiable. In my time, for instance,
marriage was an affair of business. One married to be married, to have
an heir, to regulate one's household. That was all. If a man loved his
wife three or six months it was superb. A year of constancy became
ridiculous and vulgar. Then the lady would fall in love, and the husband
conceived a friendship for the courtier, mousquetaire, or abbe, whom the
lady patronized. The husband did not fall in love; he only looked for
amusements. Sometimes chance afforded him what he needed, or he went to
the opera, where the nymphs of music and dancing took charge of his
superfluous funds. People talked of him for two days, and then he was
forgotten. Thus gently and pleasantly the husband and wife floated down
the stream of time; each keeping close to a bank, and shaking hands
whenever the currents brought them together. In the business of life
they were always as considerate as possible of each other, and shed some
honest tears when death separated them. Sometimes in old age, when both
were wearied by passion, and satiated with love, they recounted to each
other their wild adventures, as sailors tell their stories of shipwrecks
and the perils of their voyages. But," continued the Prince, "as there
are exceptions to all rules, the exceptions were the kindly-disposed and
well-regulated households, which were spoken of and laughed at.
Happiness, however, avenged them. Thus, beautiful lady, people lived in
other times. They do not live thus now--"

"All this I own," said Aminta, "interests me deeply."

"The devil!" said the Prince, aside, and under the impression that he
was in the presence of the irregular passion of his son, "Does not
morganaticism suffice?" Under this hypothesis, which made him smile with
pity, he resolved to cut the foolish hope short at the roots.

"In our days all is changed--women are saints and husbands are
angels--and the two are riveted together for all time. The wife is
constant, the husband faithful; or, if the contrary be the case, the
matter is hushed up and concealed. If public morality is satisfied, the
lovers are not the losers. It is also said that unhappy marriages now
are the exceptions. The chief difference is, though, that now men do
before marriage what they used to do afterwards. If one finds a pleasant
woman," said he, approaching Aminta, "like you, beautiful, intelligent,
and I venture to say also full of talent, as you are--we swear we love
her, and are really sincere. Reason, however, in the guise of matrimony,
hurries to sound the knell of love. At the first peal, it escapes, and
whither? The beauty we adore first weeps, and then finds consolation, or
rather suffers herself to be consoled. Then, opening her wings like the
butterfly, she hurries to find the pleasure she calls and expects."

The tone, rather than the language, of this conversation terrified and
amazed Aminta.

The Prince observed this. "Did she love him really?" he said; and
touched with this idea, he added--

"All that I say, madame, is a general remark, the application of which I
make to no one, least of all to yourself."

"Signor," said Aminta, rising, "I do not understand you."

"Certainly," said the Prince, "you do not understand that one who loves
you should cease to do so. That is what I had the honor to tell you just
now. The Marquis, though, is very young and inexperienced. He believes
in love, as men of twenty-five usually do. This explains to me the
apparent rigidness of his words, and unveils the mystery of his
pretended wisdom. I do not, however, wish to make a person so charming
as you are desperate; and perhaps I do you a great favor in warning you
against future dangers and mischances."

"Signor," said Aminta, trembling with emotion, "I cannot guess why you
speak to me thus; but I perceive that you do not know me."

The Prince said, with a smile, "I speak to a charming woman, to one of
earth's angels, whom some lucky mortals meet with, and who by their
tenderness reveal all the pleasures and joys promised to the faithful by
the houris of divine Providence."

"Signor," said Aminta, looking at the Prince with an expression in which
both indignation and contempt were visible, "unused as I am to such
language, though I scarcely understand it, my reason and good sense tell
me you would speak thus only to the mistress of the Marquis de Maulear."

"True," said the Prince, "and I speak now to the most charming mistress
imaginable."

"Me! do you speak thus to me, Signor?" said the young woman, with a
painful accent. "And you thought----?"

"Who then are you, madame!" asked the old man, with surprise and terror
at Aminta's tone.

"Who is she, monsieur?" said the Marquis, coming from a neighboring
alley, where, pale and terrified, he had for some time been listening to
this conversation, "she is my wife, the _Marquise de Maulear_!"

Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of the Prince he could not have
been more surprised. The blood left his face, and he supported himself
against the back of his chair.

"Henri," said Aminta, "tell this man again that he has dared to insult
your wife! Tell him I am yours in God's eyes, and that he has doubly
outraged me in the fact that his words fell from the lips of age. Say to
him, that a gentleman, if such he is, should not utter such things until
assured they were neither an insult nor an outrage to her who heard
them."

"Aminta," said the Marquis, "the person of whom you speak thus is----"

"Be silent, monsieur,"[N] interrupted the Prince, looking sternly at his
son, "madame has not offended me, though I have her. Madame," said he,
"accept my apology for a fault caused by the Marquis alone. The name you
bear is entitled to the respect of all, especially to mine. I will be
the last to forget it. Be pleased to leave the Marquis de Maulear and
myself together for a few moments. What I have to say none must listen
to. Do not be afraid," added he, when he saw the hesitation with which
Aminta left; "I am no foe of the Marquis, and besides, the only weapon
of old men is the tongue. Our conversation will not be long, and I will
then leave the Marquis to you for ever."

Henri made a motion, the purport of which was to beseech Aminta to go.
Taking a lateral alley, she disappeared.

"Monsieur," said the Prince, "you should know that my name should not be
pronounced in the presence of that young woman, especially after the
error which your silence has led me into in relation to her." The Prince
continued, "So you are married?"

"Yes, monsieur," said Maulear, trembling like a criminal in the presence
of the judge.

"Contrary to my orders, and without my consent," continued the Prince.

"Father, if any excuse be possible, you will find it in the person I
have selected."

"I do not ask for justification, monsieur, but for excuse. How long did
you reflect on this union before you contracted it?"

"A month," said the Marquis.

"A month is a short time to reflect on a life of remorse and regret.
You know I never will forgive you."

"Never, monsieur?" asked Maulear, bowing respectfully before his father.
"God himself pardons."

"I am not God, monsieur, and have neither his goodness nor his mercy.
Hearken to me, and let none of my words be lost, as they are the last I
shall ever speak to you. I have not concealed my principles, which were
probably not firm enough in relation to morals and virtue. In these
principles the people of the century in which I was born lived. I was,
perhaps, badly educated, but so were all nobles then; and if they
preserved their loyalty and honor, were faithful to their kings, and
died for them,--if they did honor to their family, and fought well, they
were forgiven for other faults. Philosophy and the progress of the age
have rectified all this: whether they have improved the state of things
the future must decide. I am too old to retrace my steps, and have the
faults, and perhaps the virtues, of my century. There is one thing true,
certain ideas I never will abandon, among which are my opinions about
marriage. All this you think behind the spirit of the age, and perhaps
ridiculous; but I intend to express myself fully, that you may not
expect me ever to alter my opinion about your conduct. For four
centuries, monsieur, there has not been a single _mesalliance_ in my
family. The Dukes of Salluce, the Princes of Maulear, from whom we are
sprung, were never married but with the noblest families of the
world--those of France--that is the only safety for me, that was the
only marriage for you. I was willing to receive as a daughter-in-law
only a French woman, of noble blood--noble as our own. This you say is a
prejudice--so it may be, monsieur, but it is a prejudice I will not lay
aside. I was never a rigorous father to you, and I contemplated using
only one of my paternal rights, that of bringing about a marriage for
you to suit myself. You acted for yourself, monsieur, and must continue
to do so. Adieu! Henceforth the Marquis de Maulear has no father, and
the Prince no son."

The old man arose with cold and haughty dignity, preparing to leave.

"Father, do not leave me thus--for the sake of my mother, whom you
loved, pause."

The Prince walked away.

"For the sake of your father, whom you adored!"

The Prince did not pause.

"Well," said the Marquis, in despair, and just then he saw Aminta at the
end of the alley, "I prefer to abandon the nobility of the Maulears,
which produces such obduracy, for the virtues and talent of a Rovero."

The old man had scarcely heard the last word, than he turned around and
said to his son:

"Rovero! did you say Rovero? the minister of Murat?"

"There is his daughter," said Henri, pointing to Aminta.

The countenance of the Prince lost its icy coldness, and assumed an
expression of deep tenderness. Drawing near to Aminta, with tears in his
eyes, he said, "The daughter of Rovero?" and with increasing agitation,
"Are you the daughter of Rovero?"

Looking at her for a few moments in silence, his countenance assumed an
indefinable expression, and seemed to read in the countenance of the
young girl an infinitude of memories and dreams. Finally, completely
carried away by a feeling he could not control, he folded Aminta in his
arms and clasped her to his bosom.


III.--THE MAN WITH THE MASK.

Paris, that great theatre on which, for fifty years, so much sublime and
common-place republicanism, so many monarchic, imperial, constitutional,
and other dramas had been represented--Paris, about the end of 1818, two
years after the occurrence of the events described in the last chapter,
presented a strange aspect, over which we will cast a retrospective
glance for the purpose of making our story intelligible.

Louis XVIII. reigned perhaps a little more absolutely than the charter
permitted. By the aggregation of power, kings and kingdoms almost always
fall; and this king, who wished to govern with the restrictions on power
which he had himself yielded to France, found himself in endless
controversy, from the errors of his friends, his family, and his
minister. Monsieur[O] was in the opposition, and with him were all the
malcontents of the realm. _Monsieur_ had his creatures, and his
ministers in casû, all ready to consecrate their services to the good of
the country. These were the only men, said the Prince, who could rescue
the restoration from the factions in arms against it. At the head of
this ministry was the Count Jules de Polignac, the favorite of the
ex-comte d'Artois. Next to Polignac came M. de Vitrolles, famous for his
intellect and his devotion to the royal family, M. de Grosbois, and
others, who had made progress in the graces and confidence of the
Prince. The King at that time exhibited a decided favoritism to a
certain statesman of merit and worth, the rapid fortune of whom,
however, had made many persons jealous and had excited much hatred. The
star of M. de Blacus, which till then had been so brilliant, began to
grow pale. From these palace intrigues, from these divisions of
families, arose in public affairs a species of perpetual controversy
which impeded the progress of the ship of state. In the mean time,
parties taking advantage of this discontent, excited every bad passion,
and silently undermined the soil preparing the explosion which
ultimately destroyed this feeble and disunited monarchy. The great
parties were divided and subdivided into many factions opposed to each
other, but, as will be seen hereafter, all striving to overturn the
existing order of things--though in the end each purposed the triumph of
his own cause when a general chase should have ensued. The French
nation, though strong, great and powerful when its parts are united, was
then composed of royalists frankly devoted to the government of the
restoration of ultra royalists, more so even than the King himself--and
who wished the country to retrace its steps to principles, which good
sense, time, healthy reason, and especially the revolutionary tempest,
had most painfully refuted. Next came the Bonapartists, who seeing
themselves disinherited by a peaceful government, and deprived of the
prospects of glory they had deemed their own, regretted sincerely the
man of victory and his triumphs. Next came the liberals, a portion of
whom were sincerely devoted to political progress, for which the country
was not yet prepared--and, finally, the Jacobins, old relics of 1793,
who sought to precipitate France into that abyss of horror, the very
trace of which the wonderful genius of Napoleon had effaced. All these
opinions, advocated by intelligent and capable men, of gifted minds, but
also of turbulent and dangerous spirits, to whom agitation is the
natural element--all these were secretly busy, watching their
opportunity to burst upon the public attention. Paris, the head of the
great French body, was all the time happy as possible, and seemed calm
and flourishing. It was like those men with a smiling face, a calm and
cold icy exterior, but who nurse violent passions and bitter
animosities. The police at that time was under the control of a minister
who was young and active, but who was often led astray; just as
greyhounds, who, when almost overrunning their quarry, catch a glimpse
of other prey. The multiplied and contradictory devices of the factions,
therefore, led the police and its agents into difficulties of which the
criminals always contrived to take advantage. For two years, plot
followed plot, almost uninterruptedly; Bonapartist, liberal,
ultra-royalist plots followed each other; that of Didier was the first.
His object was to confide the Kingly office to a Lieutenant-General, to
the Duke of Orleans. Didier sought for his confederates among the men,
whom a kind of fanaticism yet attached to the exile of Saint-Helena;
among the old soldiers of the valley of the Loire, and that crowd of
imperial agents whom the restoration had stripped of honor and
employment. He promised good titles, orders, to all, and seduced many.
The plot failed from its own impotence, for the police had little to do
with it. Another affair, the consequences of which to those concerned in
it were great, gave increased activity to the police, and diverted it
from the only circumstances which could unfold to it the true enemies of
the government of Louis XVIII. This affair was known as the _Society of
Patriots_ of 1816, and had as its chiefs _Pleigner_, _Carbonneau_, and
_Tolleron_. They intended to ask the Emperor of Russia to grant them a
constitutional King, chosen elsewhere than from the elder branch of the
Bourbons. A man named Schellstein, who had been a kind of enlisting
agent to the conspirators, informed M. Angles, chief of police, of their
plan, and intentions, and by a sentence given July 7, 1816, _Pleigner_,
_Carbonneau_, and _Tolleron_, were sentenced to have their hands cut off
and to be beheaded. Three days after the sentence was executed. Finally,
in 1818, a third conspiracy was pointed out to the notice of the police.
This conspiracy had a more exalted character than the preceding ones,
for it included the ultra-royalists, that is to say the nobles,
generals, peers, and high functionaries of France.

The Morning Chronicle, June 27, 1818, published at London the
following:--"There was a report at Paris, that a conspiracy had been
discovered at Saint Cloud, embracing many of the ultra-royalist party.
The King would abdicate, and be replaced by Monsieur."

The Times, on the 2d July, said--"The plan of the conspiracy is known.
Should the King abdicate, the conspirators have resolved to treat him
like Paul I. The following is the list of ministers:--General Canuel, of
war; M. de Chateaubriand, of foreign affairs; M. Bruges, of the navy; M.
Villele, of the interior; M. de Labourdonnaie, of the police; General
Donadieu, commandant of Paris." All this was announced with an
appearance of truth; for all the persons named belonged to the
opposition to the King and his favorite. When, however, facts were
sought for, and the proof was pointed out, all the edifice crumbled
away, and there remained only a few malcontents, but no rebels were to
be found. The sentence of the Royal Court of Paris, given November 3d
following, declared--"Generals Canuel and Donadieu, MM. de Rieux, de
Songis, de Chapdelaine, de Romilly, and Joannis, are released and
declared innocent." They had been imprisoned forty days. This affair
produced a most painful sensation in France, and the minister of police
was reproached with great imprudence, which made many new enemies to the
government, and did not add to its security. The fact was, the true
criminals had been overlooked; and, like the worms which eat away the
interior of a beautiful fruit without changing its form and color, they
more skilfully and adroitly attacked the very heart of society when it
seemed most secure and safe. The perfidious worm which was eating away
at the heart of France, as it had long done those of the other European
monarchies, was Carbonarism. As we said in our first chapters, the
existence of this power was scarcely suspected, while in secret, by its
ramifications, it ruled Europe.

A man of mind and energy, but whose mild and almost effeminate manners
concealed vigor and perseverance, M. H----, at that time under the
direction of M. Angles, supervised the political police of the kingdom.
M. H---- was always aware of the extent of the operations of the
various factions, and probably was the only man in France really alarmed
at the influence which Carbonarism exerted in France and the neighboring
states. Often he had made communications to the prefect, another
minister, who paid attention to known parties and attached but little
importance to this new foe, which was, however, the most terrible of
all, and proposed to itself the object of destroying, at any risk, and
received into its bosom all the operatives of this work, whatsoever
might be their opinions. M. H---- had no evidence in relation to this
terrible organization, nor did he know where it met. Towards the end of
February, 1819, M. H---- received a letter sealed in black, and with the
impression on the wax of an auger piercing the globe. The strange seal
did not escape his notice. The direction was, "M. H----, for himself
alone, _confidential_." The superior of the political police read the
letter, which was as follows:--

"Monsieur,--A man who can do the state great service wishes to have an
interview with you, and requests that you will grant him a moment's
conversation to-morrow evening at nine-oclock, in your cabinet. He will
be masked. He begs you to permit him to keep his mask until he shall be
satisfied that he is seen by no one else. Should the strangeness of this
request not permit you to accept it, place a lighted taper in your
window opening on the _quai des Orfevres_ and no one will come. The
writer knows that he addresses a man of courage and honor, who never is
terrified by mere forms when he looks for important results. It is also
known that this man, though protected by wise precautions, made
necessary by the grave circumstances in which he is often placed, would
be incapable of taking an advantage of those who come to him frankly and
truly."

M. H---- reflected long on this letter. He hesitated not, because he was
used to confidences made in terms and in manner as strange. But the
conditions of the mask, so contrary to French habit, almost, in spite of
himself, annoyed and troubled him. He, however, began to be inspired
with the confidence which the man evidently felt himself. He therefore
decided to receive him, and gave orders, that should the masked man
present himself he should be admitted into his cabinet. M. H----only
took a few measures of prudence, and after having examined the locks and
charges of his pistols, which he always wore, and assured himself that
the sound of a bell on his table would be heard at once by the
attendants, waited attentively for the hour of the interview. The clock
of the Palais Royal struck nine, when he was told that a masked man
wished to speak to him. A few minutes after the visitor was introduced.
He was tall and wrapped in a brown cloak, which he threw off when he had
reached the room. He wore a costume half way between a tradesman's and
prosperous workman's.

"What do you wish, Monsieur?" asked M. H----, who was sitting in his
chair.

Without replying, the stranger, who was standing, pointed to two glass
doors on each side of one through which he had entered, behind which
were full silk curtains. M. H----understood him, and after a moment's
hesitation, decided, and clapped his hands thrice. This was probably a
signal well understood, for soon after a slight noise was heard in each
of the rooms, and the silk curtains were slightly agitated. Then rising,
M. H---- opened the two doors and shut two external ones, which
doubtless communicated with two other rooms.

"Thank you, sir," said the mask, "you will not regret your confidence."

These words were pronounced with a decidedly foreign air. The man took
off his mask, and M. H---- examined his features. His physiognomy was
that of the south; his expression dark, and his long black hair hung
over his face, and rested on his shoulders. The eyes of this man were
sad and deep; and glittering beneath his dark brows, added to the
ferocity of his expression. He was silent for some time, and then said,
in a calm voice, to the chief of police: "I come, Monsieur, to propose a
contract to you, which, when you have heard it, you can either accept or
reject. An immense volcano undermines Paris; a conspiracy, or rather an
immense association is about to be formed. They are not isolated
enemies, scattered in small numbers, but a vast family of men, here and
every where, in every man's house, and perhaps in the very bureau of the
police. Among them are millions of iron-hearted and iron-nerved men,
among whom are the mechanic, the day laborer, soldiers of every arm, the
financier, the advocate, artist, the scholar, and the priest--every rank
and condition is represented. At their head are nobles, lords, and
princes; and they wish to accomplish in France what they have already
done in the rest of Europe. First, they seek to abolish royalty, and to
bestow on the people free and unlimited liberty. Their secret assemblies
are called _Vente_. The association is called _Carbonarism_, and its
members _Carbonari_."

M. H---- sprang up from his chair. Of the plot which he had been so
anxious to discover, and of which he had but a vague knowledge, he was
now at last to obtain a clue. In a tone exhibiting the most lively
curiosity, he bade the man go on. The mask took a seat; he felt that
henceforth he might treat with M. H---- as an equal.

"I am," said he, with a smile full of venom, "but an unworthy member of
this important society, and come to treat with you, therefore, not in my
own name--"

"In the name of whom, then, do you come?"

"There is," said the mask, "a man in Paris of high rank, of noble birth,
and of great fortune, who, by means of his position and connections,
which I cannot reveal, knows, and henceforth will know, all the secrets,
all the plans of the Carbonari, from the obscure acts of the humblest
of the brothers, to the orders given to the _Vente_ by the supreme
chiefs--"

"And this man is willing to surrender his infamous associates to us?"
said M. H----.

"He will; but in consideration of this immense sacrifice, he demands
certain things which I am charged to communicate to you."

"Tell me," said M. H----, "what he asks."

"We will talk of that hereafter. I, however, propose to you an honest
bargain, and you will not be called on to pay the price until the
service shall have been performed. I therefore come to ask you not for a
reward, but for one word."

"A word?"

"A word, a promise, and an oath."

"If it be compatible with my duties."

"Certainly!" said the stranger. "We conspirators are honest people
enough, but we are prudent, and used to secrecy. We never make
revelations without exacting a double security."

"That of honor!"

"And displaying the dagger as the certain reward of treachery."

"Stop, sir!" said M. H----, rising, and evidently enraged at the daring
of the stranger. "You forget where you are; no one but myself makes
threats here; assume, therefore, another tone; for sorry as I should be
not to avail myself of your offers, I must, if you persist, terminate
our interview at once. But," continued he, "what is required of me?"

"I have told you--an oath. Here it is. You will swear on this," and he
took a crucifix from his bosom, "that neither in person, nor otherwise,
will you ever attempt to discover the person in behalf of whom I treat.
You will swear that when you have been informed of the facts which I
shall point out to you, when you shall have received proof of the
culpability of certain men, you will cause them to be arrested and give
them no clue to, and make no revelation of, the means by which you
acquired your information."

"But how will the man who is to furnish this information treat with us?"

"Through me alone," said the stranger, "and I will allow you to be
ignorant of nothing. In a few words--I will be his interpreter--the soul
of his body, the action of his thought. Here," continued he, again
presenting the crucifix to M. H----," an oath for such services is not
too much to ask. You do not often get information at so cheap a rate.
The form of the oath will doubtless appear strange to you, but I am a
native of a land where oaths are taken on the cross alone."

"So be it," said M. H----, who, as he listened to the man, reflected on
the small importance of the conditions imposed on him, which did not
demand that he should act against the _Vente_ or associations, until
there was no doubt of their guilt. "So be it; I accept. I swear that I
will never seek to ascertain of whom you are the agent, whether in
person or through others." He placed his hand on the crucifix.

"_Rely then on him--rely on me_," said the stranger.

"Why do you not speak now?" said M. H----.

"_Because it is necessary to give the fruit time to ripen before we
gather it_," said the mysterious stranger; and bowing to M. H----, he
left.

"Well," said the chief of the political police, when he was alone, "the
bargain I have made is not a rare one. Informers always have scruples at
first, especially when they are men of rank;--when those of the man of
whom the agent speaks are dissipated, or when by his wants and vices he
is forced to draw directly on our chest, his shame will pass away, and
his name will be enrolled on the list of our spies like those of M. X.,
the Baron de W----, the Advocate V----, the Ex-consul R----, and the
Countess of Fu. This man is, then, taken in three words, what we call a
SPY IN SOCIETY."


IV.--THE AMBASSADRESS.

On the twentieth of June, 1818, six months before the occurrence of the
scene we have described in the preceding chapter, the greatest
excitement was exhibited in a magnificent hotel in the Faubourg
Saint-Honoré. The principal entrance of this hotel, or the Faubourg, was
occupied by a crowd of workmen, who were busy in arranging a multitude
of flower vases, from the court-gate to the door of the hotel.
Upholsterers and florists crowded the vestibule, the stairway, and the
antechambers with their flowers and carpets. The interior of the rooms
on the ground floor presented a scene of a different kind of disorder. A
pell-mell--a crowd of men and women were tacking down and sowing rich
and sumptuous stuffs on the floors. The rooms of the lower floor of the
hotel opened on one of the gardens surrounding the _Champs-Elysées_
towards the Faubourg St. Honoré. An immense ball-room was constructed in
the garden. This ball-room was united to the house by richly dressed
doors, cut into the windows, and, with the ground floor, formed one
immense suite. The garden at this period of the year contributed in no
small degree to the pleasures of the festival. The curtains at the doors
of this hall could at any time be lifted up so as to permit access to
this oasis of verdure. One might have thought a magic ring had
transported to this corner of Paris, all the riches of the vegetation of
southern climes, and might have, in imagination, strayed beneath the
jasmin bowers, amid the roses and orange-groves of Italy, so delicious
was the perfume which filled this garden. Its peculiar physiognomy and
design, its form, manner, and even the statues, the majority of which
were _chef-d'-oeuvres_ of Italian art, all proved some foreign taste
had presided over its construction, and that this taste had been the
passion of some elegant and distinguished man.

But now this paradise had passed into the possession of a charming woman
and admirable artiste. This hotel belonged to the beautiful _Felina_,
the Italian queen of song, who had deigned to descend from a throne to
be the Duchess of Palma. The lofty brow which had borne so proudly the
diadem of Semiramis and Junia, wore now a duchess's coronet. This was a
great self-deprecation; for Europe contained a thousand duchesses, and
but one _Felina_. Worse still, many duchesses would not recognize La
Felina as one of the number. She was a duchess by chance; a duchess not
by the grace of God, but by the grace of talent and beauty. Observe,
too, that this version was the most favorable, the most amiable and
polite. It was the one adopted by the intelligent, philosophic and
sensible duchesses of the empire. The true duchesses, those of other
days, who could not understand how any one could wear a ducal coronet
without having at least three centuries of nobility, made use of all the
grape of their artillery to annihilate the _singing woman_. It was
whispered, but loudly enough to be heard by half a dozen persons, that
La Felina, arming herself with that rigidity she kept for the Duke of
Palma alone, displaying all her charms, and envying the title and
fortune of the noble Neapolitan, had refused to surrender her heart
without her hand;--that the poor Duke, entwined in the nets of this
modern Circe, wearied of the many love-scrapes which he had undergone,
made up his mind, as he could not become a lover, to become a husband.
This delightful theme was so decorated by the rich imaginations of the
ladies of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, that it could scarcely be
recognized beneath the inlaying of the rich anecdotes to which it gave
occasion; but which lacked only three essentials of merit--good sense,
justice, and truth. As far as relates to good sense, we will say that
the Duchess of Palma was far richer than her husband. Her talent had
long procured her a brilliant income; and to renounce the stage, at the
height of her reputation and glory, when every note she uttered was
worth a doubloon, was to reject vast wealth, the source of which was her
voice and talent. Good sense would not justify the reproach of cupidity;
truth and justice would equally have rejected the charge.

_La Felina_, far from wishing to lead the Duke astray--far from wishing,
as was said, to make her fortune by marrying him, had long rejected the
hand of the Neapolitan minister of police when the most powerful reasons
would have induced her to accept it. She married the Duke only because
of the deep and irrepressible passion which animated her heart for the
Count Monte-Leone. She knew the Count loved Aminta; she knew that, when
at liberty, he would marry the sister of Taddeo. Anxious to contend with
herself by creating new weapons to oppose the passion which devoured
her, anxious to build up a new barrier between the Count and herself,
and to prepare a defence for her own heart, she accepted the hand of the
Duke of Palma as a rampart of duty, and, as it were, forcibly to leave a
profession, the triumphs of which disgusted and offended her because she
regretted having ever experienced them. These were the reasons or
reasonings which led La Felina to act as she did. We shall see, at a
later period, that she achieved her purpose.

The Duke of Palma having secretly married _La Felina_ in the town of
Ferentino, the day Monte-Leone recognized him, took his beautiful wife
to a villa he possessed on the _lago di Como_, and after sojourning
there a few days, went to Naples and forced the King to accept his
resignation as minister of police. The Duke was dissatisfied with
Naples, for no one would forgive him for marrying the Prima-Donna. The
two then came to Paris after a brief mission, during which the Duke had
been obliged to leave her alone at the _lago di Como_. There they
purchased the hotel of which we have spoken, and prepared to receive the
court, and exhibit all the aristocratic luxury with which the Duke of
Palma was so familiar. One circumstance, however, which had been
entirely unforeseen, wrecked all their hopes. The best society of Paris,
which is so lenient to some eccentricities, yet so rigid in its exaction
of obedience to certain prejudices--the society to which, from rank and
position, the Duke of Palma belonged, was rebellious. Among the nobles
of the restoration there were a few exceptions, and though the persons
who ventured to the Duke's were perfectly well received--though they
praised in the highest degree the graces and exquisite _haut-ton_ of the
Duchess, their example was not followed, and the hotel remained silent
and empty. The Duke and Duchess lived alone, buried in a magnificent
tomb. The cause of this neglect of the invitations of the ex-minister
may be easily divined. The Duke had married La Felina, the singer, about
whom there had been, and yet were, so many reports. The beautiful
artiste was much wounded by this general neglect, not because she
regretted the world and its pleasures, but on account of other
impressions which had haunted her since she had lived alone at Como. The
affront, however, recoiled on her husband, and her deep, resolute soul
bitterly resented it. La Felina was an Italian, and those of that nation
who receive affronts avenge them. She was not long at a loss. Her
vengeance, however, could not easily be attained, for she had to do with
a rich and powerful society, which had, as it were, formed a coalition
to insult a woman, by rejecting her with disdain and contempt.

The renown of _La Felina_ as a singer had long excited the curiosity of
Paris. Her admirable voice, her dramatic talent, her wonderful beauty,
made the great artiste to be envied in every theatre in Europe. By a
strange caprice, or an exaggerated distrust of her powers, the great
artiste had always refused to sing in the capital, though well aware
that there alone great artistic talent is baptized. Amazed at the
national glory, she had never asked this sacrifice of French
_cognoscenti_. Great, therefore, was the emotion of the various
drawing-rooms, when it was said that a great concert would be given by
the Duke of Palma, and that his Duchess La Felina would sing. The
concert was for the benefit of some interesting charity; and humanity
was a pretext to the high Parisian society not to visit La Felina, but
to perform a great duty. How though could invitations be had? There was
great difficulty, for the invitations were most limited in number. It is
always the case in Paris, that as obstacles increase, the desire to
overcome them also is multiplied. This was exemplified in the case of
the concert. It was, however, strange that the very hotels where the
ducal _artiste_ had been worst treated, where her advances had been
worst received, were those to which the invitations came first. Here and
there some affronts given by the noble Italians who were the intimate
friends of the Duke of Palma, but they were all submitted to, so anxious
was the world to enjoy the long-desired but unexpected pleasure of
hearing La Felina.

This took place many months before the entertainments, the preparations
for which we described at the commencement of this chapter. On the day
appointed for the concert, a long file of carriages filled up the whole
Faubourg St. Honoré, and stopped at the door of the hotel of the Duke of
Palma. The Duchess sat in her most remote drawing-room, dressed with
extreme simplicity, beautiful without adornment, and waited for the
guests, whom an usher at the door of the first drawing-room announced.
As each one saluted her, she arose, and thanked them for their visit.
This reception, far from gratifying the majority of her guests, seemed
to offend them. They fancied they had met on neutral ground, in a room
appropriated to charity, and not to wait on a lady who did the honors of
her own house. The latter, however, was the case. Multiplying her cares
for and attention to her guests, appearing to notice neither the cold
politeness of the one nor the rudeness of the other, the Duchess
increased her amiability and politeness to all who approached her. The
ice was broken. The men could not resist her charms, and many women
followed their example. The dazzling luxury of the hotel, the admirable
pictures, the majestic beauty of the Duchess, produced such an effect on
this society, composed of the most illustrious persons of Paris, and of
all who were famous at the epoch, that the success of La Felina was
complete. The great feature of the entertainment was impatiently waited
for. The concert which the Duchess had announced did not begin, and it
was growing late. The artistes, it was said, had not yet come, and all
were as impatient as possible, when an excellent orchestra was heard. A
few young people, forgetting why they had come, and utterly reckless of
the opposition they would give rise to, hurried to the great ball-room,
and whiled away the time _before the concert_ in dancing.

About midnight a report was circulated among the guests that the Duchess
was fatigued at the reception of so many persons, and the _habitues_
said that her efforts to make her guests happy had been so great that
she would not sing, and the entertainment would conclude with a ball.
Nothing could equal the vexation and anger which appeared on certain
faces, and which were augmented by the fact that La Felina made no
apology, but in the kindest terms thanked them for the pleasure she had
received from them, and which she feared she could not enjoy again for a
long time, her health demanding the most complete solitude. Thus Felina
turned a concert into a ball, and forced all Paris to visit her.

The next day the journals said: "Yesterday the Duke and Duchess of Palma
gave the most magnificent entertainment of the year. The _élite_ of the
_faubourg_ Saint-Germain and the capital were assembled, and all retired
delighted with the reception extended to them by the illustrious
strangers. The Duke sent ten thousand francs to the poor of his
arrondissement, to make up a subscription which could not otherwise be
completed."

A few months after, the Duke was appointed ambassador of Naples to the
court of France, and in honor of his sovereign's birthday prepared the
magnificent entertainment which created such disorder in the _faubourg_
St. Honoré. The new position of the Duke of Palma, his diplomatic
character, and the rumor of the beauty and elegance of the Duchess had
silenced all complaints, and all now were anxious to be received at the
Neapolitan Embassy.

A circumstance, however, of which the world was entirely ignorant, had
within a few months made an altogether different woman of the Duchess,
who had previously been gay and happy. An air of sadness reigned over
her features, and her eyes assumed not unfrequently a wild glare, which
could be removed only by tears. Some unknown sorrow had made great
inroads even upon her beauty. Always kind and considerate to the Duke
and those who surrounded her, she yet seemed to fulfil her requisitions
of duty alone in complying with the observances of her rank. She seemed
anxious to seclude herself from the world, and to seek to drown her
grief in the solitude she had formerly avoided. Whether sorrow had
assumed too deep an empire over her heart, or from some other cause, all
were struck at the change so suddenly worked in her moral organization
and in her beauty. Far, however, from making any opposition to this
splendid entertainment, or exhibiting any indifference to its
preparations, all were surprised to see the Duchess devote herself to it
so fully. Nothing escaped her care; her refined taste neglected nothing
which could contribute to the brilliancy of the entertainment. The Duke,
delighted at the apparent revival of the Duchess's taste for the
pleasures of the world, which she had long disdained, aided her with
all his power, and spared no expense to gratify her. The invitations
were numerous, and on this occasion there were no refusals; for the most
noble persons were anxious to be entertained by the Neapolitan minister.
The Duke hesitated only in relation to one of the many persons who were
to be invited. This person was the Count Monte-Leone. The secretary who
had been directed to prepare the list of persons to be invited had
according to custom put down his name among the noble and distinguished
Neapolitans who had called at the embassy of their country in Paris. The
Duchess saw the list, and said nothing. The Duke hesitated for a long
time--not that he had the least suspicion of the Duchess's sentiments
towards Monte-Leone: he had attributed the presence of La Felina at the
etruscan house to the consequence of an abortive masked-ball pleasantry.
Besides, at the time of the arrest there were three other men in the
house, and the ex-minister had almost forgotten the affair. The Count,
in spite of his acquittal, was known to be an enemy of the government,
and he doubted if it was proper to receive him at the embassy. One
consideration alone prevented the Duke from erasing his name from the
list--it was that the Count would not wish to appear at the embassy, and
the Duke would thus be spared the necessity of showing any rudeness to
him. The day came at last. The interior of the hotel was really
fairy-like, and the rooms on the ground floor joined with the garden
ball-room presented one of those magical pictures of which poets dream,
but which men rarely see. The arts, luxury, comfort, opulence, and
taste, all were united to produce a spectacle, which, lighted by a
thousand lamps, spoke both to the mind and senses, and recalled one of
those splendid palaces of _The Thousand and One Nights_, of which we
have read, but which none will see.

On that day the Duchess seemed to have regained all her dazzling beauty.
An observer might however have asked if the animation of this lady was
not derived from a kind of feverish agitation, evident in the brilliancy
of her eyes and deep red of her lips, rather than from expectation of
pleasure or joy at the realization of the plans she had marked out for
herself. Nine o'clock struck when the first guests were introduced. A
crowd soon followed them, and the most distinguished names were heard in
the saloons. The Duke d'Harcourt! the Vicompte and Mlle. Marie
d'Harcourt! the Prince de Maulear! the Marquis and Marquise de Maulear!
Signor Taddeo Rovero! _Il Conte_ MONTE-LEONE!

       *       *       *       *       *

CORREGIO, the illustrious painter, is said to have been born and bred,
and to have lived and died in extreme poverty. It is stated that he came
to his death at the early age of forty, from the fatigue of carrying
home a load of halfpence paid for one of his immortal works.

FOOTNOTES:

[M] Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1850, by Stringer
& Townsend, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United
States for the Southern District of New-York.

[N] As the conversations in the rest of this book are supposed to be
sometimes in French and sometimes in English, the translator will render
the terms of courtesy now by _signor, signora_, and _signorina_, and
again by _monsieur_, _madame_, and _mademoiselle_.

[O] The Comte d'Artois, afterwards Charles X.


TRANSFORMATION.

BY THE LATE MRS. SHELLEY.

    Forthwith this frame of mine was wrench'd
      With a woful agony,
    Which forced me to begin my tale,
      And then it set me free.

    Since then, at an uncertain hour,
      That agony returns;
    And till my ghastly tale is told
      This heart within me burns.

                  COLERIDGE'S ANCIENT MARINER.


I have heard it said, that, when any strange, supernatural, and
necromantic adventure has occurred to a human being, that being, however
desirous he may be to conceal the same, feels at certain periods torn
up, as it were, by an intellectual earthquake, and is forced to bare the
inner depths of his spirit to another. I am a witness of the truth of
this. I have dearly sworn to myself never to reveal to human ears the
horrors to which I once, in excess of fiendly pride, delivered myself
over. The holy man who heard my confession, and reconciled me to the
church, is dead. None knows that once--

Why should it not be thus? Why tell a tale of impious tempting of
Providence, and soul-subduing humiliation? Why? answer me, ye who are
wise in the secrets of human nature! I only know that so it is; and in
spite of strong resolves--of a pride that too much masters me--of shame,
and even of fear, so to render myself odious to my species--I must
speak.

Genoa! my birthplace--proud city! looking upon the blue waves of the
Mediterranean sea--dost thou remember me in my boyhood, when thy cliffs
and promontories, thy bright sky and gay vineyards, were my world? Happy
time! when to the young heart the narrow-bounded universe, which leaves,
by its very limitation, free scope to the imagination, enchains our
physical energies, and, sole period in our lives, innocence and
enjoyment are united. Yet, who can look back to childhood, and not
remember its sorrows and its harrowing fears? I was born with the most
imperious, haughty, tameless spirit, with which ever mortal was gifted.
I quailed before my father only; and he, generous and noble, but
capricious and tyrannical, at once fostered and checked the wild
impetuosity of my character, making obedience necessary, but inspiring
no respect for the motives which guided his commands. To be a man, free,
independent; or, in better words, insolent and domineering, was the hope
and prayer of my rebel heart.

My father had one friend, a wealthy Genoese noble, who, in a political
tumult, was suddenly sentenced to banishment, and his property
confiscated. The Marchese Torella went into exile alone. Like my father,
he was a widower: he had one child, the almost infant Juliet, who was
left under my father's guardianship. I should certainly have been an
unkind master to the lovely girl, but that I was forced by my position
to become her protector. A variety of childish incidents all tended to
one point,--to make Juliet see in me a rock of refuge; I in her, one,
who must perish through the soft sensibility of her nature too rudely
visited, but for my guardian care. We grew up together. The opening rose
in May was not more sweet than this dear girl. An irradiation of beauty
was spread over her face. Her form, her step, her voice--my heart weeps
even now, to think of all of relying, gentle, loving, and pure, that was
enshrined in that celestial tenement. When I was eleven and Juliet eight
years of age, a cousin of mine, much older than either--he seemed to us
a man--took great notice of my playmate; he called her his bride, and
asked her to marry him. She refused, and he insisted, drawing her
unwillingly towards him. With the countenance and emotions of a maniac I
threw myself on him--I strove to draw his sword--I clung to his neck
with the ferocious resolve to strangle him: he was obliged to call for
assistance to disengage himself from me. On that night I led Juliet to
the chapel of our house: I made her touch the sacred relics--I harrowed
her child's heart, and profaned her child's lips with an oath, that she
would be mine, and mine only.

Well, those days passed away. Torella returned in a few years, and
became wealthier and more prosperous than ever. When I was seventeen, my
father died; he had been magnificent to prodigality; Torella rejoiced
that my minority would afford an opportunity for repairing my fortunes.
Juliet and I had been affianced beside my father's deathbed--Torella was
to be a second parent to me.

I desired to see the world, and I was indulged. I went to Florence, to
Rome, to Naples; thence I passed to Toulon, and at length reached what
had long been the bourne of my wishes, Paris. There was wild work in
Paris then. The poor king, Charles the Sixth, now sane, now mad, now a
monarch, now an abject slave, was the very mockery of humanity. The
queen, the dauphin, the Duke of Burgundy, alternately friends and
foes--now meeting in prodigal feasts, now shedding blood in
rivalry--were blind to the miserable state of their country, and the
dangers that impended over it, and gave themselves wholly up to
dissolute enjoyment or savage strife. My character still followed me. I
was arrogant and self-willed; I loved display, and above all, I threw
all control far from me. Who could control me in Paris? My young friends
were eager to foster passions which furnished them with pleasures. I was
deemed handsome--I was master of every knightly accomplishment. I was
disconnected with any political party. I grew a favorite with all: my
presumption and arrogance was pardoned in one so young; I became a
spoiled child. Who could control me? not letters and advice of
Torella--only strong necessity visiting me in the abhorred shape of an
empty purse. But there were means to refill this void. Acre after acre,
estate after estate, I sold. My dress, my jewels, my horses and their
caparisons, were almost unrivalled in gorgeous Paris, while the lands of
my inheritance passed into possession of others.

The Duke of Orleans was waylaid and murdered by the Duke of Burgundy.
Fear and terror possessed all Paris. The dauphin and the queen shut
themselves up; every pleasure was suspended. I grew weary of this state
of things, and my heart yearned for my boyhood's haunts. I was nearly a
beggar, yet still I would go there, claim my bride, and rebuild my
fortunes. A few happy ventures as a merchant would make me rich again.
Nevertheless, I would not return in humble guise. My last act was to
dispose of my remaining estate near Albaro for half its worth, for ready
money. Then I despatched all kinds of artificers, arras, furniture of
regal splendor, to fit up the last relic of my inheritance, my palace in
Genoa. I lingered a little longer yet, ashamed at the part of the
prodigal returned, which I feared I should play. I sent my horses. One
matchless Spanish jennet I despatched to my promised bride; its
caparisons flamed with jewels and cloth of gold. In every part I caused
to be entwined the initials of Juliet and her Guido. My present found
favor in hers and in her father's eyes.

Still, to return a proclaimed spendthrift, the mark of impertinent
wonder, perhaps of scorn, and to encounter singly the reproaches or
taunts of my fellow-citizens, was no alluring prospect. As a shield
between me and censure, I invited some few of the most reckless of my
comrades to accompany me; thus I went armed against the world, hiding a
rankling feeling, half fear and half penitence, by bravado and an
insolent display of satisfied vanity.

I arrived in Genoa. I trod the pavement of my ancestral palace. My proud
step was no interpreter of my heart, for I deeply felt that, though
surrounded by every luxury, I was a beggar. The first step I took in
claiming Juliet must widely declare me such. I read contempt or pity in
the looks of all. I fancied, so apt is conscience to imagine what it
deserves, that rich and poor, young and old, all regarded me with
derision. Torella came not near me. No wonder that my second father
should expect a son's deference from me in waiting first on him. But,
galled and stung by a sense of my follies and demerit, I strove to throw
the blame on others. We kept nightly orgies in Palazzo Carega. To
sleepless, riotous nights, followed listless, supine mornings. At the
Ave Maria we showed our dainty persons in the streets, scoffing at the
sober citizens, casting insolent glances on the shrinking women. Juliet
was not among them--no, no; if she had been there, shame would have
driven me away, if love had not brought me to her feet.

I grew tired of this. Suddenly I paid the Marchese a visit. He was at
his villa, one among the many which deck the suburb of San Pietro
d'Arena. It was the month of May--a month of May in that garden of the
world--the blossoms of the fruit-trees were fading among thick, green
foliage; the vines were shooting forth; the ground strewed with the
fallen olive blooms; the firefly was in the myrtle hedge; heaven and
earth wore a mantle of surpassing beauty. Torella welcomed me kindly,
though seriously; and even his shade of displeasure soon wore away. Some
resemblance to my father--some look and tone of youthful ingenuousness,
lurking still in spite of my misdeeds, softened the good old man's
heart. He sent for his daughter, he presented me to her as her
betrothed. The chamber became hallowed by a holy light as she entered.
Hers was that cherub look, those large, soft eyes, full dimpled cheeks,
and mouth of infantine sweetness, that expresses the rare union of
happiness and love. Admiration first possessed me; she is mine! was the
second proud emotion, and my lips curled with haughty triumph. I had not
been the _enfant gâté_ of the beauties of France not to have learnt the
art of pleasing the soft heart of woman. If towards men I was
overbearing, the deference I paid to them was the more in contrast. I
commenced my courtship by the display of a thousand gallantries to
Juliet, who, vowed to me from infancy, had never admitted the devotion
of others; and who, though accustomed to expressions of admiration, was
uninitiated in the language of lovers.

For a few days all went well. Torella never alluded to my extravagance;
he treated me as a favorite son. But the time came, as we discussed the
preliminaries to my union with his daughter, when this fair face of
things should be overcast. A contract had been drawn up in my father's
lifetime. I had rendered this, in fact, void, by having squandered the
whole of the wealth which was to have been shared by Juliet and myself.
Torella, in consequence, chose to consider this bond as cancelled, and
proposed another, in which, though the wealth he bestowed was
immeasurably increased, there were so many restrictions as to the mode
of spending it, that I, who saw independence only in free career being
given to my own imperious will, taunted him as taking advantage of my
situation, and refused utterly to subscribe to his conditions. The old
man mildly strove to recall me to reason. Roused pride became the tyrant
of my thought: I listened with indignation--I repelled him with disdain.

"Juliet, thou art mine! Did we not interchange vows in our innocent
childhood? are we not one in the sight of God? and shall thy
cold-hearted, cold-blooded father divide us? Be generous, my love, be
just; take not away a gift, last treasure of thy Guido--retract not thy
vows--let us defy the world, and setting at naught the calculations of
age, find in our mutual affection a refuge from every ill!"

Fiend I must have been, with such sophistry to endeavor to poison that
sanctuary of holy thought and tender love. Juliet shrank from me
affrighted. Her father was the best and kindest of men, and she strove
to show me how, in obeying him, every good would follow. He would
receive my tardy submission with warm affection, and generous pardon
would follow my repentance. Profitless words for a young and gentle
daughter to use to a man accustomed to make his will law, and to feel in
his own heart a despot so terrible and stern, that he could yield
obedience to nought save his own imperious desires! My resentment grew
with resistance; my wild companions were ready to add fuel to the flame.
We laid a plan to carry off Juliet. At first it appeared to be crowned
with success. Midway, on our return, we were overtaken by the agonized
father and his attendants. A conflict ensued. Before the city guard came
to decide the victory in favor of our antagonists, two of Torella's
servitors were dangerously wounded.

This portion of my history weighs most heavily with me. Changed man as I
am, I abhor myself in the recollection. May none who hear this tale ever
have felt as I. A horse driven to fury by a rider armed with barbed
spurs, was not more a slave than I to the violent tyranny of my temper.
A fiend possessed my soul, irritating it to madness. I felt the voice of
conscience within me; but if I yielded to it for a brief interval, it
was only to be a moment after torn, as by a whirlwind, away--borne along
on the stream of desperate rage--the plaything of the storms engendered
by pride. I was imprisoned, and, at the instance of Torella, set free.
Again I returned to carry off both him and his child to France; which
hapless country, then preyed on by freebooters and gangs of lawless
soldiery, offered a grateful refuge to a criminal like me. Our plots
were discovered. I was sentenced to banishment; and as my debts were
already enormous, my remaining property was put in the hands of
commissioners for their payment. Torella again offered his mediation,
requiring only my promise not to renew my abortive attempts on himself
and his daughter. I spurned his offers, and fancied that I triumphed
when I was thrust out from Genoa, a solitary and penniless exile. My
companions were gone: they had been dismissed the city some weeks
before, and were already in France. I was alone--friendless; with nor
sword at my side, nor ducat in my purse.

I wandered along the sea-shore, a whirlwind of passion possessing and
tearing my soul. It was as if a live coal had been set burning in my
breast. At first I meditated on what _I should do_. I would join a band
of freebooters. Revenge!--the word seemed balm to me:--I hugged
it--caressed it--till, like a serpent, it stung me. Then again I would
abjure and despise Genoa, that little corner of the world. I would
return to Paris, where so many of my friends swarmed; where my services
would be eagerly accepted; where I would carve out fortune with my
sword, and might, through success, make my paltry birthplace, and the
false Torella, rue the day when they drove me, a new Coriolanus, from
her walls. I would return to Paris--thus, on foot--a beggar--and present
myself in my poverty to those I had formerly entertained sumptuously.
There was gall in the mere thought of it.

The reality of things began to dawn upon my mind, bringing despair in
its train. For several months I had been a prisoner: the evils of my
dungeon had whipped my soul to madness, but they had subdued my
corporeal frame. I was weak and wan. Torella had used a thousand
artifices to administer to my comfort; I had detected and scorned them
all--and I reaped the harvest of my obduracy. What was to be
done?--Should I crouch before my foe, and sue for forgiveness?--Die
rather ten thousand deaths!--Never should they obtain that victory!
Hate--I swore eternal hate! Hate from whom?--to whom?--From a wandering
outcast--to a mighty noble. I and my feelings were nothing to them:
already had they forgotten one so unworthy. And Juliet!--her angel-face
and sylph-like form gleamed among the clouds of my despair with vain
beauty; for I had lost her--the glory and flower of the world! Another
will call her his!--that smile of paradise will bless another!

Even now my heart fails within me when I recur to this rout of
grim-visaged ideas. Now subdued almost to tears, now raving in my agony,
still I wandered along the rocky shore, which grew at each step wilder
and more desolate. Hanging rocks and hoar precipices overlooked the
tideless ocean; black caverns yawned; and for ever, among the sea-worn
recesses, murmured and dashed the unfruitful waters. Now my way was
almost barred by an abrupt promontory, now rendered nearly impracticable
by fragments fallen from the cliff. Evening was at hand, when, seaward,
arose, as if on the waving of a wizard's wand, a murky web of clouds,
blotting the late azure sky, and darkening and disturbing the till now
placid deep. The clouds had strange fantastic shapes; and they changed,
and mingled, and seemed to be driven about by a mighty spell. The waves
raised their white crests; the thunder first muttered, then roared from
across the waste of waters, which took a deep purple dye, flecked with
foam. The spot where I stood, looked, on one side, to the wide-spread
ocean; on the other, it was barred by a rugged promontory. Round this
cape suddenly came, driven by the wind, a vessel. In vain the mariners
tried to force a path for her to the open sea--the gale drove her on the
rocks. It will perish!--all on board will perish!--would I were among
them! And to my young heart the idea of death came for the first time
blended with that of joy. It was an awful sight to behold that vessel
struggling with her fate. Hardly could I discern the sailors, but I
heard them. It was soon all over!--A rock, just covered by the tossing
waves, and so unperceived, lay in wait for its prey. A crash of thunder
broke over my head at the moment that, with a frightful shock, the skiff
dashed upon her unseen enemy. In a brief space of time she went to
pieces. There I stood in safety; and there were my fellow-creatures,
battling, now hopelessly, with annihilation. Methought I saw them
struggling--too truly did I hear their shrieks, conquering the barking
surges in their shrill agony. The dark breakers threw hither and thither
the fragments of the wreck; soon it disappeared. I had been fascinated
to gaze till the end: at last I sank on my knees--I covered my face with
my hands: I again looked up; something was floating on the billows
towards the shore. It neared and neared. Was that a human form?--it grew
more distinct; and at last a mighty wave, lifting the whole freight,
lodged it upon a rock. A human being bestriding a sea-chest!--A human
being!--Yet was it one? Surely never such had existed before--a
misshapen dwarf, with squinting eyes, distorted features, and body
deformed, till it became a horror to behold. My blood, lately warming
towards a fellow-being so snatched from a watery tomb, froze in my
heart. The dwarf got off his chest; he tossed his straight, straggling
hair from his odious visage.

"By St. Beelzebub!" he exclaimed, "I have been well bested." He looked
round, and saw me, "Oh, by the fiend! here is another ally of the mighty
one. To what saint did you offer prayers, friend--if not to mine? Yet I
remember you not on board."

I shrank from the monster and his blasphemy. Again he questioned me, and
I muttered some inaudible reply. He continued:----

"Your voice is drowned by this dissonant roar. What a noise the big
ocean makes! Schoolboys bursting from their prison are not louder than
these waves set free to play. They disturb me. I will no more of their
ill-timed brawling.--Silence, hoary One!--Winds, avaunt!--to your
homes!--Clouds, fly to the antipodes, and leave our heaven clear!"

As he spoke, he stretched out his two long lank arms, that looked like
spiders' claws, and seemed to embrace with them the expanse before him.
Was it a miracle? The clouds became broken, and fled; the azure sky
first peeped out, and then was spread a calm field of blue above us; the
stormy gale was exchanged to the softly breathing west; the sea grew
calm; the waves dwindled to riplets.

"I like obedience even in these stupid elements," said the dwarf, "How
much more in the tameless mind of man! It was a well got up storm, you
must allow--and all of my own making."

It was tempting Providence to interchange talk with this magician. But
_Power_, in all its shapes, is venerable to man. Awe, curiosity, a
clinging fascination, drew me towards him.

"Come, don't be frightened, friend," said the wretch: "I am good-humored
when pleased; and something does please me in your well-proportioned
body and handsome face, though you look a little woe-begone. You have
suffered a land--I, a sea wreck. Perhaps I can allay the tempest of your
fortunes as I did my own. Shall we be friends?"--And he held out his
hand; I could not touch it. "Well, then, companions--that will do as
well. And now, while I rest after the buffeting I underwent just now,
tell me why, young and gallant as you seem, you wander thus alone and
downcast on this wild sea-shore."

The voice of the wretch was screeching and horrid, and his contortions
as he spoke were frightful to behold. Yet he did gain a kind of
influence over me, which I could not master, and I told him my tale.
When it was ended, he laughed long and loud; the rocks echoed back the
sound; hell seemed yelling around me.

"Oh, thou cousin of Lucifer!" said he; "so thou too hast fallen through
thy pride; and, though bright as the son of Morning, thou art ready to
give up thy good looks, thy bride, and thy well-being, rather than
submit thee to the tyranny of good. I honor thy choice, by my soul! So
thou hast fled, and yield the day; and mean to starve on these rocks,
and to let the birds peck out thy dead eyes, while thy enemy and thy
betrothed rejoice in thy ruin. Thy pride is strangely akin to humility,
methinks."

As he spoke, a thousand fanged thoughts stung me to the heart.

"What would you that I should do?" I cried.

"I!--Oh, nothing, but lie down and say your prayers before you die. But,
were I you, I know the deed that should be done."

I drew near him. His supernatural powers made him an oracle in my eyes;
yet a strange unearthly thrill quivered through my frame as I
said--"Speak!--teach me--what act do you advise?"

"Revenge thyself, man!--humble thy enemies!--set thy foot on the old
man's neck, and possess thyself of his daughter!"

"To the east and west I turn," cried I, "and see no means! Had I gold,
much could I achieve; but, poor and single, I am powerless."

The dwarf had been seated on his chest as he listened to my story. Now
he got off; he touched a spring; it flew open!--What a mine of
wealth--of blazing jewels, beaming gold, and pale silver--was displayed
therein. A mad desire to possess this treasure was born within me.

"Doubtless," I said, "one so powerful as you could do all things."

"Nay," said the monster, humbly, "I am less omnipotent than I seem. Some
things I possess which you may covet; but I would give them all for a
small share, or even for a loan of what is yours."

"My possessions are at your service," I replied, bitterly--"my poverty,
my exile, my disgrace--I make a free gift of them all."

"Good! I thank you. Add one other thing to your gift, and my treasure is
yours."

"As nothing is my sole inheritance, what besides nothing would you
have?"

"Your comely face and well-made limbs."

I shivered. Would this all-powerful monster murder me? I had no dagger.
I forgot to pray--but I grew pale.

"I ask for a loan, not a gift," said the frightful thing: "lend me your
body for three days--you shall have mine to cage your soul the while,
and, in payment, my chest. What say you to the bargain?--Three short
days."

We are told that it is dangerous to hold unlawful talk; and well do I
prove the same. Tamely written down, it may seem incredible that I
should lend any ear to this proposition; but, in spite of his unnatural
ugliness, there was something fascinating in a being whose voice could
govern earth, air, and sea. I felt a keen desire to comply; for with
that chest I could command the world. My only hesitation resulted from a
fear that he would not be true to his bargain. Then, I thought, I shall
soon die here on these lonely sands, and the limbs he covets will be
mine no more:--it is worth the chance. And, besides, I knew that, by all
the rules of art-magic, there were formula and oaths which none of its
practisers dared break. I hesitated to reply; and he went on, now
displaying his wealth, now speaking of the petty price he demanded, till
it seemed madness to refuse. Thus is it; place our bark in the current
of the stream, and down, over fall and cataract it is hurried; give up
our conduct to the wild torrent of passion, and we are away, we know not
whither.

He swore many an oath, and I adjured him by many a sacred name; till I
saw this wonder of power, this ruler of the elements, shiver like an
autumn leaf before my words; and as if the spirit spake unwillingly and
per force within him, at last, he, with broken voice, revealed the spell
whereby he might be obliged, did he wish to play me false, to render up
the unlawful spoil. Our warm life-blood must mingle to make and to mar
the charm.

Enough of this unholy theme. I was persuaded--the thing was done. The
morrow dawned upon me as I lay upon the shingles, and I knew not my own
shadow as it fell from me. I felt myself changed to a shape of horror,
and cursed my easy faith and blind credulity. The chest was there--there
the gold and precious stones for which I had sold the frame of flesh
which nature had given me. The sight a little stilled my emotions; three
days would soon be gone.

They did pass. The dwarf had supplied me with a plenteous store of food.
At first I could hardly walk, so strange and out of joint were all my
limbs; and my voice--it was that of the fiend. But I kept silent, and
turned my face to the sun, that I might not see my shadow, and counted
the hours, and ruminated on my future conduct. To bring Torella to my
feet--to possess my Juliet in spite of him--all this my wealth could
easily achieve. During dark night I slept, and dreamt of the
accomplishment of my desires. Two suns had set--the third dawned. I was
agitated, fearful. Oh, expectation, what a frightful thing art thou,
when kindled more by fear than hope! How dost thou twist thyself round
the heart, torturing its pulsations! How dost thou dart unknown pangs
all through our feeble mechanism, now seeming to shiver us like broken
glass, to nothingness--now giving us a fresh strength, which can _do_
nothing, and so torments us by a sensation, such as the strong man must
feel who cannot break his fetters, though they bend in his grasp. Slowly
paced the bright, bright orb up the eastern sky; long it lingered in the
zenith, and still more slowly wandered down the west; it touched the
horizon's verge--it was lost! Its glories were on the summits of the
cliff--they grew dun and gray. The evening star shone bright. He will
soon be here.

He came not!--By the living heavens, he came not!--and night dragged out
its weary length, and, in its decaying age, "day began to grizzle its
dark hair;" and the sun rose again on the most miserable wretch that
ever upbraided its light. Three days thus I passed. The jewels and the
gold--oh, how I abhorred them!

Well, well--I will not blacken these pages with demoniac ravings. All
too terrible were the thoughts, the raging tumult of ideas that filled
my soul. At the end of that time I slept; I had not before since the
third sunset; and I dreamt that I was at Juliet's feet, and she smiled,
and then she shrieked--for she saw my transformation--and again she
smiled, for still her beautiful lover knelt before her. But it was not
I--it was he, the fiend, arrayed in my limbs, speaking with my voice,
winning her with my looks of love. I strove to warn her, but my tongue
refused its office; I strove to tear him from her, but I was rooted to
the ground--I awoke with the agony. There were the solitary hoar
precipices--there the plashing sea, the quiet strand, and the blue sky
over all. What did it mean? was my dream but a mirror of the truth? was
he wooing and winning my betrothed? I would on the instant back to
Genoa--but I was banished. I laughed--the dwarfs yell burst from my
lips--_I_ banished! Oh, no! they had not exiled the foul limbs I wore; I
might with these enter, without fear of incurring the threatened penalty
of death, my own, my native city.

I began to walk towards Genoa. I was somewhat accustomed to my distorted
limbs; none were ever so ill-adapted for a straightforward movement; it
was with infinite difficulty that I proceeded. Then, too, I desired to
avoid all the hamlets strewed here and there on the sea-beach, for I was
unwilling to make a display of my hideousness. I was not quite sure
that, if seen, the mere boys would not stone me to death as I passed,
for a monster: some ungentle salutations I did receive from the few
peasants or fishermen I chanced to meet. But it was dark night before I
approached Genoa. The weather was so balmy and sweet that it struck me
that the Marchese and his daughter would very probably have quitted the
city for their country retreat. It was from Villa Torella that I had
attempted to carry off Juliet; I had spent many an hour reconnoitring
the spot, and knew each inch of ground in its vicinity. It was
beautifully situated, embosomed in trees, on the margin of a stream. As
I drew near, it became evident that my conjecture was right; nay,
moreover, that the hours were being then devoted to feasting and
merriment. For the house was lighted up; strains of soft and gay music
were wafted towards me by the breeze. My heart sank within me. Such was
the generous kindness of Torella's heart that I felt sure that he would
not have indulged in public manifestations of rejoicing just after my
unfortunate banishment, but for a cause I dared not dwell upon.

The country people were all alive and flocking about; it became
necessary that I should study to conceal myself; and yet I longed to
address some one, or to hear others discourse, or in any way to gain
intelligence of what was really going on. At length, entering the walks
that were in immediate vicinity to the mansion, I found one dark enough
to veil my excessive frightfulness; and yet others as well as I were
loitering in its shade. I soon gathered all I wanted to know--all that
first made my very heart die with horror, and then boil with
indignation. To-morrow Juliet was to be given to the penitent, reformed,
beloved Guido--to-morrow my bride was to pledge her vows to a fiend from
hell! And I did this!--my accursed pride--my demoniac violence and
wicked self-idolatry had caused this act. For if I had acted as the
wretch who had stolen my form had acted--if, with a mien at once
yielding and dignified, I had presented myself to Torella, saying, I
have done wrong, forgive me; I am unworthy of your angel-child, but
permit me to claim her hereafter, when my altered conduct shall manifest
that I abjure my vices, and endeavor to become in some sort worthy of
her; I go to serve against the infidels; and when my zeal for religion
and my true penitence for the past shall appear to you to cancel my
crimes, permit me again to call myself your son. Thus had he spoken; and
the penitent was welcomed even as the prodigal son of scripture: the
fatted calf was killed for him; and he, still pursuing the same path,
displayed such open-hearted regret for his follies, so humble a
concession of all his rights, and so ardent a resolve to reacquire them
by a life of contrition and virtue, that he quickly conquered the kind
old man; and full pardon, and the gift of his lovely child, followed in
swift succession.

Oh! had an angel from paradise whispered to me to act thus! But now,
what would be the innocent Juliet's fate? Would God permit the foul
union--or, some prodigy destroying it, link the dishonored name of
Carega with the worst of crimes? To-morrow, at dawn, they were to be
married: there was but one way to prevent this--to meet mine enemy, and
to enforce the ratification of our agreement. I felt that this could
only be done by a mortal struggle. I had no sword--if indeed my
distorted arms could wield a soldier's weapon--but I had a dagger, and
in that lay my every hope. There was no time for pondering or balancing
nicely the question: I might die in the attempt; but besides the burning
jealousy and despair of my own heart, honor, mere humanity, demanded
that I should fall rather than not destroy the machinations of the
fiend.

The guests departed--the lights began to disappear; it was evident that
the inhabitants of the villa were seeking repose. I hid myself among the
trees--the garden grew desert--the gates were closed--I wandered round
and came under a window--ah! well did I know the same!--a soft twilight
glimmered in the room--the curtains were half withdrawn. It was the
temple of innocence and beauty. Its magnificence was tempered, as it
were, by the slight disarrangements occasioned by its being dwelt in,
and all the objects scattered around displayed the taste of her who
hallowed it by her presence. I saw her enter with a quick light step--I
saw her approach the window--she drew back the curtain yet further, and
looked out into the night. Its breezy freshness played among her
ringlets, and wafted them from the transparent marble of her brow. She
clasped her hands, she raised her eyes to heaven. I heard her voice.
Guido! she softly murmured, Mine own Guido! and then, as if overcome by
the fulness of her own heart, she sank on her knees:--her upraised
eyes--her negligent but graceful attitude--the beaming thankfulness that
lighted up her face--oh, these are tame words! Heart of mine, thou
imagest ever, though thou canst not portray, the celestial beauty of
that child of light and love.

I heard a step--a quick firm step along the shady avenue. Soon I saw a
cavalier, richly dressed, young, and, methought, graceful to look on,
advance. I hid myself yet closer. The youth approached; he paused
beneath the window. She arose, and again looking out she saw him, and
said--I cannot, no, at this distant time I cannot record her terms of
soft silver tenderness; to me they were spoken, but they were replied to
by him.

"I will not go," he cried: "here where you have been, where your memory
glides like some heaven-visiting ghost, I will pass the long hours till
we meet, never, my Juliet, again, day or night, to part. But do thou, my
love, retire; the cold morn and fitful breeze will make thy cheek pale,
and fill with languor thy love-lighted eyes. Ah, sweetest! could I press
one kiss upon them, I could, methinks, repose."

And then he approached still nearer, and methought he was about to
clamber into her chamber. I had hesitated, not to terrify her; now I was
no longer master of myself. I rushed forward--I threw myself on him--I
tore him away--I cried, "O loathsome and foul-shaped wretch!"

I need not repeat epithets, all tending, as it appeared, to rail at a
person I at present feel some partiality for. A shriek rose from
Juliet's lips. I neither heard nor saw--I _felt_ only mine enemy, whose
throat I grasped, and my dagger's hilt; he struggled, but could not
escape; at length hoarsely he breathed these words: "Do!--strike home!
destroy this body--you will still live; may your life be long and
merry!"

The descending dagger was arrested at the word, and he, feeling my hold
relax, extricated himself and drew his sword, while the uproar in the
house, and flying of torches from one room to the other, showed that
soon we should be separated--and I--oh! far better die; so that he did
not survive, I cared not. In the midst of my frenzy there was much
calculation:--fall I might, and so that he did not survive, I cared not
for the death-blow I might deal against myself. While still, therefore,
he thought I paused, and while I saw the villanous resolve to take
advantage of my hesitation, in the sudden thrust he made at me, I threw
myself on his sword, and at the same moment plunged my dagger, with a
true desperate aim, in his side. We fell together, rolling over each
other, and the tide of blood that flowed from the gaping wound of each
mingled on the grass. More I know not--I fainted.

Again I returned to life: weak almost to death, I found myself stretched
upon a bed--Juliet was kneeling beside it. Strange! my first broken
request was for a mirror. I was so wan and ghastly, that my poor girl
hesitated, as she told me afterwards; but, by the mass! I thought myself
a right proper youth when I saw the dear reflection of my own well-known
features. I confess it is a weakness, but I avow it, I do entertain a
considerable affection for the countenance and limbs I behold, whenever
I look at a glass; and have more mirrors in my house, and consult them
oftener than any beauty in Venice. Before you too much condemn me,
permit me to say that no one better knows than I the value of his own
body; no one, probably, except myself, ever having had it stolen from
him.

Incoherently I at first talked of the dwarf and his crimes, and
reproached Juliet for her too easy admission of his love. She thought me
raving, as well she might, and yet it was some time before I could
prevail on myself to admit that the Guido whose penitence had won her
back for me was myself; and while I cursed bitterly the monstrous dwarf,
and blest the well-directed blow that had deprived him of life, I
suddenly checked myself when I heard her say--Amen! knowing that him
whom she reviled was my very self. A little reflection taught me
silence--a little practice enabled me to speak of that frightful night
without any very excessive blunder. The wound I had given myself was no
mockery of one--it was long before I recovered--and as the benevolent
and generous Torella sat beside me talking such wisdom as might win
friends to repentance, and mine own dear Juliet hovered near me,
administering to my wants, and cheering me by her smiles, the work of my
bodily cure and mental reform went on together. I have never, indeed,
wholly, recovered my strength--my cheek is paler since--my person a
little bent. Juliet sometimes ventures to allude bitterly to the malice
that caused this change, but I kiss her on the moment, and tell her all
is for the best. I am a fonder and more faithful husband--and true is
this--but for that wound, never had I called her mine.

I did not revisit the sea-shore, nor seek for the fiend's treasure; yet,
while I ponder on the past, I often think, and my confessor was not
backward in favoring the idea, that it might be a good rather than an
evil spirit, sent by my guardian angel, to show me the folly and misery
of pride. So well at least did I learn this lesson, roughly taught as I
was, that I am known now by all my friends and fellow-citizens by the
name of Guido il Cortese.


From the North British Review

PHILIP DODDRIDGE, AND SOME OF HIS FRIENDS.


In the ornithological gallery of the British Museum is suspended the
portrait of an extinct lawyer, Sir John Doddridge, the first of the name
who procured any distinction to his old Devonian family. Persons skilful
in physiognomy have detected a resemblance betwixt King James's
solicitor-general and his only famous namesake. But although it is
difficult to identify the sphery figure of the judge with the slim
consumptive preacher, and still more difficult to light up with pensive
benevolence the convivial countenance in which official gravity and
constitutional gruffiness have only yielded to good cheer; yet, it would
appear, that for some of his mental features the divine was indebted to
his learned ancestor. Sir John was a bookworm and a scholar; and for a
great period of his life a man of mighty industry. His ruling passion
went with him to the grave; for he chose to be buried in Exeter
Cathedral, at the threshold of its library. His nephew was the rector of
Shepperton in Middlesex; but at the Restoration, as he kept a
conscience, he lost his living. In the troubles of the Civil War, the
judge's estate of two thousand a year had also been lost out of the
family, and the ejected minister was glad to rear his son as a London
apprentice, who became, on the twenty-sixth of June, 1702, the father of
Philip Doddridge.

The child's first lessons were out of a pictorial Bible, occasionally
found in the old houses of England and Holland. The chimney of the room
where he and his mother usually sat, was adorned with a series of Dutch
tiles, representing the chief events of scriptural story. In bright
blue, on a ground of glistering white, were represented the serpent in
the tree, Adam delving outside the gate of Paradise, Noah building his
great ship, Elisha'a bears devouring the naughty children, and all the
outstanding incidents of holy writ. And when the frost made the fire
burn clear, and little Philip was snug in the arm-chair beside his
mother, it was endless joy to hear the stories that lurked in the
painted porcelain. That mother could not foresee the outgoings of her
early lesson; but when the tiny boy had become a famous divine, and was
publishing his Family Expositor, he could not forget the nursery Bible
in the chimney tiles. At ten years of age he was sent to the school at
Kingston, which his grandfather Baumann had taught long ago; and here
his sweet disposition, and alacrity for learning drew much love around
him--a love which he soon inspired in the school at St. Albans, whither
his father subsequently removed him. But whilst busy there with his
Greek and Latin, his heart was sorely wrung by the successive tidings of
the death of either parent. His father was willing to indulge a wish he
had now begun to cherish, and had left money enough to enable the young
student to complete his preparations for the Christian ministry. Of this
provision a self-constituted guardian got hold, and embarked it in his
own sinking business. His failure soon followed, and ingulfed the little
fortune of his ward; and, as the hereditary plate of the thrifty
householders was sold along with the bankrupt's effects, if he had ever
felt the pride of being born with a silver spoon in his mouth, the poor
scholar must have felt some pathos in seeing both spoon and tankard in
the broker's inventory.

A securer heritage, however, than parental savings, is parental faith
and piety. Daniel Doddridge and his wife had sought for their child
first of all the kingdom of heaven, and God gave it now. Under the
ministry of Rev. Samuel Clarke of St. Alban's, his mind had become more
and more impressed with the beauty of holiness, and the blessedness of a
religious life; and, on the other hand, that kind-hearted pastor took a
deepening interest in his amiable and intelligent orphan hearer. Finding
that he had declined the generous offer of the Duchess of Bedford, to
maintain him at either University, provided he would enter the
established church, Dr. Clarke applied to his own and his father's
friends, and procured a sufficient sum to send him to a dissenting
academy at Kibworth, in Leicestershire, then conducted by an able tutor,
whose work on Jewish antiquities still retains considerable value--the
Rev. David Jennings.

To trace Philip Doddridge's early career would be a labor of some
amusement and much instruction. And we are not without abundant
materials. No man is responsible for his remote descendants. Sir John
Doddridge, judge of the Court of King's Bench, would have blushed to
think that his great-grandnephew was to be a Puritan preacher. With more
reason might Dr. Doddridge have blushed to think that his great-grandson
was to be a coxcomb. But so it has proved. Twenty years ago Mr. John
Doddridge Humphreys gave to the world five octavos of his ancestor's
correspondence, which, on the whole, we deem the most eminent instance,
in modern times, of editorial incompetency. But the book contains many
curiosities to reward the dust-sifting historian. And were it not our
object to hasten on and sketch the ministerial model to which our last
number alluded, we could cheerfully halt for half an hour, and entertain
our readers and ourselves with the sweepings of Dr. Doddridge's Kibworth
study.

Suffice it to say that the protégé of the good Dr. Clarke rewarded his
patron's kindness. His classical attainments were far above the usual
University standard, and he read with avidity the English philosophers
from Bacon down to Shaftesbury. He early exhibited that hopeful
propensity--the noble avarice of books. In his first half-yearly account
of nine pounds are entries for "King's Inquiry," and an interleaved New
Testament; and a guinea presented by a rich fellow-student, is invested
in "Scott's Christian Life." Nor was he less diligent in perusing the
stores of the Academy Library. In six months we find him reading sixty
volumes; and some of them as solid as Patrick's Exposition and
Tillotson's Sermons. With such avidity for information, professional and
miscellaneous, and with a style which was always elastic and easy, and
with brilliant talent constantly gleaming over the surface of unruffled
temper and warm affections, it is not wonderful that his friends hoped
and desired for him high distinction; but it evinces unusual and
precocious attainments, that, when he had scarcely reached majority, he
should have been invited to succeed Mr. Jennings as pastor at Kibworth,
and that whilst still a young man he should have been urged by his
ministerial brethren to combine with his pastorate the responsible
duties of a college tutor....

From such a catastrophe the hand of God saved Philip Doddridge. In 1729
he was removed to Northampton, and from that period may be dated the
consolidation of his character, and the commencement of a new and noble
career. The anguish of spirit occasioned by parting with a much-loved
people, and the solemn consciousness of entering on a more arduous
sphere, both tended to make him thoughtful, and that thoughtfulness was
deepened by a dangerous sickness. Nor in this sobering discipline must
we leave out of view one painful but salutary element--a mortified
affection. Mr. Doddridge had been living as a boarder in the house of
his predecessor's widow, and her only child--the little girl whom he had
found amusement in teaching an occasional lesson, was now nearly grown
up, and had grown up so brilliant and engaging, that the soft heart of
the tutor was terribly smitten. The charms of Clio and Sabrina, and
every former flame, were merged in the rising glories of Clarinda--as by
a classical apotheosis Miss Kitty was now known to his entranced
imagination; and in every vision of future enjoyment Clarinda was the
beatific angel. But when he decided in favor of Northampton, Miss
Jennings showed a will of her own, and absolutely refused to go with
him. To the romantic lover the disappointment was all the more severe,
because he had made so sure of the young lady's affection; nor was it
mitigated by the mode in which Miss Jennings conveyed her declinature.
However, her scorn, if not an excellent oil, was a very good eyesalve.
It disenchanted her admirer, and made him wonder how a reverend divine
could ever fancy a spoiled child, who had scarcely matured into a
petulant girl. And as the mirage melted, and Clarinda again resolved
into Kitty, other realities began to show themselves in a sedater and
truer light to the awakened dreamer. As an excuse for an attachment at
which Doddridge himself soon learned to smile, it is fair to add that
love was in this instance prophetic. Clarinda turned out a remarkable
woman. She married an eminent dissenting minister, and became the mother
of Dr. John Aiken and Mrs. Barbauld, and in her granddaughter, Lucy
Aiken, her matrimonial name still survives; so that the curious in such
matters may speculate how far the instructions of Doddridge contributed
to produce the "Universal Biography," "Evenings at Home," and "Memoirs
of the Courts of the Stuarts."

His biographers do not mark it, but his arrival at Northampton is the
real date of Doddridge's memorable ministry. He then woke up to the full
import of his high calling, and never went to sleep again. The sickness,
the wounded spirit, the altered scene, and we may add seclusion from the
society of formal religionists, had each its wholesome influence; and,
finding how much was required of him as a pastor and a tutor, he set to
work with the concentration and energy of a startled man, and the first
true rest he took was twenty years after, when he turned aside to die.

Glorying in such names as Goodwin, and Charnock, and Owen, it was the
ambition of the early Nonconformists of England to perpetuate among
themselves a learned ministry. But the stern exclusiveness of the
English Universities rendered the attainment of this object very
difficult. It may be questioned whether it is right in any established
church to inflict ignorance as a punishment on those dissenting from it.
If intended as a vindictive visitation, it is a very fearful one, and
reminds us painfully of those tyrants who used to extinguish the eyes of
rebellious subjects. And if designed as a reformatory process, we
question its efficiency. The zero of ignorance is unbelief, and its
_minus_ scale marks errors. You cannot make dissenters so ignorant
thereby to make them Christians; and, even though you made them savages,
they might still remain seceders. However, this was the policy of the
English establishment in the days of Doddridge. By withholding education
from dissenters, they sought either to reclaim them, or to be revenged
upon them; and had this policy succeeded, the dissenting pulpits would
soon have been filled with fanatics, and the pews with superstitious
sectaries. But, much to their honor, the Nonconformists taxed themselves
heavily in order to procure elsewhere the light which Oxford and
Cambridge refused. Academies were opened in various places, and, among
others selected for the office of tutor, his talents recommended Mr.
Doddridge. A large house was taken in the town of Northampton, and the
business of instruction had begun, when Dr. Reynolds, the diocesan
chancellor, instituted a prosecution, in the ecclesiastical courts, on
the ground that the Academy was not licensed by the bishop. The affair
gave Dr. Doddridge much trouble, but he had a powerful friend in the
Earl of Halifax. That nobleman represented the matter to King George the
Second, and conformably to his own declaration, "That in his reign there
should be no persecution for conscience' sake," his majesty sent a
message to Dr. Reynolds, which put an end to the process.

Freed from this peril, the institution advanced in a career of
uninterrupted prosperity. Not only was it the resort of aspirants to the
dissenting ministry, but wealthy dissenters were glad to secure its
advantages for sons whom they were training to business or to the
learned professions. And latterly, attracted by the reputation of its
head, pupils came from Scotland and from Holland; and, in one case at
least, we find a clergyman of the Church of England selecting it as the
best seminary for a son whom he designed for the established ministry.
Among our own compatriots educated there, we find the names of the Earl
of Dunmore, Ferguson of Kilkerran, Professor Gilbert Robinson, and
another Edinburgh professor, James Robertson, famous in the annals of
his Hebrew-loving family.

With an average attendance of forty young men, mostly residing under his
own roof, this Academy would have furnished abundant occupation to any
ordinary teacher; and although usually relieved of elementary drudgery
by his assistant, the main burden of instruction fell on Doddridge
himself. He taught algebra, geometry, natural philosophy, geography,
logic, and metaphysics. He prelected on the Greek and Latin classics,
and at morning worship the Bible was read in Hebrew. Such of his pupils
as desired it were initiated in French; and besides an extensive course
of Jewish Antiquities and Church History, they were carried through a
history of philosophy on the basis of Buddæus. To all of which must be
added the main staple of the curriculum, a series of two hundred and
fifty theological lectures, arranged, like Stapfer's, on the
demonstrative principle, and each proposition following its predecessor
with a sort of mathematical precision. Enormous as was the labor of
preparing so many systems, and arranging anew materials so multifarious,
it was still a labor of love. A clear and easy apprehension enabled him
to amass knowledge with a rapidity which few have ever rivalled, and a
constitutional orderliness of mind rendered him perpetual master of all
his acquisitions; and, like most _millionaires_ in the world of
knowledge, his avidity of acquirement was accompanied by an equal
delight in imparting his treasures. When the essential ingredients of
his course were completed, he relieved his memory of its redundant
stores, by giving lectures on rhetoric and belles-lettres, on the
microscope, and on the anatomy of the human frame; and there is one
feature of his method which we would especially commemorate, as we fear
that it still remains an original without a copy. Sometimes he conducted
the students into the library, and gave a lecture on its contents. Going
over it case by case, and row by row, he pointed out the most important
authors, and indicated their characteristic excellences, and fixed the
mental association by striking or amusing anecdotes. Would not such
bibliographical lectures be a boon to all our students? To them a large
library is often a labyrinth without a clue--a mighty maze--a dusty
chaos. And might not the learned keepers of our great collections give
lectures which would at once be entertaining and edifying on those
rarities, printed and manuscript, of which they are the favored
guardians, but of which their shelves are in the fair way to become not
the dormitory alone, but the sepulchre? Nor was it to the mere
intellectual culture of his pupils that Dr. Doddridge directed his
labors. His academy was a church within a church; and not content with
the ministrations which its members shared in common with his stated
congregation, this indefatigable man took the pains to prepare and
preach many occasional sermons to the students. These, and his formal
addresses, as well as his personal interviews, had such an effect, that
out of the two hundred young men who came under his instructions,
seventy made their first public profession of Christianity during their
sojourn at Northampton....

Whilst in labors for his students and his people thus abundant,
Doddridge was secretly engaged on a task which he intended for the
Church at large. Ever since his first initiation into the Bible story,
as he studied the Dutch tiles on his mother's knee, that book had been
the nucleus round which all his vast reading and information revolved
and arranged itself; and he early formed the purpose of doing something
effectual for its illustration. Element by element the plan of the
"Family Expositor" evolved, and he set to work on a New Testament
Commentary, which should at once instruct the uninformed, edify the
devout, and facilitate the studies of the learned. Happy is the man who
has a "magnum opus" on hand! Be it an "Excursion" poem, or a Southey's
"Portugal," or a Neandrine "Church History,"--to the fond projector
there is no end of congenial occupation, and, provided he never
completes it, there will be no break in the blissful illusion. Whenever
he walks abroad, he picks up some dainty herb for his growthful Pegasus;
or, we should rather say, some new bricks for his posthumous pyramid.
And wherever he goes he is flattered by perceiving that his book is the
very desideratum for which the world is unwittingly waiting; and in his
sleeve he smiles benevolently to think how happy mankind will be as soon
as he vouchsafes his epic or his story. It is delightful to us to think
of all the joys with which, for twenty years, that Expositor filled the
dear mind of Dr. Doddridge; how one felicitous rendering was suggested
after another; how a bright solution of a textual difficulty would rouse
him an hour before his usual, and set the study fire a blazing at four
o'clock of a winter's morning; and then how beautiful the first quarto
looked as it arrived with its laid sheets and snowy margins! We see him
setting out to spend a week's holiday at St. Albans, or with the
Honorable Mrs. Scawen at Maidwell, and packing the "apparatus criticus"
into the spacious saddle-bags; and we enjoy the prelibation with which
Dr. Clarke and a few cherished friends are favored. We sympathize in his
dismay when word arrives that Dr. Guyse has forestalled his design, and
we are comforted when the doctor's chariot lumbers on, and no longer
stops the way. We are even glad at the appalling accident which set on
fire the manuscript of the concluding volume, charring its edges, and
bathing it all in molten wax: for we know how exulting would be the
thanks for its deliverance. We can even fancy the pious hope dawning in
the writer's mind, that it might prove a blessing to the princess to
whom it was inscribed; and we can excuse him if, with bashful
disallowance, he still believed the fervid praises of Fordyce and
Warburton, or tried to extract an atom of intelligent commendation from
the stately compliments of bishops. But far be it from us to insinuate
that the chief value of the Expositor was the pleasure with which it
supplied the author. If not so minutely erudite as some later works
which have profited by German research, its learning is still sufficient
to shed honor on the writer, and, on a community debarred from colleges;
and there must be original thinking in a book which is by some regarded
as the source of Paley's "Horæ Paulinæ." But, next to its Practical
Observations, its chief excellence is its Paraphrase. There the sense of
the sacred writers is rescued from the haze of too familiar words, and
is transfused into language not only fresh and expressive, but congenial
and devout; and whilst difficulties are fairly and earnestly dealt with,
instead of a dry grammarian or a one-sided polemic, the reader
constantly feels that he is in the company of a saint and a scholar. And
although we could name interpreters more profound, and analysts more
subtle, we know not any who has proceeded through the whole New
Testament with so much candor, or who has brought to its elucidation
truer taste and holier feeling. He lived to complete the manuscript, and
to see three volumes published. He was cheered to witness its acceptance
with all the churches; and to those who love his memory, it is a welcome
thought to think in how many myriads of closets and family circles its
author when dead has spoken. And as his death in a foreign land
forfeited the insurance by which he had somewhat provided for his
family, we confess to a certain comfort in knowing that the loss was
replaced by this literary legacy. But the great source of complacency
is, that He to whom the work was consecrated had a favor for it, and has
given it the greatest honor that a human book can have--making it
extensively the means of explaining and endearing the book of God.

Whilst this great undertaking was slowly advancing, the author was from
time to time induced to give to the world a sermon or a practical
treatise. Several of these maintain a considerable circulation down to
the present day; but of them all the most permanent and precious is "The
Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul." The publication of this work
was urged upon him by Dr. Isaac Watts, with whom it had long been a
cherished project to prepare a manual which should contain within itself
a complete course of practical piety, from the first dawn of earnest
thought to the full development of Christian character, But when
exhaustion and decay admonished Dr. Watts that his work was done, he
transferred to his like-minded friend his favorite scheme; and, sorely
begrudging the interruption of his Commentary, Doddridge compiled this
volume. It is not faultless. A more predominant exhibition of the Gospel
remedy would have been more apostolic; and it would have prevented an
evil which some have experienced in reading it, who have entangled
themselves in its technical details, and who, in their anxiety to keep
the track of the Rise and Progress, have forgotten that after all the
grand object is to reach the Cross. But, with every reasonable
abatement, it is the best book of the eighteenth century; and, tried by
the test of usefulness, we doubt if its equal has since appeared.
Rendered into the leading languages of Europe, it has been read by few
without impression, and in the case of vast numbers that impression has
been enduring. What adds greatly to its importance, and to the reward of
its glorified writer--many of those whom it has impressed were master
minds, and destined in their turn to be the means of impressing others.
As in the instance of Wilberforce, this little book was to be in their
minds the germ of other influential books, or of sermons; and, like the
lamp at which many torches and tapers are lighted, none can tell how far
its rays have travelled in the persons and labors of those whose
Christianity it first enkindled.

But what was the secret of Dr. Doddridge's great success? He had not the
rhetoric of Bates, the imagination of Bunyan, nor the massive theology
of Owen; and yet his preaching and his publications were as useful as
theirs. So far as we can find it out, let us briefly indicate where his
great strength lay.

As already hinted, we attach considerable importance to his clear and
orderly mind. He was an excellent teacher. At a glance he saw every
thing which could simplify his subject, and he had self-denial
sufficient to forego those good things which would only encumber it.
Hence, like his college lectures, his sermons were continuous and
straightforward, and his hearers had the comfort of accompanying him to
a goal which they and he constantly kept in view. It was his plan not
only to divide his discourses, but to enunciate the divisions again and
again, till they were fully imprinted on the memory; and although such a
method would impart a fatal stiffness to many compositions, in his
manipulation it only added clearness to his meaning, and precision to
his proofs. Dr. Doddridge's was not the simplicity of happy
illustration. In his writings you meet few of those apt allusions which
play over every line of Bunyan, like the slant beams of evening on the
winking lids of the ocean; nor can you gather out of his writings such
anecdotes as, like garnet in some Highland mountain, sparkle in every
page of Brooks and Flavel. Nor was it the simplicity of homely language.
It was not the terse and self-commending Saxon, of which Latimer in one
age, and Swift in another, and Cobbett in our own, have been the mighty
masters, and through it the masters of their English fellows. But it was
the simplicity of clear conception and orderly arrangement. A text or
topic may be compared to a goodly apartment still empty; and which will
be very differently garnished according as you move into it piece by
piece the furniture from a similar chamber, or pour in pell-mell the
contents of a lumber attic. Most minds can appreciate order, and to the
majority of hearers it is a greater treat than ministers always imagine,
to get some obscure matter made plain, or some confused subject cleared
up. With this treat Doddridge's readers and hearers were constantly
indulged. Whether they were things new or old, from the orderly
compartments of his memory he fetched the argument or the quotation
which the moment wanted. He knew his own mind, and told it in his own
way, and was always natural, arresting, instructive. And even if, in
giving them forth, they should cancel the ticket-marks--the numerals by
which they identify and arrange their own materials, authors and orators
who wish to convince and to edify must strive in the first place to be
orderly. To this must be added a certain pathetic affectionateness, by
which all his productions are pervaded.

Leaving the tutor, the pastor, the author, it is time that we return to
the man; and might we draw a full-length portrait, our readers would
share our affection. That may not be, and therefore we shall only
indicate a few features. His industry, as has been inferred, was
enormous; in the end it became an excess, and crushed a feeble
constitution into an early grave. His letters alone were an extensive
authorship. With such friends as Bishop Warburton and Archbishop Secker,
with Isaac Watts and Nathaniel Lardner, with his spiritual father, the
venerable Clarke, and with his fervent and tender-hearted brother,
Barker, it was worth while to maintain a frequent correspondence; but
many of his epistolizers had little right to tax a man like Doddridge.
Those were the cruel days of dear posts and "private opportunities;" and
a letter needed to contain matter enough to fill a little pamphlet; and
when some cosy country clergyman, who could sleep twelve hours in the
twenty-four, or some self-contained dowager, who had no charge but her
maid and her lap-dog, insisted on long missives from the busiest and
greatest of their friends, they forgot that a sermon had to be laid
aside, or a chapter of the Exposition suspended in their favor; or that
a man, who had seldom leisure to talk to his children, must sit up an
extra hour to talk to them. And yet, amidst the pressure of overwhelming
toil, his vivacity seldom flagged, and his politeness never. Perhaps the
severest thing he ever said was an impromptu on a shallow-pated student
who was unfolding a scheme for flying to the moon:--

    And will Volatio leave this world so soon,
    To fly to his own native seat, the moon?
    'Twill stand, however, in some little stead,
    That he sets out with such an empty head.

But his wit was usually as mild as his dispositions; and it was seldom
that he answered a fool according to his folly. His very essence was his
kindness and charity; and one of the worst faults laid to his charge is
a perilous sort of catholicity. The dissenters never liked his dealings
with the Church of England; and both Episcopalians and Presbyterians
have regretted his intimacy with avowed or suspected Arians. Bishop
Warburton reproached him for editing Hervey's Meditations, and Nathaniel
Neal warned him of the contempt he was incurring amongst many by
associating with "honest crazy Whitefield;" whilst the "rational
dissenters," represented by Dr. Kippis, have regretted that his superior
intelligence was never cast into the Socinian scale. Judging from his
early letters, this latter consummation was at one time far from
unlikely; but the older and more earnest he grew, the more definite
became his creed, and the more intense his affinity for spiritual
Christianity. In ecclesiastical polity he never was a partisan, and for
piety his attraction was always more powerful than for mere theology.
But in that essential element of vital Christianity, a profound and
adoring attachment to the Saviour of men, the orthodoxy of Doddridge was
never gainsaid. Had any one intercepted a packet of his letters, and
found one addressed to Whitefield and another to Wesley; one to the
Archbishop of Canterbury and another to Dr. Webster of Edinburgh; one to
Henry Baker, F.R.S., describing a five-legged limb and similar
prodigies; and another to the Countess of Huntingdon or Joseph Williams,
the Kidderminster manufacturer, on some rare phasis of spiritual
experience; he might have been at a loss to devise a sufficient theory
for such a miscellaneous man. And yet he had a theory. As he writes to
his wife, "I do not merely talk of it, but I feel it at my heart, that
the only important end of life, and the greatest happiness to be
expected in it, consists in seeking in all things to please God,
attempting all the good we can." And from the post-office could the
querist have returned to the great house at the top of the town, and
spent a day in the study, the parlor, and the lecture-room, he would
have found that after all there was a true unity amidst these several
forthgoings. Like Northampton itself, which marches with more counties
than any other shire in England, his tastes were various and his heart
was large, and consequently his borderline was long. And yet Northampton
has a surface and a solid content, as well as a circumference; and
amidst all his complaisance and all his versatility, Doddridge had a
mind and a calling of his own.

The heart of Doddridge was just recovering from the wound which the
faithless Kitty had inflicted, when he formed the acquaintance of Mercy
Maris. Come of gentle blood, her dark eyes and raven hair and brunette
complexion were true to their Norman pedigree; and her refined and
vivacious mind was only too well betokened in the mantling cheek, and
the brilliant expression, and the light movements of a delicate and
sensitive frame. When one so fascinating was good and gifted besides,
what wonder that Doddridge fell in love? and what wonder that he deemed
the twenty-second of December (1730) the brightest of days, when it gave
him such a help-meet? Neither of them had ever cause to rue it; and it
is fine to read the correspondence which passed between them, showing
them youthful lovers to the last. When away from home the good doctor
had to write constantly to apprise Mercy that he was still "pure well;"
and in these epistles he records with Pepysian minuteness every incident
which was likely to be important at home; how Mr. Scawen had taken him
to see the House of Commons, and how Lady Abney carried him out in her
coach to Newington; how soon his wrist-bands got soiled in the smoke of
London, and how his horse had fallen into Mr. Coward's well at
Walthamstow; and how he had gone a fishing "with extraordinary success,
for he had pulled a minnow out of the water, though it made shift to get
away." They also contain sundry consultations and references on the
subject of fans and damasks, white and blue. And from one of them we are
comforted to find that the Northampton carrier was conveying a
"harlequin dog" as a present from Kitty's husband to the wife of Kitty's
old admirer--showing, as is abundantly evinced in other ways, how good
an after-crop of friendship may grow on the stubble fields where love
was long since shorn. But our pages are not worthy that we should
transfer into them the better things with which these letters abound.
Nor must we stop to sketch the domestic group which soon gathered round
the paternal table--the son and three daughters who were destined, along
with their mother, to survive for nearly half a century their bright
Northampton home, and, along with the fond father's image, to recall his
first and darling child--the little Tetsy whom "every body loved,
because Tetsy loved every body."


SIR JAMES STONEHOUSE.

The family physician was Dr. Stonehouse. He had come to Northampton an
infidel, and had written an attack on the Christian evidence, which was
sufficiently clever to run through three editions, when the perusal of
Dr. Doddridge's "Christianity Founded on Argument" revolutionized all
his opinions. He not only retracted his skeptical publication, but
became an ornament to the faith which once he destroyed. To the liberal
mind of Doddridge it was no mortification, at least he never showed it,
that his son in the faith preferred the Church of England, and waited on
another ministry. The pious and accomplished physician became more and
more the bosom friend of the magnanimous and unselfish divine, and, in
conjunction, they planned and executed many works of usefulness, of
which the greatest was the Northampton Infirmary. At last Dr. Stonehouse
exchanged his profession for the Christian ministry, and became the
rector of Great and Little Cheverell, in Wiltshire. Belonging to a good
family, and possessing superior powers, his preaching attracted many
hearers in his own domain of Bath and Bristol, and, like his once
popular publications, was productive of much good. He used to tell two
lessons of elocution which he had one day received from Garrick, at the
close of the service. "What particular business had you to do to-day
when the duty was over?" asked the actor. "None." "Why," said Garrick,
"I thought you must from the hurry in which you entered the desk.
Nothing can be more indecent than to see a clergyman set about sacred
service as if he were a tradesman, and wanted to get through it as soon
as possible. But what books might those be which you had in the desk
before you?" "Only the Bible and Prayer-Book," replied the preacher.
"_Only_ the Bible and Prayer-Book," rejoined the player. "Why, you
tossed them about, and turned the leaves as carelessly as if they were a
day-book and ledger." And by the reproof of the British Roscius the
doctor greatly profited; for, even among the pump-room exquisites, he
was admired for the perfect grace and propriety of his pulpit manner.
Perhaps he studied it too carefully, at least he studied it till he
became aware of it, and talked too much about it. His old age was rather
egotistical. He had become rich and a baronet, and, as the friend of
Hannah More, a star in the constellation "Virgo." And he loved to
transcribe the laudatory notes in which dignitaries acknowledged
presentation copies of his three-penny tracts. And he gave forth oracles
which would have been more impressive had they been less querulous. But
with all these foibles, Sir James was a man of undoubted piety, and it
may well excuse a little communicativeness when we remember that of the
generation he had served so well, few survived to speak his praise. At
all events, there was one benefactor whom he never forgot; and the
chirrup of the old Cicada softened into something very soft and tender
every time he mentioned the name of Doddridge.


COLONEL GARDINER.

Amongst the visitors at their father's house, at first to the children
more formidable than the doctor, and by and by the most revered all, was
a Scotch cavalry officer. With his Hessian boots, and their tremendous
spurs, sustaining the grandeur of his scarlet coat and powdered queue,
there was something to youthful imaginations very awful in the tall and
stately hussar; and that awe was nowise abated when they got courage to
look on his high forehead which overhung gray eyes and weather-beaten
cheeks, and when they marked his firm and dauntless air. And then it was
terrible to think how many battles he had fought, and how in one of them
a bullet had gone quite through his neck, and he had lain a whole night
among the slain. But there was a deeper mystery still. He had been a
very bad man once, it would appear, and now he was very good; and he had
seen a vision; and altogether, with his strong Scotch voice, and his
sword, and his wonderful story, the most solemn visitant was this grave
and lofty soldier. But they saw how their father loved him, and they saw
how he loved their father. As he sat so erect in the square corner-seat
of the chapel, they could notice how his stern look would soften, and
how his firm lip would quiver, and how a happy tear would roll down his
deep-lined face; and they heard him as he sang so joyfully the closing
hymn, and they came to feel that the colonel must indeed be very good.
At last, after a long absence, he came to see their father, and staid
three days, and he was looking very sick and very old. And the last
night, before he went away their father preached a sermon in the house,
and his text was, "I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him and
honour him." And the colonel went away, and their father went with him,
and gave him a long convoy; and many letters went and came. But at last
there was war in Scotland. There was a rebellion, and there were
battles; and then the gloomy news arrived. There had been a battle close
to the very house of Bankton, and the king's soldiers had run away, and
the brave Colonel Gardiner would not run, but fought to the very last,
and alas for the Lady Frances!--he was stricken down and slain, scarce a
mile from his own mansion door.


JAMES HERVEY.

Near Northampton stands the little parish church of Weston Favel. Its
young minister was one of Doddridge's dearest friends. He was a tall and
spectral-looking man, dying daily; and, like so many in that district,
was a debtor to his distinguished neighbor. After he became minister of
his hereditary parish, and when he was preaching with more earnestness
than light, he was one day acting on a favorite medical prescription of
that period, and accompanying a ploughman along the furrow in order to
smell the fresh earth. The ploughman was a pious man, and attended the
Castle-Hill Meeting; and the young parish minister asked him, "What do
you think the hardest thing in religion?" The ploughman respectfully
returned the question, excusing himself, as an ignorant man; and the
minister said, "I think the hardest thing in religion is to deny sinful
self;" and, expatiating some time on its difficulties, asked if any
thing could be harder? "No, sir, except it be to deny righteous self."
At the moment the minister thought his parishioner a strange fellow, or
a fool; but he never forgot the answer, and was soon a convert to the
ploughman's creed. James Hervey had a mind of uncommon gorgeousness. His
thoughts all marched to a stately music, and were arrayed in the richest
superlatives. Nor was it affectation. It was the necessity of his ideal
nature, and was a merciful compensation for his scanty powers of outward
enjoyment. As he sat in his little parlor watching the saucepan, in
which his dinner of gruel was simmering, and filled up the moments with
his microscope, or a page of the Astro-Theology, in his tour of the
universe he soon forgot the pains and miseries of his corporeal
residence. To him "Nature was Christian;" and after his own soul had
drunk in all the joy of the Gospel, it became his favorite employment to
read in the fields and the firmament. One product of these researches
was his famous "Meditations." They were in fact a sort of Astro and
Physico-Evangelism, and, as their popularity was amazing, they must have
contributed extensively to the cause of Christianity. They were followed
by "Theron and Aspasio"--a series of Dialogues and Letters on the most
important points of personal religion, in which, after the example of
Cicero, solid instruction is conveyed amidst the charms of landscape,
and the amenities of friendly intercourse. This latter work is
memorable as one of the first attempts to popularize systematic
divinity; and it should undeceive those who deem dulness the test of
truth, when they find the theology of Vitringa and Witsius enshrined in
one of our finest prose poems. It was hailed with especial rapture by
the Seceders of Scotland, who recognized "the Marrow" in this lordly
dish, and were justly proud of their unexpected apostle. Many of them,
that is, many of the few who achieved the feat of a London journey,
arranged to take Weston on their way, and eschewing the Ram Inn and the
adjacent Academy, they turned in to Aspasio's lowly parsonage. Here they
found a "reed shaking in the wind:"--a panting invalid nursed by his
tender mother and sister; and when the Sabbath came, James Erskine, or
Dr. Pattison, or whoever the pilgrim might be, saw a great contrast to
his own teeming meeting-house in the little flock that assembled in the
little church of Weston Favel. But that flock hung with up-looking
affection on the moveless attitude and faint accents of their emaciated
pastor, and with Scotch-like alacrity turned up and marked in their
Bibles every text which he quoted; and though they could not report the
usual accessories of clerical fame--the melodious voice, and graceful
elocution, and gazing throng--the visitors carried away "a thread of the
mantle," and long cherished as a sacred remembrance, the hours spent
with this Elijah before he went over Jordan. Others paid him the
compliment of copying his style; and both among the Evangelical
preachers of the Scotch Establishment and its Secession, the
"Meditations" became a frequent model. A few imitators were very
successful; for their spirit and genius were kindred; but the tendency
of most of them was to make the world despise themselves, and weary of
their unoffending idol. Little children prefer red sugar-plums to white,
and always think it the best "content" which is drunk from a painted
cup; but when the dispensation of content and sugar-plums has yielded to
maturer age, the man takes his coffee and his cracknel without observing
the pattern of the pottery. And, unfortunately, it was to this that the
Herveyites directed their chief attention, and hungry people have long
since tired of their flowery truisms and mellifluous inanities; and,
partly from impatience of the copyists, the reading republic has nearly
ostracized the glowing and gifted original.


OTHER FRIENDS.

Gladly would we introduce the reader to a few others of Dr. Doddridge's
friends; such as Dr. Clarke, his constant adviser and considerate
friend, whose work on "The Promises" still holds its place in our
religious literature; Gilbert West, whose catholic piety and elegant
taste found in Doddridge a congenial friend; Dr. Watts, who so shortly
preceded him to that better country, of which on earth they were among
the brightest citizens; Bishop Warburton, who in a life-long
correspondence with so mild a friend, carefully cushioned his formidable
claws, and became the lion playing with the lamb; and William Coward,
Esq., with cramps in his legs, and crotchets in his head--the rich
London merchant who was constantly changing his will, but who at last,
by what Robert Baillie would have termed the "canny conveyance" of Watts
and Doddridge, did bequeath twenty thousand pounds towards founding a
dissenting college. At each of these and several others we would have
wished to glance; for we hold that biography is only like a cabinet
specimen when it merely presents the man himself, and that to know him
truly he must be seen _in situ_ and surrounded with his friends;
especially a man like Doddridge, whose affectionate and absorptive
nature imbibed so much from those around him. But perhaps enough has
been already said to aid the reader's fancy.

The sole survivor of twenty children, and with such a weakly frame, the
wonder is that, amidst incessant toil, Doddridge held out so long.
Temperance, elasticity of spirits, and the hand of God upheld him. At
last, in December, 1750, preaching the funeral sermon of Dr. Clarke, at
St. Albans, he caught a cold which he could never cure. Visits to London
and the waters of Bristol had no beneficial effect; and, in the fall of
the following year, he was advised to try a voyage to Lisbon. His kind
friend, Bishop Warburton, here interfered, and procured for his
dissenting brother a favor which deserves to be held in lasting
memorial. He applied at the London Post-office, and, through his
influence, it was arranged that the captain's room in the packet should
be put at the invalid's disposal. Accordingly, on the thirtieth of
September, accompanied by his anxious wife and a servant, he sailed from
Falmouth; and, revived by the soft breezes and the ship's stormless
progress, he sat in his easy-chair in the cabin, enjoying the brightest
thoughts of all his life. "Such transporting views of the heavenly world
is my Father now indulging me with, as no words can express," was his
frequent exclamation to the tender partner of his voyage. And when the
ship was gliding up the Tagus, and Lisbon with its groves and gardens
and sunny towers stood before them, so animating was the spectacle, that
affection hoped he might yet recover. The hope was an illusion. Bad
symptoms soon came on; and the chief advantage of the change was, that
it perhaps rendered dissolution more easy. On the twenty-sixth of
October, 1751, he ceased from his labors, and soon after was laid in the
burying-ground of the English factory. The Lisbon earthquake soon
followed; but his grave remains to this day, and, like Henry Martyn's at
Tocat, is to the Christian traveller a little spot of holy ground.

A hundred years have passed away since then; but there is much of
Doddridge still on earth. The "Life of Colonel Gardiner" is still one of
the best-known biographies; and, with Dr. Brown, we incline to think
that, as a manual for ministers, there has yet appeared no memoir
superior to his own. The Family Expositor has undergone that
disintegrating process to which all bulky books are liable, and many of
its happiest illustrations now circulate as things of course in the
current popular criticism; and though his memory does not receive the
due acknowledgment, the church derives the benefit. The singers of the
Scotch Paraphrases and of other hymn collections are often unwitting
singers of the words of Doddridge; and the thousands who quote the
lines--

    Live while you live, the epicure would say, &c.,

are repeating the epigram which Philip Doddridge wrote, and which Samuel
Johnson pronounced the happiest in our language. And if the "Rise and
Progress" shall ever be superseded by a modern work, we can only wish
its successor equal usefulness; however great its merits we can scarcely
promise that it will keep as far ahead of all competitors for a hundred
years as the original work has done. Had Doddridge lived a little
longer, missionary movements would have been sooner originated by the
British churches; but he lived long enough to be the father of the Book
Society. And though Coward College is now absorbed in a more extensive
erection, the founders of St. John's Wood College should rear a statue
to Doddridge, as the man who gave the mightiest impulse to the work of
rearing an educated Nonconformist ministry in England.


From Leigh Hunt's Journal.

LORD THURLOW, AND HIS TERRIBLE SWEARING.


Lord Thurlow, once Lord High Chancellor of England, Keeper of the
Conscience of George the Third, &c., was a tall, dark, harsh-featured,
deep-voiced, beetle-browed man, of strong natural abilities, little
conscience, and no delicacy. Having discovered, in the outset of life,
that the generality of the world were more affected by manner than
matter, he indulged a natural inclination to huffing and arrogance, by
acting systematically upon it to that end; and, in a worldly point of
view, he succeeded to perfection; with this drawback--which always
accompanies false pretensions of the kind--that, knowing to what extent
they were false, his mind was kept in a proportionate state of
irritability and dissatisfaction; so that his success, after all, was
only that of a man who prospers by parading an infirmity. With good
intention as a judge in ordinary cases, he had sufficient patience
neither to study nor to listen. As a statesman, he was actuated wholly
by personal feelings of ambition and rivalry; and as keeper of the Royal
Conscience, he presented an aspect of ludicrous inconsistency,
discreditable to both parties; for he openly kept a mistress, while his
master professed to be a pattern of chastity and decorum. But he had
face for any thing. Seeing that airs of independence would turn to good
account, even in the royal closet, provided he was servile at heart, he
sometimes, with great cunning, huffed the King himself; and he did as
much with the Prince of Wales, and with the like success. What he really
could have done best, had his industry equalled his acuteness, and his
ambition been less towards the side of pomp and power, would have been
something in literary and metaphysical criticism, as may be seen in his
letters to Cowper and others. What he became most famous for doing, was
swearing.

We must here advertise our fair readers (in case any of them should be
doing us the honor of reading this article aloud), that we are going to
give some specimens of the swearing of this solemn and illustrious
person; so that, if they do not regard the words in the same childish,
meaningless, and nonsensical light that we do ourselves (for reasons
that we shall give presently), and therefore cannot comfortably frame
their lovely and innocent lips to utter them (which, indeed, custom will
hardly allow us to expect), they had better hand over the passages to
the nearest male friend that happens to be with them, and get him to
read or to _initialize_ them instead. As to ourselves (for reasons also
to be presently given), we shall write the words at full length, out of
sheer sense of their nothingness; only premising, that such was not the
opinion entertained of them by this tremendous Lord Chancellor, or by
the age in which he lived; otherwise he would not have resorted to them
as clenches for his thunderbolts, neither would his contemporaries have
given them to the reading world under those mitigated and whispering
forms of initials and hyphens, which have come down to our own times,
and which are intended to impress their audacity by intimating their
guilt.

"_Damns_ have had their day," says the man in the "Rivals." So they
have; and so we would have the reader think, and treat them accordingly;
that is to say, as things of no account, one way or the other. But such
was not the case when the dramatist wrote; and therefore Lord Thurlow
was renowned as a swearer, even in a swearing age. It was his ambition
to be considered a swearer. He took to it, as a lad does, who wishes to
show that he has arrived at man's estate. Every thing with the judge was
"damned bad" or "damned good," damned hot or cold, damned stupid, &c. It
was his epithet, his adjective, his participle, his sign of positive and
superlative, his argument, his judgment. He could not have got on
without it. To deprive Thurlow of his "damn" would have been to shave
his eyebrows, or to turn his growl to a whisper.

"Lamenting," says Lord Campbell, "the great difficulty he had in
disposing of a high legal situation, he described himself as long
hesitating between the intemperance of A. and the corruption of B., but
finally preferring the man of bad temper. Afraid lest he should have
been supposed to have admitted the existence of pure moral worth, he
added, 'Not but that there was a d----d deal of corruption in A.'s
intemperance.' Happening to be at the British Museum, viewing the
Townley Marbles, when a person came in and announced the death of Mr.
Pitt, Thurlow was heard to say, 'a d----d good hand at turning a
period!' and no more.

"The following anecdote (continues his lordship) was related by Lord
Eldon:--

"After dinner, one day, when nobody was present but Lord Kenyon and
myself, Lord Thurlow said, 'Taffy,[P] I decided a cause this morning,
and I saw from Scott's face he doubted whether I was right.' Thurlow
then stated his view of the case, and Kenyon instantly said, 'Your
decision was quite right.' 'What say you to that?' asked the Chancellor.
I said, 'I did not presume to form a judgment upon a case in which they
both agreed. But I think a fact has not been mentioned, which may be
material.' I was about to state the fact, and my reasons. Kenyon,
however, broke in upon me, and, with some warmth, stated that I was
always so obstinate, there was no dealing with me. 'Nay,' interposed
Thurlow, 'that's not fair. You, Taffy, are obstinate, and give no
reasons; you, Jack Scott, are obstinate, too; but then you give your
reasons, and d----d bad ones they are!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

"In Thurlow's time, the habit of profane swearing was unhappily so
common, that Bishop Horsley, and other right reverend prelates, are said
not to have been entirely exempt from it; but Thurlow indulged in it to
a degree that admits of no excuse. I have been told by an old gentleman,
who was standing behind the woolsack at the time that Sir Ilay Campbell,
then Lord Advocate, arguing a Scotch appeal to the bar in a very tedious
manner, said, 'I will noo, my lords, proceed to my seevent pownt.' 'I'll
be d----d if you do,' cried Lord Thurlow, so as to be heard by all
present; 'this house is adjourned till Monday next,' and off he
scampered. Sir James Mansfield, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
used to relate that, while he and several other legal characters were
dining with Lord Chancellor Thurlow, his lordship happening to swear at
his Swiss valet, when retiring from the room, the man returned, just put
his head in, and exclaimed, 'I von't be d----d for you, Milor;' which
caused the noble host and all his guests to burst out into a roar of
laughter. From another valet he received a still more cutting retort.
Having scolded this meek man for some time without receiving any answer,
he concluded by saying, 'I wish you were in hell.' The terrified valet
at last exclaimed, 'I wish I was, my lord! I wish I was!'

"Sir Thomas Davenport, a great _nisi prius_ leader, had been intimate
with Thurlow, and long flattered himself with the hopes of succeeding to
some valuable appointment in the law; but, several good things passing
by, he lost his patience and temper along with them. At last he
addressed this laconic application to his patron: 'The Chief Justiceship
of Chester is vacant; am I to have it?' and received the following
laconic answer--'No! by God! Kenyon shall have it.'

"Having once got into a dispute with a bishop respecting a living, of
which the Great Seal had the alternate presentation, the bishop's
secretary called upon him, and said, 'My lord of ---- sends his
compliments to your lordship, and believes that the next turn to present
to ---- belongs to his lordship.' _Chancellor._--'Give my compliments to
his lordship, and tell him that I will see him d----d first before he
shall present.' _Secretary._--'This, my lord, is a very unpleasant
message to deliver to a bishop.' 'You are right, it is so, therefore
tell the bishop that _I_ will be damned first before he shall
present.'"[Q]

Lord Campbell concludes his records of the Chancellor's _jusjuration_
(if we may coin a word for a precedent so extraordinary), by frankly
extracting into his pages the whole of a long damnatory ode, which was
put into the judge's mouth by the authors of the once-famous collection
of libels called _Criticisms on the Rolliad_, and _Probationary Odes for
the Laureateship_,--the precursor, and very witty precursor, though
flagrantly coarse and personal, of the _Anti-Jacobin Magazine_ and the
_Rejected Addresses_. They were on the Whig side of politics, and are
understood to have been the production of Dr. Lawrence, a civilian, and
George Ellis, the author of several elegant works connected with poetry
and romance. We shall notice the book further when we come to speak of
Mr. Ellis himself. Lord Thurlow is made to contribute one of the
Probationary Odes; and he does it in so abundant and complete a style,
that bold as our "innocence" makes us in this particular, yet not having
the legal warrant of the biographer, we really have not the courage to
bring it in as evidence. The reader, however, may guess of what sort of
stuff it is composed, when he hears that it begins with the
comprehensive line,

    "Damnation seize ye all;"

and ends with the following pleasing and particular couplet:--

    "Damn them beyond what mortal tongue can tell;
    Confound, sink, plunge them all, to deepest, blackest hell."

After this, it will hardly be a climax to add, that Peter Pindar said of
this Keeper of the King's Conscience, with great felicity, that he
"swore his prayers."

We have been thus particular on the subject of Lord Thurlow's swearing,
partly because it is the main point of his lordship's character with
posterity, but chiefly that we might show what has already been
intimated; namely, what a nothing such talk has become, and what high
time it is to treat it as it deserves, and give it no longer in
typography those implied awful significances, those under-breaths and
intensifications of initials and hyphens, which make it pretend to have
a meaning, and are the main cause why it survives. The word _damned_ in
Lord Thurlow's mouth, for all its emphasis and effect, had as little
meaning as the word _blest_, or the word _conscience_. It has equally
little meaning in any body's. It no more signifies what it was
originally intended to signify, than the word "cursed" means
_anathematized_, or the word "pontificate" means _bridge-making_. This
is the natural death of oaths in any tremendous sense of the words, or
in any sense at all. They become things of "sound and fury, signifying
nothing." Who that utters the word "zounds," imagines that he is
speaking of such awful and inconceivable things as "God's wounds,"
though literally he is doing so? Or what honest farmer, who ejaculates
"Please the pigs" (such extraordinary things do reform and vicissitude
bring together!) supposes that his Protestant soul is propitiating the
_Pyx_, or Holy Sacrament box, of the Roman Catholic Church? Yet time
was, when the innocent word "zounds" was written with the same culpatory
dashes and hyphens as the "damns that have had their day;" and "pigs,"
we suppose, were exenterated in like manner: suggested only by their
heads and tails,--the first letter and the last. We happen to be no
swearers ourselves, so that we are speaking a good word for no custom of
our own; though, we confess, that when we come to an oath as a trait of
character, in biography or in fiction, we are no more in the habit of
balking it, than we are of ignoring any other harmless ejaculation; and
therefore, by reason of its very nonsense and nothingness, we like to
see it written plainly out as if it _were_ nothing, instead of being
mystified into a more nonsensical importance. We have known better men
than ourselves who have sworn; and we have known worse; but with none of
them had the word any meaning, nor has it any, ever, except in the
pulpit; where it is a pity (as many an excellent clergyman has thought)
that it is heard at all. Treat it lightly elsewhere, as an expletive and
a mere way of speaking, and it will come to nothing as it deserves, and
follow the obsolete "plagues" and "murrains" of our ancestors.

The only persons who profess to swear to any purpose, are the Roman
Catholics; and they, indeed, may well be said to swear "terribly"--or
rather they would do so, if any poor set of human creatures, fallible by
the necessity of their natures, could of a surety know what is
infallible, and be commissioned by a writing on the sun or moon to let
us hear it. Lord Thurlow, with all his damns, and his big voice, and his
power of imprisonment to boot, was a babe of grace compared with the
Roman Catholic Bishop of Rochester who thundered forth the famous
excommunication which the Protestant chapter-clerk of that city gave to
the author of _Tristram Shandy_ to put in his book; to the immortal
honor of said Protestant, and disgrace of the unalterable and infallible
Roman Catholic Churchmen; who, when delivered from their bonds, and
complimented on partaking of the progress and civilization common to the
rest of the world, take the first opportunity for showing us we are
mistaken, and crying damnation to their deliverers.

We shall not repeat the document alluded to, lest we should be thought
to give the light matter of which we have been treating, a tone of too
much importance. Suffice it to say, that when all the powers, and
angels, and very virgins of heaven are called upon by the
excommunication to "curse" and "damn" the object of it limb by limb
(literally so), his eyes, his brains, and his heart (how unlike fair
human readers, who doubt whether the very word "damn" should be
uttered), good Uncle Toby interposes one of those world-famous
pleasantries which have shaken the old Vatican beyond recovery.

"'Our armies swore terribly in Flanders,' cried my Uncle Toby; 'but
nothing to this. For my own part, I could not have the heart to curse my
dog so.'"

FOOTNOTES:

[P] Thurlow politely calls Kenyon _Taffy_, because the latter was a
Welshman. _Scott_ is Lord Eldon himself.

[Q] _Lives of the Chancellors._ Second Series. Vol. v. pp. 644, 664.


From Chambers' Edinbourgh Journal.

THE LAST OF THE FIDDLERS.

A VILLAGE TALE.

BY BERTHOLD AUERBACH.


The midnight silence of the village is broken by unusual clattering
sounds--a horse comes galloping along at the top of his speed, his rider
crying aloud, "Fire--fire! Help, ho! Fire!" Away he rides straight to
the church, and presently the alarm-bell is heard pealing from the
steeple.

It is no easy matter to arouse the harvest folks, after a hard day's
work, from their first sound sleep: there they lie, stretched as
unconsciously as the corn in the fields which they have reaped in the
sweat of their brow. But wake they must--there is no help for it. The
stable-boys are the first on the alert--every one anxious to win the
reward which, time out of mind, has been given to the person, who, on
the occasion of a fire, is the first to reach the engine-house with
harnessed horses. Here and there a light is seen at a cottage lattice--a
window is opened--the men come running out of doors with their coats
half drawn on, or in their shirt sleeves. The villagers all collect
about the market-house, and the cry is heard on all sides, "Where is it?
Where is the fire?"

"In Eibingen."

Question and answer were alike unneeded, for in the distance, behind the
dark pine-forest, the whole sky was illumined with a bright-red glow, in
the stillness of the night, like the glow of the setting sun; while
every now and then a shower of sparks rose into the air, as if shot out
from a blast-furnace.

The night was still and calm, and the stars shone peacefully on the
silent earth.

The horses are speedily put to the fire-engine, the buckets placed in a
row, a couple of torches lighted, and the torch-bearers stand ready on
either side holding on to the engine, which is instantly covered with
men.

"Quick! out with another pair of horses! two can't draw such a
load!"--"Down with the torches!"--"No, no; they're all right--'tis the
old way!"--"Drive off, for Heaven's sake--quick!"

Such-like exclamations resounded on all sides. Let us follow the crowd.

The engine, with its heavy load, now rolls out of the village, and
through the peaceful fields and meadows: the fruit-trees by the roadside
seem to dance past in the flickering light; and soon the crowd hurry,
helter-skelter, through the forest. The birds are awakened from sleep,
and fly about in affright, and can scarcely find their way back to their
warm nests. The forest is at length passed, and down below, in the
valley, lies the hamlet, brightly illumined as at noon-day, while
shrieks and the alarm-bell are heard, as if the flames had found a
voice.

See! what is yonder white, ghost-like form, in a fluttering dress, on
the skirts of the forest? The wheels creak, and rattle along the stony
road--no sounds can be distinguished in the confusion. Away! help! away!

The folks are now seen flying from the village with their goods and
chattels--children in their bare shirts and with naked feet--carrying
off beds and chairs, pots and pans. Has the fire spread so fearfully, or
is this all the effect of fright?

"Where's the fire?"

"At Hans the Fiddler's."

And the driver lashed his horses, and every man seemed to press forward
with increased ardor to fly to the succor.

As they approached the spot, it was clearly impossible to save the
burning cottage; and all efforts were therefore directed to prevent the
flames extending to the adjoining houses. Just then every body was
busied in trying to save a horse and two cows from the shed; but the
animals, terrified by the fire, would not quit the spot, until their
eyes were bandaged, and they were driven out by force.

"Where's old Hans?" was the cry on all sides.

"Burnt in his bed to a certainty," said some. Others declared that he
had escaped. Nobody knew the truth.

The old fiddler had neither child nor kinsfolk, and yet all the people
grieved for him; and those who had come from the villages round about
reproached the inhabitants for not having looked after the fate of the
poor fellow. Presently it was reported that he had been seen in Urban
the smith's barn; another said that he was sitting up in the church
crying and moaning--the first time he had been there without his fiddle.
But neither in the barn nor in the church was old Hans to be found, and
again it was declared that he had been burnt to death in his house, and
that his groans had actually been heard; but, it was added, all too late
to save him, for the flames had already burst through the roof, and the
glass of the windows was sent flying across the road.

The day was just beginning to dawn when all danger of the fire spreading
was past; and leaving the smouldering ruins, the folks from a distance
set out on their return.

A strange apparition was now seen coming down the mountain-side, as if
out of the gray mists of morning. In a cart drawn by two oxen sat a
haggard figure, dressed in his bare shirt, and his shoulders wrapped in
a horse-cloth. The morning breeze played in the long white locks of the
old man, whose wan features were framed, as it were, by a short,
bristly, snow-white beard. In his hands he clutched a fiddle and
fiddlestick. It was old Hans, the village fiddler. Some of the lads had
found him at the edge of the forest, on the spot where we had caught a
glimpse of him, looking like a ghostly apparition, as we rattled past
with the engine. There he was found standing in his shirt, and holding
his fiddle in both his hands pressed tightly to his breast.

As they drew near the village, he took his fiddle and played his
favorite waltz. Every eye was turned on the strange-looking man, and all
welcomed his return, as if he had risen from the grave.

"Give me a drink!" he exclaimed to the first person who held out a hand
to him. "I'm burnt up with thirst!"

A glass of water was brought him.

"Bah!" cried the old man; "'twere a sin to quench such a thirst as mine
with water; bring me some wine! Or has the horrid red cock drunk up all
my wine too?"

And again he fell to fiddling lustily, until they arrived at the spot of
the fire. He got down from the cart, and entered a neighbor's cottage.
All the folks pressed up to the old fiddler, tendering words of comfort,
and promising that they would all help him to rebuild his cottage.

"No, no!" replied Hans; "'tis all well. I have no home--I'm one of the
cuckoo tribe that has no resting-place of its own, and only now and then
slips into the swallow's nest. For the short time I have to live, I
shall have no trouble in finding quarters wherever I go. I can now climb
up into a tree again, and look down upon the world in which I have no
longer any thing to call my own. Ay, ay, 'twas wrong in me ever to have
had any thing of my own except my precious little fiddle here!"

No objection was raised to the reasoning of the strange old man, and the
country-folks from a distance went their ways home with the satisfaction
of knowing that the old fiddler was still alive and well. Hans properly
belonged to the whole country round about: his loss would have been a
public one: much as if the old linden-tree on the Landeck Hill close by
had been thrown down unexpectedly in the night Hans was as merry as a
grig when Caspar the smith gave him an old shirt, the carpenter Joseph a
pair of breeches--and so on. "Well, to be sure, folks may now say that I
carry the whole village on my back!" said he; and he gave to each
article of dress the name of the donor. "A coat indeed like this, which
a friend has worn nicely smooth for one, fits to a T. I was never at my
ease in a new coat; and you know I used always to go to the church, and
rub the sleeves in the wax that dropped from the holy tapers, to make
them comfortable and fit for wear. But this time I'm saved the trouble,
and I'm for all the world like a new-born babe who is fitted with
clothes without measuring. Ay, ay, you may laugh; but 'tis a fact--I'm
new-born."

And in truth it quite seemed so with the old man: the wild merriment of
former years, which had slumbered for a while, all burst out anew.

A fellow just now entered who had been active in extinguishing the fire,
and having his hand in the work, had been at the same time no less
actively engaged in quenching a certain internal fire--and in truth, as
was plain to be seen, more than was needed. On seeing him, the old
fiddler cried out, "By Jove, how I envy the fellow's jollity!" All the
folks laughed; but presently the merriment was interrupted by the
entrance of the magistrate with his notary, come to investigate the
cause of the fire, and take an inventory of the damage.

Old Hans openly confessed his fault. He had the odd peculiarity of
carrying about him, in all his pockets, a little box of lucifer matches,
in order never to be at a loss when he wanted to light his pipe.
Whenever any one called on him, and wherever he went, his fingers were
almost unconsciously playing with the matches. Often and often he was
heard to exclaim, "Provoking enough! that these matches should come into
fashion just as I am going off the stage. Look! a light in the twinkling
of an eye! Only think of all the time I've lost in the course of my life
in striking a light with the old flint and steel,--days, weeks, ay,
years!"

The fire had, to all appearances, originated with this child's play of
the old man, and the magistrate said with regret that he must inflict
the legal penalty for his carelessness. "However, at all events 'tis
well 'tis no worse," he added; "you are in truth the last of the
fiddlers; in our dull, plodding times, you are a relic of the past--of a
merry, careless age. 'Twould have been a grievous thing if you had come
to such a miserable end."

"Look ye, your worship, I ought to have been a parson," said Hans; "and
I should have preached to the folks after this fashion:--'Don't set too
much store on life, and it can't hurt you; look on every thing as
foolery, and then you'll be cleverer than all the rest. If the world was
always merry--if folks did nothing but work and dance, there would be no
need of schoolmasters--no need of learning to write and read--no
parsons--and (by your worship's pardon) no magistrates. The whole world
is a big fiddle--the strings are tuned--Fortune plays upon them; but
some one is wanted to be constantly screwing up the strings; and this is
a job for the parson and magistrate. There's nothing but turning and
screwing, and turning and scraping, and the dance never begins.'"

The fiddler's tongue went running on in this way, until his worship at
length took a friendly leave of him. We shall, however, remain, and tell
the reader something of the history of this strange character.

It is now nearly thirty years since the old man first made his
appearance in the village, just at the time when the new church was
consecrated. When he first came among the villagers, he played for three
days and three nights almost incessantly the maddest tunes.
Superstitious folks muttered one to another that it must be Old Nick
himself who could draw such spirit and life from the instrument, as
never to let any one have rest or quiet any more than he seemed to
require it himself. During the whole of this time he scarcely ate a
morsel, and only drank--but in potent draughts--during the pauses. Often
it seemed as if he did not stir a finger, but merely laid the
fiddlestick on the strings, and magic sounds instantly came out of them,
while the fiddle-bow hopped up and down of itself.

Hey-day! there was a merrymaking and piece of work in the large
dancing-room of the "Sun." Once, during a pause, the hostess, a buxom
portly widow, cried out, "Hold hard, fiddler; do stop--the cattle are
all quarrelling with you, and will starve if you don't let the lads and
girls go home and feed them. If you've no pity on us folks, do for
goodness' sake stop your fiddling for the sake of the poor dumb
creatures."

"Just so!" cried the fiddler; "here you can see how man is the noblest
animal on the face of the earth; man alone can dance--ay, dance in
couples. Hark ye, hostess, if you'll dance a turn with me, I'll stop my
fiddlestick for a whole hour."

The musician jumped off the table. All the by-standers pressed the
hostess, till at length she consented to dance. She clasped her partner
tight round the waist, whilst he kept hold of his fiddle, drawing from
it sounds never before heard; and in this comical manner, playing and
dancing, they performed their evolutions in the circle of spectators;
and at length, with a brilliant scrape of his bow, he concluded,
embraced the hostess, and gave her a bouncing kiss, receiving in return
a no less hearty box on the ear. Both were given and taken in fun and
good temper.

From that time forward the fiddler was domiciled under the shade of the
"Sun." There he nestled himself quietly, and whenever any merrymaking
was going on in the country round-about, Hans was sure to be there with
his fiddle; but he always returned home regularly; and there was not a
village nor a house far and wide around, in which there was more
dancing, than in the hostelry of the portly landlady of the "Sun."

The fiddler comported himself in the house as if he belonged to it; he
served the guests (never taking any part in out-of-doors work),
entertained the customers as they dropped in, played a hand at cards
occasionally, and was never at a loss in praising a fresh tap. "We've
just opened a new cask of wine--only taste, and say if there's not music
in wine, and something divine!" Touching every thing that concerned the
household, he invariably used the authoritative and familiar _we_:-"_We_
have a cellar fit for a king;" "_Our_ house lies in every one's way;"
and so forth.

Hans and his little fiddle, as a matter of course, were at every
village-gathering and festivity; and the people of the country
round-about could never dissociate in their thoughts the "Sun" inn and
Hans the fiddler. But possibly the hostess considered the matter in a
different light. At the conclusion of the harvest merrymaking she took
heart and said--"Hans, you must know I've a liking for you; you pay for
what you eat; but wouldn't you like for once to try living under another
roof? What say you?"

Hans protested that he was well enough off in his present quarters, and
that he felt no disposition to neglect the old proverb of "Let well
alone." The landlady was silent.

Weeks went over, and at length she began again--"Hans, you wouldn't do
any thing to injure me?"

"Not for the world!"

"Look ye--'tis only on account of the folks hereabouts. I would not
bother you, but you know there's a talk----You can come back again after
a month or two, and you'll be sure to find my door open to you."

"Nay, nay, I'll not go away, and then I shall not want to come back."

"No joking, Hans--I'm in earnest--you must go."

"Well, there's one way to force me: go up into my room, pack my things
into a bundle, and throw them into the road; otherwise I promise you
I'll not budge from the spot."

"You're a downright good-for-nothing fellow, and that's the truth; but
what am I to do with you?"

"Marry me!"

The answer to this was another box on the ear; but this time it was
administered much more gently than at the dance. As soon as the
landlady's back was turned, Hans took his fiddle and struck up a lively
tune.

From time to time the hostess of the "Sun" recurred to the subject of
Hans's removal, urging him to go; but his answer was always
ready--always the same--"_Marry me!_"

One day in conversation she told him that the police would be sure soon
to interfere and forbid his remaining longer, as he had no proper
certificate; and so forth. Hans answered not a word, but cocking his hat
knowingly on the left side, he whistled a merry tune, and set out for
the castle of the count, distant a few miles. The village at that time
belonged to the Count von S----.

That evening, as the landlady was standing by the kitchen fire, her
cheeks glowing with the reflection from the hearth, Hans entered, and
without moving a muscle of his face, handed to her a paper, and said,
"Look ye, there's our marriage-license; the count dispenses with
publishing the bans. This is Friday--Sunday is our wedding-day!'

"What do you say, you saucy fellow? I hope"----

"Hollo, Mr. Schoolmaster!" interrupted Hans, as he saw that worthy
functionary passing the window just at that instant "Do step in here,
and read this paper."

Hans held the landlady tight by the arm, while the schoolmaster read the
document, and at the conclusion tendered his congratulations and good
wishes.

"Well, well--with all my heart!" said the landlady at length. "Since
'tis to be so, to tell the truth I've long had a liking for you, Hans;
but 'twas only on account of the prate and gossip"----

"Sunday morning then?"

"Ay, ay--you rogue."

A merry scene was that, when on the following Sunday morning Hans the
Fiddler--or, to give him his proper style, Johann Grubenmüller--paraded
to church by the side of his betrothed, fiddling the wedding-march,
partly for his self-gratification, partly to give the ceremony a certain
solemn hilarity. For a short space he deposited his instrument on the
baptismal font; but the ceremony being ended, he shouldered it again,
struck up an unusually brisk tune, and played so marvellously, that the
folks were fairly dying with laughter.

Ever since that time Hans resided in the village, and that is as much as
to say that mirth and jollity abode there. For some years past, however,
Hans was often subject to fits of dejection, for the authorities had
decreed that there should be no more dancing without the special
permission of the magistrate. Trumpets and other wind-instruments
supplanted the fiddle, and our friend Hans could no longer play his
merry jigs, except to the children under the old oak-tree, until his
reverence, in the exercise of his clerical powers, forbade even this
amusement, as prejudicial to sound school discipline.

Hans lost his wife just three years ago, with whom he had lived in
uninterrupted harmony. Brightly and joyously as he had looked on life at
the outset of his career, its close seemed often clouded, sad, and
burthensome, more than he was himself aware. "A man ought not to grow so
old!" he often repeated--an expression which escaped from a long train
of thought that was passing unconsciously in the old man's mind, in
which he acknowledged to himself that young limbs and the vigor of
youth properly belonged to the careless life of a wandering musician.
"The hay does not grow as sweet as it did thirty years ago!" he stoutly
maintained.

The new village magistrate, who had a peculiarly kind feeling towards
old Hans, set about devising means of securing him from want for the
rest of his days. The sum (no inconsiderable one) for which the house
was insured in the fire-office was by law not payable in full until
another house should be built in its place. It happened that the parish
had for a long time been looking out for a spot on which to erect a new
schoolhouse in the village, and at the suggestion of the worthy
magistrate the authorities now bought from Hans the ground on which his
cottage had stood, with all that remained upon it. But the old man did
not wish to be paid any sum down, and an annuity was settled on him
instead, amply sufficient to provide for all his wants. This plan quite
took his fancy; he chuckled at the thought (as he expressed it) that he
was eating himself up, and draining the glass to the last drop.

Hans, moreover, was now permitted again to play to the children under
the village oak on a summer evening. Thus he lived quite a new life; and
his former spirit seemed in some measure to return. In the summer, when
the building of the new schoolhouse was commenced, old Hans was riveted
to the spot as if by magic; there he sat upon the timbers, or on a pile
of stones, watching the digging and hammering with fixed attention.
Early in the morning, when the builders went to their work they always
found Hans already on the spot. At breakfast and noon, when the men
stopped work to take their meals, which were brought them by their wives
and children, old Hans found himself seated in the midst of the circle,
and played to them as they ate and talked. Many of the villagers came
and joined the party; and the whole was one continued scene of
merriment. Hans often said that he never before knew his own importance,
for he seemed to be wanted everywhere--whether folks danced or rested,
his fiddle had its part to play: and music could turn the thinnest
potato-broth into a savory feast.

But an unforeseen misfortune awaited our friend Hans, of which the
worthy magistrate, notwithstanding his kindness to the old man, was
unintentionally the cause. His worship came one day, accompanied by a
young man, who had all the look of a genius: the latter stood for some
minutes, with his arms folded, gazing at Hans, who was busy fiddling to
the workpeople at their dinner.

"There stands the last of the fiddlers, of whom I told you," said the
magistrate; "I want you to paint him--he is the only relic of old times
whom we have left."

The artist complied. At first old Hans resisted the operation stoutly,
but he was at length won over by the persuasion of his worship, and
allowed the artist to take his likeness. With trembling impatience he
sat before the easel, wanting every instant to jump up and see what the
man was about. But this the artist would not allow, and promised to show
him the picture when it was finished. Day after day old Hans had to sit
to the artist, in this state of wonder and suspense, and when at noon he
played to the workmen at their meals, his tunes were slow and heavy, and
had lost all their former vivacity and spirit.

At length the picture was finished, and Hans was allowed to see himself
on canvas. At the first glance he started back in affright, crying out
like one mad, "Donner and Blitz!--the rascal has stolen me!"

From that day forward, when the artist had gone away, and taken the
picture with him, old Hans was quite changed: he went about the village,
talking to himself, and was often heard to mutter, "Nailed up to the
wall--stolen! Hans has his eyes open day and night, looking down from
the wall--never sleeps, nor eats, nor drinks. Stolen!--the thief!"
Seldom could a sensible word be drawn from him; but he played the
wildest tunes on his fiddle, and every now and then would stop and
laugh, exclaiming, as if gazing at something, "Ha, ha! you old fellow
there, nailed up to the wall, with your fiddle; you can't play--you are
the wrong one--here he sits!"

On one occasion the spirit of the old man burst out again: it was the
day when the gayly-decked fir bush was stuck upon the finished gable of
the new schoolhouse.[R] The carpenters and masons came, dressed in their
Sunday clothes, preceded by a band of music, to fetch "the master." The
old fiddler, Hans, was the whole day long in high spirits--brisk and gay
as in his best years. He sang, drank, and played till late into the
night, and in the morning he was found, with his fiddle-bow in his hand,
dead in his bed....

Many of the villagers fancy, in the stillness of the night, when the
clock strikes twelve, that they hear a sound in the schoolhouse, like
the sweetest tones of a fiddle. Some say that it is old Hans's
instrument, which he bequeathed to the schoolhouse, and which plays by
itself. Others declare that the tones which Hans played _into_ the wood
and stones, when the house was building, come _out_ of them again in the
night. Be this as it may, the children are taught all the new rational
methods of instruction, in a building which is still haunted by the
ghost of the last fiddler.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE III. gave Lord Eldon a seal, containing a figure of Religion
looking up to Heaven, and of Justice with no bandage over her eyes, his
Majesty remarking at the same time, that Justice should be bold enough
to look the world in the face. The motto of the seal was _His dirige te.
Quere._ Would not this be a more appropriate inscription for the spout
of a tea-pot than for the seal of a Lord Chancellor.

FOOTNOTES:

[R] This custom is prettily related in Auerbach's story of 'Ivo.'


From Dickens' Household Words.

A BIOGRAPHY OF A BAD SHILLING.


I believe I may state with confidence that my parents were respectable,
notwithstanding that one belonged to the law--being the zinc door-plate
of a solicitor. The other was a pewter flagon residing at a very
excellent hotel, and moving in distinguished society; for it assisted
almost daily at convivial parties in the Temple. It fell a victim at
last to a person belonging to the lower orders, who seized it, one fine
morning, while hanging upon some railings to dry, and conveyed it to a
Jew, who--I blush to record the insult offered to a respected member of
my family--melted it down. My first mentioned parent--the zinc
plate--was not enabled to move much in society, owing to its very close
connection with the street door. It occupied, however, a very
conspicuous position in a leading thoroughfare, and was the means of
diffusing more useful instruction, perhaps, than many a quarto, for it
informed the running as well as the reading public, that Messrs.
Snapples and Son resided within, and that their office hours were from
ten till four. In order to become my progenitor it fell a victim to
dishonest practices. A "fast" man unscrewed it one night, and bore it
off in triumph to his chambers. Here it was included by "the boy" among
his numerous "perquisites," and, by an easy transition, soon found its
way to the Hebrew gentleman above mentioned.

The first meeting between my parents took place in the melting-pot of
this ingenious person, and the result of their subsequent union was
mutually advantageous. The one gained by the alliance that strength and
solidity which is not possessed by even the purest pewter; while to the
solid qualities of the other were added a whiteness and brilliancy that
unadulterated zinc could never display.

From the Jew, my parents were transferred--mysteriously and by night--to
an obscure individual in an obscure quarter of the metropolis, when, in
secrecy and silence, I was _cast_, to use an appropriate metaphor, upon
the world.

How shall I describe my first impression of existence? how portray my
agony when I became aware _what I was_--when I understood my mission
upon earth? The reader, who has possibly never felt himself to be what
Mr. Carlyle calls a "sham," or a "solemnly constituted imposter," can
have no notion of my sufferings!

These, however, were endured only in my early and unsophisticated youth.
Since then, habitual intercourse with the best society has relieved me
from the embarrassing appendage of a conscience. My long career upon
town--in the course of which I have been bitten, and rung, and subjected
to the most humiliating tests--has blunted my sensibilities, while it
has taken off the sharpness of my edges; and, like the counterfeits of
humanity, whose lead may be seen emulating silver at every turn, my only
desire is--not to be worthy of passing, but simply--to pass.

My impression of the world, on first becoming conscious of existence,
was, that it was about fifteen feet in length, very dirty, and had a
damp, unwholesome smell; my notions of mankind were, that it shaved only
once a fortnight; that it had coarse, misshapen features; a hideous
leer; that it abjured soap, as a habit; and lived habitually in its
shirt-sleeves. Such, indeed, was the aspect of the apartment in which I
first saw the light, and such the appearance of the professional
gentleman who ushered me into existence.

I may add that the room was fortified, as if to sustain a siege. Not
only was the door itself lined with iron, but it was strengthened by
ponderous wooden beams, placed upright, and across, and in every
possible direction. This formidable exhibition of precautions against
danger was quite alarming.

I had not been long brought into this "narrow world" before a low and
peculiar tap, from the outside of the door, met my ear. My master
paused, as if alarmed, and seemed on the point of sweeping me and
several of my companions (who had been by this time mysteriously ushered
into existence) into some place of safety. Reassured, however, by a
second tapping, of more marked peculiarity, he commenced the elaborate
process of unfastening the door. This having been accomplished, and the
entrance left to the guardianship only of a massive chain, a mysterious
watchword was exchanged with some person outside who was presently
admitted.

"Hollo! there's two on you?" cried my master, as a hard, elderly animal
entered, followed somewhat timidly by a younger one of mild and modest
aspect.

"A green 'un as I have took under my arm," said Mr. Blinks (which I
presently understood to be the name of the elder one), "and werry
deserving he promises to be. He's just come out of the stone-pitcher,
without having done nothing to entitle him to have gone in. This was it:
a fellow out at Highbury Barn collared him, for lifting snow from some
railings, where it was a hanging to dry. Young Innocence had never
dreamt of any thing of the kind--bein' a walking on his way to the
work'us--but beaks being proverbially otherwise than fly, he got six
weeks on it. In the 'Ouse o' Correction, however, he met some knowing
blades, who put him up to the time of day, and he'll soon be as
wide-awake as any on 'em. This morning he brought me a pocket-book, and
in it eigh--ty pound flimsies. As he is a young hand, I encouraged him
by giving him three pun' ten for the lot--it's runnin' a risk, but I
done it. As it is, I shall have to send 'em all over to 'Amburg.
Howsomever, he's got to take one pund in home made: bein' out of it
myself, I have brought him to you."

"You're here at the nick o' time," said my master, "I've just finished a
new batch--"

And he pointed to the glittering heap in which I felt myself--with the
diffidence of youth--to be unpleasantly conspicuous.

"I've been explaining to young Youthful that it's the reg'lar thing,
when he sells his swag to gents in my way of business, to take part of
it in this here coin." Here he took _me_ up from the heap, and as he did
so I felt as if I were growing black between his fingers, and having my
prospects in life very much damaged.

"And is all this bad money?" said the youth, curiously gazing, as I
thought, at me alone, and not taking the slightest notice of the rest of
my companions.

"Hush, hush, young Youthful," said Mr. Blinks, "no offence to the home
coinage. In all human affairs, every thing is as good as it looks."

"I could not tell them from the good--from those made by government, I
should say"--hastily added the boy.

I felt myself leaping up with vanity, and chinking against my companions
at these words. It was plain I was fast losing the innocence of youth.
In justice to myself, however, I am bound to say that I have, in the
course of my subsequent experience, seen many of the lords and masters
of the creation behave much more absurdly under the influence of
flattery.

"Well, we must put you up to the means of finding out the real turtle
from the mock," said my master. "It's difficult to tell by the ring.
Silver, if it's at all cracked--as lots of money is--don't ring no
better than pewter; besides, people can't try every blessed bit o' tin
they get in that way; some folks is offended if they do, and some ain't
got no counter. As for the color, I defy any body to tell the
difference. And as for the figgers on the side, wot's your dodge? Why,
wen a piece o' money's give to you, look to the hedges, and feel 'em too
with your finger. When they ain't quite perfect, ten to one but they're
bad 'uns. You see, the way it's done is this--I suppose I may put the
young 'un up to a thing or two more?" added Mr. Blinks, pausing.

My master, who had during the above conversation lighted a short pipe,
and devoted himself with considerable assiduity to a pewter pot--which
he looked at with a technical eye, as if mentally casting it into crown
pieces,--now nodded assent. He was not of an imaginative or philosophic
turn, like Mr. Blinks. He saw none of the sentiment of his business, but
pursued it on a system of matter of fact, because he profited by it.
This difference between the producer and the middle-man may be
continually observed elsewhere.

"You see," continued Mr. Blinks, "that these here '_bobs_'"--by which he
meant shillings--"is composed of a mixter of two metals--pewter and
zinc. In coorse these is first prigged raw, and sold to gents in my line
of bis'ness, who either manufacters them themselves, or sells 'em to
gents as does. Now, if the manufacturer is only in a small way of
bis'ness, and is of a mean natur, he merely casts his money in plaster
of Paris moulds. But for nobby gents like our friend here (my master
here nodded approvingly over his pipe), this sort of thing won't
pay--too much trouble and not enough profit. All the top-sawyers in the
manufactur is scientific men. By means of what they calls a galwanic
battery a cast is made of that partiklar coin selected for himitation.
From this here cast, which you see, that there die is made, and from
that there die impressions is struck off on plates of the metal prepared
for the purpose. Now, unfortunately, we ain't got the whole of the
masheenery of the Government institootion _yet_ at our disposal, though
it's our intention for to bribe the Master of the Mint (in imitation
coin) some of these days to put us up to it all--so you see we're
obliged to stamp the two sides of this here shilling, for instance
(taking _me_ up again as he spoke), upon different plates of metal,
jining of 'em together afterwards. Then comes the _milling_ round the
hedges. This we do with a file; and it is the himperfection of that 'ere
as is continually a preying upon our minds. Any one who's up to the
bis'ness can tell whether the article's geniwine or not, by a looking at
the hedge; for it can't be expected that a file will cut as reg'lar as a
masheen. This is reely the great drawback upon our purfession."

Here Mr. Blinks, overcome by the complicated character of his subject,
subsided into a fit of abstraction, during which he took a copious pull
at my master's porter.

Whether suggested by the onslaught upon his beer, or by a general sense
of impending business, my master now began to show symptoms of
impatience. Knocking the ashes out of his pipe, he asked "how many bob
his friend wanted?"

The arrangement was soon concluded. Mr. Blinks filled a bag which he
carried with the manufacture of my master, and paid over twenty of the
shillings to his _protégé_. Of this twenty, _I_ was one. As I passed
into the youth's hand I could feel it tremble, as I own mine would have
done had I been possessed of that appendage.

My new master then quitted the house in company with Mr. Blinks, whom he
left at the corner of the street--an obscure thoroughfare in
Westminster. His rapid steps speedily brought him to the southern bank
of the "fair and silvery Thames," as a poet who once possessed me (only
for half an hour) described that uncleanly river, in some verses which I
met in the pocket of his pantaloons. Diving into a narrow street,
obviously, from the steepness of its descent, built upon arches, he
knocked at a house of all the unpromising rest the least promising in
aspect. A wretched hag opened the door, past whom the youth glided, in
an absent and agitated manner; and, having ascended several flights of a
narrow and precipitate staircase, opened the door of an apartment on the
top story.

The room was low, and ill-ventilated. A fire burnt in the grate, and a
small candle flickered on the table. Beside the grate, sat an old man
sleeping on a chair; beside the table, and bending over the flickering
light, sat a young girl engaged in sewing. My master was welcomed, for
he had been absent, it seemed, for two months. During that time he had,
he said, earned some money; and he had come to share it with his father
and sister.

I led a quiet life with my companions, in my master's pocket, for more
than a week. At the end of that time, the stock of good money was nearly
exhausted, although it had on more than one occasion been judiciously
mixed with a neighbor or two of mine. Want, however, did not leave us
long at rest. Under pretence of going away again to get "work," my
master--leaving several of my friends to take their chance, in
administering to the necessities of his father and sister--went away. I
remained to be "smashed" (passed) by my master.

"Where are you going so fast, that you don't recognize old friends" were
the words addressed to the youth by a passer-by, as he was crossing, at
a violent pace, the nearest bridge, in the direction of the Middlesex
bank.

The speaker was a young gentleman, aged about twenty, not ill-looking,
but with features exhibiting that peculiar expression of cunning, which
is popularly described as "knowing." He was arrayed in what the police
reports in the newspapers call "the height of fashion,"--that is to say,
he had travestied the style of the most daring dandies of last year. He
wore no gloves; but the bloated rubicundity of his hands was relieved by
a profusion of rings, which--even without the cigar in his mouth--were
quite sufficient to establish his claims to gentility.

Edward, my master, returned the civilities of the stranger, and, turning
back with him, they agreed to "go somewhere."

"Have a weed," said Mr. Bethnal, producing a well-filled cigar-case.
There was no resisting. Edward took one.

"Where shall we go?" he said.

"I'll tell you what we'll do," said Mr. Bethnal, who looked as if
experiencing a novel sensation--he evidently had an idea. "I tell you
what--we'll go and blow a cloud with Joe, the pigeon-fancier. He lives
only a short distance off, not far from the abbey; I want to see him on
business, so we shall kill two birds. He's one of us, you know."

I now learned that Mr. Bethnal was a new acquaintance, picked up under
circumstances (as a member of Parliament, to whom I once belonged, used
to say in the House) to which it is unnecessary further to allude.

"I was glad to hear of your luck, by-the-by," said the gentleman in
question, not noticing his companion's wish to avoid the subject. "I
heard of it from Old Blinks. Smashing's the thing, if one's a
presentable cove. You'd do deuced well in it. You've only to get nobby
togs and you'll do."

Mr. Joe, it appeared, in addition to his ornithological occupations,
kept a small shop for the sale of coals and potatoes; he was also, in a
very small way, a timber merchant; for several bundles of firewood were
piled in pyramids in his shed.

Mr. Bethnal's business with him was soon dispatched; although not until
after the latter had been assured by his friend, that Edward was "of the
right sort," with the qualification that he was "rather green at
present;" and he was taken into Mr. Joe's confidence, and also into Mr.
Joe's up-stairs sanctum.

In answer to a request from Mr. Bethnal, in a jargon to me then
unintelligible, Mr. Joe produced from some mysterious depository at the
top of the house, a heavy canvas bag, which he emptied on the table,
discovering a heap of shillings and half-crowns, which, by a sympathetic
instinct, I immediately detected to be of my own species.

"What do you think of these?" said Mr. Bethnal to his young friend.

Edward expressed some astonishment that Mr. Joe should be in the line.

"Why, bless your eyes," said that gentleman, "you don't suppose I gets
my livelihood out of the shed down stairs, nor the pigeons neither. You
see, these things are only dodges. If I lived here like a
gentleman--that is to say, without a occupation--the p'lese would soon
be down upon me. They'd be obleeged to take notice on me. As it is, I
comes the respectable tradesman, who's above suspicion--and the pigeons
helps on the business wonderful."

"How is that?"

"Why, I keeps my materials--the pewter, and all that--on the roof, in
order to be out o' the way, in case of a surprise. If I was often seed
upon the roof, a-looking after such-like matters, inquisitive eyes would
be on the look out. The pigeons is a capital blind. I'm believed to be
devoted to my pigeons, out o' which I takes care it should be thought I
makes a little fortun--and that makes a man respected. As for the pigeon
and coal and 'tatur business, them's dodges. Gives a opportoonity of
bringing in queer-looking sackfuls o' things, which otherwise would
compel the _'spots'_--as we calls the p'lese--to come down on us."

"Compel them!--but surely they come down whenever they've a suspicion?"

"You needn't a' told me he was green," said Mr. Joe to his elder
acquaintance, as he glanced at the youth with an air of pity. "In the
first place, we takes care to keep the vork-shop almost impregnable; so
that, if they attempts a surprise, we has lots o' time to get the things
out o' the way. In the next, if it comes to the scratch--which is a
matter of almost life and death to us--we stands no nonsense."

Mr. Joe pointed to an iron crowbar, which stood in the chimney-corner.

"I ses nothing to criminate friends, you know," he added significantly
to Mr. Bethnal, "but _you_ remember wot Sergeant Higsley got?"

Mr. Bethnal nodded assent, and Mr. Joe volunteered for the benefit and
instruction of Edward an account of the demise and funeral of the late
Mr. Sergeant Higsley. That official having been promoted, was ambitious
of being designated, in the newspapers, "active and intelligent," and
gave information against a gang of coiners; "Wot wos the consequence?"
continued the narrator. "Somehow or another, that p'leseman was never
more heered on. One fine night he went on his beat; he didn't show at
the next muster; and it was s'posed he'd bolted. Every inquiry was made,
and the 'mysterious disappearance of a p'leseman,' got into the
noospapers. Howsomnever, _he_ never got any wheres."

"And what became of him?"

Mr. Joe then proceeded to take a long puff at his pipe, and winking at
his initiated friend, proceeded to narrate how that the injured gang
dealt in eggs.

"What has that to do with it?"

"Why you see eggs is not always eggs." Mr. Pouter then went on to state
that one night a long deal chest left the premises of the coiners,
marked outside, 'eggs,' for exportation. "They were duly shipped, a
member of the firm being on board. The passage was rough, the box was on
deck, and somehow or other, somebody tumbled it overboard."

"But what has this to do with the missing policeman?"

"The chest was six feet long, and----,"

Here Mr. Bethnal became uneasy.

"Vell," said the host, "the firm's broke up, and is past peaching up,
only it shows you, my green 'un, what we _can_ do."

I was shaken in my master's pocket by the violence of the dread which
Mr. Joe's story had occasioned him.

Mr. Bethnal, with the philosophy which was habitual to him, puffed away
at his pipe.

"The fact o' the matter is," said Mr. Joe, who was growing garrulous on
an obviously pet subject, "that we aint afeerd o' the p'lese in this
neighborhood, not a hap'orth; _we_ know how to manage them." He then
related an anecdote of another policeman, who had been formerly in his
own line of business. This gentleman being, as he observed, "fly" to all
the secret signs of the craft, obtained an interview with a friend of
his for the purpose of purchasing a hundred shillings. A package was
produced and exchanged for their proper price in currency, but on the
policeman taking his prize to the station house to lay the information,
he discovered that he had been outwitted. The rouleau contained a
hundred good farthings, for each of which he had paid two pence
half-penny.

"Then, what is the bad money generally worth?" asked Edward,
interrupting the speaker.

"As a general rule," was the answer, "our sort is worth about one-fifth
part o' the wallie it represents. So, a sovereign--(though we aint got
much to do with gold here--that's made for the most part in
Brummagem)--a 'Brum' sovereign may be bought for about four-and-six; a
bad crown piece for a good bob; a half-crown for about fippence; a bob
for two pence half-penny, and so on. As for the sixpennys and
fourpennys, we don't make many on 'em, their wallie bein' too
insignificant." Mr. Joe then proceeded with some further remarks for the
benefit of his protégé:----

"You see you need have no fear o' passing this here money if you're a
respectable-looking cove. If a gentleman is discovered at any think o'
the kind, it's always laid to a mistake; the shopman knocks under, and
the gentleman gives a good piece o' money with a grin. And that's how it
is that so much o' our mannyfactur gets smashed all over the country."

The visitors having been somewhat bored, apparently, during the latter
portion of their host's remarks, soon after took their departure. The
rum-and-water which Mr. Joe's liberality had supplied, effectually
removed Edward's scruples; and on his way back he expressed himself in
high terms in favor of "smashing," considered as a profession.

"O' course," was the reply of his experienced companion. "It aint once
in a thousand times that a fellow's nailed. You shall make your first
trial to-night. You've the needful in your pocket, hav'n't you? Come,
here's a shop--I want a cigar."

Edward appeared to hesitate; but Mr. Joe's rum-and-water asserted
itself, and into the shop they both marched.

Mr. Bethnal, with an air of most imposing nonchalance, took up a cigar
from one of the covered cases on the counter, put it in his mouth, and
helped himself to a light. Edward, not so composedly, followed his
example.

"How much."

"Sixpence."

The next instant the youth had drawn me from his pocket, received
sixpence in change, and walked out of the shop, leaving me under the
guardianship of a new master.

I did not remain long with the tobacconist: he passed me next day to a
gentleman, who was as innocent as himself as to my real character. It
happened that I slipped into a corner of this gentleman's pocket, and
remained there for several weeks--he, apparently, unaware of my
existence. At length he discovered me, and one day I found myself, in
company with a _good_ half-crown, exchanged for a pair of gloves, at a
respectable-looking shop. After the purchaser had left, the assistant
looked at me suspiciously, and was going to call back my late owner, but
it was too late. Taking me then to his master, he asked if I was not
bad.

"It don't look very good," was the answer. "Give it to me, and take care
to be more careful for the future."

I was slipped into the waistcoat pocket of the proprietor, who
immediately seemed to forget all about the occurrence.

That same night, immediately on the shop being closed, the shopkeeper
walked out, having changed his elegant costume for garments of a coarser
and less conspicuous description, and hailing a cab, requested to be
driven to the same street in Westminster in which I first saw the light.
To my astonishment, he entered the shop of my first master: how well I
remembered the place, and the coarse countenance of its proprietor!
Ascending to the top of the house, we entered the room, to which the
reader has been already introduced,--the scene of so much secret toil.

A long conversation, in a very low tone, now took place between the
pair, from which I gleaned some interesting particulars. I discovered
that the respectable gentleman who now possessed me was the coiner's
partner,--his being the "issue" department, which his trade
transactions, and unimpeachable character, enabled him to undertake very
effectively.

"Let your next batch be made as perfectly as possible,"--I heard him say
to his partner. "The last seems to have gone very well: I have heard of
only a few detections, and one of those was at my own shop to-day. One
of my fellows made the discovery, but not until after the purchaser left
the shop."

"That, you see, will 'appen now and then," was the answer; "but think o'
the number on 'em as is about, and how sharp some people is
getting--thanks to them noospapers, as is always a interfering with wot
don't concern 'em. There's now so much of our metal about, that it's
almost impossible to get change for a suff'rin nowhere without getting
some on it. Every body's a-taking of it every day; and as for them
that's detected, they're made only by the common chaps as aint got our
masheenery,"--and he glanced proudly at his well-mounted galvanic
battery. "All I wish is, that we could find some dodge for milling the
edges better--it takes as much time now as all the rest of the work put
together. Howsomever, I've sold no end on 'em in Whitechapel and other
places, since I saw you. And as for this here neighborhood, there's
scarcely a shop where they don't deal in the article more or less."

"Well," said Mr. Niggle's (which, I learned from his emblazoned
door-posts was the name of my respectable master), "be as careful about
these as you can. I am afraid it's through some of our money that that
young girl has been found out."

"Wot, the young 'ooman as has been remanded so often at the p'lese
court?"

"The same. I shall know all about it to-morrow. She is to be tried at
the Old Bailey, and I am on the jury, as it happens."

Mr. Niggles then departed to his suburban villa, and passed the
remainder of the evening as became so respectable a man.

The next morning he was early at business; and, in his capacity of
citizen, did not neglect his duties in the court, where he arrived
exactly two minutes before any of the other jurymen.

When the prisoner was placed in the dock, I saw at once that she was the
sister of my first possessor. She had attempted to pass two bad
shillings at a grocer's shop. She had denied all knowledge that the
money was bad, but was notwithstanding arrested, examined, and was
committed for trial. Here, at the Old Bailey, the case was soon
dispatched. The evidence was given in breathless haste; the judge summed
up in about six words, and the jury found the girl guilty. Her sentence
was, however, a very short imprisonment.

It was my fortune to pass subsequently into the possession of many
persons, from whom I learnt some particulars of the afterlife of this
family. The father survived his daughter's conviction only a few days.
The son was detained in custody; and as soon as his identity became
established, charges were brought against him which led to his being
transported. As for his sister--I was once, for a few hours, in a family
where there was a governess of her name. I had no opportunity of knowing
more; but--as her own nature would probably save her from the influences
to which she must have been subjected in jail--it is but just to
suppose, that some person might have been found to brave the opinion of
society, and to yield to one so gentle, what the law calls "the benefit
of a doubt."

The changes which I underwent in the course of a few months were many
and various--now rattling carelessly in a cash-box; now loose in the
pocket of some careless young fellow, who passed me at a theatre; then,
perhaps, tied up carefully in the corner of a handkerchief, having
become the sole stock-in-hand of some timid young girl. Once I was given
by a father as a "tip" or present to his little boy; when, I need
scarcely add, I found myself ignominiously spent in hard-bake ten
minutes afterwards. On another occasion, I was (in company with a
sixpence) handed to a poor woman, in payment for the making of a dozen
shirts. In this case I was so fortunate as to sustain an entire family,
who were on the verge of starvation. Soon afterwards, I formed one of
seven, the sole stock of a poor artist, who contrived to live upon my
six companions for many days. He had reserved me until the last--I
believe because I was the brightest and best-looking of the whole; and
when he was at last induced to change me, for some coarse description of
food, to his and my own horror, I was discovered!

The poor fellow was driven from the shop; but the tradesman, I am bound
to say, did not treat me with the indignity that I expected. On the
contrary, he thought my appearance so deceitful, that he did not scruple
to pass me next day, as part of change for a sovereign.

Soon after this, somebody dropped me on the pavement, where, however, I
remained but a short time. I was picked up by a child, who ran
instinctively into a shop for the purpose of making an investment in
figs. But, coins of my class had been plentiful in that neighborhood,
and the grocer was a sagacious man. The result was, that the child went
figless away, and that I--my edges curl as I record the humiliating
fact--was nailed to the counter as an example to others. Here my career
ended, and my biography closes.


A SUPPLY OF COCKED HATS.


In new work entitled _A Voyage to the Mauritius and Back_, just
published in London, we find the following capital story, from which it
is apparent that the Chatham-street auction system, even if indigenous,
is not peculiar to New-York. The subject of the joke was an Indian
officer at the Cape, on leave of absence, and an inmate of the
boarding-house where the writer was living.

"The most singular character which Cape Town presented was a Major
Holder, of the Bombay Army. In dress he was entirely unique. He wore
invariably a short red shell jacket, thrown open, with a white
waistcoat, and short but large white trousers, cotton stockings, and
shoes; on his head a cocked-hat, with an upright red and white feather,
the whole surmounted by a green silk umbrella, held painfully aloft to
clear the feather: to this may be added a shirt-collar which acted
almost as a pair of blinders on either side. In person he was ample, but
somewhat shapeless; and he had a vast oblong face, which neither laughed
nor showed any sign of animation whatever. The history of the Major's
cocked-hat was as follows. Strolling into an auction at Bombay, he was
rather taken with the reasonable price of a cocked-hat, which the
flippant auctioneer was recommending with all his ingenuity. 'Going for
six rupees--must be sold to pay the creditors. No advance upon six?
Shall we say siccas?' In an evil hour the Major bid for the hat, left
his address, and returned to his quarters, the happy possessor of a
'bargain.' Seated at breakfast the next morning, a procession is
observed approaching the house; four men carrying a large packing-case
slung to a pole, and headed by a half-caste, with a small paper in his
hand.

"'Major Holder, sar, brought you the cocked-hats, sir; all sound and
good, sar; wish live long to wear out, sar. Here leel' bill, which feel
obleege you pay, sar.' Whereupon he puts into the hands of the astounded
commander a document, headed 'Major Thomas Holder, of H.E.I.C.'s ----
Regt., Dr. to estate of ---- and Co., bankrupts, for seventy-two
cocked-hats, purchased at auction,' &c., &c., &c.

"It was in vain that the Major remonstrated after he understood the
predicament in which he was placed; in vain he appealed to the
auctioneer--to the company present; it was too good a joke, and they
would have given it against him under almost any circumstances.

"Major Holder was a rigid economist; he had almost a mind which admitted
but one idea at a time, and, indeed, not very often that. He was
possessed of six dozen of cocked-hats, and they must be worn out. Being
mostly in command of his own regiment, he had unlimited choice as to his
own head-dress; so he commenced the task at once. From thenceforth all
other hats or caps were to him matters of history. At the economical
rate of two hats a year, he might safely calculate upon being much
advanced in life before the case was exhausted. True, there were
drawbacks: he was much consulted about auctions by his friends; many
inquiries made of him on that point; bills of auction, and especially
any thing relating to cocked-hats, forwarded to him by the kind
attention of acquaintance; and a question very currently put to him by
the ensigns was 'Tom, how are you off for hats?'

"The interest taken in the Major's hats was far from dying, even after
the lapse of years: the less likely to do so, indeed, from the
circumstance of their forming epochs in history; as, 'Such a one got
leave in Tom's fourth hat;' or, 'I hope to be off before Tom changes his
hat;' or, 'I'll make you a bet that Jack's married before another hat's
gone.' When this individual arrived at the Cape he was understood to be
in his fifteenth hat: but there occurred some confusion in the Major's
chronology; for it was understood that, owing to the practical jokes
played there, no less than three hats were expended during the short
month of his stay. To correct this, he adopted the plan of sitting upon
his hat at dinner; but as he wore no tails to his jacket, and left the
feather protruding behind, it had to a stranger the appearance of being
a natural appendage to his person."


BUYING DONKEYS AT SMITHFIELD.


One of the brothers Mayhew is publishing in London, (and the Harpers are
reprinting it in New-York) a serial work under the title of _London
Labor and London Poor_, similar in design to the sketches of trades and
occupations a year or two ago printed in the _Tribune_. It is in as
lively a vein as may be, but such an anatomy is unavoidably sometimes
repulsive. The authors perhaps endanger the designed effect of their
performance by attempting to invest it with the attractions of
quaintness and humor. We quote from the second part the following
description of coster-mongers in the Smithfield market:

"The donkeys standing for sale are ranged in a long line on both sides
of the race course, their white velvety noses resting on the wooden rail
they are tied to. Many of them wear their blinkers and head-harness, and
others are ornamented with ribands fastened in their halters. The
lookers-on lean against this railing, and chat with the boys at the
donkeys' heads, or with the men who stand behind them, and keep
continually hitting and shouting at the poor still beasts, to make them
prance. Sometimes a party of two or three will be seen closely examining
one of these 'Jerusalem ponies,' passing their hands down his legs or
quietly looking on, while the proprietor's ash stick descends on the
patient brute's back, making a dull hollow sound. As you walk in front
of a long line of donkeys, the lads seize the animals by their nostrils
and show their large teeth, asking if you 'want a hass, sir,' and all
warranting the creature to be 'five years old next buff-day.' Dealers
are quarrelling among themselves, down-crying each other's goods. 'A
hearty man,' shouted one proprietor, pointing to his rival's stock,
'could eat three sich donkeys as yourn at a meal!' One fellow, standing
behind his steed, shouts as he strikes, 'Here's the real Britannia
metal;' whilst another asks, 'Who's for the pride of the market?' and
then proceeds to flip 'the pride' with the whip till she clears away the
mob with her kickings. Here, standing by its mother, will be a shaggy
little colt, with a group of ragged boys fondling it and lifting it in
their arms from the ground.

"During all this the shouts of the drivers and runners fill the air, as
they rush past each other on the race course. Now a tall fellow,
dragging a donkey after him, runs by, crying, as he charges in amongst
the mob, 'Hulloa! hulloa! Hi! hi!' his mate, with his long coat-tails
flying in the wind, hurrying after him and roaring, between his blows,
'Keem up!'"


From the Leader.

TO LAYARD, DISCOVERER OF BABYLON AND NINEVEH.


    No harps, no choral voices, may enforce,
    The words I utter. Thebes and Elis heard
    Those harps, those voices, whence high men rose higher;
    And nations crowned the singer who crowned _them_.
    His days are over. Better men than his
    Live among _us_: and must they live unsung
    Because deaf ears flap round them? or because
    Gold lies along the shallows of the world,
    And vile hands gather it? My song shall rise,
    Although none heed or hear it: rise it shall,
    And swell along the wastes of Nineveh
    And Babylon, until it reach to thee,
    Layard! who raisest cities from the dust,
    Who driest Lethe up amid her shades,
    And pourest a fresh stream on arid sands,
    And rescuest thrones and nations, fanes and gods,
    From conquering Time: he sees thee, and turns back.
      The weak and slow Power pushes past the wise,
    And lifts them up in triumph to her ear:
    They, to keep firm the seat, sit with flat palms
    Upon the cushion, nor look once beyond
    To cheer thee on thy road. In vain are won
    The spoils; another carries them away;
    The stranger seeks them in another land,
    Torn piecemeal from thee. But no stealthy step
    Can intercept thy glory.
                          Cyrus raised
    His head on ruins: he of Macedon
    Crumbled them, with their dreamer, into dust:
    God gave thee power above them, far above;
    Power to raise up those whom they overthrew,
    Power to show mortals that the kings they serve
    Swallow each other, like the shapeless forms,
    And unsubstantial, which pursue pursued
    In every drop of water, and devour
    Devoured, perpetual round the crystal globe.[S]

                              WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR.

FOOTNOTES:

[S] Seen through a solar microscope.


From Household Words.

PHYSIOLOGY OF INTEMPERANCE.


"One glass more," exclaimed mine host of the Garter. "A bumper at
parting! No true knight ever went away without 'the stirrup-cup.'"

"Good," cried a merry-faced guest; "but the Age of Chivalry is gone, and
that of water-drinkers and teetotallers has succeeded. Temperance
societies have been imported from America, and grog nearly thrown
overboard by the British Navy."

"Very properly so," observed a Clergyman who sat at the table. "The
accidents which occur from drunkenness on board ship may be so
disastrous on the high seas, and the punishment necessary to suppress
this vice is so revolting, that the most experienced naval officers have
recommended the allowance of grog, served both to officers and men in
our Navy, to be reduced one-half. In America, as well as in our own
Merchant Service, vessels sail out of harbor on the Temperance
principle; not a particle of spirits is allowed on board; and the men
throughout the voyage are reported to continue healthy and able-bodied.
Tea is an excellent substitute; many of our old seamen prefer it to
grog."

"That may be," exclaimed the merry-faced guest. "Horses have been
brought to eat oysters; and on the Coromandel coast, Bishop Heber says,
they get fat when fed on fish. Sheep have been trained up, during a
voyage, to eat animal food, and refused, when put ashore, to crop the
dewy greensward. When honest Jack renounces his grog, and, after reefing
topsails in a gale of wind, goes below deck to swill down a domestic
dish of tea, after the fashion of Dr. Samuel Johnson at Mrs. Thrale's, I
greatly fear the character of our British seamen will degenerate. In the
glorious days of Lord Nelson, the observation almost passed into a
proverb, that the man who loved his grog always made the best sailor.
Besides, in rough and stormy weather, when men have perhaps been
splicing the mainbrace, and exposed to the midnight cold and damp, the
stimulus of grog is surely necessary to support, if not restore, the
vital energy?"

"Not in the least," rejoined the clergyman. "Severe labor, even at sea,
is better sustained without alcoholic liquors; and the depressing
effects of exposure to cold and wet weather best counteracted by a hot
mess of cocoa or coffee served with biscuit or the usual allowance of
meat. In fact, I have lately read, with considerable satisfaction, a
prize essay by an accomplished physician, in which he proves that
alcohol acts as a poison on the nervous system, and that we can dispense
entirely with the use of stimulants."

"Not exactly so," observed a physician, who was of the party. "Life
itself exists only by stimulation; the air we breathe, the food we eat,
the desires and emotions which excite the mind to activity, are all so
many forms of physical and mental stimuli. If the atmosphere were
deprived of its oxygen, the blood would cease to acquire those
stimulating properties which excite the action of the heart, and sustain
the circulation; and if the daily food of men were deprived of certain
necessary stimulating adjuncts, the digestive organs would no longer
recruit the strength, and the wear and tear of the body. Nay, strange as
it may appear, that common article in domestic cookery, salt, is a
natural and universal stimulant to the digestive organs of all
warm-blooded animals. This is strikingly exemplified by the fact, that
animals, in their wild state, will traverse, instinctively, immense
tracts of country in pursuit of it; for example, to the salt-pans of
Africa and America; and it is a curious circumstance that one of the ill
effects produced by withholding this stimulant from the human body is
the generation of worms. The ancient laws of Holland condemned men, as a
severe punishment, to be fed on bread unmixed with salt; and the effect
was horrible; for these wretched criminals are reported to have been
devoured by worms, engendered in their own stomach. Now, I look upon
alcohol to be, under certain circumstances, as healthful and proper a
stimulant to the digestive organs as salt, when taken in moderation,
whether in the form of malt liquor, wine, or spirits and water. When
taken to excess, it may act upon the nervous system as a poison; but the
most harmless solids or fluids may, by being taken to excess, be
rendered poisonous. Indeed, it has been truly observed, that 'medicines
differ from poisons, only in their doses.' Alcoholic stimulants,
artificially and excessively imbibed, are, doubtless, deleterious."

"The subject," observed the host, filling his glass, and passing the
bottle, "is a curious one. The port before us, at all events, is not
poison, and I confess, that so ignorant am I of these matters, that I
would like to know something about this alcohol which is so much spoken
of."

"The explanation is not difficult," answered the Doctor. "Alcohol is
simply derived by fermentation, or distillation, from substances or
fluids containing sugar; in other words, the matter of sugar, when
subjected to a certain temperature, undergoes a change, and the elements
of which the sugar was previously composed enter into a new combination,
which constitutes the fluid named Alcohol, or Spirits of Wine. Raymand
Lully, the alchemist, (thirteenth century,) is said to have given it the
name of Alcohol; but the art of obtaining it was, in that age of
darkness and superstition, kept a profound mystery. When it became more
known, physicians prescribed it only as a medicine, and imagined that it
had the important property of prolonging life, upon which account they
designated it 'Aqua Vitæ,' or the 'Water of life,' and the French, to
this day, call their Cognac _'Eau de Vie_.'"

"It is a remarkable circumstance," observed the Clergyman, filling his
glass, "that there is hardly any nation, however rude and destitute of
invention, that has not succeeded in discovering some composition of an
intoxicating nature; and it would appear, that nearly all the herbs, and
roots, and fruits on the face of the earth have been, in some way or
other, sacrificed on the shrine of Bacchus. All the different grains
destined for the support of man; corn of every description; esculent
roots, potatoes, carrots, turnips; grass itself, as in Kamtschatka;
apples, pears, cherries, and even the delicious juice of the peach, have
been pressed into this service; nay, so inexhaustible appear to be the
resources of art, that a vinous spirit has been obtained by distillation
from milk itself."

"Milk!" cried the merry-faced guest. "Can alcohol be obtained from
mother's milk?"

"Very probably," continued the Clergyman. "The Tartars and Calmucks
obtain a vinous spirit from the distillation of mares' and cows' milk;
and, as far as I can recollect, the process consists in allowing the
milk first to remain in untanned skins, sewed together, until it sours
and thickens. This they agitate until a thick cream appears on the
surface, which they give to their guests, and then, from the skimmed
milk that remains, they draw off the spirits."

"Exactly so," observed the Doctor, "but it is worthy of notice, that a
Russian chemist discovered that if this milk were deprived of its butter
and cheese, the whey, although it contains the whole of the sugar of
milk, will not undergo vinous fermentation."

"These facts," observed the host, "are interesting, but they are more
curious than useful. The alcohol, I presume, from whatever source it be
derived, is chemically the same thing; how, then, does it happen that
some wines, containing precisely the same quantity of alcohol,
intoxicate more speedily than others?"

"The reason," explained the Doctor, "is simply this. We must regard all
wines, even the very wine we are drinking, not as a simple mixture, but
as a compound holding the matter of sugar, mucilaginous, and extractive
principles contained in the grape juice, in intimate combination with
the alcohol. Accordingly, the more quickly the real spirit is set free
from this combination, the more rapidly are intoxicating effects
produced; and this is the reason why wines containing the same quantity
of alcohol have different intoxicating powers. Thus, champagne
intoxicates very quickly. Now this wine contains comparatively only a
small quantity of alcohol; but this escapes from the froth, or bubbles
of carbonic acid gas, as it reaches the surface, carrying along with it
all the aroma which is so agreeable to the taste. The liquor in the
glass then becomes vapid. This has been clearly proved. The froth of
champagne has been collected under a glass bell, and condensed by
surrounding the vessel with ice; the alcohol has then been found
condensed within the glass. The object, therefore, of icing
champagne--or rather, the effect produced by this operation--is to
repress its tendency to effervesce, whereby a smaller quantity of
alcohol is taken with each glass. Wines containing the same quantity of
alcohol accordingly differ in their effects; nay, it is not to the
alcohol only they contain that certain obnoxious effects are to be
attributed, for, as Dr. Paris clearly shows, when they contain an excess
of certain acids, a suppressed fermentation takes place in the stomach
itself, which will cause flatulency and a great variety of unpleasant
symptoms. In fact, a fluid load remains in the stomach, to undergo a
slow and painful form of digestion."

"But, in whatever shape you introduce it," remarked the host, "whether
disguised as wine, or in the form of brandy, whiskey, or gin-and-water,
it matters not--I wish to have a clear idea of the immediate effects of
alcohol upon the living system."

"Well!" said the Doctor, "it can very easily be described. When you
swallow a glass--let us say of brandy-and-water--the stimulating liquid,
upon entering into the stomach, excites the blood-vessels and nerves of
its internal lining coat, which causes an increased flow of blood and
nervous energy to this part. The consequence is, that the internal
membrane of the stomach becomes highly reddened and injected, just as if
inflammation had already been produced by the presence of the stimulant.
Thus far you probably follow me:--but this is not all--the vessels thus
excited have an absorbing power; they suck up (as it were) and carry
directly into the stream of the circulation a portion (at all events) of
the alcohol which thus irritates them. The result is, that alcohol is
thus mixed with the blood and brought into immediate contact with the
minute structure of all the different organs of the body."

"But how," asked the merry-faced guest, "can this be known? Who ever saw
into the stomach of a living man?"

"Strange as it may appear to you, that has been done, and all the
circumstances connected with the digestion of solids and fluids in the
stomach have been very accurately observed. It happened, in the year
1822, that a young Canadian, named Alexis St. Martin, was accidentally
wounded by the discharge of a musket, which carried away a portion of
his ribs, perforating and exposing the interior of the stomach. After
the poor fellow had undergone much suffering, all the injured parts
became sound, excepting the perforation into the stomach, which remained
some two and a half inches in circumference; and upon this unfortunate
individual his physician, Dr. Beaumont, when he was sufficiently well,
made a series of very careful observations, which have determined a
great variety of important points connected with the physiology of
digestion. Fluids introduced into the stomach rapidly disappeared, being
taken up by these vessels and carried into the system. We cannot,
therefore, be surprised to hear that so subtile and penetrating a fluid
as alcohol should very speedily find its way into all the tissues of the
body. Its presence may be smelt in the breath of persons addicted to
spirituous liquors, as well as in their secretions generally."

"But to what do you attribute the noxious effects of alcohol, allowing
it to be thus carried by direct absorption into the circulation?" asked
the host.

"To the excess of carbon," answered the Doctor, "which is thus
introduced into the system; and explains why the liver, in hard
drinkers, is generally found diseased."

"How so?" inquired the host. "I have heard of the 'gin liver.'"

"It is well known that a long residence in India," interposed the
Clergyman, "will give rise to enlargement and induration of this organ."

"And for the same reason," answered the Doctor, "the liver acts as a
substitute for the lungs--just as the skin acts vicariously for the
kidneys."

"Not a word of this do I understand," said the merry-faced guest.

"Well, then," continued the Doctor, "I will endeavor to explain it. By a
wonderful provision of nature, which appears to come under the law of
compensation, when one organ, by reason of decay, is unable to perform
its functions, another undertakes its functions, and, to a certain
extent, supplies its place. You all know that blind people acquire a
preternatural delicacy in the sense of touch, which did not escape the
philosophical observation of Wordsworth, who speaks of

              "A watchful heart,
    Still couchant--an inevitable ear;
    And an eye practised like the blind man's touch."

"Now, it is the office of the vessels of the skin to throw off by
perspiration the watery parts of the blood; the kidneys do the same; and
under a great variety of circumstances which must be familiar to all,
these organs frequently act vicariously for one another. The office of
the liver, and the lungs also, is in like manner to throw off carbon
from the system, and when during a residence in a tropical climate the
lungs are unable, from the state of the atmosphere, to perform their
functions, the liver acting vicariously for this organ is stimulated to
undue activity, and becomes consequently diseased. Applying these
remarks to the spirit drinker, it is obvious that the excess of carbon
introduced into the system by alcohol is thrown upon the liver, and by
stimulating it to undue activity produces a state of inflammation."

"This I understand," observed the Clergyman, "but how does it act upon
the brain? Does the alcohol itself actually become absorbed, and enter
into the substance of the brain?"

"The effect of an excess of carbon, in the blood-vessels of the brain,
is to produce sleep and stupor; hence the drunkard breathes thick, and
snores spasmodically, and after this state, ends in confirmed apoplexy
and death--just as dogs become insensible when held over the Grotto del
Cane, in Italy, where they inhale this deleterious gas. But in addition
to this it has been clearly proved, that alcohol does enter into the
substance of the brain, for it has been detected by the smell, upon
examining the brain of persons who have died drunk; besides which,
alcohol, after having been introduced by way of experiment, into the
body of a living dog, has afterwards been procured absolutely as alcohol
by distillation from the substance of the brain. It is so subtile a
fluid that Liebig says it permeates every tissue of the body."

"But how do you explain the circumstance that death sometimes happens
suddenly after drinking spirits," asked the host, "before there can be
time for absorption to take place?"

"I remember, not many years ago," interrupted the merry-faced guest, "a
water-man, in attendance at the cab-stand at the top of the Haymarket,
for a bribe of five shillings, tossed off a bottle of gin, upon which he
dropped down insensible, and soon died."

"This may clearly be accounted for," observed the Doctor. "The stomach,
as I premised, is plentifully supplied with nerves, and is connected
with one of the great nervous centres in the body, so that a sudden
impression produced upon these nerves, by the introduction of a quantity
of such stimulus, gives a shock to the whole nervous system, which
completely overpowers it. From the centre to the circumference it acts
like a stroke of lightning, and the death is often instantaneous. A
draught of iced water taken when the system has been overheated by
exertion, by dancing or otherwise, has been known to be immediately
fatal. The physiological action--or rather the 'shock' upon the nervous
system, is in both cases the same--violent mental emotion will in like
manner suspend the action of the heart and produce instant death. These
are the terrors of alcohol, when drank to excess; but the health of the
habitual tippler is sure to be undermined; his hands become tremulous,
he is unsteady in his gait, his complexion becomes sallow, and all his
mental faculties gradually impaired."

"To what, may I ask," inquired the merry-faced guest, "do you attribute
the circumstance of the trembling hand recovering its steadiness, after
taking a glass of spirits in the morning after a debauch; 'hair of the
dog,' as it is called, 'that bit overnight?'"

"Action and reaction is the great law of the animal economy," replied
the Doctor; "over stimulation will always produce a corresponding degree
of depression; when, therefore, the nervous system has been over-excited
by alcoholic liquors, the usual amount of nervous energy which is
necessary to give tone to the muscular system is wanting, and then a
stimulus gives a fillip to the nervous centres, which restores the
nervous powers to the extremities. When this state of things, however,
has been permitted to go on, and the brain has been frequently brought
under alcoholic influence, its structure becomes affected, and a slow
and very insidious inflammation takes place, which terminates in a
softening of its substance. This mischief may proceed for a considerable
period without being suspected, but on a sudden _delirium tremens_ may
supervene, which will terminate, perhaps, in paralysis--perhaps death!"

"To what, Doctor," inquired the Clergyman, "do you attribute the mental
pleasures of intoxication? Can this be explained upon physiological
principles?"

"Easily, I think," answered the Doctor. "All inebriating agents have a
two-fold action--as I have already pointed out--first, on the
circulation; and secondly, on the nervous system. There can be no doubt
that the mind becomes endowed with increased energy when the circulation
through the brain is moderately quickened. This has been proved by
observation. The case has been reported of a person who having lost by
disease a part of the skull and its investments, a corresponding portion
of brain was open to inspection. In a state of dreamless sleep the brain
lay motionless within the skull; but when dreams occurred, as reported
by the patient, then the quantity of blood was observed to flow with
increased rapidity, causing the brain to move and protrude out of the
skull. When perfectly awake, and engaged in active thought, then the
blood again was sent with increased force to the brain, and the
protrusion was still greater. Under all circumstances, increased
circulation through the brain gives rise to mental excitement, and
sometimes to an unusual lucidity of ideas. It is observed in the early
stages of fever, and even in the dying--and this accounts for the
clearing up of the mind which sometimes occurs in the last moments of
life--what is called familiarly 'the lightening before death.'"

"That," observed the Clergyman, "is a very curious circumstance, which I
firmly believe; and you account for this, if I understand your meaning,
by explaining that the blood which no longer circulates in the
extremities, which may have become cold, flows with increased impetus
through the brain."

"Exactly so," replied the Doctor; "and upon this very principle, the
rapidity of ideas, and the pleasurable mental excitement attending that
temporary state of intellectual exaltation, depends on the increased
rapidity of the flow of blood through the brain; but when this becomes
carried to too great an extent, and the rapidity of the current disturbs
the healthy condition of the brain, then the manifestations of the mind
necessarily become impaired, the ideas are no longer under the control
of the reasoning faculty, and the bodily organs, usually under the
dominion of the will, no longer obey its mandates. This I believe to be
the true theory of mental intoxication."

"But there are many circumstances," observed the host, "which may
accelerate or retard this excitement."

"Certainly," continued the Doctor; "persons who join the social board
already elated with some good news, or cause of unusual happiness;
persons who talk much, and excite themselves in argument, are apt to
become affected more speedily than those who hold themselves in the
midst of the convivial scene sedate and taciturn. The mind, in fact, may
exercise a considerable power of resistance against inebriation; for
which reason, persons in the society of their superiors, under
circumstances which render it necessary they should maintain the
appearance of being always well conducted, drink with impunity more than
they otherwise could, if they did not impose upon themselves this
consciousness of self-government. We also observe the influence of the
mind, in controlling, and, indeed, putting an end to a fit of
intoxication, by making, doubtless, an impression on the heart and
causation, when a sense of danger, or a piece of good or bad news,
suddenly communicated, sobers a person on a sudden."

"I have heard," observed the merry-faced guest, "that moving
about--changing from one seat into another--will check the effects of
liquor; and I have known persons who have left a social party perfectly
sober, become suddenly tipsy in the open air. How is this to be
explained?"

"Precisely on the same principle," answered the Doctor, "upon leaving an
overheated room, on your returning homewards, you expose yourself to an
atmosphere many degrees below that you have just left. The cold checks
the circulation on the surface of the body; the blood is driven inwards;
it accumulates, consequently, in the internal organs; and sometimes its
pressure is such on the brain, as to produce on a sudden the very last
stage of intoxication. The limbs refuse to support their burthen, and
the person falls down in a state of profound insensibility."

"I have recently," said the host, "read in the Police Reports several
cases of this description; and imagined that some narcotic drug must
have been mixed with the liquor drank by such persons. Adulterations of
some sort must go on to a frightful extent in gin-palaces."

"Not by any means," answered the Doctor, "to the extent you suppose. It
is said that the spirit dealer makes his whisky or gin bead by adding a
little turpentine to it. Well! what then? Turpentine is a very healthy
diuretic. It is given to infants to kill worms in very large doses.
Then, again, vitriol is spoken of; but so strong is sulphuric acid, that
it would clearly render these spirits quite unpalatable. I do not affirm
that the art of adulteration may not occasionally be had recourse to,
even with criminal intentions, for such cases have been brought under
the notice of the authorities; but I do not believe the practice is so
general as some persons suppose. I apprehend dilution is a more general
means of fraud."

"It has often occurred to me," said the Clergyman, "that our municipal
regulations ought, on this subject, be much improved. Our Excise
officers enter the cellars of the wholesale and retail spirit-dealers,
only to gauge the strength of the spirit, and to ascertain how much it
may be overproof, which alone regulates the Government duty; but for the
sake of the public health I would go further than this. If a butcher be
found selling unhealthy meat; a fishmonger, bad fish; or a baker cheat
in the weight of bread, they severally have their goods confiscated, and
are fined; and so far the public is protected. But the authorities seem
not to care what description of poison is sold across the counter of
gin-palaces--an evil which may easily be remedied. I would put the
licensed victualler on the same level with the butcher and fishmonger:
and if he were found selling adulterated spirits, and the charge were
proved against him by the same having been fairly analyzed, he, too,
should be liable to be fined, or even lose his license. The public
health is, upon this point, at present, utterly unprotected."

"Some such measure," observed the host, "might be advantageously
adopted; but I confess that I do not advocate the prohibition principle;
instead of preaching a Crusade against the use of any particular
article, whether of necessity or comfort, let us educate the people, and
improve their social condition by inculcating sound moral principles;
they will soon learn that habits of industry and temperance can alone
insure them and their children happiness and prosperity; and in so doing
you will teach a sound, practical permanent lesson."

"But," interrupted the Clergyman, "if we continue the conversation
longer, we shall ourselves become transgressors; the 'stirrup-cup' is
drained; much remains doubtless to be said respecting the evils,
physical and moral, which arise from intemperance; but let us now
adjourn."

"With all my heart!" exclaimed the host, "and now, 'to all and each, a
fair good night.'"


From "Rambles beyond Railways;" by W. Wilkie Collins, author of
"Antonina."

MINING UNDER THE SEA.


In complete mining equipment, with candles stuck by lumps of clay to
their felt hats, the travellers have painfully descended by
perpendicular ladders and along dripping-wet rock passages, fathoms down
into pitchy darkness; the miner who guides them calls a halt.

We are now four hundred yards out under the bottom of the sea, and
twenty fathoms or a hundred and twenty feet below the sea level.
Coast-trade vessels are sailing over our heads. Two hundred and forty
feet beneath us men are at work; and there are galleries deeper yet even
below that. The extraordinary position down the face of the cliff, of
the engines and other works on the surface at Botallack, is now
explained. The mine is not excavated like other mines under the land,
but under the sea.

Having communicated these particulars, the miner next tells us to keep
strict silence and listen. We obey him, sitting speechless and
motionless. If the reader could only have beheld us now, dressed in our
copper-colored garments, huddled close together in a mere cleft of
subterranean rock, with flame burning on our heads and darkness
enveloping our limbs, he must certainly have imagined, without any
violent stretch of fancy, that he was looking down upon a conclave of
gnomes.

After listening for a few moments, a distant unearthly noise becomes
faintly audible,--a long, low, mysterious moaning, that never changes,
that is felt on the ear as well as heard by it; a sound that might
proceed from some incalculable distance, from some far invisible height;
a sound unlike any thing that is heard on the upper ground in the free
air of heaven; a sound so sublimely mournful and still, so ghostly and
impressive when listened to in the subterranean recesses of the earth,
that we continue instinctively to hold our peace, as if enchanted by it,
and think not of communicating to each other the strange awe and
astonishment which it has inspired in us both from the very first.

At last the miner speaks again, and tells us that what we hear is the
sound of the surf lashing the rocks a hundred and twenty feet above us,
and of the waves that are breaking on the beach beyond. The tide is now
at the flow, and the sea is in no extraordinary state of agitation: so
the sound is low and distant just at this period. But when storms are at
their height, when the ocean hurls mountain after mountain of water on
the cliffs, then the noise is terrific; the roaring heard down here in
the mine is so inexpressibly fierce and awful that the boldest men at
work are afraid to continue their labor; all ascend to the surface to
breathe the upper air and stand on the firm earth; dreading, though no
such catastrophe has ever happened yet, that the sea will break in on
them if they remain in the caverns below.

Hearing this, we get up to look at the rock above us. We are able to
stand upright in the position we now occupy; and, flaring our candles
hither and thither in the darkness, can see the bright pure copper
streaking the dark ceiling of the gallery in every direction. Lumps of
ooze, of the most lustrous green color, traversed by a natural network
of thin red veins of iron, appear here and there in large irregular
patches, over which water is dripping slowly and incessantly in certain
places. This is the salt water percolating through invisible crannies in
the rock. On stormy days it spirts out furiously in thin continuous
streams. Just over our heads we observe a wooden plug of the thickness
of a man's leg; there is a hole here, and the plug is all that we have
to keep out the sea.

Immense wealth of metal is contained in the roof of this gallery,
throughout its whole length; but it remains, and will always remain,
untouched: the miners dare not take it, for it is part, and a great
part, of the rock which forms their only protection against the sea, and
which has been so far worked away here that its thickness is limited to
an average of three feet only between the water and the gallery in which
we now stand. No one knows what might be the consequence of another
day's labor with the pick-axe on any part of it. This information is
rather startling when communicated at the depth of four hundred and
twenty feet under ground. We should decidedly have preferred to receive
it in the counting-house. It makes us pause for an instant, to the
miner's infinite amusement, in the very act of knocking away about an
inch of ore from the rock, as a memento of Botallack. Having, however,
ventured, on reflection, to assume the responsibility of weakening our
defence against the sea by the length and breadth of an inch, we secure
our piece of copper, and next proceed to discuss the propriety of
descending two hundred and forty feet more of ladders, for the sake of
visiting that part of the mine where the men are at work.

Two or three causes concur to make us doubt the wisdom of going lower.
There is a hot, moist, sickly vapor, floating about as, which becomes
more oppressive every moment; we are already perspiring at every pore,
as we were told we should, and our hands, faces, jackets, and trousers,
are all more or less covered with a mixture of mud, tallow, and
iron-drippings, which we can feel and smell much more acutely than is
exactly desirable. We ask the miner what there is to see lower down. He
replies, nothing but men breaking ore with pickaxes: the galleries of
the mine are alike, however deep they may go; when you have seen one,
you have seen all.

The answer decides us: we determine to get back to the surface.


From Tait's Magazine.

THE COSTUME OF THE FUTURE.


Our business is with male attire, and it would be ungallant to
introduce, merely in a parenthesis, the subject of ladies' dress, or we
might pause to congratulate them and ourselves upon the very reasonable
and natural costume which they have enjoyed for some time. The portraits
of the present day are not disfigured by the towering head-gear, the
long waists and hoops against which Reynolds had to contend, nor by the
greater variety of hideous fashions, including the no-waist, the tight
clinging skirt, the enormous bows of hair, and the balloon or
leg-of-mutton sleeves, which at various periods interfered with the
highest efforts of Lawrence. The present dress differs slightly from
that of the best ages; and Vandyke or Lely, if summoned to paint the
fair ladies of the Court of Queen Victoria, would find little they could
wish to alter in the arrangement of their costume. But what would they
say to the gentlemen?

They would miss the rich materials, the variety of color and of make,
and the flowing outlines to which they were accustomed, and would find,
instead of them every body going about in a plain, uniform,
close-fitting garb, admitting of no variety of color or make, and not
presenting a single line or contour upon which they could look with
pleasure. They might not be much gratified by learning the superior
economy of modern fashions: they might say that, putting rich materials
and delicate hues aside, it is possible to contrive a picturesque dress
out of the most simple fabrics. Beauty and expense are by no means of
necessity associated in dress. When Oliver Goldsmith, after spending
more than would pay a modern gentleman's tailor's bill for a couple of
years, upon a single coat of cherry-colored velvet, had the misfortune
to stain it in a conspicuous place, he was obliged to go on wearing it,
and always to hold his hat (in this instance of some use) before the
fatal grease-spot. He could not afford to have another new coat, and yet
this expensive and unfortunate piece of finery was every bit as ugly, if
not more so, than the plain black or invisible-green cloth coat of this
age. The long shoes, pointed toes, and other grotesque fashions of the
middle ages, must all of them have been expensive; and it was by
inefficient sumptuary laws that it was attempted to put them down. The
draperies which we admire on an Etruscan vase were of the coarsest
woollen: and the possession of silken stuffs in abundance has not tended
to make the Chinese national dress better than what we know it to be.

Of coats, the frock is better than the evening or dress-coat. It fulfils
the purpose of a garment more completely, and when buttoned up is
capable of protecting the chest. The triangular opening in front of the
coat and waistcoat is, however, an absurdity. It leaves unprotected from
cold and wet the very part which most requires protection. Pictorially,
the regularly-defined patch of white seen through it is always
offensive; but its whiteness has one merit, if it really be white. The
exposure of part of the linen worn under the tailor's portion of the
man's dress makes attention to its condition necessary; and perhaps has
contributed to the greater personal cleanliness which obtains among a
coat-wearing than among a blouse-wearing population. Cleanliness is very
truly reputed to be next to godliness, and it may be worth while making
some sacrifice of convenience and taste for the sake of it: it belongs
to morals rather than to æsthetics, and should accordingly take
precedence of any thing appertaining only to the latter.

The tail or dress coat is evidently derived from the frock, or from
something like the frock, by turning back the skirts. Remains of this
process may be seen in the buttons which, without serving any useful
purpose, still continue to decorate the coat-tails in many military
uniforms, and in servants' liveries, and in those which, without being
so remarkable, still adhere to the tails of an ordinary dress-coat. This
arrangement may be noticed very distinctly in the well-known portraits
of Charles XII. of Sweden, in which the white livery is seen buttoned
back upon the blue cloth which forms the outer side of the coat skirts.

The tail-coat is certainly the worst of the two, whether for utility or
for appearance; and so thought George IV., whose opinion, however, in
matters of taste, was not in general good for much. This king, in his
latter days, carried his aversion to it so far as to banish it entirely
from his back, and from his presence for a time, during which he, and
the persons immediately about him, wore a kind of frock coat in evening
dress. But the public did not follow the royal lead, and the
swallow-tails still flutter behind the wearer of an evening coat.

Waistcoats do not call for much reprobation, except in the matter of the
already-mentioned white triangle, in which they err in company with the
coats. But a good long waistcoat, buttoned up to the throat, is a very
useful and unexceptionable piece of attire. A few years ago, people wore
them of all kinds of color, and of all kinds of stuffs, silks, and
velvet; now, however, black is your only wear, with perhaps an
occasional license to assume the white waistcoat, which was once
associated with that exceedingly frivolous and now evanescent party who
were called 'Young England.'

Trousers are so sensible and convenient a portion of attire that little
can be said against them. It is a form of covering for the legs well
fitted for the inhabitants of a cold and variable climate, and hardly
differs from what may be seen on the figures of the Gauls on Trajan's
Column, and other monuments of antiquity. In practical convenience, they
far surpass their shorter rivals, which also require continuation by
stockings to complete the purpose of clothing the leg. Buttons at the
knee are a great nuisance, and probably were what chiefly contributed to
the melancholy determination of a certain gentleman in the last century,
who found his existence insupportable, and put an end to it with his own
hand. Life, he said, was made up of nothing but buttoning and
unbuttoning; and so he shot himself one morning in his dressing-gown and
slippers, before the intolerable burden of the day commenced.

Trousers are great levellers. The legs of Achilles and of Thersites
would share the same fate in them, and both would in modern London be as
well entitled to the epithet of "well-trousered," as the former alone
was to that of 'well-greaved' before Troy. Probably the majority of
mankind are but too well content with this result, as there are few who
could emulate Mr. Cruikshanks in James Smith's song of names, who

      "----stepped into ten thousand a year
    By showing his leg to an heiress;"

and the trouser is therefore likely to be a permanent article in the
wardrobe, so that its continued existence must be taken as a datum or
postulate in any discussion upon vestimentary reform. This, it must be
allowed, makes any reform to a very picturesque costume out of the
question; for not only is the loose trouser itself hostile to the fit
display of the lower limbs, but it interferes with the use of any such
dress as the military habit of the Romans, or the Highland kilt, or the
short tunic with which we are familiar on the stage in costumed plays,
where no particular accuracy as to place or time is affected. The effect
of the combination may often be noticed in the dress of little boys, who
may be seen wearing trousers under such a tunic, reaching to the knee or
a little above it. The horizontal line which terminates the lower part
of the kilt is seen in immediate contrast with, and at right angles to
the almost perpendicular lines of the trousers, which produces a most
disagreeable appearance; although it is well adapted, by the contrast of
a straight line with the graceful curves of the legs, to set them off to
advantage when uncovered.

Flowing robes after the classical or eastern fashion are of course not
to be thought of. They would be mightily out of place in railroad
carriages, or in omnibuses, or in walking the streets on muddy days.
Modern habits of activity and personal independence require the dress to
be tolerably succinct and unvoluminous; but some change in the right
direction has been lately made by the introduction of what are called
paletots, and other coats of various transitional forms between them and
the shooting-jacket proper. In these a good deal of the stiffness and
angularity of the regulation frock coat is got rid of, and they admit of
adaptation to different statures and sizes. They have much comfort and
convenience to recommend them, and it would be a great point gained if
they were altogether adopted, and the frock-coat, which still asserts a
claim to be considered more correct, were quietly given up.

It may be matter only of custom and association, or it may also depend
upon some deeper considerations, but the result of much observation is,
that with the ordinary out-of-door costume of the present day, as worn
in cities, nothing goes so well as the black hat. There is an ugliness
and a stiffness about it which is congruous with the ugliness and
stiffness of every thing else. Its very height and straight sides tend
to carry the eye upwards, in conformity with the indication of the
principal lines in the lower part of the dress. It is like a steeple
upon a Gothic tower, and repeats the perpendicular tendencies of what is
below it, instead of contradicting them by the introduction of a
horizontal element. Certainly, no kind of cap goes well with it: the
traveller who has not unpacked his hat, and continues to wear in the
streets what served him on the road, or the Turk, European in all but
his red fez, cut but a sorry and mongrel figure among the shining
beavers around them, which retain their place as necessary evils under
the existing order of things.

Once, however, escape from the town, and see how every one gets rid of
his regular coat, and of his chimney-pot. The man of business in his
rural retreat, the lawyer in vacation, the lounger at the sea-side, have
all discarded them. Emancipation from the coat and hat is synonymous
with leisure, enjoyment, and freedom from the formal trammels of public
and civic life. The most staid and reverend personages may now be seen
disporting themselves in divers jackets, and in that Wide-awake which a
few years since was confined to the sportsman or his slang imitator.
Surely this universal consent of mankind must be accepted as an omen of
the future; and when the looser and more sensible garments now worn in
the country, shall be established as the usual dress of the towns also,
they will be accompanied by the soft and wide-leaved hat of felt, which
already goes along with them wherever they are tolerated.


From the Athenæum.

LIFE IN PERSIA, IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.


Prince Alexis Soltykoff, a Russian, who published in Paris last year his
_Travels in India_, has just given to the world from the same city a
volume of _Novels in Persia_. In both works we find the same charm of
simplicity in the narrative, the same truth and spirit in the drawings,
and, we may add, what some people would call the same deficiencies--that
is to say, the same absence of got-up learning and bookmaking art. There
are no historical, geological, or philological treatises pressed into
their pages, no statistical calculations, not one quotation from other
people's books, not a single word about Darius, Sapor, or Khosroes!

Prince Soltykoff has not followed the too commonly adopted recipe for
writing a book of travels. He has not on his return home read every body
else's book on the same subject,--and then condensed his readings into
one volume, bristling with erudition and stuck full of learned notes
which, ten to one, are either not read at all or read in the wrong
place. As to notes--there are not two to each volume. Satisfied with
having said nothing that is not true, and with having related nothing
that he has not seen, he feels no misgivings or regret at leaving much
unsaid. Of all the information which can be acquired without leaving
one's fireside in London or St. Petersburg he gives not a word, but the
valuable testimony of the eyewitness he records in a series of drawings
in which Eastern life is 'taken in the fact' with a truth and liveliness
of touch rarely found in an amateur pencil. The letter-press is a
secondary part of the work,--merely to render the drawings intelligible;
and we are convinced that if the author could have imagined a more
unpretending title for his book than the one given, he would have
selected it. Indeed, the word _book_ is scarcely an appropriate one to
use on this occasion; and we may compare the pleasure which we have
derived in perusing Prince Soltykoff's travels both in Persia and in
India to that afforded by the inspection of the album of an intelligent
traveller who should enliven the exhibition by his agreeable and
instructive conversation.

The travels in India took place between the years 1841 and 1846, while
those in Persia were accomplished as far back as 1838. We are not told
why the publication has been so long delayed, and can account for it
only by supposing that the fashion which has lately brought before the
public in the capacity of authors so many subjects of the Czar, was not
in 1838 so prevalent at St. Petersburg. Be that as it may, a picture of
the Eastern world in its immobility can brave a lapse of time which
would prove fatal to the likeness of any portraiture of European
society. The following sketch, for instance, is likely to be as true
now, as when it was written:--

"After three months' stay at Teheran, I was heartily tired of it and of
Persia altogether. The manner of living is fearfully monotonous. A
stranger, debarred from female society, and deprived of all the
diversions of European cities, can scarcely find employment for his day.
I had hired for six _toumans_ a month (the touman is worth about ten
shillings) one of the prettiest houses of the town in the quarter named
Gazbine-Dervazé. The air, it is true, circulated as freely through it as
in the open street, but the climate is so mild and the weather was so
fine that this could scarcely be considered an objection. The house
consisted of two stories of several rooms with two terraces to each.
Those of the upper story overlooked the town, which, in spite of its
dulness, had a certain air of activity. Two rows of windows--the lower
closed with wooden shutters and the upper one formed of colored
glass,--gave light to the principal room, of which the walls were white
as snow. I took advantage of two niches to place therein two complete
Persian armors which I had procured with inconceivable trouble, for no
one can imagine the numberless and tedious difficulties which impede
every kind of transaction. For the most trifling purchase one hundred
toumans are spoken of as a hundred roubles in Russia. Besides,
punctuality is a virtue unknown in Persia, and this alone would suffice
to make the country odious to foreigners. If you charge a tradesman with
want of faith, he replies gravely that 'his nose has burned with
regret'--a strange expression of repentance certainly! Indeed, the habit
of falsehood is so inveterate among Persians of this class--and I may
even say of all classes--that when they happen by chance to keep their
word they never fail to claim a reward as though they had performed a
most rare and meritorious act. Having examined all the rare but rather
heterogeneous articles which compose the royal treasury, we went to see
the king's second son (the eldest was at Tauris), to whom Count
Simonitsch had to pay a farewell visit. We found the little prince in
the audience chamber, seated on the floor on a cachmere, and propped by
several large bolsters covered with pink muslin. He was a delicate
sickly child of four or five years old, with an unmeaning countenance, a
pale face, insignificant and rather flattened features, and red hair,
or rather, I should say, with his hair dyed of a deep red. He was
dressed in a shawl caftan lined with fur, and wore on his little
black cap a diamond aigrette. We sat down in front of him on the
carpet;--Mirza-Massoud, the minister for foreign affairs, and two or
three other dignitaries who were present at the interview, remained
standing. _Démàhi schoumà tschogh est?_ that is to say, 'Is your nose
very fat?' inquired Count Simonitsch. This extraordinary form of speech
universally used by well-bred persons in Persia, seems to indicate that
they ascribe considerable hygienic importance to that feature. All my
researches to discover the origin and symbolical meaning of this
courtesy have proved in vain; I have never obtained a satisfactory
explanation to my questions on this head: all I can say is, that the
hackneyed forms of salutation in use among European nations have since
seemed to me far less absurd than they formerly did."

We have no doubt that even should Prince Keikhobade-Mirza have departed
this life, another original might be found for the following picture of
a Persian prince in reduced circumstances:

"On my return home I found an Armenian merchant waiting for me who
seemed somewhat less of a rogue than his brethren. He had brought me a
_Sipehr_ (shield) in delicately wrought steel, ornamented with
inscriptions and arabesques, inlaid in gold; it belonged, he said, to
Prince Mohammed-Veli-Mirza, and he demanded a sum of thirty-six toumans
(about eighteen pounds), which I gave without hesitation. It was not
dear at that price. This Mohammed-Veli-Mirza, one of the numerous sons
of the late Fet-Ali-Schah, had been, if I mistake not, governor of
Schiraz. His reputation, as well as that of his brother
Keikhobade-Mirza, (indeed, I might say of all his brothers), was so well
established in the country, that the Armenian begged I would not
consider the bargain as concluded until he had paid the money into the
prince's hands, lest he should wish to recede from his word. You know,
he said, that these _Schahzadès_ have no scruples in these
matters,--that they are all _tamamkharab_, that is to say, bad
characters--_kharab_, meaning a thing that is bad--decayed, dilapidated.
Fortunately the fears of the prudent Armenian were not realized; for a
wonder, Mohammed-Veli-Mirza was contented with the sum he had first
asked, and the _Sipehr_ was added to my collection. A few days later I
received a deputation from Prince Keikhobade-Mirza, offering me a
similar shield as a present. In the first impulse of my gratitude I
hastened to present my thanks to the generous donor. His house was the
abode of poverty; his appearance was noble and dignified, and his
countenance very handsome, although he squinted. The portrait of his
royal father, the late Fet-Ali-Schah, hung in the room, and I was
struck with the resemblance between father and son. The full-length
portrait of my gracious host was there also--in the full dress of a
prince of the blood holding a shield. Keikhobade-Mirza, whose gracious
and cordial reception touched me the more on account of the evident
poverty of his household, pointed to this latter portrait,--saying that
in his father's lifetime he was, as I could see, his _selictar_, or
royal shield-bearer, and enjoyed a brilliant station, but that now he
was fallen; adding that he had sent me the shield which he had
inherited--the same which I saw represented in the picture--knowing that
I had been looking out for curious arms at the bazaar. I was profuse in
my expressions of gratitude, although thanks in Persia denote a man of
mean station, and though my Persian servant, who had accompanied me, was
making signs to me to stop. 'It is a mere trifle,' said the Prince, 'and
I hope to find some other articles more worthy your acceptance, for my
only desire is to be agreeable to you.' The morrow brought me his
_Nazir_, or steward, to ask for three hundred _toumans_ (150_l._); and
as I seemed in no hurry to give them, he sent for his shield back again.
Some time afterwards, he came to see me, and asked why I had returned
it. 'You sent for it by your nazir,' I said. 'My nazir,' he replied,
(although the man was present and looking on with an ambiguous smile,)
'is a rogue and a storyteller; give me a hundred toumans and I will let
you have the shield, which indeed is yours. I begged you to accept it as
well as every thing else I may possess.' And so the matter ended."

The foregoing picture of Oriental munificence can scarcely be more
disenchanting than the sight of the sketch of Mohammed-Schah which
Prince Soltykoff had the honor to take. The large head, the heavy
inexpressive features, the clumsy frame, are sad dream dispellers; and
were it not for the redeeming Persian cap, the "Centre of the World"
might be mistaken for a grocer of the Rue St. Denis in a shawl
dressing-gown. On grand occasions the appearance of the Schah must be
still more incongruous, if we are to believe the description which the
author gives of the state dress preserved in the royal treasury. One can
scarcely fancy a gouty Centre of the World attired in a European uniform
of _blue cloth_, with the facings embroidered in diamonds, ruby buttons,
and epaulets formed of immense emeralds, to which are attached fringes
of large pearls. We translate a description of a last sitting, and of
the exchange of courtesies between the royal model and the amateur
artist; it may serve to reconcile some of our readers to the rather
monotonous form in which royal munificence is usually displayed in
European courts. When compared to a lame horse, a gold snuff-box
appears--if not an ingenious--at least a convenient present:

"On the 31st of January I went for the last time to the Palace to take
leave of the Schah, and make another portrait of him.... He proposed at
first to sit for his profile, but as I objected on the score of its
being less interesting:--'Well, well, he said, 'as you wish; you
understand the thing better than I do.' He then resumed his conversation
with the courtiers, who were ranged in a row at the other end of the
room,--sounding my praises in Turkish in the most exaggerated terms,
according to the rules of Persian politeness, and remarking among other
things how difficult it was to catch an exact likeness so
quickly--doubtless to set me at my ease, for he saw I was hurrying in my
task. To all these remarks the courtiers merely replied: '_Bêli_,
_bêli_, yes, yes,' in a monotonous and inexpressive tone. The Schah
seemed much surprised to learn that I was to leave Teheran the following
day. He inquired what motive induced me to leave Persia so soon. I
replied, that I was eager to join my family and friends, to inform them
of the favors I had received at the hands of His Majesty. For these
latter words the interpreter substituted the words 'Centre of the
World.' I added, that I intended returning to Teheran with my brother in
the course of the following year, at which the Prince of course appeared
delighted--'Return soon,' he said, 'you will always be welcome at my
court.' Then turning to Mirza-Massoud, his Minister for Foreign Affairs,
who had accompanied me:--I have known many Franks,' he remarked, 'but
none who pleased me as much as this one.' This phrase, it must be said,
loses somewhat of its effect when it is known that the good Prince never
failed to address it to every stranger who presented himself. He next
inquired of the Minister for Foreign Affairs if the presents he intended
for me were ready, and particularly recommended that they should not be
worth less than three hundred toumans. I then took leave of His Majesty,
backing out of the room as well as I could, while he continued to bestow
on me his smiles and gracious words. The next day, on my way to the
Russian Embassy, I met four of the King's servants, slowly leading in
great ceremony a tall, lame, bay horse. Before they accosted me to tell
me so, I had guessed that it was intended for me. I had not had time to
take on a fitting air for the occasion before my groom, who was walking
beside my horse, began to abuse the Schah's people in most lively terms,
refusing to admit such a sorry jade into my stables. In spite of my
opposition to so rude an action, and my exclamations in bad Turkish, the
Persians returned to the Palace stables, where they chose another horse,
which they brought me direct to the Embassy. My groom was not more
inclined to receive it than the first, nor to listen to my
remonstrances, and those of a dragoman of the Embassy, whose aid I had
invoked in order to declare that I accepted the royal gift with due
respect. All was useless; the quarrel proceeded,--my squire insisting on
performing his duty in spite of myself, and only interrupting himself to
make me understand that he was acting in my interest. The Schah's
servants at last, reduced to silence by the observations of so zealous a
follower, departed once more with their horse to submit the affair to
the Prime Minister, who was to decide in his wisdom whether the animal
was or was not worthy of being offered to me. A mixture of cleverness
and cunning, with an almost childish naïveté, seemed to me a striking
feature in the Persian character. Hadji-Mirza-Agassi pronounced the
steed to be to a certain degree valuable, and requested me to excuse
it,--for the present a better could not be offered,--adding, that on my
return I should receive a magnificent one."

Prince Soltykoff's remarks generally relate more to the habits and
indications of character observable among those whom he visits than to
any material objects or physical sensations. The notions entertained of
politeness in Persia seem especially to have struck him, as our readers
may have seen by the extracts which we have given. We will give one more
illustrating the same subject. It has often been said that a knowledge
of foreign countries is apt to make us better satisfied with our own,
and we have shown how an experience of Oriental gifts may restore the
oft-derided snuff-box to honor. Who knows whether even saucy children
may not in future be more patiently endured by our readers after the
following anecdote. For our own part, we know of no "dear little pickle"
whom we would not prefer to this very well-behaved Persian boy:

"Three days afterwards I was at Gazbine, installed in the house of a
certain Scherif-Khan, and received in his absence by his four sons, who
were all dressed alike, and the eldest of whom was barely eleven. In the
midst of the ruins of the town--all Persian towns indeed are mere
abominable ruins of mud walls--I considered myself fortunate in
obtaining a room and a fire-place. One of the walls of the apartment to
which I was conducted consisted of small bits of colored glass,
checkered at regular intervals with small squares of wood, for glass is
both rare and expensive in Persia. As, however, the greater part of the
colored glass was broken, and the wind came rushing through the holes
and crevices, I was half frozen and nearly stifled with smoke, until an
end was put to my sufferings by stopping the holes and nailing some felt
on the doors. The children of the house came, under the guidance of a
sort of servant who filled the office of tutor, to pay me a visit, and
seated themselves on the floor. The second, who was about ten, and who
by right of his mother's superior rank was to inherit all the paternal
titles and wealth, inquired after my health; and on my asking him in my
turn how he felt, replied with a very stiff little air, 'that in my
presence every body must feel satisfied.' I then offered him some cakes,
requesting to know if they were to his liking.--'All you offer is very
good,' he said, 'and all you eat must be excellent.' I had a cap on my
head, and another lay on the table; I questioned him on the value which
he attached to the two articles, and asked which he preferred. 'Both are
superb,' he replied, 'but the one you prefer is undoubtedly the best.'
After this piquant specimen of the civility of the country, it may be
supposed that I was not sorry to end the conference, and to get rid of
such an excessively well bred child. I took care, however, to send a cup
of tea to his mother, who, the tutor informed me, was young and pretty,
and lived in the house with three other wives of Scherif-Khan. She found
it so much to her liking that she sent to beg for a pound of it."

One word more: Oehlenschläger used to complain that when he wrote in
Danish he wrote for two hundred readers; Russians are very much in the
same case, and Prince Soltykoff, like all his countrymen who desire to
have a public, has been obliged to have recourse to a foreign language.
But the misfortune is so easily and gracefully borne, that we can
scarcely find pity for it. The drawings are well lithographed by French
artists. Our neighbors are much fonder of lithographic illustrations
than we are, and, it must be admitted, excel us in that branch of art.
We have noticed especially the lithographs executed by M. Trayer, a
young artist, who is also a painter of promise.


From Leigh Hunt's Journal.

DUELLING TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY YEARS AGO.

SIR THOMAS DUTTON AND SIR HATTON CHEEK.

BY THOMAS CARLYLE.


Peace here, if possible; skins were not made for mere slitting and
slashing! You that are for war, cannot you go abroad, and fight the
Papist Spaniards? Over in the Netherlands there is always fighting
enough. You that are of ruffling humor, gather your truculent ruffians
together; make yourselves colonels over them; go to the Netherlands, and
fight your bellyful!

Which accordingly many do, earning deathless war-laurels for the moment;
and have done, and will continue doing, in those generations. Our
gallant Veres, Earl of Oxford and the others, it has long been their
way; gallant Cecil, to be called Earl of Wimbledon; gallant Sir John
Burroughs, gallant Sir Hatton Cheek,--it is still their way. Deathless
military renowns are gathered there in this manner; deathless for the
moment. Did not Ben Jonson, in his young hard days, bear arms very
manfully as a private soldado there? Ben, who now writes learned plays
and court-masks as Poet Laureate, served manfully with pike and sword
there, for his groat a day with rations. And once when a Spanish soldier
came strutting forward between the lines, flourishing his weapon, and
defying all persons in general--Ben stept forth, as I hear; fenced that
braggart Spaniard, since no other would do it; and ended by soon
slitting him in two, and so silencing him! Ben's war-tuck, to judge by
the flourish of his pen, must have had a very dangerous stroke in it.

"Swashbuckler age," we said; but the expression was incorrect, except as
a figure. Bucklers went out fifty years ago, "about the twentieth of
Queen Elizabeth"; men do not now swash with them, or fight in that way.
Iron armor has mostly gone out, except in mere pictures of soldiers;
King James said, It was an excellent invention; you could get no harm,
and neither could you do any in it. Bucklers, either for horse or foot,
are quite gone. Yet old Mr. Stowe, good chronicler, can recollect when
every gentleman had his buckler; and at length every serving man and
city dandy. Smithfield--still a waste field, full of puddles in wet
weather,--was in those days full of buckler duels, every Sunday and
holiday in the dry season; and was called Ruffian's Rig, or some such
name.

A man, in those days, bought his buckler, of gilt leather and wood, at
the haberdasher's; "hung it over his back, by a strap fastened to the
pommel of his sword in front." Elegant men showed what taste, or sense
of poetic beauty, was in them by the fashion of their buckler. With
Spanish beaver, with starched ruff, and elegant Spanish cloak, with
elegant buckler hanging at his back, a man, if his moustachios and boots
were in good order, stepped forth with some satisfaction. Full of
strange oaths, and bearded like the pard; a decidedly truculent-looking
figure. Jostle him in the street thoroughfares, accidentally splash his
boots as you pass--by heaven the buckler gets upon his arm, the sword
flashes in his fist, with oaths enough; and you too being ready, there
is a noise! Clink, clank, death and fury; all persons gathering round,
and new quarrels springing from this one! And Dogberry comes up with the
town guard? And the shopkeepers hastily close their shops? Nay, it is
hardly necessary, says Mr. Howe; these buckler fights amount only to
noise, for most part; the jingle of iron against tin and painted
leather. Ruffling swashers strutting along with big oaths and whiskers,
delight to pick a quarrel; but the rule is you do not thrust, you do not
strike below the waist; and it was oftenest a dry duel--mere noise, as
of working tinsmiths, with profane swearing! Empty vaporing bullyrooks
and braggarts, they encumber the thoroughfares mainly. Dogberry and
Verges ought to apprehend them. I have seen, in Smithfield, on a dry
holiday, "thirty of them on a side," fighting and hammering as if for
life; and was not at the pains to look at them, the blockheads; their
noise as the mere beating of old kettles to me!

The truth is, serving-men themselves, and city apprentices had got
reckless, and the duels, no death following, ceased to be sublime. About
fifty years ago, serious men took to fighting with rapiers, and the
buckler fell away. Holles, in Sherwood, as we saw, fought with rapier,
and he soon spoiled Markham. Rapier and dagger especially; that is a
more silent duel, but a terribly serious one! Perhaps the reader will
like to take a view of one such serious duel in those days, and
therewith close this desultory chapter.

It was at the siege of Juliers, in the Netherlands wars, of the year
1609; we give the date, for wars are perpetual, or nearly so, in the
Netherlands. At one of the storm parties of the siege of Juliers, the
gallant Sir Hatton Cheek, above alluded to, a superior officer of the
English force which fights there under my Lord Cecil, that shall be
Wimbledon; the gallant Sir Hatton, I say, being of hot temper, superior
officer, and the service a storm-party on some bastion or demilune,
speaks sharp word of command to Sir Thomas Dutton, who also is probably
of hot temper in this hot moment. Sharp word of command to Dutton; and
the movement not proceeding rightly, sharp word of rebuke. To which
Dutton, with kindled voice, answers something sharp; is answered still
more sharply with voice high flaming;--whereat Dutton suddenly holds in;
says merely, "He is under military duty here, but perhaps will not
always be so;" and rushing forward, does his order silently, the best he
can. His order done, Dutton straightway lays down his commission; packs
up, that night, and returns to England.

Sir Hatton Cheek prosecutes his work at the siege of Juliers; gallantly
assists at the taking of Juliers, triumphant over all the bastions, and
half-moons there; but hears withal that Dutton is at home in England,
defaming him as a choleric tyrant and so forth. Dreadful news, which
brings some biliary attack on the gallant man, and reduces him to a bed
of sickness. Hardly recovered, he dispatches message to Dutton, That he
shall request to have the pleasure of his company, with arms and seconds
ready, on some neutral ground,--Calais sands for instance,--at an early
day, if convenient. Convenient; yes, as dinner to the hungry! answers
Dutton; and time, place, and circumstances are rapidly enough agreed
upon.

And so, on Calais sands, on a winter morning of the year 1609, this is
what we see most authentically, through the lapse of dim Time. Two
gentlemen stript to the shirt and waistband; in two hands of each a
rapier and dagger clutched; their looks sufficiently serious! The
seconds, having stript, equipt, and fairly overhauled and certified
them, are just about retiring from the measured fate-circle, not without
indignation that _they_ are forbidden to fight. Two gentlemen in this
alarming posture; of whom the Universe knows, has known, and will know
nothing, except that they were of choleric humor, and assisted in the
Netherlands wars! They are evidently English human creatures, in the
height of silent fury and measured circuit of fate; whom we here audibly
name once more, Sir Hatton Cheek, Sir Thomas Dutton, knights both,
soldadoes both. Ill-fated English human creatures, what horrible
confusion of the pit is this?

Dutton, though in suppressed rage, the seconds about to withdraw, will
explain some things if a word were granted, "No words," says the other;
"stand on your guard!" brandishing his rapier, grasping harder his
dagger. Dutton, now silent too, is on his guard. Good heavens! after
some brief flourishing and flashing,--the gleam of the swift clear steel
playing madly in one's eyes,--they, at the first pass, plunge home on
one another; home, with beak and claws; home to the very heart! Cheek's
rapier is through Dutton's throat from before, and his dagger is through
it from behind,--the windpipe miraculously missed; and, in the same
instant, Dutton's rapier is through Cheek's body from before, his dagger
through his back from behind,--lungs and life _not_ missed; and the
seconds have to advance, "pull out the four bloody weapons," disengage
that hell-embrace of theirs. This is serious enough! Cheek reels, his
life fast-flowing; but still rushes rabid on Dutton, who merely parries,
skips, till Cheek reels down, dead in his rage. "He had a bloody burial
there that morning," says my ancient friend. He will assist no more in
the Netherlands or other wars.

Such scene does history disclose, as in sunbeams, as in blazing
hell-fire, on Calais sands, in the raw winter morning; then drops the
blanket of centuries, of everlasting night, over it, and passes on
elsewhither. Gallant Sir Hatton Cheek lies buried there, and Cecil of
Wimbledon, son of Burleigh, will have to seek another superior officer.
What became of the living Dutton afterwards, I have never to this moment
had the least hint.


From Blackwood's Magazine

MY NOVEL:

OR, VARIETIES IN ENGLISH LIFE.

BY PISISTRATUS CAXTON.

_Continued from page 550, Vol. II._


BOOK IV.--INITIAL CHAPTER:

COMPRISING MR. CAXTON'S OPINIONS ON THE MATRIMONIAL STATE, SUPPORTED BY
LEARNED AUTHORITIES.

"It was no bad idea of yours, Pisistratus," said my father graciously,
"to depict the heightened affections and the serious intentions of
Signior Riccabocca by a single stroke--_He left off his spectacles!_
Good."

"Yet," quoth my uncle, "I think Shakspeare represents a lover as falling
into slovenly habits, neglecting his person, and suffering his hose to
be ungartered, rather than paying that attention to his outer man which
induces Signior Riccabocca to leave off his spectacles, and look as
handsome as nature will permit him."

"There are different degrees and many phases of the passion," replied my
father. "Shakspeare is speaking of an ill-treated, pining, wobegone
lover, much aggrieved by the cruelty of his mistress--a lover who has
found it of no avail to smarten himself up, and has fallen despondingly
into the opposite extreme. Whereas Signior Riccabocca has nothing to
complain of in the barbarity of Miss Jemima."

"Indeed he has not!" cried Blanche, tossing her head--"forward
creature!"

"Yes, my dear," said my mother, trying her best to look stately, "I am
decidedly of opinion that, in that respect, Pisistratus has lowered the
dignity of the sex. Not intentionally," added my mother mildly, and
afraid she had said something too bitter; "but it is very hard for a man
to describe us women."

The Captain nodded approvingly; Mr. Squills smiled; my father quietly
resumed the thread of his discourse.

"To continue," quoth he, "Riccabocca has no reason to despair of success
in his suit, nor any object in moving his mistress to compassion. He
may, therefore, very properly tie up his garters and leave off his
spectacles. What do you say, Mr. Squills?--for, after all, since
love-making cannot fail to be a great constitutional derangement, the
experience of a medical man must be the best to consult."

"Mr. Caxton," replied Squills, obviously flattered, "you are quite
right: when a man makes love, the organs of self-esteem and desire of
applause are greatly stimulated, and therefore, of course, he sets
himself off to the best advantage. It is only, as you observe, when,
like Shakspeare's lover, he has given up making love as a bad job, and
has received that severe hit on the ganglions which the cruelty of a
mistress inflicts, that he neglects his personal appearance: he neglects
it, not because he is in love, but because his nervous system is
depressed. That was the cause, if you remember, with poor Major Prim. He
wore his wig all awry when Susan Smart jilted him; but I set it all
right for him."

"By shaming Miss Smart into repentance, or getting him a new
sweetheart?" asked my uncle.

"Pooh!" answered Squills, "by quinine and cold bathing."

"We may therefore grant," renewed my father, "that, as a general rule,
the process of courtship tends to the spruceness, and even foppery, of
the individual engaged in the experiment, as Voltaire has very prettily
proved somewhere. Nay, the Mexicans, indeed, were of opinion that the
lady at least ought to continue those cares of her person even after
marriage. There is extant, in Sahagun's _History of New Spain_, the
advice of an Aztec or Mexican mother to her daughter, in which she
says--'That your husband may not take you in dislike, adorn yourself,
wash yourself, and let your garments be clean.' It is true that the good
lady adds,--'Do it in moderation; since, if every day you are washing
yourself and your clothes, the world will say you are over-delicate; and
particular people will call you--TAPETZON TINEMAXOCH!' What those words
precisely mean," added my father modestly, "I cannot say, since I never
had the opportunity to acquire the ancient Aztec language--but something
very opprobrious and horrible, no doubt."

