
At nine o'clock the emperor came out of his sleeping apartments, dressed
for the whole day. First the officers on duty were admitted, and received
their orders for the day. Then the _grandes entrees_ and the officers of
the household not on duty were introduced; and if any one had any
particular communication to make, he staid till the public audience was
concluded. At half after nine o'clock Napoleon breakfasted, on a small
mahogany table with one leg, and covered with a napkin. The prefect of
the palace stood close by this table, with his hat under his arm. The
breakfast rarely lasted beyond eight minutes. Sometimes, however, men of
science or literature, or distinguished artists, were admitted at this
time, with whom Napoleon is represented to have conversed in an easy and
lively style. Amongst these were M. Monge, Costaz, Denon, Bertholet,
Corvisart, David, Gerard, Isabey, Talma, and Fontaine. Dinner was served
at six o'clock; the emperor and the empress dined alone on the common
days of the week, but on Sunday all the imperial family attended, upon
which occasion Napoleon, the empress, and Madame Mère had arm-chairs, and
the rest chairs without arms. There was only one course. The emperor
drank no wine but Chambertin, and that usually mixed with water. Dinner
lasted in general from fifteen to twenty minutes. All this time the
prefect of the palace had to superintend the affair _en grand_, and to
answer any questions put to him. In the drawing-room a page presented to
the emperor a waiter with a cup and a sugar-stand. Le chef d'office
poured out the coffee; the empress took the cup from the emperor; the
page and the chef d'office retired; the prefect waited till the empress
had poured the coffee into the saucer and given it to Napoleon. After
this the emperor went to his papers again, and the empress played at
cards. Sometimes he would come and talk a little while with the people of
the household in the apartments of the empress, but not often, and he
never staid long. Upon his retiring, the officers on duty attended the
audience _du coucher_, and received their orders for the morrow. This was
the ordinary economy of the emperor's time, when not with the army.

Napoleon read the English newspapers every day in French, and M. de
Bausset says the translation was rigorously exact. One day in January,
1811, the emperor gave some of these extracts to de B., and ordered him
to read them aloud during dinner. The prefect got on pretty well, till he
stumbled at some uncouth epithets, with which he was puzzled how to deal,
especially in the presence of the empress, and a room full of domestics.
He blew his nose, and skipped the words--"No!" said Napoleon, "read out!
you will find many more." "I should be wanting--" "Read, I tell you,"
repeated the emperor, "read every thing!" At last de B. ran upon "tyrant
or despot," which he commuted for "emperor." Napoleon caught the paper
out of his hands, read the real phrase aloud, and then ordered M. de B.
to continue. These translations used to be made by Maret, Duke of
Bassano.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GATHERER.

  "A snapper-up of unconsidered trifles."
                                 SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


RETENTIVE MEMORY.


The historian, Fuller, in 1607, had a most retentive memory; he could
repeat 500 strange, unconnected words, after twice hearing them; and a
sermon verbatim, after reading it once. He undertook, after passing from
Temple Bar to the farthest part of Cheapside and back again, to mention
all the signs over the shops on both sides of the streets, repeated them
backwards and forwards, and performed the task with great exactness.

J.T.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


EVE'S TOMB.


About two miles northward of Djidda is shown the tomb of Howa (Eve), the
mother of mankind; it is, as I was informed, a rude structure of stone,
about four feet in length, two or three feet in height, and as many in
breadth; thus resembling the tomb of Noah, seen in the valley of Bekaa,
in Syria--_Burckhardt's Travels in Arabia_.

       *       *       *       *       *


ACROSTIC ON THE EYES.


  E nchanting features! how thy beauties charm;
  Y e magic orbs, in which for ever dwell
  E ach varying passion, from the bosom warm,
  S ilently ye express what language ne'er, can tell.
                                         C.J.T.

       *       *       *       *       *


VOLTAIRE.


When Voltaire was once ridiculing our immortal author of "Paradise Lost,"
in the presence of Dr. Young, it is said the latter delivered the
following extempore:

  "Thou art so witty, profligate, and thin,
   Thou seem'st a Milton, with his Death and Sin."
                                        R.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

VENTILATION.

Garrick told Cibber, "that his pieces were the best ventilators to his
theatre at Drury Lane; for as soon as any of them were played, the
audience directly left the house."

       *       *       *       *       *

ACROSTIC TO BRAHAM.

  B ear not away ye gales that sound!
  R apture be mute, nor breathe one sigh!
  A ttentive angels hover round--
  H eaven listens to his melody;
  A nd all the spheres' harmonious strings
  M ove in celestial strains when Braham sings!
                                     G.J.T.

       *       *       *       *       *

This day is published, price 5s. with a Frontispiece, and thirty other
Engravings, the

ARCANA OF SCIENCE, AND ANNUAL REGISTER OF THE USEFUL ARTS, FOR 1829.

The MECHANICAL department contains ONE HUNDRED New Inventions and
Discoveries, with 14 _Engravings_.

CHEMICAL, SEVENTY articles, with 2 _Engravings_.

NATURAL HISTORY, 135 New Facts and Discoveries, with 7 _Engravings_.

ASTRONOMICAL and METEOROLOGICAL PHENOMENA--35 articles--6 _Engravings_.

AGRICULTURE, GARDENING, and RURAL ECONOMY, 100 _Articles_.

DOMESTIC ECONOMY 50 _Articles_.

USEFUL ARTS, 50 _Articles_.

FINE ARTS.

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.

MISCELLANEOUS REGISTER, &c.

"We hope the editor will publish a similar volume annually."--_Gardener's
Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed and Published by J. LIMBIRD, 143, Strand. (near Somerset House,)
London; sold by ERNEST FLEISCHER, 626, New Market, Leipsic; and by all
Newsmen and Booksellers_.