Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)


_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD

AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    SUBSCRIPTION PRICE.     MARCH 18, 1897         Vol. 1. NO. 19
    $2.50 PER YEAR
    [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second-class matter]

[Illustration]

    A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER

    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY


Copyrighted 1897, By WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.

       *        *       *       *       *

=School Books Wanted=


The following school books will be taken in exchange for subscriptions for
"Great Round World" at prices named.

Send books by express prepaid. Send none which are much soiled or worn;
pages must not be torn nor missing. Mark package--"GREAT ROUND
WORLD, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City, care William Beverley
Harison."

Put your name on package and send a list by mail with your subscription
order.

=We can use Standard School Books of all kinds, send List of any you may
wish to dispose of.=

=READERS=

    Barnes'          First, 20c.   Second, 30c.   Third, 40c.
    Appleton's           "  15c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    Cyr's                "  20c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    New Franklin         "  20c.       "   30c.      "   35c.
    McGuffey's Revised   "  15c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    Stickney's           "  10c.       "   15c.      "   20c.
    Swinton's            "  20c.       "   30c.      "   40c.
    Information          "  30c.       "   30c.      "   30c.

=HISTORIES. UNITED STATES=

    Barnes'          Primary, 40c.   Large 1890 or later, 75c.
    Eggleston's   First Book, 40c.     "                  75c.
    Fiske's                            "                  75c.
    Johnston's       Shorter, 40c.     "                  75c.
    Montgomery's  Beginner's, 30c.     "                  75c.
    Sheldon's                          "                  50c.
    Thomas'                            "                  50c.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND WORLD And WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   MARCH 18, 1897.   NO. 19

       *       *       *       *       *

Cuba has changed places with Greece this week, and again occupies the most
important place in men's thoughts.

An American citizen who was arrested there two weeks ago has been found
dead in his cell, under very mysterious circumstances.

This man was Dr. Ricardo Ruiz.

He was born in Cuba, but came to the United States many years ago. He
studied dentistry in Philadelphia, lived there several years, obtained his
papers, and became an American citizen.

A foreigner who wishes to become an American citizen has to go before a
judge and declare his intention of becoming a citizen of the United
States. The court then gives him what are called his "first papers."

He must have lived here five years before he can become a citizen. To do
this he asks for what are called his first papers, and then he must wait
two years before he can get what are called his "second papers," which
make him a citizen of the United States, and give him all the rights and
privileges of a native-born citizen. Before the second papers are given
him, he has to take an oath swearing to be a true and faithful citizen of
his new country, and he has to give up any title that he may have borne in
his former land.

[Illustration: Prison at Guanabacoa Dr. Ricardo Ruiz]

The oath he takes, which is called the oath of allegiance, binds him to
give up his citizenship in his former country, and to become so completely
an American that if a war were to break out between his old country and
the United States, he would fight against her and for America.

He went back to Cuba, after a while, and settled in Guanabacoa.

Guanabacoa, if you will remember, is the town which is ruled by the cruel
Fondeviella. In Number 13 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD we told you about this
man, and his cruelty.

It would seem that Dr. Ruiz fell a victim to Fondeviella's cruelty.

The Spaniards seem to have a very spiteful feeling against Cubans who have
become American citizens.

They vow vengeance against such men, and are ever on the watch to find an
excuse for arresting or punishing them.

Dr. Ruiz, though he seems to have attended to his own business, and obeyed
the law in every way, interfering with no one, has been an object of
suspicion to Fondeviella for some time past, and when, on January 16th, a
train was thrown off the rails by insurgents, a few miles from Guanabacoa,
Dr. Ruiz was accused of having taken part in the outrage.

He was arrested and thrown into jail.

When the reason for his arrest was known, some well-known citizens of
Guanabacoa came forward, and said that they knew Dr. Ruiz was innocent. It
seems that on that very night there was a birthday party at the house of
Dr. Ruiz's father-in-law.

The doctor was present, but, feeling tired, he left the party at ten
o'clock and went to his own house. Two of his friends went with him, and
sat chatting with him until after twelve o'clock.

The train was thrown off the rails at ten-thirty, so that it was quite
impossible that Dr. Ruiz could have had any hand in the work.

The authorities refused to listen to these statements made by Dr. Ruiz's
friends, and kept him shut up in a dark and filthy cell for fourteen days.
At the end of this time word came to Consul-General Lee that Dr. Ruiz had
died in prison.

As he was a very strong and healthy man, the American Consul at once
suspected that he had not died a natural death.

On investigation it was found that the poor fellow had died from the
effects of a blow on the head.

No one knows, and probably no one ever will know, how he was killed, but
there are dark rumors that he was murdered in his cell by Fondeviella's
orders.

When the Americans were going to see the cell in which poor Dr. Ruiz had
died, they were obliged to pass along a corridor lined with other cells,
in which more prisoners were confined.

As they walked along this passage, several of the poor captives came to
their doors, and whispered that Ruiz had been ill-treated, and they
thought murdered. They declared that they had heard sounds of blows coming
from his cell, and that the jail had rung with the poor doctor's cries for
help.

This may not be true, because Cubans shut up in jails by Spaniards are not
likely to feel very friendly toward them, and these stories may have been
invented with the hope of angering the Americans into making war on Spain.

But whether these stories be true or false, it is very well known that the
Spaniards do not treat their prisoners kindly, and there is good ground
for suspicion in this case.

Our Consul was so disturbed by the news that was brought to him, and by
the sights that he saw in the jail, that he sent word to the government in
Washington, asking that warships be sent to Havana to protect the American
prisoners who are in Cuban jails.

There have been, and still are, a number of our citizens under arrest in
Cuba, and the case of Mrs. Rodriguez, about whom you read in Number 16 of
THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, followed so closely by the death of Dr. Ruiz, has
made General Lee feel that the Americans in Cuba need some better
protection than they have at present.

The government however, has refused him the help he asked for, and it is
reported that the Consul-General has sent in his resignation, preferring
to give up his office rather than remain in Cuba without the power to help
his countrymen.

This news has created the greatest excitement. The government denies that
it is true, and declares that General Lee has neither asked for warships
nor sent in his resignation. But signed telegrams come from Havana,
stating that the whole matter is quite true, and that the General cabled
his resignation, so that there might be no delay in its reaching our
government.

Both Houses of Congress are demanding to be told the whole truth about the
matter. Senators, who, as a rule, are very loyal to the government, are
asking for explanations, and insisting that all the papers and letters in
Mr. Olney's hands that relate to the subject shall be given to the
Senate.

Havana is also highly excited. The report that General Lee had asked for
warships set the Spaniards afire. They threatened, and raged, and became
so angry and indignant that the Marquis de Ahumada, the governor of
Havana, was afraid that riots would break out.

He therefore sent for the colonels of the various volunteer troops in the
city, and assured them that the reports were altogether false, and that
Mr. Cleveland and Mr. Olney were the faithful friends of Spain.

Despite the governor's proclamation, the Spaniards openly declare that if
an American man-of-war enters Havana harbor they will attack the American
Consulate, and declare war on the United States.

Meanwhile, people are wondering what turn Cuban affairs will take, after
they are in the hands of the new President.

The Spaniards declare that Major McKinley will follow in the footsteps of
Mr. Cleveland and Mr. Olney, and do nothing at all.

In Washington it is said that great changes will be made. While war will
not be declared on Spain, warships will be sent to Cuba to protect our
citizens there, and the United States Navy will no longer be kept doing
police work for Spain by preventing filibustering.

One thing, however, is sure. Dr. Ruiz's death will be closely inquired
into.

General Lee's prompt and manly action has been of some little help to
another poor American confined in a Cuban jail.

This second prisoner is a Mr. Charles Scott, who is accused of having
some postage stamps in his possession that were issued by the insurgent
government.

It is the custom of the Spaniards to keep important prisoners in solitary
confinement until they have been examined by the judge. Their law says
that a prisoner shall be shut up thus closely for seventy hours, and
during that time he shall be completely cut off from the rest of the
world, and therefore at the mercy of his jailers.

It was during this confinement, and while he was waiting for his
examination, that Dr. Ruiz was, if reports be true, beaten to death by the
Spaniards.

Mr. Scott was also waiting for his examination, but General Lee, fearing
that he, too, might "happen to die" in his prison, made such a clamor for
his release, that he has been put with the other prisoners, and where his
friends can see him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fighting still continues in Crete, and it seems as if the Powers were
really sincere in their wish to make Greece keep the peace.

Colonel Vassos has been doing some fine work as commander of the Corps of
Occupation. He has attacked fort after fort, and has won several victories
over the Turks.

Encouraged by his success, he decided to advance on Canea.

No sooner was word of his advance brought to the city, than the admirals
in command of the various fleets set out for the Greek camp, and had a
talk with Colonel Vassos.

They would not tell what had passed, but on their return to Canea they
sent to the commander of the Greek fleet, and asked him to call on them.

When this gentleman met the admirals, they were all assembled together,
and had evidently been talking the situation over. They informed him, as
the result of their conference, that if Colonel Vassos did attack the
city, the allied fleets of the Powers would fire upon him and drive him
away.

The same message was sent to Colonel Vassos.

In spite of it, he advanced upon Canea, and the morning after the warning
had been received his troops began to fire upon the town.

Immediately, the admirals of the fleets in the harbor ordered the decks of
their ships to be cleared for action, and fired their guns upon the
Greeks.

After a short while, the Greeks, finding that they could not stand against
the terrible fire from the big guns, became disheartened, and withdrew.

The moment the Greek flag was hauled down, the ships stopped firing.

A good deal of indignation has been felt that Christian Powers should
interfere to uphold the misrule of infidels, but the Great Powers say they
are acting for the best interests of Europe.

It seems quite sure that they do not mean to leave the Cretans under the
care of the Sultan of Turkey.

The latest news tells us that Greece has once more been ordered to leave
Crete, and that this time she has agreed to do so, provided that the
island be made independent.

Lord Salisbury, the Prime Minister of England, suggested that Crete should
be given home rule under the governorship of a Greek prince, and thus far
the rest of the Powers are willing to agree with him.

Nothing will be done until the Greek troops have been made to leave Crete,
and this may not be so easy to accomplish. Word comes from Athens that the
people are not at all pleased with the idea of home rule for Crete. They
want the island to be joined to Greece, and would rather fight for it,
than give it up. It is very natural that they should feel this way.

If the people of some near-by country were almost all Americans and
relations of ours, and were cruelly treated by their rulers, we would feel
just as the Greeks do. There is hardly a family in Greece which has not
suffered wrong from the Turks. It is but natural that they fight for their
brothers, the Cretans.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Number 14 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, we spoke of the massacre of a
number of white men in Africa by the King of Benin. We told how the Queen
of England had ordered her soldiers to punish the African king for his
cruelty.

News has just come that the soldiers sent by England have captured Benin
City, and that its king, Drunami, is fleeing before his angry foes.

A part of the soldiers remained in Benin to hold the city, and the rest
went in pursuit of the king. They expect to take him prisoner, and if they
succeed in doing so, they will keep him a captive, to prevent any more of
his cruel outbreaks.

The English must be very glad to have Benin in their possession, because
the king used to send out parties of his warriors to lay waste all the
country round about the city. He would attack and capture the trading
parties carrying ivory to the coast, and would bring the traders back
within the walls of Benin, to torture and kill them in cruel and savage
ways.

His city was so strongly fortified that none of the surrounding tribes
dared to attack it, and he had things pretty much his own way.

So sure was he of the strength of his walls, and the cleverness of his
warriors, that he laughed at the idea of the Queen of England punishing
him for his wicked deeds, and waited for the soldiers to come to Benin,
expecting to be able to make very short work of them.

Now, however, he has learned that there are greater and more powerful
monarchs than the King of Benin, and that his boasted stronghold was of no
account when attacked by a clever foe. Obliged to flee for his life,
leaving his city in ruins behind him, Drunami, King of Benin, is learning
that he is not so great or powerful as he thought he was. It will probably
be a very useful lesson to him, and make him a better man.

       *       *       *       *       *

A very curious law case has just come to an end in France.

It is such a silly case, that it seems strange that the French lawyers
waste their time over it.

