WINNING A CAUSE

by

JOHN GILBERT THOMPSON


     *     *     *     *     *     *


     In Flanders Now

     (An Answer to Lt.-Col. McCrae)


     We have kept faith, ye Flanders' dead,
     Sleep well beneath those poppies red,
       That mark your place.
     The torch your dying hands did throw
     We 've held it high before the foe,
     And answered bitter blow for blow,
       In Flanders' fields.

     And where your heroes' blood was spilled
     The guns are now forever stilled
       And silent grown.
     There is no moaning of the slain,
     There is no cry of tortured pain,
     And blood will never flow again
       In Flanders' fields.

     Forever holy in our sight
     Shall be those crosses gleaming white,
       That guard your sleep.
     Rest you in peace, the task is done,
     The fight you left us we have won,
     And "Peace on Earth" has just begun
       In Flanders now.

     EDNA JACQUES
     in the _Calgary Herald_


     *     *     *     *     *     *


[Frontispiece: Edwin Rowland Blashfield's poster, "Carry On," used in
the Fourth Liberty Loan.

This striking lithograph in the movement of its design expresses the
compelling force of the American spirit as it entered the World War.

The original oil painting has been purchased by The Metropolitan Museum
of Art, New York City.]


WINNING A CAUSE

World War Stories

by

JOHN GILBERT THOMPSON
Principal of the State Normal School, Fitchburg, Mass.

and

INEZ BIGWOOD
Instructor in Children's Literature, State Normal School,
Fitchburg, Mass.

Authors of
  Lest We Forget


Silver, Burdett and Company
Boston ---- New York ---- Chicago
Copyright, 1919, by
Silver, Burdett and Company.


PREFACE

_Lest We Forget_, the first volume of World War stories, gave an
outline of the struggle up to the time of the signing of the armistice,
November 11, 1918, and contained in general chronological order most of
the stories that to children from ten to sixteen years of age would be
of greatest interest, and give the clearest understanding of the
titanic contest.

This; the second volume of the same series, contains the stories of the
war of the character described, that were not included in _Lest We
Forget_,--stories of the United States naval heroes, of the Americans
landed in France, of the concluding events of the war, of the visit of
President Wilson to Europe, and of the Peace Conference.  In a word,
emphasis is placed upon America's part in the struggle.

This volume should be of even greater interest to American children
than the first, for it tells the story of America's greatest
achievement, of a nation undertaking a tremendous and terrible task not
for material gain, but for an ideal.

No more inspiring story has ever been told to the children of men than
the story of America's part in winning the greatest cause for which men
have ever contended.  President Wilson said in Europe, "The American
soldiers came not merely to win a war, but to win a cause."  Every
child in every home and in every school should be made familiar with
how it was won, and with the separate stories which go to make up the
glorious epic.

The two volumes of the series give for children, in a way that they
will comprehend and enjoy, through stories so selected and so connected
as to build up an understanding of the whole, the causes, the conduct,
and the results of the World War.

The thanks of the authors and publishers are hereby expressed to Mr.
Edwin Rowland Blashfield for the permission to reproduce his poster,
"Carry On"; to Mrs. Ella Wheeler Wilcox for "Song of the Aviator"; to
George H. Doran Company, Publishers, for "Pershing at the Tomb of
Lafayette" from "The Silver Trumpet," by Amelia Josephine Burr,
copyright 1918; for "Where Are You Going, Great-Heart?" from "The
Vision Splendid" by John Oxenham, copyright 1918; for "Trees" from
"Trees and Other Poems" by Joyce Kilmer, copyright 1914; to _Collier's_
for Lieutenant McKeogh's story of "The Lost Battalion"; to Mr. Roger
William Riis for his article "The Secret Service"; and to Mr. John
Mackenzie, Chief Boatswain's Mate, U. S. S. _Remlik_, for the facts in
the story, "Fighting a Depth Bomb."


CONTENTS


  1. WHY THE UNITED STATES ENTERED THE WAR
  2. AMERICA COMES IN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._Klaxton_
  3. PERSHING AT THE TOMB OF LAFAYETTE . . . .  _Amelia Josephine Burr_
  4. AMERICA ENTERS THE WAR  . . . . . . . . . . . _David Lloyd George_
  5. THE FIRST TO FALL IN BATTLE
  6. FOUR SOLDIERS
  7. WHERE THE FOUR WINDS MEET . . . . . . .  _Geoffrey Dalrymple Nash_
  8. THE SOLDIERS WHO GO TO SEA
  9. WHEN THE TIDE TURNED  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Otto H. Kahn_
 10. A BOY OF PERUGIA
 11. REDEEMED ITALY
 12. SONG OF THE AVIATOR . . . . . . . . . . . .  _Ella Wheeler Wilcox_
 13. NATIONS BORN AND REBORN
 14. "TO VILLINGEN--AND BACK"
 15. ALSACE-LORRAINE
 16. THE CALL TO ARMS IN OUR STREET  . . . . . . . . . .  _W. M. Letts_
 17. THE KAISER'S CROWN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Charles Mackay_
 18. THE QUALITY OF MERCY
 19. THE REALLY INVINCIBLE ARMADA
 20. "I KNEW YOU WOULD COME" . . . . . .  _Rev. Ernest M. Stires, D.D._
 21. THE SEARCHLIGHTS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Alfred Noyes_
 22. FIGHTING A DEPTH BOMB
 23. THE SECOND LINE OF DEFENSE
 24. U. S. DESTROYER OSMOND C. INGRAM
 25. JOYCE KILMER
 26. BLOCKING THE CHANNEL
 27. THE FLEET THAT LOST ITS SOUL
 28. THE LITTLE OLD ROAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Gertrude Vaughan_
 29. HARRY LAUDER SINGS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Dr. George Adams_
 30. THE THIRTEENTH REGIMENT
 31. WHERE ARE YOU GOING, GREAT-HEART? . . . . . . . . . _John Oxenham_
 32. THIS CAPTURE OF DUN
 33. BOMBING METZ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  _Raoul Lufbery_
 34. THE UNSPEAKABLE TURK
 35. THE SECRET SERVICE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Roger William Riis_
 36. AT THE FRONT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  _G. B. Manwaring_
 37. A CAROL FROM FLANDERS . . . . . . . . . . . . .  _Frederick Niven_
 38. THE MINER AND THE TIGER
 39. THE LOST BATTALION
 40. UNITED STATES DAY
 41. NOVEMBER 11, 1918
 42. IN MEMORIAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  _Alfred Tennyson_
 43. THE UNITED STATES AT WAR--IN FRANCE . . _General John J. Pershing_
 44. THE UNITED STATES AT WAR--AT HOME
 45. A CONGRESSIONAL MESSAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Woodrow Wilson_
 46. PRESIDENT WILSON IN FRANCE
 47. SERGEANT YORK OF TENNESSEE


ILLUSTRATIONS

Edwin Rowland Blashfield's poster, "Carry On," used in the Fourth
Liberty Loan . . . . _Frontispiece_

The standard bearers and color guard leading a column of the Fifth
Artillery of the First American Division through Hetzerath, Germany, on
their way to the Rhine.

"Lafayette, We Are Here!"  The immortal tribute of General John J.
Pershing at the grave of the great Frenchman.

The religious and military tribute paid to the first Americans to fall
in battle, at Bathelmont, November 4, 1917.

Saint George and the Dragon, painted by V. Carpaccio in 1516, Venice;
S. Giorgio Maggiore.

Jeanne d'Arc, rising in her stirrups, holds on high her sword, as if to
consecrate it for a war of Right.

Memorial Day, 1918, was celebrated abroad as well as at home.

This memorial to the memory of Edith Cavell was unveiled by Queen
Alexandra in Norwich, England, at the opening of the Nurse Cavell
Memorial Home.

Somewhere in France these Salvation Army "lassies" are baking pies and
"doughnuts for the doughboys."

The U.S. Destroyer _Fanning_ with depth bombs stored in run-ways on the
after deck.

One of the camouflaged guns of the German shore batteries which raked
with fire the _Vindictive_, the _Daffodil_, and the _Iris_ when they
grappled with the mole, during the night raid.

The British Cruiser _Curacao_, Admiral Tyrwhitt's flagship, leading out
one column of British cruisers at the surrender of the German navy.

From left to right, Admiral Sir David Beatty, Admiral Rodman, King
George, the Prince of Wales, and Admiral Sims on the deck of the U.S.
Battleship _New York_.

The heroic American ace, Raoul Lufbery, wearing his well-earned
decorations just after an official presentation.

A two-passenger tractor biplane flying near the seashore.

The official entry of General Allenby into Jerusalem, December 11, 1917.

David Lloyd George.

Georges Clemenceau.

Major General Clarence R. Edwards pinning the congressional Medal of
Honor on the breast of Lieutenant Colonel Charles W. Whittlesey.

Messages from Colonel Whittlesey and Lieutenant McKeogh.

This picture shows the standardized style of building used in every
army in the United States.

A 10-inch caliber naval gun on a railroad mount.

A photograph from an airplane at 7900 feet, showing Love Field, Dallas,
Texas, and a parachute jumper.

The Red Cross War Fund and Membership poster.

A photograph of the United States Transport _George Washington_ taken
from an airplane.

President Wilson driving from the railroad station in Paris with
President Poincaré of France.

Sergeant York wearing the French Croix de Guerre and the Congressional
Medal of Honor.

Pronouncing Vocabulary (four images).


WINNING A CAUSE


WHY THE UNITED STATES ENTERED THE WAR

The United States was slow to enter the war, because her people
believed war an evil to be avoided at almost any cost except honor.  In
fact, "Peace at any price" seemed to be the motto of many Americans
even after two years of the World War.

[Illustration: The standard bearers and color guard leading a column of
the Fifth Artillery of the First American Division through Hetzerath,
Germany, on their way to the Rhine.]

President Wilson declared in a speech at Philadelphia on May 10, 1915,
that there is such a thing as being too proud to fight.  He was
severely criticized for his statement, and yet it is very true, and for
more than a generation it had been taught to American boys and girls.
Peace societies had sent lecturers to the public schools to point out
the wickedness of war and the blessings of peace.  Prizes had been
offered to high school, normal school, and college students for the
best essays on _Peace_, _How to Maintain the Peace of the World_, and
other similar subjects.  To get ready for war by enlarging the army and
navy was declared to be the very best way to bring on war.  School
reading books made a feature of peace selections, and school histories
were making as little of our national wars as possible.  These
teachings and the very air of the land of freedom made people too proud
to fight, if there were any honorable way of avoiding it.

It is said that "People judge others by themselves."  So Americans,
being peaceful, contented, and not possessed with envy of their
neighbors, supposed all other civilized people were like themselves.
Therefore they could not at first believe that the Germans were
different and looked upon war as a glorious thing, because through it
they might get possession of the wealth and property of others.
Perhaps the Germans, judging other people by themselves, believed that
the French and Russians and English, like the Germans, stood ready to
go to war whenever through it they might gain wealth and territory; but
the Germans did not think this of the people of the United States.
They thought that they were a nation of traders and money-getters in
love with the Almighty Dollar.  As events proved, this idea was a fatal
mistake on the part of the Germans.

In entirely different ways, both Americans and Germans were taught that
they were the people above all other peoples in the world.  The German
insolently sang "Germany above All" while the American good-naturedly
boasted his land as the freest, the noblest and best, leading all the
other countries and showing them the way to become greater and better.
The American people, however, did not intend to force their beliefs
upon other nations.  But the Germans were led by the idea that German
Kultur would be a blessing for all mankind and that it was their
destiny to conquer and improve all other nations.

  Thor stood at the northernmost point of the world.
  His hammer flew from his hand.
  "So far as my hammer this arm has hurled,
  All mine are the sea and the land."
  And forward flew the giant tool
  Over the whole broad earth, to fall
  At last in the southernmost pool
  To prove that Thor's was all.
  Since then 'tis the pleasant German way
  By the hammer, lands to win,
  And to claim for themselves world-wide sway,
  As the Hammer-god's nearest kin.


But the American does not go this far.  While he is inclined to believe
himself and his country better than any other people or nation, yet he
is content to let others live in their own way as long as they are
honest and do not interfere with him and his business.  He is, to be
sure, desirous of improving them, but by peaceful means, by building
dams and railroads for them, and by giving them schools and sending
them missionaries.

It was difficult therefore for Americans to realize that the Germans
really planned and desired the war in order that they might rule the
world.  It took months and even years of war for the majority of
Americans to come to a full realization of this truth.  This should be
remembered when the question is asked, not why the United States
entered the war, but why she did not enter it earlier.

Americans are honorable and look upon the breaking of a pledge or an
agreement as a shameful thing.  It was almost impossible for them to
believe that a nation, far advanced in science and learning of all
kinds, could look upon a treaty as a scrap of paper and consider its
most solemn promises as not binding when it was to its advantage to
break them.  Americans in their homes, their churches, and their
schools had been taught that "an honest man is the noblest work of
God."  They had heard the old saying that "All is fair in love and
war"; but they could not think for a moment that a whole nation of men
and women had been taught that lies and treachery and broken promises
were fair because they helped the Fatherland work out its destiny and
rule the world.

They knew that Chancellor Bismarck falsified a telegram to bring on the
war with France in 1870, and they learned to their dismay that
Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg in 1914 declared the treaty with Belgium
only "a scrap of paper" when Germany wished to cross that country to
strike France.  Americans kept learning that Germany's promises to
respect hospitals and hospital ships, stretcher-bearers and the Red
Cross, not to interfere with non-combatants, not to use poison gas, not
to bombard defenseless cities and towns were all "scraps of paper."
They discovered even the naturalization papers which Germans in America
took out in order to become American citizens were lies sworn to, for
the German who declared his loyalty to his new mother country was still
held by Germany as owing his first fealty and duty to her.  It must be
said, however, that many Germans who became naturalized in the United
States did not agree with these secret orders of their Fatherland; but
many others did, and the rulers of Germany encouraged such deception.

It was many months after the beginning of the World War before the
large body of American citizens would believe that the German nation
and the German people made a business of lies and deception, and
considered such a business just and proper when in the service of the
Fatherland.  But when Germany--after having promised the United States
on May 4, 1916, that merchant ships would not be sunk without warning
or without giving the crews and passengers an opportunity for
safety--on January 31, 1917, informed Washington that she was not going
to keep her promise and told the German people that she had only made
it in order to get time to build a great submarine fleet which would
bring England to her knees in three months--then the American people
saw Germany as she was and in her shame.

Of all the peoples of the earth, the Americans are probably the most
sympathetic and helpful to the weak and the afflicted.  They are the
most merciful, striving to be kind not only to people but even to
animals.  The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children,
another for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and the numberless
Bands of Mercy show the feeling of the people of America toward the
helpless.  Americans supposed that other people were like them in this
respect.  They knew of the German pensions to the widows and to the
aged, and they supposed that the efficient and enlightened Germans were
among the merciful and sympathetic to the weak and dependent.  The
people of the United States knew, of course, of the Zabern incident
where two German soldiers held a crippled Alsatian cobbler while a
German officer slashed his face with his sword for laughing at
him,--they knew that the German army officers were haughty and
overbearing, but they thought this came from their training and was not
a part of the German character.  Americans had read the Kaiser's
directions to the German soldiers going to China during the Boxer
uprising to "Show no mercy!  Take no prisoners!  Use such frightfulness
that a Chinaman will never dare look at a German again.  Make a name
for yourselves as the Hun did long ago."  But the Americans, or most of
them, did not believe that in the twentieth century a nation classified
among the civilized nations could or would adopt _Frightfulness_ as a
policy.  But when they read of the devastation of Belgium and northern
France; of the destruction of Louvain; of whole villages of innocent
men, women, and children being wiped out; of the horrible crimes of the
sinking of the _Lusitania_, the _Falaba_, and the _Laconia_; of the
execution of Edith Cavell; of the carrying off into slavery, or worse
than slavery, of the able-bodied women and men from the conquered
territory--when Americans learned these horrors one after another, they
at last were forced to acknowledge that, like the brutal Assyrian kings
who sought to terrify their enemies into submission by standing as
conquerors upon pyramids of the slain, the modern Huns sought mastery
by _Frightfulness_.

When most Americans came to realize that Germany was fighting a war to
conquer the world, first Russia and France, then England, and then the
United States--for she had written Mexico that if she would attack the
United States, Germany and Mexico would make war and peace
together--when they came to know the German nature and the idea of the
Germans, that Might makes Right and that truth, honesty, and square
dealing like mercy, pity, and love are only words of weaklings; that
they were a nation of liars and falsifiers and the most brutal of all
people of recorded history; when, added to this, the Americans realized
that for over two years France and England had really been fighting for
everything for which the United States stood and which her people held
dear, for her very life and liberty, then America almost as one man
declared for war.

Meanwhile Germany had declined to recognize the laws of nations which
allowed America to sell munitions to the Allies.  She had scattered
spies through the United States to destroy property and create labor
troubles.  She had challenged the right of peaceful Americans to travel
on the high seas.  She had sunk the _Lusitania_ with a loss of one
hundred twenty-four American lives; the _Sussex_, the _Laconia_ with a
loss of eight Americans, the _Vigilancia_ with five, the _City of
Memphis_, the _Illinois_, the _Healdton_, and others.  She had tried to
unite Mexico and Japan against us.

Not until then, after the American people had become fully aware of the
German character and purposes, did Congress on April 6, 1917, declare a
state of war existed between Germany and the United States.  On that
day the outcome of the war was decided.  Through her hideous
selfishness, her stupidity, and her brutality, Germany, after having
spent nearly fifty years in preparation, lost her opportunity for world
dominion.  The resources and the fighting power of what she looked upon
as a nation of cowardly, money-loving merchants decided the conflict.


  AMERICA COMES IN

  We are coming from the ranch, from the city and the mine,
  And the word has gone before us to the towns upon the Rhine;
      As the rising of the tide
      On the Old-World side,
  We are coming to the battle, to the Line.

  From the Valleys of Virginia, from the Rockies in the North,
  We are coming by battalions, for the word was carried forth:
      "We have put the pen away
      And the sword is out today,
  For the Lord has loosed the Vintages of Wrath."

  We are singing in the ships as they carry us to fight,
  As our fathers sang before us by the camp-fires' light;
      In the wharf-light glare,
      They can hear us Over There
  When the ships come steaming through the night.

  Right across the deep Atlantic where the Lusitania passed,
  With the battle-flag of Yankee-land a-floating at the mast
      We are coming all the while,
      Over twenty hundred mile,
  And we're staying to the finish, to the last.

  We are many--we are one--and we're in it overhead,
  We are coming as an Army that has seen its women dead,
      And the old Rebel Yell
      Will be loud above the shell
  When we cross the top together, seeing red.

  KLAXTON.


  PERSHING AT THE TOMB OF LAFAYETTE

  They knew they were fighting our war.
    As the months grew to years
  Their men and their women had watched
    through their blood and their tears
  For a sign that we knew, we who could not
    have come to be free
  Without France, long ago.  And at last
    from the threatening sea
  The stars of our strength on the eyes
    of their weariness rose;
  And he stood among them,
    the sorrow strong hero we chose
  To carry our flag to the tomb
    of that Frenchman whose name
  A man of our country could once more
    pronounce without shame.
  What crown of rich words would he set
    for all time on this day?
  The past and the future were listening
    what he would say--
  Only this, from the white-flaming heart
    of a passion austere,
  Only this--ah, but France understood!
    "Lafayette, we are here."

  AMELIA JOSEPHINE BURR.

[Illustration: "Lafayette, We Are Here!"  The immortal tribute of
General John J. Pershing at the grave of the great Frenchman.  Notice
the difference between the American and French salutes.]


AMERICA ENTERS THE WAR

SPEECH BY LLOYD GEORGE, BRITISH PREMIER,

APRIL 12, 1917

I am in the happy position of being, I think, the first British
Minister of the Crown who, speaking on behalf of the people of this
country, can salute the American Nation as comrades in arms.  I am
glad; I am proud.  I am glad not merely because of the stupendous
resources which this great nation will bring to the succor of the
alliance, but I rejoice as a democrat that the advent of the United
States into this war gives the final stamp and seal to the character of
the conflict as a struggle against military autocracy throughout the
world.

That was the note that ran through the great deliverance of President
Wilson.  The United States of America have the noble tradition, never
broken, of having never engaged in war except for liberty.  And this is
the greatest struggle for liberty that they have ever embarked upon.  I
am not at all surprised, when one recalls the wars of the past, that
America took its time to make up its mind about the character of this
struggle.  In Europe most of the great wars of the past were waged for
dynastic aggrandizement and conquest.  No wonder when this great war
started that there were some elements of suspicion still lurking in the
minds of the people of the United States of America.  There were those
who thought perhaps that kings were at their old tricks--and although
they saw the gallant Republic of France fighting, they some of them
perhaps regarded it as the poor victim of a conspiracy of monarchical
swash-bucklers.  The fact that the United States of America has made up
its mind finally makes it abundantly clear to the world that this is no
struggle of that character, but a great fight for human liberty.

They naturally did not know at first what we had endured in Europe for
years from this military caste in Prussia.  It never has reached the
United States of America.  Prussia was not a democracy.  The Kaiser
promises that it will be a democracy after the war.  I think he is
right.  But Prussia not merely was not a democracy.  Prussia was not a
state; Prussia was an army.  It had great industries that had been
highly developed; a great educational system; it had its universities;
it had developed its science.

All these were subordinate to the one great predominant purpose of
all--a conquering army which was to intimidate the world.  The army was
the spearpoint of Prussia; the rest was merely the haft.  That was what
we had to deal with in these old countries.  It got on the nerves of
Europe.  They knew what it all meant.  It was an army that in recent
times had waged three wars, all of conquest, and the unceasing tramp of
its legions through the streets of Prussia, on the parade grounds of
Prussia, had got into the Prussian head.  The Kaiser, when he witnessed
on a grand scale his reviews, got drunk with the sound of it.  He
delivered the law to the world as if Potsdam was another Sinai, and he
was uttering the law from the thunder clouds.

But make no mistake.  Europe was uneasy.  Europe was half intimidated.
Europe was anxious.  Europe was apprehensive.  We knew the whole time
what it meant.  What we did not know was the moment it would come.

This is the menace, this is the apprehension from which Europe has
suffered for over fifty years.  It paralyzed the beneficent activity of
all states, which ought to be devoted to concentrating on the
well-being of their peoples.  They had to think about this menace,
which was there constantly as a cloud ready to burst over the land.  No
one can tell except Frenchmen what they endured from this tyranny,
patiently, gallantly, with dignity, till the hour of deliverance came.
The best energies of military science had been devoted to defending
itself against the impending blow.  France was like a nation which put
up its right arm to ward off a blow, and could not give the whole of
her strength to the great things which she was capable of.  That great,
bold, imaginative, fertile mind, which would otherwise have been
clearing new paths for progress, was paralyzed.

That is the state of things we had to encounter.  The most
characteristic of Prussian institutions is the Hindenburg line.  What
is the Hindenburg line?  The Hindenburg line is a line drawn in the
territories of other people, with a warning that the inhabitants of
those territories shall not cross it at the peril of their lives.  That
line has been drawn in Europe for fifty years.

You recollect what happened some years ago in France, when the French
Foreign Minister was practically driven out of office by Prussian
interference.  Why?  What had he done?  He had done nothing which a
minister of an independent state had not the most absolute right to do.
He had crossed the imaginary line drawn in French territory by Prussian
despotism, and he had to leave.  Europe, after enduring this for
generations, made up its mind at last that the Hindenburg line must be
drawn along the legitimate frontiers of Germany herself.  There could
be no other attitude than that for the emancipation of Europe and the
world.

It was hard at first for the people of America quite to appreciate that
Germany had not interfered to the same extent with their freedom, if at
all.  But at last they endured the same experience as Europe had been
subjected to.  Americans were told that they were not to be allowed to
cross and recross the Atlantic except at their peril.  American ships
were sunk without warning.  American citizens were drowned, hardly with
an apology--in fact, as a matter of German right.  At first America
could hardly believe it.  They could not think it possible that any
sane people should behave in that manner.  And they tolerated it once,
and they tolerated it twice, until it became clear that the Germans
really meant it.  Then America acted, and acted promptly.

The Hindenburg line was drawn along the shores of America, and the
Americans were told they must not cross it.  America said, "What is
this?"  Germany said, "This is our line, beyond which you must not go,"
and America said, "The place for that line is not the Atlantic, but on
the Rhine--and we mean to help you roll it up."

There are two great facts which clinch the argument that this is a
great struggle for freedom.  The first is the fact that America has
come in.  She would not have come in otherwise.  When France in the
eighteenth century sent her soldiers to America to fight for the
freedom and independence of that land, France also was an autocracy in
those days.  But Frenchmen in America, once they were there, their aim
was freedom, their atmosphere was freedom, their inspiration was
freedom.  They acquired a taste for freedom, and they took it home, and
France became free.  That is the story of Russia.  Russia engaged in
this great war for the freedom of Serbia, of Montenegro, of Bulgaria,
and has fought for the freedom of Europe.  They wanted to make their
own country free, and they have done it.  The Russian revolution is not
merely the outcome of the struggle for freedom.  It is a proof of the
character of the struggle for liberty, and if the Russian people
realize, as there is every evidence they are doing, that national
discipline is not incompatible with national freedom--nay, that
national discipline is essential to the security of national
freedom--they will, indeed, become a free people.

I have been asking myself the question, Why did Germany, deliberately,
in the third year of the war, provoke America to this declaration and
to this action--deliberately, resolutely?  It has been suggested that
the reason was that there were certain elements in American life, and
the Hohenzollerns were under the impression that they would make it
impossible for the United States to declare war.  That I can hardly
believe.  But the answer has been afforded by Marshal von Hindenburg
himself, in the very remarkable interview which appeared in the press,
I think, only this morning.

He depended clearly on one of two things.  First, that the submarine
campaign would have destroyed international shipping to such an extent
that England would have been put out of business before America was
ready.  According to his computation, America cannot be ready for
twelve months.  He does not know America.  Second, that when America is
ready, at the end of twelve months, with her army, she will have no
ships to transport that army to the field of battle.  In von
Hindenburg's words, "America carries no weight."  I suppose he means
she has no ships to carry weight.  On that, undoubtedly, they are
reckoning.

Well, it is not wise always to assume that even when the German General
Staff, which has miscalculated so often, makes a calculation it has no
ground for it.  It therefore behooves the whole of the Allies, Great
Britain and America in particular, to see that that reckoning of von
Hindenburg is as false as the one he made about his famous line, which
we have broken already.

The road to victory, the guarantee of victory, the absolute assurance
of victory is to be found in one word--ships; and a second word--ships.
And with that quickness of apprehension which characterizes your
nation, I see that they fully realize that, and today I observe that
they have already made arrangements to build one thousand 3000-tonners
for the Atlantic.  I think that the German military advisers must
already begin to realize that this is another of the tragic
miscalculations which are going to lead them to disaster and to ruin.
But you will pardon me for emphasizing that.  We are a slow people in
these islands--slow and blundering--but we get there.  You get there
sooner, and that is why I am glad to see you in.

But may I say that we have been in this business for three years?  We
have, as we generally do, tried every blunder.  In golfing phraseology,
we have got into every bunker.  But we have got a good niblick.  We are
right out on the course.  But may I respectfully suggest that it is
worth America's while to study our blunders, so as to begin just where
we are now and not where we were three years ago?  That is an
advantage.  In war, time has as tragic a significance as it has in
sickness.  A step which, taken today, may lead to assured victory,
taken tomorrow may barely avert disaster.  All the Allies have
discovered that.  It was a new country for us all.  It was trackless,
mapless.  We had to go by instinct.  But we found the way, and I am so
glad that you are sending your great naval and military experts here
just to exchange experiences with men who have been through all the
dreary, anxious crises of the last three years.

America has helped us even to win the battle of Arras.  The guns which
destroyed the German trenches, shattered the barbed wire--I remember,
with some friends of mine whom I see here, arranging to order the
machines to make those guns from America.  Not all of them--you got
your share, but only a share, a glorious share.  So that America has
also had her training.  She has been making guns, making ammunition,
giving us machinery to prepare both; she has supplied us with steel,
and she has all that organization, and all that wonderful facility,
adaptability, and resourcefulness of the great people which inhabits
that great continent.  Ah!  It was a bad day for military autocracy in
Prussia when it challenged the great republic of the west.  We know
what America can do, and we also know that now she is in it she will do
it.  She will wage an effective and successful war.

There is something more important.  She will insure a beneficent peace.
To this I attach great importance.  I am the last man to say that the
succor which is given to us from America is not something in itself to
rejoice in, and to rejoice in greatly.  But I do not mind saying that I
rejoice even more in the knowledge that America is going to win the
right to be at the conference table when the terms of peace are being
discussed.  That conference will settle the destiny of nations--the
course of human life--for God knows how many ages.  It would have been
tragic for mankind if America had not been there, and there with all
the influence, all the power, and the right which she has now won by
flinging herself into this great struggle.

I can see peace coming now--not a peace which will be the beginning of
war, not a peace which will be an endless preparation for strife and
bloodshed, but a real peace.  The world is an old world.  It has never
had peace.  It has been rocking and swaying like an ocean, and
Europe--poor Europe!--has always lived under the menace of the sword.
When this war began two-thirds of Europe were under autocratic rule.
It is the other way about now, and democracy means peace.  The
democracy of France did not want war; the democracy of Italy hesitated
long before they entered the war; the democracy of this country shrank
from it--shrank and shuddered--and never would have entered the caldron
had it not been for the invasion of Belgium.  The democracies sought
peace; strove for peace.  If Prussia had been a democracy there would
have been no war.  Strange things have happened in this war.  There are
stranger things to come, and they are coming rapidly.

There are times in history when this world spins so leisurely along its
destined course that it seems for centuries to be at a standstill; but
there are also times when it rushes along at a giddy pace, covering the
track of centuries in a year.  Those are the times we are living in
now.  Today we are waging the most devastating war that the world has
ever seen; tomorrow--perhaps not a distant tomorrow--war may be
abolished forever from the category of human crimes.  This may be
something like the fierce outburst of winter, which we are now
witnessing, before the complete triumph of the sun.  It is written of
those gallant men who won that victory on Monday--men from Canada, from
Australia, and from this old country, which has proved that in spite of
its age it is not decrepit--it is written of those gallant men that
they attacked with the dawn--fit work for the dawn!--to drive out of
forty miles of French soil those miscreants who had defiled it for
three years.  "They attacked with the dawn."  Significant phrase!

The breaking up of the dark rule of the Turk, which for centuries has
clouded the sunniest land in the world, the freeing of Russia from an
oppression which has covered it like a shroud for so long, the great
declaration of President Wilson coming with the might of the great
nation which he represents into the struggle for liberty, are heralds
of the dawn.  "They attacked with the dawn," and these men are marching
forward in the full radiance of that dawn, and soon Frenchmen and
Americans, British, Italians, Russians, yea, and Serbians, Belgians,
Montenegrins, will march into the full light of a perfect day.


THE FIRST TO FALL IN BATTLE

During the trench warfare, it was customary to raid the enemy trenches
at unexpected hours, sometimes during the night, often during "the
sleepiest hour," just before the dawn.  In such a raid made by the
Germans in the early dawn of November 3, 1917, fell the first American
soldiers to die in the World War.

The Germans began by shelling the barbed-wire barrier in front of the
trenches where the Americans were stationed for a few days, taking
their first lessons in trench warfare.  A heavy artillery fire was then
directed so as to cover the trenches and the country immediately back
of them.  This prevented reinforcements coming into the trenches.
Following the barrage a large number of Huns broke through the barbed
wire and jumped into the trenches.

The Americans did not fully understand the situation, for it was their
first experience with a trench raid.  A wounded private said, "I was
standing in a communicating trench waiting for orders.  I heard a noise
back of me and looked around in time to see a German fire in my
direction.  I felt a bullet hit my arm."

Three Americans were killed.  They were the first fighting under the
American flag to fall in battle on the soil of Europe.  They were--

Corporal James B. Gresham, Evansville, Indiana.

Private Merle D. Hay, Glidden, Iowa.

Private Thomas F. Enright, Pittsburg, Pennsylvania.

On November 6, three graves were dug.  On one side of them stood a line
of poilus in their uniforms of horizon blue and red, and on the other a
line of American soldiers in khaki.  The flag-covered caskets were
lowered, as the bugler sounded "taps," and the batteries fired minute
guns.

Then the French officer in command of the division, amid the broken
roar of the minute guns and the whistle of shells, paid a tribute to
the dead.

"In the name of this division, in the name of the French army, and in
the name of France, I bid farewell to Corporal Gresham, Private Hay,
and Private Enright of the American army.

"Of their own free will they left a happy, prosperous country to come
over here.  They knew war was here.  They knew that the forces battling
for honor, for justice, and for civilization were still being checked
by the forces serving the powers of frightfulness, brute force, and
barbarity.  They knew that fighting was still necessary.  Not
forgetting historical memories, they wished to give us their brave
hearts.

"They knew all the conditions, nothing had been hidden from them, not
the length and hardship of the war, not the violence of battle, not the
terrible destruction of the new weapons, not the falseness of the
enemy.  Nothing stopped them.  They accepted the hard life, they
crossed the ocean at great peril, they took their places at the front
beside us; and now they have fallen in a desperate hand-to-hand fight.
All honor to them.

"Men!  These American graves, the first to be dug in the soil of
France, and but a short distance from the enemy, are a symbol of the
mighty land that has come to aid the Allies, ready to sacrifice as long
as may be necessary until the final victory for the most noble of
causes, the liberty of peoples and of nations, of the weak as well as
the strong.  For this reason the deaths of these humble soldiers take
on an extraordinary grandeur.

"We shall ask that the mortal remains of these young men be left here,
left with us forever.  We will inscribe on the tombs, 'Here lie the
first soldiers of the Republic of the United States to fall on the soil
of France for liberty and justice.'  The passer-by will stop and
uncover his head.  Travelers and men of feeling will go out of their
way to come here to pay tribute.

"Corporal Gresham, Private Hay, Private Enright, in the name of France,
I thank you.  God receive your souls.  Farewell."

As the French officer wished, there they remain.  Soon a worthy
monument will be erected upon the ground where they fought and now lie
asleep in death.  Americans of this generation and of generations to
come will stand in future days with bared heads before that monument
and pay tribute.

[Illustration: The religious and military tribute paid to the first
Americans to fall in battle, at Bathelmont, November 4, 1917.  General
Bordeaux, in the name of the French army,  bade "farewell to all that
was mortal of the three heroes."  At this point in the funeral, notice
that the American soldiers in the background are standing at "parade
rest."]


FOUR SOLDIERS

THE BOCHE

The _boche_ was chiefly what his masters made him.

He was planned and turned out according to specifications.  His leaders
and his enemies always knew just what he would do under any given
circumstances, and he himself always knew just what he would do.  He
would do what he was ordered to do, if he understood the order and had
been taught how to execute it; otherwise he would do nothing but stare
helplessly.  He was a machine built to order, according to plans and
specifications.

"In critical moments the boche waited for direction instead of relying
on himself.  He could not vary a hairbreadth from an order given, even
when the variation would have brought success.  He was part of a
machine army, a cog in a mechanism which needed a push to make it move;
his actions must be dictated or he could not act; his very thoughts
were disciplined and uniformed."


To the _boche_ there was no chivalry in war.  He fought as the
barbarians would have fought, if they had had all his knowledge and
equipment, but were still uncivilized.  Women and children never called
forth his pity or his mercy.  He would defile and destroy a church or a
cathedral with greater pleasure than he would a peasant's hut.

To him there were no laws of war.  War meant to fight, to conquer, to
kill, to gain the end by any means whatever.  Dropping bombs on
defenseless women and children and on Red Cross hospitals; torpedoing
merchant ships without warning and sending all the passengers, even
neutrals or friends, to death, or worse, in open boats far from land;
firing on stretcher-bearers and nurses; using poison gas and liquid
fire; poisoning wells and spreading disease germs; all are forbidden to
civilized races by the laws of war.  The _boche_ regularly perpetrated
them all and committed other atrocities much worse.  He hoped to
frighten the world by his cruelty and brutality, by making every man,
woman, and child among his enemies believe that each _boche_ was an
unconquerable giant possessed of a devil.

To the _boche_ war was simply a robbery, and he was one of a robber
band.  On the land, he was a brigand, on the sea, a pirate.  He went
about his business with no more mercy and chivalry than a New York
gunman or a Paris apache.  To him war was a business, an unlawful
business to be sure, but, he believed, a profitable one.  He went at
it, therefore, as he had at manufacturing and commerce in the days of
peace.  He sought to do bigger things than any one else and to gain an
advantage by any means, fair or foul.  Why should he think about being
fair or humane?  He was a thief, not a judge.

And yet let it be recorded that while nearly all _boches_ acted like
brutes instead of men, there were some who were different and who
showed the highest type of courage and died bravely as soldiers may die.


THE POILU

The soldier of France, the _poilu_, is a crusader.  He is fighting to
defend France, his great mother, in whose defense, centuries ago, the
invisible powers called and sustained Jeanne d'Arc.  In his love of
country there is something almost religious, like that of the
Mohammedan for Mecca and Medina.  To serve France, to fight for her, to
die for her--and every French soldier expects to die in battle--is a
privilege as well as a duty.  He fights for his country as an
Englishman fights for his home.  With the Englishman, his home comes
first and is nearest and dearest; with the Frenchman, his country.

Philip Gibbs, who has written from day to day, from the trenches and
the battlefields, letters that will never be forgotten because of their
beauty and truth, says of the French _poilu_:--

"Yet if the English reader imagines that because this thread of
sentiment runs through the character of France there is a softness in
the qualities of French soldiers, he does not know the truth.  Those
men whom I saw at the front and behind the fighting lines were as hard
in moral and spiritual strength as in physical endurance.  It was this
very hardness which impressed me even in the beginning of the war, when
I did not know the soldiers of France as well as I do now.  After a few
weeks in the field these men, who had been laborers and mechanics,
clerks and journalists, artists and poets, shop assistants and railway
porters, hotel waiters, and young aristocrats of Paris, were toned down
to the quality of tempered steel.  With not a spare ounce of flesh on
them--the rations of the French army are not as rich as ours--and
tested by long marches down dusty roads, by incessant fighting in
retreat against overwhelming odds, by the moral torture of those
rearguard actions, and by their first experience of indescribable
horrors, among dead and dying comrades, they had a beauty of manhood
which I found sublime.  They were bronzed and dirty and hairy, but they
had the look of knighthood, with a calm light shining in their eyes and
with resolute lips.  They had no gayety in those days, when France was
in gravest peril, and they did not find any kind of fun in this war.
Out of their baptism of fire they had come with scorched souls, knowing
the murderous quality of the business to which they were apprenticed,
but though they did not hide their loathing of it, nor the fears which
had assailed them, nor their passionate anger against the people who
had thrust this thing upon them, they showed no sign of weakness.  They
were willing to die for France, though they hated death, and in spite
of the first great rush of the German legions, they had a fine
intellectual contempt of that army, which seemed to me then
unjustified, though they were right, as history now shows.  Man against
man, in courage and cunning they were better than the Germans, gun
against gun they were better, in cavalry charge and in bayonet charge
they were better, and in equal number irresistible."


THE TOMMY

John Masefield, the English writer, says, "St. George did not go out
against the dragon like that divine calm youth in Carpaccio's picture,
nor like that divine calm man in Donatello's statue.  He went out, I
think, after some taste of defeat knowing that it was going to be bad,
and that the dragon would breathe fire, and that very likely his spear
would break, and that he wouldn't see his children again, and people
would call him a fool.  He went out, I think, as the battalions of our
men went out, a little trembling and a little sick and not knowing much
about it, except that it had to be done, and then stood up to the
dragon in the mud of that far land and waited for him to come on."

[Illustration: Saint George and the Dragon, painted by V. Carpaccio in
1516, Venice; S. Giorgio Maggiore.  The background, as in most medieval
paintings, gives scenes that explain further the legend depicted.]

But as soon as the British Tommy had reached the dragon's lair, he
became the British player in a great championship game of the nations.
He was the British sportsman, hunting big game; for in matters of life
or death, he is always the player or the sportsman.  That it was a
hideous dragon breathing out poison gas and fire and destroying
Christian maidens, made the sport all the more interesting and worth
while.  Philip Gibbs says of the English Tommy:--

"They take great risks sometimes as a kind of sport, as Arctic
explorers or big game hunters will face danger and endure great bodily
suffering for their own sake.  Those men are natural soldiers.  There
are some even who like war, though very few.  But most of them would
jeer at any kind of pity for them, because they do not pity themselves,
except in most dreadful moments which they put away from their minds if
they escape.  They scorn pity, yet they hate worse still, with a most
deadly hatred, all the talk about 'our cheerful men.'  For they know
that, however cheerful they may be, it is not because of a jolly life
or lack of fear.  They loathe shell-fire and machine-gun fire.  They
know what it is 'to have the wind up.'  They have seen what a
battlefield looks like before it has been cleared of its dead.  It is
not for non-combatants to call them 'cheerful'; because non-combatants
do not understand and never will, not from now until the ending of the
world.  'Not so much of your cheerfulness,' they say, and 'Cut it out
about the brave boys in the trenches.'  So it is difficult to describe
them, or to give any idea of what goes on in their minds, for they
belong to another world than the world of peace that we knew, and there
is no code which can decipher their secret, nor any means of
self-expression on their lips."

The Tommy dislikes to show emotion or to brag or to be praised when he
is present.  To outsiders and to soldiers of other nations sent to help
him, he likes to make the duties and the dangers seem as disagreeable,
as horrible, and as inevitable as he possibly can, but when he has
discharged a particularly tiresome and obnoxious duty himself or has
met without flinching a terrible danger, he declares his act was
"nothing."

"The _poilu_ and the Tommy are vastly different.  The Frenchman works
himself up into a fanatical state of enthusiasm, and in a wild burst of
excitement dashes into the fray.  The Englishman finishes his
cigarette, exchanges a joke with his 'bunkie' and coolly goes 'over the
top.'  Both are wonderful fighters with the profoundest admiration for
each other."

The Tommy wants his tea and the officers like to carry their canes and
swagger sticks with them "over the top" into battle.  A brave,
unpretending man, who likes his own ways and wishes to be allowed to
follow them and who is willing to fight and die that others also may be
free--such is the English Tommy.  With him it is all a part of the
game, the game of war, and the greatest game of all, the game of life.
He must play his part and play it well.


THE YANK

The _boche_ went into the war as a robber, the _poilu_ as a crusader
determined to save the sacred and holy things of the world from
desecration and destruction, the _Tommy_ as a player in a great game,
and the _Yank_ as a policeman whose job it was to "clean up" the affair.

To the American soldiers, the _Yanks_, and to the American people, the
war was a job, a most disagreeable one, but one that must be done.  No
one else was ready and able to do it; so they went at it smilingly and
"jollied" every one with whom they came in contact.

French children were asked to write descriptions of the "Yanks" for a
New York paper.  They nearly all said that they were big and handsome
and quick, that they always smiled and were always hungry, especially
for chocolate and candy.  The French noticed the everlasting smile of
the _Yank_, for after three years of war and suffering the French, even
the children, had ceased to smile.  It is said the children had even
forgotten how to play, but they responded to the love in the hearts of
the _Yanks_, as did the German children when the American soldiers
crossed the Rhine.  To the _Yanks_ there were no enemies among the
children; they loved them, French or German.

The _Yank_ did not smile because he failed to realize the seriousness
of his job, but because with him the harder, the more dangerous, and
the dirtier the job, the more must he smile and "jolly" about it.

"They had come to France to do a certain piece of work.  It was a
bloody, dusty, sweaty, unclean, disagreeable one, and they proposed to
finish it. . . .  We are a people given to discounting futures, and the
average American soldier, to put it bluntly, discounted being killed in
action.  If our Allies, whose fortitude was sustained in a dark hour by
the way that our men fought, could have probed what was in the mind of
these Americans, they would have found still further reason for faith
in our military strength."  So declares Major Palmer of General
Pershing's staff.

Raymond Fosdick says the character of the American soldier was shown
when a Y.M.C.A. secretary asked a large body of _Yanks_ to write on
little slips of paper distributed to them what they thought were the
three greatest sins in a soldier.  When the papers were passed back and
examined, it was found that they agreed unanimously upon the first sin.
It was cowardice.  And almost unanimously upon the second.  It was
selfishness.  And the third was big-headedness.

The _Yank_ is wonderfully free from the sins he hates.  Dashing,
fearless, willing to die rather than to surrender, unable, as General
Bundy said, to understand an order to retreat, he is always a
"jollier."  It is said one platoon of _Yanks_ went "over the top"
wearing tall silk hats with grenades in one hand and carrying pink
parasols in the other.  This may be only a story of what the _Yanks_
would have done if permitted, but it is true to their nature.

The _Yanks_ have written the noblest chapter of American history.  They
have honored their fathers and mothers, their churches, the American
public school, and the land of Washington and Lincoln.  Those who sleep
beneath foreign soil have not died in vain.

*******************

  DUTY

  So nigh is grandeur to our dust,
    So near is God to man,
  When Duty whispers low, "_Thou must_,"
    The youth replies, "I _can_."


  WHERE THE FOUR WINDS MEET

  There are songs of the north and songs of the south,
    And songs of the east and west;
  But the songs of the place where the four winds meet
    Are the ones that we love the best.

  "And where do the four winds meet?" you ask.
    The answer is ready at hand--
  "Wherever our dear ones chance to be
    By air, or by sea, or land."

  So the sailor, keeping his midnight watch
    'Mid icicles, snow, and sleet,
  Can think of a village near Portsmouth town
    As the place where the four winds meet.

  And mother, perhaps, and sweetheart true
    Pray hard for the North Sea Fleet,
  And harder still for the boy who's gone
    To his place, where the four winds meet.

  And the man on guard at the "firing-step,"
    'Mid star-shells shimmering down,
  Can think of his home--where the four winds meet
    In some sheltered English town.

  And thoughts may fly to the distant trench,
    Whatever its name or "street,"
  For "Somewhere in France" seems far less vague
    If we add, "where the four winds meet."

  And the pilot steers thro' the trackless waste
    While the engines throb and beat,
  Flouting surprise, with the army's eyes
    High up where the four winds meet.

  And to those who mourn comes a cheering cry,
    Which the angels in heaven repeat,
  "Grieve not, brave hearts; we await you here--
    _Here_, where the four winds meet."

  There are songs of the north and songs of the south,
    The east and the west complete;
  But here is a song of the place we love,
    Which is called, "Where the four winds meet."

  GEOFFREY DALRYMPLE NASH.

*******************

  THE UNITED STATES MARINES

  Our flag's unfurled to every breeze
    From dawn to setting sun,
  We have fought in every clime or place
    Where we could take a gun--
  In the snow of far-off northern lands
    And in sunny tropic scenes,
  You will find us always on the job--
    The United States Marines.


THE SOLDIERS WHO GO TO SEA

  "If the army or the navy ever gaze on Heaven's scenes,
  They will find the streets are guarded by United States marines."


So sing the soldiers who go to sea, commonly called the marines.  The
Germans after the battles of Belleau Wood and Bouresches called them
"devil hounds," and the French named them the "green devils."

An English rhymester wrote to his home paper,

  "You must not call them Sammies,
  You should not call them Yanks.
  And if you call them 'doughboys'
  Loud laughter splits their flanks.
  You will not call them Buddies,
  And when on Kultur's track,
  You need not call them forward,
  You cannot call them back."


They know too that whenever trouble arises in any part of the world,
they are the first to be sent to protect American interests.  It is
said that many of them believe the chief reason why the United States
has a navy is for the purpose of carrying the marines to the points
where they are needed.  They are aware of the fact that marines may be
landed and such landing not be considered an act of war.  Therefore
they look upon their service as much more important than that of the
soldier.

The marine has been everywhere man has gone by land or sea or air, as
one of their poets wrote:

  "From the hills of Montezuma
  To the gates of old Peking
  He has heard the shrapnel bursting,
  He has heard the Mauser's ping.
  He has known Alaskan waters
  And the coral roads of Guam,
  He has bowed to templed idols
  And to sultans made salaam."


"I am more than a sailor, for although I belong to the navy I fight on
the land.  I am more than a soldier, for I do all that the soldier does
and at the same time I belong to the navy and go to sea."  Thus the
marine proves to himself that he is "it," as the soldiers and sailors
would say.

"The marines get aviation, searchlight, wireless telegraph, heliograph,
and other drill.  They plant mines, put up telegraph and telephone
lines in the field, tear down or build up bridges, sling from a ship
and set up or land guns as big as 5-inch for their advance base work.

"It is a belief with marines that the corps can do anything.  Right in
New York City is a marine printing plant with a battery of linotypes
and a row of presses.  They set their own type, write their own stuff
(even to the poetry), draw their own sketches, do their own
photography, their own color work--everything.  Every man in that plant
is a marine, enlisted or commissioned.  Every one has seen service
somewhere outside his country."

Such a feeling of superiority, however, would soon be laughed down if
it were not based upon something more than talk.  The marines know this
and try in every way to show that they excel the other branches.  They
are extremely careful of their dress, and their personal appearance,
and of their conduct whether on duty or off.  They try to sustain the
reputation of their branch in every little way as well as in every
great one.

As an illustration of this, they are not satisfied with a commonplace
mascot.  Soldiers and sailors, and marines too, must have a mascot.  A
cat, a dog, a goat, a parrot, a monkey, a pig, a lion cub, or a bear
are among the commonest and most popular of mascots.  Therefore the
marines would usually disdain any one of these.  If any of them should
happen to be accepted as a mascot, there would be some wonderful story
to explain why it was the most remarkable monkey, goat, or lion cub
that ever lived.

A large and hideous snake, a young kangaroo, or an anteater are mascots
more to the liking of the marines.  They must have something like
themselves, exclusive and distinguished.  The anteater that one body of
marines adopted when they were landed at Vera Cruz proved a very
interesting and original mascot, and also that anteaters were not
always exactly as they are described in school textbooks, for this
anteater disdained to eat ants and greedily devoured anything from the
food of the marines that they would give him, or that he could
steal--bread, meat, pie, doughnuts, or eggs.

A writer telling about this anteater mascot says he was taught several
tricks, one of which was to put out with his forepaws every lighted
cigarette dropped near him and then to tear it into little pieces.
Heywood Broun, the writer, goes on to say, "The marine who dropped a
hundred franc note by mistake just in front of Jimmy says that teaching
tricks to anteaters is all foolishness."

And how do they sustain the reputation of their branch in the great
things?  Here is where soldier, sailor, or marine must prove his
superiority, for excelling here means greater service to his country.
It would be difficult indeed to give the palm to any branch of the
service.  They have all endured hardship and met wounds and death with
equal gallantry, each striving to outdo the other in devotion and
sacrifice.

Secretary Daniels has told the inspiring heroic story of the fighting
of the eight thousand marines who in June, 1918, were thrown into the
open gap between the advancing Germans and Paris.

Although they were without proper artillery support and too small in
numbers for the task, General Pershing in those dark days offered their
services to Marshal Foch, saying, "If you have no other troops to use
and the gap must be closed and the Germans stopped, they will do it."
And they did!  But out of the eight thousand, four thousand were
missing, wounded, or killed.  Read Secretary Daniels' story of this
fight, called the battle of Belleau Wood, and be proud that you are an
American.


This efficient fighting, building, and landing force of the navy has
won imperishable glory in the fulfillment of its latest duties upon the
battlefields of France, where the marines, fighting for the time under
General Pershing as a part of the victorious American army, have
written a story of valor and sacrifice that will live in the brightest
annals of the war.  With heroism that nothing could daunt, the Marine
Corps played a vital rôle in stemming the German rush on Paris, and in
later days aided in the beginning of the great offensive, the freeing
of Rheims, and participated in the hard fighting in Champagne, which
had as its object the throwing back of the Prussian armies in the
vicinity of Cambrai and St. Quentin.

With only 8000 men engaged in the fiercest battles, the Marine Corps
casualties numbered 69 officers and 1531 enlisted men dead and 78
officers and 2435 enlisted men wounded seriously enough to be
officially reported by cablegram, to which number should be added not a
few whose wounds did not incapacitate them for further fighting.
However, with a casualty list that numbers nearly half the original
8000 men who entered battle, the official reports account for only 57
United States marines who have been captured by the enemy.  This
includes those who were wounded far in advance of their lines and who
fell into the hands of Germans while unable to resist.

Memorial Day shall henceforth have a greater, deeper significance for
America, for it was on that day, May 30, 1918, that our country really
received its first call to battle--the battle in which American troops
had the honor of stopping the German drive on Paris, throwing back the
Prussian hordes in attack after attack, and beginning the retreat which
lasted until Imperial Germany was beaten to its knees and its
emissaries appealing for an armistice under the flag of truce.  And to
the United States marines, fighting side by side with equally brave and
equally courageous men in the American army, to that faithful sea and
land force of the navy, fell the honor of taking over the lines where
the blow of the Prussian would strike the hardest, the line that was
nearest Paris, and where, should a breach occur, all would be lost.

The world knows today that the United States marines held that line;
that they blocked the advance that was rolling on toward Paris at a
rate of six or seven miles a day; that they met the attack in American
fashion and with American heroism; that marines and soldiers of the
American army threw back the crack guard divisions of Germany, broke
their advance, and then, attacking, drove them back in the beginning of
a retreat that was not to end until the "cease firing" signal sounded
for the end of the world's greatest war.

It was on the evening of May 30, after a day dedicated to the memory of
their comrades who had fallen in the training days and in the Verdun
sector, that the 5th and 6th Regiments and the 6th Machine Gun
Battalion, United States marines, each received the following orders:--

Advance information official received that this regiment will move at
10 P.M. 30 May by bus to new area.  All trains shall be loaded at once
and arrangements hastened.  Wagons, when loaded, will move to Serans to
form train.


All through the night there was fevered activity among the marines.
Then, the next morning, the long trains of camions, busses, and trucks,
each carrying its full complement of United States marines, went
forward on a road which at one place wound within less than ten miles
of Paris, toward Meaux and the fighting line.

Through the town of Meaux went the long line of camions and to the
village of Montriel-aux-Lions, less than four miles from the rapidly
advancing German line.  On this trip the camions containing the
Americans were the only traffic traveling in the direction of the
Germans; everything else was going the other way--refugees, old men and
women, small children, riding on every conceivable conveyance, many
trudging along the side of the road driving a cow or calf before them,
all of them covered with the white dust which the camion caravan was
whirling up as it rolled along; along that road only one organization
was advancing, the United States marines.

At last, their destination reached early on the morning of June 2, they
disembarked, stiff and tired after a journey of more than seventy-two
miles, but as they formed their lines and marched onward in the
direction of the line they were to hold they were determined and
cheerful.  That evening the first field message from the Fourth Brigade
to Major General Omar Bundy, commanding the 2d Division, went forward:--

Second Battalion, 6th Marines, in line from Le Thiolet through
Clarembauts Woods to Triangle to Lucy.  Instructed to hold line.  First
Battalion, 6th marines, going into line from Lucy through Hill 142.
Third Battalion in support at La Voie du Châtel, which is also the post
command of the 6th Marines.  Sixth Machine Gun Battalion distributed at
line.


Meanwhile the 5th Regiment was moving into line, machine guns were
advancing, and the artillery taking its position.  That night the men
and officers of the marines slept in the open, many of them in a field
that was green with unharvested wheat, awaiting the time when they
should be summoned to battle.  The next day at 5 o'clock, the afternoon
of June 2, began the battle of Château-Thierry, with the Americans
holding the line against the most vicious wedge of the German advance.

The advance of the Germans was across a wheat field, driving at Hill
165 and advancing in smooth columns.  The United States marines,
trained to keen observation upon the rifle range, nearly every one of
them wearing a marksman's medal or better, that of the sharpshooter or
expert rifleman, did not wait for those gray-clad hordes to advance
nearer.

Calmly they set their sights and aimed with the same precision that
they had shown upon the rifle ranges at Paris Island, Mare Island, and
Quantico.  Incessantly their rifles cracked, and with their fire came
the support of the artillery.  The machine-gun fire, incessant also,
began to make its inroads upon the advancing forces.  Closer and closer
the shrapnel burst to its targets.  Caught in a seething wave of
machine-gun fire, of scattering shrapnel, of accurate rifle fire, the
Germans found themselves in a position in which further advance could
only mean absolute suicide.  The lines hesitated.  They stopped.  They
broke for cover, while the marines raked the woods and ravines in which
they had taken refuge with machine gun and rifle to prevent them making
another attempt to advance by infiltrating through.

Above, a French airplane was checking up on the artillery fire.
Surprised by the fact that men should deliberately set their sights,
adjust their range, and then fire deliberately at an advancing foe,
each man picking his target, instead of firing merely in the direction
of the enemy, the aviator signaled below "Bravo!"  In the rear that
word was echoed again and again.  The German drive on Paris had been
stopped.

For the next few days the fighting took on the character of pushing
forth outposts and determining the strength of the enemy.  Now, the
fighting had changed.  The Germans, mystified that they should have run
against a stone wall of defense just when they believed that their
advance would be easiest, had halted, amazed; then prepared to defend
the positions they had won with all the stubbornness possible.  In the
black recesses of Belleau Wood the Germans had established nest after
nest of machine guns.  There in the jungle of matted underbrush, of
vines, of heavy foliage, they had placed themselves in positions they
believed impregnable.  And this meant that unless they could be routed,
unless they could be thrown back, the breaking of the attack of June 2
would mean nothing.  There would come another drive and another.  The
battle of Château-Thierry was therefore not won and could not be won
until Belleau Wood had been cleared of the enemy.

It was June 6 that the attack of the American troops began against that
wood and its adjacent surroundings, with the wood itself and the towns
of Torcy and Bouresches forming the objectives.  At 5 o'clock the
attack came, and there began the tremendous sacrifices which the Marine
Corps gladly suffered that the German fighters might be thrown back.

The marines fought strictly according to American methods--a rush, a
halt, a rush again, in four-wave formation, the rear waves taking over
the work of those who had fallen before them, passing over the bodies
of their dead comrades and plunging ahead, until they, too, should be
torn to bits.  But behind those waves were more waves and the attack
went on.

"Men fell like flies"; the expression is that of an officer writing
from the field.  Companies that had entered the battle 250 strong
dwindled to fifty and sixty, with a sergeant in command; but the attack
did not falter.  At 9:45 o'clock that night Bouresches was taken by
Lieutenant James F. Robertson and twenty odd men of his platoon; these
soon were joined by two reënforcing platoons.  Then came the enemy
counter-attacks, but the marines held.

In Belleau Wood the fighting had been literally from trees to tree,
stronghold to stronghold; and it was a fight which must last for weeks
before its accomplishment in victory.  Belleau Wood was a jungle, its
every rocky formation forming a German machine-gun nest, almost
impossible to reach by artillery or grenade fire.  There was only one
way to wipe out these nests--by the bayonet.  And by this method they
were wiped out, for United States marines, bare chested, shouted their
battle cry of "E-e-e-e-e y-a-a-h-h-h-yip!" charged straight into the
murderous fire from those guns, and won!

Out of the number that charged, in more than one instance, only one
would reach the stronghold.  There, with his bayonet as his only
weapon, he would either kill or capture the defenders of the nest, and
then swinging the gun about in its position, turn it against the
remaining German positions in the forest.  Such was the character of
the fighting in Belleau Wood, fighting which continued until July 6,
when after a short relief the invincible Americans finally were taken
back to the rest billet for recuperation.

In all the history of the Marine Corps there is no such battle as that
one in Belleau Wood.  Fighting day and night without relief, without
sleep, often without water, and for days without hot rations, the
marines met and defeated the best divisions that Germany could throw
into the line.

The heroism and doggedness of that battle are unparalleled.  Time after
time officers seeing their lines cut to pieces, seeing their men so dog
tired that they even fell asleep under shell fire, hearing their
wounded calling for the water that they were unable to supply, seeing
men fight on after they had been wounded and until they dropped
unconscious; time after time officers seeing these things, believing
that the very limit of human endurance had been reached, would send
back messages to their post command that their men were exhausted.  But
in answer to this would come the word that the lines must hold, and, if
possible, those lines must attack.  And the lines obeyed.  Without
water, without food, without rest, they went forward--and forward every
time to victory.  Companies had been so torn and lacerated by losses
that they were hardly platoons, but they held their lines and advanced
them.  In more than one case companies lost every officer, leaving a
sergeant and sometimes a corporal to command, and the advance continued.

After thirteen days in this inferno of fire a captured German officer
told with his dying breath of a fresh division of Germans that was
about to be thrown into the battle to attempt to wrest from the marines
that part of the wood they had gained.  The marines, who for days had
been fighting only on their sheer nerve, who had been worn out from
nights of sleeplessness, from lack of rations, from terrific shell and
machine-gun fire, straightened their lines and prepared for the attack.
It came--as the dying German officer had predicted.

At 2 o'clock on the morning of June 13 it was launched by the Germans
along the whole front.  Without regard for men, the enemy hurled his
forces against Bouresches and the Bois de Belleau, and sought to win
back what had been taken from Germany by the Americans.  The orders
were that these positions must be taken at all costs; that the utmost
losses in men must be endured that the Bois de Belleau and Bouresches
might fall again into German hands.  But the depleted lines of the
marines held; the men who had fought on their nerve alone for days once
more showed the mettle of which they were made.  With their backs to
the trees and bowlders of the Bois de Belleau, with their sole shelter
the scattered ruins of Bouresches, the thinning lines of the marines
repelled the attack and crashed back the new division which had sought
to wrest the position from them.

And so it went.  Day after day, night after night, while time after
time messages like the following traveled to the post command:--

Losses heavy.  Difficult to get runners through.  Some have never
returned.  Morale excellent, but troops about all in.  Men exhausted.


Exhausted, but holding on.  And they continued to hold on in spite of
every difficulty.  Advancing their lines slowly day by day, the marines
finally prepared their positions to such an extent that the last rush
for the possession of the wood could be made.  Then, on June 24,
following a tremendous barrage, the struggle began.

The barrage literally tore the woods to pieces, but even its immensity
could not wipe out all the nests that remained, the emplacements that
were behind almost every clump of bushes, every jagged, rough group of
bowlders.  But those that remained were wiped out by the American
method of the rush and  the bayonet, and in the days that followed
every foot of Belleau Wood was cleared of the enemy and held by the
frayed lines of the Americans.

It was, therefore, with the feeling of work well done that the depleted
lines of the marines were relieved in July, that they might be filled
with replacements and made ready for the grand offensive in the
vicinity of Soissons, July 18.  And in recognition of their sacrifice
and bravery this praise was forthcoming from the French:--

Army Headquarters, June 30, 1918.

In view of the brilliant conduct of the Fourth Brigade of the Second
United States Division, which in a spirited fight took Bouresches and
the important strong point of Bois de Belleau, stubbornly defended by a
large enemy force, the General commanding the Sixth Army orders that
henceforth, in all official papers, the Bois de Belleau shall be named
"Bois de la Brigade de Marine."

DIVISION GENERAL DEGOUTTE,
  Commanding Sixth Army.


On July 18 the marines were again called into action in the vicinity of
Soissons, near Tigny and Vierzy.  In the face of a murderous fire from
concentrated machine guns, which contested every foot of their advance,
the United States marines moved forward until the severity of their
casualties necessitated that they dig in and hold the positions they
had gained.  Here, again, their valor called forth official praise.

Then came the battle for the St. Mihiel salient.  On the night of Sept.
11 the 2d Division took over a line running from Remenauville to Limey,
and on the night of Sept. 14 and the morning of Sept. 15 attacked, with
two days' objectives ahead of them.  Overcoming the enemy resistance,
they romped through to the Rupt de Mad, a small river, crossed it on
stone bridges, occupied Thiacourt, the first day's objective, scaled
the heights just beyond it, pushed on to a line running from the
Zammes-Joulney Ridges to the Binvaux Forest, and there rested, with the
second day's objectives occupied by 2:50 o'clock of the first day.  The
casualties of the division were about 1000, of which 134 were killed.
Of these, about half were marines.  The captures in which the marines
participated were 80 German officers, 3200 men, ninety-odd cannon, and
vast stores.

But even further honors were to befall the fighting, landing, and
building force, of which the navy is justly proud.  In the early part
of October it became necessary for the Allies to capture the bald,
jagged ridge twenty miles due east of Rheims, known as Blanc Mont
Ridge.  Here the armies of Germany and the Allies had clashed more than
once, and attempt after attempt had been made to wrest it from German
hands.  It was a keystone of the German defense, the fall of which
would have a far-reaching effect upon the enemy armies.  To the glory
of the United States marines, let it be said, that they were again a
part of that splendid 2d Division which swept forward in the attack
which freed Blanc Mont Ridge from German hands, pushed its way down the
slopes, and occupied the level ground just beyond, thus assuring a
victory, the full import of which can best be judged by the order of
General Lejeune, following the battle:--

France, Oct. 11, 1918.

Officers and Men of the 2d Division:--

It is beyond my power of expression to describe fitly my admiration for
your heroism.  You attacked magnificently and you seized Blanc Mont
Ridge, the keystone of the arch constituting the enemy's main position.
You advanced beyond the ridge, breaking the enemy's lines, and you held
the ground gained with a tenacity which is unsurpassed in the annals of
war.

As a direct result of your victory, the German armies east and west of
Rheims are in full retreat, and by drawing on yourselves several German
divisions from other parts of the front you greatly assisted the
victorious advance of the Allied armies between Cambrai and St. Quentin.

Your heroism and the heroism of our comrades who died on the
battlefield will live in history forever, and will be emulated by the
young men of our country for generations to come.

To be able to say when this war is finished, "I belonged to the 2d
Division; I fought with it at the battle of Blanc Mont Ridge," will be
the highest honor that can come to any man.

JOHN A. LEJEUNE,
  Major General, United States Marine Corps, Commanding.


Thus it is that the United States marines have fulfilled the glorious
traditions of their corps in this their latest duty as the "soldiers
who go to sea."  Their sharpshooting--and in one regiment 93 per cent
of the men wear the medal of a marksman, a sharpshooter, or an expert
rifleman--has amazed soldiers of European armies, accustomed merely to
shooting in the general direction of the enemy.  Under the fiercest
fire they have calmly adjusted their sights, aimed for their man, and
killed him, and in bayonet attacks their advance on machine-gun nests
has been irresistible.

In the official citation lists more than one American marine is
credited with taking an enemy machine gun single handed, bayoneting its
crew and then turning the gun against the foe.  In one battle alone,
that of Belleau Wood, the citation lists bear the names of fully 500
United States marines who so distinguished themselves in battle as to
call forth the official commendation of their superior officers.

More than faithful in every emergency, accepting hardships with
admirable morale, proud of the honor of taking their place as shock
troops for the American legions, they have fulfilled every glorious
tradition of their corps, and they have given to the world a list of
heroes whose names will go down to all history.


WHEN THE TIDE TURNED

THE AMERICAN ATTACK AT CHÂTEAU-THIERRY AND BELLEAU WOOD IN THE FIRST
WEEK OF JUNE, 1918

BY OTTO H. KAHN

AN ADDRESS AT THE UNITED WAR WORK CAMPAIGN MEETING OF THE BOSTON
ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION, NOVEMBER 12, 1918

WHY THE TIDE WAS FATED TO TURN


These are soul-stirring days.  To live through them is a glory and a
solemn joy.  The words of the poet resound in our hearts: "God's in His
heaven, all's right with the world."

Events have shaped themselves in accordance with the eternal law.  Once
again the fundamental lesson of all history is borne in upon the world,
that evil--though it may seem to triumph for a while--carries within it
the seed of its own dissolution.  Once again it is revealed to us that
the God-inspired soul of man is unconquerable and that the power,
however formidable, which challenges it is doomed to go down in defeat.

A righteous cause will not only stand unshaken through trials and
discomfiture, but it will draw strength from the very setbacks which it
may suffer.  A wrongful cause can only stand as long as it is buoyed up
by success.

The German people were sustained by a sheer obsession akin to the
old-time belief in the potent spell of "the black arts" that their
military masters were invulnerable and invincible, that by some
power--good or evil, they did not care which--they had been made so,
and that the world was bound to fall before them.

The nation was immensely strong only as long as that obsession remained
unshaken.  With its destruction by a series of defeats which were
incapable of being explained as "strategic retreats," their morale
crumbled and finally collapsed, because it was not sustained, as that
of the Allies was sustained in the darkest days of the war, by the
faith that they were fighting for all that men hold most sacred.

To those who were acquainted with German mentality and psychology, it
had been manifest all along that when the end foreordained did come, it
would come with catastrophic suddenness.


WHERE THE TIDE TURNED

It is the general impression that the tide of victory set in with
Marshal Foch's splendid movement against the German flank on July 18th.
That movement, it is true, started the irresistible sweep of the wave
which was destined to engulf and destroy the hideous power of
Prussianism.  But the tide which gathered and drove forward the waters
out of which that wave arose, had turned before.  It turned with and
through the supreme valor of our marines and other American troops in
the _first_ battle at Château-Thierry and at Belleau Wood, _in the
first week of June_.

The American force engaged was small, measured by the standard of
numbers to which we have become accustomed in this war, but the story
of their fighting will remain immortal and in its psychological and
strategic consequences the action will take rank, I believe, among the
decisive battles of the war.

I am not speaking from hearsay.  I was in France during the week
preceding that battle, the most anxious and gloomy period, probably, of
the entire war.  What I am about to relate is based either on
authoritative information gathered on the spot, or on my own
observations.  In telling it, nothing is farther from my thoughts than
to wish to take away one tittle from the immortal glory which belongs
to the Allied armies, nor from the undying gratitude which we owe to
the nations who for four heart-breaking years, with superb heroism,
fought the battle of civilization--our battle from the very beginning,
no less than theirs--and bore untold sacrifices with never faltering
spirit.


JUST BEFORE THE TIDE TURNED

On the 27th of last May the Germans broke through the French position
at the Chemin des Dames, a position which had been considered by the
Allies as almost impregnable.  They overthrew the French as they had
overthrown the British two months earlier.  Day by day they came nearer
to Paris, until only thirty-nine miles separated them from their goal.
A few days more at the same rate of advance, and Paris was within range
of the German guns of terrific destructive power.  Paris, the nerve
center of the French railroad system and the seat of many French war
industries, not only, but the very heart of France, far more to the
French people in its meaning and traditions than merely the capital of
the country; Paris in imminent danger of ruthless bombardment like
Rheims, in possible danger even of conquest by the brutal invader,
drunk with lust and with victory!  As one Frenchman expressed it to me:
"We felt in our faces the very breath of the approaching beast."

And whilst the Hunnish hordes came nearer and nearer, and the very roar
of the battle could be dimly and ominously heard from time to time in
Paris, there were air raids over the city practically every night, and
the shells from the long-range monster guns installed some sixty or
seventy miles distant fell on its houses, places, and streets almost
every day.

They were not afraid, these superb men and women of France.  They do
not know the meaning of fear in defense of their beloved soil and their
sacred ideals.  There was no outward manifestation even of excitement
or apprehension.  Calmly and resolutely they faced what destiny might
bring.  But there was deep gloom in their hearts and dire forebodings.

They had fought and dared and suffered and sacrificed for well-nigh
four years.  They had buried a million of their sons, brothers, and
fathers.  They were bleeding from a million wounds and more.  They
said: "We will fight on to our last drop of blood, but alas! our
physical strength is ebbing.  The enemy is more numerous by far than
we.  Where can we look for aid?  The British have just suffered grave
defeat.  The Italians have their own soil to defend after the disaster
of last autumn.  Our troops are in retreat.  The Americans are not
ready and they are untried as yet in the fierce ordeal of modern
warfare.  The Germans know well that in three months or six months the
Americans will be ready and strong in numbers.  That is why they are
throwing every ounce of their formidable power against us _now_.  The
Hun is at the gate _now_.  Immeasurable consequences are at stake
_now_.  It is a question of days, not of weeks or months.  Where can we
look for aid _now_?"

And out of their nooks and corners and hiding places crawled forth the
slimy brood of the Bolshevik-Socialists, of the Boloists, Caillauxists,
and pacifists, and they hissed into the ears of the people, "Make
peace!  Victory has become impossible.  Why go on shedding rivers of
blood uselessly?  The Germans will give you an honorable, even a
generous peace.  Save Paris!  Make peace!"

The holy wrath of France crushed those serpents whenever their heads
became visible.  Clemenceau, the embodiment of the dauntless spirit of
France, stood forth the very soul of patriotic ardor and indomitable
courage.  But the serpents were there, crawling hidden in the grass,
ever hissing, "Make peace!"

And then, suddenly out of the gloom flashed the lightning of a new
sword, sharp and mighty, a sword which had never been drawn except for
freedom, a sword which had never known defeat--the sword of America!


THE TURNING OF THE TIDE

A division of marines and other American troops were rushed to the
front as a desperate measure to try and stop a gap where flesh and
blood, even when animated by French heroism, seemed incapable of
further resistance.  They came in trucks, in cattle cars, by any
conceivable kind of conveyance, crowded together like sardines.  They
had had little food, and less sleep, for days.

When they arrived, the situation had become such that the French
command advised, indeed ordered, them to retire.  But they and their
brave general would not hear of it.  They disembarked almost upon the
field of battle and rushed forward, with little care for orthodox
battle order, without awaiting the arrival of their artillery, which
had been unable to keep up with their rapid passage to that front.

They stormed ahead, right through the midst of a retreating French
division, yelling like wild Indians, ardent, young, irresistible in
their fury of battle.  Some of the Frenchmen called out a well-meant
warning: "Don't go in this direction.  There are the boches with
machine guns."  They shouted back:

"That's where we want to go.  That's where we have come three thousand
miles to go."  And they did go, into the very teeth of the deadly
machine guns.  In defiance of all precedent they stormed, with rifle
and bayonet in frontal attack, against massed machine guns.

They threw themselves upon the victory-flushed Huns to whom this
unconventional kind of fierce onset came as a complete and
disconcerting surprise.  They fought like demons, with utterly reckless
bravery.  They paid the price, alas! in heavy losses, but for what they
paid they took compensation in over-full measure.

They formed of themselves a spearhead at the point nearest Paris,
against which the enemy's onslaught shattered itself and broke.  They
stopped the Hun, they beat him back, they broke the spell of his
advance.  They started victory on its march.

A new and unspent and mighty force had come into the fray.  And the Hun
knew it to his cost and the French knew it to their unbounded joy.  The
French turned.  Side by side the Americans and the French stood, and on
that part of the front the Germans never advanced another inch from
that day.  They held for a while, and then set in the beginning of the
great defeat.

I was in Paris when the news of the American achievement reached the
population.  They knew full well what it meant.  The danger was still
present, but the crisis was over.  The boche could not break through.
He could and would be stopped and ultimately thrown back, out of
France, out of Belgium, across the Rhine and beyond!

The aid for which the sorely beset people of France had been praying,
had arrived.  The Americans had come, young, strong, daring, eager to
fight, capable of standing up against and stopping and beating back
German shock troops specially selected and trained, and spurred on by
the belief in their own irresistibility and the exhaustion of their
opponents.  The full wave of the hideous instruments of warfare which
the devilish ingenuity of the Germans had invented, liquid fire,
monstrous shells, various kinds of gases including the horrible mustard
gas, had struck the Americans squarely and fully, and they had stood
and fought on and won.

The French, so calm in their trials, so restrained in their own
victories, gave full vent to their joy and enthusiasm at the splendid
fighting and success of the Americans.  The talk of them was everywhere
in Paris.  Hundreds of thousands of American soldiers already in
France, thousands coming upon every steamer, millions more to come if
needed--and they had shown the great stuff they were made of!  All
gloom vanished, overnight.  The full magnificence of the French
fighting morale shone out again--both behind the lines and at the
front.  "Ils ne passeront pas!"  "On les aura." [1]

And the Bolshevik-Socialists, Boloists, weak-kneed pacifists, and that
whole noisome tribe slunk back into their holes and corners and hiding
places, and never emerged again.

And, as the people of Paris and the poilus at the front correctly
interpreted the meaning of that battle in those early days of June, so
did the supreme military genius of Marshal Foch interpret it.  He knew
what the new great fighting force could do which had come under his
orders, and he knew what he meant to do and could do with it.  It is an
eloquent fact that when six weeks later he struck his great master
stroke which was to lead ultimately to the utter defeat and collapse of
the enemy, American troops formed the larger portion of an attacking
force which, being thrown against a particularly vital position, was
meant to deal and did deal the most staggering blow to the enemy; and
other American troops were allotted the place which from the paramount
responsibility attaching to it, may be termed the place of honor, in
the center of the line, in immediate defense of the approaches to Paris.

They made good there--officers and men alike.  They made good
everywhere, from Cantigny to Sedan.  They made good on land, on the
seas, and in the air; worthy comrades of the war-seasoned heroes of
France and Great Britain, worthy defenders of American honor, eager
artisans of American glory.  When for the first time the American army
went into action as a separate unit under the direct command of its
great chief, General Pershing, Marshal Foch allotted them ten days for
the accomplishment of the task set for them, i.e., the ejection of the
German army from the strongly fortified St. Mihiel salient, which the
enemy had held for four years.  They did it in thirty hours, and made a
complete and perfect job of it.

I have had the privilege of seeing these splendid boys of ours, in all
situations and circumstances, from their camps in America to the front
in France--the boys and their equally splendid leaders.  The sacred
inspiration of what I have thus seen will stay with me to my last day.

I confess I find it hard to speak of them without a catch in my throat
and moisture in my eyes.  I see them before me now in the fair land of
France--brave, strong, ardent; keen and quick-witted; kindly and clean
and modest and wholly free from boasting; good-humored and
good-natured; willingly submissive to unaccustomed discipline;
uncomplainingly enduring all manner of hardships and discomforts;
utterly contemptuous of danger, daring to a fault, holding life cheap
for the honor and glory of America.  What true American can think of
them or picture them without having his heart overflow with grateful
and affectionate pride?

As I observed our army "over there," I felt that in them, in the mass
of them, representing as they do all sections and callings of America,
there had returned the ancient spirit of knighthood.  I measure my
words.  I am not exaggerating.  If I had to find one single word with
which to characterize our boys, I should select the adjective
"knightly."

A French officer who commanded a body of French troops, fighting
fiercely and almost hopelessly in Belleau Wood near Château-Thierry
(since then officially designated by the French Government as the Wood
of the Marine Brigade), told me that when they had arrived almost at
the point of total exhaustion, suddenly the Americans appeared rushing
to the rescue.  One of the American officers hurried up to him, saluted
and said in execrably pronounced French just six words:
"Vous--fatigués, vous--partir, notre job."  "You--tired, you--get away,
our job." And right nobly did they do their job!


[1] "They shall not pass!"  "We will get them."

*******************

Almost every soldier who goes into battle leaves a letter to be read in
the event of his death.  Sturgis ("Spud") Pishon, a former famous
college athlete, serving in the American air forces in Italy, before
his fatal flight wrote this letter, so full of the strength and
simplicity of a great soldier:

"What little I have to give to my country I give without reservation.
If there ever was a righteous cause it is ours, and I am proud to have
worked and died for it.

"Pray God this war will be over soon and that it will be the last war.

"I leave you with a smile on my lips and a heart full of love for you
all.  God bless you and keep you."

STURGIS.


A BOY OF PERUGIA

In the year 1500, Raphael was a boy of eighteen in Perugia working and
studying with the master painter Perugino.  Did the city itself, free
on its hill top, looking afar over undulating mountains and great
valleys, implant in the sensitive soul of Raphael a love of beauty and
a vision that made him become one of the greatest painters of the
world?  Perugia can never be forgotten, for the boy Raphael once lived,
worked, and studied there.

In the year 1915 Enzo Valentini was a boy of eighteen in Perugia.  He
was a high school boy and his father was mayor of the city.  One of his
teachers says he was an unusually brilliant scholar, with remarkable
artistic gifts.  Did the city and its beautiful surroundings open his
soul to the vision of love and tenderness for his "little mother" and
of the duty that called him while but a boy in the high school to serve
and, if need be, die for his country?

When Italy entered the war, he gave up his studies, dropped his pen and
his brushes, volunteered as a private, and was soon fighting with his
countrymen in the Alps.

Certainly his soul was responsive to beauty in nature; for in the midst
of war and war's alarms, he found peace of spirit in the wonderful
Alpine country.  He writes, "The longer I am here, the more I love the
mountains.  The spell they weave does not come so quickly as that of
the sea, but I think it is deeper and more enduring.  Every passing
moment, every cloud, every morning mist clothes the mountains in a
beauty so great that even the coarsest of our brave soldiers stop to
admire it.  It may be for only an instant but this is enough to prove
that the soul never forgets its heavenly birth even though it be the
soul of an uneducated peasant, imprisoned in the roughest shell.  The
days pass one after another calmly, serenely.  It seems as if the
autumn ought never to end.  The divine and solemn peace of the nights
is beyond the power of words to express, especially now that the moon
is shedding its magic silver over all.  There are hours in the day when
everything is so filled and covered with light and when the silence is
so impressive that at moments the light seems to be gone letting the
silence blaze forth in the wonderful harmony of nature."

Enzo Valentini loved nature, loved his native land, and loved his
mother.  She understood him and knew that because of his love for her
he was willing to die for Italy and the mothers of Italy.  Shortly
before his death he wrote her this beautiful letter:--

"Little mother, in a very few days I am leaving for the front lines.
For your dear sake I am writing this farewell which you will read only
if I am killed.  Let it be my good-by to father, to my brothers, and to
all those in the world who cared for me.

"My heart in its love and gratitude to you has always brought its
holiest thoughts to you; and now it is to you that I make known my last
wishes.

"Many have loved me.  To each of them give some little thing of mine in
remembrance of me, after you have laid aside all those that you care
for most.  I wish that all who have loved me should possess something
of the friend that is gone to rise like a flame above the clouds, above
the flesh, into the sun, into the very soul of the universe.

"Try, if you can, not to weep for me too much.  Believe that even
though I do not come back to you, I am not dead.  My body, the less
important part of me, suffers and dies; but not I myself--I, the soul,
cannot die, because I come from God and must return to God.  I was made
for happiness and through suffering I must return to the everlasting
happiness.  If I have been for a short time a prisoner in the body, I
am not the less eternal.  My death is freedom, the beginning of the
real life, the return to the Infinite.

"Therefore do not mourn for me.  If you consider the immortal beauty of
the ideals for which my soul is willingly sacrificing my body, you will
not mourn.  But if your mother heart must weep, let the tears flow; a
mother's tears are forever sacred.  God will take account of them; they
will be the stars of a crown.

"Be strong, little mother.  From the great beyond, your son says
farewell to you, to father, to brothers, to all who have loved
him--your son, who has given his body in the fight against those who
would put out the light of the world."


So read the "little mother" of Enzo Valentini after the assault upon
Sano di Mezzodi.  When his platoon charged he was the first to dash
from the trench giving courage to all who hesitated.  Together they
made the mountains ring with the old Italian war cry, "Savoia!  Italia!"

Enzo Valentini fell pierced by five pieces of shrapnel.  They carried
him back to a grotto where the surgeons dressed his wounds.

A comrade says, "We laid him down on the litter in the grotto, among
the great rocks, under the dark vault of the sky, his face upturned to
the stars.  He was exhausted, and asked for a drink, and fainted.  Then
they carried him to the hospital and I never saw him again.  I have
been told they carried him down Mount Mesola to the side of the little
lake he loved so well, 'his little lake,' and that he sleeps there in
death.  But for his comrades he is still living in the glory of his
youth, there on the Alps, waving his cap with an edelweiss in it, and
crying, 'Savoia!  Italia!'"

*******************

  Wild wind! what do you bear--
    A song of the men who fought and fell,
  A tale of the strong to do and dare?
    --Aye, and a tolling bell!


REDEEMED ITALY

Italy, since 1860 at least, has cherished the dream that sometime all
European territory with Italian-speaking inhabitants would be united
under Italian government.  When the World War began Italy was supposed
to be an ally of Germany and Austria.  She had agreed to fight with
them in case they were attacked--in a defensive war.

At first she did not enter the World War.  She perceived from the very
beginning that Germany and Austria were the attackers and were not the
nations attacked.  Her people began to understand what victory for the
Central Powers would mean and clamored for war on the side of the
Allies.  Then the cry went up to redeem the lost Italian provinces held
by Austria and called "Italia Irredenta" or "Unredeemed Italy," and
Italy entered the war May 23, 1915.

At first she declared war upon Austria but not upon Germany.  She made
no attempt to work in harmony with the Allies.  It was a war of her own
upon Austria to regain the lost Italian provinces of the Trentino and
Trieste.  Although she fought against tremendous obstacles in the
mountain passes with wonderful courage and success, her entrance into
the war was of assistance to the Allies only as it kept a certain
number of Austrian soldiers from the eastern and western fronts.

In 1916, the Italians captured Gorizia and all Italy went wild and
began to dream of a more wonderful development than had ever seemed
possible before.  In 1917, they fought on with seemingly great success
and dreamed wilder dreams than ever, for Russia was out of the war and
would have no claim to Constantinople and the straits.  Italy in this
year sent an army across the Adriatic into Albania to assure Italian
control of that country.

And then the "castles in the air" were suddenly shattered.  The Italian
army had not been properly supplied and the country was very short of
coal.  The army had therefore not been able to follow up its successful
attacks.  The enemy had also caused great discontent among the common
soldiers in the Italian forces by spreading lies among them.  The
collapse of the Russian armies had also made many of them believe
Germany was unbeatable.

Then, too, it is said the Italian generals were too sure, "too
confident," as athletic trainers would say, and had not properly
protected their armies and their northern provinces against a reverse.
Italy had declared war on Germany on August 27, 1916, and German shock
troops set free by the downfall of Russia were sent against the
incautious Italians and broke through their lines.

No prepared positions were ready back of the lines.  The great bases
were close up to the lines.  Therefore when the Italian armies were
obliged to retreat to prevent being surrounded and captured, they had
to retreat so far that their army bases with all their supplies were
lost and hundreds of thousands of Italian non-combatants were forced to
leave their homes on scarcely a "moment's notice."  250,000 Italians
and 2000 guns were captured by the enemy.

The greatest humiliation and the worst suffering followed, however, for
the Italian people who were left behind in the provinces overrun by the
victorious Austrians and Germans.  The following proclamation by the
Germans in the province of Udine is an excellent example of how the
Huns treated conquered territory and conquered peoples.


PROCLAMATION issued by the Headquarters of the German Military
Government at Udine to the inhabitants of conquered Italy.

A house-to-house search will be made for all concealed arms, weapons,
and ammunition.

All victuals remaining in the houses must be delivered up.

Every citizen must obey our labor regulations.

ALL WORKMEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN OVER 15 YEARS OLD ARE obliged to work
in the fields every day, Sundays included, from 4 A.M. to 8 P.M.

Disobedience will be punished in the following manner:--

(1) Lazy workmen will be accompanied to their work and watched by
Germans.  After the harvest they will be IMPRISONED for six months, and
every third day will be given NOTHING BUT BREAD AND WATER.

(2) Lazy women will be obliged to work, and after the harvest receive
SIX MONTHS' IMPRISONMENT.

(3) LAZY CHILDREN WILL BE PUNISHED BY BEATING.

The Commandant Reserves the Right to Punish Lazy Workmen with 20 Lashes
Daily.


What a contrast to the proclamation of General Allenby when the English
captured Jerusalem whereby the inhabitants were guaranteed protection
in carrying on their business, and all homes and buildings were to be
safeguarded.  When following the armistice the American soldiers
occupied German cities, the Germans were surprised to find that they
were in no wise punished or prevented from going about their regular
pursuits.

As a result of the World War, Italy recovered the unredeemed provinces,
and just before the signing of the armistice, she redeemed herself in
war by wiping out the memory of her humiliating defeat about a year
earlier at Caporetto.

The Italian war office in its official report of this second battle of
the Piave says in substance the following:--

"The war against Austria-Hungary which under the supreme direction of
the king, the commander-in-chief of the Italian army, began May 24,
1915, and which since then, with inferior numbers and material, has
been conducted with unflagging faith and constant valor for forty-one
months has been won.

"The gigantic battle of October 24 is victoriously ended.  Fifty-one
Italian divisions, three British, two French, one Czechoslovak, and one
American regiment fought against sixty-three Austro-Hungarian divisions.

"The Austro-Hungarian army is destroyed.  It suffered very heavy losses
in the fierce resistance of the first days of the battle, and in
retreat it lost an immense quantity of material of all kinds, nearly
all its stores and depots, and has left in our hands over 300,000
prisoners, with their commands complete, and not less than 5,000 guns.

"The defeat has left what was one of the most powerful armies in the
world in disorder and without hope of returning along the valleys
through which it advanced with proud assurance."


Church bells were rung all over Italy and parades and celebrations were
held in all the large cities.

President Wilson sent on November 4 the following message to the King
of Italy:--

May I not say how deeply and sincerely the people of the United States
rejoice that the soil of Italy is delivered from her enemies?  In their
name I send your Majesty and the great Italian people the most
enthusiastic congratulations.

WOODROW WILSON.


During the war, Italy called to the colors from a male population of
only 17,000,000 nearly 5,500,000 men and suffered a loss of almost
1,000,000 of them.  It is estimated that the nation's man power
suffered a permanent loss of over half a million.

But serious as is this loss, Italy inflicted an even greater punishment
upon the foe.  In Austrian prisoners alone she captured over a million.
The Austrian loss in killed and wounded was doubtless far greater than
Italy's.

Over 2500 miles of roads were constructed on the mountains of Italy and
Albania, and 1000 miles of aërial cable railroads were built to carry
food, ammunition, and guns over deep ravines.

Italy's fighters and industrial workers accomplished their work with an
inadequate supply of materials and food that meant real and continuous
suffering such as probably was felt by no other of the warring peoples.

*******************

We will never bring disgrace to this, our city, by any act of
dishonesty or cowardice, nor ever desert our suffering comrades in the
ranks.  We will fight for the ideals and sacred things of the city,
both alone and with many; we will revere and obey the city's laws and
do our best to incite a like respect and reverence in those above us
who are prone to annul or to set them at naught; we will strive
unceasingly to quicken the public's sense of civic duty.  Thus in all
these ways we will transmit this city not only not less but greater,
better and more beautiful than it was transmitted to us.

_The Oath of the Athenian Youth._


SONG OF THE AVIATOR

(_This poem was written for an entertainment given by the Y.M.C.A. at
an aviation barracks in a large camp in France.  Mrs. Wilcox addressed
five hundred aviators, and these verses were recited with great effect
by Mrs. May Randall.  After the entertainment there was a rush to
obtain autographed copies of the poem._)

  You may thrill with the speed of your thoroughbred steed,
  You may laugh with delight as you ride the ocean,
  You may rush afar in your touring car,
  Leaping, sweeping by things that are creeping--
  But you never will know the joy of motion
  Till you rise up over the earth some day
  And soar like an eagle, away--away.

  High and higher, above each spire,
  Till lost to sight is the tallest steeple,
  With the winds you chase in a valiant race,
  Looping, swooping, where mountains are grouping,
  Hailing them comrades, in place of people.
  Oh, vast is the rapture the bird man knows
  As into the ether he mounts and goes.

  He is over the sphere of human fear;
  He has come into touch with things supernal.
  At each man's gate death stands await;
  And dying flying were better than lying
  In sick beds crying for life eternal.
  Better to fly halfway to God
  Than to burrow too long like a worm in the sod.

  ELLA WHEELER WILCOX.


NATIONS BORN AND REBORN

In America, and in many other countries, people have listened with
wonder and enjoyment to strangely beautiful music played by, probably
the greatest of all pianists of today, Ignace Jan Paderewski.  For
years he has traveled from country to country and from city to city,
playing the piano in a manner no other has been able to imitate,
although Chopin's playing, it is said, had much the same effect upon
the audiences.  In Paderewski's playing as in his composition there is
always an undercurrent deeply sad and weird.  No one but a genius from
the martyred land of Poland, or from some other that had equally
suffered, could play as Chopin and Paderewski played or could compose
music such as they composed.  All the old glory of Poland in the
ancient centuries, her grievous losses, the terrible wrongs done her,
and the long-treasured dreams of a new and happier day for her people,
live in the soul of Paderewski, and vibrate through his very finger
tips as they move over the keys of his loved instrument.

Today the dreams of the Polish people are coming true.  Hopes cherished
since about the twelfth century are through the World War being
realized in a new Poland.

The tenth century saw the formation of the first kingdom of Poland in
central Europe to the east of the Germans.  The country grew and
prospered for two hundred years.  Then, lacking kingly leadership, it
became weak, and was finally divided into many principalities.  At that
time came the terrible Tartar invasion across Russia and into Poland,
resulting in shocking desolation and ruin.

When complete destruction was threatened from hostile peoples, on the
north and east, the Poles summoned aid from the Teutonic Knights, a
German crusading order.

The Germans drove out the hostile neighbors, promptly taking control of
their lands.  Then Poland learned that she had even worse enemies to
fear in those she had called to help her.  She watched them build up
military power to conquer her own lands.  But by joining with the
Lithuanians, she managed at length to defeat the Germans at the famous
battle of Tannenberg in 1410.

For over three hundred years the kingdom possessed great power.  But at
last it again began to weaken, and the year 1772 "saw the beginning of
the end."  The three great nations, Russia, Prussia, and Austria, then
joined against Poland and began to divide the kingdom among themselves.
By 1795 Poland had ceased to exist as a nation.

The terrible misfortunes of the Polish people under these hostile
foreign powers served really to bind them together with one common
purpose--to win back the kingdom and to reëstablish a free country.
This was their dream.

When the World War came, the Polish people in many lands, especially in
the United States, volunteered for service on the French front.  On
June 22, 1918, the first division of Polish troops in France was
presented with flags at a solemn ceremony, and listened to an address
by the French president.  Soon large numbers of Poles were fighting the
Austrians and Germans in Italy and in Russia, although they knew that
capture meant court-martial and death, since Austria and Germany
considered them deserters, as they indeed were.  The supreme commander
of Polish forces, General Josef Haller, had been a colonel in the
Austrian army.  But he decided to desert the Austrian army to lead an
"Iron Brigade" of Poles against the enemies of freedom.

Eighty-eight officers and twenty-six privates in his regiment were
captured by the Austrians, court-martialed, and sentenced to death.
When offered pardon by the Emperor Karl, they refused, saying, "We are
soldiers of the Polish Nation.  The Austrian government has no right to
grant us pardon even as it has no more right to inflict punishment upon
us than upon the soldiers of France and England."

Facing death, these men wrote to the Polish Parliamentary Club in
Vienna, their reasons for desertion,--namely, the unfair treatment at
the hands of the Austrians and their love for Poland.  They had heard a
rumor that the Polish organization was about to secure a more liberal
sentence for them by agreeing to the cession of certain provinces of
Poland.  So the prisoners further wrote:--

"We value greatly the love of our countrymen and we were touched deeply
by the generosity with which they thought of us, but we desire to
protest most energetically against relief and concessions secured for
us to the detriment of our country and the ancient rights of our nation.

"Do not permit our personal lot to weaken the united Polish front, for
the death penalty can affect us only physically.  The sufferings
undergone by our grandfathers and fathers, we will continue to endure
and with the sincere conviction that we are serving a free, united, and
independent Poland."


A few days after they were condemned, the Polish National Committee
sent a message to Italy declaring that representatives from all classes
of the Polish people had met at Warsaw and proclaimed the union of all
Poland.

Italy, France, and Great Britain formally recognized the Polish
national army as independent and Allied, and on November 4, 1918,
Secretary Lansing, in a letter, to a representative of the Polish
National Committee, stated that the United States Government also
wished to recognize officially the independence of the Polish army as a
part of the Allied forces.

The people of the United States with those of other countries are
hoping that Paderewski's great national family shall become united in
one free and independent state.  They now applaud this master of music
as the first leader of free Poland.  He will help destroy Bolshevism
with its cry, "Death to the educated," which has resulted already in
the death of hundreds of doctors, professors, engineers, and in one
case, the extermination of all the pupils in a single high school.  He
will join the other great leaders in their belief that "Economic
development, patriotism, and the ennobling of all human souls alone can
lead to freedom."

To the south of Poland in the very heart of Europe is another new
country, which already has set up a democratic government and elected
as its president,--Thomas G. Masaryk, a former professor in the
University of Prague, now the capital of Czecho-Slovakia.

Professor Masaryk spent some time in the United States conferring with
officials at Washington.  He was here when he received word that he had
been elected first president of his newly formed country by a
convention held in Geneva, Switzerland.

Great preparations for his return were made by the people.  When at one
o'clock on December 22, the booming of cannon told that the president's
train was drawing in at the station, the hundred thousand people who
had poured into the city of Prague were massed on every side to welcome
him and sang, as only the Slavs can sing, their national song.

Soon President Masaryk's train, with its engine elaborately decorated,
steamed in through the silent crowd.  In complete silence, Masaryk,
gray-haired and distinguished appearing, left the train and entered the
station.  There he saw groups of Czecho-Slovaks in French uniforms,
some wearing the war cross, and groups who had been fighting in the
Italian Alps.  He saw also a group of university professors who had
come to honor him.

In the tense silence, one of the leaders of the new republic came
forward.  He had for years conspired and worked with Masaryk for the
freedom of their country, and now he greeted him by throwing his arms
about him.  After a further greeting from the government officials, and
from the nation's aged and honored poet, Masaryk gave a brief speech
telling of his hopes for the republic.  He then passed out to the crowd
who hailed him in a tumult of joy.  One who witnessed Masaryk's return
pictures the scenes on the way to the government buildings.


"There began a triumphal procession which took two hours to arrive at
the Parliament house.  Every window, every balcony and every roof was
filled to overflowing, and every street lined on either side, twenty
deep.  All this multitude, most of whom had been standing for hours,
had such joy written on their faces as has never before been seen and
cannot possibly be described.  Elders were holding children on their
shoulders, all eyes were full of tears, all eyes smiling.  The people
kissed the flags of the Allies as they would kiss their babies.

"Since the proclamation, all the young ladies of Prague have taken to
the fashion of peasant costumes, and several members of Parliament wore
the old national dress.  Searchlights playing on the spires and
steeples of this most beautiful Slav city now again touch the great
castle, henceforth the seat of government, where hundreds of windows
are ablaze with lights, the first rejoicing it has known for three
hundred years."


For three hundred years the peasants of Bohemia together with Slovakia
which, with some smaller provinces, is now called Czecho-Slovakia, had
tried every means to free themselves from Austria.  On the north and
west were the Germans and on the south the Austrians, both enemies,
seeking only to get what they could for themselves out of the little
country.

In their Declaration of Independence, given in Paris, October 18, 1918,
the people have told the story of their past, as well as their purposes
for the future.


"We make this declaration on the basis of our historic and natural
right.  We have been an independent State since the seventh century,
and in 1526, as an independent State, consisting of Bohemia, Moravia,
and Silesia, we joined with Austria and Hungary in a defensive union
against the Turkish danger.  We have never voluntarily surrendered our
rights as an independent State in this confederation.  The Hapsburgs
broke their compact with our nation by illegally transgressing our
rights and violating the Constitution of our State, which they had
pledged themselves to uphold, and we therefore refuse longer to remain
a part of Austria-Hungary in any form.

"We claim the right of Bohemia to be reunited with her Slovak brethren
of Slovakia, once a part of our national State, later torn from our
national body, and fifty years ago incorporated in the Hungarian State
of the Magyars, who, by their unspeakable violence and ruthless
oppression of their subject races have lost all moral and human right
to rule anybody but themselves.

"The world knows the history of our struggle against the Hapsburg
oppression.  The world knows the justice of our claims, which the
Hapsburgs themselves dared not deny.  Francis Joseph in the most solemn
manner repeatedly recognized the sovereign rights of our nation.  The
Germans and Magyars opposed this recognition, and Austria-Hungary,
bowing before the Pan-Germans, became a colony of Germany, and, as her
vanguard, to the East, provoked the last Balkan conflict, as well as
the present world war, which was begun by the Hapsburgs alone without
the consent of the representatives of the people.

"We cannot and will not continue to live under the direct or indirect
rule of the violators of Belgium, France, and Serbia, and would-be
murderers of Russia and Rumania, the murderers of tens of thousands of
civilians and soldiers of our blood, and the accomplices in numberless
unspeakable crimes committed in this war against humanity by the two
degenerate and irresponsible dynasties.  We will not remain a part of a
State which has no justification for existence.

"We refuse to recognize the divine right of kings.  Our nation elected
the Hapsburgs to the throne of Bohemia of its own free will, and by the
same right deposes them.  We hereby declare the Hapsburg dynasty
unworthy of leading our nation, and deny all of their claims to rule in
the Czecho-Slovak land, which we here and now declare shall henceforth
be a free and independent people and nation.

"We accept and shall adhere to the ideals of modern democracy, as they
have been the ideals of our nation for centuries.  We accept the
American principles as laid down by President Wilson; the principles of
liberated mankind--of the actual equality of nations--and of
Governments deriving all their just power from the consent of the
governed.  We, the nation of Comenius, cannot but accept these
principles expressed in the American Declaration of Independence, the
principles of Lincoln, and of the declaration of the rights of man and
of the citizen.  For these principles our nation shed its blood in the
memorable Hussite Wars, 500 years ago; and for these same principles,
beside her Allies, our nation is shedding its blood today in Russia,
Italy, and France."


It is said that the Czech soldiers fighting on the French front
received the news of the declaration with wild enthusiasm, rushed
forward, and wrested from the enemy one of the most difficult positions
on the Aisne.

The Czechs were also fighting in Italy, and in Russia, although they
had been first forced into the Austrian army.  One Czech battalion
commanded by Austrians and ordered against the Russians, rushed
forward, but killed their officers on the way and surrendered in a body
to the Russians, asking to fight with them against the Austro-Germans.
If the Russian soldiers had held together and followed the invincible
Czechs, Germany would have been driven completely out of Russia.

But the Czechs did not deceive the Austrians.  Their hopes and plans
were not secret.  They openly warned Austria of their desertion.  They
wrote in chalk on the outside of the cars: "With us the Monarchy will
not win."

Upon seeing this declaration, it is reported, the German and Austrian
officers ordered the trainload of men to stand in line, and then shot
every tenth man.

But the rest went on, through terrible and thrilling experiences,
fighting and dying by the hundreds for the sake of the new republic
which at last was born.

The story of the passage through Russia and Siberia of the
Czecho-Slovak troops, who were fighting with Russia against Austria and
Germany, is one of the most remarkable and exciting stories of history.
These troops probably saved Siberia for the Allies and were at last
able to join in the fighting on the western front.

Still another new nation now called Jugo-Slavia, although it may
finally be called Serbia or some other name, has risen south of
Austria-Hungary and east of the Adriatic Sea.  It lies across from
Italy and is nearly the same size as the mainland of that country.  Its
story, too, is one of conquest by northern enemies, followed by the
crushing out of all freedom.  But since the beginning of the World War,
the people of Jugo-Slavia, on July 20, 1917, have set up a new republic
based upon the ideas of justice and democracy, united under one flag,
and granting its three different races equal rights and privileges.

Across the sea, in Arabia, the country of Hedjaz has been freed from
Germany's allies, the Turks.  The people of Hedjaz also once enjoyed
freedom and glory, their power in early history reaching all the way
from France to China.  Backed by the British in Egypt and Mesopotamia,
the Arabs revolted from the Turks, drove them out of the holy cities of
Mecca and Medina, and at length broke their power completely.
Mohammedans have always recognized the Mohammedan ruler who controlled
Mecca and Medina, the birthplace and the burial place of the prophet,
as their Kalif.  If this custom is followed, the King of Hedjaz becomes
the Kalif in place of the Sultan of Turkey.

Hedjaz has already arisen from the ruins of the Turks as an independent
and separate state.  Armenia, it is to be hoped, will do the same.

Each country needs only the will and the declaration of the people for
freedom in order to secure the sympathy, aid, and recognition of the
victorious Allied nations and the United States.  As soon as they
declare their independence and choose their own government, the greater
nations at once rush to their relief.  This was shown especially in the
case of Finland.

For centuries Finland's fate was uncertain, resting now in the hands of
Sweden, now in the power of Russia, and last, and worst of all, in the
hands of Germany.  But the people rose united, expelled their new
rulers, who had been sent to them by the Germans, and declared their
independence.

At once the United States and the Allies, with Food Administrator
Hoover, planned a gigantic program for relief, which for Finland alone
provided 14,000 tons of food.  They further promised aid to all Russian
provinces as fast as they should drive out the Bolsheviki, or at least
deprive them of power.  This meant a shipment in three months of
200,000 tons of food, clothing, agricultural supplies, and railroad
equipment.

The world expects Russia to regain her equilibrium and reach the
greatest heights of power ever known in her history.  Her possessions
will not be as large as they were before the World War, because of the
loss of Finland, and of provinces in the west and south which are
likely to become independent states.

In America the boys and girls scarcely realize what the blessings of
freedom mean, as the children of the new countries do.  But that
America is indeed blessed with liberty and happiness is shown by the
closeness with which the new nations have followed her as a pattern.
Their appreciation of this country was clearly expressed in the
Czecho-Slovak Declaration of Independence, and again when President
Masaryk at the Hague, on December 30, 1918, spoke as follows:--

"Komensky's historic prayer has literally been fulfilled and our
people, free and independent, advances, respected and supported by
universal sympathy, into the community of European nations.  Are we
living in a fairy tale?  Politicians of all countries are asking this.
I put the same question to myself and yet it is all an actual reality.

"When the German victories seemed about to realize the Pan-German plan
of the subjection of the whole of the Old World, America stepped out of
its reserve, replaced weary and betrayed Russia and within a short time
Marshal Foch dictated terms to beaten Germany and Austria-Hungary.

"President Wilson formulated the leading principle of democracy which
is contained in the American Declaration of Independence, where, as in
the French Declaration of the Rights of Man, revolution triumphed and
established that all political power comes from the people.  And as
Lincoln said, is of the people, by the people, and for the people.

"President Wilson proclaimed as the object of the war the liberation of
all mankind.  We Czechs and Slovaks could not stand aside in this world
war.  We were obliged to decide against Austria-Hungary and Germany for
our whole history led us to democratic powers.

"In May of last year I was obliged to go to Russia whence in the
beginning of March I went to Japan and from Japan to the United
States,--a remarkable and unexpected journey round the world,--verily a
propaganda journey, winning the whole world for our national cause.

"After seven months I returned nominated by our government as the first
president of the Czecho-Slovak republic.  I know not whom I ought to
thank first.  It is natural that the recognition by England and the
United States, the greatest Allied Powers, has helped us greatly.  The
United States guaranteed from their wealth abundant help, and we have
from them a definite promise for the future.  President Wilson himself
has devoted sincere attention to our question and we are obliged to him
and the Allied Powers.  They can always count on us.

"The real object of the war and peace is the reorganization of eastern
Europe and the solution of the eastern question.  The war was a
culmination of many struggles to solve the eastern question in the
broad sense of the word.  German pressure eastwards was directed
against a zone of small nations between Germany and Russia, beginning
with the Finns and going as far down as Greece, making a series of
eighteen small nations.  German, Austro-Hungarian, and Russian
imperialism suffered shipwreck.  The small nations are freed.  The
war's negative task is fulfilled.  The positive task awaits--to
organize east Europe and this with mankind in general.  We stand on the
threshold of a new time when all mankind feels in unity.  Our people
will contribute with full consciousness its part in the realization of
this great and lofty task."

*******************

And for your country, boy, and for that flag, never dream a dream but
of serving her as she bids you, though the service carry you through a
thousand hells.  No matter what happens to you, no matter who flatters
you or who abuses you, never look to another flag, never let a night
pass but you pray God to bless that flag.  Remember, boy, that behind
all these men you have to do with, behind officers, and government, and
people even, there is the Country Herself, your Country, and that you
belong to Her as you belong to your own mother.  Stand by Her, boy, as
you would stand by your mother.

EDWARD EVERETT HALE.


"TO VILLINGEN--AND BACK"

Very remarkable in the world struggle for liberty was the eagerness of
the Allied soldiers to fight and to make the supreme sacrifice if
necessary.  The Americans, especially, brought cheer and courage to the
tired French, Belgian, Italian, and British hearts, so daring and high
spirited were they when going into battle.  With a smile, a shout, or a
song, they went over the top to meet the Huns, ready for anything
except to be taken prisoners into Germany.

This was the one possibility dreaded by the soldiers all along the
front.  They knew that the Huns were not a pleasant company to meet;
that they sang only when ordered to do so, and sang only what they were
ordered to sing; that they laughed most and shouted loudest when
cruelly torturing innocent, unprotected, and unarmed people.  What life
must be in a German prison at the mercy of German soldiers, they dared
hardly imagine.

It is not strange therefore that our men wished rather to die than to
be prisoners.  Nor is it strange that, having been taken, they made the
most desperate attempts to escape.

Naturally the easiest time to break away was while being carried from
the front to the rear of the German lines.  Once thrown into prison,
the difficulties were much greater.

Often the captive was handed back from one company of guards to
another, being made to work for the enemy on his way.  Private Donahue
was one who was sent back in this manner, after being captured in a
midnight skirmish near Château-Thierry.

He was dropped unconscious on the ground outside a German officer's
tent, and when he revived he found that all his belongings,--even
letters and snapshots from home,--had been taken from him.  A German
stood over him and began questioning him, hoping to gather important
military information.

When asked how many Americans were at the front, the prisoner said,
"Thirty-two American divisions and forty French."

"Pigs!" shouted the German lieutenant, and the cry was caught up by the
guards, who came at a signal and dragged Donahue away.

From early morning until nightfall, he worked with the camouflage men,
masking the batteries and cutting leafy branches for screening the
stores of ammunition heaped by the roadside.

The Germans gave him no blankets at night, and for food poured out for
him a sort of tasteless gruel and tossed him chunks of coarse black
bread to eat with it.  Every day a different soldier took him in
charge.  Each night he was closely guarded.  He knew from the distant
sounds of the guns that he was being taken back into Germany.

On the seventh night, he lay on the ground with Germans sleeping all
about him.  His guard sat beside him, leaning against a tree, his rifle
between his knees.  Private Donahue wished that he were back in the
American lines, when suddenly in the moonlight he could see the guard's
head nodding and nodding.  Now was his time to escape.

He stole away and began creeping through the woods.  There were Germans
lying all around and he stumbled over several of them.  But they only
grunted savagely, and he crept fearfully on.

Soon he reached the edge of the woods and crawled under a bush to think.

Above No Man's Land an occasional shell was bursting, by whose light he
could dimly see the American lines, eight kilometers away.  He crept
along in the shadows, lying still whenever a soldier passed near him.
When morning came, he crawled into a grain field and lay down so that
no one might see him.  Several times soldiers passed so close to him
that he could hear them talking.  Once he was nearly trampled under the
hoofs of two horses, and twice a Red Cross dog threatened to disclose
his presence in the field.  But he lay still as death and the dog went
off.

That night he was creeping up the side of a ravine when he was
discovered by the sentry.

"Halt!" cried the guard.

Private Donahue had been fearing that he would hear that word.  But now
he recognized it as spoken by an American voice.

"I am an American!" he cried joyfully, springing to his feet.

Soon he was sleeping inside his own lines, under two old potato sacks.
At dawn he ate a good breakfast at the field kitchen, then reported at
headquarters.

He had kept his eyes open during his seven days' journey through the
German lines, and had some important information to give at French
headquarters.

But many times the captives had no opportunity to escape before they
were locked in the prison camp somewhere in Germany.  Then it demanded
every bit of Yankee ingenuity to get away.

One of the most elaborate attempts, involving the escape of a great
number of men, is told in the following story.

There were seventy Americans among the prisoners in a German camp at
Villingen in Baden.  Not all had arrived at the same time.  Some were
newcomers, others unfortunately had been detained there for more than a
year.

The prison consisted of a barracks for the men, surrounded by a large
stretch of land, all inclosed with two rows of high wire fencing,
completely charged with electricity.  The second fence, which was six
or eight feet away from the first, was very strong and bent inward
toward the top, so that if a prisoner by any possible means succeeded
in getting over the inner fence, he surely could not climb the outer.
Moreover, guards were kept on watch between the fences, and outside,
sentinels were stationed about thirty yards apart.  It seemed
impossible for the prisoners to get away by daylight, and at night the
barracks with their iron-barred windows were closely guarded.

The treatment of the prisoners, especially of those who had made any
attempts to escape, was shameful and often cruel.  The food, in
general, consisted of sour black bread, soup made largely from tree
leaves, and some sort of drink made from acorns and called coffee.
Needless to say, the prisoners were half starved.  Indeed, two American
girls who were in Berne, Switzerland, working among the released
prisoners, in a letter to America showed in what an awful condition
they found some of the men.  Their letter read:--

"We have gone to the station three times at four o'clock in the morning
to help feed the English soldiers who were on their way home after
being exchanged for German prisoners.  We had the privilege of giving
some of them the first white bread they had had in four years.  The men
who had been kept working behind the lines were in a pitiable
condition.  One such man happened to be at my table,--for they are
taken off the train for two hours, given hot tea and roast beef and ham
sandwiches,--and the poor fellow began taking sandwiches, eating a few
bites, and stowing the rest feverishly away in his pocket.  He couldn't
realize that he was in a place where he would be fed."


All of the seventy Americans at Villingen wished themselves anywhere
outside the prison camp, and most of all back on the firing line,
helping to win.

So much did they wish this that a few more daring than the rest had
twice attempted to escape together.  Their attempts had ended in
failure, but that had only led them to spend months in making still
more elaborate plans to gain their freedom.

Not all could leave the camp, they knew.  Many did not care to risk it,
while thirty of the seventy Americans were doctors and thought they
ought to stay and do what they could for their weak and sickly fellow
prisoners.  But in the final plan, sixteen men were to try this break
for liberty.

One of the men was Lieutenant Harold Willis of Boston, an aviator in
the famous Lafayette Escadrille.  He had been captured after a battle
in the air.  Not even fourteen months in a German prison could kill the
daring spirit of this young lieutenant.  Instead, the cruel treatment
of the prisoners, the daily contact with the stupid German guards, made
him long once more to cut through the clouds and bring down another
boche.  Accordingly, he became a leader in carrying out the plans for
escape.

Lieutenant Edward V. Isaacs, of Cresco, Iowa, an officer in the United
States Navy, was another leader.  He was crossing the Atlantic in the
big American transport, President Lincoln, when it was torpedoed by the
submarine U-90, on May 31, 1918.  He went down with the ship, but came
to the surface again and crawled up on a raft where he stayed until one
of the lifeboats came by and the men took him off.  But the boat had
gone but a short distance, when the guilty submarine pushed its nose up
through the surface of the water near by.  Its commander ordered the
lifeboat to draw near and the helpless oarsmen had to obey.  When asked
the whereabouts of the captain of the vessel, the men in the lifeboat
answered that, as far as any of them knew, he had gone down with the
ship.

Then the commander, probably noticing his uniform, singled out
Lieutenant Isaacs, demanded that he come on board the submarine, and
informed him that if he did not find the captain, he would take him
instead to Germany.

Two days later, the U-boat carrying this American officer was sighted
by two American destroyers.  Immediately the destroyers made for the
submarine and tried to sink it.

The U-boat quickly submerged and floated far below the surface while
the destroyers circled about for several hours dropping many depth
bombs, five of which exploded not three hundred yards from the
submarine.  So great was the shock of these explosions that, in telling
of his experiences afterward, Isaacs said it seemed as if the ocean
shook the boat much as a dog shakes a rat.

During this time not a word was spoken except by the watch officers,
who were at their posts like the rest of the crew, and reported to the
commander the directions in which the bombs were falling, thus enabling
him to move the boat about in a safe course.  The bombing continued
until nightfall.  Then the commander thought he was safe.  But the next
day, another American warship appeared, and the U-90 made for its home
port as fast as possible.

Lieutenant Isaacs, more fortunate than many U-boat prisoners, was
treated well by the officers and crew.  He messed with the officers and
heard them most of the time discussing why the United States entered
the war.  They told Isaacs that the only possible reason was that the
United States had loaned so much money to the Allies that she was
obliged to enter the war to make sure of being repaid.

But Isaacs had no intention of remaining in the U-boat.  As it entered
neutral waters about four miles off the Danish coast, it began running
along above the surface.

Isaacs secretly left his room, hurried to the deck, and was just about
to dive over into the water, hoping to swim ashore, when Captain Remy,
the commander, caught hold of him.  He had suspected Isaacs and had
followed him from below.  "Stupid fool," he exclaimed as he drew him
away from the side of the boat and ordered him below.

On landing at Wilhelmshaven, Isaacs was questioned by German
intelligence officers, and then sent to Karlsruhe where he was again
examined with the hope that he would give out information which would
be valuable to the Germans.  Here with several other prisoners, he was
held for three days in a "listening hotel" where dictographs had been
strung about the room.  The German officers hoped that, left without
guards in the room, the prisoners would talk over military matters, not
knowing that the dictographs were there to record all that was said and
thus reveal all to the Germans.  But the prisoners expected some trick,
discovered the dictographs, and pulled out the wires so that they would
not work.

Isaacs remained in Karlsruhe for some time, then was placed on a train
with several officers and started for the prison camp at Villingen in
Baden.  At Karlsruhe he had been shamefully treated and he determined
he should never arrive in Baden.

On the train he was put in the charge of two guards and so closely was
he watched that he despaired of having any chance to escape.  But
within five miles of his destination, he noticed that one guard became
drowsy, while the other had his attention on the passing landscape.

Then it was, with the train running forty miles an hour, that he jumped
to his feet and dived through the little car window.  He landed on his
head and knees on the opposite track.  Although badly stunned, he
struggled to his feet and began to run.  By this time the train had
been stopped and the guards were pursuing, firing as they came on.
Isaacs went some distance but could hardly run for he had badly injured
his knees.  A bullet whistled by his ear and he dropped and let the
guard come up to him.

Mad with rage the German kicked him, and beat him with his gun until he
broke it.  The rest of the guards soon came up.  Then they made Isaacs
walk the five miles into Baden, beating him now and then on the way.

On reaching the camp he was first taken to the officers' quarters and
threatened with death if he tried again to escape.  After being
plastered with paper bandages he was put into solitary confinement for
three weeks.  So poor was the prison food that had it not been for the
nourishment furnished by the American Red Cross, Isaacs never would
have recovered.

He had been threatened with death if he tried again to escape, but he
began at once to make plans and would have gained his liberty much
sooner than he did, had not the Russian prisoner attendants each time
betrayed his plans before he could try them.  And now he and Lieutenant
Willis with fourteen other men decided to try again for freedom.

The prisoners were sometimes permitted to take walks with the guards
about the country.  In this way the men who were to escape were able to
learn about the roads and the best hiding places.  They managed to
secure maps and compasses by bribing some of the Russian attendants.

But these would only be of help when once outside the camp, and how to
get out was a serious question.  Some believed that the best way was to
get past the guards through the big gate.  To climb over the two wire
fences, so heavily charged with electricity, seemed entirely impossible.

But Isaacs discovered a way across that barbed wire.

He had seen two of the prisoners marking out the whitewashed lines on
the tennis court where the German officers played each day.  The lines
were made by the use of two narrow wooden boards, eighteen feet long,
fastened together by crosspieces, allowing a small space of about two
inches between.  While the boards seemed very light, they were so
fastened together that they were really quite strong.  They could be
made even stronger by nailing on more cross-pieces.  Then they would
form a sort of bridge over which the men could crawl from the barracks'
windows to the outer fence, where they could drop to the ground and run
from the sentinels.

For months the men gathered their necessary materials together.  Many
of the prisoners, who were not to try to escape, were let into the
secret and helped as much as they could.  They drew the screws out of
the doors and windows, and brought strips of wood from broken provision
boxes with which to finish making the bridges.

Best of all they secured three pairs of wire cutters, one from a
Russian prisoner, and a second from a Russian attendant.  The third
pair was made by one of the prisoners.

This secret collection was a constant source of danger, as the
prisoners were searched nearly every day.  It is said that one prisoner
was given solitary confinement because a map was found sewn in the seat
of his trousers.  Therefore, much of the work, such as bringing the
boards into the barracks and nailing the bridges together, was left
until the last.  A month before they were to escape, they were
suspected and the guard was doubled.  Still they worked on and hoped on.

Their plans were nearly completed when it was suddenly announced that
the camp at Villingen would be used in the future as a prison for
Americans only.  All other nationalities would be transferred at once
to some other camp.  This, the prisoners knew, would mean first a
thorough searching of every corner and crevice in camp.  Thus it seemed
necessary to break away at once before this careful inspection should
be made, or they probably could not escape at all that winter.

For two days they worked steadily and carefully.  Night was their best
time to escape, but somehow the electric lighting system, as well as
the electric current in the wire fences, must be shut off.  To do this,
it was necessary to find strips of wire for making short-circuiting
chains.  A few of these strips they cut from the fencing back of the
tennis courts.  Most of them, however, were taken from the steep prison
roof where they were used to hold the slate tiles in place.  Nearly all
of these wires were drawn out, so that if a whirlwind had suddenly
swept across the country, that roof would have been scattered in every
direction.

All this had to be done very quietly.  One or two would work at it
while others attracted the attention of the Germans by creating some
excitement in distant corners of the camp.

The night before the camp was to be inspected, the break was made.  The
sixteen men were divided into four groups of four each, one in each
group acting as a leader.

The first group, with Lieutenant Isaacs leading, was to get over the
two fences from the windows by crossing on the bridges.  The second
group, led by Lieutenant Willis, was to cut its way through the wire
fences.  The third had ready some ladders made of strong rope, by which
they hoped to climb over the fences.  The last group intended to rush
out with the guards when they ran through the gates to catch those who
were jumping from the bridges.

At 10:30 that night, a signal was given and everything followed like
clockwork.  One of the prisoners short-circuited the wires, shutting
off the electric lighting system and the current in the wire fences.
There was no moon, and the camp was left in utter darkness.

At first the guards did not suspect anything, thinking the affair just
an accident.

But immediately Isaacs began cutting away the bars at the window.  When
this was done, the prisoners helped him and his companions to throw
over their bridges.  The first man got out upon this flimsy bridge and
when he was half way over, the inner end of the board was pushed out
farther and farther until it touched the outer fence.  Reaching the
end, the man sprang to the ground, the inner part of the bridge was
drawn back in by the prisoners at the window, and another man crawled
out.  This was continued until the four men had gone.  It had been
decided that the lightest man in the company would try getting over the
bridge first, and Lieutenant Isaacs being the lightest led his group
across.

When he dropped to the ground, he landed on his hands and knees not six
feet from two German sentries, both of whom fired but did not even
touch him.  Without waiting for the others he ran into the woods to a
spot two miles from camp which he and Lieutenant Willis had chosen for
a meeting place, if they should get away safely.

Unprepared, as always if taken by surprise, the Germans when they
realized the meaning of the disturbance rushed wildly about, one
officer shooting frantically straight up into the air.

Willis had started cutting a way through the wires; but when his group
was fired upon, they decided to change their plans and dash through the
gate with the last group as best they could.  Willis knew that in the
darkness he might easily pass for one of the guards, so carefully had
he disguised himself.  He wore an old raincoat, decorated with German
insignia and numerals, and a large belt-buckle, all cut out of a tin
can.  He carried a dummy wooden gun, bundles of food, maps, and a
compass; and he wore a German cap.

He expected that the gates would be opened at once, but they remained
locked while the patrol went into the guardhouse to report.  But as
they marched back again, the gates were thrown open and Willis and the
other men dashed out.

They sped past the camp toward the dense forest.  Willis darted off
across the fields to a steep hill up which he ran, the guards firing
continually at him.

As he reached the summit, he turned into the forest and hastened in the
direction he had agreed upon with Isaacs.  He soon met him, and
together they started off toward the southwest, guided by the compass
they had brought with them.  They did not see any of the other men,
with the exception of one whom Isaacs had heard puffing and grunting
past him as they ran from camp.  In the darkness he had not been able
to recognize him.

That night they traveled about twenty-five miles.  Hidden in the brush,
they slept by day and traveled on again at night.  It was a perilous
trip through the forest, lasting eight days.  Often they could only
push their way backwards for long distances, through the terrible
thickets.  It rained and they were cold and wet.  But on the eighth day
they found themselves on the top of a dizzy precipice just above the
Rhine.  There they lay hidden until nightfall, although they were in
constant danger of being discovered by German sentinels and townspeople
who passed near them.  When darkness came, they crawled about for two
hours, seeking to find a trail that would lead them down to the river.
If only they could cross the river, they were sure of safety.  But
wherever there was a possible way of reaching the river, there was a
German sentry.  Once Willis kneeled on a dry twig which snapped.  In a
trice a German sentinel flashed a bright pocket searchlight--but in the
opposite direction.

The hearts of the two men sank in fear lest having nearly gained their
freedom they should again be captured.  Then they decided that they
must creep down by one of the little tributaries flowing into the
Rhine.  So they stepped into the little stream and crawled down it,
feeling for loose stones that might rattle and attract the attention of
the sentry.

After several hours they reached the water's edge, about two o'clock in
the morning.

The water was freezing cold, as the streams flowing into the river come
from the mountains where snow and ice are found nearly the year around.
As they stood knee-deep in the water and looked across to the other
shore, they doubted whether they could swim the long distance.  Here
the Rhine is about seven hundred feet wide.  Moreover, there are many
whirlpools in the river and the current itself is very swift.  The men
besides were tired and weak from lack of food.  But they could not
think of turning back, and there was no other way of getting across.
So they removed their shoes and outer garments.

Isaacs stood talking softly with Willis, when suddenly there was no
answer to one of his questions.  He moved toward the spot where Willis
had been standing, but his feet went from under him and he was carried
by the current out into the river.  Then he knew that the same thing
must have happened to Willis, and that he had not called to him for
fear of being heard by the sentry.

If the water was cold near the shore, it was colder in the river
itself.  The men had to fight hard against the current.

When about halfway across, Isaacs was caught in a whirlpool which spun
him round and round until it left him nearly exhausted.  Just as he was
thinking that he would have to give up, he made one last mighty effort
and reached the shore.

When he could gather himself up he discovered that he had landed on the
Swiss shore, near Basel.  Soon he found a family willing to get up in
the middle of the night to give him food and a warm bed.  One of the
men started out to find Willis, but met a messenger who had been sent
by Willis to find Isaacs.  The messenger said that Willis had succeeded
in reaching the Swiss shore, although some distance from the spot where
Isaacs landed.  The next day the men went on and finally walked into
the French lines.

They received a welcome that would warm the coldest heart, and learned
that another aviator, Lieutenant George Puryear, who was also one of
the men to make the break with them from the prison camp, had arrived
before them.

They told of the awful conditions in the German camps, of how the
officers themselves did not seem to favor Prussia, and of many serious
strikes which had occurred in that country, about which the Allies knew
nothing.

Isaacs had been treated so badly and was so exhausted that he was soon
sent to London to rest, and later to his home in the United States
where he landed on the day before the armistice was signed,--the first
U-boat prisoner to escape.

Willis was anxious to get into actual service again and make up for
lost time, although he was joyfully informed that peace at last seemed
near.  He was obliged to wait in Paris until certain formalities were
attended to, before he could fight once more.  He then went to the
front to study the latest improvements that had been made in airplanes
during his absence, in order to take his place again in the fighting
which, however, was drawing rapidly to a close.


ALSACE-LORRAINE

On slight pretext, Germany in 1864 and in 1866 had made wars against
Denmark and Austria that might easily have been avoided.

France took notice of the warlike ambitions of her neighbor and began
to prepare for the war that she knew would soon come between her and
Germany.  The French emperor probably also desired this war, but the
French people did not and France was not ready for it.

The Prussian chancellor, Bismarck, was a man of "iron and blood," for
only by these two forces did he believe the Germans could advance.

In 1870, the Spanish Liberals expelled Queen Isabella II and offered
the crown of Spain to a Hohenzollern prince.  The offer was declined,
but after Bismarck saw to what its acceptance might lead, he succeeded
in having it renewed.  Then the Emperor Napoleon informed King William
that he would regard its acceptance as a sufficient ground for war
against Germany.  The Hohenzollern prince, however, rejected the offer
and the matter might have ended here, had not Napoleon directed the
French ambassador to secure from King William a promise never to permit
a Hohenzollern prince to accept the Spanish crown.

King William who was at Ems refused to do this and declined to give the
French ambassador another interview as he was leaving Ems that night.
He telegraphed an account of the affair to Bismarck who realized that
here was his chance to bring on the war he desired.  He changed the
wording of King William's telegram in such a way that when it was given
out the next day, it gave the impression to Germans that their king had
been insulted by the French ambassador and to Frenchmen that their
ambassador had been insulted by the king of Prussia.

"There is little doubt," writes a German historian, "that, had this
telegram been worded differently, the Franco-German struggle might have
been avoided."

French pride would not now allow France to withdraw her request, and
the war that Bismarck desired became certain--a war caused by a scrap
of paper on which were written German lies signed by German leaders.
After reading this story of the falsity of the greatest of all Prussian
statesmen, Bismarck, it does not seem strange that another scrap of
paper on which the Prussian government had written lies brought England
into the World War and assured the defeat of Germany.

Poorly prepared, France could not stand long against the Prussian war
machine.  After a sharp conflict lasting about six months, the French
National Assembly at Bordeaux was forced to ratify the unfair treaty
which required her to pay a great indemnity in money and to give up the
coveted provinces of Alsace and Lorraine, with the exception of
Belfort.  The beautiful country which had been the home of Jeanne
d'Arc, the sacred heroine of France, was to be given over to rough and
haughty bands of soldiers such as she had given her life to expel from
her beloved France.  But France had to choose between losing a small
portion of the country, or meeting with complete destruction in war
against greatly superior forces who had already destroyed the French
military power.

[Illustration: Jeanne d'Arc, rising in her stirrups, holds on high her
sword, as if to consecrate it for a war of Right.  This inspiring
statue, located near Grant's Tomb on Riverside Drive, New York City,
overlooks the Hudson, where it bade Godspeed to all the American
soldiers and sailors going overseas to deliver France from the Hun.]

One morning in that fateful year of 1871, a notice was posted in the
towns and villages of Alsace and Lorraine telling the people that the
next day these provinces would pass from French into German hands.  In
anticipation of this, petitions from these provinces had continually
been sent both to France and Germany declaring deep loyalty only to
France.  For the last forty-eight years these glowing words have been
true.

"France cannot consent to it.  Europe cannot sanction it.  We call upon
the Governments and Nations of the whole World to witness in advance
that we hold null and void all acts and treaties . . . which so consent
to the abandoning to the foreigner all or any part of our Provinces of
Alsace and Lorraine."

And their plea, drawn up and signed by the fifteen representatives to
the Reichstag, is still kept at Metz.  Some one has well said that it
is "one of the _scraps of paper_ against which the strength of the
German Empire has been broken."

The Germans after hearing innumerable petitions became exasperated.
They imprisoned many of the inhabitants, censored the press, and
established such a strict system of passports that "a veritable Chinese
wall was raised around the annexed country."

And more than this, although the Germans may not always have realized
that they were doing so, they humiliated the people by degrading things
looked upon by them as holy.  For instance, the Kaiser had a statue of
himself, upturned moustache and all, placed upon the cathedral of Metz.
He wore a Biblical cowl and was pointing impressively to a parchment
scroll.  He was supposed to represent the prophet Daniel.  This statue
was found headless in December, 1918.

Despite the petitions, for all those years the policy of the government
never varied.  The chancellor, Bismarck, replied every time that
Alsace-Lorraine was not annexed for the sake of the people.  They could
move to some section still under French control.  The provinces were
taken from France only to further the interest of the German Empire.
"If this were a permanent peace," he said, "we would not have done it.
So long as France possesses Strassburg and Metz her strategical
position is stronger offensively than ours is defensively."  There was
going to be another war and Germany needed these provinces for military
advantage!

But the German government did realize more and more how bitterly
opposed to the annexation were these unfortunate people, and decided to
crush out everything French in Alsace-Lorraine.  The people were
forbidden to write or speak the French language; even the signboards at
the street crossings were changed to German.  How the children spent
the last day that French could be taught in the schools is told by a
little Alsatian boy.

That morning I was very late for school, and was terribly afraid of
being scolded, for M. Hamel, the schoolmaster, had said he intended to
examine us on the participles, and I knew not a word about them.  The
thought came into my head that I would skip the class altogether, and
so off I went across the fields.

The weather was so hot and clear!

One could hear the blackbirds whistling on the edge of the wood; in
Ripperts' meadow, behind the sawyard, the Prussian soldiers were
drilling.  All this attracted me much more than the rules about
participles; but I had the strength to resist and so I turned and ran
quickly back towards the school.

In passing before the town hall, I saw that a number of people were
stopping before the little grating where notices are posted up.  For
two years past it was there we learned all the bad news, the battles
lost, and the orders of the commandant; so I thought to myself without
stopping: "What can it be now?"  Then, as I was running across the
square, the blacksmith, Wachter, who was there with his apprentice,
just going to read the notice, cried out to me:--

"Don't be in such a hurry, little fellow, you will be quite early
enough for your school."

I thought he was making fun of me, and I was quite out of breath when I
entered M. Hamel's little courtyard.

Generally, at the beginning of the class, there was a great uproar
which one could hear in the street; desks opened and shut, lessons
studied aloud all together, with hands over ears to learn better, and
the big ruler of the master tapping on the table: "More silence there."

I had counted on all this commotion to gain my desk unobserved; but
precisely that day all was quiet as a Sunday morning.  Through the open
window I could see my schoolmates already in their places, and M.
Hamel, who was walking up and down with the terrible ruler under his
arm.  I had to open the door and enter in the midst of this complete
silence.  You can fancy how red I turned and how frightened I was.

But no, M. Hamel looked at me without any anger, and said very gently:--

"Take your place quickly, my little Franz, we were just going to begin
without you."

I climbed up on the bench and sat down at once at my desk.

Only then, a little recovered from my fright, I noticed that our master
had on his new green overcoat, his fine plaited frill, and the
embroidered black skull-cap which he put on for the inspection days or
the prize distributions.  Besides, all the class wore a curious solemn
look.  But what surprised me most of all was to see at the end of the
room, on the seats which were usually empty, a number of the village
elders seated and silent like the rest of us; old Hansor with his
cocked hat, the former mayor, the old postman, and a lot of other
people.  Everybody looked melancholy; and Hansor had brought an old
spelling book, ragged at the edges, which he held wide open on his
knees, with his big spectacles laid across the pages.

While I was wondering over all this, M. Hamel had placed himself in his
chair, and with the same grave, soft voice in which he had spoken to
me, he addressed us:--

"My children, it is the last time that I shall hold class for you.  The
order is come from Berlin that only German is to be taught in the
schools of Alsace and Lorraine from now on.  The new master arrives
tomorrow.  Today is your last lesson in French.  I ask you to be very
attentive."

These words quite upset me.  Ah, the wretches! this then was what they
had posted up at the town hall.

My last lesson in French!

And I who hardly knew how to write.  I should never learn then!  I must
stop where I was!  How I longed now for the wasted time, for the
classes when I played truant to go birds'-nesting, or to slide on the
Saar!  The books which I was used to find so wearisome, so heavy to
carry--my grammar, my history--now seemed to me old friends whom I was
very sorry to part with.  The same with M. Hamel.  The idea that he was
going away, that I should never see him again, made me forget the
punishment and the raps with the ruler.

Poor man!

It was in honor of this last class that he had put on his Sunday
clothes, and now I understood why the elders of the village had come
and seated themselves in the schoolroom.  That meant that they were
grieved not to have come oftener to the school.  It was a sort of way
of thanking our master for his forty years of good service, and of
showing their respect for their country that was being taken from them.

I had come as far as this in my reflections when I heard my name
called.  It was my turn to recite.  What would I not have given to have
been able to say right through that famous rule of the participles,
quite loud and very clear, without a stumble; but I bungled at the
first word, and stopped short, balancing myself on my bench, with
bursting heart, not daring to raise my head.  I heard M. Hamel speak to
me:--

"I shall not scold thee, my little Franz, thou must be punished enough
without that.  See how it is.  Every day one says, 'Bah!  There is time
enough.  I shall learn tomorrow.'  And then see what happens.  Ah! that
has been the great mistake of our Alsace, always to defer its lesson
until tomorrow.  Now those folk have a right to say to us, 'What! you
pretend to be French and you cannot even speak or write your language!'
In all that, my poor Franz, it is not only thou that art guilty.  We
must all bear our full share in the blame.  Your parents have not cared
enough to have you taught.  They liked better to send you to work on
the land or at the factory to gain a few more pence.  And I too, have I
nothing to reproach myself with?  Have I not often made you water my
garden instead of learning your lessons?  And when I wanted to fish for
trout, did I ever hesitate to dismiss you?"

Then from one thing to another M. Hamel began to talk to us about the
French language, saying that it was the most beautiful language in the
world, the clearest, the most forceful; that we must guard it among us
and never forget it, because when a people falls into slavery, as long
as it holds firmly to its own tongue, it holds the key of its prison.
Then he took a grammar and gave us our lesson.  I was astonished to
find how well I understood.  All he said seemed to me so easy, so easy.
I think, too, that I never listened so hard, and that he had never
taken such pains to explain.  One would have said that before going
away the poor man wished to give us all his knowledge, to ram it all
into our heads at one blow.

That lesson finished, we passed to writing.  For that day M. Hamel had
prepared for us some quite fresh copies, on which was written in
beautiful round hand: _France, Alsace, France, Alsace_.  They looked
like little banners floating round the class room on the rail of our
desks.  To see how hard every one tried!  And what a silence there was!
One could hear nothing but the scraping of the pens on the paper.  Once
some cock-chafers flew in; but nobody took any heed, not even the
little ones, who worked away at their pothooks with such enthusiasm and
conscientiousness as if feeling there was something French about them.
On the roof of the school the pigeons cooed softly, and I thought to
myself, hearing them:--

"Are they to be forced to sing in German too?"

From time to time, when I raised my eyes from the page, I saw M. Hamel
motionless in his chair, looking fixedly at everything round him, as if
he would like to carry away in his eyes all his little schoolhouse.
Think of it!  For forty years he had been in the same place, in his
court outside or with his class before him.  Only the benches and the
desks had grown polished by the constant rubbing; the walnut trees in
the courtyard had grown up, and the honeysuckle, which he had planted
himself, now garlanded the windows up to the roof.  What a heart-break
it must be for this poor man to leave all these things, and to hear his
sister coming and going in the room above, packing up their boxes, for
they were to go the next day--to leave the country forever.

All the same, what courage he had to carry out the class to the end!
After the writing we had our history lesson; then the little ones sang
all together their Ba, Be, Bi, Bo, Bu.  There at the end of the room,
old Hansor put on his spectacles, and holding his spelling-book with
both hands, he spelt the letters with them.  One could see that he too
did his best; his voice trembled with emotion, and it was so funny to
hear him that we all wanted to laugh and cry at once.  Ah!  I shall
always remember that class.

Suddenly the clock of the church rang for noon, then for the Angelus.
At the same moment, the trumpets of the Prussians returning from drill
pealed out under our windows.  M. Hamel rose from his chair, turning
very pale.  Never had he looked to me so tall.

"My friends," he said, "my friends, I--I--"  But something choked him.
He could not finish the sentence.

Then he turned to the blackboard, took a piece of chalk, and pressing
with all his might, he wrote as large as he could:--

VIVE LA FRANCE[1]


The determination of the people of Alsace and Lorraine not to submit to
the pressure of their conquerors was made evident even up to the very
day that war was declared in 1914.  Von Moltke had predicted that "It
will require no less than fifty years to wean the hearts of her lost
Provinces from France."  Notwithstanding all their efforts, the German
leaders in 1890 had said, "After nineteen years of annexation, German
influence has made no progress in Alsace."  When the German soldiers at
the beginning of the World War entered the provinces, their officers
said to them, "We are now in enemy country."

This remark seems all the more strange because the population of the
provinces was largely German.  Most of the French citizens had
emigrated to France, and all the young men had left to avoid German
military service and the possibility of being forced to fight France.
Many Germans had moved in.  Indeed if at this late day a vote had been
taken, no doubt the majority would have expressed the desire to remain
under German rule.  But Germany still considered the country as an
enemy.  She knew the whole world disapproved of her seizing the
provinces.  Therefore it did not surprise the German government to
learn that President Wilson, as one of the fourteen points to be
observed in making a permanent peace for the world, gave as the
eighth,--

"The wrong done to France by Prussia in 1871, in the matter of
Alsace-Lorraine, which has unsettled the peace of the world for nearly
fifty years should be righted."

At the foot of the Vosges mountains near the Lorraine border, the
American armies joined those of France.  There in the Lorraine sector
they fought valiantly and finally drove the enemy headlong before them
through the Argonne forest, helping to make it possible for the
peacemakers to gather again in the great council hall at Versailles
where, nearly half a century before, France had seen the first German
emperor crowned and then had been forced to sign the humiliating
agreement that later became the Treaty of Frankfort.

But now the tables were turned; this meeting was in answer to the plea
of a defeated Germany who was to agree to return her stolen property
and to make good as far as possible the wrong she had done France and
the world.

The statue of Strassburg in Paris had been stripped of the mourning
which had covered it for nearly fifty years.  Germany, as a victor, had
indeed been a hard master, not caring in the least for the interests of
the people in the conquered territories.  How different was the spirit
of the French as victors is shown in General Pétain's orders to the
French armies after the signing of the armistice.

[Illustration: Memorial Day, 1918, was celebrated abroad as well as at
home.  In Masevaux, the provisional capital of the recaptured Alsatian
territory, the American troops, headed by their band, paraded through
the streets.  In the contingent directly behind the band you can see a
delegation of American and French officers and prominent citizens.]

As a piece of military literature it ranks with the soundest and the
most eloquent ever delivered.  In the spirit of President Lincoln's
second inaugural address, "With malice towards none, with charity for
all," it emphasizes a contrast which will be remembered for
generations, to the everlasting shame of Germany and the glory of
France.  To every true American patriot it means that our armies have
been fighting with the flower and chivalry of France, not for revenge,
but for the overthrow of oppression, the freedom of the oppressed, and
for honorable and permanent peace.

To the French Armies:--

During long months you have fought.  History will record the tenacity
and fierce energy displayed during these four years by our country
which had to vanquish in order not to die.

Tomorrow, in order to better dictate peace, you are going to carry your
arms as far as the Rhine.  Into that land of Alsace-Lorraine that is so
dear to us, you will march as liberators.  You will go further: all the
way into Germany to occupy lands which are the necessary guarantees of
just reparation.

France has suffered in her ravaged fields and in her ruined villages.
The freed provinces have had to submit to intolerable, vexatious, and
odious outrages, but you are not to answer these crimes by the
commission of violences, which, under the spur of your resentment, may
seem to you legitimate.

You are to remain under discipline and to show respect to persons and
property.  You will know, after having vanquished your adversary by
force of arms, how to impress him further by the dignity of your
attitude, and the world will not know which to admire more, your
conduct in success or your heroism in fighting.

I address a fond and affectionate greeting to our dead, whose
sacrifices gave us the victory.  And I send a message of salutation,
full of sad affection, to the fathers, to the mothers, to the widows
and orphans of France, who, in these days of national joy, dry their
tears for a moment to acclaim the triumph of our arms.  I bow my head
before your magnificent flags.

Vive la France!

(Signed) PETAIN.


[1] Translated from the French of Alphonse Daudet.


  THE CALL TO ARMS IN OUR STREET

  There's a woman sobs her heart out,
  With her head against the door,
  For the man that's called to leave her,
  --God have pity on the poor!
      But it's beat, drums, beat,
      While the lads march down the street,
      And it's blow, trumpets, blow,
      Keep your tears until they go.

  There's a crowd of little children
  That march along and shout,
  For it's fine to play at soldiers
  Now their fathers are called out.
      So it's beat, drums, beat;
      And who will find them food to eat?
      And it's blow, trumpets, blow,
      Oh, it's little children know.

        *      *      *      *      *

  There's a young girl who stands laughing,
  For she thinks a war is grand,
  And it's fine to see the lads pass,
  And it's fine to hear the band.
      So it's beat, drums, beat,
      To the fall of many feet;
      And it's blow, trumpets, blow,
      God go with you where you go.

  W. M. LETTS.


  THE KAISER'S CROWN

  (VERSAILLES, JANUARY 18, 1871)

  The wind on the Thames blew icy breath,
  The wind on the Seine blew fiery death,
  The snow lay thick on tower and tree,
  The streams ran black through wold and lea;
  As I sat alone in London town
  And dreamed a dream of the Kaiser's crown.

  Holy William, that conqueror dread,
  Placed it himself on his hoary head,
  And sat on his throne with his nobles about,
  And his captains raising the wild war-shout;
  And asked himself, 'twixt a smile and a sigh,
  "Was ever a Kaiser so great as I?"

  From every jewel, from every gem
  In that imperial diadem,
  There came a voice and a whisper clear--
  I heard it, and I still can hear--
  Which said, "O Kaiser great and strong,
  God's sword is double-edged and long!"

  "Aye," said the emeralds, flashing green--
  "The fruit shall be what the seed has been--
  His realm shall reap what his hosts have sown;
  Debt and misery, tear and groan,
  Pang and sob, and grief and shame,
  And rapine and consuming flame!"

  "Aye," said the rubies, glowing red--
  "There comes new life from life-blood shed;
  And though the Goth o'erride the Gaul.
  Eternal justice rides o'er all!
  Might may be Right for its own short day,
  But Right is Might forever and aye!"

  "Aye," said the diamonds, tongued with fire;
  "Grief tracks the pathways of desire.
  Our Kaiser, on whose head we glow,
  Takes little heed of his people's woe,
  Or the deep, deep thoughts in the people's brain
  That burn and throb like healing pain.

  "Thinks not that Germany, joyous now,
  Cares naught for the crown upon his brow,
  But much for the Freedom--wooed, not won--
  That must be hers ere all is done,--
  That gleams, and floats, and shines afar,
  A glorious and approaching star!"

  "Aye!" said they all, with one accord,
  "He is the Kaiser, King, and Lord;
  But kings are small, the people great;
  And Freedom cometh, sure, though late--
  A stronger than he shall cast him down!"
  This was my dream of the Kaiser's crown.

  CHARLES MACKAY--1871.


THE QUALITY OF MERCY

There is an old saying, "Like king, like people," which means that the
king is usually not very different from the people whose executive he
is.  If this is true of kings, it surely must be true of American
presidents.  With this in mind, contrast the German Kaiser, William II,
with Abraham Lincoln.  The first constantly talked of himself and God
as ruling the world.  Boastfully declaring that he was the greatest of
all men and that he ruled by divine right, the former German emperor
brought upon the world the greatest evil that has ever befallen it
through selfish ambition for himself, his family, and for the German
autocracy; the other claiming to be a common man, a servant of men,
seeking no riches, no throne, no personal power, entirely unselfish,
gave his life at last to save a united democracy.  Shall we not say
that Lincoln served by the right of the divine qualities in him, while
the Kaiser turned the world into a hell because of the selfish aims of
his nature--aims that are just the opposite of divine?

During the American Civil War, Mrs. Bixby, a Massachusetts mother, lost
five sons.  President Lincoln wrote her the following letter:--

"I have been shown in the files of the War Department a statement of
the Adjutant General of Massachusetts that you are the mother of five
sons who have died gloriously on the field of battle.  I feel how weak
and fruitless must be any words of mine which should attempt to beguile
you from the grief of a loss so overwhelming.  But I cannot refrain
from tendering to you the consolation that may be found in the thanks
of the Republic they died to save.  I pray that our Heavenly Father may
assuage the anguish of your bereavement and leave you only the
cherished memory of the loved and lost, and the solemn pride that must
be yours to have laid so costly a sacrifice upon the altar of freedom."


During the World War, Frau Meter, a German mother, lost nine sons.
Kaiser William wrote her the following letter:--

"His Majesty the Kaiser hears that you have sacrificed nine sons in
defense of the Fatherland in the present war.  His Majesty is immensely
gratified at the fact, and in recognition is pleased to send you his
photograph, with frame and autograph signature."


Is it necessary to add a word to make one who reads the two letters
understand the difference between the two rulers and the two ideals
they represent?  God is man's highest ideal of good.  Which represents
this ideal, Lincoln or the Kaiser?  The United States or Germany?

A poet says of the Kaiser's letter:--

  "What bit of writing plainer tells
  That neither love nor mercy dwells
  Within his heart?  What picture grim
  Could better paint the soul of him?"


The Kaiser was reported to have said that no family in Germany had
escaped loss.  Perhaps he was "gratified" at this as he was at the fact
that Frau Meter had lost nine sons.  One family in Germany lost neither
father nor any one of the six adult sons,--the family of Kaiser William
II.  Certainly no other family in Germany of such a size escaped loss.
Would the Kaiser have felt equally "gratified" if his six sons had
given up their lives in fighting Germany's war of plunder and conquest?

In the last days of the war, American soldiers found upon a German
prisoner a postal card with a picture of Quentin Roosevelt lying dead
beside his airplane.  Below was printed in German the statement that
America was so short of fliers, that she had to use her presidents'
sons.  Germans could not understand that in America the presidents'
sons would be the first to offer their services and for work of the
most dangerous kind.  The sons of the Kaiser were carefully kept out of
danger.


THE REALLY INVINCIBLE ARMADA

The northern coast of Scotland is about as far north as the southern
point of Greenland and nearly all of Norway lies still nearer the pole.
Across the stretch of ocean between Scotland and Norway, a distance of
about three hundred miles, for over four years the English navy kept
guard, summer and winter.  After the United States entered the war, the
entire distance was protected also by mines.

The hardships suffered by the crews of these blockading ships during
the terrible winters in that northern latitude can never be fully
appreciated by any one who did not have to endure them and overcome
them.  This called for courage of the highest order, and the British
sailors proved again, as they have so many times in the past, that they
possessed it.

For thirty to forty days, each blockading ship kept the seas and then
returned to port for a short period of rest.  When on blockade, the men
were frequently on duty on deck for twenty hours at a time wet through
to the skin; they then went below to their berths for a few hours'
sleep, to be followed by twenty hours more of duty on deck.   "Blow
high, blow low, rain, hail, or snow, mines or submarines," said one of
them, "we have to go through it."

A suspicious vessel is sighted, headed for Norway, Denmark, or Holland.
She must be hailed, stopped, and boarded to make sure she is not
carrying cotton or rubber, or other contraband of war intended for
Germany.  No matter how rough the sea or what the temperature, this
duty must be done.  "We have just crawled into port again," wrote an
officer; "what fearful weather it has been, nothing but gales, rain and
snow, with rough seas.  Two nights out of the last four were terrible
and for the last fortnight it seems to have been one incessant gale,
sometimes from the east, and then, for a change, from the west, with
rain all the time.  The strictest lookout must be kept at all times, as
with the rough seas that are going now, a submarine's periscope takes a
bit of spotting, likewise a floating mine, the lookout hanging on to
the rigging in blinding rain, with seas drenching over them for hours
at a time, peering into the darkness."

W. Macneile Dixon gives the following vivid account of the work of the
British navy.  "So it goes, and none save these who know the sea can
form a picture or imagine at all the unrelaxing toil and strain aboard
these ocean outposts that link northern with southern climes and draw
their invisible barrier across the waters.  The sea, if you would
traffic with her, demands a vigilance such as no landsman dreams of,
but here you have men who to the vigilance of the mariner have added
that of the scout, who to the sailor's task have added the sentry's,
and on an element whose moods are in ceaseless change, today bright as
the heavens, tomorrow murky as the pit.

"To this rough duty in northern seas what greater contrast than that
other in southern, the naval bombardment of the Dardanelles?  How broad
and various the support given by the British fleet to the Allies can
thus be judged.  Separated each from the other by some thousands of
miles, the one fleet spread over leagues of ocean, kept every ship its
lonely watch, while the bombarding vessels, concentrated in imposing
strength, attempted to force a passage through a channel, the most
powerfully protected in the world.  Unsuccessfully, it is true, but in
the grand manner of the old and vanished days when war had still
something of romance, and was less the hideous thing it has become.

"We have here at least a standard by which to measure the doings of
Britain on the sea.  For remember the attempt upon the Dardanelles,
with all the strength and energy displayed in it, must be thought of as
no more than a minor episode in the work of the navy, not in any way
vital to the great issue.  It was not the first nor even the second
among the tasks allotted to it.  For while, first of all, the great
vessels under the commander-in-chief paralyzed the activities of the
whole German navy, while second in importance, the cruising patrols
held all the doors of entrance and exit to the German ports, still
another fleet of great battleships remained free to conduct so daring
an adventure as the attempt upon the Dardanelles.  Nor was this all,
for, when the unsupported fleet could do no more, another heroic
undertaking was planned upon which fortune beguilingly smiled--the
landing on the historic beaches of Gallipoli.

"Take, first, the attempt of the ships upon the Straits.  In the light
of failure no doubt it must be written down a military folly.  Ships
against forts had long been held a futile and unequal contest.  But it
was not the forts that saved Constantinople.  In the narrow gulf
leading to the Sea of Marmora no less than eight mine fields zigzagged
their venomous coils across the channel.  The strong, unchanging
current of the Dardanelles, flowing steadily south, carried with it all
floating mines dropped in the upper reaches.  Torpedo tubes ranged on
the shore discharged their missiles halfway across the Straits.  Before
warships could enter these waters a lane had to be swept and kept.
Daily, therefore, the minesweepers steamed ahead of the fleet to clear
the necessary channel.  But when thus engaged they became the target of
innumerable and hidden guns, secluded among the rocks, in gullies and
ruins and behind the shoulders of the hills, in every fold of the
landscape.  To 'spot' these shy, retiring batteries was of course
imperative, but when spotted they vanished to some other coign of
vantage, equally inconspicuous, and continued to rain fire upon the
minesweepers.  The warships poured cataracts of shell along the shores
and among the slopes, the sea trembled, and the earth quaked.  Amid the
devastating uproar the trawlers swept and grappled and destroyed the
discovered mines, but almost as fast as they removed them others were
floated down to fill their places.  Ships that ventured too far in
support of the sweepers, like the _Bouvet_ and the _Triumph_, perished;
the waterways were alleys of death.  Progress indeed was made, but
progress at a cost too heavy, and wisdom decreed the abandonment of the
original plan.

"There remained another way.  An army landed on the peninsula might
cross the narrow neck of land, demolish the batteries, and free the
minesweepers from their destructive fire.  Could that be done, it was
thought the ships might yet force a passage into the broader waters and
approach within easy range of the Turkish capital.  After long and
fatal delay the attempt was made.  What might have been easily
accomplished a month or two earlier had increased hour by hour in
difficulty.  Warned in good time of the coming danger, the Turks
converted Gallipoli, a natural fortress, into a position of
immeasurable strength.  With consuming energy, in armies of thousands,
they worked with pick and shovel till every yard of ground commanding a
landing place was trench or rifle pit or gun emplacement.  An
impenetrable thicket of barbed wire ran up and down and across the
gullies, stretched to the shore and netted the shallow waters of the
beach itself.  Then when all that man could do was done, they awaited
the British attack in full confidence that no army, regiment, or man
could land on that peninsula and live.

"No more extraordinary venture than this British landing on a naked
beach within point-blank range of the most modern firearms can be read
in history or fable.  It was a landing of troops upon a foreign shore
thousands of miles from home, hundreds from any naval base.  Without
absolute command of the sea, it could not have been so much as thought
of.  Men, guns, food, ammunition, even water had to be conveyed in
ships and disembarked under the eyes of a hostile army, warned, armed,
alert, and behind almost impregnable defenses.

"To conceive the preposterous thing was itself a kind of sublime folly;
to accomplish it, simply and plainly stated, a feat divine.  Though a
thousand pens in the future essay the task no justice in words can ever
be done to the courage and determination of the men who made good that
landing.  Put aside for a moment the indisputable fact that the whole
gigantic undertaking achieved in a sense nothing whatever.  View it
only as an exploit, a martial achievement, and it takes rank as the
most amazing feat of arms that the world has ever seen or is likely to
see.  That at least remains, and as that, and no less than that, with
the full price of human life and treasure expended, it goes upon the
record, immortal as the soul of man.  And nothing could be more fitting
than that an accomplishment which dims the glory of all previous
martial deeds, which marks the highest point of courage and resolution
reached by Britain in all her wars, should have been carried through by
British, Irish, and Colonial troops, representatives of the whole
empire under the guidance and protecting guard, of the British fleet.

"At Lemnos, for the more than Homeric endeavor on Homer's sea, lay an
assemblage of shipping such as no harbor had ever held.  Within sight
of Troy they came and went, and in the classic waters ringed round by
classic hills waited for the day, a great armada, line upon line of
black transports, crowded with the finest flower of modern youth, and
beyond them, nearer the harbor mouth, the long, projecting guns and
towering hulls of the warships.  On April 24th they sailed, while, amid
tempests of cheering, as the anchors were got and the long procession
moved away, the bands of the French vessels played them to the Great
Endeavor.  There is no need to tell again the story of the arrival, the
stupendous uproar of the bombardments, so that men dizzy with it
staggered as they walked, the slaughter in the boats and on the
bullet-torn shingle, the making good of the landings and all the
subsequent battles on that inhuman coast.  They will be told and retold
while the world lasts.  And now that all is over, the chapter closed,
the blue water rippling undisturbed which once was white with a tempest
of shrapnel, now that all is over, the armies and the ships withdrawn,
and one reflects upon the waste of human life, the gallant hearts that
beat no longer, the prodigal expenditure of thought and energy and
treasure, there should perhaps mingle with our poignant regret and
disappointment no sense of exultation.  Yet it surges upward and
overcomes all else.  For our nature is so molded that it can never
cease to admire such doings, the more perhaps if victory be denied the
doers.  And here at least on the shell-swept beaches, among the rocks
and flowery hillsides of Gallipoli, men of the British race wrote,
never to be surpassed, one of the world's deathless tales. . . .

"There are navies and navies.  The old and fighting British navy, whose
representatives keep the seas today against the king's enemies, has
been heard of once or twice during the present war, but for the most
part preserves a certain aristocratic and dignified aloofness from the
public gaze.  There is, however, another and an older navy which comes
and goes under the eyes of all, as it has done any time these three or
four centuries.  On its six or eight thousand ships, to prove that
England is Old England still, the Elizabethan mariner has come to life
again, who took war very much as he took peace, unconcernedly, in his
day's work.  Needless to say no other nation on earth could have
produced, either in numbers or quality, for no other nation possessed
these men, bred to the sea and the risks of the sea, born where the air
is salt, who, undeterred by the hazards of war, which was none of their
employ, answered their country's call as in the old Armada days.  From
the Chinese and Indian seas they came, from the Pacific and Atlantic
trade routes, from whaling, it might be, or the Newfoundland fishing
grounds or the Dogger Bank--three thousand officers and some two
hundred thousand men--to supply the Grand Fleet, to patrol the
waterways, to drag for the German mines, to carry the armies of the
Alliance, and incidentally, to show the world, what it has perhaps
forgotten, that it is not by virtue of their fighting navy that the
British are a maritime people, but by virtue of an instinct amounting
to genius, rooted in a very ancient and unmatched experience of
shipping and the sea.  The Grand Fleet is only the child of this
service which was already old before the word 'Admiralty' was first
employed, which made its own voyages and fought its own battles since
Columbus discovered America, and before even that considerable event.
These travel-worn ships formed the solid bridge across which flowed in
unbroken files the men and supplies to the British and the Allied
fronts.

"Picture a great railroad which has for its main line a track four or
five thousand miles in length, curving from Archangel in Russia to
Alexandria in Egypt, a track which touches on its way the coasts of
Norway, of the British Isles, of France, of Portugal, of Spain, of
Italy, of Greece.  Picture from this immense arc of communication
branch lines longer still, diverging to America, to Africa, to India,
knitting the ports of the world together in one vast railway system.
That railroad system, with its engines and rolling stock, its stations
and junctions, its fuel stores and offices, over which run daily and
nightly the wagon loads, of food, munitions, stores for a dozen
countries at war with the Central Powers, is a railroad of British
ships.  To dislocate, to paralyze it, Germany would willingly give a
thousand millions, for the scales would then descend in her favor and
victory indubitably be hers.  For consider the consequences of
interruption in that stream of traffic.  Britain herself on the brink
of starvation, her troops in France, in Egypt, in Salonica, cut off
without food, without ammunition, unable to return to their homes.  But
for this fleet that bridges the seas, Britain could not send or use a
single soldier anywhere save in defense of her own shores.  India,
Australia, Canada, all her dependencies would be cut off from the
Mother Country, the bonds of empire immediately dissolved.  Some little
importance then may be attached to this matter of bridging the
waterways, and some admiration extended towards the men who do it and
the manner of the doing.

"If you ask what have the Allies gained, take this evidence of a French
writer in _Le Temps_: 'If at the beginning of the war we were enabled
to complete the equipment of our army with a rapidity which has not
been one of the least surprises of the German staff, we owe it to the
fleet which has given us the mastery of the seas.  We were short of
horses.  They were brought from Argentina and Canada.  We were short of
wool and of raw materials for our metal industries.  We applied to the
stockbreeders of Australia.  Lancashire sent us her cottons and cloth,
the Black Country its steel.  And now that the consumption of meat
threatens to imperil our supplies of live stock, we are enabled to
avoid danger by the importation of frozen cargoes.  For the present
situation the mastery of the sea is not only an advantage but a
necessity.  In view of the fact that the greater part of our coal area
is invaded by the enemy the loss of the command of the sea by England
would involve more than her own capitulation.  She indeed would be
forced to capitulate through starvation.  But France also and her new
ally, Italy, being deprived of coal and, therefore, of the means of
supplying their factories and military transport, would soon be at the
mercy of their adversaries.'

"On this command of the sea rested, then, the whole military structure
of the Alliance.  It opposed to Germany and her friends not the
strength of a group of nations, each fighting its own battle, separate
and apart, but the strength of a federation so intimately knit together
as to form a single united power which has behind it the inexhaustible
resources of the world.  Thus the British navy riveted the Great
Alliance by operations on a scale hardly imaginable, operations whose
breadth and scope beggar all description, since they span the globe
itself.  As for the men and the spirit in which they work, let him sail
on a battleship, a tramp, a liner, or a trawler, the British sailor is
always the same, much as he has been since the world first took his
measure in Elizabeth's days.

  'Like the old sailors of the Queen and the Queen's old sailors.'


"A great simplicity is his quality, with something of the child's
unearthly wisdom added, and a Ulysses-like cunning in the hour of
necessity, an ascetic simplicity almost like the saints', looking
things in the face, so that to that fine carelessness everything, all
enterprises, hazards, fortunes, shipwreck, if it come, or battle, are
but the incidents of a chequered day, and his part merely to 'carry on'
in the path of routine and duty and the honorable tradition of his
calling.  Manifestly his present business is epic and the making of
epic, if he knew it; yet not knowing it he grasps things, as the epic
paladins always grasp them, by the matter-of-fact, not the heroic,
handle.  What better stories have the poets to tell than that of
Captain Parslow, a Briton if ever there was one, who, refusing to
surrender, saved his ship in a submarine attack at the cost of his own
life?  Mortally wounded as he stood on the ship, the wheel was taken
from the dying father's hand by his son, the second mate.  Knocked down
by the concussion of a shell that gallant son of a gallant father still
held to his post and steered the vessel clear.  Or have they anything
better to relate than the tale of the _Ortega_ and Captain Douglas
Kinneir, who, when pursued by a German cruiser of vastly greater speed,
called upon his engineers and stokers for a British effort and drove
his vessel under full steam, and a trifle more, into the uncharted
waters of Nelson's Straits, 'a veritable nightmare for navigators,' the
narrowest and ugliest of channels, walled by gloomy cliffs, bristling
with reefs, rocks, overfalls, and currents, through which, by the mercy
of God and his own daring, he piloted his ship in safety and gave an
example to the world of what stout hearts can do.  It is such men
Germany supposed she could intimidate!

"These are but episodes in the long roll of honor.  You will find
others in the quite peaceful occupation of minesweeping, or the search
for mines--'fishing' the navy calls it--that the impartial German
scatters to trip an enemy, perhaps a friend, an equal chance and it
matters not which, an occupation for humanitarians and seekers after a
quiet life.  On this little business alone a thousand ships and
fourteen thousand fishermen have been constantly engaged.  Take the
case of Lieutenant Parsons, who was blown up in his trawler, escaped
with his life, and undisturbed continued to command his group of
sweepers.  On that day near Christmas time they blew up eight and
dragged up six other mines, while, as incidents within the passage of
ten crowded minutes, his own ship and another were damaged by
explosions and a third destroyed!  Read that short chapter of North Sea
history and add this, for a better knowledge of these paths of peace,
from the letter of an officer: 'Things began to move rapidly now.
There was a constant stream of reports coming from aloft.  "Mine ahead,
Sir," "Mine on the port bow, Sir"; "There is one, Sir, right
alongside," and on looking over the bridge I saw a mine about two feet
below the surface and so close that we could have touched it with a
boat hook. . . .  After an hour at last sighted the minesweepers, which
had already started work.'

"One may judge of these North Sea activities from the record of a
single lieutenant of the Naval Reserve who, besides attending to other
matters, destroyed forty or fifty mines, twice drove off an inquisitive
German Taube, attacked an equally inquisitive Zeppelin, twice rescued a
British seaplane and towed it into safety; rescued in June the crew of
a torpedoed trawler, sixteen men, also the crew of a sunk fishing
vessel; in July assisted two steamers that had been mined, saving
twenty-four of the sailors; in September assisted another steamer,
rescued three men from a mined trawler, towed a disabled Dutch steamer
and assisted in rescuing the passengers; in November assisted a
Norwegian steamer, rescued twenty-four men, and also a Greek steamer
which had been torpedoed and rescued forty.

"Some day it will all be chronicled, and not the least fascinating
record will be that of men who, perhaps, never fired a shot but
enlarged their vision of the recesses of the enemy mind in other ways
and met his craft by deeper craft, or navigated African rivers, fringed
by desolate mangrove swamps, in gunboats, or hammered down the
Mediterranean in East Coast trawlers, boys on their first command, or
saw with their own eyes things they had believed to be fables.

"'We travel about 1000 miles a week, most of it in practically unknown
seas, full of uncharted coral reefs, rocks, islands, whose existence
even is unknown.  And by way of making things still more difficult we
keep meeting floating islands.

"'I always thought these things were merely yarns out of boys'
adventure books.  However, I have seen five, the largest about the size
of a football field.  They are covered with trees and palms, some of
them with ripe bananas on them.  They get torn away from the swampy
parts of the mainland by the typhoons, which are very frequent at this
time of year.'

"The story of these things cannot be written here; it will fill many
volumes.  Here an attempt has been made to sketch merely in its
broadest outlines some of the activities of British sailors during the
greatest of wars.  Whatever the future historian will say of the part
they bore he will not minimize it, for on this pivot the whole matter
turned, on this axis the great circle of the war revolved.  He will
affirm that, though in respect of numbers almost negligible compared
with the soldiers who fought in the long series of land battles, the
sailors held the central avenues, the citadel of power.

"If it be possible in a single paragraph, let us set before our eyes
the work of the British navy and its auxiliaries during these loud and
angry years.  Let us first recall the fact, that, besides the
protection of Britain and her dependencies from invasion, together with
the preservation of her overseas trade, to the navy was intrusted a
duty it has fulfilled with equal success, the protection of the coasts
of France from naval bombardment or attack--no slight service to
Britain's gallant ally.  Behind this barrier of the British fleet, she
continued to arm and munition her armies undisturbed.  Recall, too, the
French colonial armies as well as our own overseas troops, escorted to
the various seats of war--more than seven million men--the vital
communications of the Allies, north and south, secured; the supplies
and munitions--seven million tons--carried overseas; 1,250,000 horses
and mules embarked, carried and disembarked; the left wing of the
Belgian force supported in Flanders by bombardment; the Serbian army
transferred to a new zone of war; and last, if we may call last what is
really first and the mastering cause of all the rest, Germany's immense
navy fettered in her ports.  Bring also to mind that fifty or sixty of
her finest war vessels have been destroyed, besides many Austrian and
Turkish; five or six million tons of the enemy's mercantile marine
captured or driven to rust in harbor; her trade ruined, a strict
blockade of her ports established which impoverishes day by day her
industrial and fighting strength; hundreds of thousands of Germans
overseas prevented from joining her armies; her wireless and coaling
stations over all the world and her colonial empire, that ambitious and
costly fabric of her dreams, cut off from the Fatherland and brought
helplessly to the ground.

"When all this has been passed in review dwell for a moment on the
matter reversed--but for the British fleet Germany's will would now be
absolute, her emperor the master of the world."


"I KNEW YOU WOULD COME"

We are all very proud that America was permitted to have a share in the
holiest defensive war ever known.  Then let us also remember that our
share in it was largely made possible by England.  While we hesitated,
considered, debated, who was it that maintained the freedom of the seas
and kept inviolate our coasts?  The great, gallant, modest navy of
Great Britain.

Despite her desperate need of us England uttered no reproaches, and she
never seemed to doubt our final decision.  It recalls an incident which
I discussed with British officers as I stood with them in a concealed
observation post on a summit of Vimy Ridge in September.  On a dark
night a raid on the German trenches was made, and in the party were two
brothers, English lads.  The raid was successful, but when the men
returned one of the brothers was missing.  The other pleaded for
permission to return and bring him in.  The colonel refused on the
ground that the attempt would be both dangerous and fruitless.
Finally, he yielded to the lad's passionate pleading, and the young
soldier crawled out into No Man's Land, returning a half hour later
with a machine gun bullet in his shoulder, yet gently carrying the
brother, whose spirit rose to the ranks of the greater army just as
they reached the trench.  "You see, my boy," said the colonel, "it was
useless, your brother is gone, and you are wounded."  "No, colonel,"
replied the lad, "it was not useless.  I had my reward, for just as I
found him out there, he said, 'Is that you, Tom?  I knew you would
come.'"

This seems a fitting moment not only to thank God that we came in time
to be of service, but to thank England for her patience and her
confidence which have never failed.  If after entering the war we are
gratified at placing two million men quickly upon the battlefield, let
us remember that nearly 1,200,000 of them were transported in British
vessels and convoyed by British warships.

America is beginning to know England.  We honored her before; we felt
the tie of blood and speech; we were grateful to her for most of our
best.  But we never knew England as we know her now.  That first
hundred thousand that gladly flung their lives away for righteousness'
sake; the happy lads of Oxford and Cambridge who gave their joyous
youth that joy might not depart from earth; the colonials who came from
the ends of the world that the old mother might live, and that honor
and justice should not perish; these have added brighter pages to
England's records of glory.  Today one knows England better and one is
very proud to be her ally.  For the light which shines from England is
steadfast faithfulness to plighted honor, to the safety of her
children, and to those ideals of civilization of which she has for
centuries been the chief and responsible custodian.

REV. ERNEST M. STIPES, D.D.
  From _The Churchman_, N. Y.


  THE SEARCHLIGHTS

_Political morality differs from individual morality, because there is
no power above the State_.--GENERAL VON BERNHARDI.

  Shadow by shadow, stripped for fight,
    The lean black cruisers search the sea.
  Night-long their level shafts of light
    Revolve and find no enemy.
  Only they know each leaping wave
  May hide the lightning and their grave.

  And, in the land they guard so well,
    Is there no silent watch to keep?
  An age is dying; and the bell
    Rings midnight on a vaster deep;
  But over all its waves once more
  The searchlights move from shore to shore.

  And captains that we thought were dead,
    And dreamers that we thought were dumb,
  And voices that we thought were fled
    Arise and call us, and we come;
  And "Search in thine own soul," they cry,
  "For there, too, lurks thine enemy."

  Search for the foe in thine own soul,
    The sloth, the intellectual pride,
  The trivial jest that veils the goal
    For which our fathers lived and died;
  The lawless dreams, the cynic art,
  That rend thy nobler self apart.

  Not far, not far into the night
    These level swords of light can pierce:
  Yet for her faith does England fight,
    Her faith in this our universe,
  Believing Truth and Justice draw
  From founts of everlasting law.

  Therefore a Power above the State,
    The unconquerable Power, returns.
  The fire, the fire that made her great,
    Once more upon her altar burns.
  Once more, redeemed and healed and whole,
  She moves to the Eternal Goal.

  ALFRED NOYES


FIGHTING A DEPTH BOMB

All who have read of the sinking of the _Lusitania_, by a torpedo, shot
from a German U-boat, realize the terribly destructive force of this
modern weapon of war, but many do not know that the depth bomb is even
more destructive and must be handled with much greater care to be sure
that it does not explode accidentally or prematurely.  The bomb usually
contains from 100 to 500 pounds of tri-nitro-toluol, or T.N.T., as it
is usually called, the most powerful of all explosives.  The explosion
of a ship loaded with it in Halifax harbor, December 6, 1917, caused
almost as great a loss of life and property as a volcanic eruption.

When the 500 pounds of T.N.T. is exploded it changes suddenly into
nearly 80,000 cubic feet of gas.  Now this amount of gas will fill a
room 160 feet long, 25 feet wide, and 20 feet high.  When the bomb
explodes under the water the gas must find room somewhere, and with
tremendous force it pushes the water in all directions.  If a hollow
submarine is near the point of the explosion, its walls will give way
easier than the water around it and it is crushed like an empty egg
shell.

Only very swift boats should drop the depth bombs from their sterns,
for the boat must be moving at a rate of at least twenty-five miles an
hour to be sure to escape damage from the bombs dropped behind her.

John Mackenzie, the hero of this story, writes in regard to the
converted yachts used for dropping depth bombs in European waters as
follows: "Only destroyers made speed exceeding 25 knots.  There were no
converted yachts operating in European waters capable of making 25
knots.  A very few made 15 to 18 and the majority about 12.  Of course
we had to take our chances in getting away safely, although we knew
that the chances were about even.  That is, we were in about as much
danger from our depth charges as the enemy was."  His statement shows
the risks that American sailors were willing to take.

The bomb, of course, weighs over one hundred pounds.  It is made with
one end flattened, upon which it will stand, and in the early types its
accidental discharge is rendered practically impossible by a sort of
peg called a safety pin, which must be removed before the bomb is
dropped.  The use of depth bombs against the U-boats made fighting in
the German submarines so dangerous and so much to be dreaded, that it
is said, as the war drew to a close, all U-boat crews had to be forced
into service, and that none of them expected ever to return and see
their homes and friends again.

In the early days of the war the bombs were carried in cradles, and
later in racks or run-ways.  From most of the bombs the detonator,
which would fire them, was removed; but some were kept ready for
instant firing, near the stern of the ship.  The early type of bomb was
discharged by a length of wire attached to a float.  The bomb itself
sank, the float remained on the surface of the water and reeled off the
wire until the pull upon it discharged the bomb.  It can be readily
seen that the depth at which the bomb was discharged would depend upon
the length of wire attached to the float.  Imagine what might follow if
one of these bombs, set ready for discharge, should break loose from
its case in a storm at sea.

Such a terrible accident did happen on the U.S.S. Remlik.  The ship was
groaning and tossing in a very heavy sea, for a severe storm was
raging.  She gave a lurch and pitched back with so much force that a
wooden box, containing a depth bomb and securely fastened to the after
deck, suddenly broke.  The bomb rolled out of the box and began to
bound back and forth across the deck as the ship lurched and pitched
from side to side.

The crew seemed stunned, and no orders were issued for concerted
action.  The frightfulness of the situation was greatly increased when
it was observed that the safety pin had dropped out.  All expected the
next time the bomb struck with force against the rail that the float
section would be released and reel off enough wire to fire the
detonator and utterly destroy the ship and all aboard.

But Chief Boatswain's Mate, John Mackenzie of the Naval Reserve Fleet,
needed no orders.  He saw what should be done and did not wait for some
one to order him to do it.  He could not pick up the bomb in his arms
and throw it overboard, for it weighed too much, and even if he could
this might be the worst thing to do.  The ship was laboring and barely
holding her own with no headway, although the engines were turning over
for 8 knots, and the bomb would no doubt have exploded directly under
the ship had it gone overboard.

Mackenzie had a plan, and the first step in it was to stop the bomb.
He threw himself in front of it and tried to hold it by his arms and
the weight of his body, but the weight and the momentum of the moving
bomb were too great and he was pushed aside; but he had stopped its
movement somewhat so that when it struck the rail on the other side of
the deck it did not explode.  He jumped for it as it bounded back from
the rail and almost stopped it, but it seemed to those looking on that
the hundreds of pounds of metal and explosives would roll over his body
and seriously injure him.  He escaped this, however, and slowed down
the movement of the heavy bomb to such an extent that near the opposite
rail he was able to grasp it, lying with feet and hands braced in the
grating of the gun platform.  Then to be sure that it did not escape
him until help came, he turned it upright upon its flattened end and
sat down upon the most destructive bomb used in war, on the deck, of a
ship lurching at sea in a severe storm.

Then other members of the crew that had been watching him as if dazed
ran to his assistance, and the bomb was soon placed in safety.

The commanding officer of the _Remlik_ recommended that Chief
Boatswain's Mate, John Mackenzie, be awarded the Medal of Honor.  The
report to the Secretary of the Navy was in part as follows:--

"Mackenzie in acting as he did, exposed his life and prevented a
serious accident to the ship and the probable loss of the ship and the
entire crew.  Had this depth charge exploded on the quarterdeck, with
the sea and the wind that existed at the time, there is no doubt that
the ship would have been lost."


Mackenzie was awarded by the Navy Department the Medal of Honor, and a
gratuity of one hundred dollars; but these awards are of little value
compared with the greater reward which comes to him in the admiration
and respect of all who read or hear the story of his heroic deed.


THE SECOND LINE OF DEFENSE

In Norwich, England, stands a memorial which will forever be visited
and prized by travelers from every part of the world, and especially by
the people of England and of Belgium.  It is the statue erected to
Edith Cavell, the British nurse who was wrongfully condemned to death
for helping innocent women and children to escape from the terrible
cruelties of the invading Huns.  That her fine courage equals the
bravery of any soldier is indicated in the sculptor's work itself.  It
represents a soldier of the Allies looking up toward her strong, kindly
face, raising in his right hand a laurel wreath to place at one side of
her, opposite the one already hung at the other.

The statue is a symbol of the glorious deeds and the beautiful spirit
of the women of France, England, and America, during the awful
conflict.  It is difficult to realize the complete revolution which
took place in the lives of the women of the world when they awakened to
the need for their services in connection with the war.

In forsaken schoolhouses and barns, as well as in quickly erected
hospitals, near the firing lines, they moved quietly in and out among
the patients, administering needed medicines, bringing cheer and
comfort to the long line of wounded soldiers.  At unexpected moments
the hospital was bombarded, making it necessary for them hurriedly to
transfer their patients to some other building.  During a bombardment
of a large theater which had been turned into a hospital, several
patients were too ill to be moved.  So some of the nurses, wearing
steel helmets, remained to care for these men while shells burst all
around them.

[Illustration: This memorial to the memory of Edith Cavell was unveiled
by Queen Alexandra in Norwich, England, at the opening of the Nurse
Cavell Memorial Home.  The statue and the home for district nurses are
constant reminders of the nurse, a brave victim of Prussian despotism,
who lived a patriot and died a martyr.]

Certain dressing stations in which the nurses cared for the most
seriously wounded were so near the firing line that the men could be
carried to them.  Summoned, perhaps by a Red Cross dog, a nurse at
times ventured out under the enemy's fire.  In the fields or woods lay
a badly injured man who must have constant care until darkness would
permit bringing him in unseen by the enemy, for the Huns spared neither
the wounded nor the Red Cross workers.

In the operating rooms, in hospital kitchens, on hospital trains and
ships, the nurses gave no thought for their own safety but worked
untiringly to save the wounded.

But even thousands of miles from the firing line, women were saving
lives and winning the victory.  There were the girls who assisted the
police in the places of the men gone to fight.  Gloriously they served
during many an air raid over France and England, ready in the face of
danger to do their full duty,--like those of Paris, who behaved so
bravely that some one suggested they be mentioned in the Orders of the
Day.  But the commanding officer's reply only reflected the daring
spirit of the girls themselves.  "No," he said, "we never mention
soldiers in orders for doing their duty."

There were the women and girls who went to work in fireproof overalls,
stopping before entering the shop to be inspected and to give up all
jewelry, steel hairpins, and anything else which might cause an
explosion of the munitions among which they worked.  They might be seen
often with their hair hanging in braids as they hurried to and fro
between the different sheds, over the narrow wooden platforms, raised
from the ground to prevent them from carrying in on the soles of their
shoes any particles of grit, iron, steel, or glass, that might cause a
spark among the high explosives.  So well did these women work that
near the end of the war in many places more shells were made in two
weeks than previously could be made in a year.  The many women,
willingly risking their lives in these shops, made this work possible.
In England alone, where seventy-five out of every hundred men stepped
out to fight, seventy-five out of a hundred women and girls left their
homes and stepped in to work or to serve.

More tiresome were the long hours spent at machines in large closed
factories where army blankets and clothing of all sorts were turned out
for the use of the fighting men.

Out on the farms the girls could be seen in overalls, plowing furrows
in long, sloping fields, and planting potatoes and vegetables to help
feed the world.  With hard work and small pay, they too helped win the
victory.  One girl tells how on arriving home from work one night, she
found at the house a letter from a friend.

"How jolly it must be," she wrote, "and how you must be enjoying it!"
That day had been particularly cold and wet and windy, but the girls
had worked right through it.  When they had finished, they were damp
and weary and only glad that it was time for tea.  "I don't feel a bit
patriotic," said the girl, "and I don't care if I never plant another
potato."  She was an artist and found farm life very different from
sitting in a quiet studio.  But planting potatoes was more helpful to
her country and so the next morning found her up early and ready to
work again.

Like this artist many women, unused to common labor, gladly left lives
of ease and good times to help win the war even by drudgery.  In the
case of English women this was particularly true, and would have been
true in America if the war had continued much longer.  As it was, the
women of America responded to the call of service with the same spirit
which sent millions of men to the colors.  Besides those positions
which, left open by men going into war, were filled by women, countless
services were performed by them to add to the comfort and happiness of
soldiers, sailors, and marines.  Knitted articles were made for the
needy in the service, and for the destitute in the ravaged war
countries.  Not a canteen in the whole United States but has seen the
untiring devotion of weary workers who whole-heartedly sacrificed their
time and household comforts.  In Europe the Salvation Army "lassies"
worked in the trenches themselves.  Hospitals everywhere have been made
more grateful sanctuaries by the tender reassurance of the American
nurse.  As if by one voice the fighters of the nation unite in praise
and appreciation of all the women who by their help made the second
line of defense.

[Illustration: Somewhere in France these Salvation Army "lassies" are
baking pies and "doughnuts for the doughboys."  Their kitchen is set up
in a part of the trenches under constant fire from the German guns.
You can see their "box respirators," or gas-masks, worn at the "alert"
position.  Home cooking for the soldiers made home itself seem not so
far away after all!]


U. S. DESTROYER _OSMOND C. INGRAM_

If you were standing on the deck of a patrol boat watching for
submarines and, looking down at the water, suddenly perceived a torpedo
coming directly toward you and knew it would strike the boat beneath
your feet in a few seconds, what would you do?

A bullet or a cannon ball moves so swiftly that it is not seen.  If it
is coming straight for you, you only know your danger when it is over
and you lie wounded; or your friends know it when it is too late.  But
a moving torpedo can be seen, and for some seconds one may stand and
know a terrible explosion and probable death are approaching him.

On October 14, 1917, the United States destroyer _Cassin_ was on duty
looking for German submarines.  After many hours scouting, a U-boat was
discovered five or six miles away, and the _Cassin_ made all speed in
its direction; but the U-boat perceived its danger and submerged.  The
_Cassin_ cruised around for some time, for the U-boat could not be far
away and might come to the surface at any moment; but no periscope was
to be seen.  The patrol boat kept steaming in zigzag lines so that the
U-boat would find it more difficult to strike her with a torpedo.

Before an hour had passed, the commander of the _Cassin_ discovered the
wake of a torpedo, a moving line of white on the surface of the ocean,
and knew that in a few seconds the torpedo would strike his boat
amidships.  To avoid this he ordered full steam ahead, hoping perhaps
to avoid being struck at all, and at least not amidships.  But he had
not seen the torpedo soon enough and it was quickly apparent that it
would strike the _Cassin_ on the side and near the stern.

Ordinarily this would be less dangerous than if it struck amidships
where it would very likely disable the engines and possibly explode the
boilers, but in the case of the _Cassin_, avoiding one danger only
brought another and a more serious one, for piled on the deck near the
stern were boxes of high explosives which would be set off by the
striking of the torpedo.

Some of the crew had been watching the approach of the torpedo.  Most
of them were forward and would escape the terrible danger at the stern
of the boat.

But Gunner's Mate, O. C. Ingram, did not hurry forward; he rushed aft
and began to throw overboard the boxes of explosives.  He did not stop
to see how near the torpedo had come and how much time he had; he
simply set to work to save the boat and her crew.  Just as he hurled
the last box from his hand, the torpedo struck the _Cassin_ with a
terrible explosion, throwing Ingram far overboard into the sea.

The torpedo had struck the destroyer near the stern, and blew off about
thirty feet of the boat.  It disabled one of the engines, and the
steering gear, but the after bulkhead kept out the water and the
destroyer was later towed to port and repaired.

Had the explosives not been thrown overboard, the _Cassin_ would
doubtless have been sunk and few if any of her crew saved.  As it was,
Gunner's Mate Ingram was the only one to lose his life, for he drowned
before help was able to reach him.

The _Cassin_ did not attempt, even after this experience, to get to
safety, but remained watching for the reappearance of the submarine.
When the U-boat finally came to the surface, she was greeted with
several shots from the _Cassin_ and suddenly sank, or submerged.  It is
thought she was damaged and possibly destroyed.

The Secretary of the Navy, Josephus Daniels, sent the following letter
to the commander, the other officers, and the crew of the _Cassin_:--

"The Department has received the report of the action between the U. S.
S. _Cassin_ and a German submarine on October 15, 1917, and notes with
gratification the highly commendable conduct of yourself, the other
officers, and the crew of the _Cassin_.  The manner in which the
_Cassin_ was kept under way with her steering-gear disabled and
practically at the mercy of the submarine, and opened fire on her when
she appeared, is well worthy of the best traditions of the Navy."

[Illustration: The U. S. Destroyer _Fanning_ with depth bombs stored in
run-ways on the after deck.  These may be instantly released and
dropped over the stern.  (Refer to page 152.) The high explosives
stored in crates on the after deck of the _Cassin_ were in the same
general location as the above, but not primed for action.]

Sometime later Secretary Daniels told the following story of the naming
of a new and very fast destroyer:--

"Awhile ago I was asked to give a name to a new destroyer.  I took up
first the names of the great admirals, and then the great captains, and
all the American heroes of the sea, and all were worthy.  And then I
thought of Osmond C. Ingram, second-class gunner's mate on the
destroyer _Cassin_.  I thought of the night when he was on watch and
saw a U-boat's torpedo headed for his ship.  He was standing near the
place where the high explosives were stored, and the torpedo was headed
for that spot.  In a flash he was engaged in hurling overboard those
deadly explosives, which would have destroyed the ship if they remained
on board, and he managed to get rid of enough of them to save the lives
of all the officers and sailors on board, but he lost his own life.  So
I named the newest and finest addition to the American navy the _Osmond
C. Ingram_."


JOYCE KILMER

The first poet and author in the American army to give up his life for
the cause of freedom was Joyce Kilmer.  Like Alan Seeger, another
American poet who fell fighting in the Foreign Legion of France, Joyce
Kilmer greatly loved life.  He loved the flowers and birds and trees.
Probably his finest poem is one which he wrote about trees.  He loved
the people around him, impatient only with those who did not love and
make the most of the life that God had given them.  He loved children,
and simple everyday things, as he shows in one of his latest poems,
"The Snowman in the Yard."

  "But I have something no architect
    or gardener ever made,
  A thing that is shaped by the busy touch
    of little mittened hands;
  And the Judge would give up his lovely estate,
    where the level snow is laid,
  For the tiny house with the trampled yard,
    the yard where the snowman stands."


After his graduation from Columbia University in 1908, he became a
teacher of Latin in the high school at Morristown, New Jersey, his home
state.  He seemed but a lad himself,--tall, with stern, dark eyes, a
clear, musical voice, and a winning smile.  Jovial, gracious, and
gentlemanly in his manners, he made many friends both in his home state
and in New York, where he soon took his wife and little son to live.

In college he had written some poetry.  In New York he hoped to write
more.  He began his career there as editor of a journal for horsemen.
But he did not remain at this work long.  He became in turn a salesman
in a large New York book store, an assistant editor, and then an
editor.  When the war broke out, he was a member of the staff of the
_New York Times_.  He had written several poems, and prose articles for
popular magazines and periodicals.  At the age of twenty-five he was
widely known, enough of a celebrity, in fact, to have his name appear
in "Who's Who in America."

He liked adventure, as does any American youth.  He was always glad to
visit a friend who had met with an accident or any other unusual
circumstance.  He found himself in what he considered an interesting
and entertaining predicament when in New York he was struck by a train
and had to be carried to a hospital.  "Such things did not happen every
day," he said, and he took the experience in good humor.

Soon after landing in France, he wrote a description of a long march
made by his regiment.  At the end of the march, the men were too weary
even to spread out their blankets, but dropped down to rest on the
floor of the loft in the French peasant home where they were billeted
for the night.  But even that experience was new and interesting.
Later, when the men were somewhat rested, they missed one of their
mates, and on going down stairs found him with his frozen feet in a tub
of cold water furnished him by the peasant woman.  The little girl of
the home was on his knees, and the two boys were standing beside
him--as Joyce Kilmer described them--"_envying_ him" his frozen feet.

He also found interesting work at the front, in connection with the
trench newspaper, _The Stars and Stripes_.

At the dawn of a dark and misty Sunday morning in July, his regiment
was ordered to charge across the river Ourcq and take the hill beyond,
from where the enemy's machine guns were pouring down a withering rain
of bullets.  His own battalion, he learned, was not to be in the lead.
So he promptly asked and obtained permission to join the leading
battalion.

Across the river they charged and for five days fought for the heights.
But Joyce Kilmer was not there to witness the victory.

In the fiercest battles, the bravest officers often go before and lead
their men into the fight, thus encouraging them more than if following
them or charging at their side.  The fight beyond the Ourcq was a
fierce one, and the chief officer dashed on ahead of his men.  Touching
elbows with him was Sergeant Kilmer.  When the battalion adjutant was
killed, he served, although without a commission, as a sort of aid to
the battalion commander.

To the very heights he rushed, and threw himself down at a little ridge
where he might peer over and seek out the hidden enemy machine gun
battery.  It was there, lying as if still scouting, that his comrades
found him, so like his living self that they did not at first think him
dead.

They buried him at the edge of a little wood, called the Wood of the
Burned Bridge, close to the rippling waters of the Ourcq, and at the
foot of the unforgetable hill.

Deep and keen was the loss felt by his comrades and his officers.  From
their pockets many of the men drew forth verses written by the poet
about some incident in the trenches or some comrade who had been lost.

One of the poems to a lost soldier was read over the poet's grave.  A
refrain, supposed to be sounded by the bugle, is repeated through the
verses, and as these lines were read the sad notes of "taps" sounded
faintly from the grove.  On his little wooden cross were written the
simple words: "Sergeant Joyce Kilmer," then his company and regiment,
and "Killed in Action, July 30, 1918."

But Joyce Kilmer and his verses will long live in the minds and hearts,
not only of his comrades in battle, but of all Americans.

Such a buoyant, happy life does not seem to have passed away.  Some
beautiful tributes to him, written by other American poets, express
this thought.

One friend at the news of Kilmer's death was reminded of his poem,
"Main Street."

  "God be thanked for the Milky Way that runs across the sky;
  That is the path my feet would tread whenever I have to die.
  Some folks call it a Silver Sword, and some a Pearly Crown,
  But the only thing I think it is, is Main Street, Heaventown."


Then the friend touchingly added, "Perhaps Seeger and Kilmer are
strolling down Main Street together tonight."

*******************

  TREES

  I think that I shall never see
  A poem lovely as a tree.

  A tree whose hungry mouth is prest
  Against the earth's sweet flowing breast;

  A tree that looks at God all day,
  And lifts her leafy arms to pray;

  A tree that may in summer wear
  A nest of robins in her hair;

  Upon whose bosom snow has lain;
  Who intimately lives with rain.

  Poems are made by fools like me,
  But only God can make a tree.

  JOYCE KILMER.


BLOCKING THE CHANNEL

Bruges is an important city of Belgium made familiar to American boys
and girls by Longfellow's beautiful poem, "The Belfry of Bruges."  He
describes what "the belfry old and brown" has seen.

  "Till the bell of Ghent responded o'er lagoon and dike of sand,
  'I am Roland!  I am Roland! there is victory in the land.'"

What a terrible story the historian or poet will have to tell who
narrates what the belfry of Bruges has seen during the fifty-two months
of the World War, a year, we may call it, in which each week had become
a month.

The port of Bruges, called Zeebrugge or Bruges on the Sea, lies not far
from the city, at the mouth of a maritime canal.  The entrance to this
canal was protected by a great crescent-shaped mole thirty feet high
inclosing the harbor.

The Germans in the shipbuilding yards at Antwerp built small warships
and submarines and sent them over the canals across Belgium to Ostend
and Zeebrugge, from where they went out to destroy Allied shipping.

The English determined to put an end to this and on the night of April
22, 1918, an expedition was sent to block the channel and to destroy as
far as possible the mole which protected it.  It has been said that it
was "one of the most thrilling and picturesque of the naval operations
of the war.  To Americans it recalled Hobson's exploit with the
Merrimack, at Santiago, while to Englishmen it brought back memories of
Sir Francis Drake and his fire ships in the harbor of Cadiz."  The
fight lasted only an hour but the British lost 588 men, for the channel
and the mole were so fully guarded with searchlights, machine guns, and
artillery that such an attempt was looked upon by the Germans as
foolhardy and doomed to absolute failure.

A British cruiser, the _Vindictive_, in charge of Commander Alfred F.
B. Carpenter, with two ferryboats, the _Daffodil_ and the _Iris_, were
to escort six obsolete British cruisers filled with concrete and sand
to the harbor mouths at Ostend and Zeebrugge and to sink them there in
the channels.  The ferryboats carried sailors and marines who were to
attack and destroy the mole.  It was thought that this attack would
divert the attention of the defenders and make it easier to sink the
concrete laden cruisers in the channel.  Two old and useless
submarines, filled with explosives, were to be blown up against the
viaduct joining the mole and the shore.

A heavy protective curtain of smoke was essential to the success of the
plan.  Commander Brock, who was killed during the action, planned the
smoke screen and carried it out so successfully that the _Vindictive_
was able to get almost to the mole before being discovered.  At Ostend
the wind blew from such a direction that the smoke screen did not hide
the boats and the attack there on that night was for that reason a
failure.  It succeeded better later, on May 9, when the battered
_Vindictive_ was sunk in the channel.

The following is the story of the action at Zeebrugge taken from the
official report of the British Admiralty:--

"The night was overcast and there was a drifting haze.  Down the coast
a great searchlight swung its beam to and fro in the small wind and
short sea.  From the _Vindictive's_ bridge, as she headed in toward the
mole, with the faithful ferryboats at her heels, there was scarcely a
glimmer of light to be seen shoreward.  Ahead, as she drove through the
water, rolled the smoke screen, her cloak of invisibility, wrapped
about her by small craft.  This was the device of Wing Commander Brock,
without which, acknowledges the Admiral in command, the operation could
not have been conducted.

"A northeast wind moved the volume of it shoreward ahead of the ships.
Beyond it, was the distant town, its defenders unsuspicious.  It was
not until the _Vindictive_, with blue-jackets and marines standing
ready for landing, was close upon the mole that the wind lulled and
came away again from the southeast, sweeping back the smoke screen and
laying her bare to eyes that looked seaward.

"There was a moment immediately afterward when it seemed to those on
the ships as if the dim, coast-hidden harbor exploded into light.  A
star shell soared aloft, then a score of star shells.  The wavering
beams of the searchlights swung around and settled into a glare.  A
wild fire of gun flashes leaped against the sky, strings of luminous
green beads shot aloft, hung and sank.  The darkness of the night was
supplemented by a nightmare daylight of battle-fired guns and machine
guns along the mole.  The batteries ashore awoke to life.

"It was in a gale of shelling that the _Vindictive_ laid her nose
against the thirty-foot high concrete side of the mole, let go her
anchor and signaled to the _Daffodil_ to shove her stern in.

"The _Iris_ went ahead and endeavored to get alongside likewise.  The
fire was intense, while the ships plunged and rolled beside the mole in
the seas, the _Vindictive_ with her greater draught jarring against the
foundations of the mole with every lunge.  They were swept diagonally
by machine-gun fire from both ends of the mole and by the heavy
batteries on shore.

"Commander (now Captain) Carpenter commanded the _Vindictive_ from the
open bridge until her stern was laid in, when he took up his position
in the flame thrower hut on the port side.  It is marvelous that any
occupant should have survived a minute in this hut, so riddled and
shattered is it.

"The officers of the _Iris_, which was in trouble ahead of the
_Vindictive_, describe Captain Carpenter as handling her like a picket
boat.  The _Vindictive_ was fitted along her port side with a high
false deck, from which ran eighteen brows or gangways by which the
storming and demolition parties were to land.

"The men gathered in readiness on the main lower decks, while Colonel
Elliott, who was to lead the marines waited on the false deck just
abaft of the bridge.  Captain Halahan, who commanded the blue-jackets,
was amidships.  The gangways were lowered, and they scraped and
rebounded upon the high parapet of the mole as the _Vindictive_ rolled
in the seaway.

"The word for the assault had not yet been given when both leaders were
killed, Colonel Elliott by a shell and Captain Halahan by machine-gun
fire which swept the decks.  The same shell that killed Colonel Elliott
also did fearful execution in the forward Stokes mortar battery.  The
men were magnificent; every officer bears the same testimony.

"The mere landing on the mole was a perilous business.  It involved a
passage across the crashing and splintering gangways, a drop over the
parapet into the field of fire of the German machine guns which swept
its length, and a further drop of some sixteen feet to the surface of
the mole itself.  Many were killed and more wounded as they crowded up
the gangways, but nothing hindered the orderly and speedy landing by
every gangway.

"Lieutenant H. T. C. Walker had his arm shot away by shell on the upper
deck, and lay in darkness while the storming parties trod him under.
He was recognized and dragged aside by the commander.  He raised his
remaining arm in greetings.  'Good luck to you,' he called as the rest
of the stormers hastened by.  'Good luck.'

"The lower deck was a shambles as the commander made the rounds of the
ship, yet those wounded and dying raised themselves to cheer as he made
his tour. . . .

"The _Iris_ had troubles of her own.  Her first attempts to make fast
to the mole ahead of the _Vindictive_ failed, as her grapnels were not
large enough to span the parapet.  Two officers, Lieutenant Commander
Bradford and Lieutenant Hawkins, climbed ashore and sat astride the
parapet trying to make the grapnels fast till each was killed and fell
down between the ship and the wall.  Commander Valentine Gibbs had both
legs shot away and died next morning.  Lieutenant Spencer though
wounded, took command and refused to be relieved.

"The _Iris_ was obliged at last to change her position and fall in
astern of the _Vindictive_, and suffered very heavily from fire.  A
single big shell plunged through the upper deck and burst below at a
point where fifty-six marines were waiting for the order to go to the
gangways.  Forty-nine were killed.  The remaining seven were wounded.
Another shell in the wardroom, which was serving as a sick bay, killed
four officers and twenty-six men.  Her total casualties were eight
officers and sixty-nine men killed, and three officers and 103 men
wounded.

"Storming and demolition parties upon the mole met with no resistance
from the Germans other than intense and unremitting fire.  One after
another buildings burst into flame or split and crumbled as dynamite
went off.  A bombing party working up toward the mole extension in
search of the enemy destroyed several machine-gun emplacements, but not
a single prisoner rewarded them.  It appears that upon the approach of
the ships and with the opening of fire the enemy simply retired and
contented themselves with bringing machine guns to the short end of the
mole."

[Illustration: One of the camouflaged guns of the German shore
batteries which raked with fire the _Vindictive_, the _Daffodil_, and
the _Iris_ when they grappled with the mole, during the night raid.
The outer end of this mole, where a viaduct joins the mole to the
shore, was destroyed for a distance of sixty to one hundred feet by an
old British submarine, loaded with high explosives, running into the
channel and blowing itself up at the entrance.]

The story of the three block ships that were to be sunk in the channel
at Zeebrugge, also from the report of the British Admiralty, is as
follows:--

"The _Thetis_ came first, steaming into a tornado of shells from great
batteries ashore.  All her crew, save a remnant who remained to steam
her in and sink her, already had been taken off her by a ubiquitous
motor launch, but the remnant spared hands enough to keep her four guns
going.  It was hers to show the road to the _Intrepid_ and the
_Iphigenia_, which followed.  She cleared a string of armed barges
which defends the channel from the tip of the mole, but had the ill
fortune to foul one of her propellers upon a net defense which flanks
it on the shore side.

"The propeller gathered in the net, and it rendered her practically
unmanageable.  Shore batteries found her and pounded her unremittingly.
She bumped into the bank, edged off, and found herself in the channel
again still some hundreds of yards from the mouth of the canal in
practically a sinking condition.  As she lay she signaled invaluable
directions to others, and her commander, R. S. Sneyed, also accordingly
blew charges and sank her.  Motor launches under Lieutenant Littleton
raced alongside and took off her crew.  Her losses were five killed and
five wounded.

"The _Intrepid_, smoking like a volcano and with all her guns blazing,
followed.  Her motor launch failed to get alongside outside the harbor,
and she had men enough for anything.  Straight into the canal she
steered, her smoke blowing back from her into the _Iphigenia's_ eyes,
so that the latter was blinded, and, going a little wild, rammed a
dredger, with her barge moored beside it, which lay at the western arm
of the canal.  She was not clear, though, and entered the canal pushing
the barge before her.  It was then that a shell hit the steam
connections of her whistle, and the escape of the steam which followed
drove off some of the smoke and let her see what she was doing.

"Lieutenant Stuart Bonham Carter, commanding the _Intrepid_, placed the
nose of his ship neatly on the mud of the western bank, ordered his
crew away, and blew up his ship by switches in the chart room.  Four
dull bumps were all that could be heard, and immediately afterward
there arrived on deck the engineer, who had been in the engine room
during the explosion, and reported that all was as it should be.

"Lieutenant E. W. Bullyard Leake, commanding the _Iphigenia_, beached
her according to arrangements on the eastern side, blew her up, saw her
drop nicely across the canal, and left her with her engines still
going, to hold her in position till she should have bedded well down on
the bottom.  According to the latest reports from air observation, two
old ships, with their holds full of concrete, are lying across the
canal in a V position, and it is probable that the work they set out to
do has been accomplished and that the canal is effectively blocked.  A
motor launch, under Lieutenant P. T. Deane, had followed them in to
bring away the crews and waited further up the canal toward the mouth
against the western bank.

"Lieutenant Bonham Carter, having sent away his boats, was reduced to a
Carley float, an apparatus like an exaggerated life-buoy, with the
floor of a grating.  Upon contact with the water it ignited a calcium
flare and he was adrift in the uncanny illumination with a German
machine gun a few hundred yards away giving him its undivided
attention.  What saved him was possibly the fact that the defunct
_Intrepid_ still was emitting huge clouds of smoke which it had been
worth nobody's while to turn.  He managed to catch a rope, as the motor
launch started, and was towed for a while till he was observed and
taken on board."


A short time after the attack, the Kaiser visited Zeebrugge and gave
out the statement that practically no damage had been done and that the
channel was still clear.  But then an Allied airplane flew over the
channel and the mole and secured photographs showing two cruisers sunk
in the channel just as had been planned, and effectively blocking it,
and also a break in the viaduct sixty to one hundred feet in length.
"Only another German lie, this time indorsed by the Kaiser," declared
the British papers.  A leading German daily said, however, "It would be
only foolishness to deny that the British naval forces scored a great
success.  By a stroke, crazy in its audacity, they penetrated one of
the most important strongholds over which the German flag floats."


THE FLEET THAT LOST ITS SOUL

Sailors and especially fighters on the sea have in all ages possessed
the noblest and bravest of souls and the finest morale.  This is why
the British sailors have felt so bitter about the atrocities committed
by the German U-boats.  In case a ship is sinking, the members of the
crew do not expect to leave her until all the passengers are in the
lifeboats, and the captain is always the last man to leave.  Sometimes
he prefers to go down with his ship so that it may never be said that
his soul failed him.  For sea fighters in U-boats to disregard this
traditional chivalry of the sea and to sink merchant ships without
warning and without assuring the passengers of their safety seemed to
the sailors of other lands like giving up the high ideals that had
grown out of their dangerous calling--like poisoning their souls with
deceit and violence.

Most naval officers would rather die than surrender.  Captain Lawrence,
fighting for America in the war of 1812, wounded and dying, cried to
his men, "Don't give up the ship."  To fight rather than to surrender
even in the face of the greatest odds has been for centuries the idea
of sea fighters.

Admiral Cervera at Santiago in 1898 knew he was outmatched by the
American fleet waiting for him off the harbor; but he brought his ships
out and made a brave fight in trying to escape.  Lieutenant Hobson knew
there were terrible odds against him when he and his little company
went in under the guns of the forts and attempted to block the channel.
In the Russo-Japanese War, the Russians in the Sea of Japan with their
ships foul and barnacled after a voyage of thousands of miles were not
afraid to face certain defeat.  Brave men do not lose their souls in
the face of tremendous odds or even in the face of sure death.

Did the soul of Private George Dilboy of Somerville, Massachusetts,
faint in him when he charged alone the German machine gun?  He had come
with his platoon up a little rise to a railroad track at the top, when
suddenly an enemy machine gun opened fire upon them at about one
hundred yards distance.  Dilboy did not throw himself on the ground to
escape the bullets.  No, he raised his rifle to his shoulder and
standing in plain sight of the German gunners, began to fire at them.
As they were partially hidden he was not sure of his aim.  So he ran
down the embankment and across a wheat field towards them.  The machine
gun was immediately turned upon him and before he reached it, he fell
with one leg nearly severed above the knee by the rain of lead and with
several bullets through his body.  Half crouched on the only knee left
him, he aimed at the gunners one after another until he had killed or
dispersed them all, and then fainted and died.  He had advanced in the
face of certain death, but had saved the lives of many of his comrades,
for the gun had to be captured to gain their objective.

The brute is usually a coward at heart.  The sinking of unarmed
merchant ships and of hospital ships by the German U-boats, the bombing
of undefended towns and hospitals, and the firing upon Red Cross
workers were acts of brutes and cowards.  So it is not strange that the
great German fleet which all through the war, except at the battle of
Jutland, had hidden in security behind the guns of Heligoland and the
defenses of the Kiel Canal lost its soul when, as a last hope, it was
ordered out to fight the Allied fleet.  The German sailors knew the
battle would really be a gigantic sacrifice and refused to fight it for
the Fatherland.

There is always a very slight chance that through accident or some
peculiar combination of unusual circumstances, a battle even against
very great odds may be won.  The German fleet had this chance--a very,
very slight one, to be sure; and did not take it.  The fleet had lost
its soul.

Two weeks later, after the signing of the armistice, the German fleet
surrendered to the Allies.  It was the greatest, the most amazing, and
some add, the most shameful surrender in the naval history of the
world.  It was also the greatest concentration of sea power and the
most magnificent spectacle old ocean has ever witnessed.

The surrender was demanded by the terms of the armistice and was made
on November 21, according to the program laid down by the commander of
the British fleet.  It was not the surrender of a foe beaten in a fair
battle and yet recognized by his enemies as worthy of his steel.  It
was the surrender of a foe who declined to fight with the strong and
the armed, but who had taken every opportunity to kill the weak and the
defenseless.  The British sailors could not forget, and they say they
never will, the barbarous treatment of their brothers in the merchant
marine by the German U-boats.  There was therefore none of the sympathy
and the fraternization that usually has accompanied a great surrender
at sea.

On the afternoon of the day before the surrender the following notice
was posted on all the Allied ships:--

"Let it be impressed on all--officers and men--that a state of war
exists during the armistice.  Their relations with officers and men of
the German navy with whom they may now be brought in contact are to be
strictly of a formal character in dealing with the late enemy, while
courteous.

"It is obligatory that the methods by which they waged war must not be
forgotten.  No international compliments are to be paid, and all
conversation is forbidden except in regard to the immediate business to
be transacted.

"If it should be necessary to provide food for the German officers and
men, they should not be entertained, but it should be served to them in
a place specifically set.  If it should be necessary to accept food
from the Germans, the request is made that it be similarly served."

[Illustration: The British Cruiser _Curacoa_, Admiral Tyrwhitt's
flagship, leading out one column of British cruisers at the surrender
of the German navy.  Overhead is a captive or "kite" balloon.  As used
in naval work, it is attached to an anchored or moving ship by a small
steel cable, by which it is regulated for purposes of observation.  The
tubular surfaces which give the balloon the appearance of an elephant's
head are not filled with hydrogen gas, but are inflated by the winds at
high altitudes, thus keeping the balloon relatively steady like a kite
with a long tail.  The stationary balloon is such a good target for
anti-aircraft guns that the observers are supplied with parachutes, the
type of which appears on page 341.]

Later, notices were posted giving the hour when they were to meet the
Germans and requiring every precaution to be taken against treachery.

"At 9:40 the Battle Fleet will meet the German fleet.  Immediate
readiness for action is to be assumed."

They would not trust the people to whom solemn treaties were but scraps
of paper, and whose necessity made any act however treacherous appear
to them to be a right one.

The Allied fleets were anchored on the night of November 20 in the
Firth of Forth above and below its famous bridge.  The United States
was represented by the _New York_, the _Florida_, the _Arkansas_, and
the _Wyoming_, and France by a cruiser and two destroyers.  Ships from
Canada, New Zealand, and Australia were also in line.  There were
nearly four hundred warships in the Allied fleet, including sixty
dreadnoughts, fifty cruisers, and over two hundred destroyers.

At four o'clock on the morning of Friday, November 21, the great Battle
Fleet weighed anchor and one by one steamed out to sea.  It was, even
in the darkness, a wonderful and thrilling sight, an exhibition of sea
power never before seen in the history of mankind.

Picture that scene in the gray darkness before the dawn.  Mile after
mile of mighty dreadnoughts and swift cruisers and destroyers weighing
their anchors one by one until four hundred mighty engines of war
slipped almost silently from their places, each leaving a trail of
black smoke behind.  As you imagine the scene as it would appear to the
eye, can you realize its significance and what it all meant?  Do the
people of the United States fully understand that but for England's
magnificent fleet their great coast cities would have been bombarded or
obliged to pay a ransom; and that without the Grand Fleet the war would
have been lost to selfish autocracy?  Let us never forget England's
service.

The German line, each ship flying the German naval flag at the main
top, consisted of thirteen of the dreadnought or superdreadnought
class, seven light cruisers, and fifty destroyers, and was over twenty
miles in length.  Each column of the Allied fleet was almost twice as
long as this.  Over them flew a British naval airplane.

The surrendered ships, guarded on both sides, steamed on towards the
anchorage selected for them near May Island at the entrance to the
Firth of Forth; and reached there about two o'clock in the afternoon.
Admiral Beatty from his flagship, the _Queen Elizabeth_, issued the
following signal to the fleet: "The German flag will be hauled down at
sunset today.  It will not be hoisted again without permission."

[Illustration: From left to right, Admiral Sir David Beatty, Admiral
Rodman, King George, the Prince of Wales, and Admiral Sims on the deck
of the U. S. Battleship New York, the flagship of the American warships
at the surrender of the German navy.]

A little later Admiral Beatty sent the following signal:--

"It is my intention to hold a service of thanksgiving at 6 P.M. today
for the victory Almighty God has vouchsafed His Majesty's arms.  Every
ship is recommended to do the same."

And to every ship he sent a message reading:--

"I wish to express to the flag officers, captains, officers and men of
the Grand Fleet my congratulations on the victory which it has gained
over the sea power of the enemy.  The greatness of this achievement is
no way lessened by the fact that the final episode did not take the
form of a fleet action.  Although deprived of this opportunity, which
we so long eagerly awaited, and of striking the final blow for the
freedom of the world, we may derive satisfaction from the singular
tribute that the enemy has accorded the Grand Fleet.  Without joining
us in action, he has given testimony to the prestige and efficiency of
the fleet which is without a parallel in history, and it is to be
remembered that this testimony has been accorded to us by those who
were in the best position to judge.  I desire to express my thanks and
appreciation to all who assisted me in maintaining the fleet in instant
readiness for action and who have borne the arduous and exacting labors
which have been necessary for perfecting the efficiency which has
accomplished so much."


  THE LITTLE OLD ROAD

  There's a breath of May in the breeze
    On the little old road;
  May in hedges and trees,
  May, the red and the white,
  May to left and to right,
    Of the little old road.

  There's a ribbon of grass either side
    Of the little old road;
  It's a strip just so wide,
  A strip nobody owns,
  Where a man's weary bones
  When he feels getting old
  May lie crushing the gold
  Of the silverweed flower
  For a long lazy hour
    By the little old road.

  There's no need to guide the old mare
    On the little old road.
  She knows that just there
  Is the big gravel pit
  (How we played in it
  As mites of boys
  In our corduroys!)
  And that here is the pond
  With the poplars beyond,
  And more May--always May,
  Away and away
    Down the little old road.

  There's a lot to make a man glad
    On the little old road
  (It's the home-going road),
  And a lot to make him sad.
  Ah! he'd like to forget,
  But he can't, not just yet,
  With chaps still out there. . . .
  She's stopping, the steady old mare.
  Is it here the road bends?
  So the long journey ends
    At the end of the old road,
    The little old road.

  There's some one, you say, at the gate
    Of the little old house by the road?
  Is it Mother?  Or Kate?
  And they're not going to mind
  That, since "Wypers," [1] I'm blind,
    And the road is a long dark road?

  GERTRUDE VAUGHAN.


[1] The Battle of Ypres.


HARRY LAUDER SINGS

Harry Lauder, an extremely popular Scotch singer and entertainer, gave
his services to help cheer the soldiers on the western front.


The men went wild with enthusiasm and joy wherever he went.  One day I
was taking Harry to see the grave of his only child, Captain John
Lauder of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, as fine a lad as ever
wore a kilt, and as good and brave a son as ever a father had.

As we were motoring swiftly along, we turned into the town of Albert
and the first sharp glance at the cathedral showed the falling Madonna
and Child.  While we lingered a bunch of soldiers came marching
through, dusty and tired.  Lauder asked the officer to halt his men for
a rest and he would sing to them.  I could see that they were loath to
believe it was the real Lauder until he began to sing.  Then the doubts
vanished, and they abandoned themselves to the full enjoyment of this
very unexpected pleasure.  When the singing began, the audience would
number about 200; at the finish of it easily more than 2000 soldiers
cheered him on his way.

It was a strange send-off on the way that led to a grave--the grave of
a father's fondest hopes--but so it was.  A little way up the Bapaume
road the car stopped, and we clambered the embankment and away over the
shell-torn field of Courcelette.  Here and there we passed a little
cross which marked the grave of some unknown hero; all that was written
was "A British Soldier."

He spoke in a low voice of the hope-hungry hearts behind all those at
home.  Now we climbed a little ridge, and here a cemetery, and in the
first row facing the battlefield was the cross on Lauder's boy's
resting place.

The father leaned over the grave to read what was written there.  He
knelt down, indeed he lay upon the grave and clutched it, the while his
body shook with the grief he felt.  When the storm had spent itself he
rose and prayed: "O God, that I could have but one request.  It would
be that I might embrace my laddie just this once and thank him for what
he has done for his country and humanity."

That was all, not a word of bitterness or complaint.  On the way down
the hill, I suggested gently that the stress of such an hour made
further song that day impossible.  But Lauder's heart is big and
British.  Turning to me with a flash in his eye he said, "George, I
must be brave; my boy is watching and all the other boys are waiting.
I will sing to them this afternoon though my heart break!"  Off we went
again to another division of Scottish troops.

There within the hour he sang again the sweet old songs of love and
home and country, bringing all very near, and helping the men to
realize the deeper what victory for the enemy would mean.

DR. GEORGE ADAMS.

*******************

  Today the journey is ended,
    I have worked out the mandates of fate,
  Naked, alone, undefended,
    I knock at the Uttermost Gate--
  Lo, the gate swings wide at my knocking;
    Across endless reaches I see
  Lost friends, with laughter, come flocking
    To give a glad welcome to me.
  Farewell, the maze has been threaded,
    This is the ending of strife;
  Say not that death should be dreaded,
    'Tis but the beginning of life.


THE THIRTEENTH REGIMENT

The World War has shown clearly that all peoples are not alike, that
they do not think alike, that they do not feel in the same way about
the great things of life and death, and that they do not live alike.
England felt very differently from Germany about invading a state whose
neutrality both nations had guaranteed.

The difference is largely due to education in the home, the church, and
the school; but it is also the result of heredity.  Races seem to
differ naturally in regard to these things.  The Germans have always
been cruel, hard, and unmerciful, while the French are tender and
inclined to be too easy, even with wrongdoers.  The Slav is dreamy,
musical, and poetic, while the Bulgarians seek to gain their ends by
deceit and brute force.  In thinking of the nations and the peoples of
the Balkan peninsula, we must be sure to distinguish clearly between
them, for they are not at all alike.

Only at the beginning and at the end of the World War have we heard
much of Serbia.  At the beginning, two Serbians, who were, however,
Austrian subjects, assassinated the Crown Prince of Austria, Archduke
Franz Ferdinand, and his wife, on June 28, 1914, at Sarajevo, the
capital of Bosnia, an Austrian province.  Whether the war had been
already planned or not, this assassination was used as a reason for
Austria's attack upon Serbia.

General Putnik, a great commander, was put in charge of the Serbian
troops.  As General Joffre did in France, he retired before the greatly
superior numbers of the enemy, until he was in a position to
counterattack and win a victory.  Joffre was thus able to save his
country from being entirely devastated and defeated, but General Putnik
was not.  Instead the Serbian army disappeared as a determining force,
until near the end of the war when it helped to bring Bulgaria to her
knees.

The Serbians sing as they go into battle, for, as has been said, they
are an imaginative and a musical people.  The heroes of today are
blended in their visions with the Serbian heroes of ancient days, and
their battle songs are of them both, or first of one and then of the
other.

As they went into their last victorious battles in 1918 against the
brutal and lying Bulgarians, they sang a sad but spirited song, the
words of which may be translated into English as follows:--

"Colonel Batsicht, the Austrians are a thousand to one, but what does
it matter?  You are only one, yourself, but you are Colonel Batsicht!
Were the Austrians as many as the leaves in the forests and their rush
to attack more violent than the flood of the Vardar in the spring time,
you would even then be their equal, Colonel Batsicht!"


And the marvelous thing about the words of this wonderful battle song
is that they are true, and that one man fighting for the right with the
spirit and devotion of Colonel Batsicht is always the equal of
thousands seeking to establish the wrong.  In all the history of the
world, nothing has proved this so fully and so clearly as the story of
Belgium in the World War.  Standing like one man against thousands, she
saved the world and herself.

Colonel Batsicht was in command of the Thirteenth Regiment of Infantry
in the Serbian army at the opening of the war in 1914.  When the
Austrians attacked in force, General Putnik decided upon a general
retirement to save his armies.

On the evening of the 27th of November, 1914, while this retirement was
being carried out, the commanding general sent the following orders to
Colonel Batsicht, "If possible, hold your ground for twenty-four hours.
If necessary, sacrifice your regiment to save the Serbian army."

Colonel Batsicht sent back word to the commanding general, "I have your
orders and they will be carried out."  Then he set about preparing to
defend the heights which his regiment was holding.

At seven o'clock the next morning, sixteen battalions of Austrian
infantry, ten batteries, and four squadrons of cavalry attacked the
position.  At the firing of the first gun, Colonel Batsicht looked at
his watch and exclaimed, "The twenty-four hours for which we must hold
our ground have now begun!"

The Austrians were ten against one and the battle was a furious one.
Three times the Austrians were driven back; but from their great
numbers and from reinforcements coming up, they soon reformed and
renewed the attack and were finally successful in pushing back the
Serbian right wing for a short distance.  But Colonel Batsicht quickly
rallied his forces, and they stood their ground.  Then the left wing
wavered and the colonel hurried to the left end of his line to
reorganize it and encourage the men.  He was wounded himself, but this
did not stop him and his presence was enough to make his soldiers
invincible.  So all through the day, Colonel Batsicht directed and
encouraged, and at evening the Thirteenth Regiment of Infantry of the
Serbian army still held the line although most of their number had been
killed and their colonel twice wounded.

The Austrians were much disturbed by the heroic resistance of the small
body of Serbian soldiers and determined in the early morning of the
next day to finish the matter quickly.  At dawn they attacked and the
Serbians gave way, first on one wing and then on the other, and at last
in the center.  The reserve was thrown in but could not prevent the
Austrians from slowly advancing.  It was six o'clock and the Serbians
had held the line for twenty-three hours.  The few officers that were
uninjured urged Colonel Batsicht to order a retreat.

"It is no use to struggle longer," replied the colonel.  "Order the men
to retire."

"Come with us," said the officers.

"No," replied the colonel, "I cannot.  I promised to hold this ground
for twenty-four hours, and I must remain for one hour longer."

"But we cannot go without you," cried the officers.

"Obey my orders!  Return to your troops and retire with them!" said the
colonel sternly.

Military discipline permitted the officers to do nothing but obey.

The colonel was left with his orderly upon the top of the hill up which
the Austrians were advancing.  The orderly continued firing until the
first platoon of the enemy were upon them, when he fell, and the
colonel was left standing alone.

"Where is the Thirteenth Regiment?" asked the Austrian officer.

"I am the Thirteenth Regiment," replied the colonel with a smile.

"Then surrender," cried the officer.

"You insult me by asking me, a colonel in the Serbian army, to
surrender," replied the colonel as he raised his revolver.  But the
Austrians were watching sharply and fired first, and the brave colonel
fell mortally wounded.

He was carried back of the Austrian lines in an ambulance.  When the
Austrian general was told the story, he hurried to the hospital and
found Colonel Batsicht still alive.

The Austrian told him that it was sad indeed to see such a brave man
dying and that he was sorry the colonel had not surrendered.

"I am not sorry, General," replied the colonel.

A few hours later he died, and was buried with military honors.

The Serbian soldiers and the Serbian people will never forget him.  He
has now become one of their national heroes.  Their imaginative and
poetical natures see him now as one greater than a mere man, as a sort
of superman with the attributes of a god.  So they sing in the valley
of the Vardar and in the meadows and mountains of Montenegro and
Albania the sad but spirited song of which the words in English are:--

"Colonel Batsicht, the Austrians are a thousand to one, but what does
it matter?  You are only one, yourself, but you are Colonel Batsicht!
Were the Austrians as many as the leaves in the forests and their rush
to attack more violent than the flood of the Vardar in the spring time,
you would even then be their equal, Colonel Batsicht!"


  WHERE ARE YOU GOING, GREAT-HEART?

  Where are you going, Great-Heart,
    With your eager face and your fiery grace?--
    Where are you going, Great-Heart?

    "To fight a fight with all my might,
    For Truth and Justice, God and Right,
    To grace all Life with His fair Light."
      Then God go with you, Great-Heart!

  Where are you going, Great-Heart?
    "To beard the Devil in his den;
    To smite him with the strength of ten;
    To set at large the souls of men."
      Then God go with you, Great-Heart!

  Where are you going, Great-Heart?
    "To end the rule of knavery;
    To break the yoke of slavery;
    To give the world delivery."
      Then God go with you, Great-Heart!

        *      *      *      *

  Where are you going, Great-Heart?
    "To cleanse the earth of noisome things
    To draw from life its poison-stings;
    To give free play to Freedom's wings."
      Then God go with you, Great-Heart!

  Where are you going, Great-Heart?
    "To lift Today above the Past;
    To make Tomorrow sure and fast;
    To nail God's colors to the mast."
      Then God go with you, Great-Heart!

  Where are you going, Great-Heart?
    "To break down old dividing-lines;
    To carry out My Lord's designs;
    To build again His broken shrines."
      Then God go with you, Great-Heart!

  Where are you going, Great-Heart?
    "To set all burdened peoples free;
    To win for all God's liberty;
    To 'stablish His Sweet Sovereignty."
      God goeth with you, Great-Heart!

  JOHN OXENHAM.

*******************

"Let it be your pride, therefore, to show all men everywhere, not only
what good soldiers you are, but also what good men you are, keeping
yourselves fit and straight in everything, and pure and clean through
and through.  Let us set for ourselves a standard so high that it will
be a glory to live up to it and add a new laurel to the crown of
America.  My affectionate confidence goes with you in every battle and
every test.  God keep and guide you!"

WOODROW WILSON.


THE CAPTURE OF DUN

After the Americans had cleared the Saint Mihiel salient, Marshal Foch
gave them a task which was probably the most difficult and dangerous of
the whole war.  They were to move north and west along the Meuse River
through the Argonne forest to Sedan.  There they would cut one of the
two main communication lines of the Germans, the loss of which would
mean to them disaster and rout.

Just before the signing of the armistice on November 11, the Americans
reached Sedan after fighting from September 26 over an almost
impassable country with few roads and against the strongest forces the
Germans could muster.  For four years the Germans had been fortifying
this part of the line in every possible way, for they realized the
danger to them of a successful advance along the Meuse from Verdun to
Sedan.  The railroad through Mézières, Sedan, and Montmédy was called
in a German order "our life artery."  To cut it meant death to the
German army.

The Argonne forest is a very dense growth of trees and underbrush
covering a chain of hills running north and south.  It is very
difficult for a large army to advance and be supplied with food and
munitions without good roads over which to move, and all the roads in
this region are poor and, with very few exceptions, run east and west.

The Americans, twenty-one divisions or about 750,000 men, took part in
the action.  They were obliged to move through the valleys above which,
on the hillsides, the Germans had stationed innumerable machine guns
and light artillery.

"It was bitter fighting in the woods, brush and ravines, over a region
perfectly registered and plotted by the enemy, where his guns, big and
little, could be used with the greatest efficiency.  The original nine
American divisions in some cases were kept in the line over three
consecutive weeks.  The American reserves were then thrown in until
every division not engaged on another part of the line had been put in
action.

"It is a fact commented on with pride by the American commanders and
complimented by the allies that seven of these divisions that drove
their way through this hard action never before had been in an active
sector, while green troops, fresh from home, were poured in as
replacements.

"The Associated Press dispatches from day to day told what these men
did; how the enemy was slowly pushed back from his strongest and most
vital positions, through one defense system after another, using his
finest selected troops, which had been withdrawn in many instances from
other portions of the line, in an effort to hold an enemy which he
derisively said last spring could not be brought to Europe, and if so
would not fight, and even if he tried to fight would not know how to do
so."


As they advanced, they were obliged to cross the Meuse and capture the
town of Dun.  This is a simple statement and might be passed over as
not very significant, but in its few words, it contains a story of one
of the bravest deeds of any army in any war.

The Germans knew, of course, that if they could prevent the crossing of
the river at this point, the Americans could not capture Sedan and cut
their line of communications.  It may be that the Americans took them
completely by surprise when they attempted the crossing here, and that
if the Germans had in the least expected the attempt would be made,
they would have been better prepared to defeat it.  As it was, however,
the Americans were met by a frightful and deadly fire from the enemy
behind natural defenses so strong that they believed no army would
think of attacking them.

The river at this point is about 160 feet wide.  Beyond it lies a half
mile of mud, and then a canal 60 feet wide with perpendicular walls
rising several feet above the surface of the water.

On Monday afternoon, just one week before the war ended, the order was
given to cross the river, the mud, and the canal and to occupy the west
bank.  The officers had hesitated to give the command for they realized
what it meant in dead and wounded; but the privates also knew and they
hoped they would be allowed to make the attempt, which with American
soldiers means to succeed.  They were there to bring the war to an end,
and to press on against every danger was the sure way to end it quickly.

Those who could swim the river were first called out.  Each one was
given the end of a rope long enough to reach across the river; then
they jumped in and swam exposing as little of their heads and bodies as
possible.  The German machine guns were so placed as to cover by their
fire every foot of the east bank of the river, and the rifles also of
hundreds of Huns across the canal attempted to pick off the swimmers.
Many were killed and many others were wounded and left to drown, for it
would not do to stop to rescue them.  A story is told, however, of two
chums swimming side by side.  One of them was hit by a bullet in the
neck and was saved by the other who swam on supporting him until they
reached the opposite bank.  Then he stopped long enough to bind up the
wound and leave his chum lying flat in the mud while he advanced
through the mud and across the canal.  Both lived to return home with
the victorious army.

When the swimmers were across, they held the ropes, which were fastened
at the other bank, taut, so that those who could not swim could cross
by holding on to them.  Some attempted to cross on hastily built rafts
and in collapsible canvas boats.  More of these were lost than of the
swimmers who, partially submerged, were not so good targets for the
riflemen.

At the same time the engineers were building pontoon bridges and
smaller foot bridges.  After the first wave of men had crossed the
river and the mud and were climbing up the further side of the canal,
the engineers were not so greatly delayed by rifle fire and soon had a
foot bridge ready over which the troops quickly rushed.  The pontoon
bridge was destroyed by enemy fire.  Many were lost in the mud where
progress was slow and where, obliged to stand erect, they made good
targets.

Those swimmers who reached the canal jumped in, swam across the 60 feet
of water, and climbed the opposite bank by using grappling hooks.

The Germans had not taken the precaution to build trenches beyond the
canal, thinking that the river, the mud, and the canal at this point
would offer protection enough.  Therefore, when the Americans had
succeeded in crossing the canal, the Germans hastily retreated.
Probably there were fewer casualties among the Americans than if the
attack had been made at what seemed a less dangerous point, for
elsewhere along the river the Huns had intrenched themselves.

The action was one demanding skill and courage of the highest order.
It was carried through successfully because the Americans possessed
both of these qualities and realized they were fighting for the noblest
cause for which men ever fought.  They were willing to give up their
today that others might have a secure and happy tomorrow.

The capture of Sedan forced the Germans to ask for an armistice and to
accept whatever terms were offered.  In studying the war and the
masterly strategy of Marshal Foch, it should never be forgotten that in
a few weeks, the armies under his command would have won the greatest
victory ever recorded in history and that more than a million Germans
would have been obliged to surrender with all their guns and equipment.
A smaller minded or more selfish general than Foch might have declined
to grant an armistice in order to gain the credit of such a marvelous
victory; but Foch thought of the lives that might be saved by granting
the armistice and did not think of his own glory.  He has lost none of
the credit that belongs to him by doing this, but has gained a higher
place in the esteem of men.

Nor should it be forgotten that if General Pershing's army had failed
in its almost impossible task, no armistice would have been asked for.
The war with its suffering and death would have gone over into another
year.  The same would have been true if the British and French armies
had failed.  All did the duties assigned them nobly, heroically, and
successfully, and the Hun realized that, as always, might was with the
forces of right.


BOMBING METZ

ADAPTED FROM THE ACCOUNT WRITTEN BY RAOUL LUFBERY

In January, 1916, I belonged to the Bombing Escadrille 102.  One fair
day a little after one o'clock, we were ordered to get ready for an
expedition.  Naturally, we were curious about where we were to go, but
it is not usual to name the objective until ready to leave.  From the
amount of gasoline we were ordered to carry, we all guessed it would be
the railroad station at Metz.

Forty planes were to take part in the raid, twenty from my Escadrille
102 and twenty from Escadrille 101, led by brave Commander Roisin.

At one end of the aviation field, the planes stand in a row facing the
wind.  The engines are carefully gone over by the machinists, the
gunners examine the guns, the bombs are placed in their racks.  I carry
six bombs, others take eight, nine, and even ten, depending upon the
size and condition of the airplane and its engine.

We stand ready and wait for the final orders.  We are given maps on
which the route we are to take is indicated.  We all set our watches by
that of the commander of the expedition.  Fifty minutes after the first
plane leaves, we must all be over Nichola-du-port and at an altitude of
at least 6000 feet.  From there, following the signals which would be
given us by the commander, we were to go on; or return to the aviation
field, if the weather, the wind, the clouds, or poor grouping of our
machines made it necessary.

[Illustration: The heroic American ace, Raoul Lufbery, wearing his
well-earned decorations just after an official presentation.  Behind
him stands a member of the French Cabinet.]

An engine at the end of the line on our left is purring.  The plane
starts and rolls along the ground and then takes to the air.  A second
follows it, and then a third.  My machine is number seven.  I ask my
observer, Allard, if he is ready.  He answers, "Yes."  I start the
engine, give it all the gas, like the others roll along the ground for
a few seconds, and then take the air.

Just before leaving, Allard informs me that he will try to get a little
sleep while I am reaching the proper elevation.  He says he will be
ready to study the map when we get beyond our trenches.  As he can be
of no service whatever to me in helping the machine rise, I see no
reason to object to his going to sleep if he desires.  I turn around
and look at him several times while we are climbing up.  His eyes are
closed, but I doubt his sleeping.  He surely has a perfect right to,
for very soon he will need all his coolness and strength.

2:20 P.M.  I am at the place named, exactly on time.  I recognize the
commander's machine by the little red flags at the ends of the wings.
I get the signal to go on, and I proceed with the group.

After the trenches are crossed, the faster planes make a few spirals to
allow the slower ones to catch up.  The group is now more compact and
we go on with the shrapnel bursting now and then around us.  This
troubles no one of us, however, for only by luck or chance would we be
injured.  A few or even many holes in the fabric do little or no harm.

I watch the country as it spreads out beneath my feet.  To my right is
the Seille River, its banks washed away by floods so that it looks like
a great necklace of ponds.  To my left is the Moselle and the canal
beside it.  They look like two beautiful silver lines which disappear
at the north in a cloud of mist.  And now I see that that which I call
a cloud of mist is only the smoke from the chimneys of Metz.

As I get nearer, I can see through this smoke the houses and churches
and the long buildings with red tile roofs, which are probably the
barracks.  A circle of green surrounds the whole.  These are the forts;
from above they seem quite harmless.

In a few minutes I shall be over my objective, the small freight house.
The machines in the lead make a half turn so that those behind may
overtake them.  As my machine is a slow one, I make directly for my
objective.  I am the first to arrive.

The enemy must have expected us, for many of their machines are in the
air moving around at different altitudes ready to attack us.  One of
them is coming to welcome me.  I turn quickly to see if Allard, the
observer, is wide awake.  His machine gun is pointed at the enemy, his
fingers are on the trigger.  Good.  All is ready.

At 150 yards, the boche biplane suddenly turns its right flank toward
us to allow the gunner to fire.  Today such a turn is not necessary,
for such machines carry two guns, one fixed and one behind mounted on a
pivot so as to fire in any direction.  I keep my eyes on the enemy.
The black iron crosses are very plainly seen on the rudder and the
fuselage.  The fight begins.

The machine guns spit fire, and the boche dives, seeming to have had
enough.  I do not follow him, for the way ahead is clear, and I have an
important duty to perform.  Through the opening in the floor at my feet
I see the railroad junction, some trains moving and others standing.  I
can also see the depots for the freight and munitions.

[Illustration: A two-passenger tractor biplane flying near the
seashore.  The oblong black speck directly under the airplane is an
aërial bomb, with guiding fins like a torpedo's, which the bomber, who
is sitting in the rear seat, has just released from the rack under him.
On most planes a machine gun on a swivel is mounted behind the man in
the rear seat.  If the plane is a single-seater, the machine gun is
stationary, mounted in front of the pilot, and "synchronized," or
timed, to fire so that the bullets pass between the blades of the
propeller, which is making about 1600 revolutions a minute.  In the
lower left-hand corner can be seen the wing tip of the plane from which
the photograph was taken.]

Allard touches my left shoulder and signs for me to keep straight
ahead.  Another touch and I know he has dropped the bombs.  It is done,
and I have nothing to do but to turn about and make for home.

But now the boches seem to be thick about us.  We must be very careful.
But in spite of all, we are surprised and attacked by a Fokker fighting
plane.  He fires a volley into us and is gone before we can get a shot
at him.  Two or three short "spats" tell me that his aim was good and
our machine has been hit.

The engine is certainly not injured for it roars on.  Allard examines
the gasoline tank, but it does not seem to have been struck.

The wind is blowing from the north and helps us get home quickly.  In a
short time, we are back above our trenches.  I laugh aloud.  Why, I do
not know.  I look around and see that Allard is also laughing.  We are
beaming and happy.  Now that we are out of danger, we want to talk
about it, but the roar of the engine drowns our voices.  We have to be
patient and wait until we land.

Slowing down as we descend, the plane glides sweetly over the Meurthe
valley.  We volplane gently toward the earth.  Little by little things
begin to look real.  The beautiful green moss changes into forests, the
black ribbons into railways, and the white ribbons into highways.  What
I had thought from a distance to be a huge curtain of black smoke,
becomes the beautiful city of Nancy.  We are only 800 feet above the
field.  One more spiral and we land.

I examine the machine at once.  The fabric of the planes is full of
bullet holes.

Many of the planes that went with us have not returned.  We are told
that some of them will not, for they were seen dropping into enemy
territory.

But one by one, the white specks in the sky come in.  At last all of
our squadron have returned and the grave and worried look leaves the
commander's face.  He is indeed pleased and does not hide it.

But alas!  It is not the same with all the squadrons.  There is still
time, of course, to find that we are mistaken.  The missing planes may
appear, but it is to be feared that this night at some of the messes,
black bread will be eaten.

*******************

The British parliament recognized the brave work of the aviators in the
following words:

"Far above the squalor and the mud, so high up in the firmament as to
be invisible from the earth, they fight the eternal issues of right and
wrong.  Every fight is a romance, every report is an epic.  They are
the knighthood of this war.  Without fear and without reproach, they
have fought, for they have brought back the legendary days of chivalry,
not merely by the daring of their exploits, but by the nobility of
their spirit."


THE UNSPEAKABLE TURK

Although the great issues of the war were decided, and victory was
finally won, by the fighting on the western front, the British
campaigns in Palestine and in Mesopotamia were in no small way
responsible for the final result.  The fighting in this theater of the
war was against the Turkish allies of Germany.  The Turks were
originally one of the Tartar tribes, dwelling in Asia, east of the
Caspian Sea.  Many of these tribes passed over into Europe, where they
are now known as the Lapps, the Finns, the Bulgarians, and the Magyars
or Hungarians.  More of these Tartar tribes migrated to Asia Minor and
adopted the Mohammedan religion.  The Turks were one of these.  They
served first as hired soldiers, but were finally united by their
leader, Seljuk, into a strong people called the Seljukian Turks.  Their
power grew rapidly and soon they captured the city of Jerusalem.  They
also invaded Europe and captured Constantinople, in 1453, where they
have ever since been a menace to civilization.

Less than a year after William II became Emperor of Germany, the
imperial yacht, the _Hohenzollern_, steamed through the Mediterranean
into the narrow Dardanelles and, saluted by forts on both shores,
passed on to Constantinople, the capital of the Moslem Kalif and the
Sultan of Turkey, Abdul Hamid II.

The head of the Catholic church is called the Pope; the head of the
Eastern church, the Patriarch; and the head of the Mohammedan, the
Kalif.  Just as Catholics, no matter of what country they are citizens,
recognize the authority of the Pope in matters of religion, so
Mohammedans, with few exceptions, are guided in these matters by the
Kalif.

William II was accompanied by the Empress, his wife, and this was their
first ceremonial visit to any of the crowned heads of Europe.  Why did
the German Kaiser select Abdul Hamid for this high honor?

The Germans were received with great joy.  The entire city of
Constantinople was decorated with the gorgeous display that only an
eastern city makes.  The visit was evidently greatly appreciated by the
Mohammedan Kalif and the Sultan of Turkey; and his people, at his
orders doubtless, made the Germans realize how proud they were at being
thus honored by the Kaiser.

What attraction brought these two strange monarchs together?  And why
was the visit repeated nine years later in 1898?  Did William II feel
in 1889 that Abdul Hamid was a man after his own heart, more nearly so
than any other ruler in Europe?  And was he sure of it in 1898?

Certain it is, that while the greetings were cordial in 1889, they were
much more so in 1898; for on this second visit, the Kaiser kissed the
Kalif on both cheeks and called him "brother."  Then after having made
arrangements for the German building and the German control of the
Berlin to Bagdad railway, William II went on to Jerusalem.  There he
stood in homage before the Holy Sepulcher, and afterward before the
manger in Bethlehem.  A few days later in Damascus, a chief Moslem
city, he spoke to the Mohammedan officers then ruling the Holy Land,
and in the course of his speech said, "His Majesty, the Sultan Abdul
Hamid, and the three hundred million Mohammedans who reverence him as
Kalif may be sure that at all times the German Kaiser will be their
friend."

Abdul Hamid was a Turk, a Mohammedan, and a Sultan.  As a Turk, he
believed all other people were no better than animals; and that it was
no more of a sin to kill a man, woman, or child of another race than it
was to kill a dog or a rat.  As a Mohammedan, he believed that killing
a Christian gained merit in the eyes of Allah (which is the Mohammedan
word for God).  And as a Sultan, he remembered how he had lost Serbia,
Bosnia, Bulgaria, and Roumania.  These Balkan states together with
Bosnia were formerly a part of Turkey in Europe.  Most of their
inhabitants were Christians and were more progressive than the Turks.
As they advanced in education and wealth, they revolted and gained
their independence in 1878.  As Turkey lost these, the Sultan feared he
might lose Armenia, his last remaining Christian province.  This was
Turkey's Armenian problem.  The Sultan attempted to solve it in true
Turkish manner,--adopted later by the Huns in Belgium, but never
carried out so relentlessly as in Armenia.

Between the two visits of Kaiser William II, Abdul Hamid had been able
to put into effect some of the ideas in which he believed.  First he
made a plan to kill about two million of his subjects living in
Armenia.  Here it was that Noah is said to have landed with the ark on
Mt. Ararat after the flood had partially subsided, and here was a
people called Armenians and a country called Armenia long before the
time of Christ.  But the Turk said in the days of Abdul Hamid, "There
is no such country as Armenia," and the Armenians were ordered never to
use the word or to speak of their country for it had disappeared, and
they now lived in a Turkish province.  Abdul Hamid determined the
people should also disappear.

It seems almost impossible for Americans in the twentieth century to
believe that such a story can be true.  They can easily believe it of a
thousand years ago, but not of twenty-five years ago.  Yet it is beyond
doubt.  Henry Morgenthau, American Ambassador to Turkey during the
first two years of the World War, has written the story of the attempts
by the Turkish government to massacre the Armenian Christians in 1895
and in 1915.

He writes: "Abdul Hamid apparently thought there was only one way of
ridding Turkey of the Armenian problem--and that was to rid her of the
Armenians.  The physical destruction of two million men, women, and
children by massacres, organized and directed by the state, seemed to
be the one sure way of forestalling the further disruption of the
Turkish Empire. . . .  Yet Abdul Hamid was not able to accomplish his
full purpose.  Had he had his will, he would have massacred the whole
nation in one hideous orgy."

In 1895-96 nearly two hundred thousand Armenians were put to death on
one pretext or another, usually in the most horrible ways, and in many
cases after the most terrible torture.  The entire race would have been
exterminated if Christian Europe and America had not risen in protest.
But no word of protest came from Abdul Hamid's good friend, William II.
Instead, the Kaiser visited, within two years after these terrible
massacres, the monarch who was now called throughout Europe, "Abdul the
Damned," and kissing him on both cheeks, called him brother!

Why did the Kaiser love the Sultan and Kalif so greatly?  Perhaps
because they were kindred spirits.  It certainly could not be because
of Abdul Hamid's knowledge and intellectual power, for he was very
ignorant, and not at all the type of mind that would impress a German.
He was very superstitious and suspicious, always fearing attempts upon
his life.  A lot of books on chemistry, imported by an American
missionary, were seized by the Turkish customs officers because they
claimed they were intended to injure the Sultan.  When the missionary
asked for an explanation, the officer opened one of the books and
pointed to the expression H[subscript 2]O, which occurred very
frequently in it.  Now H[subscript 2]O is the chemical symbol for water
and means that two atoms of hydrogen unite with one atom of oxygen to
form one molecule of water.  However, Abdul Hamid, or his officers,
believed that H stood for Hamid, 2 for II, and O for nothing, and that
H[subscript 2]O was a secret way of saying to the Christians in Turkey,
"Abdul Hamid II is nothing."

It is also said that Constantinople was lighted only by gas long after
electric lights were used in other large cities, because "the red
Sultan," as he was also often called on account of his bloody deeds,
would allow neither dynamite nor dynamos to be brought into the city
where he lived.  He knew of the destructive power of dynamite and could
never be made to believe that a dynamo was not equally to be feared!

The German Kaiser was not charmed by the brilliancy and the
intelligence of the "Great Assassin."  He may have admired his deeds
but he probably loved him for what he thought he could get out of him
and his country.  It seems clear now that even in 1889, at the
beginning of his reign, William II began to plan a Greater Germany and
possibly World Domination.  Certainly he soon dreamed of a German
Middle Europe reaching from the North Sea to the Persian Gulf and
crossed from Berlin to Bagdad by a German controlled railroad.  It
seems too that he realized he must have Turkey as an ally and that to
accomplish his ends, he might possibly be obliged to bring about a Holy
War with all the Mohammedan world fighting the Christian.  The
Mohammedans considered the Kaiser one of themselves and referred to him
as "His Islamic Majesty."  In the World War he attempted to cause this
Holy War but failed because the Mohammedans in Arabia did not recognize
the Sultan of Turkey as Kalif.  The two holy cities of the Mohammedans
in Arabia are Mecca where the prophet, Mohammed, was born and Medina
where he died.  Whoever rules over these cities is the Mohammedan
Kalif.  When the Kaiser attempted to bring on a Holy War, the Arabians
joined the Allies, founded the independent kingdom of Hedjaz, and
recognized its king as the Kalif.

The "red Sultan" must have known that the Kaiser would not object to
his massacres of the Armenians and the strengthening of Turkish rule,
for these only aided the purposes of Germany.  But Abdul Hamid was
forced to abdicate by a revolution of his own people before the
Armenians were exterminated and before the Kaiser's dream was realized.
By 1915, however, the "Great Assassin's" power was in the hands of
Turks who held the same beliefs and sought to carry out the same plans
as he had in 1895.  And now England, France, Russia, and Italy, all
engaged in war, were unable to interfere, and the Turks felt very sure
the United States would not trouble them.

Now Enver Pasha and Taalat Pasha, the real rulers of Turkey, determined
that there should be no blunder or mistake; they would exterminate the
nearly two million Christian Armenians, who were Turkish subjects, and
thus remove a serious problem in the management of Turkey and all
danger of the Armenians rendering assistance to the Allies.

One of the chief indictments of the German government, under William
II, is that it uttered no protest while the Armenian men in the vigor
of life were taken from the villages by the hundred and shot, or killed
in more brutal ways, and the old men, women, and children obliged to
march off to a distant desert part of Asia Minor, or to the malarial
swamps of the Euphrates.  Of course, they nearly all died on the way.
About one million Armenians were exterminated in this way in 1915.  The
German government could have stopped it by a word.  But how could they
say the word?  They had hardly finished their Belgian atrocities and
were still deporting men and girls from Belgium and France.  No protest
came from the Kaiser, his ministers; or his people.

The Armenians dress very largely in red.  A common costume of women and
girls is striking even at a distance because of the amount of red in
it.  The same is true to a less degree of the men.  The hordes of old
men, old women, the sick, and the frail, with children of all ages
marching mile after mile, often in cold and rain with no food except
what they had been able to seize as they were driven on a moment's
notice from their homes and villages, leaving their strong men brutally
slaughtered, have been called "red caravans of death," and in truth
they were caravans of victims seeking, desiring, praying for death, and
marching on till death relieved them.

In 1915, the Turkish armies in Palestine, under German leadership,
attempted to gain possession of the Suez Canal, in order to prevent
supplies passing through on Allied ships.  Although the Turks made
several attempts to block the canal, they were all unsuccessful.  After
these numerous attacks on the canal, England realized that the only
safe way to protect her Egyptian possessions was to gain Palestine.  In
1916 a plan was made for an offensive into the Holy Land.  The plan was
first tried by General Maxwell and then by General Murray, but both
attempts were unsuccessful.

In June, 1917, the English transferred General Allenby, then fighting
on the western front, to the command of the Egyptian expeditionary
forces.  He immediately began to lay plans for an offensive into
Palestine, with the city of Jerusalem as his main objective.  The Turks
were strongly fortified in southern Palestine, on a line extending from
the coast city of Gaza to the inland city of Beersheba.  Allenby's plan
was to attack the left flank of the enemies' line, capturing Beersheba,
where he counted on renewing his water supply.  To aid the successful
advancement of his main offense, he sent a small body of troops toward
the city of Gaza, situated on the enemies' right flank.  This was done
to draw the Turkish reserves toward Gaza, where they would expect the
main offense to take place.  The British warships in the Mediterranean
helped in this movement, by bombarding the town as the land forces
approached it.  The plan was put into effect on October 30.  On the
next day the city of Beersheba was taken by surprise, and the Turkish
left flank was routed.  After renewing his supply of water at
Beersheba, General Allenby advanced on Gaza, which was captured with
little resistance.  Although greatly hampered by poor water supply and
tremendous transportation difficulties, he drove the Turks north and by
a successful engagement at Junction Station cut their forces in two.

By this time the Turks in Jerusalem were becoming greatly disturbed by
Allenby's rapid advance.  Enver Pasha, the famous Turkish commander,
rushed to the city to rally his generals, but after studying the
situation, he left the city the next day.  Soon after Enver's hurried
departure, General Falkenhayn arrived.  Military supplies were moved
north of the city and the Germans prepared to leave.  The remaining
Turks were under the command of Ali Fuad Pasha, who by proclamations
and entreaties, tried to rally the people of the city.

Meanwhile General Allenby had moved north and captured the city of
Jaffa, situated on the Mediterranean, a little northwest of Jerusalem.
From Jaffa, by hard fighting he advanced through the Judean hills,
towards the Holy City.  Jerusalem was occupied by English troops on
December 9, 1917, and General Allenby made his official entrance on
December 11.  Soon after the occupation of the city by the English, a
proclamation was read, amidst great cheering, announcing freedom of
worship.

[Illustration: The official entry of General Allenby into Jerusalem,
December 11, 1917.  With the exception of a few years, 1099-1187, and
1229-1244, the city, until General Allenby's entry, had been under
Mohammedan control from the seventh century.  The clock tower is a
modernized minaret, on the balcony of which the muezzin summons to
prayer the faithful Mohammedans.]

Part of the proclamation is as follows.  "Since your city is regarded
with affection by the adherents of three of the great religions of
mankind, and its soil has been consecrated by the prayers and
pilgrimages of multitudes of devout people of these three religions for
many centuries, therefore, do I make it known to you that every sacred
building, monument, holy spot, shrine, traditional site, endowment,
pious bequest, or customary place of prayer of whatsoever form of the
three religions will be maintained and protected according to the
existing customs and beliefs of those to whose faith they are sacred."

The capture of Jerusalem was hailed by the entire civilized world as
one of the greatest accomplishments of the war.  Although it was taken
for strategical reasons, the fact that the Holy City was once more in
the hands of Christians meant more to the world than the military
advantage gained by its capture.  Jerusalem is generally thought of
only as a peaceful shrine of many nations; it is in reality a fortress
more often contested, perhaps, than any other city in the world.  Until
captured by General Allenby, Jerusalem had been, except for two brief
intervals, under Mohammedan control for almost thirteen centuries.  Now
that it is once more in Christian hands, it appears probable that it
will remain so forever.

After capturing the city, the English began to strengthen its
fortifications against counter-attacks.  They also fortified the coast
city of Jaffa which they had captured just previous to the advance on
Jerusalem.  The Turks made several attempts to recapture their lost
ground, but all were unsuccessful.  The English were unable to resume
their offensive the following spring, because of the crisis which
compelled them to send a large part of their forces to Europe to check
the new German drive on the western front.  It was not until September
18, 1918, that General Allenby started his next offensive.  The object
of this was the capture of Damascus, the capital of Syria.  He started
his advance on a line extending from Haifa on the coast, across
Palestine to the Arabian Desert.  Although strongly opposed by a
Turkish army numbering at least 100,000 men, he advanced by remarkable
forced marching and hard fighting on Damascus, which he occupied
October 1, 1918.  During the offensive on Damascus, he captured over
70,000 prisoners and 350 guns.  Included in these figures were several
Turkish commanders and German and Austrian troops numbering more than
200 officers and 3000 privates.

Damascus is the most beautiful city in Asiatic Turkey and is the oldest
city in the world.  There is a Turkish prophecy, many centuries old,
made in fact when the Turks were at the height of their power, that
some day they would be conquered and driven back to the place from
which they came.  The prophet said, "When the end is at hand, Damascus
will be taken by the infidels.  An Imam wearing a green turban and a
green robe will ascend to the top of a green minaret with his last
salavat.  He will call all the faithful about him and they will all
then start on a journey to the place from whence they came."

Because of this prophecy, there is a Turkish saying known to all Turks
educated or ignorant, dweller in city or in obscure village, which
reads, _Evelli Sham, Akhuri Sham_.  Now _Sham_ is the Turk's name for
Damascus, _Evelli_ means first, and _Akhuri_ means last: and the
meaning of the saying in English would be something like this,
"Damascus is everything to the Turk, and when it falls all is lost."
Probably the prophet had no idea that Damascus would or could be taken
from the south by forces led across the desert as General Allenby led
the English.  If Damascus should be captured from the north, all of the
Turkish dominion would have to be conquered before the foe reached
there.  So the Turks have repeated with a feeling of security, _Evelli
Sham, Akhuri Sham_.

The capture of Damascus opened the way to Aleppo, situated on the
Constantinople-Bagdad railroad about 180 miles to the north.  The
Turkish troops, routed by the rapid advance of the British on Damascus,
gave very little resistance to Allenby in his drive on Aleppo.  The
English entered Aleppo on Saturday morning, October 26, and stopped
Turkish traffic on the Constantinople-Bagdad railway at this point.  On
October 29, General Marshall's forces defeated the Turks at Kaleh
Sherghat, cutting off their communications with Mosul.  The combined
victories of Allenby in Palestine and Marshall in Mesopotamia left the
remaining Turkish forces helpless.  Turkey signed an armistice October
30, 1918, which was virtually the same as an unconditional surrender,
and meant the end of the "unspeakable Turk" in Europe.


THE SECRET SERVICE

The United States did not declare war till nearly three years after the
war had begun in Europe.  During most of that time the situation was
this: Germany, to win at all, must win at once.  The longer the Allies
could stave Germany off, the more time they would have to collect arms
and armies, powder, food, and ships, and the more certain they would be
of winning in the end.  Therefore they sent to America, which was rich
and had many factories, for tremendous quantities of every sort of war
provisions.  Of course it was necessary for Germany to prevent the
Allies from getting these supplies.  It was in the effort to do this
that the German spy system became so widespread in the United States.

The German government had always kept in direct touch with a number of
Germans in America, and in indirect touch with a great many more.  So
when Germany needed help in America, she called on the German-Americans
to hinder in every way possible the sending of aid to Great Britain and
France.  The United States could not allow any one to blow up American
factories and railroads and start strikes among American workmen.
Consequently the United States Secret Service and its fellow agencies
set to work, and the great fight was on.

The opponents, the German Intelligence Office and the American Secret
Service, were not so unevenly matched as one might imagine.  What
advantage the Germans lost by being in the enemy's country they made up
by being prepared far in advance, and by knowing just what they wanted
to do.  And there is always an advantage on the side of the hunted
animal.  Let us see briefly just what each organization was like.

The German service in its heyday was a fearful and wonderful thing.
Little by little, as spies were "shadowed," captured, and their papers
examined, the whole far-reaching tangle was revealed.  One can tell
only a little here about this tangle--for to tell it all would take
more books than one.

In the German system there were five or six names to be remembered.
Count von Bernstorff, the German Ambassador and chief plotter; Dr.
Heinrich Albert, his assistant and treasurer; Franz von Rintelen,
reported to be a near relative to the Kaiser; Captain Franz von Papen,
the military attaché; and his partner, Captain Boy-Ed, the naval
attaché.  From this group at the top, the lines spread down, through
business men, doctors, editors, clerks, butlers, and every rank and
class in America.  "Big Bill" Flynn, for many years the clever chief of
the Secret Service, said that he thought there were 250,000 men and
women in this country who were working for Germany.  Sad to say, not
all of them were German by birth; a few, the most dangerous, were
native Americans, although they were Germans at heart.  Everywhere, in
the most unexpected places, these German agents were found, always
busily carrying out their orders with regular German blindness, and
never questioning or knowing anything about the hideous acts of their
superiors.  The German machine was, in short, like a huge wheel, with
the brains at the hub.

The United States fought this contemptible creation with several
weapons.  The Secret Service was of course the most active; but it was
very greatly helped by the Department of Justice, the Naval
Intelligence, and the Military Intelligence, as well as by the police
departments in the various cities.  In fact, one of the greatest
troubles at times was that too many agencies would be working on the
same case.  They stepped on each other's heels.

All these branches grew in size during the war, but especially the
Naval and Military Intelligence offices.  As early as January, 1916,
patriotic citizens were quietly serving their government, all unknown
even to their own friends, and were collecting pieces of information
and hints here and there that, in the end, were of great value.  If the
Germans had spies in every nook and cranny of our nation, so did
we--business men, secretaries, cooks, doctors, and laborers.  The
Secret Service was everywhere.  Again and again, when some devoted
German was busily doing his duty to his Fatherland, an American Secret
Service agent would lay a hand on his shoulder and show him a ticket to
a prison camp.  And then, so curious is the German way of thinking,
nine times out of ten the German, intensely surprised and very cross at
being caught in the act, would insist that he was doing nothing, and
that he had a perfect right to do it!

Now watch the two forces at war.  The German machine was working
quietly along, now and then blowing up a factory and now and then being
caught red-handed.  It had already suffered a severe loss, for Captain
von Papen, the military attaché, had been discovered in his work by the
British and had been deported.  When he reached Germany, by the way, he
was given the Order of the Red Eagle by the Kaiser, who doubtless
recognized in the bungling plotter a fellow spirit.  Thanks to the
information gained from von Papen's papers, the United States had a
very good idea of what the other Germans in America were doing and
began to make arrests.

Every afternoon at about five o'clock Dr. Albert, the ambassador's
assistant, would leave his office at 45 Broadway, New York, and take
the elevated railroad uptown to his luxurious rooms in the German Club.
He always carried with him a brown leather dispatch case.  The Secret
Service men, who had been keeping an eye on him, determined to get that
case, because they knew from the way the doctor always held on to it,
that it must contain something important.  A wise member of the Service
was chosen to make the coup.

He watched the German closely for many days, and saw that the doctor
took a train just at five o'clock every day; that, on the train, he
read his evening paper very intently (possibly to see which one of his
friends had been arrested last); and that he always walked through the
same streets from the railroad to his club.  Finally one day the agent
decided that he was ready to try for that little brown case.

That evening a quiet, well-mannered gentleman, not noticeable in any
particular way, took the seat next to Dr. Albert on the train.  The
doctor spread out his paper with true German disregard for the persons
on each side of him, and began to read.  Always he held the flat brown
case clutched against his side.  The train passed several stations and
still the doctor hugged his case.  Although the car was packed with
people, the American carefully avoided crushing against the spy, for
fear of alarming him.  More stations were left behind, and the doctor
had nearly finished his paper.  The Secret Service man was getting
worried; would he fail?  And there were the papers, so close to him.
Then the train stopped at the next to the last station.  At the same
minute Dr. Albert completed his reading, and for the fraction of a
moment raised his arm to fold the sheets.  With lightning quickness the
agent slid the dispatch case away from the doctor's side and stood up.
Two or three people jostled him, and he staggered against the doctor.
Then he lunged for the door.  The doctor finished folding his paper and
felt for his case.  It was gone.  He jumped to his feet and glared
around him wildly.

"Conductor!" he shouted, "My case!  It is gone!"

The gates of the car clanged shut and the train started slowly.  Down
the stairs to the street went the American, quietly and confidently,
with the brown leather case under his arm.  On the train, Dr. Albert,
white of face, was bitterly calling on his German Gott to find his case
for him!

The next day, and the next, and for many days thereafter, a few modest
lines of advertising appeared in New York papers, saying that a brown
leather case had been lost on an elevated train and that a small reward
would be paid for its return.  The advertisement stated that the case
was of no value to anyone but the owner.  The poor doctor did not dare
call attention to his loss by sounding too loud an alarm, for he knew
what was in the bag.

"Of no value to anyone but the owner!"  Not to ninety-nine people out
of a hundred, perhaps; but the hundredth man had the case, and he and
his chief knew what to make of it.

On a windy morning in April, 1916, two American secret agents, dressed,
as always, in civilian clothes, were walking down Wall Street toward
number 60.  From information obtained through the capture of several
spies, they knew that in an office at 60 Wall Street a big, polite
German, Wolf von Igel, was running an advertising agency that was not
an advertising agency.  They knew further that Wolf was one of the
chief plotters, and that he kept many of the most important German
plans locked in a big burglar-proof safe, on which was painted the
Imperial German seal.  Lastly, and this explains why the two agents
were walking to his office at exactly that hour, they knew that some
especially important plans would be in the safe and that another
dangerous spy would be talking to von Igel.  This piece of knowledge
had come through one of the many underground ways which so puzzled the
Germans.  It may have been a "tip" from some American agent who was
secretly working with the Germans to spy on them.

The Americans pushed open the door, hurried right past the clerk in the
outer office, and entered the inner room.  Von Igel, who was bending
over a packet of papers, looked up.

"I'll trouble you for those papers, von Igel," said one of the
Americans, stepping up to him.

The startled German shoved him back, leaped to the safe door, and
slammed it shut.  But before he had time to give the knob a twirl, the
Secret Service men were upon him.  In rushed the clerk, and for a few
minutes the four men wrestled and struggled madly all around the little
room.  But the Americans were powerful, and they had help at hand.
They threw the Germans down and sat on them to rest, while the
frightened Germans protested.

"You have no right to do this," panted von Igel.  "This is the property
of the Imperial German Government, and cannot be broken into this way!"

"That'll be all right," answered one American.  "You see it has been
broken into."

The papers, seventy pounds of them, were packed up and taken
away,--with the Germans.  As the men were leaving the office, they met
the other spy, who was just arriving.  It did not take much persuasion
to make him go along too.

The German Ambassador, von Bernstorff, raised a frightful uproar over
this, and claimed that the papers were his.  This was a sad mistake on
his part, because, when the letters were opened and the plans read, he
was asked to remember that he had said they were his.  There was enough
proof in that seventy pounds to convince even a German.  Among other
things there came to light their conspiracies to undermine the
citizenship of other countries.  But now all this was made worse than
useless, for its discovery not only laid bare the plot, but also told
the names of all the men who were taking part in it.  It was the
biggest victory scored by either side, and the credit for it goes to
our regular Secret Service.

Three of the heads of the German beast in America had now been cut off.
There remained only von Bernstorff.  He lasted nine months longer than
the others.  The government has not yet told the world all the details
of the ambassador's last great defeat, but some were as follows--

Germany now knew that if she were to win at all, it must be
immediately.  So she decided to carry on her ruthless submarine
warfare, and sink all the ships she could, no matter to whom they
belonged.  She realized that it would make America declare war on her,
and in order to offset her coming in, she hit upon the idea of having
Mexico attack her on the South, and if possible, Japan on the West.
She did not stop to think (she had no time for that) that Japan was one
of the Allies, and of course would not make war against her.  Perhaps
she believed Japan would not remain faithful to the Allies.

So the Foreign Office in Berlin wrote to von Bernstorff in Washington,
and he in turn was to write to Mexico.  The success of the whole scheme
depended on secrecy.  The arrangements must be made without the United
States knowing anything about it.  Once again a heavy responsibility
was thrown upon our Secret Service.  How did they carry it?

We have already seen that the Service had its agents in the most
unsuspected places.  One of the most unsuspected of them all must have
gotten to work, for within a week the Service knew that something
unusually mysterious was going on inside the German Embassy.  Patiently
the resourceful agents worked and worked, bit by bit, until at
last--they won.  They secured the most necessary document of the whole
case, the one which Germany was most anxious to keep secret.  When it
was made public, it caused the greatest sensation of years.  Here it
is:--

"Berlin, January 19, 1917.

(To von Eckhardt, the German Minister in Mexico.)

"On the first of February we intend to begin submarine warfare
unrestricted.  In spite of this it is our intention to endeavor to keep
neutral the United States of America.

"If this attempt is not successful, we propose an alliance on the
following basis with Mexico: that we shall make war together and
together make peace.  We shall give general financial support, and it
is understood that Mexico is to recover the lost territory in New
Mexico, Texas, and Arizona.  The details are left to you for settlement.

"You are instructed to inform the President of Mexico of the above in
greatest confidence, as soon as it is certain that there will be an
outbreak of war with the United States, and suggest that the President
of Mexico on his own initiative should communicate with Japan,
suggesting adherence to this plan.  At the same time offer to mediate
between Germany and Japan.

"Please call to the attention of the President of Mexico that the
employment of ruthless submarine warfare now promises to compel England
to make peace in a few months."

"Zimmermann."


Alfred Zimmermann was the German Foreign Minister.

The German defense to this piece of absolute proof was what we have
since learned to expect from Germans;--

"We were not doing it.  And anyway, it was not unfriendly, and we had a
perfect right to do it."

The once great German machine was now without its leaders, and all it
could do was to carry on a number of small local agitations, with no
directing intelligence.  A very few months after the publication of the
Zimmermann letter, the United States itself went into the war.  Then
the constant struggle between detectives and enemy-aliens became even
more serious.  A new problem faced the Secret Service and its
co-workers.  That was to keep the German spies over here from sending
to Germany information that would be of value to her in a military way.
No knowledge of the movements of troops, of fleets, or of supplies must
be allowed to leave America.  At all costs the war plans must be kept
secret.

The spies tried to send information to Germany by many different ways,
such as by cable to Denmark, Switzerland, or any other neutral European
nation, and then by telegraph into Germany; or by telegraph to Mexico,
and then by wireless to Germany; or by wireless to a neutral ship on
the ocean, which would relay to Germany by her wireless.  The first and
most important thing for the spy in every case was to get his message
out of this country.

To prevent this, the United States established censorships.  There were
telegraph censors, watching the wires into Mexico; there were postal
censors, examining the mails; but the most interesting was the cable
censor, who had to keep all the cables free from enemy use.  Although
cable censorship was done by the Navy Department, its work very often
overlapped that of the Secret Service.  Here is a typical example of
how these two worked together, not correct in details but accurately
showing the method followed in a great many cases:--

In June, 1917, some of General Pershing's first troops sailed from New
York, in number about 15,000 men, in 13 transports.  On that very day a
Spanish firm in the city filed a cable to Spain, saying:--

"Quote 13 millers at 15 per cent."

The censor's suspicious mind, always on the alert for something
unusual, saw that this message could easily be a code, which would mean
to the man receiving it, "Sailed, 13 transports with 15,000 troops."

It was too probable to be an accident, thought the censor, and he
decided to watch Mendez & Co.  A few days later two more transports
sailed, and Mendez filed three more cables, each containing the number
2, with other figures.  The censor promptly put the detectives on the
trail.

The merciless grasp of the Secret Service, which always "gets" its man,
then settled about Mendez.  The Spaniard could make no move, day or
night, that was not immediately known to the Service.

In the dead of an autumn night, two agents opened the door of Mendez'
office with a master key, and searched his desk.  One man ran over all
the papers, reading them rapidly in a low voice, while his companion,
an expert stenographer, took down the words with lightning speed.  This
done, they placed a dictagraph in the inner office, working quickly and
well.  With a final glance around, they left, having completed the work
in a remarkably short time.

The next day Mendez' telephone was tapped.  Then his secretary left,
and the new one he hired was a Secret Service agent.  The Spaniard
never guessed it, for the secretary brought the most trustworthy
references.  Every time Mendez held a meeting of his group of German
agents and talked of how to send information to Germany, the secretary
heard all they said, and at once reported it to his chief.  Every time
Mendez telephoned, a Secret Service agent listened to what he said.
Every time he had a conference in his office, if the secretary by
chance was not there, the dictagraph made a record of the conversation,
and the Service knew about it.

Naturally such careful watching won in the end.  Mendez, who had caught
the German habit of believing that no one was so clever as himself, did
not dream of the net that was being woven around him, and went on
filing his cable messages which, of course, were not sent.  All the
information obtained by the Secret Service was sifted, arranged, and
confirmed, and Mendez was arrested.  With his departure, his whole
following was helpless, and settled back to swear at the United States
for its tyranny.  The patient Secret Service had scored again.

So it went.  For every German spy or would-be spy in America, there was
an agent of the Secret Service, equally resourceful, and more likely to
succeed, because, no matter how clumsy his adversary seemed, he never
made the mistake of underrating him.  "Stupid Yankees," von Papen had
called us, while he went about his plotting with child-like faith in
his skill at hiding.  "Stupid Germans," the Secret Service might have
retorted, as it skillfully uncovered all his plotting and sent him back
to his Kaiser, where his stupidity was more appreciated.

But it took many months of patient, unceasing work, and far the
greatest part of it was dull, hard, steady grind.  Rarely was there any
excitement for the industrious government agents, and more rarely was
there any glory, for the work had to be kept secret.  Trailing,
watching, studying, thinking, always putting two and two together and
often finding that they made five instead of four; through day and
night, through sun and storm, the officers whose duty it was to catch
the spy before he could harm America worked steadily on.

That is why America won at home just as she won abroad.  Had not the
silent army in the United States fought so unceasingly and so
skillfully, the army in France would have been paralyzed.  When you
think of the Great Victory, remember those quiet, unknown men and women
at home who did so much to help win it, and give full credit to the
Secret Service.

ROGER WILLIAM RIIS.


AT THE FRONT

_What one soldier writes, millions have experienced._


At first the waiting for orders; the wonder of how to adapt one's
nature to the conditions that lay ahead.  The fear of being afraid.
Many times in that last week in London, which now seems so far away, I
did aimless, meaningless things that I had done before; wondering if I
should ever do them again.  Visiting old scenes of happy days, trying,
as it were, to conjure up old associations, for fear the chance might
not come again.  Strange, perhaps, but many of the things I do are
strange, and only those who know me best would understand.  My good-by
to you--and the curtain rose on the first act of the drama that I have
been privileged to watch, with every now and then a "walking on" part.
The first act was one of absorbing interest, learning the characters of
the play, and my mind was filled with wonder at the plot as day by day
it unfolded before me.  I have tried to write of all the wonders of the
Base; its organization and the mastery of an Empire to serve its ideal
in its hour of need.  The second curtain rose on the trenches, and it
is my impressions of this life, rather than of its details, that I
would now write.  The first and greatest is the way the average man has
surmounted the impossible, has brought, as it were, a power to strike
that word from his vocabulary.  Living in conditions which in previous
years would have caused his death, he has maintained his vitality of
mind and body.  Healthy amid the pestilence of decaying death, of chill
from nights spent sometimes waist deep in water; or chattering with
cold as misty morning finds him saturated with its clammy cold.  Facing
death from bullet, shell, and gas, and all the ingenuity that devilish
manhood can devise, yet remaining the same cheery, lively animal,
wondering when it all will cease.  A new spirit of unselfishness has
entered the race, or perchance the old selfishness bred by years of
peace has died, leaving a cleaner, nobler feeling in its place.  Men
who before cheated their neighbors, grasping to themselves all that
came their way, have learned instinctively to share their little all.
The message from Mars, "Halves, partner," has become the general
spirit; and yet some say that there is no finer side to war!  As for
the officers, as a rule, no words for them can be too fine.  For they
have learned at once to be the leaders and the servants of their men,
tiring themselves out for others' comforts.  And the men know it; from
them can come no class hatred in future years.  If danger lies in that
direction it must surely come from those who have stayed at home.

For myself, I am slowly learning my lesson; learning that death, which
seems so near one, seldom shakes one by the hand.  Learning to look
over the "top" to encourage those whose duty makes them do so.
Learning to walk out with a wiring party to "No Man's Land," or to set
a patrol along its way.  Learning to share the risks that others run so
as to win the confidence of my men.

Now let me say a word of the demoralizing effects of dugouts: Often it
takes a conscious effort to leave its safety or to stay away from it
for the dangers of level ground, and this is what all officers must
learn; for men can have no confidence in one who, ordering them out,
stays underground himself.  I am learning, but, oh! so slowly, for mine
is not a nature that is really shaped for war.  A vivid imagination is
here a handicap, and it is those who have little or none who make the
best soldiers.  At last the "finished and finite clod" has come into
his own.  Stolid, in a danger he hardly realizes, he remains at his
post, while the other, perchance shaking in every limb, has double the
battle to fight.  My pencil wanders on and I hardly seem to know what I
write.  Confused thoughts and half-formed impressions crowd through my
brain, and from the chaos some reach the paper.  What kind of reading
do they make?  I wonder.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

I'm awfully tired, but this may well be my last undisturbed night this
week, and I know how much letters must mean to you waiting and waiting
for news in England.  All afternoon I've been wandering about the front
line, exploring, and learning to find my way about that desolate waste
of devastation representing recently captured ground.  One waded knee
high amid tangled undergrowth dotted with three-foot stakes, and
learned from the map that this was a wood.  One looked for a railway,
where only a buried bar of twisted metal could be found.  One road we
could not find at all, so battered was the countryside; and so after
five and a half hours' wandering, we returned to a dinner of soup,
steak, stewed fruit, and cocoa.  Today I noticed for the first time the
wonderful variety of insect life in the trenches; flies and beetles of
gorgeous and varied color showing against the vivid white of the
fresh-cut chalk.  Past a famous mining village which for two years has
been swept by shell fire, now British, now German, until nothing save
the village Crucifix remains unbattered; iron, brick, and concrete,
twisted by the awful destructive power of high explosives.  Graves
dating back to October, 1915, and up to the present time, lie scattered
here and there, but each with the name of the fallen one well marked on
it, waiting to be claimed when Peace shall come.  As I walked the old
lines flashed into my head--

  "And though you be done to the death, what then,
    If you battled the best you could?
  If you played your part in the world of men,
    Why, the critics will call it good!
  Death comes with a crawl, or comes with a pounce,
    And whether he's slow or spry,
  It isn't the fact that you're dead that counts,
    But only, _how did you die?_"

Strange! but nowhere did I see a German grave other than those with the
inscription in English, "A German Soldier killed in action."  Dead
Germans have I seen, but never a German grave.

There seems to be no bird life here, beyond a rare covey of partridges
well behind the line, or a solitary lark searching for summer.  One
misses--oh, so much!--the cheeky chirp of the sparrow or the note of
the thrush.  We found a stray terrier about yesterday and have adopted
it, but I don't think it will go into the front line: there's enough
human suffering, without adding innocent canine victims that cannot
understand.  Here let me say a word for the horses and mules, exposed
to dangers and terror (for mules actually come into the trenches to
within 200 yards of the line), patiently doing their work, often
terrified, often mutilated and never understanding why they have been
taken from their peaceful life to the struggle and hardship of war.
Much has been written, much is being done, but how few realize it from
their point of view.  The men are wonderful, their cheerfulness, their
ability to work is nothing short of marvelous; but for the others, the
animals, their patient slavery is more wonderful, still.

Coming over the ridge tonight I saw the distant hills against the
after-glow of sunset; the moment was quiet, as one often finds it so;
for those few seconds no guns were firing, no shells bursting, and not
even the distant "ping" of a rifle was to be heard.  It seemed so
English, just as though we were on one of our September holidays in the
car, looking towards the north hill country that I love so much.  Then
suddenly the guns started, and we were at war again.  There is one of
those strange feelings of expectation in the air tonight, as though
there were great things pending, and yet all is normal as far as we
know.  Who knows, perhaps the end is not as far as we believe.  A few
more days of trial and we shall have earned our next rest.

I go to my so-called bed, to try and snatch a few short hours' sleep,
lulled by the music of the guns that have started their nightly hate.

My love to you.  Keep smiling.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Picture if you can a flight of twenty-four steps leading into the
darkness of the underground.  At the foot of this a room, if room it
can be called, some thirteen feet by ten by seven high, the walls of
tree trunks and railway sleepers, the roof of corrugated iron resting
on railway lines; from this hang stalactites of rust, and large and
loathsome insects creep about; above lives a colony of rats: such is
our living-room, damp with a dampness that reaches one's bones and
makes all things clammy to the touch.  A couple of tables, a chair, and
some boxes, such is our dining-room suite.  From this a long, narrow,
low passage leads to the kitchen, signalers' and 'phone room, officers'
bunks and office.  By day and night one stumbles among sleeping
soldiers off duty, tired enough to find sleep on the boarded floor.  My
bed,--a couple of boards and some sand-bags,--is four feet from the
ground, too narrow for safety, and yet I sleep.  Men who previously
grumbled at an eight-hour day, now do eighteen hours for seven days a
week--such is war, and such is the spirit in which they take it.

Outside--or rather up above--a cold drizzle adds to the general
discomfort, "pineapples" drop promiscuously about, but one can hear
them coming, save when barrages are about, and the roar of gun and
bursting shell drowns all else.  One nearly got me this morning.  I
just ducked in time as it burst on the parapet behind where I was
standing--a splinter caught my tin hat, but bounded off.  In spite of
all, this has been a cheery day.  One learns to laugh at Fritz's
efforts to kill one, and at the appalling waste of money he spends in
misplaced shells; one laughs still more when they fall in his own lines
from his own guns, and frantic cries of distress and protest, in the
form of colored rockets, fill the air.  LIFE, even with all its letters
capitals, has its humors.  Dire rumors of the postponement of our
longed-for rest--but what is rumor, after all?

Half of another weary night has passed.  I took a morning in bed (five
hours, only disturbed twice) and so raised my sleep average to nearly
four hours a day.

How unreal it seems to be writing with a loaded revolver by one's
paper, and a respirator on one's chest.  I bet the Huns are sorry that
they ever invented gas.  You make too much of what I did on Monday, it
was nothing wonderful, and had I had time to think, I should probably
have funked it.  Instinct and training and the excitement of the
moment--that is all, just my duty.  I did see a brave act that morning,
and one that required real pluck, not excitement.  I must see a
specialist about the injury as soon as I can get an appointment.  Still
smiling.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

A long wooden box five feet by three feet "in the cold, dark
underground."  Here we move and sleep and have our being, under one of
the famous battlefields of Europe, a captured German dugout, with
German shells bumping on the roof from time to time.  Had I but the
ability I could paint you a word-picture that might bring to you the
wonder of last night's events in their grandeur and their grimness.  As
it is I must do what little I can.

A long straying column along a road as darkness fell; turning westward
one saw the splendor of a blood-red sunset where the crimson melted to
gold, the gold to green, so often called blue.  Against this the
silhouetted outlines of slag-heaps and pits and houses, now ruined, now
whole.  By the roadside little huts some three feet square built by
their owners, who gathered around little blazing fires now that their
day's work was done.  The low drone of homing planes filled the air as
one by one they swooped down to earth, or rose on some perilous
mission, while bursting shrapnel added golden balls of fire to the
firmament of heaven, now a deep, deep blue.  To north, to east, to
south, yellow-green flashes of guns stabbed the darkness, and the
redder glare of bursting shells came ever and anon.  Across an open
heath, along a road pitted with shell-holes to the skeleton of a
shell-smashed town like some ghostly sentinel to the gates of war.
Here the sweet smell of a September evening was every now and then
rendered hideous by pungent odors through the dead town, where the
smell of gas still clung to houses and issued up from cellars.  Now
trenches lay along the road, and the golden harvest moon turned to
silver and flooded the scene, casting long, strange shadows on the
ground.  A deepening roar, followed by the whizzing scream of shells as
hidden batteries poured death into the German lines.  A whistle, a
roar, a thud, a sudden check, and on as a couple of shells spattered
the road ahead.  "Halt, off-load the limbers"--on to a crater where our
guides awaited us.  Here the chalk molds and craters of the shattered
German lines along which we walked looked like miniature snow-clad
mountains in the moonlight.  Destruction everywhere, but a destruction
that was grand while it was dreadful.  And so to dug-outs, and the
night-time "hate" and gas--a doze, and the wonderful dawn of a perfect
daybreak.  Exploration of trenches, broken by pauses to look at aërial
combats far up in the blue, where planes looked like bits of silver
dust whirled about by the breeze.  Interest covered and crushed every
other emotion, and though many of the things that lie about seem
loathsome in cold-blooded language, I found nothing of loathing there.
Now a human skull with matted ginger hair, but with the top bashed in,
now a hand or arm sticking up from some badly-buried body or
shell-smashed grave, and everywhere the appalling waste of war--spades,
shovels, German clothes, armor, ammunition scattered in a chaos beyond
words.

Crash! bang! boom! and like rabbits to earth once more; we have been
spotted, and whiz-bangs fall--a dozen wasted German shells.

Packed like sardines we lie and try to snatch some moments' sleep.
With revolvers by our sides, and respirators on our chests, we live in
the perpetual night of underground, coming to the surface to work or
see a little of God's sunshine or explore, as shells permit and the
spirit moves us.  Time as a measure has ceased to be and our watches
serve just as checks on our movements.  I love life, and oh, how I hate
it too!

G. B. MANWARING.


  A CAROL FROM FLANDERS

  1914

  In Flanders on the Christmas morn
    The trenchéd foemen lay,
  The German and the Briton born--
    And it was Christmas Day.

  The red sun rose on fields accurst,
    The gray fog fled away;
  But neither cared to fire the first,
    For it was Christmas Day.

  They called from each to each across
    The hideous disarray
  (For terrible had been their loss):
    "O, this is Christmas Day!"

  Their rifles all they set aside,
    One impulse to obey;
  'Twas just the men on either side,
    Just men--and Christmas Day.

  They dug the graves for all their dead
    And over them did pray;
  And Englishman and German said:
    "How strange a Christmas Day!"

  Between the trenches then they met,
    Shook hands, and e'en did play
  At games on which their hearts are set
    On happy Christmas Day.

  Not all the Emperors and Kings,
    Financiers, and they
  Who rule us could prevent these things
    For it was Christmas Day.

  O ye who read this truthful rime
    From Flanders, kneel and say:
  _God speed the time when every day
    Shall be as Christmas Day_.

  FREDERICK NIVEN.


THE MINER AND THE TIGER

On an October day in 1866, David Lloyd George, then a little lad of
three years, came with his mother and younger brother to live with his
uncle, Richard Lloyd, for his father had died leaving the family
penniless.  His uncle, a shoemaker and preacher, was educated though
poor.  In the picturesque little village of Llanystumdwy on the coast
of Wales, Lloyd George grew up,--a leader among his mates, not only in
his studies but in mischief as well.  He was a good thinker and liked
to debate with his uncle, and to be in his uncle's shop in the evening
when the men of the village gathered to talk over questions of business
and politics.  As he grew older, he took part in their conversation and
was acknowledged by them to have a good mind.

When he had finished his ordinary schooling, after which most boys were
put to work, his mother and his uncle agreed that the lad ought to
receive a good education; that such a capable boy should not all his
life be obliged to work by the day at farming.  But his mother was
penniless, and his uncle had only a few hundred pounds which he had
saved to care for himself in his old age.  But, though he was often
stern with the boy, he loved him, and decided to spend all that he had
for his education.  He could not know then that he was helping a boy
who would be the greatest man in England at a later day.

Eagerly Lloyd George entered upon his work at the university, studying
especially the subject of law.  At graduation time, funds were too low
to pay for the official robe which was accustomed to be worn in the
profession.  But Lloyd George left college and worked in an office
until he had acquired the needed sum.  Then he went back home and
opened a law office.

[Illustration: David Lloyd George.]

He knew that his home people needed his help, for they were farmers who
were continually being taxed or having portions of their land taken
from them unjustly by the rich landowners.  He knew, too, that the
laborers in the Welsh mining districts were unfairly treated.  Lloyd
George undoubtedly had heard the men talk over their troubles in his
uncle's shop.  Now he was prepared to defend them, and soon had many
clients, for they learned that he could not only sympathize with them,
but could plead their cases well.  Because he so strongly championed
the rights of the miners, and because he himself lived for so long in
the mining district, Lloyd George came to be called "The Miner."

More and more, renowned lawyers of the country began to hear of him.
He carried cases to the high court of London where he won great
admiration.  Always he fought for the poor and downtrodden people.  He
began to speak everywhere--on street corners, in the market places, and
in public buildings, with such feeling and force that even those who
opposed him admired him.  They liked his quick wit and good humor, and
his honest, direct way of looking at things.

In the year 1890 he obtained a seat in the House of Commons.  His
reputation grew, as through one act after another he sought to make
life easier and fairer for the nation's poor.  His advance, step by
step, to higher seats in the government was met with constant
opposition from the rich lords and magistrates.  But there was in him
an almost unbelievable power for overcoming all obstacles.  He was keen
to see what was the right thing to be done, then went straight after
it, making a new way, if necessary,--breaking down all barriers by
means of his own wonderfully skillful schemes.  Thus his policy came to
be known as one of "make or break."  Often the men who opposed him most
bitterly at first were afterward his stanchest friends and supporters.
No other premier, elected at the beginning of the World War, succeeded
in holding the position until the end.

He served in many capacities, proving invaluable in all.  It became
natural for officials or people anywhere, having difficult problems at
hand, to send for Lloyd George to settle them.  Once 200,000 miners of
Wales struck and refused to work again until certain conditions were
granted by their employers.  Lloyd George had really nothing to do with
the case.  But the labor officials spent a long time trying to arrive
at some agreement, and failed completely.  At last they sent for Lloyd
George to assist them.  He traveled down from London to the miners'
camp and in one day reached a settlement and left the men in good humor
back at their work again.

He was impatient at delay and slowness of action.  So when the British
soldiers went into the trenches to fight, he determined that they
should have as many and as good guns and shells as the enemy.  He
decided that the government should have all the money it needed to back
the great war; for building ships, airplanes, and countless other
necessities.

With his characteristic straightforward manner, he brought the problems
before the people, and thrilled and stirred them mightily by his
powerful, searching speeches.  He thus secured all that was desired.
At the close of the war, he was the chief power in England and whatever
he willed was done.

Yet Lloyd George was a warm-hearted Welshman who loved the people.
Even in war time, he was a jovial, home-loving man.  At the royal
house, at 11 Downing Street, he lived in sweet companionship with his
wife and two daughters, Olwen and Megan--one a young lady, the other a
little girl of twelve years.  His two sons fought in France.  Nor did
he forget his aged uncle now past ninety, who staked all that he had
for the boy's education.  As Premier of England, Lloyd George gladly
welcomed him to his royal home.  No other name in the past few years,
save that of President Wilson, has been so often and so affectionately
upon the lips of people in every land as has the name of David Lloyd
George.  He is a hero worthy of any boy's admiration and emulation.  He
has made some glorious pages in English history.  At the peace table,
in all his kindliness and power, he determined to see justice meted out
to poor, unfortunate people in all lands.


Georges Clemenceau, Premier of France, is another who stands for
justice and liberty.  He has upheld these virtues with such fierce
determination that he has come to be known in France as the "Old Tiger."

His father in the days of Napoleon III was a leader of the revolution
and aided in the attempts to establish a republic in place of the
kingdom.  He was thrown into prison, but his son, Georges Clemenceau,
became an even greater worker in the cause of freedom.  As a young man
he, too, was cast into prison because in the midst of an imperial
celebration, he shouted on the streets of Paris "Vive la République."
After he was released, he realized that he would be treated practically
as an exile, and so he came to America.  Here for a few years he was
instructor in French in a school for girls.  After marrying one of his
students, he returned with her to France.

Through his writings and speeches, he became widely known in Paris for
his democratic ideas upon all public questions.  At one time a young
military officer, Captain Dreyfus, was about to be condemned for high
treason.  Clemenceau believed him innocent, and proved that the trial
was unjust.  By his newspaper editorials, he so aroused the people of
Paris--those of society as well as the working classes and university
students--that a new trial was finally secured for the prisoner.  The
whole nation was interested in the Dreyfus case, and the youth of
France especially hailed Clemenceau as a leader of justice.

He was first made premier in 1906, at the age of sixty-six.  He served
for three years and then again retired to private life.  Often his
voice alone was raised in objection to laws or regulations which to him
seemed unfair.  Even when no one shared his ideas, however, he forced
the government and the people to listen to him, such a keen and
stirring debater was he.  For years he continued, as an editor of a
newspaper, to struggle for justice for the common people.  So unpopular
was the "Old Tiger" with his cries of freedom for all, that he had to
"tear and claw and bite" his way into society and to power in the
government.

[Illustration: Georges Clemenceau.]

When the World War came, his daily paper, the _Free Man_, told the
dangers and weaknesses of the government war measures.  Like Lloyd
George in England, he dared to propose new and gigantic means for
winning the victory.  He wrote much to keep high the courage of the
French soldiers and the people, defending the just and righteous cause
of their country.  It is said that in the first three years of the war,
he wrote over a thousand such editorials.

Then came the great crisis, when the Huns were planning a final drive
that should win them the victory.  Some one must be chosen who should
be able to prepare the armies to strike hard at the enemy.  Clemenceau
was the man chosen.  On October 17, 1917, he was once more made Premier
of France, though he was now seventy-eight years old.  But his eyes
flashed keener, and his mind was more clever and daring than ever in
his youth.  The man who even in the titles of his newspapers,--_Labor_,
_Justice_, _Dawn_, the _Free Man_,--had for years been shouting for
liberty, now had a share in the command of the forces of the Allies
which were to win the fierce struggle for democracy.

In the spring of 1918, when the French feared that they must lose the
war, it was Clemenceau who cheered them and urged them on and on in
their efforts to win, until at length he gave them the most cheering
message of all, "Hold the line, for America comes!"

Overcoming all obstacles, he led the nation to victory.  Down into the
trenches he went, risking his life in the very front lines, that he
might go among his soldiers to cheer them, and to let them know that he
did not send his men where he would not go himself.

His behavior toward his would-be assassin, on February 19, 1919, was in
itself a striking example of his daring, fighting spirit.  As he rode
home in his car from the Peace Conference, a man aimed and fired at
him.  Instantly Premier Clemenceau pushed open the door of his car,
and, while the man continued firing, sprang upon him and grappled with
him until the police reached the spot and seized the offender.  Five
bullets had been shot, only one of which lodged itself in the "Old
Tiger's" shoulder, and did no great harm.

Even those who opposed Clemenceau's political policies, strongly
denounced the attempt upon his life, which had been made by a supposed
Russian socialist.  Thus this keen, jovial, loyal defender of liberty
has come into the love of all his people.

An unnamed poilu sent Premier Clemenceau his Croix de Guerre, with the
following letter:--

"You have not been given the Croix de Guerre.  Here is mine, bearing
only two stars.  You merit two palms."


Clemenceau is reported to have wept when he read the letter.

It gave him untold pleasure to serve as the nation's host during the
visit of President Wilson--with whom, as representative of the great
republic of the United States, he should further help to establish
freedom throughout the world.


THE LOST BATTALION

On December 24, 1918, Lieutenant Colonel Charles W. Whittlesey of
Pittsfield, Massachusetts, was presented in the presence of 20,000
people on Boston Common by Major General Edwards with the congressional
Medal of Honor, the highest tribute of valor the United States awards.

General Edwards presented the medal with these words: "Your heroic act
thrilled the entire American Expeditionary Force.  It was a piece of
stout-hearted work that reflected credit upon the part of yourself and
of the men who were serving under you.  It sustained the best
traditions of American arms and valor.  It is a great pleasure to have
the presentation assigned to me; I regard it as a sacred duty."

Lieutenant Colonel Whittlesey smiled, and straightening up to his full
stature of six feet and four inches, simply said, "I thank you,
General."

The medal was given to reward his courage and determination when with
his "lost battalion" he was surrounded by the Germans in the Argonne
forest.

On the fourth day of suffering in the cold and rain without food or
blankets, when their ammunition was almost gone, an American who had
been taken prisoner by the Germans was sent to Major Whittlesey--his
promotion to Lieutenant Colonel came later--with a written message
saying, "Americans, you are surrounded on all sides.  Surrender in the
name of humanity.  You will be well treated."

[Illustration: Major General Clarence R. Edwards, former commander of
the Twenty-sixth Division, pinning the congressional Medal of Honor on
the breast of Lieutenant Colonel Charles W. Whittlesey.]

Major Whittlesey's exclamation when he had read the message was very
brief and very forceful.  It made the Germans understand without
further parley that the Americans would never surrender.  Major
Whittlesey's men cheered his reply.  Not one of them, cold, hungry, and
almost exhausted, thought for a moment of surrendering.

Several days before on the morning of September 26, they had entered
the Argonne forest, as a part of the line of American attack.  At
five-thirty in the morning, they had gone "over the top" in a very
heavy fog and behind their creeping barrage toward the German trenches.
They had to force their passage through trees, shrubs, vines, and
undergrowth grown all together so that it was almost impossible to
advance and yet keep in touch with one another as they were ordered to
do.

They reached the first German trenches which were named the _Ludwig_.
The Huns named their trenches so as to identify them readily in orders
and upon the maps.  These trenches were empty and they went on to a row
of fancy concrete and iron dugouts, called by the Germans _Karlsruhe_,
where they made their headquarters for the night.

The next day they met stubborn resistance from artillery and nests of
machine guns, but they were able to make progress.  In the first mile
they passed over twelve abandoned trench systems.

As they went forward they left men behind at regular intervals to keep
them in touch with the regimental headquarters.  Along this line of
men, stationed near enough together to communicate easily with each
other, orders, ammunition, and rations could be passed.

The Germans knew their plan and as the battalion in the next days
gradually got ahead of the main American line and out of touch with it
on the flanks, the Huns pushed through, killed part of the men on the
line of communication, and surrounded it, placing machine-gun nests in
the rear.

When Major Whittlesey discovered their predicament, he directed his
adjutant, Lieutenant Arthur McKeogh, with two men to make an attempt to
get back to regimental headquarters and inform the colonel of the
situation.  Lieutenant McKeogh has told the story of his success.  It
is intensely exciting and makes one shiver at the horror of men, who
have no personal enmity but might be friends, killing one another, and
also makes one thrill with pride and admiration for the courage that
dares even to death--not the quick death of the glorious charge, but
the slow death of thirst, exhaustion, and fatigue.  It shows us the
worst and the best of war, and that the worst is too great a price to
pay for the best.  Lieutenant McKeogh writes in an article in
_Collier's_:--

I took Munson and Herschowitz, and on hands and knees, with drawn
revolvers, we began a detour of the nests.  I was keeping my direction
by compass every foot of the way.  We had been going a scant ten
minutes when shots from a light Maxim and rifles broke out in front.  I
thought we had been spotted, but after a wait, when we started again,
we crawled within a few feet of the real target, now lifeless; he was
in khaki and apparently he had strayed from his outfit.  During our
wait we saw a boche passing through the trees.  From the crackling of
the brush there seemed to be others.  With my lips I made the words
"Don't fire" to my runners, and then covered him, in case he saw us.
He went by.  Realizing that we might have something of a time of it
getting through, I motioned the runners to my side, read the messages
to them in whispers and had them repeat.  Then scooping out a little
hole in the sodden leaves under my chin, I buried the messages, with
several others from my map case, in fine pieces.  Next I impressed upon
them that our mission was not to fight unless forced to it, but to get
back to the regiment, all of us, if possible; one, certainly.
Consequently we would separate when it became necessary.

Half an hour's traveling brought us to a broad clearing, cleaving the
forest as far as I could see, on a true north-south line.  Our
direction was south, and the trail down the center of the clearing
meant real progress, although I knew trails to be dangerous.  We were
not long upon it, when suddenly, out of a side trail, two German
officers appeared, fifty yards ahead.

The one in advance shouted something with "Kamerad" in it.  But at the
same time he was leveling his pistol at me, and I needed no interpreter.

We darted off the trail behind a bush at its edge.  The boches fired
into the bush as they came.  We stretched out and waited.  In front of
me a bough ran low and parallel to the ground; upon it I rested my
pistol, directing it upon the trail through the thin leaves underneath.

Presently Herr Offizier came creeping along, bent to the waist and
peering through the bush.  We looked squarely into each other's eyes as
we fired, less than ten feet separating us.  Being settled and ready
for him, my gun had about a second the better of his.  I aimed at his
mouth, allowing for the rise of the bullet from the "kick."  As he
fired I actually felt the concussion against my face, we were so close;
then a hot, sharp pain in my right forearm, as if some one had suddenly
pushed a white-hot knife blade along under the elbow when I hadn't been
looking.

Munson and Herschowitz fired too, and there seemed to be shots from the
second boche.  My own particular duelist dropped back limp after my
first shot, although I got off four in quick succession.

Now we made for the thick of the woods.  My resolution was to stick to
them though they should be thick as fish glue.  Under good cover Munson
dressed my wound.  My fingers had begun stiffening up a bit, and I
worked them to keep the trigger finger in good trim, thinking at the
time what a ludicrous shot I'd be with the left hand.  A thought for
soldiers in training: Are you ambidextrous?  I've never fired a shot
with the left.

The wound itself was a puzzler.  Almost at once the arm swelled until
it seemed that a duck egg had been inserted under the flesh.  But,
feeling around it, there was no hard substance beneath.  The sleeve
showed two holes within three inches of each other where the cartridge
had gone in and out.  What probably happened was that my shot had
diverted his aim and his bullet had passed under my crooked elbow and
armpit, merely searing the forearm in a caressing sort of way.  The
blood was negligible.  Altogether, it was a "cushy blighty," as the
Tommy puts it.  We reloaded our revolvers to wait for nightfall.  There
was a bit of stale bread in the bottom of my gas mask, forgotten until
now.  I split it into three parts, about two mouthfuls for each, and
dug out some half-soaked cigarettes.

"We'll have a smoke, Jack" (military rank is forgotten sometimes), "if
it's the last," I said, and he agreed with a wan sort of smile.
Herschowitz whispered that he didn't smoke, and dropped asleep as the
words left his mouth.

None of us had water.  And we were very thirsty.  The boys had white,
sticky saliva in the corners of their mouths, and, from the feel of
mine, I knew that I had too.

To the inevitable monody of machine guns, we dozed until dusk came.
Then with compass and revolver, one in each hand, I started again upon
the eternal crawl.  My arm had grown in circumference until the sleeve
was tight upon it.  Crawling added nothing to its comfort, for to do
the crawfish stroke the elbows are pushed out ahead and upon them as
anchors the rest of the body is then drawn up.  As yet it was not
necessary to go so carefully.  But when, after hours, we came to a
clearing as grateful as I was for the chance of unhampered movement, I
dropped to hands and knees.  Ten minutes of thus shinning passed
without event.  Then suddenly a boche voice called out, a little to our
front: "_Bist du Deutsch_?"  That much German I understood.  We
flattened.  As it happened, we were at the foot of a tree at the base
of which grew brush.  We lay motionless.  Again the voice, with its
demand in intonation.

Then the bolt of a rifle clicked clearly and the owner of the voice
fired.  The flash was clear against the night.  From the right and left
of the flash, and close to it, came other flashes.  The bullets whined
harmlessly above us.

Was this a small, mobile party?  If so, they would be slinking about.
But during half an hour of their intermittent firing the position of
the flashes never changed.  That looked like funk holes!  And if it was
a case of funk holes, by all the nasty little elves of tough luck, _we
had stumbled right into a German position_!

By watching the direction of the flashes I tried to determine their
front.  Cupping my hand over the radio-lighted dial of my compass, I
studied it in connection with their bursts of fire.  They seemed to be
firing north.  But north was our own battalion front, and theirs,
according to the military logic of things, south, unless--unless they
had swung in from our flank behind us and had dug in facing our rear!

No amount of juggling of the compass could satisfactorily account for
the position of those bodies.  So I settled down to waiting tactics.
Clearly, it's wise to let your enemy think you have moved off while he
is most on the alert for your movement.  After that he relaxes
vigilance, and you stand a better chance of getting away without
foreign substances under the skin.

I whispered--oh, very softly--that we would stay here for some time.
Possibly an hour.  And then I fell asleep!

Munson woke me by gently pounding on my thigh.  I don't remember the
time.  Must have been around midnight.  The funk holes were quiet now,
and we wormed away in a new direction without drawing fire.  I
recollect seeing the shiny hobnails and the horseshoe of steel on the
runners' boots as I crawled back past them to take the lead.  I
wondered at what distance they were visible.

Occasionally my helmet would come afoul of a vine or small branch; and
then like cathedral bells to my overstrained ears the edge of the
helmet would make a little ringing sound.  I berated myself for ever
having removed its burlap camouflage, though it gathered all the sand
in the world to deposit in my hair.

Once I heard Munson struggling to restrain a cough.  We froze to the
ground while he sputtered as softly as he could.  And I was to know
later what mental as well as physical torture the sensation is.  For
hours it seemed, painstakingly, inch by inch, we wormed our way out of
those funk holes.  _Out_, as I thought.  But it was deeper into them
that we went!

I was congratulating myself on leaving the hotbed, as I headed for a
bush, when, just at the fringe of it, and almost out of its very
leaves, came another demand in German.

This was a moment for quick action.  It was time for the message to go
back by three individuals on different routes.  I heard the safety lock
of a rifle snapped back.  He would fire the next minute.  Springing up,
I shouted: "Separate!" to the boys, and ran as fast as I could,
helter-skelter down the side of a gradual slope.  I was making no
effort at stooping now.  Speed was my salvation, if anything was.

Rifles barked all around.  For a moment or two I heard the runners
crashing through the brush.  Several shots hummed past me, but I was
too preoccupied to notice them much.  I knew I'd have to get cover
soon--before they saw and dropped me.  Just ahead, in dark outline, I
spotted what seemed to be a providential bit of cover.  I made for it
full tilt, the sloping ground quickening my pace.

I hurled myself at it, legs first and spread apart, so as to land in a
sitting position.  It was so that I did land--right astride the
shoulders of a boche.  I had selected a German funk hole for cover!

As I landed, a second boche who like the first had been squatted down
rose to his feet, slowly, it seemed, alongside me.  We were both bereft
of speech from the surprise; the fellow under me was incapable of
locomotion as well, for while I felt him squirm a bit he stayed put.

My mind was racing like an overfed gas engine.

"What," I thought, "is the convention when one tumbles in upon a pair
of Fritzes without the formality of being announced?"

I knew I had to gain time until the muscular paralysis from the
surprise had passed.  Subconsciously I must have been thinking that if
only I could speak to him in his native tongue he might believe for the
moment that I was one of his own.

I cudgeled my brain for a German expression.  Then I remembered a
masseuse, a very German woman, who has called at my home for years to
dress my sister's hair.  What was it she used to say so much?  What was
it?  Ah, I knew!

"_Was ist los_?" I said triumphantly to my vis-a-vis as he rose to his
feet.

Amusingly enough, I didn't actually know at the time that it meant
"What's the matter?"  I had an idea it was a liberal translation of
"Who's looney now?"  And that seemed pat enough for the occasion.

"_Was ist los_?" Fritz repeated with a strong, rising inflection on the
"_los_."  And at that he drew his overcoat, which apparently had been
thrown across his shoulders, high above his head and down over it, as
if he were cold.  I can see the silhouette of that coat against the
stars now.  Of course I could have been in the hole no longer than
fifteen seconds, but it seemed hours, and every move is deep limned
upon my memory.

As he lowered the coat, his hands holding the collar at his cheeks, my
wits became somewhat normal again.  "You idiot!" I said to myself.
"You've got a revolver in your right hand."

Sharply I brought the muzzle against his left breast and fired twice.
Then, crooking my elbow, I reached down, sunk the muzzle into the back
of the man under me, and again fired twice.  I recall spreading my legs
for fear of injuring myself.  His body crumpled under me.

The first one had fallen backward, supported by the side of the funk
hole.  His hands seemed to be reaching blindly for something in his
belt now.  Both their rifles lay extended over the little parapet.  He
might be trying to get at his trench knife.  So I fired again, and
without waiting to see the effect of the shot, sprang up and ran wildly
down the slope.

My breath was coming in gasps.  I thought it was all up, for the whole
camp--a bivouac of a company it surely was--went into an uproar of
shouts and shots and flashes.

"_Amerikaner_!" I heard several times.

I don't know how far I ran.  Not far.  For I was expecting to be hit at
any moment.  Again I found a low-growing bush.  And again
half-anticipating finding myself with the enemy, I sprawled in under
it.  My breath was burning my throat.  I was horribly thirsty.  And my
heart was pounding like a pile driver--and every bit as loud.

Little by little I squirmed in under the branches.  Voices came from
half a dozen directions.  Some were drawing toward me.  About fifteen
yards to my right front, shots came steadily from what I knew to be
another funk hole.  I thought of the shiny hobnails on the runners'
boots, and drew my legs up closer.  My watch gleamed like a group of
flares, and I twisted its face to the under side of my wrist.

The voices were very close now.  It seemed to be a little party,
beating the bushes for me.  I saw one fellow's head and shoulders
against the sky line.  My first thought was of my gun.  I knew there
was but a single cartridge left.  Softly I opened the clips on my
cartridge pouch and reloaded.

I didn't like lying face down.  It was too inviting to a shot in the
back.  I wanted to roll over and be prepared when they came upon me, to
sit up into some sort of firing position.  But my white face (and I'll
wager it was unwontedly white!) might show up in the dark.  So I clawed
my fingers into the ground in the hope that I could apply some
camouflage in the form of mud.  But mud is perverse; it lies yards deep
when you don't want it, and is miles away when you do.  The ground was
wet enough from the rains--so was I, for that matter!--but with spongy,
dead leaves.  I tried smearing some over the backs of my hands, but
when I extended one to get the effect it was as lily-white as milady's;
whereat I hastily tucked it back under my gas mask, worn at the "alert"
upon my chest.

The searchers, meantime, were snaking around among the bushes.  Their
conversation was as audible as it was meaningless to me--now to my
left, next close up, then withdrawing to my right.

All this time the "li'l .45" was ready if they got so near that
discovery would be inevitable.  I hadn't given up hope by any means,
but I did let myself picture several boches taking my maps and message
books (one of them full of carbon copies) into some dugout.  Such odd
little thoughts as how long it would take them to find a boche who
could read English occurred to me.  And from that I was whisked back to
a Forty-second Street barber whose English was excellent and who had
told me of his service in the German army.  Many such reservists must
have returned to the Fatherland.  I wondered, too, if, in the
anticipated exchange of shots, having wounded me, they would kill me
outright in reprisal for my killing their two comrades.

Oh, it was a cheerful line of speculation!  I was deep in it when,
above the regular shots of the fellow in the funk hole nearest me, came
a rattle of pistol explosions some distance away.  "One of the
runners," I thought.  "Hope he was as lucky as I."  Munson told me
later that he had run into a boche near a railway track and had dropped
him.

The chap in the near-by funk hole began to amuse me now.  He kept up
his shots at fifteen-second intervals for half an hour.  I'm inclined
to believe those Jerries were more frightened than we.  May have
thought it was a surprise attack in force.  This fellow, for instance,
was firing, I knew, at nothing in the world but atmosphere.  And in his
own mind he may have been bumping off a lot of Yanks lying in wait for
the word to charge at his front--wherever in blazes his front was!

I got to feeling rather snug about the nervousness of this outfit.  And
pride cometh also before a cough.  After three days of intermittent
rain, without overcoat, I had acquired a cold.  And now my throat
tickled and my nose itched, and I was headed straight for a healthy
bark.  I sunk my teeth around my forearm--the good one--and let go.  It
was pretty well smothered and attracted no attention, for the fellow
with all the superfluous ammunition remained quiet.

Seemingly secure from discovery, I was in no great rush to decide on
future plans.  But some sort of campaign had to be laid out, for dawn
was not many hours away.  I think it was about two-thirty, and before
light I had to be out of those environs, if ever I was to get out.  But
at the moment it would have been suicidal to move.  The night had
become so quiet that I hardly dared raise my head for fear the edge of
the helmet would scrape against something.  Once, when my head dropped
from sleepiness, the helmet brought up against the muzzle of my gun.
It sounded like the crack of Doomsday to me.

I studied my compass to prevent drowsing.  I was satisfied that
whatever way I crawled--farther away from or closer to more funk
holes--it would be a matter of pure guesswork, so I determined to hit
out south when move I did.  The sky was sown with stars.  As I looked
at them I thought of all the untroubled people they were shining upon;
saw the theatre crowds on Broadway.  "Old stars," I thought, "I wonder
if ever I'll see you again."  And then smiled at myself for finding
time to wax sentimental when practical matters should be engaging me!
Next I deplored my luck that there should be stars at all on this
night.  Wind and rain were what I wanted.  Under their cover I stood a
fair chance at weaseling off.

A visual reconnoissance of the ground immediately in front of me to the
south showed, within reach, the stump of a sapling.  I couldn't see
whether it had been cut by shell fire or for camouflage.  Wriggling
forward a few feet, I extended my arm outside the bush.  It was too
clean a cut for shell fire, my fingers told me.  Nothing but a sharp ax
had severed it so smoothly.  Here was one spot I'd circuit before going
south--if I would avoid "going west."

The night was wearing on, and I caught myself half dozing several
times.  I kept looking at my watch and telling myself that I
mustn't--mustn't sleep.  The rawness of early morning did much to keep
me awake in my muddy, soggy clothes.

At about four o'clock I noticed that the stars were thinning out.  If
only it _would_ rain!  I will always believe that there was something
miraculous about the way the heavens were swept clear of those stars,
as if a great hand had gathered them in.  For soon a wind came up that
tossed the tree tops and bent even the bushes.  And with it, within a
few minutes, a heavy, lashing rain.  Nothing could have better suited
my purpose.

I reached up and snapped off a few branches.  No danger now of being
heard.  The wind was kicking up a delightful rustling.  The twigs I
inserted under my collar, their leaves thus giving some covering to my
face and breaking the line of my helmet.

Without loss of time I began crawling, taking care merely to keep low.
As I left, a German voice was traveling along what I assumed to be the
line of funk holes, yelling "_Posten_!" every few seconds.  I figured
that it was their "Stand to," or the relieving of a guard, for a little
earlier there had been the regular tramp of feet--maybe two squads,
from the sound--along a plank walk to my rear.

Machine guns were clattering away at their matins in several places in
the woods, but I was leaving them farther and farther in my wake--the
only wake of mine that I wanted them to attend.  Once more it was the
struggle with the forest; once more the difficulty of keeping my
bearings, constantly watching the delicate compass.  But breasting the
wilderness didn't matter now.  I was hungry and thirsty and so tired
that it was a real effort to plow my feet through the undergrowth.  But
at least, I was done with boche voices.

Then I came to a path in the exact center of which was a shell crater
nearly full of clay-colored water.  I almost fell upon the hole
reaching back for my canteen.  But as I leaned toward it, a strong
smell of mustard gas rose.  And I went on!

I hadn't gone far along the path when somewhere a boche shouted
something, but he was not very near and must have been calling to a
comrade.  I darted into the woods again, resolved to stay in them if I
dropped some place for good.  I was awfully tired, and to my surprise
found myself staggering.

Over fallen trees I climbed, so high that at times I was well above the
young saplings.  Dawn was breaking now, and it was easier to preserve a
sense of direction.  I came to another crater.  While I took the
precaution to smell, I would have drunk, I believe, even had the water
been gassed.  My mouth was terribly parched.  Already I had resorted to
shaking the rain-wet young trees over my upturned face; I had even
pressed their wet leaves against my tongue.  Now I drank--drank till I
could hold no more.  The water was almost as filthy as Gunga Din's--but
it was wonderful!

Broad day had come when I reached another such wide clearing as that of
our dueling exploit.  I was timid of taking it, but it ran south;
indeed, it may have been the same.  The firing was faint behind me, and
I decided to follow it.  I was vexed because I could not quite control
my steps.  My gun was swinging listlessly in my hand, and for the first
time in twenty-four hours I pushed it back into its holster.

Half an hour's going disclosed a broad road ahead.  I was passing
untenanted trenches.  I heard voices ahead presently and sprang into
the bushes at the side.  Then I went ahead slowly, with ears keen.  The
voices grew more distinct; I caught syllables and--it was English, good
old English!

I tumbled out and approached several Americans standing near a funk
hole.  I went up to one of them.  He looked at me with some concern in
his eyes.

"My God, but I'm glad to see you!" I said.  They were of the Third
Battalion, and my exclamation must have startled them, for, of course,
I did not know them.  "Tell me something in American," I added.  My
nerves were frayed, I guess, and my voice sounded curiously far-off.

"Is anything the matter, sir?" one of them asked.

"Nothing at all.  I'm on my way back to regiment at Karlsruhe.  Will
this path take me?"

Then I learned that I had reached the Tirpitz trench, the reserve
battalion's new position.

"Let me go back to the next runner post with you," said one, and made
to take my arm.  Which annoyed me, naturally.

The colonel was about to eat breakfast when I arrived at the fancy
dugouts we had taken so many eons ago.  I indicated my battalion's
position on his map and told him the situation briefly.


Lieutenant McKeogh adds, "Relief was sent with ammunition and food on
September 30, and on the following day the refreshed command started
forward again--again to be cut off, this time for five days."  The men
in the battalion crouched in the rain and the cold in their shallow and
hastily constructed trenches.  The Germans kept a constant fire upon
them from machine guns and attempted to reach them with their
artillery, but fortunately they did not get the exact range.

There were machine-gun nests all about them and if a man showed himself
ever so little or made any loud noise, he brought upon all of them
volleys from the guns and from the trench mortars.  At regular
intervals all the machine guns would sweep the place with a rain of
bullets.  Snipers were also constantly on the watch for the exposure of
the smallest part of a man's body.

They had carried little food with them, for they expected it to follow
them along their line of communication.  There was water in the swampy
little creek in the ravine, but to attempt to reach it by day meant
certain death.  At night the enemy covered it with machine gun fire,
making it almost impossible for the Americans to crawl down and back
again.  Many did make the venture, and some returned with their
canteens full, which they shared with their comrades.  Others were
found afterward by the stream where they had fallen under the enemy's
fire.

At regimental headquarters it was known, even before Lieutenant McKeogh
got through, that the battalion was surrounded in the forest, unless it
had been exterminated or had surrendered.  So daily, American aviators
flew over the forest attempting to locate the men.  They dropped
carrier pigeons in boxes hoping some of them might fall into Major
Whittlesey's hands and that by them he might send his location to the
colonel.  They also dropped boxes of food, but neither the pigeons nor
the food reached the "lost battalion."

Major Whittlesey had no rockets to send up to give his location, and
his men could not yell loud enough to make the aviators hear them and
locate them, but their yells did help the Germans to get better range
for their trench mortars and machine guns.

As the days passed the Americans grew more and more exhausted, but
their courage and hope continued strong.  All would rather die than
surrender.  Their ammunition was getting so low that the Germans were
able to come closer to them, for Major Whittlesey ordered his men only
to fire when the Hun was near enough so that they were sure not to miss
him.

After five days of this terrible exposure and strain, the battalion was
rescued by a relief party.  Of more than six hundred men at the
beginning, three hundred and ninety-four survived at the end of the
five days' fighting and suffering.  All were completely exhausted, and
many wounded.  Many were so weak they had to be carried to the rear
where warm blankets, warm food, and drink awaited them.

But more than this awaited them.  Their comrades were waiting for them
with happy smiles and proud cheers.  A place in history among the
valiant deeds of brave and daring men also awaited them.  They taught a
lesson in pluck and endurance that the world will not allow to be
forgotten.

To those who read this story of _The Lost Battalion_, Colonel
Whittlesey and Lieutenant McKeogh send the following messages:--

The most striking memory of one who returns from abroad is the memory
of the enlisted men, who bore the real hardship of the war and did
their work in a simple, cheerful way.

Charles W. Whittlesey.


America's greatest contribution to the World War was--the enlisted man.
His calm valor, his smiling self-sacrifice can never be told.

Arthur McKeogh
  1st Lieut., Inf., U.S.A.


[Illustration: Messages from Colonel Whittlesey and Lieutenant McKeogh.]


UNITED STATES DAY

United States Day was celebrated in Paris on April 20, 1918.

On that day, exercises were held in the great hall of the Sorbonne; on
April 21, a reception was given the American ambassador, and a great
procession marched to the statue of Lafayette.  The Stars and Stripes
flew from the Eiffel Tower and from the municipal buildings on both
days.

At the exercises in the Sorbonne on April 20, M. Millerand, president
of the French Maritime League, ranked Wilson with Washington and
Lincoln.

"Washington, Lincoln, Wilson--these are immortal types of
the presidency of a democracy--men who, conscious of their
responsibilities, assume the duty of guiding the people at whose head
they have the honor to be placed, thus realizing the necessary harmony
in human affairs between the principle of authority and the principle
of liberty.  Yes, history will assign to President Wilson a place among
the great statesmen of all time, for he has been able to make clear the
reasons why honor condemned neutrality and commanded war in order to
assure to humanity the blessing of peace."


Following the speech, the American and French flags were held aloft,
touching each other.  Then a French poet, Jean Richepin, recited with
great emotion and telling effect, a poem he had composed for the
occasion, entitled, "The Kiss of the Flags."  Ambassador Sharp saluted
the great republic of France and her Allies.

In London, the American flag flew on April 20, 1918, where no flag
except the British flag had flown in all history, at the top of the
Victoria Tower over the Houses of Parliament at Westminster.  A solemn
and beautiful service was held at St. Paul's Cathedral.  The King and
Queen and England's greatest men and women attended.

These celebrations in Paris and London and elsewhere are of importance
to America, because they proved that the world was beginning to realize
that the people of the United States were more than money seekers
looking only for selfish gain, and therefore weak and unreliable.  When
America entered the war, a leading German paper said,

"We do not think that America's intervention will have an essential
effect on the results of the war.  The Allies are going to have a
momentary advantage, but they will soon be aware that America is like a
stick that breaks when one wants to lean on it."


Another great German daily gave the following as America's reasons for
joining the Allies:--

"First, the desire to have a place at the peace conference; second, the
wish to weaken or destroy the love of different peoples for their
native lands; third, the hope thereby to be able to increase her
military and naval equipment; and fourth, the desire to build up a
great American merchant fleet."


Because Germany saw in the United States only the love of power and of
the Almighty Dollar, she made the terrible mistake that brought about
her downfall.  With the declaration of war with Germany on April 6,
1917, at least England and France saw the people of America more nearly
as they are, lovers and defenders of the highest ideals man has yet
felt and spoken.  The American soldiers showed a little later at
Belleau Wood and in the Argonne forest, that they loved these ideals
enough to die for them.

The English writer, Hall Caine, described the celebration in London in
beautiful and graphic language:--

American Day in London was a great and memorable event.  It was another
sentinel on the hilltop of time, another beacon fire in the history of
humanity.  The two nations of Great Britain and America can never be
divided again.  There has been a national marriage between them, which
only one judge can dissolve, and the name of that judge is Death. . . .

Two lessons, at least, must be learned from the service of Friday in
St. Paul's Cathedral.  The first is that the accepted idea of the
American Nation as one that weighs and measures all conduct by material
values in dollars and cents, must henceforth be banished forever.
Thrice already in its short history has it put that hoary old slander
to shame, and now once again has it given the lie to it.  The history
of nations has perhaps no parallel to the high humanity, the splendid
self-sacrifice, the complete disinterestedness that brought America
into this war, with nothing to gain and everything to lose.  It has
broken forever with the triple monarchies of murder.  To live at peace
with crime was to be the accomplice of the criminal.  Therefore, in the
name of justice, of mercy, of religion, of human dignity, of all that
makes man's life worth living and distinguishes it from the life of the
brute, America, for all she is or ever can be, has drawn the sword and
thrown away the scabbard.  God helping her, she could do no other.

The second of the lessons we have to learn from the services of Friday
is that, having made war in defense of the right, America will make
peace the moment the wrong has been righted.  No national bargains will
weigh with her, no questions of territory, no problems of the balance
of power, no calculations of profit and loss, no ancient treaties, no
material covenants, no pledges that are the legacy of past European
conflicts.  Has justice been done?  Is the safety of civilization
assured?  Has reparation been made, as far as reparation is possible,
for the outrages that have disgraced the name of man, and for the
sufferings that have knocked at the door of every heart in Christendom?
These will be her only questions.  Let us take heart and hope from
them.  They bring peace nearer.

It was not for nothing that the flags of Great Britain and America hung
side by side under the chancel arch on Friday morning.  At one moment
the sun shot through the windows of the dome and lit them up with
heavenly radiance.  Was it only the exaltation of the moment that made
us think invisible powers were giving us a sign that in the union of
the nations, which those emblems stood for, lay the surest hope of the
day when men will beat their swords into plowshares and know war no
more?  The United States of Great Britain and America!  God grant the
union celebrated in our old sanctuary may never be dissolved until that
great day has dawned.


NOVEMBER 11, 1918

Sinners are said sometimes to repent and change their ways at the
eleventh hour; and on the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the
eleventh month of the year of 1918, the Kaiser, and other German war
lords, if they did not repent, at least changed their ways, for at that
hour the armistice went into effect and the war was over, with Germany
and her allies humbled and defeated.

November 11 has become one of the great dates in world history, but it
was already great in the history of the nation whose entrance into the
World War determined beyond question its final result.

In the State House Library in Boston, there lies in a glass case a very
precious manuscript.  It is the _History of the Plymouth Plantation_
written by Governor William Bradford.  It is often called _The Log of
the Mayflower_, for it records the journey of the _Mayflower_ carrying
the Pilgrims to a land of freedom.  It tells the story of the forming
of an independent government by members of this little band, strong
only in their faith and in their desire for liberty.

In the glass case the written manuscript lies open at the record of the
solemn compact made in the cabin of the _Mayflower_ in order that all
who look may read and know the aims of these few courageous men and
women in seeking a new world.

This was about 300 years ago, on November 11, 1620.  Let us read again
the compact of these brave and adventurous souls, who saw the vision of
democracy, a dream not realized for the whole world until 298 years
later, on November 11, 1918.


"In the name of God, Amen.  We whose names are under-written, the loyal
subjects of our dread sovereign Lord, King James, by the grace of God,
of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith &c.
having undertaken for the glory of God and advancement of the Christian
faith, and honor of our King and country, a voyage to plant the first
colony in the Northern parts of Virginia, do by these presents solemnly
and mutually in the presence of God, and of one another, covenant and
combine ourselves together into a civil body politic, for our better
ordering and preservation and furtherance of the ends aforesaid; and by
virtue hereof to enact, constitute and frame such just and equal laws,
ordinances, acts, constitutions and offices, from time to time, as
shall be thought most meet and convenient for the general good of the
colony, unto which we promise all due submission and obedience.  In
witness whereof we have hereunder subscribed our names at Cape Cod the
11th of November, in the year of the reign of our sovereign lord, King
James, of England, France, and Ireland the eighteenth and of Scotland
the fifty-fourth.  Anno Dom. 1620."


It is safe to say that from this agreement which Senator Hoar called
"the most important political transaction that has ever taken place
upon the face of the earth," and from this band of Pilgrims, has come
in the three centuries leading up to world democracy a greater
influence for freedom and liberty than from any other single source in
the affairs of men.

How singular that this compact and the armistice with Germany, which is
without doubt the most significant transaction between men in all
recorded history, should both have been signed on November 11!  It has
been suggested that hereafter November 11, instead of the last Thursday
in November, should be set aside as Thanksgiving Day.  It certainly
should be forever a day of thanksgiving even if it is not made
officially Thanksgiving Day.

Sunday night, November 10, the whole world waited in breathless
suspense.  The armistice conditions had been considered by the German
government at a late sitting in Berlin on Sunday afternoon.  Hard as
they were, the government decided to accept them and telephoned
instructions to Spa, the headquarters of the German army, authorizing
the German delegates to sign the papers.  The messenger was waiting at
Spa to carry the information to the German representatives who were at
Château de Francfort with Marshal Foch and Admiral Sir Rosslyn Wemyss,
first lord of the British navy.  He reached them at about two o'clock
on Monday morning, November 11, and after some discussion the armistice
was signed at five o'clock, to become effective six hours later.

Saturday and Sunday, November 9 and 10, the whole world stopped,
looked, and listened.  Nothing just like it had happened before in the
history of mankind.  The world is constantly growing smaller as men
overcome the difficulty of getting quickly from place to place, and
peoples are thereby getting nearer to each other, so that whatever
happens to one is of immediate interest to all others.  The following
description of Sunday night and Monday morning in a newspaper office in
a small Massachusetts city is a graphic and interesting account of
scenes that were being enacted at the same time all over the world.


WAITING FOR THE FLASH

Not at once can the mind grasp the full significance of the wonderful
event of Monday, and as time goes on, more and more will the world come
to realize what the signing of the armistice which ended the war means
to present and future generations.  Events were moving so rapidly
during the dying days of German military might that keeping pace with
them was literally out of the question.  That Germany was a mere shell,
most people who had followed the course of the war believed; and that
she must accept dictated terms of armistice from the allies, regardless
of their severity, was growing clearer day by day.

Events of last Friday made it quite plain that the armistice offered by
the allied nations through Marshal Foch was to be signed by Germany
within the specified 72 hours.  This position was strengthened Saturday
afternoon when positive word came that the Kaiser had abdicated.  It
was the beginning of the definite end.  It revealed a power in Germany
greater than the power of the Hohenzollerns--the power of an outraged
people rising after long years of oppression.

From that hour of mid-afternoon on Saturday when the abdication of the
Kaiser was "flashed" to the _Sentinel_ over its Associated Press wire,
there was no relaxation in its plant.  In the press room--which must be
ready at a second's notice--men were on guard for every minute until
the Kaiser's hour struck on Monday morning at 2.45 o'clock.  It
mattered not to them that a bed between two rolls of paper was the
softest they could find, for couches and easy chairs are no part of a
newspaper establishment.  Sometimes the thought comes that "newspaper"
is but a synonym for "slavery."

With the coming of Sunday morning, without the expected word, the vigil
was taken up in other directions.  The composing, telegraph, and
editorial rooms joined in keeping guard.  The wire began to tick off
its code messages of riots in Berlin, further spreading of the "Red"
revolt in the army and navy, the flight of the dethroned Kaiser to
Holland, and the other numerous signs all pointing to positive
assurance that Germany must sign the armistice terms read to its
representatives by Marshal Foch, no matter how stern they might be.  In
mid-afternoon came a brief message plucked from the air--a Berlin
wireless--that the signing of the armistice was expected momentarily.
But the hours wore on into late evening, and then came through a
dispatch from Washington saying that the delay of the German courier in
crossing the line might result in an extension of the 72-hour limit.
Cold water never had a chilling effect equal to that.  One by one the
afternoon papers began to click out "good night" to the main office
until only a few remained with the morning paper operators.

Around The Associated Press New England circuit it must have been a
great day for the tobacco trust, for pipes burn freely under pressure.
From apples to dogs, from men who do little and make a big fuss about
it to men who do much and keep still about it, goes the discussion
between a bite at a sandwich and a sip at a mug of alleged coffee
brought in from a lunch room.  All the while the clock was moving along
to the hour that was to say whether the answer was peace or more war.

It was during an argument, surely--for that's the stock in trade in a
newspaper office--that it came.  What the argument was, and who was
winning it and who losing it, is forgotten now, for from the adjoining
room of The Associated Press operator at 2.46 o'clock in the morning
came the wild exclamation--F-L-A-S-H--The Associated Press signal, very
seldom employed, indicating that something big has happened.  Three
jumps to the operator's side, and there on the paper in his typewriter
appeared just three words: "Flash--Armistice signed."  It was enough.
Action replaced watchful waiting.

Not long afterward the bells began to ring and the whistles to blow.
The assembling place for the celebration the mayor had ordered was
right in front of the _Sentinel_ office, the biggest and most available
congregation park in the city.  By that time the first _Sentinel_ extra
had gone to press, and there was a breathing spell.  From the top floor
of the _Sentinel_ home everything happening below could be seen.  First
to arrive in the square was an automobile from Prospect hill, driven by
the chairman of the committee on public safety, for he had been
notified simultaneously with the mayor.  Then another car came up Main
street.  Then men on foot began to arrive.  At first they came in ones
and twos and threes, up street and down street and around the corners,
and then in droves and swarms.  Automobiles increased in number, coming
from all directions, with blaring horns and seemingly slight regard for
their own safety, but also with much regard for the safety of others.

Soon the square was alive, and there will not in our time be another
sight like it, for war of conquest is an unpopular business now.  The
flashing headlights of the motor cars, the screaming horns, the yelling
men, women and children, combined to make a picture never to be erased
from memory.  It was great to have seen it, even though not an
immediate part of it.  Then the parade started, disappeared down the
street, and in due time came back.  Later in the day was another
parade, and a larger and more formal one.  But it was not like the
early morning rallying of the "victory clans."  Nothing again will ever
be like it.  A spontaneous celebration of the victorious ending of a
terrible struggle that has rocked the world for more than four years
has a place by itself.

While the city was still seething with jubilant excitement and the main
street was getting more and more alive with people every minute, the
darkness of night began to give way before the dawn of day.  And it was
a beautiful dawn, too.  The eastern sky did not reveal itself in sullen
shade, but in clear color, more calm than brilliant, more in keeping
with a message of peace than of strife on earth.[1]


These celebrations were in many cases of the strangest character, the
chief aim seeming to be to march somewhere in some procession and to
make as much noise as possible.  In one of the large cities of
Massachusetts, the first sight that struck the eyes of citizens rushing
into the square was fifty or more of the most prominent business men,
each in a tin wash boiler, being drawn by two men over the paved street
while its occupant yelled at the top of his voice and beat its sides
with a hammer.  Auto trucks dashed up and down the streets as long as
these were clear, then joined processions or dragged behind them over
the pavements four or five empty galvanized ash cans.  In New York at
the premature celebration, which occurred November 8 when a false
report was cabled from Europe saying the armistice was signed, and at
the celebration on November 11, thousands of pieces of paper of all
sizes were dropped from the windows of the great buildings, scrap
baskets were emptied, catalogues, directories, and other pamphlets were
torn up and dropped sheet by sheet until in some places the entire
street was covered by this "paper snow storm."  It is said that it cost
the city $80,000 to clean the paper from the streets after the
celebration was over.

The tolling of church bells all over the country in the very early
hours of the morning not only announced to the people the signing of
the armistice, but also announced in many places church services of
thanksgiving.

Some cities and towns held two celebrations beside the so-called "fake"
celebration on November 8.  The Governor of Massachusetts early on
Monday issued a proclamation naming Tuesday, November twelfth, as a
legal holiday, but this did not deter the people from celebrating on
the eleventh.  In Boston all the talcum powder available was purchased
and thrown on people's hats and shoulders.  When it was brushed off in
considerable quantities, it made the pavements look as if they were
covered with snow and even more slippery.  The chief spectacular
feature of the celebration in Boston, however, was the burning on the
Common, on Tuesday night, of twenty-five tons of red fire in one great
blaze.  Similar and perhaps more hilariously happy scenes took place in
New York, Philadelphia, Washington, Atlanta, Chicago, San
Francisco,--in every great city and hamlet in the country.

Soldiers and sailors marched, reviewed by mayors and governors and
generals and admirals.  Speeches were made and songs were sung.  It
seemed at times as if everyone had gone crazy.  If a person could have
ascended high enough in an air plane and could have had the vision to
have seen the whole United States, he would have perceived a most
wonderful sight--a hundred million people yelling and singing and
parading in every nook and corner of this great country.  Nothing shows
better the horror and hatred of war that was felt by the American
people than this wonderful joy at the knowledge that it was all over;
and nothing shows better how much liberty and democracy meant to them
than their willingness to enter upon war when they so detested it and
so much desired to see it done away with forever.

Imagine the joy on these days in France and England and Belgium with
their great cities lit up again after more than four years of darkness!
What wonder that the Belgian boys and girls in Ghent marched up and
down the streets singing, "It's a long, long way to Tipperary," the
song which was probably the last they had heard on the lips of British
soldiers as they were pushed back out of the city by the foe!
Meanwhile the adults gathered in groups on the streets and in the cafés
and sang "The Marseillaise."

No other war correspondent felt and described the war with as much
sympathy and power as Philip Gibbs.  His description of the rejoicing
in Ghent on Tuesday, November 12, is a beautiful and touching story.
He writes of the lights and the singing as follows:--

"For the first time in five winters of war, they lighted their lamps
with open shutters, and from many windows there streamed out bright
beams which lured one like a moth to candle light because of its sign
of peace.  There were bright stars and a crescent moon in the sky,
silvering the Flemish gables and frontages between black shadows and
making patterns of laces in the Place d'Armes below the trees with
their autumn foliage.

"In these lights and in these shadows the people of Ghent danced and
sang until midnight chimed.  They danced in baker's dozens, with linked
arms, men and girls together, singing deep voices and high voices, all
mingling, so that when I went to my bedroom and looked out of the
casement window, it rose in a chorus from all over the city, like music
by Debussy.

"One song came as a constant refrain between all the others.  It was
'The Marseillaise.'  They sang it in crowds and in small groups of
soldiers and students, and I followed one man, who walked down a
deserted avenue and who, as he walked, sang the song of liberty to
himself, brandishing his stick, while his voice rang out with a kind of
ecstasy of passion."


Messages of congratulation passed from country to country and to armies
and navies.  Josephus Daniels sent by wireless the following tribute to
all United States naval stations and ships:--

"The signing of the armistice makes this the greatest day for our
country since the signing of the Declaration of Independence.  For the
world there has been no day so momentous for liberty.  I send greetings
and congratulations to all in the naval establishments at home and
abroad.  The test of war found the navy ready, fit, with every man on
his toes.  Every day all the men in the service have given fresh proof
of devotion, loyalty, and efficiency."


President Wilson cabled to King Albert on the day the king was expected
to enter Brussels, the Belgian capital, the following message:--

"Never has a national holiday occurred at a more auspicious moment and
never have felicitations been more heartfelt than those which it is my
high privilege to tender to Your Majesty on this day."

"When facing imminent destruction, Belgium by her self-sacrifice won
for herself a place of honor among nations, a crown of glory,
imperishable though all else were lost.

"The danger is averted, the hour of victory come and with it the
promise of a new life, fuller, greater, nobler than has been known
before.

"The blood of Belgium's heroic sons has not been shed in vain."


The most terrible and bloody conflict in all history had ended, and the
world was saved for the people.  The struggle upward by the common
people for over a thousand years was not after all to be in vain.
Liberty and democracy were now assured to all; the danger of slavery
and autocracy was over.  It was not strange that a whole world seemed
to have gone wild with joy.


[1] George H. Godbeer in Fitchburg, Mass., _Daily Sentinel_.


  IN MEMORIAM

  [THE FIGHTING YEARS, 1914-1918]

  Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky,
    The flying cloud, the frosty light:
    The year is dying in the night;
  Ring out, wild bells, and let him die.

  Ring out the old, ring in the new,
    Ring, happy bells, across the snow--
    The year is going, let him go;
  Ring out the false, ring in the true.

  Ring out the grief that saps the mind,
    For those that here we see no more;
    Ring out the feud of rich and poor,
  Ring in redress to all mankind.

  Ring out a slowly dying cause,
    And ancient forms of party strife;
    Ring in the nobler modes of life,
  With sweeter manners, purer laws.

  Ring out the want, the care, the sin,
    The faithless coldness of the times;
    Ring out, ring out my mournful rhymes,
  But ring the fuller minstrel in.

  Ring out false pride in place and blood,
    The civic slander and the spite;
    Ring in the love of truth and right,
  Ring in the common love of good.

  Ring out old shapes and foul disease;
    Ring out the narrowing lust of gold;
    Ring out the thousand wars of old,
  Ring in the thousand years of peace.

  TENNYSON.


THE UNITED STATES AT WAR--IN FRANCE

_Adapted with a few omissions and changes in language from the report of
General Pershing made November 20, 1918, to the Secretary of War._


Upon receiving my orders, I selected a small staff and proceeded to
Europe in order to become familiar with conditions at the earliest
possible moment.

The warmth of our reception in England and France was only equalled by
the readiness of the leaders of the Allied armies to assist us in every
way.  We met and considered the best ways of working together.

The French and British armies could not be increased in strength and they
had been unable to drive the enemy from his systems of trenches in
Belgium and France.  It was therefore necessary to plan for an American
force large enough to turn the scale in favor of the Allies.  The problem
before us was one of the very greatest difficulty.  The first step was
the formation of a General Staff and I gave this my early attention.

A well organized General Staff to put into effect the plans of the
Commander in Chief is essential to a successful modern army.  However
capable divisions, battalions, and companies may be as units, success
would be impossible unless they worked together.  A well organized
General Staff trained for war has not hitherto existed in our army.
Under the Commander in Chief this staff must carry out the policy of the
army as a whole and direct all the details of its preparation, support,
and operation.  As models to aid us, we had the veteran French General
Staff and the experience of the British who had formed a staff to meet
the demands of a great army.  By selecting from each the features that
best met our needs and helped by our own early experience in the war, our
great General Staff system was completed.

The General Staff is divided into five groups, each with its chief.  G. 1
is in charge of the organization and equipment of troops, replacements,
overseas shipment, and welfare associations; G. 2 has censorship,
gathering and disseminating information, particularly concerning the
enemy, preparation of maps, and all similar subjects; G. 3 is charged
with all strategic studies and plans and the supervision of the movement
of troops and of fighting; G. 4 co-ordinates questions of army supply,
necessary construction, transport for troops going into battle, of
hospitals and the movement of the sick and wounded; G. 5 supervises the
various schools and has general direction of education and training.

It was decided that our combat divisions should consist of four regiments
of infantry of 3,000 men each with three battalions to a regiment, and
four companies of 250 men each to a battalion, and of an artillery
brigade of three regiments, a machine gun battalion, an engineer
regiment, a trench-mortar battery; a signal battalion, wagon trains, and
the headquarters staffs and military police.  These with medical and
other units, made a total of over 28,000 men, or about double the size of
a French or German division.  Each corps consisted of six divisions--four
combat and one depot and one replacement division--and also two regiments
of cavalry.  Each army consisted of from three to five corps.  With four
divisions fully trained, a corps could take over an American sector with
two divisions in line and two in reserve, with the depot and replacement
divisions prepared to fill the gaps in the ranks.

Our purpose was to prepare an American force which should be able to take
the offensive in every respect.  Accordingly, the development of a
self-reliant infantry by thorough drill in the use of the rifle and in
the tactics of open warfare was always uppermost.  The plan of training
after arrival in France allowed a division one month for acclimatization
and instruction in small units from battalions down, a second month in
quiet trench sectors by battalion, and a third month after it came out of
the trenches when it should be trained as a complete division in war of
movement.

Very early a system of schools was outlined and started which should have
the advantage of instruction by officers direct from the front.  At the
great school centre at Langres, one of the first to be organized, was the
staff school, where the principles of general staff work, as laid down in
our own organization, were taught to carefully selected officers.  Men in
the ranks who had shown qualities of leadership were sent to the school
of candidates for commissions.  A school of the line taught younger
officers the principles of leadership, tactics, and the use of the
different weapons.  In the artillery school, at Saumur, young officers
were taught the fundamental principles of modern artillery; while at
Issoudun an immense plant was built for training cadets in aviation.
These and other schools, with their well-considered curriculums for
training in every branch of our organization, were co-ordinated in a
manner best to develop an efficient army out of willing and industrious
young men, many of whom had not before known even the rudiments of
military technique.  Both Marshal Haig and General Pétain placed officers
and men at our disposal for instructional purposes, and we are deeply
indebted for the opportunities given to profit by their veteran
experience.

The place the American Army should take on the western front was to a
large extent influenced by the vital questions of communication and
supply.  The northern ports of France were crowded by the British Armies'
shipping and supplies while the southern ports, though otherwise at our
service, had not adequate port facilities for our purposes, and these we
should have to build.  The already overtaxed railway system behind the
active front in Northern France would not be available for us as lines of
supply, and those leading from the southern ports of Northeastern France
would be unequal to our needs without much new construction.  Practically
all warehouses, supply depots and regulating stations must be provided by
fresh constructions.  While France offered us such material as she had to
spare after a drain of three years, enormous quantities of material had
to be brought across the Atlantic.

With such a problem any hesitation or lack of definiteness in making
plans might cause failure even with victory within our grasp.  Moreover,
plans as great as our national purpose and resources would bring
conviction of our power to every soldier in the front line, to the
nations associated with us in the war, and to the enemy.  The tonnage for
material for necessary construction for the supply of an army of three
and perhaps four million men would require a mammoth program of
shipbuilding at home, and miles of dock construction in France, with a
corresponding large project for additional railways and for storage
depots.

All these considerations led to the conclusion that if we were to handle
and supply the great forces deemed essential to win the war we must
utilize the southern ports of France--Bordeaux, La Pallice, St. Nazaire,
and Brest--and the comparatively unused railway systems leading therefrom
to the northeast.  This would mean the use of our forces against the
enemy somewhere in that direction, but the great depots of supply must be
centrally located, preferably in the area included by Tours, Bourges, and
Châteauroux, so that our armies could be supplied with equal facility
wherever they might be serving on the western front.

To build up such a system there were talented men in the Regular Army,
but more experts were necessary than the army could furnish.  Thanks to
the patriotic spirit of our people at home, there came from civil life
men trained for every sort of work involved in building and managing the
organization necessary to handle and transport such an army and keep it
supplied.  With such assistance the construction and general development
of our plans have kept pace with the growth of the forces, and the
Service of Supply is now able to discharge from ships and move 45,000
tons daily, besides transporting troops and material in the conduct of
active operations.

As to organization, all the administrative and supply services, except
the Adjutant General's, Inspector General's, and Judge Advocate General's
Departments, which remain at general headquarters, have been transferred
to the headquarters of the services of supplies at Tours under a
commanding General responsible to the Commander-in-Chief for supply of
the armies.  The Chief Quartermaster, Chief Surgeon, Chief Signal
Officer, Chief of Ordnance, Chief of Air Service, Chief of Chemical
Warfare, the general purchasing agent in all that pertains to questions
of procurement and supply, the Provost Marshal General in the maintenance
of order in general, the Director General of Transportation in all that
affects such matters, and the Chief Engineer in all matters of
administration and supply, are subordinate to the Commanding General of
the Service of Supply, who, assisted by a staff especially organized for
the purpose, is charged with the administrative co-ordination of all
these services.

The transportation department under the Service of Supply directs the
operation, maintenance, and construction of railways, the operation of
terminals, the unloading of ships, and transportation of material to
warehouses or to the front.  Its functions make necessary the most
intimate relationship between our organization and that of the French,
with the practical result that our transportation department has been
able to improve materially the operations of railways generally.
Constantly laboring under a shortage of rolling stock, the transportation
department has nevertheless been able by efficient management to meet
every emergency.

The Engineer Corps is charged with all construction, including light
railways and roads.  It has planned and constructed the many projects
required, the most important of which are the new wharves at Bordeaux and
Nantes, and the immense storage depots at La Pallice, Mointoir, and
Glèvres, besides innumerable hospitals and barracks in various ports of
France.  These projects have all been carried on by phases, keeping pace
with our needs.  The Forestry Service under the Engineer Corps has cut
the greater part of the timber and railway ties required.

To meet the shortage of supplies from America, due to lack of shipping,
the representatives of the different supply departments were constantly
in search of available material and supplies in Europe.  In order to
co-ordinate these purchases and to prevent competition between our
departments, a general purchasing agency was created early in our
experience to co-ordinate our purchases and, if possible, induce our
allies to apply the principle among the allied armies.  While there was
no authority for the general use of appropriations, this was met by
grouping the purchasing representatives of the different departments
under one control, charged with the duty of consolidating requisitions
and purchases.  Our efforts to extend the principle have been signally
successful, and all purchases for the allied armies are now on an
equitable and co-operative basis.  Indeed, it may be said that the work
of this bureau has been thoroughly efficient and businesslike.

Our entry into the war found us with little of the equipment necessary
for its conduct in the modern sense.  Among our most important
deficiencies in material were artillery, aviation, and tanks.  In order
to meet our requirements as rapidly as possible, we accepted the offer of
the French Government to provide us with the necessary artillery
equipment of seventy-fives, one fifty-five millimeter howitzer, and one
fifty-five G. P. F. gun, from their own factories for each of the thirty
divisions.  The wisdom of this course is fully demonstrated by the fact
that, although we soon began the manufacture of these classes of guns at
home, there were no guns of the calibres mentioned manufactured in
America on our front at the date the armistice was signed.  The only guns
of these types produced at home thus far received in France are 109
seventy-five millimeter guns.

In aviation we were in the same situation, and here again the French
Government came to our aid until our own aviation program should be under
way.  We obtained from the French the necessary planes for training our
personnel, and they have provided us with a total of 2,676 pursuit,
observation, and bombing planes.  The first airplanes received from home
arrived in May, and altogether we have received 1,379.  The first
American squadron completely equipped by American production, including
airplanes, crossed the German lines on Aug. 7, 1918.  As to tanks, we
were also compelled to rely upon the French.  Here, however, we were less
fortunate, for the reason that the French production could barely meet
the requirements of their own armies.

It should be fully realized that the French Government has always taken a
most liberal attitude, and has been most anxious to give us every
possible assistance in meeting our deficiencies in these as well as in
other respects.  Our dependence upon France for artillery, aviation, and
tanks was, of course, due to the fact that our industries had not been
exclusively devoted to military production.  All credit is due our own
manufacturers for their efforts to meet our requirements, as at the time
the armistice was signed we were able to look forward to the early supply
of practically all our necessities from our own factories.  The welfare
of the troops touches my responsibility as Commander-in-Chief to the
mothers and fathers and kindred of the men who came to France in the
impressionable period of youth.  They could not have the privilege
accorded European soldiers during their periods of leave of visiting
their families and renewing their home ties.  Fully realizing that the
standard of conduct that should be established for them must have a
permanent influence in their lives and on the character of their future
citizenship, the Red Cross, the Young Men's Christian Association,
Knights of Columbus, the Salvation Army, and the Jewish Welfare Board, as
aids in this work, were encouraged in every possible way.  The fact that
our soldiers, in a land of different customs and language, have borne
themselves in a manner in keeping with the cause for which they fought,
is due not only to the efforts in their behalf, but much more to their
high ideals, their discipline, and their innate sense of self-respect.
It should be recorded, however, that the members of these welfare
societies have been untiring in their desire to be of real service to our
officers and men.  The patriotic devotion of these representative men and
women has given a new significance to the Golden Rule, and we owe to them
a debt of gratitude that can never be repaid.

During our period of training in the trenches some of our divisions had
engaged the enemy in local combats, the most important of which was
Seicheprey by the 26th on April 20, in the Toul sector, but none had
taken part in action as a unit.  The 1st Division, which had passed
through the preliminary stages of training, had gone to the trenches for
its first period of instruction at the end of October, and by March 21,
when the German offensive in Picardy began, we had four divisions with
experience in the trenches, all of which were equal to any demands of
battle action.  The crisis which this offensive developed was such that
our occupation of an American sector must be postponed.

On March 28 I placed at the disposal of Marshal Foch, who had been agreed
upon as Commander-in-Chief o the Allied Armies, all of our forces, to be
used as he might decide.  At his request the 1st Division was transferred
from the Toul sector to a position in reserve at Chaumont en Vexin.  As
German superiority in numbers required prompt action, an agreement was
reached at the Abbeville conference of the Allied Premiers and commanders
and myself on May 2 by which British shipping was to transport ten
American divisions to the British Army area, where they were to be
trained and equipped, and additional British shipping was to be provided
for as many divisions as possible for use elsewhere.

On April 26 the 1st Division had gone into the line in the Montdidier
salient on the Picardy battlefront.  Tactics had been suddenly
revolutionized to those of open warfare, and our men, confident of the
results of their training, were eager for the test.  On the morning of
May 28 this division attacked the commanding German position in its
front, taking with splendid dash the town of Cantigny and all other
objectives, which were organized and held steadfastly against vicious
counterattacks and galling artillery fire.  Although local, this
brilliant action had an electrical effect, as it demonstrated our
fighting qualities under extreme battle conditions, and also that the
enemy's troops were not altogether invincible.

The Germans' Aisne offensive, which began on May 27, had advanced rapidly
toward the River Marne and Paris, and the Allies faced a crisis equally
as grave as that of the Picardy offensive in March.  Again every
available man was placed at Marshal Foch's disposal, and the 3d Division,
which had just come from its preliminary training in the trenches, was
hurried to the Marne.  Its motorized machine-gun battalion preceded the
other units and successfully held the bridgehead at the Marne, opposite
Château-Thierry.  The 2d Division, in reserve near Montdidier, was sent
by motor trucks and other available transport to check the progress of
the enemy toward Paris.  The division attacked and retook the town and
railroad station at Bouresches and sturdily held its ground against the
enemy's best guard divisions.  In the battle of Belleau Wood, which
followed, our men proved their superiority and gained a strong tactical
position, with far greater loss to the enemy than to ourselves.  On July
1, before the 2d was relieved, it captured the village of Vaux with most
splendid precision.

Meanwhile our 2d Corps, under Major Gen. George W. Read, had been
organized for the command of our divisions with the British, which were
held back in training areas or assigned to second-line defenses.  Five of
the ten divisions were withdrawn from the British area in June, three to
relieve divisions in Lorraine and in the Vosges and two to the Paris area
to join the group of American divisions which stood between the city and
any further advance of the enemy in that direction.

The great June-July troop movement from the States was well under way,
and, although these troops were to be given some preliminary training
before being put into action, their very presence warranted the use of
all the older divisions in the confidence that we did not lack reserves.
Elements of the 42d Division were in the line east of Rheims against the
German offensive of July 15, and held their ground unflinchingly.  On the
right flank of this offensive four companies of the 28th Division were in
position in face of the advancing waves of the German infantry.  The 3d
Division was holding the bank of the Marne from the bend east of the
mouth of the Surmelin to the west of Mézy, opposite Château-Thierry,
where a large force of German infantry sought to force a passage under
support of powerful artillery concentrations and under cover of smoke
screens.  A single regiment of the 3d wrote one of the most brilliant
pages in our military annals on this occasion.  It prevented the crossing
at certain points on its front while, on either flank, the Germans, who
had gained a footing, pressed forward.  Our men, firing in three
directions, met the German attacks with counter attacks at critical
points and succeeded in throwing two German divisions into complete
confusion, capturing 600 prisoners.

The great force of the German Château-Thierry offensive established the
deep Marne salient, but the enemy was taking chances, and the
vulnerability of this pocket to attack might be turned to his
disadvantage.  Seizing this opportunity to support my conviction, every
division with any sort of training was made available for use in a
counter offensive.  The place of honor in the thrust toward Soissons on
July 18 was given to our 1st and 2d Divisions in company with chosen
French divisions.  Without the usual brief warning of a preliminary
bombardment, the massed French and American artillery, firing by the map,
laid down its rolling barrage at dawn while the infantry began its
charge.  The tactical handling of our troops under these trying
conditions was excellent throughout the action.  The enemy brought up
large numbers of reserves and made a stubborn defense both with machine
guns and artillery, but through five days' fighting the 1st Division
continued to advance until it had gained the heights above Soissons and
captured the village of Berzy-le-Sec.  The 2d Division took Beau Repaire
Farm and Vierzy in a very rapid advance and reached a position in front
of Tigny at the end of its second day.  These two divisions captured
7,000 prisoners and over 100 pieces of artillery.

The 26th Division, which, with a French division, was under command of
our 1st Corps, acted as a pivot of the movement toward Soissons.  On the
18th it took the village of Torcy, while the 3d Division was crossing the
Marne in pursuit of the retiring enemy.  The 26th attacked again on the
21st and the enemy withdrew past the Château-Thierry-Soissons road.  The
3d Division, continuing its progress, took the heights of Mont St. Père
and the villages of Chartèves and Jaulgonne in the face of both
machine-gun and artillery fire.

On the 24th, after the Germans had fallen back from Trugny and Epieds,
our 42d Division, which had been brought over from the Champagne,
relieved the 26th, and, fighting its way through the Fôret de Fère,
overwhelmed the nest of machine guns in its path.  By the 27th it had
reached the Ourcq, whence the 3d and 4th Divisions were already
advancing, while the French divisions with which we were co-operating
were moving forward at other points.

The 3d Division had made its advance into Ronchères Wood on the 29th and
was relieved for rest by a brigade of the 32d.  The 42d and 32d undertook
the task of conquering the heights beyond Cierges, the 42d capturing
Sergy and the 32d capturing Hill 230, both American divisions joining in
the pursuit of the enemy to the Vesle, and thus the operation of reducing
the salient was finished.  Meanwhile the 42d was relieved by the 4th, and
the 32d by the 28th, while the 77th Division took up a position on the
Vesle.  The operations of these divisions on the Vesle were under the 3d
Corps, Major Gen. Robert L. Bullard commanding.

With the reduction of the Marne salient, we could look forward to the
concentration of our divisions in our own zone.  In view of the
forthcoming operation against the St. Mihiel salient, which had long been
planned as our first offensive action on a large scale, the First Army
was organized on Aug. 10 under my personal command.  While American units
had held different sectors along the western front, there had not been up
to this time, for obvious reasons, a distinct American sector; but, in
view of the important parts the American forces were now to play, it was
necessary to take over a permanent portion of the line.  Accordingly, on
Aug. 30, the line beginning at Port sur Seille, east of the Moselle and
extending to the west through St. Mihiel, thence north to a point
opposite Verdun, was placed under my command.  The American sector was
afterward extended across the Meuse to the western edge of the Argonne
Forest, and included the 2d Colonial French, which held the point of the
salient, and the 17th French Corps, which occupied the heights above
Verdun.

The preparation for a complicated operation against the formidable
defenses in front of us included the assembling of divisions and of corps
and army artillery, transport, aircraft, tanks, ambulances, the location
of hospitals, and the molding together of all the elements of a great
modern army with its own railheads, supplied directly by our own Service
of Supply.  The concentration for this operation, which was to be a
surprise, involved the movement, mostly at night, of approximately
600,000 troops, and required for its success the most careful attention
to every detail.

The French were generous in giving us assistance in corps and army
artillery and we were confident from the start of our superiority over
the enemy in guns of all calibres.  Our heavy guns were able to reach
Metz and to interfere seriously with German rail movements.  The French
Independent Air Force was placed under my command, which, together with
the British bombing squadrons and our air forces, gave us the largest
assembly of aviators that had ever been engaged in one operation on the
western front.

From Les Eparges around the nose of the salient at St. Mihiel to the
Moselle River the line was, roughly, forty miles long and situated on
commanding ground greatly strengthened by artificial defenses.  Our 1st
Corps, (82d, 90th, 5th, and 2d Divisions,) under command of Major Gen.
Hunter Liggett, resting its right on Pont-à-Mousson, with its left
joining our 3d Corps, (the 89th, 42d, and 1st Divisions,) under Major
Gen. Joseph T. Dickman, in line to Xivray, was to swing toward Vigneulles
on the pivot of the Moselle River for the initial assault.  From Xivray
to Mouilly the 2d Colonial French Corps was in line in the centre, and
our 5th Corps, under command of Major Gen. George H. Cameron, with our
26th Division and a French division at the western base of the salient,
was to attack three difficult hills--Les Eparges, Combres, and Amaranthe.
Our 1st Corps had in reserve the 78th Division, our 4th Corps the 3d
Division, and our First Army the 35th and 91st Divisions, with the 80th
and 33d available.  It should be understood that our corps organizations
are very elastic, and that we have at no time had permanent assignments
of divisions to corps.

After four hours' artillery preparation, the seven American divisions in
the front line advanced at 5 A.M. on Sept. 12, assisted by a limited
number of tanks, manned partly by Americans and partly by French.  These
divisions, accompanied by groups of wire cutters and others armed with
bangalore torpedoes, went through the successive bands of barbed wire
that protected the enemy's front-line and support trenches in
irresistible waves on schedule time, breaking down all defense of an
enemy demoralized by the great volume of our artillery fire and our
sudden approach out of the fog.

Our 1st Corps advanced to Thiaucourt, while our 4th Corps curved back to
the southwest through Nonsard.  The 2d Colonial French Corps made the
slight advance required of it on very difficult ground, and the 5th Corps
took its three ridges and repulsed a counter attack.  A rapid march
brought reserve regiments of a division of the 5th Corps into Vigneulles
and beyond Fresnes-en-Woëvre.  At the cost of only 7,000 casualties,
mostly light, we had taken 16,000 prisoners and 443 guns, a great
quantity of material, released the inhabitants of many villages from
enemy domination, and established our lines in a position to threaten
Metz.  This signal success of the American First Army in its first
offensive was of prime importance.  The Allies found they had a
formidable army to aid them, and the enemy learned finally that he had
one to reckon with.

On the day after we had taken the St. Mihiel salient, much of our corps
and army artillery which had operated at St. Mihiel, and our divisions in
reserve at other points, were already on the move toward the area back of
the line between the Meuse River and the western edge of the Forest of
Argonne.  With the exception of St. Mihiel, the old German front line
from Switzerland to the east of Rheims was still intact.  In the general
attack all along the line, the operations assigned the American Army as
the hinge of this Allied offensive were directed toward the important
railroad communications of the German armies through Mézières and Sedan.
The enemy must hold fast to this part of his lines, or the withdrawal of
his forces, with four years' accumulation of plants and material, would
be dangerously imperiled.

The German Army had as yet shown no demoralization, and, while the mass
of its troops had suffered in morale, its first-class divisions, and
notably its machine-gun defense, were exhibiting remarkable tactical
efficiency as well as courage.  The German General Staff was fully aware
of the consequences of a success on the Meuse-Argonne line.  Certain that
he would do everything in his power to oppose us, the action was planned
with as much secrecy as possible and was undertaken with the
determination to use all our divisions in forcing decision.  We expected
to draw the best German divisions to our front and to consume them while
the enemy was held under grave apprehension lest our attack should break
his line, which it was our firm purpose to do.

Our right flank was protected by the Meuse, while our left embraced the
Argonne Forest, whose ravines, hills, and elaborate defense, screened by
dense thickets, had been generally considered impregnable.  Our order of
battle from right to left was the 3d Corps from the Meuse to Malancourt,
with the 33d, 80th, and 4th Divisions in line and the 3d Division as
corps reserve; the 5th Corps from Malancourt to Vauquois, with the 79th,
87th, and 91st Divisions in line and the 32d in corps reserve, and the
1st Corps from Vauquois to Vienne le Château, with the 35th, 28th, and
77th Divisions in line and the 92d in corps reserve.  The army reserve
consisted of the 1st, 29th, and 82d Divisions.

On the night of Sept. 25, our troops quietly took the place of the
French, who thinly held the line in this sector, which had long been
inactive.  In the attack which began on the 26th we drove through the
barbed-wire entanglements and the sea of shell craters across No Man's
Land, mastering all the first-line defenses.  Continuing on the 27th and
28th, against machine guns and artillery of an increasing number of enemy
reserve divisions, we penetrated to a depth of from three to seven miles
and took the village of Montfaucon and its commanding hill, and other
villages.  East of the Meuse one of our divisions, which was with the 2d
Colonial French Corps, captured Marcheville and Rieville, giving further
protection to the flank of our main body.  We had taken 10,000 prisoners,
we had gained our point of forcing the battle into the open, and were
prepared for the enemy's reaction, which was bound to come, as he had
good roads and ample railroad facilities for bringing up his artillery
and reserves.

In the chill rain of dark nights, our engineers had to build new roads
across spongy, shell-torn areas, repair broken roads beyond No Man's
Land, and build bridges.  Our gunners, with no thought of sleep, put
their shoulders to wheels and drag ropes to bring their guns through the
mire in support of the infantry, now under the increasing fire of the
enemy's artillery.  Our attack had taken the enemy by surprise, but,
quickly recovering himself, he began to fire counter attacks in strong
force, supported by heavy bombardments, with large quantities of gas.
From Sept. 28 until Oct. 4, we maintained the offensive against patches
of woods defended by snipers and continuous lines of machine guns, and
pushed forward our guns and transport, seizing strategical points in
preparation for further attacks.

Other divisions attached to the Allied Armies were doing their part.  It
was the fortune of our 2d Corps, composed of the 27th and 30th Divisions,
which had remained with the British, to have a place of honor in
co-operation with the Australian Corps on Sept. 29 and Oct. 1 in the
assault on the Hindenburg line where the St. Quentin Canal passes through
a tunnel under a ridge.  The 30th Division speedily broke through the
main line of defense for all its objectives, while the 27th pushed on
impetuously through the main line until some of its elements reached
Gouy.  In the midst of the maze of trenches and shell craters and under
crossfire from machine guns the other elements fought desperately against
odds.  In this and in later actions, from Oct. 6 to Oct. 19, our 2d Corps
captured over 6,000 prisoners and advanced over thirteen miles.  The
spirit and aggressiveness of these divisions have been highly praised by
the British Army commander under whom they served.

On Oct. 2-9 our 2d and 36th Divisions were sent to assist the French in
an important attack against the old German positions before Rheims.  The
2d conquered the complicated defense works on their front against a
persistent defense worthy of the grimmest period of trench warfare and
attacked the strongly held wooded hill of Blanc Mont, which they captured
in a second assault, sweeping over it with consummate dash and skill.
This division then repulsed strong counter attacks before the village and
cemetery of Ste. Etienne and took the town, forcing the Germans to fall
back from before Rheims and yield positions they had held since
September, 1914.  On Oct. 9 the 36th Division relieved the 2d, and in its
first experience under fire withstood very severe artillery bombardment
and rapidly took up the pursuit of the enemy, now retiring behind the
Aisne.

The allied progress elsewhere cheered the efforts of our men in this
crucial contest, as the German command threw in more and more first-class
troops to stop our advance.  We made steady headway in the almost
impenetrable and strongly held Argonne Forest, for, despite this
reinforcement, it was our army that was doing the driving.  Our aircraft
was increasing in skill and numbers and forcing the issue, and our
infantry and artillery were improving rapidly with each new experience.
The replacements fresh from home were put into exhausted divisions with
little time for training, but they had the advantage of serving beside
men who knew their business and who had almost become veterans overnight.
The enemy had taken every advantage of the terrain, which especially
favored the defense, by a prodigal use of machine guns manned by highly
trained veterans and by using his artillery at short ranges.  In the face
of such strong frontal positions we should have been unable to accomplish
any progress according to previously accepted standards, but I had every
confidence in our aggressive tactics and the courage of our troops.

On Oct. 4 the attack was renewed all along our front.  The 3d Corps,
tilting to the left, followed the Brieulles-Cunel road; our 5th Corps
took Gesnes, while the 1st Corps advanced for over two miles along the
irregular valley of the Aire River and in the wooded hills of the Argonne
that bordered the river, used by the enemy with all his art and weapons
of defense.  This sort of fighting continued against an enemy striving to
hold every foot of ground and whose very strong counterattacks challenged
us at every point.  On the 7th the 1st Corps captured Châtel-Chênéry and
continued along the river to Cornay.  On the east of Meuse sector, one of
the two divisions, co-operating with the French, captured Consenvoye and
the Haumont Woods.  On the 9th the 5th Corps, in its progress up the
Aire, took Flêville, and the 3d Corps, which had continuous fighting
against odds, was working its way through Brieulles and Cunel.  On the
10th we had cleared the Argonne Forest of the enemy.

It was now necessary to constitute a second army, and on Oct. 9 the
immediate command of the First Army was turned over to Lieut. Gen. Hunter
Liggett.  The command of the Second Army, whose divisions occupied a
sector in the Woëvre, was given to Lieut. Gen. Robert L. Bullard, who had
been commander of the 1st Division and then of the 3d Corps.  Major Gen.
Dickman was transferred to the command of the 1st Corps, while the 5th
Corps was placed under Major Gen. Charles P. Summerall, who had recently
commanded the 1st Division.  Major Gen. John L. Hines, who had gone
rapidly up from regimental to division commander, was assigned to the 3d
Corps.  These four officers had been in France from the early days of the
expedition and had learned their lessons in the school of practical
warfare.

Our constant pressure against the enemy brought day by day more
prisoners, mostly survivors from machine-gun nests captured in fighting
at close quarters.  On Oct. 18 there was very fierce fighting in the
Caures Woods east of the Meuse and in the Ormont Woods.  On the 14th the
1st Corps took St. Juvin, and the 5th Corps, in hand-to-hand encounters,
entered the formidable Kriemhilde line, where the enemy had hoped to
check us indefinitely.  Later the 5th Corps penetrated further the
Kriemhilde line, and the 1st Corps took Champigneulles and the important
town of Grandpré.  Our dogged offensive was wearing down the enemy, who
continued desperately to throw his best troops against us, thus weakening
his line in front of our Allies and making their advance less difficult.

Meanwhile we were not only able to continue the battle, but our 37th and
91st Divisions were hastily withdrawn from our front and dispatched to
help the French Army in Belgium.  De-training in the neighborhood of
Ypres, these divisions advanced by rapid stages to the fighting line and
were assigned to adjacent French corps.  On Oct. 31, in continuation of
the Flanders offensive, they attacked and methodically broke down all
enemy resistance.  On Nov. 3, the 37th had completed its mission in
dividing the enemy across the Escaut River and firmly established itself
along the east bank included in the division zone of action.  By a clever
flanking movement troops of the 91st Division captured Spitaals Bosschen,
a difficult wood extending across the central part of the division
sector, reached the Escaut, and penetrated into the town of Audenarde.
These divisions received high commendation from their corps commanders
for their dash and energy.

On the 23d, the 3d and 5th Corps pushed northward to the level of
Banthéville.  While we continued to press forward and throw back the
enemy's violent counter attacks with great loss to him, a regrouping of
our forces was under way for the final assault.  Evidences of loss of
morale by the enemy gave our men more confidence in attack and more
fortitude in enduring the fatigue of incessant effort and the hardships
of very inclement weather.

With comparatively well-rested divisions, the final advance on the
Meuse-Argonne front was begun on Nov. 1.  Our increased artillery force
acquitted itself magnificently in support of the advance, and the enemy
broke before the determined infantry, which, by its persistent fighting
of the past weeks and the dash of this attack, had overcome his will to
resist.  The 3d Corps took Ancreville, Doulcon, and Andevanne, and the
5th Corps took Landres et St. Georges and pressed through successive
lines of resistance to Bayonville and Chennery.  On the 2d, the 1st Corps
joined in the movement, which now became an impetuous onslaught that
could not be stayed.

On the 3d, advance troops surged forward in pursuit, some by motor
trucks, while the artillery pressed along the country roads close behind.
The 1st Corps reached Authe and Châtillon-sur-Bar, the 5th Corps, Fosse
and Nouart, and the 3d Corps, Halles, penetrating the enemy's line to a
depth of twelve miles.  Our large-calibre guns had advanced and were
skillfully brought into position to fire upon the important lines at
Montmédy, Longuyon, and Conflans.  Our 3d Corps crossed the Meuse on the
5th, and the other corps, in the full confidence that the day was theirs,
eagerly cleared the way of machine guns as they swept northward,
maintaining complete co-ordination throughout.  On the 6th, a division of
the 1st Corps reached a point on the Meuse opposite Sedan, twenty-five
miles from our line of departure.  Their strategical goal which was our
highest hope was gained.  We had cut the enemy's main line of
communications, and nothing but surrender or an armistice could save his
army from complete disaster.

In all forty enemy divisions had been used against us in the
Meuse-Argonne battle.  Between Sept. 26 and Nov. 6 we took 26,059
prisoners and 468 guns on this front.  Our divisions engaged were the
1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 26th, 28th, 29th, 32d, 33d, 35th, 37th, 42d, 77th,
78th, 79th, 80th, 82d, 89th, 90th, and 91st.  Many of our divisions
remained in line for a length of time that required nerves of steel,
while others were sent in again after only a few days of rest.  The 1st,
5th, 26th, 42d, 77th, 80th, 89th, and 90th were in the line twice.
Although some of the divisions were fighting their first battle, they
soon became equal to the best.

On the three days preceding Nov. 10, the 3d, the 2d Colonial, and the
17th French Corps fought a difficult struggle through the Meuse hills
south of Stenay and forced the enemy into the plain.  Meanwhile, my plans
for further use of the American forces contemplated an advance between
the Meuse and the Moselle in the direction of Longwy by the First Army,
while, at the same time, the Second Army should assume the offensive
toward the rich coal fields of Briey.  These operations were to be
followed by an offensive toward Château-Salins east of the Moselle, thus
isolating Metz.  Accordingly, attacks on the American front had been
ordered, and that of the Second Army was in progress on the morning of
Nov. 11 when instructions were received that hostilities should cease at
11 o'clock A.M.

At this moment the line of the American sector, from right to left, began
at Port-sur-Seille, thence across the Moselle to Vandières and through
the Woëvre to Bezonvaux, in the foothills of the Meuse, thence along to
the foothills and through the northern edge of the Woëvre forests to the
Meuse at Mouzay, thence along the Meuse connecting with the French under
Sedan.

Co-operation among the Allies has at all times been most cordial.  A far
greater effort has been put forth by the allied armies and staffs to
assist us than could have been expected.  The French Government and Army
have always stood ready to furnish us with supplies, equipment, and
transportation, and to aid us in every way.  In the towns and hamlets
wherever our troops have been stationed or billeted the French people
have everywhere received them more as relatives and intimate friends than
as soldiers of a foreign army.  For these things words are quite
inadequate to express our gratitude.  There can be no doubt that the
relations growing out of our associations here assure a permanent
friendship between the two peoples.  Although we have not been so
intimately associated with the people of Great Britain, yet their troops
and ours when thrown together have always warmly fraternized.  The
reception of those of our forces who have passed through England and of
those who have been stationed there has always been enthusiastic.
Altogether it has been deeply impressed upon us that the ties of language
and blood bring the British and ourselves together completely and
inseparably.

There are in Europe altogether, including a regiment and some sanitary
units with the Italian Army and the organizations at Murmansk, also
including those en route from the States, approximately 2,053,347 men,
less our losses.  Of this total there are in France 1,338,169 combatant
troops.  Forty divisions have arrived, of which the infantry of ten have
been used as replacements, leaving thirty divisions now in France
organized into three armies of three corps each.

The losses of the Americans up to Nov. 18 are: Killed and wounded,
36,145; died of disease, 14,811; deaths unclassified, 2,204; wounded,
179,625; prisoners, 2,163; missing, 1,160.  We have captured about 44,000
prisoners and 1,400 guns, howitzers, and trench mortars.

The duties of the General Staff, as well as those of the army and corps
staffs, have been very ably performed.  Especially is this true when we
consider the new and difficult problems with which they have been
confronted.  This body of officers, both as individuals and as an
organization, has, I believe, no superiors in professional ability, in
efficiency, or in loyalty.

Nothing that we have in France better reflects the efficiency and
devotion to duty of Americans in general than the Service of Supply,
whose personnel is thoroughly imbued with a patriotic desire to do its
full duty.  They have at all times fully appreciated their responsibility
to the rest of the army, and the results produced have been most
gratifying.

Our Medical Corps is especially entitled to praise for the general
effectiveness of its work, both in hospital and at the front.  Embracing
men of high professional attainments, and splendid women devoted to their
calling and untiring in their efforts, this department has made a new
record for medical and sanitary proficiency.

The Quartermaster Department has had difficult and various tasks, but it
has more than met all demands that have been made upon it.  Its
management and its personnel have been exceptionally efficient and
deserve every possible commendation.

As to the more technical services, the able personnel of the Ordnance
Department in France has splendidly fulfilled its functions, both in
procurement and in forwarding the immense quantities of ordnance
required.  The officers and men and the young women of the Signal Corps
have performed their duties with a large conception of the problem, and
with a devoted and patriotic spirit to which the perfection of our
communications daily testifies.  While the Engineer Corps has been
referred to in another part of this report, it should be further stated
that the work has required large vision and high professional skill, and
great credit is due their personnel for the high proficiency that they
have constantly maintained.

Our aviators have no equals in daring or in fighting ability, and have
left a record of courageous deeds that will ever remain a brilliant page
in the annals of our army.  While the Tank Corps has had limited
opportunities, its personnel has responded gallantly on every possible
occasion, and has shown courage of the highest order.

The Adjutant General's Department has been directed with a systematic
thoroughness and excellence that surpassed any previous work of its kind.
The Inspector General's Department has risen to the highest standards,
and throughout has ably assisted commanders in the enforcement of
discipline.  The able personnel of the Judge Advocate General's
Department has solved with judgment and wisdom the multitude of difficult
legal problems, many of them involving questions of great international
importance.

It would be impossible in this brief preliminary report to do justice to
the personnel of all the different branches of this organization, which I
shall cover in detail in a later report.

The navy in European waters has at all times most cordially aided the
army, and it is most gratifying to report that there has never before
been such perfect co-operation between these two branches of the service.

As to the Americans in Europe not in the military service, it is the
greatest pleasure to say that, both in official and in private life, they
are intensely patriotic and loyal, and have been invariably sympathetic
and helpful to the army.

Finally, I pay the supreme tribute to our officers and soldiers of the
line.  When I think of their heroism, their patience under hardships,
their unflinching spirit of offensive action, I am filled with emotion
which I am unable to express.  Their deeds are immortal, and they have
earned the eternal gratitude of our country.

JOHN J. PERSHING.
  General, Commander-in-Chief,
    American Expeditionary Forces.


THE UNITED STATES AT WAR--AT HOME

When any nation declares war, it immediately brings upon itself unusual
problems and difficulties, but probably no other nation ever had such
problems to solve and such difficulties to overcome as the United
States, immediately after Congress declared a state of war existed with
Germany.  The United States was not ready for war.  She had been a
peace loving nation, and although possessed of great natural resources,
she had never developed them, to any extent, for the purpose of
carrying on war.  The cosmopolitan people of the United States had
never been put to the severe test of war conditions, and whether or not
they would stand together as one great nation was yet to be proved.
This meant that when war was declared the United States had to start
right at the bottom and build up a mighty fighting nation.  This had to
be done as quickly as possible, for Germany's plan was to crush her
enemies before the United States could bring any help.

The first thing that the country was called upon to do was to raise an
army.  Under ordinary circumstances, the government would call for
volunteers.  In this way an army could be provided which would be
sufficient for usual conditions.  The war with Germany, however, was by
no means a war in any way like that Americans had taken part in before.
The government knew this and realized that the United States would have
to raise an army that numbered in the millions.  To do this, the
volunteer system was found entirely inadequate.  So a system of
drafting men was worked out for which the government passed the draft
law, compelling all men between the ages of 21 and 31 to register for
military service.  This plan was accepted with great favor by the
people, and consequently, the day after registration the government had
ten million men in the prime of life from which to pick her army.  The
draft system was in charge of General Crowder who, as a result of long
study on the subject, had devised a system which was not in any way
influenced by political pull and was equally fair to both the rich and
the poor.  Local boards were established for examining the drafted men,
and those selected were soon on their way to training camps.

To house this great army, the government had to build a great system of
army camps.  Contracts were given out soon after war was declared and
the camps began to spring up almost overnight.  The government built 16
draft army camps and 16 national guard camps.  There were also numerous
other military zones where smaller bodies of troops were trained.  The
draft army camps were located so as to house the men from different
sections of the country, as a glance at the list of camps will show:--

Camp Devens, Massachusetts; Camp Upton, New York; Camp Dix, New Jersey;
Camp Meade, Maryland; Camp Lee, Virginia; Camp Jackson, South Carolina;
Camp Gordon, Georgia; Camp Sherman, Ohio; Camp Taylor, Kentucky; Camp
Custer, Michigan; Camp Grant, Illinois; Camp Pike, Arkansas; Camp
Dodge, Iowa; Camp Funston, Kansas; Camp Travis, Texas; Camp Lewis,
Washington.


These great cities were built in less than four months.  If all the
buildings of the sixteen cantonments were placed end to end, they would
make a continuous structure reaching from Washington to Detroit.  Each
one of these camps housed between 35,000 and 47,000 men.  The sixteen
cantonments were capable of providing for a number equal to the
combined population of Arizona and New Mexico.  The hospitals of these
camps were able to take care of as many sick and wounded as are to be
found in all the hospitals west of the Mississippi in normal times.
Each camp covered many square miles of land which had to be cleared of
trees and brush before buildings and roads were completed.

[Illustration: This picture shows the standardized style of building
used in every army cantonment in the United States.  The tar-paper
structures in the foreground were used for storehouses and general
out-buildings.  In the background are the well-built barracks.  The
company "streets" run between them.  Camp Devens, Mass.]

To keep these cantonments clean and fit to live in, large numbers of
sanitary engineers, medical officers, and scientific experts were kept
busy planning and installing the most modern sanitation systems.  To
command this great army, the government built officers' camps where men
best fitted were trained to be officers, and were then sent to the
cantonments to help in changing the American citizen into a soldier.
War was declared in April, and by the hot weather of summer America was
sending troops by the tens of thousands to Europe.  The wonderful way
in which American shipbuilders had made it possible to transport these
soldiers is told later.  But before leaving the subject of raising an
army, let us first see by means of figures just what the United States
had accomplished in this work.  In August, 1918, the overseas force
alone was seven times as large as the entire United States army sixteen
months before, at the declaration of war.  In this time she had
transported a million and a half troops overseas and had the same
number on this side, with the numbers always increasing.  In September,
1918, she had another draft and registration, calling men between the
ages of 18 and 45.  This gave thirteen million more men.

The colleges of the country had suffered a great deal because of the
two draft laws, as practically all men of college age were liable to
military service.  To overcome this difficulty, the government
established in the fall of 1918, the Student Army Training Corps.  This
plan allowed all students of military age, who were physically fit, to
enlist in the army and receive military training, and at the same time
obtain a college education.  From these men the government planned to
choose future officer material.  Although the war came to a close
before the plan could be fully carried out, it gave every promise of
being a success.

It must be evident that perhaps even a greater problem than raising the
army was how it was to be transported to Europe.  At the beginning of
the war, the United States had no ships to use for her necessary task
of transporting men and supplies.  The ships that were sailing from her
ports were all doing their capacity work and could not be used for the
new demands.  The Shipping Board immediately looked around for yards to
place orders for new ships; but there were no yards to fill the orders,
as the few the United States had were all overburdened with work.  The
only remaining solution of the problem was to build new yards.  America
did it.

The United States went into the war with something like thirty steel
and twenty-four wood shipyards, employing less than eighty thousand
men.  In a little over a year's time, there were one hundred and
fifty-five yards turning out ships and employing over three hundred and
eighty-six thousand men.  These men turned out more tonnage every month
than the United States had ever turned out in any entire year before
the war.  Of the new yards, the greatest was the famous Hog Island
yard.  On what was once a swamp on the Delaware River, just below
Philadelphia, the United States built this yard which is the largest in
the world.  The demand for speed in building resulted in the plan of
fabricating the steel before sending it to the yards.  By this method
the steel is cut and punched before going to the yard where it is then
assembled.  Thus steel mills at long distances from the shipyards could
be doing a very considerable part of building the ships.  Perhaps the
great increase in shipping can be best stated by a few figures.  In the
month of January, 1918, America produced 88,507 tons.  Six months later
in July she produced 631,944 tons.  Before the war the official
estimate of America's annual shipping production was 200,000 tons.  The
estimated production for 1919 was 7,500,000 tons.

The United States navy at the time of the declaration of war was
unprepared for the task ahead of it.  It was efficient but not nearly
large enough for the tremendous amount of work it was called upon to
perform.  The troop and supply transports needed convoys.  There were
hundreds of miles of coast to be patrolled.  Merchant ships must be
armed with men and guns.  All this had to be done, besides the work of
aiding the Allied fleets in European waters.  The government was not
long in seeing the need of a great increase in the naval force and was
soon making plans to bring this about.  New yards were constructed
immediately for the building of warships, and the capacity of the old
yards was increased.  These yards were soon busy turning out destroyers
and battleships at a remarkable speed.  The special work of patrolling
the coasts for submarines called for a great many small and speedy
submarine chasers.  Motor boat manufacturers all over the country
immediately began to make these swift little craft which were popularly
called the "mosquito fleet."  Even the great factories of Henry Ford,
although already busy turning out thousands of motor cars, found room
to build these chasers at their inland factories.  They were built on
specially constructed flat cars, which were then drawn to the coast,
where the ships were launched.

As the number of ships increased, the man power was accordingly
increased.  The navy established a new record by placing a unit of five
14-inch naval guns mounted on specially built railway cars for land
duty in France.  These guns were the longest range guns in France and
were out-distanced only by the great German super guns, the destroying
of which was one of their objects.  The German super gun fired a small
shell for a distance of from sixty to seventy miles.  The naval 14-inch
guns fired a 1400 lb. shell about twenty-five miles.  Although this was
a new departure for the navy, it met with the same success which had
crowned all of the other war work of this branch of the service.

[Illustration: A 10-inch caliber naval gun on a railroad mount at the
Aberdeen Proving Grounds, Maryland, where, after official testing, it
was destined for the advance into Germany.  Railroad artillery played a
very important part in the late war because of its great mobility and
range.  This gun is terrifically effective at a range of fifteen miles.
The oil cylinders visible under the gun where it is mounted are not
sufficient to take up the recoil, hence the braces which protrude
against the wooden platforms sunk into the ground.  The bridge-like
structure on the rear platform of the car is part of the carrier for
the shell in loading, and the arched bar over the breech block a part
of the newly invented quick loading device.]

In figures the work of the navy stands out prominently.  At the time
war was declared, the navy had 65,777 men in the service and 197 ships
in commission; when the armistice was signed, the navy consisted of
497,030 men and about 2000 ships, out of which 75,000 men and 388 ships
were on duty in foreign waters.

While army and navy preparations were going on, the business of
obtaining munitions and supplies was being very carefully attended to.
Before the war there were very few firms making supplies for the
government.  This meant that the government would have to turn to the
great private concerns for its material.  These firms dropped all their
pre-war work and attended strictly to government orders.  The result
was that at the end of the summer of 1918 the government was doing
business with over 3,000 firms and had over 12,000 contracts in
operation.  Even small plants invested heavily in increasing their
capacity so as to be able to turn out more and better work for the
government.  The organizing and manufacturing genius of the American
people came to the front with a result that the American overseas
forces were almost entirely supplied by American products, thereby
taking little strength away from the foreign manufacturers.

A few facts concerning the production of motor vehicles will give an
idea of the immensity of America's manufacturing program.  The
automobile industry as a whole expended one billion three hundred
million dollars in order to expand its factories to fill government
orders.  By the month of October, 1918, 70,000 motor trucks had been
sent overseas.  At the end of the war, 5-ton and 10-ton trucks were
being built at the rate of 1000 a day, and all trucks, at the rate of
shipment then prevailing, would have in a year's time made a procession
300 miles long.

If critical persons were to try to point out any weakness in America's
preparedness program, they would probably take the production of
aircraft as an instance where the government had failed.  Although
America was slow in producing airplanes, it must be taken into
consideration that this was almost entirely a new departure for
American manufacturers.  The delay in airplane production was due to
the fact that there was too much red tape to be unrolled before actual
work was begun.  The government soon realized this and appointed one
man to have entire charge of aircraft production.  Under his management
the red tape was thrown aside and business-like methods took its place.

The combined ability of the automobile engineers of the country
produced the Liberty motor which proved to be one of the best airplane
engines ever developed to lift great weights.  The DeHaviland and
Handley-Page, bombing and reconnaissance planes, were immediately
equipped largely with the new Liberty.  3180 of the former and 101 of
the latter were produced in this country in the year before the
armistice was signed.  Out of this number 1379 had been shipped
overseas.  In the meantime the production of planes had been far
outstripped by the enlisted and commissioned personnel of the air
service.  Thousands of cadets and officers were delayed in the ground
schools, at the flying schools, and at Camp Dick, Texas, the
concentration post for aviation, because of the ruinous shortage of
planes, just when the American forces newly brought into the battle
zones needed the efficient help of a great fleet of aircraft.
Airplanes are rightly called "the eyes of the army."  It is
unofficially stated that less than 800 American aviators ever saw
service over the German lines, and these men, not having American scout
planes, used largely foreign models equipped with the famous French
Gnome, LeRhone, and Hispano-Suiza motors.  American-made machines,
whether for bombing, observing, or scouting, went into action for the
first time in July, 1918.

[Illustration: A photograph from an airplane at 7900 feet, showing Love
Field, Dallas, Texas, and a parachute jumper in the "Flying Frolic,"
November 12, 1918.  Parachutes were used by observers to escape from
"kite" balloons ignited by German artillery fire, and a new type is
being perfected by which aviators may also escape from disabled
airplanes.]

The American people before the war were the most wasteful people in the
world.  This was probably due to the fact that the people had never
been confronted by a real necessity for economizing.  However, when war
was declared the government immediately demanded that the people
conserve their food.  The result was that Americans were soon observing
wheatless, meatless, and porkless days with great patriotic fervor.
12,000,000 families signed pledges to observe the rules of the food
administration, and hotels and restaurants joined in the great
conservation effort.  War gardens sprang up by the millions.  The
country was soon conserving millions of pounds of foodstuffs that would
ordinarily have been wasted.  A food "hog" was considered in the same
light as a traitor!

On the same plan as the food administration, the government conducted
the conservation of coal.  The result was that the essential industries
received coal first and the people could get only what was absolutely
necessary for heating their homes.  Lights were turned out in cities
early to save fuel.  The "daylight saving" plan from April to November
turned the clocks ahead one hour.  As a result of all these
precautions, the factories were kept going, the ships were not hindered
for lack of coal, and America's great preparedness program was carried
on without hindrance or delay.

It is difficult to realize what gigantic efforts America was putting
forth.  An illustration from the manufacture of ordnance will help such
an understanding.  In the fall of 1918, the United States government
was spending upon the making of ordnance alone, every thirty days, an
amount equal to the cost of the Panama Canal, and it was spending as
much or more in several other departments.  What a terrible loss war
brings to the world!

[Illustration: The Red Cross War Fund and Membership poster by A. E.
Foringer was one of the most effective produced during the War.]

To finance these tremendous preparedness projects, the government
called upon the people to lend their money by buying government liberty
bonds.  This was an entirely new thing for the American people of any
generation, but they responded in a manner that showed the government
that the people were backing it to the last inch, and that they were
out to win as quickly as possible, regardless of cost, or other
sacrifices they were called upon to make.  The government conducted
great loan campaigns.  Each one met with greater success than the one
preceding it.  The bonds were bought by all classes of people, and a
man without a bond was like a dog without a home.  Of course the great
banks and corporations bought millions of dollars worth of bonds, but
the great number of small denomination bonds bought by the wage-earning
classes was what spelled the success of the loans.  The total amount
raised by the five loans was approximately twenty-two billion dollars.

Besides these great loans, the American people contributed $300,000,000
to two Red Cross funds inside of a year.  There were also enormous
contributions to the Y. M. C. A., the Knights of Columbus, the War Camp
Community Service, the Salvation Army, and allied funds.

Although a great deal of credit for the remarkable success of America's
preparedness program is due to the fact that she had such wonderful
resources, the true underlying reason for her success is the
magnificent spirit of the American people.  Germany thought that,
because of the cosmopolitan make-up of the people and the immensity of
the country they occupied, they would not unite as one great nation.
The United States has proved for all time that she is one solid
indivisible nation with ho thought of anything but the progress and
liberty of her country and the world, of the unsullied honor and
unquestioned defense of her flag, and of all for which it stands.