Then in the Great War a new habit was born in the minds of the people,
the habit of crises. Even then at first they came decently, in ordered
succession--Mons, Ypres, the Coalition, Gallipoli. But the people's
craving was insatiable; the people cried for more crises.

Then this man stood up and said to the people, "I will give you
crises."

And he did. Instead of a casual crisis here and there, to every year
a crisis or two, he gave them a crisis every month, every week, every
day, and still they were not satisfied. And so, at last, out of all
the muddle and waste and pettifogging stupidity this man created
crises as men create matches, by the gross. And this was how he
created them:--

_Extract from "The Slime," April 3rd, a paragraph in the Foreign
Intelligence:--_

"BOBADIG, _April 1st._

"A party of French mules, passing to their quarters in the vilayet of
Arimabug, were to-day attacked by an Australian sheep on the staff of
the British Military Mission. It is feared that many of the mules were
injured. Feeling runs high among the peasantry, incensed already by
the failure of the British Government to provide mosquito-nets for the
sacred goats."


_Extract from a leading article in "The Slime," April 6th, on Land
Tenure in Wales:--_

" ... Parliament to-day will be occupied with the preposterous Budget
proposals, but we hope our legislators will find time to press the
PRIME MINISTER for an explanation of the outrageous incident at
Bobadig reported in our columns last week. There is only too good
reason to fear that the policy of alternate violence and inertia,
against which we have so often protested, has at last inflamed the
law-abiding animals of Bobadig ..."

_From "The Slime" Special Correspondent:--_

BOBADIG, _April 8th._

"Since my last message (much mutilated by the Censor) events have
moved rapidly. Two of the mules have died of their injuries in
hospital; three others lie in a dangerous condition at Umwidi, four
miles away, where they fled for refuge from the wanton onslaught of
the Australian sheep. This sheep, it now transpires, was the personal
attendant of General Riddlecombe, Head of the Military Mission, a
circumstance which is not calculated to allay the local animosity
which the incident has aroused. The situation will require all the
tact that the British Government can command."


_Extract from the Special Crisis Column of "The Slime," April 11th:--_

"ANGLO-ARMENIAN RELATIONS.
 GRAVE WARNING.

"In a telegram which we print in another column our Special
Correspondent in Armenia confirms to-day the serious fears to which we
gave expression in our issue of April 6th concerning the possibility
of a crisis in Anglo-Armenian relations. The incident of the Bobadig
mules is already bearing fruit, and we can no longer doubt that
popular feeling in the vilayet of Arimabug has been dangerously
inflamed by the obtuse procrastination of the British Government.
These unfortunate mules...."


"SCRATCHIPOL, _April 10th._

"Communications with Bobadig have broken down, but it is reported that
a mule was buried there on Sunday in circumstances of great popular
excitement. A large crowd followed the body to the cemetery and made
a demonstration after the ceremony outside the house of the local
veterinary surgeon, who is alleged to have treated the animal for
mumps instead of sheep-shock, with fatal results."


_From "The Slime," April 14th.--_

"GRAVE CRISIS.
 ARMENIAN ANGER.
 THE MURDERED MULES.

"As we feared, a serious crisis has arisen in Anglo-Armenian
relations. At Bobadig a third mule has perished and his interment was
made the occasion of a great popular demonstration against the policy
of Great Britain. In diplomatic circles no one is attempting to
conceal that the situation is extremely grave. The PRIME MINISTER has
returned to Downing Street from Le Touquet. Shortly after his arrival
the Armenian Minister drove up in a motor-cab and was closeted with
the PREMIER for a full ten minutes. After lunch, Lord Wurzel arrived
in his brougham. At tea-time the Minister of Mutton-Control dashed up
in a 24 'bus, followed rapidly by the Secretary of State for War on
his scooter. Mr. Burble wore an anxious look...."

_Extract from a leading article in "The Slime," April 16th:--_

"SPIT IT OUT.

"We trust it is not already too late to appeal to the Government to
extricate the Empire from the perilous position in which their wilful
stupidity has placed it. The news from Bobadig is exceedingly serious.
Another of the affronted mules has perished in circumstances of the
foulest indignity; it only remains for the other two to die for
the triumph of British statesmanship to be complete. These wretched
creatures are being slowly sacrificed for the foolish whim of a
British Prime Minister. No doubt remains that they have been subjected
to sheep-shock by the savage bites of the Australian animal. The
Government, blinded by its own infatuate folly and deaf to the storms
of popular indignation in this country, continues to treat them
for mumps.... By this test the Government will be judged at the
forthcoming election. They must realise that the time for trifling is
past. If the resources of the British Empire are unable at this date
to combat the menace of sheep-shock among the loyal mules of Bobadig,
then indeed.... At least we are entitled to ask for an explanation of
the presence of an infuriated sheep on the staff of a British General.
The PRIME MINISTER...."


_From "The Slime," April 17th.--_

"AT LAST.

The situation in Bobadig is easing rapidly. The Government has at last
carried out the instructions of _The Slime_, and we understand that a
Ministerial expert in sheep-shock has been sent to the assistance of
the surviving mules. But while we may congratulate ourselves on the
lifting of the clouds in that direction matters in West Ham give
ground for the gravest anxiety. The wood-lice of West Ham are
proverbially of an irritable nature, and the attitude of the
Government has been calculated for some time to inflame...."

_From "The Slime," April 19th.--_

"BOBADIG CRISIS OVER.

PREMIER YIELDS.

We are glad to report ..."

_From "The Slime," April 20th.--_

"WEST HAM CRISIS BEGINS.

WOOD LICE IN REVOLT.

GRAVE WARNING.

Once again we must warn the Government...."

And so on.

A. P. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TRUE POLITENESS.

_Party in Check Cap._ "WILL YOU HAVE MY PLACE, SIR?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Three swift fierce rounds between Beckett and Wells and the
    18,000 spectators at Olympia last night witnessed the close of
    yet another great ring drama."--_Daily Chronicle._

    "Beckett ... bowed more by instinct than of set purpose to the
    shouting, over-wrought people who from the floor of Olympia
    shot up to the ceiling."--_Daily Telegraph._

We had no idea until we read these paragraphs that the spectators took
such an active part in the proceedings.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _House-hunter (after another fruitless day)._ "WHAT
ABOUT TAKING THIS? WE COULD AT LEAST HANG OUR PICTURES."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FAIRY BALL.

  "I am asked to the ball to-night, to-night;
  What shall I wear, for I must look right?"
  "Search in the fields for a lady's-smock;
  Where could you find you a prettier frock?"

  "I am asked to the ball to-night, to-night;
  What shall I do for my jewels bright?"
  "Trouble you not for a brooch or a ring,
  A daisy-chain is the properest thing."

  "I am asked to the ball to night, to-night;
  What shall I do if I shake with fright?"
  "When you are there you will understand
  That no one is frightened in Fairyland."

R. F.

       *       *       *       *       *

"WIT AND HUMOUR.

    Ashton and District Undertakers' Association have advanced
    the prices of hearse and carriages for funerals."--_Yorkshire
    Paper._

If this is the kind of humour that appeals to our contemporary it
should alter the heading to "Grave and Gay."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE LUXURIES OF THE RICH.

_Club Member (owner of thirty thousand acre estate)._ "I TELL YOU
WHAT IT IS--I MUST REALLY GET MY HAIR CUT. DASH IT, I'VE GOT THE
MONEY."]

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMUNISM AT CAMBRIDGE.

    [Bolshevism and Communism claim many adherents among the young
    intellectuals at our ancient Universities.--_Vide Press._]

I am a Socialist, a Syndicalist, an Anarchist, a Bolshevist--whatever
you like to call me; if you wish to be precise, an International
Communist.

Anyhow, as such I am opposed tooth-and-nail to the iniquity of the
existing Competitive System. It is my intention to devote my life
to its eradication, in whatever form it may be disguised, and to
inaugurate an era of loving-kindness, peace, leisure and plenty,
similar to that now enjoyed by the people of Russia.

But my duties do not lie only in the distant future; they are here, in
the present, facing me in the University. For never, I think, was the
unclean thing, Competition, so prevalent and unabashed as at Cambridge
to-day.

Both in work and in sport is the evil rampant. Take as an example
the reactionary custom of dividing the Tripos Honours List into three
classes. Can you imagine anything more inducive to competition? Worse,
it is a direct invitation to the worker--often, I am proud to say,
unheeded--to exceed the one-hour-day for which we Communists are
striving.

Even more deplorable is the competitive spirit in sport; more
deplorable because more insidious. Even those whom we are wont to
regard as our comrades and leaders are not always proof against the
canker in this guise. I remember paying a visit to Fenner's, that
fair field corrupted by competition, to raise my protest against
inter-collegiate sports. To my indescribable grief and amazement I
beheld one whom I had always followed and reverenced--a man of mighty
voice oft lifted in debate--preparing to _compete_ (mark the word)
in a Three-Mile Race. "Stay, comrade," I cried. He heeded me not;
moreover, it certainly appeared to me that he attempted--thank God,
unsuccessfully--to win the race. Maybe I go too far in ascribing to
him this desire to come in first, with a resultant triumph over his
fellows; but was not his very entrance a countenancing of evil? Had
he considered the feelings of bitter enmity inspired in the many
who toiled behind him? And the encouragement to College rivalry!--a
rivalry in no way differing from that between nations, save that
College distinctions are, of course, less artificial.

It becomes obvious, I think, to every unprejudiced observer that most
of the games now unfortunately so popular at the University--rowing,
cricket, football and the like--_must go_. But let it not be assumed
that the Communist is averse from recreation properly conducted; far
from it. There is no possible objection to diabolo or top-spinning,
for instance, and, though competitive marbles must not be played
(whether on the Senate House steps or elsewhere), solitaire may be
permitted as in no way provoking the deplorable spirit of rivalry.

Of other games the Communist will discard bridge, billiards and
"general post"; and even "hunt-the-slipper" and "hide-and-seek" are
not altogether free from the competitive taint. But an excellent
game is open to him in "patience," while there is no pastime more
indicative of the true Communistic spirit than "ring-a-ring o' roses,"
so long as proper care be taken that at the last "tishu" all the
players collapse simultaneously.

