    "Goth. liudan[3] (crescere); O.H.G. liotan (sometimes unorganic,
    hliotan); O.H.G. liut (populus); A.-S. lëóð; O.N. lióð: Goth.
    lauths -is (homo), ju33alauths -dis (adolescens); O.H.G. sumar
    -lota (virgulta palmitis, i.e. qui una æstate creverunt, _Gl.
    Rhb._ 926'b, Jun. 242.); M.H.G. corrupted into sumer -late (M.S.
    i. 124'b. 2. 161'a. virga herba). It is doubtful whether ludja
    (facies), O.H.G. andlutti, is to be reckoned among
    them."--_Deutsche Gram._ ii. 21. For this last see Diefenbach,
    _Vergl. Gram. der Goth. Spr._ i. 242.

In his _Erlauterungen zu Elene_, p. 166., Grimm further remarks:--

    "The verb is leoðan, leað, luðon (crescere), O.S. lioðan, lôð,
    luðun. Leluðon (_Cædm._ 93. 28.) is creverunt, pullulant; and
    3eloðen (ap. Hickes, p. 135. note) onustus, but rather cretus.
    Elene, 1227. 3eloðen unðep leápum (cretus sub foliis)."

It has been surmised that LEDE was connected with the O.N.
hlÿt[4]--which not only signified _sors, portio_, but _res
consistentia_--and the A.-S. hlet, hlyt, lot, portion, inheritance:
thus, in the A.-S. Psal. xxx. 18., on hanðum ðinum hlÿt mín, _my
heritage is in thy hands_. Notker's version is: Mín lôz ist in dínen
handen. I have since found that Kindlinger (_Geschichte der Deutchen
Hörigkeit_) has made an attempt to derive it from _Lied, Lit_, which in
Dutch, Flemish, and Low German, still signify a _limb_; I think,
unsuccessfully.

Ray, in his _Gloss. Northanymbr._, has "unlead, nomen opprobrii;" but he
gives a false derivation: Grose, in his _Provincial Glossary_, "unleed
or unlead, a general name for any crawling venomous creature, as a toad,
&c. It is sometimes ascribed to a man, and then it denotes a sly wicked
fellow, that in a manner creeps to do mischief. See Mr. Nicholson's
Catalogue."

In the 2d edition of Mr. Brockett's _Glossary_, we have: "Unletes,
displacers or destroyers of the farmer's produce."

This provincial preservation of a word of such rare occurrence in
Anglo-Saxon, and of which no example has yet been found in old English,
is a remarkable circumstance. The word has evidently signified, like the
Gothic, in the first place _poor_; then _wretched_, _miserable_; and
hence, perhaps, its opprobrious sense of _mischievous_ or _wicked_.

    "In those rude times when wealth or movable property consisted
    almost entirely of living money, in which debts were contracted
    and paid, and for which land was given in mortgage or sold; it
    is quite certain that the serfs were transferred with the land,
    the lord considering them as so much live-stock, or part of his
    _chattels_."

A vestige of this feeling with regard to dependants remains in the use
of the word _Man_ (which formerly had the same sense as _lede_). We
still speak of "a general and his men," and use the expression "our
men." But, happily for the masses of mankind, few vestiges of serfdom
and slavery, and those in a mitigated form, now virtually exist.

S.W. SINGER.

April 16. 1850.

    [Footnote 1: It occurs many times in the Moeso-Gothic version of
    the Gospels for [Greek: ptochos]. From the Glossaries, it
    appears that iungalauths is used three times for [Greek:
    neaniskos], a young man; therefore lauths or lauds would signify
    simply _man_; and the plural, laudeis, would be _people_. See
    this established by the analogy of vairths, or O.H.G. virahi,
    also signifying people. Grimm's _Deutsche Gram._ iii. 472.,
    note. "Es konnte zwar _unlêds_ (pauper) aber auch _unlêths_
    heissen."--_D. Gr._ 225.]

    [Footnote 2: Sir F. Palgrave has given this extract in the
    Appendix to his _Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth_,
    p. ccccvii., where, by an error of the press, or of
    transcription, the word stands _lich_. It may be as well to
    remark, that the corresponding word in Latin formulas of the
    same kind is "catallis," _i.e. chattels_. A passage in Havelok,
    v. 2515., will clearly demonstrate that _lith_ was at least one
    kind of _chattel_, and equivalent to _fe_ (fee).

      "Thanne he was ded that Sathanas
        Sket was seysed al that his was,
      In the King's hand il del,
        _Lond_ and _lith_, and other _catel_,
      And the King ful sone it yaf
      Ubbe in the hond with a fayr staf,
      And seyde, 'Her ich sayse the
      In al the _lond_ in al the _fe_.'"]

    [Footnote 3: The author of _Tripartita seu de Analogia
    Linguacum_, under the words "Leute" and "Barn," says:--"Respice
    Ebr. Id. Ebr. ledah, partus, proles est. Ebr. lad, led, gigno."
    A remarkable coincidence at least with Grimm's derivation of
    léôd from the Goth. liudan, crescere.]

    [Footnote 4: Thus, Anthon, _Teutschen Landwirthschaft_, Th. i.
    p. 61.:--"Das Land eines jeden Dorfes, einer jeden Germarkung
    war wirklich getheilt und, wie es sehr wahrscheinlich, alsdan
    verlost worden. Daher nannte man dasjenige, was zu einem
    Grunstüke an Äkern, Wiesen gehörte, ein _Los_ (Sors). Das
    Burgundische Gesetz redet ausfdrücklich vom Lande das man in
    _Lose_ erhalten hat (Terra _sortis_ titulo acquisita, Tit. i. §
    1.)" Schmeller, in his _Bayrishces Wort. B._ v. _Lud-aigen_,
    also points to the connection of _Lud_ with hluz-hlut, sors,
    portio; but he rather inclines to derive it from the Low-Latin,
    ALLODIUM. It appears to me that the converse of this is most
    likely to have been the case, and that this very word LEDS or
    LÆDS is likely to furnish a more satisfactory etymology of
    ALLODIUM than has hitherto been offered.]

       *       *       *       *       * {433}

BP. COSIN'S MSS.--INDEX TO BAKER'S MSS.

Your correspondent "J. SANSOM" (No. 19. p. 303.) may perhaps find some
unpublished remains of Bp. Cosin in Baker's MSS.; from the excellent
index to which (Cambridge, 1848, p. 57.) I transcribe the following
notices, premising that of the volumes of the MSS. the first
twenty-three are in the British Museum, and the remainder in the
University Library, (not, as Mr. Carlyle says in a note in, I think, the
3d vol. of his _Letters. &c. of Cromwell_ in the library of Trin.
Coll.).

    "Cosin, Bp.--
      Notes of, in his Common Prayer, edit. 1636, xx. 175.
      Benefactions to See of Durham, xxx. 377-380.
      Conference with Abp. of Trebisond, xx. 178.
      Diary in Paris, 1651, xxxvi. 329.
      Intended donation for a Senate-House, xxx. 454.
      Letters to Peter Gunning, principally concerning
        the authority of the Apocrypha, vi. 174-180.
        230-238.
      Manual of Devotion, xxxvi. 338."

As the editors of the Index to Baker's MSS. invite corrections from
those who use the MSS., you will perhaps be willing to print the
following additions and corrections, which may be of use in case a new
edition of the Index should be required:--

    Preface, p. vii. _add_, in _Thoresby Correspondence_, one or two
    of Baker's _Letters_ have been printed, others have appeared in
    Nichols's _Literary Anecdotes_.

    Index, p. 2. Altars, suppression of, in Ely Diocese, 1550, xxx.
    213. Printed in the _British Magazine_, Oct. 1849, p. 401.

    P. 5. Babraham, Hullier, Vicar of, burnt for heresy. _Brit.
    Mag._ Nov. 1849, p. 543.

    P. 13. Bucer incepts as Dr. of Divinty, 1549, xxiv. 114. See Dr.
    Lamb's _Documents from MSS. C.C.C.C._ p. 153.

    Appointed to lecture by Edw. VI., 1549, xxx. 370. See Dr. Lamb,
    p. 152.

    Letter of University to Edw., recommending his family to care,
    x. 396. Dr. Lamb, p. 154.

    P. 14. Buckingham, Dr. Eglisham's account of his poisoning James
    I., xxxii. 149-153. See _Hurl. Misc._

    Buckmaster's Letter concerning the King's Divorce, x. 243. This
    is printed in _Burnet_, vol. iii. lib. 1. collect. No. 16., from
    a copy sent by Baker, but more fully in Dr. Lamb, p. 23., and in
    Cooper's _Annals_.

    P. 25. Renunciation of the Pope, 1535. See Ant. Harmer,
    _Specimen_, p. 163.

    P. 51. Cowel, Dr., charge against, and defence of his
    Antisanderus. _Brit. Mag._ Aug. 1849, p. 184.

    Cranmer, extract from C.C.C. MS. concerning. _Brit. Mag._ Aug.
    1849, p. 169, _seq_.

    Cranmer, life of, xxxi. 1-3. _Brit. Mag._ Aug. 1849, p. 165.

    P. 57. Convocation, subscribers to the judgment of, xxxi. 9.
    _British Magazine_, Sept. 1849, p. 317.

    P. 68. Ely, Altars, suppression of, 1550, xxx. 213. _Brit. Mag._
    Oct. 1849, p. 401.

    P. 77. Several of the papers relating to Bishop Fisher will be
    found in Dr. Hymers' edition of _The Funeral Sermon on Lady
    Margaret_.

    P. 80. Gloucester, Abbey of, &c., a Poem by Malvern, v. 285-7.
    _Brit. Mag._ xxi. 377.; Caius Coll. MSS. No. 391. art 13.

    Goodman, Declaration concerning the articles in his book.
    Strype's _Annals_, I. i. 184.

    P. 89. Henry VII., Letter to Lady Margaret, xix. 262. See Dr.
    Hymers, as above, p. 160.

    P. 91. Henry VIII., Letter to, giving an account of the death of
    Wyngfield, &c. See Sir H. Ellis, _Ser. III._ No. 134.

    P. 94. Humphrey, Bishop, Account, &c., xxxv. 1-19. Rend xxvi.
    1-19.

    Humphrey, Bishop, Images and Relics, &c., xxx. 133-4. _Brit.
    Mag._ Sept. 1849, p. 300.

    P. 121-2. Lady Margaret. Several of the articles relating to
    Lady Margaret have been printed by Dr. Hymers (_ut sup_.).

    P. 137. Pole Card. Oratio Johannis Stoyks, &c., v. 310-312. Dr.
    Lamb, p. 177.

    P. 143. Redman, Dr., Particulars of, xxxii. 495.--_Brit. Mag._
    Oct. 1849, p. 402.

    P. 151. Spelman's Proposition concerning the Saxon Lecture, &c.
    Sir H. Ellis _Letters of Eminent Literary Men_, Camd. Soc. No.
    59.

    P. 169. Noy's Will, xxxvi. 375., read 379.

Many of the articles relating to Cambridge in the MSS. have been printed
by Mr. Cooper in his _Annals of Cambridge_: some relating to Cromwell
are to be found in Mr. Carlyle's work; and several, besides those which
I have named, are contained in Dr. Lamb's _Documents_.

J.E.B. MAYOR.

Marlborough Coll., March 30.

       *       *       *       *       *

ARABIC NUMERALS AND CIPHER.

