1. Oval (size 2.1 in. by 1.3). The angel Gabriel kneeling before a standing
figure of the Virgin, and holding a scroll, on which is inscribed AVE
MARIA. Legend:

    * [cross] S. HOS * PITALIS * IER * NE * NACH.

Yarmouth was anciently called Gernemutha, or Iernemutha; and Ives
attributes this seal to Yarmouth, though both the legend and the
workmanship have a decidedly foreign appearance.

Can any more satisfactory locality be assigned it?

2. Circular (1 in. in diameter). Three fishes naiant (the arms of
Yarmouth), within a bordure of six cusps. Legend:

  SAAL D' ASAI D' GRANT GARNAMVT.

Workmanship of about the fourteenth century; use unknown; but it has been
employed for sealing burgess letters for many years past, until 1847.

Can it have reference to the staple? (Vid. Statutes at Large, Anne; 27 Ed.
III. stat. 2.; 43 Ed. III. cap. 1.; 14 Ric. II. cap. 1.)

3. Circular (size 1.1 in. diameter). On an escutcheon a herring hauriant;
the only instance of this bearing in connection with Yarmouth. Legend:

    S. OFFIC : CORROTULAT : Í : NOVE : IERNMUTH.

Of this seal nothing whatever is known. Its workmanship is of the fifteenth
century. The suggested extension of the legend is "Sigillum officii
contrarotulatoris"--in nova Jernemutha, or in _nave_ Jernemuthe. But was
Yarmouth ever called _nova Gernemutha_? or what was the office alluded to?

The above are required for a literary purpose; and as speedy an answer as
possible would much oblige me.

E. S. TAYLOR.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries.

_Hand in Bishop Canning's Church._--In Bishop Canning's Church, Wilts, is a
curious painting of a hand outstretched, and having on the fingers and
thumb several inscriptions in abbreviated Latin. Can any correspondent tell
me when and why this was placed in the church; and also the inscriptions
which appear thereon?

RUSSELL GOLE.

_"I put a spoke in his wheel."_--What is the meaning of the phrase, "I put
a spoke in his wheel?"

In April last, a petition was heard in the Rolls Court on the part of the
trustees of Manchester New College, praying that they might be allowed to
remove that institution to London; and a single trustee was heard against
such removal. One of the friends of the college was on this occasion heard
to remark, "the removal to London was going on very smoothly, and it would
have been done by this time, if this one trustee had not _put his spoke in
the wheel_:" meaning, that the conscientious scruple of this trustee was
the sole _impediment to the movement_. Is this the _customary_ and proper
mode of using the phrase; and, if so, how can putting a spoke to a wheel
impede its motion?

On the other hand, having heard some persons say that they had always
understood the phrase to denote affording _help_ to an undertaking, and
confidently allege that this must be the _older_ and {270} more correct
usage, for "what," say they, "is a wheel without spokes?" I inquired of an
intelligent lady, of long American descent, in what way she had been
accustomed to hear the phrase employed, and the answer was "Certainly as a
help: we used to say to one who had anything in hand of difficult
accomplishment, 'Do not be faint-hearted, I'll give you a spoke.'"

Dr. Johnson, in the folio edition of his _Dictionary_, 1755, after defining
a spoke to be the "bar of a wheel that passes from the nave to the felly,"
cites:

 "    .    .    .    .       All you gods,
  In general synod, take away her power,
  Break all the _spokes_ and fellies to her wheel,
  And bowl the round nave down the hill of Heaven."--_Shakspeare_.

G. K.

_Sir W. Hewit._--At p. 159. of Mr. Thoms's recent edition of Pulleyn's
_Etymological Compendium_, Sir W. Hewit, the father-in-law of Edward
Osborne, who was destined to found the ducal family of Leeds, is said to
have been "a pin-maker." Some other accounts state that he was a
clothworker; others again, that he was a goldsmith. Which is correct; and
what is the authority? And where may any pedigree of the Osborne family,
_previous to Edward_, be seen?

H. T. GRIFFITH.

_Passage in Virgil._--Dr. Johnson, in his celebrated Letter to Lord
Chesterfield, says, in reference to the hollowness of patronage: "The
shepherd, in Virgil, grew at last acquainted with Love; and found him a
native of the rocks." To what passage in Virgil does Johnson here refer,
and what is the point intended to be conveyed?

R. FITZSIMONS.

Dublin.

_Fauntleroy._--In Binns' _Anatomy of Sleep_ it is stated that a few years
ago an affidavit was taken in an English court of justice, to the effect
that Fauntleroy was still living in a town of the United States.

Can any of your correspondents refer me to the circumstance in question?

C. CLIFTON BARRY.

_Animal Prefixes, descriptive of Size and Quality._--Will somebody oblige
me by pointing out in the modern languages any analogous instances to the
Greek [Greek: bon], English _horse_-radish, _dog_-rose, _bull_-finch, &c.?

C. CLIFTON BARRY.

_Punning Devices._--Sir John Cullum, in his _Hist. of Hawsted_, 1st edit.
p. 114., says that the seal of Sir William Clopton, knight, t. Hen. VII.,
was "a ton, out of which issues some plant, perhaps a _caltrop_, which
might be contracted to the first syllable of his name." This appears to be
too violent a contraction. Can any of your readers suggest any other or
closer analogy between the name and device?

BURIENSIS.

"_Pinece with a stink._"--In Archbishop Bramhall's _Schism Guarded_
(written against Serjeant) there is a passage in which the above curious
expression occurs, and of which I can find no satisfactory, nor indeed any
explanation whatever. The passage is this (_Works_, vol. ii. p. 545., edit.
Ox.):

    "But when he is baffled in the cause, he hath a reserve,--that
    Venerable Bede, and Gildas, and Foxe in his Acts and Monuments, do
    brand the Britons for wicked men, making them 'as good as Atheists; of
    which gang if this Dinoth were one,' he 'will neither wish the Pope
    such friends, nor envy them to the Protestants.'

    "What needeth this, when he hath got the worst of the cause, to defend
    himself like a _pinece with a stink_? We read no other character of
    Dinoth, but as of a pious, learned, and prudent man."

Can any of your readers furnish an explanation?

R. BLAKISTON.

_Soiled Parchment Deeds._--Having in my possession some old and very dirty
parchment deeds, and other records, now almost illegible from the
accumulation of grease, &c., on the surface of the skins, I am desirous to
know if there be any "royal road" to the cleansing and restoration of these
otherwise enduring MSS.?

T. HUGHES.

Chester.

_Roger Wilbraham, Esq.'s Cheshire Collection._--Can any of your
correspondents say where the original collection made by the above-named
gentleman, or a copy of them, referred to in Dr. Foote Gower's _Sketch of
the Materials for a Cheshire History_, may now be met with?

CESTRIENSIS.

_Cambridge and Ireland._--In the first volume of the _Pictorial History of
England_, p. 270., it is stated that--

    "Martin skins are mentioned in _Domesday Book_ among the commodities
    brought by sea to Chester; and this appears from other authorities to
    have been one of the exports in ancient times from Ireland. Notices are
    also found of merchants from Ireland _landing at Cambridge_ with
    cloths, and exposing their merchandise to sale."

The authority quoted for this statement is Turner, vol. iii. p. 113.

On referring to Turner's _Anglo-Saxons_, I find it stated:

    "We read of merchants from Ireland _landing at Cambridge_ with cloths,
    and exposing their merchandise to sale."

Mr. Turner refers to Gale, vol. ii. p. 482.

I do not know to what work Mr. Turner refers, unless to Gale's _Rerum
Anglicarum Scriptores {271} Veteres_; on examining this I can find no
passage at the page and volume indicated, on the subject.

Can any of your readers state where it is to be found? It appears
remarkable that the merchants from Ireland should land at the inland town
of Cambridge, and it seems a probable conjecture that Cambridge is a
mistake for Cambria.

William of Malmesbury speaks of a commerce between Ireland and the
neighbourhood of Chester, and it seems much more probable that the
merchants of Ireland landed in Wales than in Cambridge.

JOHN THRUPP.

_Derivation of Celt._--What is the proper derivation of the word _celt_, as
applied to certain weapons of antiquity? A good authority, in Dr. Smith's
_Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities_, p. 351., obtains the term
from--

    "Celtes, an old Latin word for a chisel, probably derived from cælo, to
    engrave."

Mr. Wright (_The Celt, Roman, and Saxon_, p. 73.) says that Hearne first
applied the word to such implements in _bronze_, believing them to be
"Roman _celtes_ or chisels;" and that--

    "Subsequent writers, ascribing these instruments to the Britons, have
    retained the name, forgetting its origin, and have applied it
    indiscriminately, not only to other implements of bronze, but even to
    the analogous instruments of _stone_."

And he objects to the term "as too generally implying that things to which
it is applied are Celtic." On the other hand, Dr. Wilson (_Prehistoric
Annals_, p. 129.) prefers to retain the word, inasmuch as the Welsh
etymologists, Owen and Spurrell, furnish an ancient Cambro-British word
_celt_, a flint stone. M. Worsaae (_Primeval Antiq._, p. 26.) confines the
term to those instruments of bronze which have a hollow socket to receive a
wooden handle; the other forms being called paalstabs on the Continent. It
seems clear that there is no connexion between this word and the name of
the nation (_Celtæ_); but its true origin may perhaps be elicited by a
little discussion in the pages of "N. & Q."

C. R. M.

_Ancient Superstition against the King of England entering or even
beholding the Town of Leicester._--The existence of a superstition to this
effect is recorded in Rishanger's _Chronicle_, and also, as I am informed,
in that of Thomas Wikes; but this I have not at present an opportunity of
consulting.

Rishanger's words are:

    "Rex [Henricus III.] autem, capta Norhamptun., Leycestr. tendens, in ea
    hospitatus est, quam nullus regni præter eum etiam videre,
    prohibentibus quibusdam superstitiose, præsumpsit."--P. 26.

It is also mentioned by Matthew of Westminster. (Vide Bohn's edition, vol.
ii. p. 412.) The statement, that no king before Henry III. had entered the
town, is however incorrect, as William the Conqueror and King John are
instances to the contrary.

Can any of your correspondents explain the origin of this superstition, or
favour me with any farther notices respecting it?

It is not unworthy of observation that very many of the royal personages
who have visited Leicester, have been either unfortunate in their lives, or
have met with tragical deaths.

We may, however, hope, for the credit of the town, that their misfortunes
may be attributed to other causes, rather than to their presence within its
time-hallowed walls.

WM. KELLY.

Leicester.

_Burton._--Is there any family of this name who can make out a descent
from, or connexion with, a Mr. John Burton, alderman of Doncaster, who died
1718?

C. J.

_The Camera Lucida._--I should feel much obliged to any reader of "N. & Q."
who would be kind enough to answer the following questions, and refer me to
any work treating of the handling and management of the Camera Lucida. I
have one made by King of Bristol, and purchased about thirty years ago: it
draws out, like a telescope, in three pieces, each six inches long; and at
full length will give a picture of the dimensions of twenty inches by
twelve. The upper piece is marked from above downwards, thus: at two inches
below the lens, "2;" at an inch below that point, "3;" at half an inch
lower, "4;" at half an inch lower still, "5;" half an inch below the point
"5," a "7" is marked; and half an inch below the "7," there is a "10;" at
seven-eighths below this last, "D" is marked. What reference have these
nicely graduated points to the distance of an object from the instrument?
Do the figures merely determine the size of the picture to be taken? How is
one to be guided in their use and application to practice?

CARET.

_Francis Moore._--Francis Moore was born at Bakewell about the year 1592,
and was Proctor of Lichfield Cathedral at the time of the Great Rebellion.
I am anxious to know who were his parents, and what their place of abode.

EDWARD PEACOCK.

Bottesford Moors, Kirton-in-Lindsey.

_Waugh, Bishop of Carlisle._--What were the family arms of Dr. John Waugh,
Bishop of Carlisle, who died October 29, 1734? Was he of a Scotch family,
and are any of his descendants now living?

RUFUS.

_Palace at Enfield._--We read that there was formerly a royal palace at
Enfield in Middlesex, ten miles north from London; and one room still {272}
remains in its original state. Can you, or any of your subscribers, inform
me whereabouts in the town it is situated? Also, the date of erection of
the church?

HAZELWOOD.

_"Solamen miseris," &c._--Please to state in what author is the following
line? No one knows.

    "Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris."

A CONSTANT READER.

_Soke Mills._--Correspondents are requested to communicate the names of
"Soke" or Manorial Mills, to which the suit is still enforced.

S. M.

_Second Wife of Mallet._--The second wife of Mallet was Lucy Elstob, a
Yorkshire lady, daughter of a steward of the Earl of Carlisle. Can any of
your readers inform me at what place in Yorkshire her father resided, and
where the marriage with Mallet in 1742 took place? She survived her
husband, and lived to the age of eighty years. Where did she die, and what
family did Mallet leave by his two wives?

F.

Leamington.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries with Answers.

_Books burned by the Common Hangman._--

    "Historia Anglo-Scotica: or an Impartial History of all that happen'd
    between the kings and kingdoms of England and Scotland from the
    beginning of the Reign of _William the Conqueror_ to the Reign of Queen
    Elizabeth, &c., by James Drake, M.D., 8vo., London, 1703."

Of this work it is said, in a note in the _Catalogue_ of Geo. Chalmers'
library (fourth day's sale, Sept. 30, 1841), that--

    "On June 30, 1703, the Scotch parliament ordered this book to be burned
    by the hands of the common hangman, and that the magistrates of
    Edinburgh should see it carried into effect at eleven o'clock on the
    following day."

Will any correspondent of yours furnish me with some notice of Dr. Drake,
the author, and also explain the ground of offence upon which his book was
condemned? I confess to be unable to discover anything to offend; neither,
as it seems, could Mr. Surtees, for he says:

    "I quote Drake's _Historia Anglo-Scotica_, 1703, a book which, for what
    reason I never could discover, was ordered to be burned by the common
    hangman."--_History of Durham_, vol. iv. p. 55. note _l_.

Any notices of books which have been signalised by being subjected to
similar condemnation, would much interest me, and perhaps others of your
readers.

BALLIOLENSIS.

    [The ground of offence for burning the _Historia Anglo-Scotica_ is
    stated in _The Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland_, vol. xi. p. 66.,
    viz.: "Ordered, that a book published by the title of _Historia
    Anglo-Scotica_, by James Drake, M.D., and dedicated to Sir Edward
    Symour containing many false and injurious reflections upon the
    sovereignty and independence of this crown and nation, be burnt by the
    hand of the common hangman at the mercat Cross of Edinburgh, at eleven
    o'clock to-morrow (July 1, 1703), and the magistrates of Edinburgh
    appointed to see the order punctually executed." It would appear from
    the dedication prefixed to this work, that Drake merely pretended to
    edit it, for he says, that "upon a diligent revisal, in order, if
    possible, to discover the name of the author, and the age of his
    writing, he found that it was written in, or at least not finished
    till, the time of Charles I." But he says nothing more of the MS., nor
    how it came into his hands. A notice of Dr. Drake is given in
    Chalmers's _Biographical Dictionary_, and in the preface to _The
    Memorial of the Church of England_, edit. 1711, which was also burnt by
    the common hangman in 1705. See "N. & Q.," Vol. iii., p. 519.]

_Captain George Cusack._--It appears by an affidavit made by a Mr. Thomas
Nugent in the year 1674, and now of record in the Exchequer Record Office,
Dublin, that--

    "He, being on or about the 20th of September preceding in London, was
    by one Mr. Patrick Dowdall desired to goe along with him to see one
    George Cusack, then in prison there for severall hainous offences
    alleadged to have beene by him committed, which he could not do by
    reason of other occasions; but having within two or three days
    afterwards mett with Mr. Dowdall, was told by him that he had since
    their last meeting seene the said Cusack in prison (being the
    Marshalsea in Southwark) with bolts on, and that none of Cusack's men
    who were alsoe in prison were bolted:"

that on the 11th of November Cusack was still in restraint, and not as yet
come to his trial:

    "That there were _bookes written of the said Cusack's offences_, which
    he heard cryed about in the streets of London to be sold, and that y^e
    generall opinion and talke was that the said Cusack should suffer death
    for his crimes."

By a fragment of an affidavit made by a Mr. Morgan O'Bryen, of the Middle
Temple, London, it appears that this man was a Captain George Cusack, who,
I presume, was a pirate. May I take leave to ask, are the above-mentioned
books in existence, and where are they to be found?

JAMES F. FERGUSON.

Dublin.

    [In the British Museum is the following pamphlet:--"The Grand Pyrate:
    or the Life and Death of Captain George Cusack, the Great Sea-Robber,
    with an Accompt of all his notorious Robberies both at Sea and Land;
    together with his Tryal, Condemnation, and Execution. Taken by an
    Impartial Hand." London, 1676, pp. 24. 4to.]

_Sir Ralph Winwood._--I am particularly desirous of obtaining some
information respecting {273} Sir Ralph Winwood, private secretary to James
I., and should feel much obliged if any of your numerous correspondents
would favour me with anything they may know concerning him, or with the
titles of any works in which his name is mentioned.

H. P. W. R.

    [Biographical notices of Sir Ralph Winwood will be found in _Biographia
    Britannica_, Supplement; Lloyd's _State Worthies_; Wood's _Athenæ_;
    Granger and Chalmers' Biographical Dictionaries. Sir F. Drake's Voyage,
    by T. Maynarde, is dedicated to him. Letters to him from Sir Thomas
    Roe, in 1615, 1616, are in the British Museum, Add. MS. 6115. fol. 71.
    75. 146. And a letter to him from Sir Dudley Carlton will be found in
    the _Gentleman's Magazine_, vol. lvii. p. 143. The Diaries of the time
    of James I. may also be consulted; a list of them is given in "N. &
    Q.," Vol. vi., p. 363.]

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies.

BOOKS CHAINED TO DESKS IN CHURCHES.

(Vol. viii., p. 93.)

The authority for this ancient custom appears to be derived from an act of
the Convocation which assembled in 1562. Strype informs us (_Annals_, vol.
i. c. 27.) that at this Convocation the following injunctions were given:

    "First, That a Catechism be set forth in Latin, which is already done
    by Mr. Dean of Paul's [Dean Nowell], and wanteth only viewing.
    Secondly, That certain Articles [the Thirty-nine Articles], containing
    the principal grounds of Christian religion, be set forth much like to
    such Articles as were set forth a little before the death of King
    Edward, of which Articles the most part may be used with additions and
    corrections as shall be thought convenient. Thirdly, That to these
    Articles also be adjoined the _Apology_, writ by Bishop Jewell, lately
    set forth after it, hath been once again revised and so augmented and
    corrected as occasion serveth. That these be joined in _one_ book; and
    by common consent authorised as containing true doctrine, and be
    enjoined to be taught the youth in the Universities and grammar schools
    throughout the realm, and also in cathedral churches, and collegiate,
    and in private houses: and that whosoever shall preach, declare, write,
    or speak anything in derogation, depraving or despising of the said
    book, or any doctrine therein contained, and be thereof lawfully
    convicted before any ordinary, &c., he shall be ordered as in case of
    heresy, or else shall be punished as is appointed for those that offend
    and speak against the Book of Common Prayer, set forth in the first
    year of the Queen's Majesty's reign that now is: that is to say, he
    shall for the first offence forfeit 100 marks; for the second offence,
    400 marks; and for the third offence, all his goods and chattels, and
    shall suffer imprisonment during life."

It is probable that this book found a place in churches as affording a
standard of orthodoxy easy of reference to congregations in times not
sufficiently remote from the Reformation, to render the preaching of Romish
doctrines unlikely. This, if the surmise be correct, would be emphatically
to bring the officiating minister to book. In Prestwich Church, the desk
yet remains, together with the "Book of Articles," bound up as prescribed
with Jewel's _Apology_ (black-letter, 1611), but the chain has disappeared.
The neighbouring church of Bingley has also its desk, to which the chain is
still attached; but the "Book of Articles" has given place to some more
modern volume.

JOHN BOOKER.

Prestwich.

MR. SIMPSON will find some account of the _Paraphrase of Erasmus_ so
chained (of which he says he cannot recal an instance) at Vol i., p. 172.,
and Vol. v., p. 332.

The following list (remains of which more or less perfect, with chains
appended, are still extant) will probably be interesting to many of your
readers:

 "_Books chayned in the Church, 25th April, 1606._

  Dionisius Carthusian vpon the New Testament, in two volumes.
  Origen vpon St. Paules Epistle to the Romanes.
  Origen against Celsus.
  Lira vpon Pentathucke of Moses.
  Lira vpon the Kings, &c.
  Theophilact vpon the New Testam^t.
  Beda vpon Luke and other P^{ts} of the Testam^t.
  Opuscula Augustini, thome x.
  Augustini Questiones in Nou[=u] Testament[=u].
  The Paraphrase of Erasmus.
  The Defence of the Apologye.
  Prierius Postill vpon the Dominicall Gospells."
          From Ecclesfield Church accounts.

J. EASTWOOD.

In Malvern Abbey Church is a copy of Dean Comber's _Companion to the
Temple_, chained to a desk, and bearing a written inscription to the effect
that it should never be removed out of the church; but should remain
chained to its desk for ever, for the use of any parishioner who might
choose to come in and read it there.

N. B. I have mislaid my copy of this inscription: and should feel greatly
obliged to any of your correspondents who may be residing in or near Great
Malvern, for a transcript of it. As it may be thought somewhat long for
your pages, perhaps some correspondent would kindly copy it out for me, and
inclose it to Rev. H. T. GRIFFITH, Hull.

University Club.

       *       *       *       *       *

EPITAPHS.

(Vol. vii. _passim._)

A goodly collection of singular epitaphs has appeared in "N. & Q."; but I
believe it yet lacks {274} a specimen of the following tomfoolery--an
initial epitaph. Green, in his _History of Worcester_, gives the following
inscription from a monument under the north-west window of St. Andrew's
Church in that city:

 "Short of Weight.
      H L T B O
         R W
     I H O A J R
    A D 1780 A 63."

Green adds the following explanation of this riddle:

    "In _full measure_ it would have stood thus: 'Here Lieth The Body Of
    Richard Weston, In Hopes Of A Joyful Resurrection. Anno Domini 1780.
    Aged 63.'"

Richard Weston was a baker, and the "Short of weight" gives the clue to the
nature of his dealings, and also to the right reading of the epitaph.

The following is from Ombersley Churchyard, Worcestershire:

 "Sharp was her wit,
    Mild was her nature;
  A tender wife,
    A good humoured creature."

From the churchyard of St. John, Worcester:

 "Honest John's
  Dead and gone."

From the churchyard of Cofton Hackett, Worcestershire, are the two
following:

    "Here lieth the body of John Galey, sen., in expectation of the Last
    Day. What sort of man he was that day will discover. He was clerk of
    this parish fifty-five years. He died in 1756, aged 75."

The next is also to a Galey. Your correspondent PICTOR (Vol. viii., p. 98.)
gives the same epitaph, slightly altered, as being at Wingfield, Suffolk:

 "Pope boldly asserts (some think the maxim odd),
  An honest man's the noblest work of GOD.
  If this assertion is from error clear,
  One of the noblest works of GOD lies here."

From Alvechurch, Worcestershire; to a man and wife:

    "He, an honest, good-natured, worthy man; she, as eminent for conjugal
    and maternal virtues during her marriage and widowhood, as she had been
    before for amiable delicacy of person and manners."

The following, which is probably not to be surpassed, appeared in one of
the earliest numbers of _Household Words_. It is from the churchyard of
Pewsey, Wiltshire:

    "Here lies the body of Lady O'Looney, great-niece of Burke, commonly
    called the Sublime. She was bland, passionate, and deeply religious:
    also, she painted in water-colours, and sent several pictures to the
    Exhibition. She was first cousin to Lady Jones: and of such is the
    kingdom of heaven."

CUTHBERT BEDE, B.A.

If epitaphs of recent date are admitted in "N. & Q.," perhaps the
following, upon an editor, which lately appeared in the _Halifax Colonist_,
may not be out of place in your publication:

 "Here _lies_ an editor!
    _Snooks_ if you will;
  In mercy, kind Providence,
    Let him _lie still_.
  He _lied_ for his living: so
    He lived, while he _lied_,
  When he could not _lie longer_,
    He _lied_ down, and died."

W. W.

Malta.

 "Here lies a Wife, a Friend, a Mother,
  I believe there never was such another;
  She had a head to earn and a heart to give,
  And many poor she did relieve.
  She lived in virtue and in virtue died,
  And now in Heaven she doth reside.
  Yes! it is true as tongue can tell,
  If she had a fault, it was loving me too well.
  And when I am lying by her side,
  Who was in life her daily pride,
  Tho' she's confined in coffins three,
  She'd leave them all and come to me!"

The above lines, written on a tablet in a church at Exeter, were composed
by Mr. Tuckett, tallow-chandler, to the memory of his wife. An old
subscriber of "N. & Q." thinks this epitaph more strange and curious than
any which has yet appeared in the columns of that valuable publication.

ANON.

       *       *       *       *       *

PAROCHIAL LIBRARIES.

(Vol. vii., p. 507.)

I copy the following from the fly-leaf of _A Treatise of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Revenues_, by the learned Father Paul, translated by Tobias
Jenkins, 8vo., Westminster, 1736:

    "Bibliotheca de Bassingbourn in Com. Cant. Dono dedit Edvardus
    Nightingale de Kneeseworth Armiger Filius et Hares Fundatoris. Feb.
    1^{mo}, 1735^{to}."

How the volume got out of the library I know not: it was purchased some
years since at a sale in Oxford.

Y. B. N. J.

To the list of parochial libraries allow me to add that of Denchworth, near
Wantage, Berks. In a small apartment over the porch, the _parvise_, I
recollect, some years since, to have seen a very fair collection of old
divinity, the books being, all of them, confined by chains, according to
the ancient usage, an instance of which I never saw elsewhere. {275}

At St. Peter's Church, Tiverton, there is also a collection of books,
mostly the gift of the Newtes, Richard (rejected in 1646 and restored in
1660), and John his son, rectors of the portions of Tidcombe and Clare in
that church. The books are preserved in a room over the vestry.

BALLIOLENSIS.

Another _venerable_ archdeacon now living permitted the churchwardens of
Swaffham to give him a fine copy of Cranmer's Bible belonging to the church
library.

S. Z. Z. S.

Add to the list Finedon, in Northamptonshire, where there is a collection
of upwards of 1000 volumes in the parvise over the porch.

E. H. A.

       *       *       *       *       *

"UP, GUARDS, AND AT THEM!"

(Vol. v., p. 426.; Vol. viii., pp. 111. 184.)

The authority for the Duke of Wellington having used these words at the
battle of Waterloo is Capt. Batty, of the Grenadier Guards, in a letter
written a few days after the battle, published in Booth's _Battle of
Waterloo_, and illustrated by George Jones, Esq., R.A., who is believed to
have superintended the whole publication. I append the extract:--

    "Upon the cavalry being repulsed, the Duke himself ordered our second
    battalion to form line with the third battalion, and, after advancing
    to the brow of the hill, to lie down and shelter ourselves from the
    fire. Here we remained, I imagine, near an hour. It was now about seven
    o'clock. The French infantry had in vain been brought against our line
    and, as a last resource, Buonaparte resolved upon attacking our part of
    the position with his veteran Imperial Guard, promising them the
    plunder of Brussels. Their artillery and they advanced in solid column
    to where we lay. The Duke, who was riding behind us, watched their
    approach; and at length, when within a hundred yards of us, exclaimed
    'Up, guards, and at them again!' Never was there a prouder moment than
    this for our country or ourselves," &c.--Second Letter of Capt. Batty,
    Grenadier Guards, dated June 22, 1815, from the village of Gommignies;
    his First Letter being dated Bavay, June 21, 1815.

This circumstantial account, written so few days after the battle,
detailing affirmatively the command to the guards as heard by one of
themselves, will probably countervail the negative testimony of C. as
derived from the Duke's want of recollection: as well as the "Goodly
Botherby's" of MR. CUTHBERT BEDE. As an instance of the Duke's impressions
of the battle, I may add, that he stated that there was _no smoke_, though
Mr. Jones told me, that when he was on the ground two days afterwards the
smoke was still hanging over it.

FRANK HOWARD.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHOTOGRAPHIC CORRESPONDENCE.

_Mr. Muller's Process._--MR. SISSON inquires for any one's experience in
the use of the above formula, and I beg to say I remember when it was
published I tried it, but gave it up. It is an excellent plan, but requires
improvement. The following were my objections:

If the objects are not well illuminated by the sun, the image is not sharp.
The skies taken are singularly the reverse of the iodide-of-potash method,
as they are almost transparent.

The solutions of iron are a constant trouble by precipitating.

It has the same disadvantages as other modes on paper from inequality in
the strength of the image. The photographic _pons asinorum_ appears however
to be got over by the process, viz. taking the picture at once in the
camera, and it is very possible that it can be made perfect. A small
quantity of chromate of potash, about one grain to three ounces of solution
of iodide of iron, gives a little more force to the picture.

I find the nitrate of lead a very useful salt in iodizing paper. Six grains
of the salt to the ounce of water, and tincture of iodine added till a pale
yellow, will give additional sensitiveness to iodized paper, if the sheets
are floated upon the solution. This will shorten the time in the camera
nearly five minutes; but it requires care, as it is apt to solarize.

A weak solution of iodide of iron has also the same effect, and, if blotted
off at once, it will not blacken by the use of gallic acid.

WELD TAYLOR.

Bayswater.

