Produced by Suzanne Shell, Jayam Subramanian, Mary Ann Fink and PG
Distributed Proofreaders


[Illustration: "And who would ever believe anybody else guilty who knew
your guest was Michael Lanyard, alias 'The Lone Wolf'?"]


ALIAS


THE LONE WOLF


BY

LOUIS JOSEPH VANCE


[Illustration: FRUCTUS QUAM FOLIA ]


1921


TO

ROBERT AITKEN SWAN

WHOSE FRIENDSHIP I HAVE TRIED

IN MANY OTHER WAYS, THIS

YARN WITH DIFFIDENCE IS

DEDICATED


NOTE: This is the fourth of the Lone Wolf stories. Its predecessors
were, in chronological sequence, "The Lone Wolf," "The False Faces,"
"Red Masquerade."

Each story, however, is entirely self-contained and independent of the
others.

If it matters....


LOUIS JOSEPH VANCE

Westport--9 September, 1921.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I WALKING PAPERS

II ONE WALKS

III MEETING BY MOONLIGHT

IV EVE

V PHINUIT & CO

VI VISITATION

VII TURN ABOUT

VIII IN RE AMOR ET AL

IX BLIND MAN'S BUFF

X BUT AS A MUSTARD SEED

XI AU REVOIR

XII TRAVELS WITH AN ASSASSIN

XIII ATHENAIS

XIV DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND

XV ADIEU

XVI THE HOUSE OF LILITH

XVII CHEZ LIANE

XVIII BROTHER AND SISTER

XIX SIX BOTTLES OF CHAMPAGNE

XX THE SYBARITES

XXI SOUNDINGS

XXII OUT OF SOUNDINGS

XXIII THE CIGARETTE

XXIV HISTORIC REPETITION

XXV THE MALCONTENT

XXVI THE BINNACLE

XXVII ÇA VA BIEN!

XXVIII FINALE


ALIAS

THE LONE WOLF


I

WALKING PAPERS


Through the suave, warm radiance of that afternoon of Spring in England
a gentleman of modest and commonly amiable deportment bore a rueful
countenance down Piccadilly and into Halfmoon street, where presently
he introduced it to one whom he found awaiting him in his lodgings,
much at ease in his easiest chair, making free with his whiskey and
tobacco, and reading a slender brown volume selected from his shelves.

This dégagé person was patently an Englishman, though there were traces
of Oriental ancestry in his cast. The other, he of the doleful habit,
was as unmistakably of Gallic pattern, though he dressed and carried
himself in a thoroughly Anglo-Saxon fashion, and even seemed a trace
intrigued when greeted by a name distinctively French.

For the Englishman, rousing from his appropriated ease, dropped his
book to the floor beside the chair, uprose and extended a cordial hand,
exclaiming: "H'are ye, Monsieur Duchemin?"

To this the other responded, after a slight pause, obscurely enough:
"Oh! ancient history, eh? Well, for the matter of that: How are you,
Mister Wertheimer?"

Their hands fell apart, and Monsieur Duchemin proceeded to do away his
hat and stick and chamois gloves; while his friend, straddling in front
of a cold grate and extending his hands to an imaginary blaze, covered
with a mild complaint the curiosity excited by a brief study of that
face of melancholy.

"Pretty way you've got of making your friends wait on your pleasure.
Here I've wasted upwards of two hours of His Majesty's time..."

"How was I to know you'd have the cheek to force your way in here in my
absence and help yourself to my few poor consolations?" Duchemin
retorted, helping himself to them in turn. "But then one never does
know what fresh indignity Fate has in store..."

"After you with that whiskey, by your leave. I say: I'd give something
to know where you ignorant furriners come by this precious pre-War
stuff." But without waiting to be denied this information, Mr.
Wertheimer continued: "Going on the evidence of your looks and temper,
you've been down to Tilbury Docks this afternoon to see Karslake and
Sonia off."

"A few such flashes of intelligence applied professionally, my friend,
should carry you far."

"And the experience has left you feeling a bit down, what?"

"I imagine even you do not esteem parting with those whom one loves an
exhilarating pastime."

"But when it's so obviously for their own good..."

"Oh, I know!" Duchemin agreed without enthusiasm. "If anything should
happen to Karslake now, it would break Sonia's heart, but..."

"And after the part he played in that Vassilyevski show his lease of
life wouldn't be apt to be prolonged by staying on in England."

"I agree; but still--!" sighed Duchemin, throwing himself heavily into
a chair.

"Which," Wertheimer continued, standing, "is why we arranged to give
him that billet with the British Legation in Peking."

"Didn't know you had a hand in that," observed Duchemin, after
favouring the other with a morose stare.

"Oh, you can't trust me! When you get to know me better you'll find I'm
always like that--forever flitting hither and yon, bestowing benefits
and boons on the ungrateful, like any other giddy Providence."

"But one is not ungrateful," Duchemin insisted. "God knows I would
gladly have sped Karslake's emigration with Sonia to Van Dieman's Land
or Patagonia or where you will, if it promised to keep him out of the
way long enough for the Smolny Institute to forget him."

"Since the said Smolny inconsiderately persists in failing to collapse,
as per the daily predictions of the hopeful."

"Just so."

"But aren't you forgetting you yourself have given that Smolny lot the
same and quite as much reason for holding your name anathema?"

"Ah!" Duchemin growled--"as for me, I can take care of myself, thank
you. My trouble is, I want somebody else to take care of. I had a
daughter once, for a few weeks, long enough to make me strangely fond
of the responsibilities of a father; and then Karslake took her away,
leaving me nothing to do with my life but twiddle futile thumbs and
contemplate the approach of middle age." "Middle age? Why flatter
yourself? With a daughter married, too!"

"Sonia's only eighteen..."

"She was born when you were twenty. That makes you nearly forty, and
that's next door to second childhood, Man!" the Englishman declared
solemnly--"you're superannuated."

"I know; and so long as I feel my years, even you can abuse me with
impunity."

But Wertheimer would not hear him. "Odd," he mused, "I never thought of
it before, that you were growing old. And I've been wondering, too,
what it was that has been making you so precious slow and cautious and
cranky of late. You're just doddering--and I thought you were simply
tired out and needed a holiday."

"Perhaps I am and do," said Duchemin patiently. "One feels one has
earned a holiday, if ever anybody did in your blessed S. S."

"Ah! You think so?"

"You'd think so if you'd been mucking round the East End all Winter
with your life in your hands."

"Still--at your age--I'd be thinking about retiring instead of asking
for a rest."

Although Duchemin knew very well that he was merely being ragged in
that way of deadly seriousness which so often amuses the English, he
chose to suggest sourly: "My resignation is at your disposal any time
you wish it."

"Accepted," said Wertheimer airily, "to take effect at once."

To this Duchemin merely grunted, as who should say he didn't consider
this turn of conversation desperately amusing. And Wertheimer resuming
his chair, the two remained for some moments in silence, a silence so
doggedly maintained on both sides that Duchemin was presently aware of
dull gnawings of curiosity. It occurred to him that his caller should
have found plenty to do in his bureau in the War Office....

"And to what," he enquired with the tedious irony of ennui, "is one
indebted for this unexpected honour on the part of the First
Under-Secretary of the British Secret Service? Or whatever your
high-sounding official title is..."

"Oh!" Wertheimer replied lazily--and knocked out his pipe--"I merely
dropped in to say good-bye."

Duchemin discovered symptoms of more animation.

"Hello! Where are you off to?"

"Nowhere--worse luck! I mean I'm here to bid you farewell and Godspeed
and what not on the eve of your departure from the British Isles."

"And where, pray, am I going?"

"That's for you to say."

Monsieur Duchemin meditated briefly. "I see," he announced: "I'm to
have a roving commission."

"Worse than that: none at all."

Duchemin opened his eyes wide.

"'The wind bloweth where it listeth,'" Wertheimer affirmed. "How do I
know whither you'll blow, now you're a free agent again, entirely on
your own? I've got no control over your movements."

"The S. S. has."

"Never no more. Didn't you tender me your resignation a moment ago?
Wasn't it promptly accepted?"

"Look here: What the devil----!"

"Well, if you must know," the Englishman interrupted hastily, "my
instructions were to give you your walking papers if you refused to
resign. So your connection with the S. S. is from this hour severed.
And if you ain't out of England within twenty-four hours, we'll jolly
well deport you. And that's that."

"One perceives one has served England not wisely but too well."

"Shrewd lad!" Wertheimer laughed. "You see, old soul, we admire you no
end, and we're determined to save your life. Word has leaked through
from Petrograd that your name has been triple-starred on the Smolny's
Index Expurgatorius. Karslake's too. An honour legitimately earned by
your pernicious collaboration in the Vassilyevski bust. Karslake's
already taken care of, but you're still in the limelight, and that
makes you a public nuisance. If you linger here much longer the verdict
will undoubtedly be: Violent death at the hands of some person or
persons unknown. So here are passports and a goodish bit of money. If
you run through all of it before this blows over, we'll find a way, of
course, to get more to you. You understand: No price too high that buys
good riddance of you. And there will be a destroyer waiting at
Portsmouth to-night with instructions to put ashore secretly anywhere
you like across the Channel. After that--as far as the British Empire
is concerned--your blood be on your own head."

The other nodded, investigating the envelope which his late chief had
handed him, then from his letter of credit and passports looked up with
a reminiscent smile.

"It isn't the first time you've vouched for me by this style.
Remember?"

"Well, you've earned as fair title to the name of Duchemin as I ever
did to that of Wertheimer."

But the smile was fading from the eyes of the man whom England
preferred to recognize as André Duchemin.

"But where on earth is one to go?" "Don't ask me," the Englishman
protested. "And above all, don't tell me. I don't want to know. Since
I've been on this job, I've learned to believe in telepathy and mind
reading and witchcraft and all manner of unholy rot. And I don't want
you to come to a sudden end through somebody's establishing illicit
intercourse with my subconscious mind."

He took his leave shortly after that; and Monsieur Duchemin settled
down in the chair which his guest had quitted to grapple with his
problem: where under Heaven to go?

After a wasted while, he picked up in abstraction the book which
Wertheimer had been reading--and wondered if, by any chance, he had
left it there on purpose, so strong seemed the hint. It was Stevenson's
'Travels with a Donkey.' Duchemin was familiar enough with the work,
and had no need to dip anew into its pages to know it offered one fair
solution to his quandary.

If--he assured himself--there were any place in Europe where one might
count on being reasonably secure from the solicitous attentions of the
grudge-bearing Bolsheviki, it was the Cévennes, those little-known
hills in the south of France, well inland from the sea.


II

ONE WALKS

