Believing that Bennigsen's plan was to reach Elbing and defend his
communications with Dantzic, Napoleon issued orders on January
twenty-seventh for a countermarch in that direction, to engage him
either there or farther to the eastward. The orders given next day to
Davout and Augereau show that by swift movements he hoped to attack at
Willenberg, break through Bennigsen's center, and scatter his forces
right and left. Lannes had been taken ill after Pultusk, and was still
an invalid; Savary was therefore put in command of his well-tried
corps to bear the brunt of the battle. His business was to cover the
line of the Narew for the purpose of assuring freedom of action to the
main French army, and with that end in view to attack the Russian
corps under Essen, which was menacing it. Three days after the orders
of Napoleon were given, his army of a hundred thousand men was in
position on a line running in general east and west within the space
bounded by Willenberg, Gilgenburg, Mlawa, and Przasnysz, with one
reserve of forty thousand on the left, to prevent the loss of Thorn,
and another of fourteen thousand on the right. Everything was in
readiness for an advance under the most advantageous circumstances, to
take Bennigsen by surprise, strike him on his flank, and close the
campaign in a single battle. On January thirty-first the final orders
were issued for the advance, and the march began. As in Franconia, on
the eve of Jena, it seemed as if the victory were already assured, won
by the marvelous moving of great bodies of men, this time in the depth
of winter.

[Illustration: Map of the Battle of Eylau.]

On what a slender thread hang the fortunes of war! That day a French
courier carrying to Bernadotte a particularly detailed account of the
Emperor's plan, and orders to advance to Gilgenburg, was caught by the
Cossacks. The precious papers were in Bennigsen's hands next morning.
The Russian troops were still in a wretched condition, badly clothed,
and sustaining life by marauding; moreover, they numbered but sixty-five
thousand, Lestocq not yet having come in from Mohrungen. The Russian
general saw how he was entrapped, and that he could escape only by a
swift retreat. His conduct of the movement was masterly, and on February
sixth, though the French columns were not far behind, he had reached
Heilsberg. During the day the Russian rear-guard was driven in, and
Bennigsen, marching all night, found himself next morning before the
town of Eylau, or, more precisely, Preussisch-Eylau, the spot he had
selected for a desperate stand in defense of Königsberg. The Russian
rear-guard was again overtaken, this time at Landsberg, where Murat
arrived with his cavalry on the morning of the seventh. All day the
Russians slowly resisted him, fighting bravely under Prince Bagration,
and receding steadily as far as Eylau, which they held by a stubborn
stand until induced to evacuate it voluntarily by the considerations of
gathering darkness and a foe superior in numbers. Their loss during the
day was upward of two thousand. When night fell the Russian lines were a
short distance behind Eylau, and stretched two miles, from Serpalten on
the left to Schloditten on the right. Lestocq, coming up with his
Prussians, had reached Rositten, between nine and ten miles away, where
he received orders to hurry onward. The French held the town of Eylau;
in and near it were the troops of Murat, Soult, Augereau, and just in
their rear the Emperor with the guard. Ney was farther to the north and
west on the left, with orders to cut off Lestocq. The terrain abounded
in lakes and ponds of considerable size, but a black frost had rendered
them so hard, and the snow had so completely bedecked them, that they
were for the purposes of manoeuvering as available as the solid
earth, both for cavalry and artillery.

When day broke on February eighth the general arrangement of the
hostile lines was such as to favor neither. Soult was before the town
on the French left, Augereau in the center, and Saint-Hilaire with one
division of Soult on the right. Behind the two latter was Murat with
the cavalry; in the rear, on rising ground, was the guard under
Bessières as a reserve. Davout was far out on the right near
Bartenstein. The total number of French on the ground was about eighty
thousand. The Russian right was commanded by Tutschkoff, the center by
Sacken, the left by Ostermann-Tolstoi; their reserve was behind the
center, under Doctoroff and Prince Galitzin. Their total number was
about fifty-eight thousand, but they were superior to their enemy in
artillery. Between the armies, in a low plain, lay several of the
frozen ponds, covered with snow. Napoleon's plan was to send Davout
around the Russian left flank, while Saint-Hilaire engaged Tolstoi.
Augereau and the cavalry were to be hurled against the center and to
push toward the enemy's right; the combined onset would roll up
Bennigsen's entire line and result in a rout; Ney would intervene, and
make the battle not only decisive, but annihilating.

The combination did not work out correctly. It was a raw and bitter
day; during the morning there were occasional snow flurries, and at
midday a heavy downfall. Bennigsen seized the initiative, and opened
the battle by a cannonade. Napoleon, divining his plan, sent a
messenger for Ney to come and strengthen Soult. At nine the Russian
right advanced and drove in the French left, which was weak, to the
town. At that moment the order was given for Augereau and
Saint-Hilaire to move. In the driving storm they lost connection with
each other, and the latter was repulsed by Russian cavalry, while
Augereau's corps was almost destroyed by the enemy's center. The
dashing horsemen of Galitzin reached the foot of the very hill on
which Napoleon stood, and a panic seized all about him, not excepting
Berthier and Bessières, who excitedly called up the guard to save
their Emperor. The Emperor, though almost "trodden under foot" as
Bertrand testified, nevertheless remained calm, exclaiming, "What
boldness! What boldness!" The pursuers fell back exhausted, and Murat
in turn dashed with his cavalry toward the gap between the enemy's
center and right. So worn out were both sides, however, that without a
collision they ceased to charge, and began to fire.

About noon Davout at last arrived on the Russian left, and drove it
from its position, while Saint-Hilaire again charged, and the two in
combination effected the movement contemplated by the Emperor. In a
few hours the Russians, who were receding in fair order and fighting
fiercely, began to waver, and some of the formations broke into
flight. In this crisis Scharnhorst arrived with five thousand
Prussians; he had been compelled to make a long detour in order to
avoid Ney, with whom Lestocq had been engaged. By nightfall the French
were brought to a stand, and soon after they were driven back from the
hamlets which they had seized in their advance. Night ended the fight.
Ney had not received his orders until two in the afternoon, and
arrived too late for service. The armies retained their relative
positions, and both claimed the day. Neither had lost, neither had
gained, the field. But the battle was disastrous for both: from first
to last the struggle had been desperate and bloody. The losses were
virtually equal--about eighteen thousand men on each side. During the
evening Napoleon began to arrange a retreat; in fact, Davout was
about to begin it when he learned that there was a great commotion in
the enemy's bivouac. Advancing as far as possible, the marshal put his
ear to the ground and distinctly noted a diminishing rumble, which
convinced him that the Russians were withdrawing. This was an
agreeable surprise, and Napoleon, when informed of the fact, ordered
his army to stand fast. The morning light displayed an abandoned
Russian camp.

It is impossible to tell which army was in the worse plight; both were
in the utmost distress. Augereau had been wounded, and, though not
disabled, had left the field. This brought down on him the commander's
displeasure, and inasmuch as his corps was nearly annihilated, it was
disbanded; some of his regiments were virtually destroyed. The living
were gaunt, exhausted, and ill with hunger; an eye-witness declared
that but for the arrival, about noon, of some Jewish traders from
Warsaw with four tuns of brandy, thousands would have perished from
cold and fatigue. The dead were strewn thick over the field, and in
some places were piled in heaps. On the white background of a Northern
winter the carnage was terribly apparent; the prowlers who skulked
from place to place in search of booty could be distinguished in all
directions. Marauding began on a frightful scale, discipline was
slackened by misery, and for miles around thousands of wretched
soldiers stripped the scarcely less wretched peasantry of their few
remaining bits of property.

The army was eager to be gone from these sickening sights. But
Bennigsen had technically admitted defeat by his withdrawal, which the
Prussians characterized as "a sin and a shame." Napoleon, therefore,
waited to secure his victory, and formally despatched a few parties in
pursuit. Murat advanced to within touch of Bennigsen, who had taken
his position under the walls of Königsberg. At the same time the
Emperor dictated a glowing account of the French triumph and of the
admirable condition of the army. It was at once despatched for
publication in the official journals of Paris. Soon afterward, on
February thirteenth, a messenger carried to Frederick William verbal
proposals for either an armistice or a separate peace on most
favorable terms. In these Napoleon set forth that the relation of
Prussia to Russia was mere vassalage, and that her rehabilitation as
an independent power was essential to the peace of Europe, agreeing to
restore her lands as far as the Elbe, and saying that as to Poland he
cared nothing whatever. The confident feeling of the allies was shown
by the Prussian king's prompt refusal to accept such overtures, and by
his determination to abide by the issue. On the other hand, the mere
fact of the proposition was evidence of Napoleon's anxiety. It is said
on good authority that the French emissary verbally offered the
complete restoration of Prussia if she would desert her ally.

Stern necessity would wait no longer on Napoleon's bravado; in a few
days his troops withdrew to the tableland behind the river Passarge.
There they found better cantonments, but the food was neither better
nor more abundant. The Emperor had only a thatched hovel for his
headquarters at Osterode, and, as he wrote to his brother Joseph,
lived in snow and filth, without wine, brandy, or bread. "We shall be
in fine condition when we get bread," he said to Soult. "My position
would be fine if I had food; the lack of food makes it only moderate,"
he wrote, on February twenty-seventh, to Talleyrand. This was true,
because now the army was more concentrated than before; and when
headquarters were moved in the spring to Finkenstein the Emperor was
more comfortable. The movements culminating in Pultusk clearly prove
that Napoleon could not until then adapt his means to the novel
conditions of warfare he found in Poland. But in the movements
antecedent to Eylau there are, in spite of virtual defeat, a clear
apprehension of the difficulties, and an evident ability to surmount
them. While Bennigsen constantly assumes the offensive, Napoleon
always seizes the initiative, and in the retreat his choice of the
plateau around Osterode as a rallying-point displays a continued
mastery of all the conditions.

Around the camp-fires there was, during the remaining months of
winter, a passive endurance, mingled with some murmuring about the
horrors caused by one man's ambition. The Emperor set his men an
example of uncomplaining cheerfulness. His health continued as
exuberant as it had been for the year past, and his activity, though
no longer feverish, lost nothing of its intensity. Savary thought he
outdid himself, accomplishing in one month what elsewhere would have
been, even for him, the work of three. Mme. de Rémusat remembered to
have heard him say that he felt better during those months than ever
before or after. This vigor of body, combined with the same iron
determination as of old, did indeed work miracles, and this in spite
of the fact that his indefatigable secretary, Maret, was long at the
point of death.

To remedy the blunder of having left Dantzic behind in the hands of
the Prussians, Lefebvre was despatched with his new corps to beleaguer
it. Savary drove the Russians from the Narew and out of Ostrolenka;
Mortier threatened Stralsund and stopped the Swedes, who, as members
of the coalition, were finally about to take an active share in the
fighting. To strengthen the weakened ranks of the invaders, new levies
were ordered in both Switzerland and Poland, while at the same time
some of the soldiers occupying Silesia and besieging her fortresses
were called in. Both Neisse and Glatz were still beset by French
troops, but the siege of Kolberg was abandoned, and still further
reinforcements thus became available. In the daily skirmishes which
occurred at the outposts the fighting was sharp; but the Cossacks were
as saucy as ever, and the French light horse could bring in little
news. Meantime Russia's difficulties, of which Napoleon remained
ignorant, kept her from reinforcing her army to the proper size. Her
credit was so low that she could raise no money on her own account,
and when she applied to England for a subsidy, it was refused. The
Czar was consequently furious, and strained Russia's resources to the
utmost; but he could give Bennigsen no more than enough funds and men
to restore his original strength.

The arms of Russia had been fairly successful on the lower Danube, for
the Turks had been paralyzed by an unforeseen danger. Great Britain
had sent a fleet to Constantinople, and the Sultan, though he
immediately declared war against England, was terrified. But
Napoleon's emissary, Sebastiani, engaged the English admiral in
negotiations until the shore batteries were sufficiently strengthened
to compel the British fleet to retire. Filled by this success with new
enthusiasm for his Eastern projects, the Emperor of the French devised
and set on foot a scheme for the alliance of Turkey and Persia in
order to checkmate the ambitions of either Russia or Austria. About
the end of April an envoy from the Shah arrived at Finkenstein. He was
received with great demonstrations, and France was delighted to see
the kings of the East seeking, as she believed, her Emperor's favor.
Napoleon's information with regard to the Orient was detailed and
accurate; his knowledge of the Eastern character was fraternally
instinctive. A treaty was easily negotiated in which France promised
to drive Russia from Georgia and to supply Persia with artillery; in
return the Shah was to break with England, confiscate British
property, instigate the peoples of Afghanistan and Kandahar to
rebellion, set on foot an army to invade India, and in case the French
should also despatch a land force against India, he was to give them
free passage along a line of march to be subsequently laid out,
together with means of sustenance. None of the Emperor's achievements
during this eventful winter shows more clearly than this how he could
rise above the discouragements of a doubtful situation, and how
sanguine his disposition was when his health was really good.

Throughout the late campaign the Emperor Francis had occupied a
position of non-intervention and hesitating neutrality similar to that
of Frederick William the year before. If he had intervened any time
during the winter after Eylau, his will would have been imperative.
But as Prussia had held off in his hour of need, leaving Napoleon
untrammeled, so now he let Prussia drink of the same cup, and remained
nominally neutral. Andréossy reported, however, that Austria's
strength was being rapidly recruited, and that her preparations
foreboded a renewal of hostilities. There was a new prime minister,
Count Stadion, remarkable for his energy and insight. Napoleon
immediately began to make propositions for an alliance, intended
merely to gain time. As he had the previous year called for the boy
conscripts of 1807, so he now demanded those for 1808, who were even
somewhat younger. The Confederacy of the Rhine was summoned to supply
fresh troops, and even Spain, in which there had recently been
symptoms of serious uneasiness, was called on for a large contingent
of auxiliaries. Before the close of negotiations with Francis,
Napoleon had virtually doubled his army; the new levies were kept in
Silesia and central Prussia, apparently as a reserve, but they were
not far from the Austrian frontier.

On May twenty-sixth, in spite of a gallant and persistent defense by
Kalkreuth, Dantzic, the queen fortress of the Baltic, capitulated.
This made Lefebvre's force available to strengthen further the army
which still lay behind the Passarge. Napoleon again offered Silesia to
Francis, this time entire and outright, as the price of an alliance;
he was even willing to make an exchange for Dalmatia. On April
twenty-sixth, at Bartenstein, Russia and Prussia had signed a new
treaty, according to which they bound themselves to make no separate
peace, and agreed that they would endeavor to unite the Scandinavian
powers with England, Austria, and themselves for a general war of
liberation. The Viennese cabinet was again divided on the question of
renewing hostilities, and in the end proposed its services as a
mediator, provided that Poland should remain divided and Turkey
unmolested, and that German affairs should be rearranged. Napoleon
coquetted with this proposal until Russia and Prussia gave their
reply, which was not an assent to Austria's proposition, but a request
for Francis's adherence to the convention of Bartenstein.[3] When
Austria's offer was thus refused the French position was virtually
secure as against her, at least for the season. Shrewd onlookers could
hardly credit their senses, and thought that so far from Francis's
policy being one of neutrality, it was a favor of the highest
importance to Napoleon. The fact was that Austria knew Prussia's
weakness and had little confidence in Russia's strength. Moreover,
France had powerful friends in Vienna, where Andréossy was
influential, and Austria's own preparations were not complete. It
would be a serious matter if she should conclude a treaty with two
allies who might be beaten before she could herself take the field.
Hence nothing disturbed the impenetrable front of the Danube power;
her own plans were maturing slowly but surely, and while the enormous
French reinforcements in central Europe were in a sense a menace, she
threw a strong military cordon upon the frontiers of Galicia, and
haughtily held aloof from anything likely to fetter her own ambitions.

         [Footnote 3: On the refusal of Russia and Prussia to join
         Austria, see Vandal: Napoléon et Alexandre Ier, Vol. I,
         Chapitre Préliminaire.]


CHAPTER III

AN INDECISIVE VICTORY: FRIEDLAND[4]

         [Footnote 4: References as before.]

     The State of France -- Remedies Proposed by the Emperor --
     Napoleon's Self-Indulgence -- Perplexities of both Combatants in
     Poland -- Opening of the Campaign -- Heilsberg -- Friedland --
     The Result Indecisive -- The Strategic Problem -- The Statesman's
     Point of View -- The Armistice -- Napoleon's Resolution -- The
     Czar's Obligations to Prussia -- His Attitude toward Napoleon.


The situation in Paris was even less satisfactory to Napoleon than
that in the rest of Europe. Then, as now, France was too much like one
of those interesting creatures called by the pleasant scientific name
of cephalopod--all head except a few tentacles; so we say Paris, and
not France. Imperial interests rested on two supports, Paris and the
rest of the world. When Napoleon withdrew behind the Passarge, not all
the fictions which his fertile brain could devise and his busy agents
spread were sufficient to deceive the astute operators of the Paris
exchange. Accordingly, the price of French government bonds went down
with a serious drop; England having announced soon afterward that she
meant to land a great army on the shores of the Baltic, public
confidence was further shaken. A year before, the French nation had
been startled by the premature demand for more French youth; the new
call to anticipate the conscription filled them with consternation.
These were grave matters, and the roads from Paris to Osterode and
Finkenstein continually resounded under the hoofs of horses and the
roll of wheels as messengers sped back and forth with questions and
replies. The nature of this correspondence shows how perfectly the
government of France was centralized in Napoleon's person, even in his
absence at such a distance: the whole gamut of administration was run,
from state questions of the gravest importance down to the disposition
of trivial affairs connected with the opera and its coryphées. As to
reviving the finances, the Emperor was at his wit's end, and in a sort
of blind helplessness he ordered the state to lend five hundred
thousand francs per month to such manufacturers as would keep at work
and deposit their wares in a government storehouse as collateral; nor
did he disdain such measures as the founding of one or two factories
of military supplies, or even the refurnishing of the Tuileries, in
which he requested the women of his family to spend their money
freely.

Of course he was absurdly unsuccessful; scarcely less so than he was
in his attempts to restore general confidence by the publication of
inspired articles in the newspapers. The censorship was more rigid
than ever, and Fouché was instructed to stop indiscreet private
letters from the army. Nevertheless, with no great difficulty the
senate was bullied into approving the new conscription, and the
volatile people soon listened without alarm to the siren voice of
their Emperor, which said these boys would be only a national guard,
children obeying the law of nature, the objects of his own paternal
care. Louis, who was governing Holland with reference to its own best
interests, and ordering the affairs of his family rigidly but
admirably, received a severe and passionate reprimand from the Emperor
for his economy. What was wanted was pay for the troops, plenty of
conscripts, encouragement for the Dutch Catholics, and a giddy court
where men would forget more serious things, and where the gay young
Queen Hortense could make a display. "Let your wife dance as much as
she wants to; it is proper for her age. I have a wife forty years old,
and from the field of battle I recommend her to go to balls; while you
want one of twenty to live in a cloister, or like a wet-nurse, always
bathing her child." In the absence of her bogy, Mme. de Staël, who
said she loved the gutters of Paris better than the mountain streams
of Switzerland, reappeared in the suburbs of that city. When Napoleon
heard of it he grew furious, and gave orders to seize her as an
intriguer, and to send her back to Geneva, by force if necessary. It
was done, but an awful presentiment took possession of the Emperor
that she had appeared like a crow foreboding a coming tempest. As if
to compensate France for the loss of the exile's literary powers and
those of her friends, many means were devised and tried for the
encouragement of an imperial literature. In his assumed and noisy
contempt for ideals, Napoleon displayed his fear of them: the Academy
was ordered to occupy itself with literary criticism; when in public
assemblies mention was made of Mirabeau or other Revolutionary heroes,
the speaker was to be admonished that he should confine himself to
their style and leave their politics alone; the schools were ordered
to train the children in geography and in history, but the instruction
must be confined to facts, and not be philosophical or religious.

Napoleon's worst qualities and his growing weaknesses were made
manifest this winter in two exhibitions of self-indulgence most
far-reaching in their results. The first bad symptom was his notorious
license, which brought from the Empress expressions of the bitterest
reproach. Growing old at forty-three, not forty, as Napoleon gallantly
but untruthfully wrote to Louis, the aging Creole dismissed from
memory the sins of her own youth and middle age, while in jealous
fury she charged her husband not only with his adulteries, but with
crimes the mere name of which sullies the ordinary records of human
wickedness and folly. She would have followed the Emperor to Poland,
but his repeated dissuasions, although honeyed, were virtual
prohibitions, and she dared not. His unfriendly annalist, Mme. de
Rémusat, says he retorted to all Josephine's charges that he needed
but one reply, the persistent I: "I am different from every one else,
and accept the limitations of no other." Her continuous weeping, he
wrote to his consort, showed neither character nor courage. "I don't
like cowards; an empress should have pluck." The second sign of
weakness was the growing neglect of detail in his work. Life has
always been too short for a despot both to gratify his passions and at
the same time to be a beneficent ruler, even under the simplest
conditions. On the recovery of Maret, the Emperor relaxed very much in
his personal attention to detail, while his secretary sought to drown
a domestic sorrow and scandal in a feverish activity still greater
than that which he had always displayed. This conjunction gave the
secretary an eminence he had not hitherto reached, and made him
thereafter a power behind the throne whose influence was dangerous to
the Empire, to France, and to the peace of Europe.

In spite of the enemy's numerical inferiority, Napoleon had been
thwarted at Eylau by the weather, by the unsurpassed bravery of the
Russian soldiers, and by the able tactics of Bennigsen. The latter had
not been worsted in the arbitrament of arms, yet the Emperor's
character for resolution and energy had virtually defeated the
Russians, and had given him not only a technical but a real victory.
Although he fell back and assumed the defensive, feeling that without
enormous reinforcements and the capture of Dantzic he could not
resume the offensive, yet nevertheless he had remained for four months
unmolested by his foe. Bennigsen's perplexities were great. The
Russian court was rent by dissensions, affairs at Constantinople were
occupying much of the Czar's attention, and the force available for
fighting in the North seemed too small for a decisive victory: he
remained virtually inert. There was an effort late in February to
drive the French left wing across the Vistula, but it failed. A few
days later Napoleon in person made a reconnaissance on his right, and
this show of activity reduced the opposing ranks to inactivity. He had
proposed to resume hostilities on June tenth, and had by that time
increased his strength on the front to one hundred and sixty thousand
men, all well equipped and fairly well fed. The reserve army in
central Europe was much larger; there were about four hundred thousand
men, all told, in the field.

[Illustration: Battle of Heilsberg.]

Meanwhile, however, the pleasant season had mended the roads and dried
the swamps. The Russians were refreshed by their long rest, and,
children of nature as they were, felt the summer's warmth as a spur to
activity. Bennigsen had by that time about ninety thousand men,
excluding the Prussians, who now numbered eighteen thousand. By his
delay he had lost the services of his best ally, the inclement
weather; but he had at least come to a decision, and forestalling
Napoleon's scheme, advanced on June sixth to the Passarge, against
Ney's corps, which was the French advance-guard. Ney retreated, and
the seventh was spent in manoeuvers which resulted in uniting his
corps with the main army. Bennigsen, having hoped to cut off and
destroy his division before attacking in force, felt compelled, in
consequence of failure, to retreat in turn, and this movement left
Lestocq at a dangerous distance to the right. At this juncture
Napoleon determined to assume the offensive himself. On the eighth he
began to concentrate his troops, and took measures to find the enemy
in order to force a battle. Bennigsen had withdrawn beyond the river
Alle; Soult and Lannes, with Murat in advance, were sent up its left
bank to Heilsberg; Davout and Mortier were to pass farther on, as part
of a general movement to surround; Ney and the guard were held in
reserve, while Victor was despatched to block Lestocq.

The first shock occurred on the morning of the tenth, in the
neighborhood of Heilsberg; for Bennigsen had sent a considerable
number of his troops back over the river to feel the enemy. The
Russians were slowly driven across the plain, fighting fiercely as
they went, until by six in the evening they reached the heights near
the town, which had been intrenched. Here they turned, and for five
hours hurled back one advancing French column after another until
eleven o'clock at night, when, fortunately for the attacking
troops,--so at least thought Savary, who was with them,--it grew too
dark, even near the summer solstice and in those high latitudes, to
fight longer. Next morning Napoleon woke after his bivouac and looked
to see his enemy gone, as at Pultusk and Eylau. But this time a
repetition of that pleasant experience was denied him. His losses had
been so serious the day before that he spent the eleventh in
manoeuvers, further concentrating his army before Heilsberg, and
despatching Davout to throw himself between Lestocq and Bennigsen,
thus turning the latter's right and checking the former, if all went
well. This movement determined the character of the whole campaign. It
had the desired effect, and on the morning of the twelfth the trenches
in front of him were empty. The Russians had stolen away, and for two
days they steadily retreated down the Alle in the general direction
of Königsberg, until on the evening of the thirteenth they reached
Friedland.

Bennigsen had expected to retreat still farther, hoping to reach
Wehlau, and cross to the right bank of the Pregel for a strong
defensive position before Königsberg. Lestocq with the Prussians was
well forward on the extreme right toward that place. But at three in
the morning of June fourteenth the head of Lannes's column appeared
before Friedland, and the Russian commander, supposing he had to do
with a single division, turned, and crossing to the left bank of the
Alle, passed through Friedland in order to meet his enemy in the open.
His evident intention was to follow the Napoleonic plan of
overwhelming the attacking divisions one by one as they arrived. His
right wing was stationed in the rear of the hamlet of Heinrichsdorf,
his left rested on a forest known as the Sortlack. When his
arrangements were completed it was nine o'clock in the morning. What
information he had is unknown, but what he did remains inexplicable.
Starting to seize Heinrichsdorf, he was, after a short conflict,
repulsed; for Lannes had stretched his line far to the left for the
same purpose, and had been reinforced by Mortier's vanguard. Bennigsen
withdrew about noon to his first position, and stood there in idleness
for three long hours, exchanging useless volleys with his foe. Having
his entire force already on the field, he remained absolutely inactive
while the enemy formed their line. In respect to his having massed his
forces before the French could form, his position was exactly parallel
to that which the latter had occupied at Jena with regard to the
Prussians, and which was used by Napoleon with such vigor for a flank
attack. But Bennigsen lacked the promptness and insight necessary to
use his advantage, and the long delay was decisive. In the interval,
Ney, Victor's artillery, and the guard arrived; at three the Emperor
issued his orders for forming the line; and two hours later he gave
the signal for Ney to attack on the right. The Russians had but
shortly before learned that the main French army was in front of them,
and were beginning their retreat with the intention of recrossing the
Alle, many having entered Friedland, which lies on the left bank of
the stream. In the first rush toward the town, Ney was repulsed with
dreadful loss; but as Ney's corps rolled back to right and left,
Dupont appeared with Victor's first division in the very middle of the
breaking lines, and at the same moment Sénarmont pressed forward close
to the Russian ranks with all Victor's artillery,--thirty-six
pieces,--and began to pour in a deadly fire. This routed the enemy,
who fled through the town and over the stream; but their right wing,
being thus turned into the rear-guard, was caught by Lannes before it
reached the crossing, and checked. The wooden bridge was set in
flames, and before nightfall that portion of the Russian army which
had not yet crossed was virtually annihilated.

About eighty thousand French and about fifty-five thousand Russians
took part in this battle; the former lost seven thousand men, the
latter sixteen thousand, with eighty field-pieces. It was the only one
of Napoleon's great engagements in which he admitted his numerical
superiority to his enemy. The same day Soult and Davout, with Murat's
cavalry, drove Lestocq into Königsberg, and prepared to invest the
town. But Lestocq's troops, with the garrison and the court, escaped,
flying for refuge toward the Russian frontier. Bennigsen collected at
Allenburg the troops he had saved, and, retreating in good order,
crossed the Niemen at Tilsit four days later. He then had the option
of awaiting Napoleon, who was close behind, or of making peace, or of
withdrawing into the interior beyond the enemy's reach, as Alexander
had done after Austerlitz. As a matter of fact, he confessed utter
defeat. "This is no longer a fight, it is butchery," he wrote to the
Czar's brother, the Grand Duke Constantine. "Tell the Emperor what you
will," he said again, "if only I can stop the carnage."[5]

         [Footnote 5: Oudinot: Mémoires, Ch. II.]

The campaign of Friedland shows either less genius or more than any
other of Napoleon's victories, according to the standpoint from which
it is judged. If he is to be regarded throughout its duration merely
as a general, then his conduct shows comparatively little ability. He
came on his enemy where he did not expect a battle. Although he had
ample time to evolve and execute an admirable plan, and while his loss
was trifling compared with that of his opponents, yet, nevertheless,
Friedland was a commonplace, incomplete affair. It compelled the foe
to abandon Heilsberg, but it did not annihilate him or necessarily end
the war. Bennigsen found all Russia behind him after his defeat:
twenty-five thousand men came in from Königsberg, Prince Labanoff
brought up the Russian reserves, and thus was formed a substantial
army. A retreat with this force into the vast interior would have left
Napoleon as a general just where he was before. This ineffectual
result was entirely due to a single deliberate move which terminated
his scheme of surrounding and annihilating the foe--the detachment of
Davout against Lestocq on the enemy's extreme right.

But when viewed from the statesman's point of view, Friedland appears
in a very different light.[6] It is a strange coincidence that in the
month previous a rebellion of the janizaries had deprived Selim III
of his throne, and that, Sebastiani's influence being thus ended,
France's position in the Oriental question was utterly changed. The
formal despatches announcing this fact did not reach Tilsit until June
twenty-seventh or twenty-eighth, but there is a strong probability
that it was known to Napoleon before the battle of Friedland. Is it
possible that the Emperor intended Friedland to do no more than
satisfy his army's eagerness for glory, and yet leave Alexander in a
humor to unite with him for the gratification of those well-known
Oriental ambitions of his which he had so recently seen jeopardized by
the Franco-Turkish alliance and the consequent ascendancy of French
influence at Constantinople? Such a hypothesis is by no means wild;
nevertheless, a careful study of the campaign seems to prove that
Napoleon, in suddenly changing from the defensive to the offensive,
and so finding himself at Heilsberg face to face with defeat, took the
quickest and easiest means to relieve a critical situation. It would
have appeared something very much like bravado had Davout's corps
penetrated between Lestocq's division and the Russian army, and thus
have exposed itself to a rear attack. If the easy self-reliance
Napoleon felt after a winter of robust health had been somewhat less,
and if his intellectual acumen had been somewhat greater, the whole
situation might have been foreseen and provided for. As neither was
the case, he did as a general the best thing that was possible at the
moment. Admitting this, we shall find the statesman making the most of
the general's poor situation; for the treaty which followed Friedland
is unique in the history of diplomacy.

         [Footnote 6: Yorck von Wartenburg: Napoleon als Feldherr, I,
         XIII.]

There were forcible reasons on both sides for arriving at an
understanding. It has been remarked that Napoleon never discharged the
stings and darts of personal abuse at Alexander I as he did at the
persons of other enemies. In what was almost a personal correspondence
at an earlier time the Czar had exhibited his noblest qualities and an
enlightened liberalism. To be sure, every humiliation had been heaped on
Russia in spurning the Oubril treaty of the previous year and by the
light disdain of peace obligations solemnly taken. Yet Napoleon was
alive to the present and imperative need of a strong ally if his
mercantile attack on England were to have even a chance of success. With
Austria he had employed all the diplomatic arts of Talleyrand and
Andréossy to no avail: the Polish campaign had made Francis alert, that
of Russia was reviving the bellicose spirit of the Austrian army.
Negotiation with Frederick William had failed because based on the
concept of a new Prussia eastward of the Elbe, a menace alike to Russia
and Austria, and a confession of defeat by the King, who preferred to
place his trust in Alexander. Francis was equally adverse to
Talleyrand's elaborate scheme of a realm eastern in fact as in name,
stretching away down the Danube valley to the Euxine, a buffer against
Russian aggression, a menace or a support to Turkey as occasion
required. It was therefore a categorical imperative which determined the
Emperor of the French to woo the Emperor of all the Russias at this
juncture. When a proposition for an armistice was made by Bennigsen on
June twenty-first, it was not only courteously but impressively
accepted, and within a very short time things were moving as if the two
emperors were no longer enemies, but rather as if they were already
intimate friends, anxious to embrace. At least, even before their
meeting, such was the attitude they assumed in their communications with
each other and ostentatiously displayed to those about them. Some things
are perfectly patent in the Czar's desire for peace. Russian autocracy
as a system was still unshakable, but the authority of his house was
not: in sixty years there had been no fewer than four revolutionary
upheavals, either by the soldiery or by a palace cabal. The instability
of the throne had sadly diminished the prestige of the country, and
after Austerlitz the nation had been treated with contempt in the person
of the Czar, both in his political and his military character, the rest
of Europe being profoundly indifferent to Russian chagrin. His situation
was not improved by Pultusk, Eylau, or Friedland. Dissensions in the
field were not concealed by the hallelujahs and hosannas of the populace
in the cities; victory bore no fruits; without Austria the next step
could not be taken, and hesitancy still marked that uneasy monarchy as
its own. Prussia, although the principal in the fight, was but a feeble
power. England, though reaping the harvest of Russia's commerce, had
become niggardly in regard to subsidies, and had delayed the
long-promised, much-vaunted Baltic expedition until it was useless. The
King of Sweden was so hated by his own subjects that his efforts as an
ally had been rendered almost futile. In Russia itself there was a
strong party, led by the Grand Duke Constantine, which steadily
denounced the war as one in the interest of strangers, and in it were
included most, if not all, the Russian officers. It was evident that
Alexander as an auxiliary would lose no prestige at home in withdrawing
from a quarrel which was not Russia's, and in which he had more than
paid any debt he owed to Prussia by the sacrifice in her behalf of his
guards and of the flower of his army. Moreover, misery abounded among
the survivors, and Russian finances were not exactly in a flourishing
condition. Such was the general discontent with the war that men of
importance--at least so it was said at the time--ventured to remind
Alexander of his father's violent death.

On the other side the urgency was becoming acute. As the strategists
say, Napoleon had won a battle, but not a victory, at Friedland. The
situation in Paris continued highly unsatisfactory. The threatened
English expedition to the Baltic might arrive at any time.
Contemptible as was Gustavus of Sweden, he was in Pomerania with an
Anglo-Hanoverian army of ten thousand men. Most disquieting of all,
there were movements both of intellectual agitation and of active
partizan warfare in Prussia that presaged a speedy convalescence on
her part. It is evident that an alliance with Russia was better for
France than one with Prussia as regards both the Oriental and European
plans of Napoleon. He therefore determined to suggest the most
glittering prospects to Alexander's messenger--nothing less than the
partition of Turkey, and the Vistula as the Russian frontier on the
Baltic.

[Illustration: Battle of Friedland.]

But all these reasons on both sides seem inadequate to explain the
extraordinary character of the events preliminary to the meeting of
the two emperors at Tilsit, of what occurred at that meeting, and of
the treaty there negotiated. When Bennigsen first proposed an
armistice, Napoleon demanded as a guarantee the three fortresses of
Pillau, Kolberg, and Graudenz. His messenger returned with the reply
that they were not Russia's to give. Soon Duroc was despatched to the
hostile camp. Would the Czar make a separate peace? To do so would be
to betray Prussia by expressly violating the Bartenstein treaty.
Technically the document was invalid, for Austria had never signed it,
although she would gladly have done so when brought to face a
Franco-Russian alliance. Morally it would be base for Alexander to
negotiate separately, for Frederick William had refused a similar
offer.[7] The young Czar, however, cared nothing for the royal Europe
of former days, and but little for the theory of a Western empire
under Napoleon. What he did care for was Russian influence in
geographical Europe under whatever name, for the dismemberment of
Turkey, and for the extension of his empire toward the west by the
acquisition of Finland from Sweden. Having failed to realize his
purpose by a coalition of so-called legitimate sovereigns, and having
heard the almost incredible suggestions which Napoleon had made to
Prince Labanoff, his messenger, he was overpowered by the temptation
thus held out, and, deserting Prussia, answered, "Yes." On the
twenty-first an armistice without serious guarantees was concluded
between France and Russia; but none was made with Prussia, for the
terms offered to her were so severe that, desperate as was her King,
he could not endure the thought of accepting them. She was no longer
an equal with either France or Russia, but a dependent on either and
on both; her nomad court was reduced to Frederick William, his
minister Hardenberg, and a few followers who were here to-day and
there to-morrow, wherever they felt most was to be gained from the
self-interest of either their former ally or their conqueror. The
Queen and royal family were at Memel, the farthest outpost of
Prussia's shattered domain.

         [Footnote 7: On the character of Alexander, see Vandal:
         Napoléon et Alexandre, Vol. I, Ch. I.]

The attitude of the Czar toward Napoleon was markedly different from
that of his predecessors in defeat. Frederick William's ancestor had
only a century before bought his title by supplying Prussian troops to
the German-Roman emperor, and, like Napoleon, had set the crown on his
own head. Francis I of Austria was the grandson of Maria Theresa, a
powerful and masterful woman, who held her throne in direct
contravention of legitimist theories, because she had conquered it.
Both were nevertheless overpowered by the sense of their legitimacy
and sacred aloofness. When Francis humiliated himself before his
conqueror after Austerlitz, his mien was distant and his salute
haughty; the miserable King of Prussia was, like him, dignified and
severe even in his beggary. The Czar was too close to the crime which
had set him on his throne to assume any airs of superiority with the
French Cæsar. Having taken the first step, he began to show a childish
eagerness for a personal meeting with Napoleon. The Emperor was far
from averse, and made a formal proposal to that effect, which was
promptly accepted; the intercourse between French and Russian officers
grew warmer and closer every day, and the arrangements for an
interview between the would-be Eastern and Western emperors were soon
completed.


CHAPTER IV

NAPOLEON AND ALEXANDER AT TILSIT[8]

         [Footnote 8: For the years of the Franco-Russian alliance the
         French archives contain a wealth of documentary material:
         regular despatches, verbatim reports of conversations between
         the French ambassadors and the Czar, the news of the day in
         St. Petersburg and the gossip of society. Savary and
         Caulaincourt may be said to have kept their master in
         personal touch with their friend and ally. There is likewise
         the ordinary regular diplomatic correspondence with Austria,
         Prussia, Turkey, and the other European states. An
         interesting and invaluable peculiarity of French archives is,
         that bound up with despatches received are the outlines of
         those sent, and generally not merely a sketch, but the first
         draft with all annotations and corrections, these quite often
         in Napoleon's almost cryptic but still decipherable
         handwriting. Much of course is in cipher, but the key is
         available and sometimes the official decipherment. The
         archives of St. Petersburg are also available for properly
         accredited searchers; Tratchefski has gone a considerable
         distance in publishing the decisive papers, and Tatistcheff
         has printed many important documents in various periodicals.
         Other sources have been already indicated: the published
         correspondence of Napoleon and of Pozzo di Borgo, the
         histories of Bignon, Lefebvre, and Rambaud, and the
         monumental work of Vandal: Napoléon et Alexandre Ier, are all
         of the first importance. Bertrand: Lettres inédites de
         Talleyrand à Napoléon, contains the replies of the minister
         to his chief. Duckworth's check at Constantinople is fully
         explained by Juchereau de Saint Denys: Révolutions de
         Constantinople en 1807 et 1808. Cf. also Hassel: Geschichte
         der Preussischen Politik, 1807 bis 1815. Choiseul-Gouffier:
         Réminiscences sur Napoléon Ier et Alexandre Ier. Adami:
         Louise de Prusse, Erinnerungen der Gräfen von Voss. Savary:
         Mémoires. Life of Sir Robert Wilson.]

     The Floating Pavilion -- Emperor, Czar, and King -- The Two
     Principals -- Their Relation to Frederick William -- A Diplomatic
     Novelty -- Napoleon's Motives -- Great Britain and the World's
     Commerce -- The Orders in Council -- Napoleon's Decrees -- Russia
     as an Ally -- The Ministers and the Negotiations -- Imperial
     Amusements -- The Fate of Turkey -- The Two Friends -- Work after
     Play.


On the morning of June twenty-fifth, 1807, there lay anchored in the
middle of the Niemen, before Tilsit, a pavilion ingeniously
constructed by French soldiers from boats and boards. It was gaily
decorated, according to the taste of their country, with flags and
garlands. The front bore a large monogram composed of the letters N
and A interlaced. Within were two comfortable rooms, one for the
sovereigns, one for their suites. At a signal two skiffs put out, one
from each shore, amid the mingled cheers of the French and Russian
guards, drawn up in view of each other across the intervening stream.
The dull roar of cannon intoned the tidings of reconciliation. In one
boat was Alexander, suitably arrayed in uniform; in the other was
Napoleon, wearing the traditional gray coat and undress hat. The
Emperor of the French was first on board the float, and received his
guest with all that winning grace which he could so well command.
After a formal embrace he began an informal conversation, which then
continued without a break as the two schemers withdrew to the
apartment arranged for their interview. The staff, at a respectful
distance, could catch nothing of what was said, and although the
interview lasted nearly two hours, no words of it are known except the
opening phrases, reported by Napoleon himself. "Sire," remarked the
Czar, "I shall second you against the English." "In that case," was
the reply, "everything can be arranged, and peace is made." Some doubt
has been cast on the literal truth of this momentous dialogue, since
it rests on a single authority. For a century it has not been denied,
and the cup of bitterness which England had held to Alexander's lips
was certainly brimming. Since the beginning of hostilities Great
Britain had failed in every single engagement. Her naval force in the
Baltic was puny, but it preyed on Russian commerce; the promised war
material did not arrive; her support at Constantinople was farcical;
she had no more heart in Turkish partition than before and ever
since; Canning was less than half-hearted and favored Austria to
Russia's disadvantage; even the money support expected and tacitly
promised was refused. The Czar knew that he had been betrayed by
England in the interest of Austria: he did not know how grave had been
Napoleon's coquetry in a similar suit. He was as much bent on the
emancipation of Russian commerce from English tyranny as Napoleon on
the "freedom of the seas," the revolutionary phrase for British
humiliation. The conversation may well have taken place literally as
reported: even though the Czar hoped to postpone the rupture for some
months, he may have given his complete confidence under four eyes. Who
can measure the fascination under which the young enthusiast fell at
first sight? In any case nothing apparently occurred to disturb the
amiability of either monarch. It was doubtless agreed that they should
form a dual alliance, absolute and exclusive.[9] "I have often slept
two in a bed," the suave but inelegant Napoleon was heard to say at a
subsequent meeting, "but never three." Savary declared that the
smiling and complacent young Czar thought the remark delightful. The
meaning of the riddle, if riddle there be, was, of course, that
Austria could no longer count as an equal in the Continental Olympus,
the membership of which was thus reduced to two.

         [Footnote 9: On this point, see Vandal: Napoléon et Alexandre
         Ier, Ch. I.]

The Czar's conscience smote him in regard to his desertion of
Prussia, but with no great effort he obtained material concessions for
her from his new ally. The same afternoon an armistice was arranged
with Frederick William, by the terms of which he temporarily kept his
strong places in Silesia and Pomerania; but his propositions for an
alliance were incontinently rejected. Next day there was another
meeting on the same raft, but this was tripartite, for the King of
Prussia was present. Napoleon was blunt and imperious, reproaching
Frederick William with the duplicity of his policy, vindictively (the
descriptive word he used himself), and with emphasis, demanding
Hardenberg's dismissal. At parting he invited Alexander to dinner, but
ostentatiously omitted to include Frederick William in the request. It
was agreed that to expedite the final negotiations the three monarchs
should remain on the ground; one half the town of Tilsit was
neutralized and divided into three portions, each of the three parties
to take up his residence in one. This closed the preliminaries, and
the two emperors returned with mutual satisfaction to the respective
sides of the river from which they had come. The sensations of
Frederick William, who accompanied Alexander, must have been those of
a soldier on the field under a capital operation in surgery. That very
afternoon the Czar removed to the quarter of Tilsit appropriated to
him. The King of Prussia took lodgings in the house of a miller, but
spent only a part of each day in them, preferring the melancholy
solitude of the neighboring hamlet of Piktupönen, where he and
Hardenberg had last alighted.

Alexander was now thirty years of age, sanguine, ambitious,
impressionable, and mature in proportion to his years. His features
were well formed on Slavic lines, his look was sympathetic, and his
form elegant. The many graces of his mind and person were natural. "My
friend," wrote Napoleon to Josephine on the twenty-fifth, "I have
just met the Emperor Alexander. I have been much pleased with him; he
is a very handsome, good young emperor; he has more intelligence than
is generally thought." Napoleon himself was only eight years older,
but his mind was more penetrating and adroit by a whole generation.
The classic cast in his features, which only a few years before made
sculptors mold him like the statue of the young Augustus, had nearly
disappeared. A complete transformation had been produced in his bodily
appearance by the robust health he had for some time enjoyed. He had
become more of a primitive Italian and less of a Roman. His skin was
now clear and of a rich, dark tint. His powerful frame was fully
developed, and while fat, he was not obese; the great head sat on a
neck which was like a pillar in thickness and strength. His expression
was slightly sensuous about the mouth and chin, but his eyes were
quick and penetrating in their glance. It was rarely that his gaze was
intent. The good manners and polished courtesy in which he indulged at
this time were an unwonted luxury.

Cobenzl said that the last step but one to universal conquest was to
divide the world between two. At that moment there was little doubt as
to which of these two would ultimately survive. Alexander was
impressionable and eager for friendship. He was flattered by the
attentive and considerate manner of the greatest man in Europe. The
glittering, intoxicating generalities of Napoleon attracted his
aspiring mind, while the fascination of the Emperor's person strongly
moved his heart. On the other hand, the influence of the Czar on the
Emperor was substantial. Beneath his frank and chivalric manners,
behind his enthusiasm and romanticism, lay much persistence and shrewd
common sense. The advantages which he gained were granted by Napoleon
mainly from motives of self-interest, for Russia, strong, was the best
helper in reducing Austria to impotence; nevertheless, they were
secured largely through personal influence, and were substantial
advantages which might be permanent in case of disaster to a single
life. Frederick William was only two years younger than Napoleon. His
development had been slow; he was well-meaning but dull, proud but
timid. Though destined to see a regeneration of Prussia under his own
reign, he had as yet done nothing to further it, and in an access of
resentment had declared a war in which she had been virtually
annihilated. His former ally insisted that he should occasionally
attend the conferences, but his presence was distasteful to Napoleon.
Thus he sat, dejection and despair stamped on his homely face;
haughty, yet a suppliant; a king, yet only by sufferance. Fortunately
his queen, Louisa, the woman of her day, beautiful, virtuous, and
wise, came finally to his support. Her hopes were destined to be
rudely shattered, and her charm was to be used in vain; but it was her
presence alone which gave any dignity to Prussia at Tilsit.

Both from the place and circumstances, from the station and character
of the persons negotiating, as well as from the nature of the results,
the meeting at Tilsit is the most remarkable in the history of
diplomacy. The motives which disposed Napoleon to an armistice were
plain enough; those which determined his later conduct can only be
divined. Prussia had seemed to the French liberals of the Revolution
to belong by nature to their system: they were quite as angry with her
persistent neutrality as was either Austria or England, both of whom
thought she should adhere to them, if only for self-preservation.
Napoleon's repeated but vain attempts to secure a Prussian alliance
before Jena, or a separate negotiation afterward, rooted this
traditional bitterness in his mind. To secure the prize for which he
was fighting he had only two courses open: either to restore Poland as
the frontier state between the civilization of his empire and the
semi-barbarism and ambitions of Russia, or else to negotiate with
Russia herself.

The former course meant an interminable warfare with Russia, Austria,
and Prussia, at a distance of fifteen hundred miles from Paris; for
Russia would fight to the death rather than lose the only possessions
which put her into the heart of Europe, and thus be relegated to the
character of an Asiatic power. The Emperor of the French had already
seen after Eylau how untrustworthy the grand army was, even in Poland;
if dejected and insubordinate there, as he may well have recalled was
actually the case, what would it be on the banks of the Dnieper, in
the plains of Lithuania? Such considerations probably determined not
only the fact of peace, but its character. In order to secure what he
had gained in western, southern, and central Europe, England must be
brought to terms. Russia must therefore not only be an ally, but a
hearty ally: as the price of her subscription to the Berlin Decree,
and the consequent closing of her harbors to English shipping, she
could gratify any reasonable ambition, and might virtually dictate her
own terms. With an engine in his hands as formidable as Russia's
adhesion to his commercial policy, he could act at the nick of
time,--which, as he declared at this very season to Joseph, was the
highest art of which man is capable,--could destroy England's
commerce, and in a long peace could consolidate the empire he had
already won. His empire thus consolidated, he would be virtual master
of half the solid earth in the Eastern hemisphere. If ambition should
still beckon him on, he would still be young; he could then consider
the next step to universal empire.

It may safely be said that Great Britain was never more haughty than
at this moment. Her king had turned the ministry of "All the Talents"
out of doors; for after Fox's death the combination lost all dignity
and power. The Duke of Portland was now prime minister. He was a blind
but energetic conservative, his Toryism, unlike that of Pitt in his
enlightened days, being of the sort which lay close to his sovereign's
heart. England's monopoly of European commerce seemed assured: Sweden,
Denmark, and the Hanse towns were the only important seafaring powers
of Europe that retained a nominal neutrality, and it was only a
question of time when they must accept terms either from France or
from her. With every other European nation embroiled in the Napoleonic
wars and deeply concerned for its own territorial integrity, the
United States of America was her only real maritime rival, and she had
bullied us into a temporary acquiescence in her interpretation of
international law.[10]

         [Footnote 10: The importance of American commerce at that
         time has not usually had due recognition; statement of its
         value see Mahan: The Influence of Sea Power upon the French
         Revolution and Empire, Vol. II, pp. 231-2.]

When colonies were first recognized as essential to the prosperity of
European nations, the rule was universally observed that only the
mother country could trade with her own. In 1756 France endeavored to
break this rule by permitting neutral ships to engage in traffic
between herself and her West Indian possessions. England at once laid
down the "rule of 1756," that neutrals should not exercise in time of
war privileges of traffic which they were not permitted to enjoy in
time of peace; and this principle she was able to maintain more or
less completely until 1793, when France declared war on her, and again
invited neutral commerce to French colonial harbors. England, having
regained her supremacy of the seas, reasserted in 1793 the rule of
1756, but nevertheless so modified it the following year that she
permitted neutral traders to break, in their own or in her harbors,
their voyages from or to colonial ports. In 1796 France notified all
neutrals that she would treat them just as they permitted Great
Britain to treat them, and in 1798 shut all her harbors to any vessel
which had even touched at a British port. This state of affairs
continued until the peace of Amiens. When war was renewed in 1803
between England and France the former again asserted the rule of 1756
as binding, while indirect trade between neutral ports and the ports
of an enemy was again allowed, but under the new proviso that the
neutral ship did not on her outward voyage furnish the enemy with
goods contraband of war. This privilege of indirect trade was
invaluable to American ship-owners, and for two years the ocean
commerce of all Europe was in their hands. The fortunes they thus
accumulated were enormous, while Great Britain saw her own
manufactures displaced by those of continental nations, and the
colonies of her enemies prospering as never before. In 1805,
therefore, she withdrew the privilege of indirect trade, and her flag
being, after Trafalgar, the only belligerent one left on the ocean,
proceeded both to enforce the new rule and to abuse the proviso
concerning neutral vessels carrying contraband of war by ruthlessly
exercising the right of search. Under the orders in council of
September fifth, 1805, every neutral ship must be examined to see
whether its lading was a cargo of neutral goods, or whether it
contained anything contraband. This could only mean that every
American ship laden with other than American goods was to be seized;
and in May of the following year, by the still more notorious order of
the sixteenth, Great Britain declared that every European harbor from
Brest to the mouth of the Elbe was blockaded. This was a distance of
eight hundred miles, and even she had not ships enough to enforce her
decree. Trafalgar had turned the heads of English statesmen.

This paper blockade was the challenge which called forth the Berlin
Decree from Napoleon. American ships, like those of the French, were
for a time seized, searched, and detained by the British on the
slightest suspicion that they were either leaving or were destined for
a hostile port, while their sailors were pitilessly impressed. The
government at Washington authorized reprisals, but American
ship-owners found it more profitable to compromise than to resist, and
Monroe came to an understanding with the English ministry; the
prosperity of American shipping was again revived, and the merchants
of the United States continued to prosper by carrying English wares
under the American flag into harbors where the union jack was
forbidden. By this evasion Great Britain retained her commercial
supremacy, and her prosperity was rather increased than diminished.
She withheld a similar coöperation from Sweden and Russia until it was
too late, her enterprise being chiefly concerned to open new channels
for her commerce in Egypt and in South America.

How was this leviathan, which was drawing the wealth of all Europe to
its stores, and eluding or repelling all attack on its chosen
element--how was this tyrant of the ocean to be slain? Clearly the
Americans must be so harassed and annoyed that in the end the public
spirit of the United States would be aroused to resent English
control, and bid defiance to Great Britain's assumption of maritime
supremacy. To this end the rigid enforcement of the Berlin Decree
would be well adapted in the long run, but in the interval much could
be done: if its principle could be extended to the destruction of all
smuggling, to the absolute exclusion of British commerce from the
entire Continent--not only from the seaports, but from the
markets--the end would be gained. With Russia's coöperation alone was
this possible. Napoleon's present plan, therefore, was to secure
France and the French Empire, as far as won, by compelling the world
to a lasting peace through the immediate establishment of a
counterpoise, the French and Russian empires against Great Britain,
leaving time to do its perfect work of exasperating the rising naval
power of the United States into open hostility against the parent
land.

These, it seems, must have been the considerations which controlled
the course of affairs at Tilsit. The deliberations were both formal,
so called, and informal. At the former were present the three
sovereigns with their ministers--Talleyrand for France, Kurakin and
Labanoff for Russia, Kalkreuth and Goltz for Prussia; at the latter
were sometimes all three of the monarchs, frequently only the two
principals, for they found Frederick William a damper on their
hilarity. The generals, the staff, and the men of the two great armies
which had fought so bravely at Friedland harmonized in mutual respect;
but the unwarlike King and his suite, both military and civil, were
outsiders. Immediately after the formal and brilliant entry of
Alexander into Tilsit, Napoleon began the exchange of prisoners, and
despatched messengers commanding his forces in Germany to restore to
their sovereign the territories of Mecklenburg, whose reigning house
was kin to the Czar. For Frederick William there was scarcely a show
of kindness--nothing, in fact, but a cold condemnation of Hardenberg,
to whose influence, combined with that of the military party, the
conqueror charged Prussia's declaration of war. This minister,
banished at Napoleon's instance, was near by. The King pleaded in vain
that he might still serve as mentor in the coming negotiation; the
Emperor scornfully refused. There were no others available, rejoined
the King. Napoleon named several: among them, and probably not by
inadvertence, Stein. This great name is welded to the regeneration of
Prussia, but its bearer was a liberal in the measures he enforced.
Hardenberg, great and adroit as he was, stood for the passing
conservatism, and while he was indefatigable to the end, he was after
all a worker at twilight, unable to see the coming metamorphosis of
old Europe into the new. It was a proposition outlined by him which
brought forward the first vital question, the partition of Turkey. His
sovereign's stateliest lands had been gained by the partition of
Austria and of Poland; he now suggested that Russia and Austria should
divide the Danubian principalities between them, that France should
take Greece and her isles, and that Poland should be restored and
given to the King of Saxony, who in turn should hand over his German
domains to Prussia. The Czar accepted the paper, which was
communicated to him as approved by the King, but kept silence.

A favorite amusement of the two emperors was playing with the French
army. Napoleon delighted in the display of his condescension to the
men, and in the exhibition of their enthusiastic affection for him.
Their drill, their uniforms, the niceties of military ceremonial, the
gorgeous drum-majors twirling their batons or marching in puffy
state--every detail fascinated the Czar, whose house, said
Czartoryski, was affected with the disease of paradomania.

[Illustration: Napoleon Exposition, 1895.

NAPOLEON, by Ingres.

From nature, during a mass at the Tuileries. Belonging to M. Germain
Bapst]

At an opportune moment on one of these reviewing expeditions,
Napoleon, surrounded by all the splendors of his power, was approached
by a hurrying courier, who put into his hands despatches announcing
the overthrow of the Sultan Selim. "It is a decree of Providence,
announcing the end of Ottoman empire!" he cried. Thenceforth he talked
incessantly of the Orient. As if inspired by prophetic fire, he
sketched a missionary enterprise for the liberation and regeneration
of Greece, and for the emancipation and reorganization of the lands
and peoples on the Danube and in the Levant by distributing them among
enlightened sovereigns. It was language identical with that which
Catherine the Great employed to inspire her people and her descendants
for Russia's policy. But the millennium must wait; for the present the
barbarous Turks must be driven back, not by force, but by a steady,
continuous application of the policy thus outlined; the consummation,
when reached, would be permanent. For the moment more immediate and
pressing matters must be settled; when Alexander should pay his
promised visit to Paris they would have more abundant leisure to
discuss ulterior plans. These dazzling prospects were a part of the
Czar's consideration. He promised in return to conclude a separate
peace with Turkey, which, in the absence of French support, he doubted
not he could make most favorable. But in case the Porte should prove
obdurate, a provisional plan of partition was drawn up to indicate
approximately what Russia might expect.

As the days passed, a routine life was gradually established. The two
emperors met privately in the morning, and chatted about every
conceivable point, pacing the floor or bending with heads touching
over the map of Europe to consider its coming divisions. Alexander had
said at the outset that his prejudice against Napoleon disappeared
at first sight, and later he exclaimed, "Why did we not meet sooner?"
He now repudiated any fondness whatever for the "legitimate" politics
of Europe; he had visited the Bourbon pretender, the so-called Louis
XVIII, at Mittau, and had found him of no account; he even accepted
the light suggestion of his new-found friend that the Russian
councilor Budberg should have no share in the conferences, as being
possibly too closely wedded to old ideas. "You be my secretary," said
Napoleon, "and I will be yours." In the afternoon the King of Prussia,
with his staff, was generally invited to join their cavalcade for a
ride. The Emperor of the French gave in later years a malicious
account of these jaunts. Himself a fearless though awkward horseman,
he spurred his charger to full speed, and the Czar followed with glee,
while the King, as timid in the saddle as in the cabinet, jounced and
bounced, often knocking Napoleon's arms with his elbows. The French
and Russian officers paired in good-fellowship, while the few
Prussians rode together. Constantine gathered Murat, Berthier, and
Grouchy about him, and treating them on equal terms, displayed the
strongest proofs of his regard. The dinners which followed, though
always large and stately, were made short, for the emperors wished to
be alone as quickly and as long as possible. The Czar was full of
curiosity. How did Napoleon win victories? How did he rule men? What
were his family relations? How did he regulate his inner life? The
Emperor was full of good humor: he told again and again the tale of
his victories, and expounded the principles on which he had won them;
he explained with candor and in detail the structure and workings of
his administrative machine; he opened his heart, and told how its
strings had been wrung by the death of the "Little Napoleon," the
eldest son of Queen Hortense.

In such pleasant converse the hours of ease rolled swiftly by, and
then the work of negotiation began once more. Where differences
appeared, Napoleon evaded close discussion and passed to other
matters. Next morning early, the Czar would receive a carefully
worded, concise note on the points at issue, together with an
argument. Sometimes he replied in writing, more frequently not. When
they met again, Napoleon sought, or appeared to seek, a compromise,
and never in vain. The council of ministers, in which there was not a
single man of force except Talleyrand, received the conclusions from
time to time, and elaborated the details.


CHAPTER V

THE TREATY OF TILSIT[11]

         [Footnote 11: References as before. Further: Lefebvre:
         Histoire des cabinets de l'Europe. Tatistcheff: Alexandre Ier
         et Napoléon. Ranke: Hardenberg und die Geschichte des
         Preussischen Staates von 1793-1813. Pingaud: Les Français en
         Russie et les Russes en France.]

     Two Equal Empires -- Central Europe and the Orient -- Prussia as
     a Second-rate Power -- The Grand Duchy of Warsaw and the Kingdom
     of Westphalia -- Napoleon and Frederick William -- Queen Louisa
     of Prussia -- The Meeting of Napoleon and Louisa -- Courtesy and
     Diplomacy -- The Bitterness of Disappointment -- The Last Plea --
     Prussia's Humiliation -- The Parting of the Emperors --
     Alexander's Disenchantment -- Napoleon's Gains and Losses.


By such hitherto unknown simplicity and address diplomacy at Tilsit
was rendered most expeditious. The negotiations were complete, the
treaties drawn up, and the signatures affixed on July seventh. There
were three different documents: a treaty of peace, a series of seven
separate and secret articles, and a treaty of alliance. The first
point gained by Napoleon was the recognition of all his conquests
before 1805. The Czar admitted for the first time absolute equality
between the two empires, and recognized the limits of the French
system as it then existed: first, the Confederation of the Rhine, with
any additions yet to be made; second, the kingdom of Italy, including
Dalmatia; third, the vassalage of Holland, Berg, Naples, and
Switzerland. There was a verbal understanding, it is said, that
Napoleon might do as he liked in Spain and the Papal States, while
the Czar should have the same liberty in regard to Finland. Subsequent
events attested the probability of this statement. To illustrate
Napoleon's attitude toward the recent, but now dissolved alliance,
Prussia was given to understand that she owed to Russia what remnants
of territory she retained; the stipulations with regard to her were
therefore included in the treaty with Russia.

Still, there was to be a Prussia. Between the two great empires was to
lie, in realization of a long-cherished plan, a girdle of neutral
states like the "marches" established by Charles the Great. In this
line Silesia was the only break. Prussia and Austria, one on each side
of this mark, shorn of their strength and prestige, might await their
destiny. France was to mediate for peace between Russia and Turkey,
Russia between England and France. In case Great Britain should not
prove tractable,--that is, admit the sanctity of all flags on the high
seas, and restore all the colonies of France and her allies captured
since 1805,--then Russia, in common with France, Denmark, Sweden,
Portugal, and Austria, would declare commercial war on England, and
complete the continental embargo on British trade. Should Turkey
refuse favorable terms, the two empires would divide between them all
her European lands except Rumelia and the district of Constantinople.
Alexander afterward declared that Napoleon gave a verbal promise that
Russia should have a substantial increment on the Danube. The rumor
was that Bessarabia, Moldavia, Wallachia, and Bulgaria were indicated
to the Czar as his share.

No mention was made of Austria, which the treaty of Presburg had
sufficiently dismembered. But Prussia? In order to complete the great
"march" between east and west, Silesia was essential. At first
Napoleon thought of combining it with Prussian Poland to form a
kingdom. This would not restore the real Poland, but it would create a
Poland, and give him a Polish army. It was already decided that the
Elbe should form Frederick William's western frontier; to weaken his
strength still further would destroy all balance between Prussia and
Austria. Moreover, Alexander made a tender appeal, and adroitly
suggested a distasteful counter-proposition. Accordingly it was
settled that the great province should remain Prussian. This was a
large concession to the Czar.

To make some pretense of fulfilling the lavish but indefinite promises
made to the Poles, the lands of Warsaw and the province of Posen, with
a considerable tract not now contained in it, were erected into the
grand duchy of Warsaw. Under the influence of historical reminiscence
this was given, not as a province but as a separate sovereignty to the
Elector of Saxony, who was simultaneously made king and a member of
the Rhine Confederation. The Czar, in return for his cessions to the
grand duchy of Warsaw, received the Prussian district of Bielostok. As
a compensation for the Bocche di Cattaro and the Ionian Islands,
Dantzic was restored to its position of a free city. The Prussian
lands of the Elbe, together with Hesse-Cassel and many minor domains,
were erected into the kingdom of Westphalia for the Emperor's brother
Jerome. We have almost forgotten in our day how, less than a century
ago, Germany was divided into insignificant fragments. It is
instructive to recall that the formation of this new kingdom
beneficently ended the separate existence of no fewer than twenty-four
more or less autonomous powers--electorates, duchies, counties,
bishoprics, and cities. It contained the all-important fortress of
Magdeburg, the possession of whose frowning walls carried with it the
command of the Elbe, and virtually made Prussia a conquered and
tributary state.

This seemed to Frederick William the climax of his misfortunes. He had
daily information from the Czar of what was under consideration, and
the rescue of Silesia by his mediator gave him high hopes for the
preservation of Magdeburg. But his poor-spirited behavior wearied even
Alexander, who, willing at the outset to atone for desertion by
intervention, became toward the end very cold. When the King desired
permission to plead in person for Magdeburg, Napoleon refused. The
Prussian case might be presented by counsel. Goltz was speedily
summoned to the task, but though he was always about to have an
interview with the French emperor, he never secured it.

It was at this crisis of Prussia's affairs that the King, after much
urging, consented to summon his Queen. The rumors and insinuations
concerning the Czar's undue admiration of her, so industriously spread
by Napoleon, had made him over-sensitive; but as a last resort he felt
the need of her presence. She came with a single idea--to make the
cause of Magdeburg her own. She had suffered under the malicious
innuendos of Napoleon regarding her character; she had shared the
disgrace of the Berlin war party in the crushing defeat at Jena and
Auerstädt; she had been a wayfarer among a disgraced and helpless
people; but her spirit was not broken, and she announced her visit
with all the dignity of her station. The court carriage in which she
drove, accompanied by her ladies in waiting, reached Tilsit on July
sixth, and drew up before the door of the humble miller under whose
roof were the rooms of her husband. Officers and statesmen were
gathered to receive and encourage her with good advice; but she waved
them away with an earnest call for quiet, so that she might collect
her ideas.

In a moment Napoleon was announced. As he climbed the narrow stairway
she rose to meet him. Friend and foe agree as to her beauty, her
taste, and her manners; her presence, in a white dress embroidered
with silver, and with a pearl diadem on her brow, was queenly. In her
husband's apartments she was the hostess, and as such she apologized
for the stair. "What would one not do for such an end!" gallantly
replied the somewhat dazzled conqueror. The suppliant, after making a
few respectful inquiries as to her visitor's welfare, and the effect
of the Northern climate on his health, at once announced the object of
her visit. Her manner was full of pathos and there were tears in her
eyes as she recalled how her country had been punished for its appeal
to arms, and for its mistaken confidence in the traditions of the
great Frederick and his glory. The Emperor was abashed by the lofty
strain of her address. So elevated was her mien that she overpowered
him; for the instant his self-assurance fled, and he felt himself but
a man of the people. He felt also the humiliation of the contrast, and
was angry. Long afterward he confessed that she was mistress of the
conversation, adding that she stood with her head thrown back like
Mlle. Duchesnois in the character of Chimène, meaning by this
comparison to stigmatize her attitude and language as theatrical. So
effective was her appeal that he felt the need of something to save
his own rôle, and accordingly he bowed her to a chair, and in the
moment thus gained determined to strike the key of high comedy. Taking
up the conversation in turn, he scrutinized the beauties of her
person, and, complimenting her dress, asked whether the material was
crape or India gauze. "Shall we talk of rags at such a solemn moment?"
she retorted; and then proceeded with her direct plea for Magdeburg.
In the midst of her eloquence, when the Emperor seemed almost
overcome by her importunity, her meddling husband most inopportunely
entered the room. He began to argue and reason, citing his threadbare
grievance, the violation of Ansbach territory, and endeavoring to
prove himself to be right. Napoleon at once turned the conversation to
indifferent themes, and in a few moments took his leave. "You ask
much," he said to the Queen on parting; "but I promise to think it
over." The courageous woman had done her best, but her cause--if,
indeed, it was ever in the balance--was lost from the moment she put
her judge in an inferior position. Her majestic bearing was fine, but
it was not diplomacy. She might, nevertheless, have succeeded had she
been the wife of a wiser man. Long afterward Napoleon thought her
influence on the negotiations would have been considerable if she had
appeared in their earlier stages, and congratulated himself that she
came too late, inasmuch as they were already virtually closed when she
arrived.

The remainder of the day passed for the Queen in a whirl of
excitement, receiving messengers from Napoleon with the pardons of
Prussian prisoners and accepting polite attentions from his adjutants.
She gladly consented to dine with Napoleon, and Berthier was chosen to
escort her to his Emperor's lodging. On arrival she was received with
distinction, and assigned at table to the seat of honor between the
host and the Czar. The Emperor was all politeness, offering unwelcome
consolations to Frederick William, and expressing astonishment at the
Queen's courage. "Did you know my hussars nearly captured you?" he
said to her. "I can scarcely believe it, sire," was the reply; "I did
not see a single Frenchman." "But why expose yourself thus? Why did
you not wait for me at Weimar?" "Indeed, sire, I was not eager."
There is a tradition that Talleyrand, whose work the treaty really
was, grew anxious and whispered to Napoleon later in the evening that
surely he would not surrender the benefits of his greatest conquest
for the sake of a pretty woman. Whether this admonition was given or
not, the Emperor was respectful and polite, but non-committal. After
dinner he conversed long with his fair guest. To her lady in waiting,
the Countess Voss, he offered snuff--a singular mark of condescension.
Next day, in a note to Josephine, he said that he had been compelled
continually to stand on his guard; and the day following, July eighth,
he again wrote to his Empress: "The Queen is really charming, using
every art to please me; but be not jealous: I am like a waxed cloth
from which all that glides off. It would cost me too much to play the
gallant." The Emperor's courtesy had deceived the poor Queen entirely,
and she is said to have returned to her husband's lodgings at
Piktupönen in the highest spirits.

On that very night, immediately after the dinner, the step she so much
dreaded was taken, and orders were given to conclude the treaty as it
stood. At the last hour Goltz secured his interview to plead the
expectations awakened in the Queen, but the Emperor coldly explained
that his conduct had been politeness, and nothing more; the house of
Prussia might be glad to recover a crown at all. Talleyrand showed a
completed and final draft of the treaty ready for signature, and said
that his master was in haste, that in two days the documents would be
signed. This was the news which greeted Louisa next morning. She
returned at once to Tilsit, her eyes swollen with weeping; but she
appeared in a stately dress, and with a smile on her lips. Again she
was the object of the most distinguished courtesy from Napoleon's
adjutants, but the expected visit from himself was not made. However,
she was again the Emperor's honored guest at dinner. The host at once
began to speak of her costume. "What, the Queen of Prussia with a
turban! Surely not to gratify the Emperor of Russia, who is at war
with the Turks!" "Rather, I think," replied the Queen, "to propitiate
Rustan," rolling her large, full eyes toward the swarthy Mameluke
behind his master's chair. She had the air, according to Napoleon's
account, of an offended coquette. After the meal it was Murat who took
the part filled the previous evening by the Emperor. "How does your
Majesty pass the time at Memel?" "In reading." "What does your Majesty
read?" "The history of the past." "But our own times afford actions
worthy of commemoration." "It is already more than I can endure to
live in them."

Before parting, Napoleon spent a few moments at her side, and at the
end, turning, pulled from a bunch a beautiful rose, which he offered
with gestures of gallantry and homage. Hesitating a moment, the Queen
at last put out her hand, and said as she accepted it, "At least with
Magdeburg." "Madame," came the frigid reply, "it is mine to give and
yours to accept." But he gave his arm to conduct her to the carriage,
and as they descended the stair together the disappointed guest said,
in a sentimental and emotional voice, "Is it possible that, having had
the happiness to see so near the man of the century and of all
history, he will not afford me the possibility and the satisfaction of
being able to assure him that he has put me under obligations for
life?" With solemn tones Napoleon replied, "Madame, I am to be pitied;
it is a fault of my unlucky star." Queen Louisa's own lady in waiting
related that her sovereign's bitterness overcame her at the last, and
as she stepped into the carriage she said, "Sire, you have cruelly
deceived me." It is certain that next day she overwhelmed Duroc with
reproaches; but she afterward frankly confessed that she could recall
no definite promise made by Napoleon. To Talleyrand she said, with
fine sarcasm, that only two persons regretted her having come to
Tilsit--he and she. Her duty, she believed, as a loving wife, as a
tender mother, as the queen of her people, was fulfilled; but her
heart was broken. Queen Mary of England said of the loss of Calais,
"Should they open my heart, they will find the name of Calais
inscribed in bloody letters within." Queen Louisa pathetically
recalled this moan; she could say the same of Magdeburg.

The treaty with Prussia, signed two days later, did not modify in the
least the terms arranged with Alexander, and for six years that
country remained in a mutilated and conquered condition, compelled to
obey with outward respect the behests of Napoleon. Every domain she
had owned west of the Elbe went to the kingdom of Westphalia, the
circle of Kottbus went to Saxony, the Polish provinces of south
Prussia and new east Prussia to the grand duchy of Warsaw, the circle
of Bielostok to Russia. Napoleon is said to have urged the Czar to
seize Memel and the strip of Prussian land east of the Niemen; but
this is denied, and in any case, Alexander, desiring to be at peace
with his neighbor, firmly refused; moreover, he verbally stipulated
for the evacuation of the Hohenzollern lands by French troops at an
early date. Nominally, therefore, the King of Prussia regained
sovereignty over less than half of his former territory. For this
consideration he was to pay an indefinite but enormous and almost
impossible indemnity, which was to cover the total cost of the war. To
guarantee this a large portion of the French army was, in spite of
Alexander's demand, still left quartered in the Hohenzollern lands, so
that the Prussian people were daily reminded of their disgrace, as
well as irritated by extortionate taxation. First and last, the war
cost Prussia, in the support of the French army and in actual
contributions to France, over a billion of francs--about the gross
national income of thirteen years. The process of Prussian
consolidation begun three years before was thus hastened. What Pozzo
di Borgo called a masterpiece of destruction turned out in the end to
be the beginning of a new birth for the nation. But the royal pair
were stricken down: the high-souled Queen died, three years later, of
chagrin; the King lived to see his people strong once more, but in a
sort of obstructing stupor, being always an uncompromising
conservative. When he died, in 1840, he left to his successor a legacy
of smothered popular discontent.

The treaties of Tilsit between France and Russia were signed, as was
said, on July seventh. The principal personages engaged on both sides
in this grand scene of reconciliation were on that day reciprocally
decorated with the orders of the respective courts, while the imperial
guards of both emperors received food and drink for a great festivity.
Next day Napoleon paid his farewell visit. At his morning toilet he
had his valet loosen the threads which fastened the cross of the
Legion of Honor to his coat, and as the Czar advanced to meet him he
asked in audible tones permission to decorate the first grenadier of
Russia. A veteran named Lazaref was summoned from the ranks, and with
a wrench the Emperor tore off his cross, and fastened it on the breast
of the peasant. The welkin rang with applause, while Lazaref kissed
his benefactor's hands and the hem of his coat. Next day Alexander
crossed the Niemen. Savary went with him as a French envoy, partly to
keep up the Czar's courage and spirits, which would be endangered by
the sullen humor of the court circles in St. Petersburg, partly to
study the temper of the Russian people.

To the last moment of their intercourse the Czar appeared to be under
the spell of Napoleon's seductive powers. He came as a conquered
prince; he left with an honorable peace, with the friendship of his
magnanimous conqueror, and with an unsmirched imperial dignity. He had
saved his recent ally from destruction, and had secured a small
increase of territory for himself; for the future there were Finland
and the fairest portion of Turkey. But in a few days the magic began
to pass. He had not secured Constantinople, and he had promised to
evacuate Wallachia and Moldavia; he had not secured the complete
evacuation of Prussia; he had risked a rupture with England; he had,
above all, submitted to the creation of a state which, under the thin
disguise of another name, was but the germ of a reconstructed Poland.
It began to appear as if he had been wheedled. There is sufficient
evidence that such bitter reflections made their appearance very soon;
but they were repressed, at first from pure shame, and afterward from
stern necessity, when England began to vent her anger. But the
Russians themselves could not be repressed. Before long Savary was
hated and abused by the public, the more because he maintained his
ascendancy over the Czar. The reports sent home by the former police
agent were clever and instructive, but their pictures of factional
disputes and Oriental plots at court, of aristocratic luxury and
general poverty, of popular superstition and barbarous manners, were
not reassuring, and confirmed in his Emperor's mind doubts felt from
the beginning as to the stability of the alliance consummated at
Tilsit, an alliance outwardly fair, but, like all Talleyrand's
diplomacy, more showy than substantial.[12]

         [Footnote 12: For an interesting comment on Talleyrand's
         diplomacy, see Sorel: L'Europe et la Révolution Française,
         Vol. VI, pp. 23-25.]

Napoleon left for Königsberg the same day on which he bade adieu to
Alexander. His route was by way of Dresden. He was not in the
slightest degree deceived. The peace of Europe, he said, was in St.
Petersburg; the affairs of the world were there. But he had gained
much. The outposts of his empire were established, and from one of
them he could touch with his hand the enchanted East. He had secured
the temporary coöperation of Russia, and with that as a beginning he
might consolidate the Continent against England, and complete the
stage in his progress now gained. Above all, he could at once restore
the confidence of France by the proclamation of peace and the
upbuilding of her prosperity. To be sure, he had forecast a division
of his prospective Eastern empire with Russia, he had left Prussia
outraged and bleeding, and Austria was uneasy and suspiciously
reserved; but he had checkmated them all in the menace of a restored
Poland, while their financial weakness and military exhaustion,
combined with the reciprocal jealousies of their dynasties, might be
relied on to prevent their immediate hostility. Besides, while he had
sung a certain tune at Tilsit, in the future he would, as he
sarcastically said somewhat later, have to sing it only according to
the written score.


CHAPTER VI

THE PATH OF NAPOLEONIC EMPIRE[13]

         [Footnote 13: References: Jauffret: Mémoires historiques sur
         les affaires ecclésiastiques de France pendant les premières
         années du XIXe siècle. Thorsoë: Den danske Statspolitiske
         Historie 1800-1864. Lemoine: Napoléon et les Juifs. Lémann:
         Napoléon et les Israélites; La prépondérance juive.]

     Napoleon and the Neutral Powers -- The Protectorate of Portugal
     and the End of Etruria -- Annexation of the Papal Legations --
     Seizure of the Danish Fleet by Great Britain -- The Degradation
     of Spain -- Godoy's Impolicy -- The Spanish Court and the Heir
     Apparent -- Effects of the Russian Alliance in Paris --
     Napoleon's Commentary on the Treaty -- His Administrative Wisdom
     -- Public Works in France -- The Jews in France -- The Sanhedrim
     -- Napoleon's Successful Reforms -- War Indemnities and Finance
     -- Annoyances of the Continental System.


But in order to fulfil the purposes and realize the possibilities
which were indicated in the treaties of Tilsit, no time was to be
lost. The fate of Sweden and the Hanse towns having been virtually
settled, there remained three small maritime states in Europe which
still maintained a nominal neutrality--Denmark, Portugal, and Etruria.
One and all, they must choose between England and France. To each a
summons was to be addressed, and Napoleon wrote the preliminary
directions at Dresden. Between the lines of his despatches it was
clear that the precious naval armaments of all three powers--ships,
arsenals, stores, and men--must be put at the disposal of France. "A
thing must needs be done before the announcement of your plan," was
one of Napoleon's own principles, and it was his intention so to
proceed in this case. At Dresden, also, was promulgated the new
constitution of Warsaw. Modeled on that of France, it was far from
liberal; but it abolished serfdom, made all citizens equal before the
law, and introduced the civil code.

In 1804 Portugal had purchased her neutrality for the duration of the
war with the sum of sixteen million francs. She was now ordered to
close her ports to the British, to seize all their goods and ships,
and finally to declare war against Great Britain. Junot, formerly
imperial ambassador at Lisbon, was despatched with twenty-seven
thousand men, designated as a "corps of observation," to be ready on
the frontier to enforce the command. In reply, England seized the
Portuguese fleet, and kept it in security until the close of the war.
During the late campaigns in Poland and Prussia, King Louis of Etruria
had died, and his helpless widow, the Spanish infanta, Maria Louisa,
acting as regent for her young son, had admitted the English to the
harbor of Leghorn. Prince Eugène was now ordered to take another
"corps of observation" of six thousand men, and drive them out. He did
so promptly. Duroc at once suggested to the Spanish minister that
Napoleon would like some proposition for the indemnification of Maria
Louisa for the loss of Etruria--say one portion of Portugal for her,
and the rest for Godoy, the Prince of the Peace.

This "deformity" removed from the Italian peninsula, it revealed a
still greater one--the fact that the Papal States disturbed the
connection between the two kingdoms of Italy and Naples. Pius VII,
returning disillusioned and embittered after the coronation ceremony,
and finding that his temporal weapons had failed him, had taken a
stand with his spiritual armor. It has already been recalled that he
began to refuse everything Napoleon desired,--the coronation as
Western emperor, the extension of the Concordat to Venice, the
confirmation of bishops appointed in France and Italy by the temporal
power, the annulment of Jerome's marriage, the recognition of Joseph's
royalty,--except in return for a guarantee of his own independence and
neutrality; in short, he feebly abjured the French alliance and all
its works. There now came a demand from Napoleon that henceforth there
should be as many French cardinals as Roman, that the agents of
hostile powers should be banished from the Papal States, and that the
papal ports should be closed to England. The Emperor was weary, too,
of the petty squabbles in connection with the Church, of the threats
to excommunicate him and declare his throne vacant. Did they mean to
put him in a convent and whip him like Louis the Pious? If not, let
the full powers of an ambassador be sent to the cardinal legate at
Paris; in any case, let there be an end to menaces. At the same time
Eugène showed to Pius a personal letter from his stepfather, which,
though marked confidential, was intended to be thus shown. It
contained the threat that the Emperor contemplated calling a council
of the Gallican, Italian, German, and Polish churches to liberate
those peoples from the domination of Roman priests. The Pontiff was
terrified, and hastened to yield the most pressing demands made in the
message which he had himself received, among them the nomination of a
negotiator. But he childishly refused the letter of the Emperor's
demand, and commissioned, not the French cardinal legate at Paris, but
an Italian cardinal. Napoleon notified the See that he would treat
only with Bayanne, the French cardinal at Paris, and that longer
dallying would compel him to annex Ancona, Urbino, and Macerata to
the kingdom of Italy. Pius yielded at once, nominating Bayanne,
agreeing to enter the federation with France, and promising to crown
Napoleon; but the annexation took place quite as expeditiously as the
surrender--was, in fact, complete before it!

Of the three minor sea powers, Denmark, commanding as she did the
gateway of the Baltic, was far the most important. Bernadotte was
already on her borders with an army. She was notified by him that she
must declare war against England immediately, or lose all her
continental possessions. Her government promised to obey, but
procrastinated. It has been claimed that English spies at Tilsit had
caught scraps of the bargain contained in the secret articles, and
that the Portland cabinet, in which Canning was secretary for foreign
affairs and Castlereagh for war and the colonies, had divined the
rest. It is now known that Canning believed there were no secret
articles, but was convinced that the two emperors had reached a secret
understanding hostile to England.[14] During the summer the ministry
received what they called the most positive information--what was its
extent and how it was obtained have never been made known--that the
French intended to invade Holstein and force Denmark to close the
Sound to British commerce. The danger seemed imminent: the Danish
fleet contained no fewer than twenty ships of the line, eighteen
frigates, nine brigs, and a number of gunboats. Such a reinforcement
of the French navy would put it again on a war footing. The English
ministry, therefore, offered to defend Denmark, guarantee her
colonies, and give her every means of defense, naval, military,
pecuniary, if only she would surrender her fleet to England, to be
restored in the event of peace. The Danish regent was already
committed to France, and did not accept. Accordingly the English army
under Cathcart landed, and laid siege to Copenhagen, while the fleet
bombarded it for three days, until the government agreed to their
stipulations. This shameful deed of high-handed violence must be laid
at Canning's door. It was the first step in the humiliation of a fine
people, to their loss of Norway, and ultimately of Schleswig and
Holstein. Moreover, it was impolitic in the highest degree, making the
Czar a bitter enemy of England for four years. The wretched country,
in distraction, threw itself into the arms of Bernadotte. Christian
VII had long been an imbecile, and his son, Frederick VI, though
energetic and well-meaning, turned Denmark into another vassal state
of France by the treaty of Fontainebleau, signed October thirtieth,
1807.

         [Footnote 14: See discussion of this question by J. H. Rose,
         "A British Agent at Tilsit," in English Historical Review,
         Oct., 1901.]

In none of their many sovereignties had the incapacity of the Bourbons
been more completely demonstrated than in Spain. With intermittent
flickerings, the light of that famous land had been steadily growing
dimmer ever since Louis XIV exultingly declared that the Pyrenees had
ceased to exist. Stripped of her colonial supremacy, shattered in
naval power, reduced to pay tribute to France, she looked silently on
while Napoleon trafficked with her lands, mourning that even the
memory of her former glories was fading out in foreign countries. The
proud people themselves had, however, never forgotten their past; with
each successive humiliation their irritation grew more extreme, and
soon after Trafalgar they made an effort to organize under the crown
prince against the scandalous régime of Godoy. Both parties sought
French support, and the quarrel was fomented from Paris until the
whole country was torn by the most serious dissensions.

When, in the previous year, Prussia declared war, and the French
legions were about to face those trained in the school of Frederick
the Great, a vigorous attempt was made by the Russian envoy in Madrid
to win the support of Spain for the coalition. England, too, at the
same moment, threatened to make the South American colonies
independent if she did not consent. Godoy was persuaded that Napoleon
had at last found his match, if not his master, and on October
fourteenth issued a manifesto couched for the most part in ambiguous
terms, but clearly announcing war as an immediate necessity. By a
strange coincidence, its date was that of the day on which was fought
the battle of Jena, and after hearing the news of that event the
Prince of the Peace hastened to make his submission in the name of the
King. Napoleon turned pale as he read the news of the contemplated
defection, which reached him at Berlin; he never forgave the
treachery, although for the time he feigned ignorance of its
existence. The renewal of Charles IV's submission gave him the
opportunity to demand that the Spanish fleet should proceed to Toulon,
that the King should send fifteen thousand men to oppose a possible
English landing at the mouth of the Elbe, and at the same time
undertake the sustenance of twenty-five thousand Prussian prisoners of
war, while thenceforward he must rigidly enforce the embargo on
English trade in all Spanish ports and markets.

These demands the weak and contemptible government could not resist.
Godoy and the Queen resumed their scandalous living, while the King
joined in a conspiracy to cut off his son Ferdinand from the
succession. The young prince had the people's sympathy; but although
he had sought Napoleon's favor, and wished to marry the Empress
Josephine's niece, there was no response, and he remained impotent
before an administration apparently supported by France. He was, in
the sequel, arrested on a charge of conspiring against his father's
life. Before the summer of 1807 closed, everything was ripe for
Napoleon's contemplated intervention to "regenerate" Spain.

Such was the harvest of Tilsit in the field of foreign relations--a
harvest which to the last the Emperor claimed that Talleyrand had
sown. As to its effect in France, Metternich, then Austrian ambassador
in Paris, declared that men sat in the cafés coldly discussing an
entire reconstruction of Europe--two empires, and seventeen new
kingdoms with new sovereigns either from or in the interest of the
imperial houses! "Rhapsodies," he said, "which proved that all Europe
might crumble without exciting a single emotion of sorrow,
astonishment, or satisfaction in a people degraded beneath all others,
beneath all imagination, and which, worn out, demoralized to the point
where every trace of even national feeling is wiped out, by nineteen
years of revolution and crimes, now looks on with cold-blooded
indifference at what is passing beyond its own frontiers. Wise men
think that the treaties, being as advantageous to Russia as to France,
necessarily contain a germ which in developing will prove dangerous to
the latter." In reality there was not now a state in Europe toward
which the French empire did not stand in strained relations, not a
nationality besides the French which did not feel its self-respect
wounded, and resent the abasement.

This, however, was not the panorama which the Emperor unfolded in
Paris. He reached St. Cloud quietly on the evening of July
twenty-seventh. The people of Paris learned the news incidentally, and
burst into spontaneous rejoicings, illuminating the city, and sending
addresses in which the terms of adulation were exhausted. Napoleon was
no longer an actor in merely human history: he was a man of the
heroic age; he was beyond admiration; nothing but love could rise to
his lofty place. On August sixteenth the Emperor opened the
legislature in person. "Since your last session," he said, "new wars,
new triumphs, new treaties, have changed the face of Europe." If the
house of Brandenburg still reigned, he continued, it was due to the
sincere friendship he felt for the Czar. A French prince would rule on
the Elbe, and would know how to conciliate his subjects, while ever
mindful of his most sacred duties. Saxony had recovered her
independence, the peoples of Dantzic and the duchy of Warsaw their
country and their rights. All nations rejoiced to see the direful
influence of England destroyed. France was united to the Confederation
of the Rhine by its laws, by the federative system to the countries of
Holland, Switzerland, and Italy; her new relations with Russia were
cemented by reciprocal esteem. In all this, he affirmed, his pole-star
had been the happiness of his people, dearer to him than his own
glory. He would like maritime peace, and for its sake would overlook
the exasperations caused by a people tossed and torn by party strife.
Whatever happened, he would be worthy of his people, as they had shown
themselves to be worthy of him. Their behavior in his absence had only
increased his esteem for their character. He had thought of several
measures to simplify and perfect their institutions.

This picture of martial and political renown, painted by a master who
had on one campaign changed the meaning of his title from its
primitive sense of military ruler to its later and grander one of
chief among and over princes, thus realizing the revival of the
Western Empire, could not but please the fancy and arouse the
enthusiasm of a generous, imaginative, forgiving people. The
impression was heightened by their Emperor's activity in keeping faith
as to their own prosperity. As after Austerlitz, his first care was
now finance. The new commercial code was promulgated, and it proved
scarcely less satisfactory to the merchants than the civil code had
been to the people at large. The Bank of France was immediately
compelled to lower its rate of discount, and a council was held to
consider how Italy and the Rhine Confederation could be made tributary
to French industry and commerce. Recourse was also had to those
measures of internal development by the execution of great public
works which had been begun after Austerlitz, but were suspended before
Jena.

Before the last campaign the Emperor and Empress had been accustomed
to visit various portions of France. During every halt the Emperor
would mount his horse, and, attended occasionally by one or more of
the local officials, but usually only by Rustan or an adjutant, would
gallop hither and thither, gathering information, examining
conditions, and making suggestions. Immediately afterward he would
throw off a sketch of needed improvements: public buildings,
almshouses, roads, canals, aqueducts, town streets, mountain
roads--anything, in short, which would arouse local enthusiasm and
benefit the country at large. Many--most, perhaps--of these schemes
remained inchoate; but many of the grandest were executed, and
Napoleon has left his impress as indelibly upon France itself as upon
its society. The routes of the Simplon and Mont Cenis, the great
canals which bind together the river systems, the restoration of the
cathedral at St. Denis, the quays of the Seine in Paris, the great
Triumphal Arch, the Vendôme Column, the Street of Peace, the Street of
Rivoli, the bridges of Austerlitz, Jena, and the Arts--these are some
of the magnificent enterprises due to his initiative. Such works were
pushed throughout the summer of 1807 by employing large numbers of
laborers and artisans, while local workshops were opened in every
department to furnish employment to all who could not otherwise find
it. The political economist may lift his eyebrows and shrug his
shoulders in contemplating such shifts; but they were imperial shifts,
and created a high degree of comfort at the time, while they satisfied
in permanency that passion for beauty in utility which does not
sufficiently enter as an element into economic science.

Closely connected with this policy was a measure of Napoleon's already
referred to, but little known. In some respects it was more successful
than any other; it certainly is most characteristic of the man. The
evil aimed at was cured at the time, and the permanent question is
less acute in modern France than in any other European country. For
years past there had been chronic distress among the agricultural
classes in some of the most fertile districts of France, notably in
the northeast. This was attributed to the presence of Jews in large
numbers. The stringent laws of the old régime had crowded that
unfortunate people out of all occupations but two--peddling and
money-lending. In both of these they became experts, and when
emancipated by the Revolution they used their liberty, not to widen
their activities, but to intensify the evils of the monopoly which
they had secured. Since 1791 large numbers of Polish and German Jews
had established themselves on the right bank of the Rhine; and
reaching hands across that stream to their kinsfolk on the left bank,
they combined to strip the French peasantry by the familiar arts of
barter and usury, which need not be described here, until in a few
years they were creditors to the extent of twenty-three million
francs, and had become extensive landed proprietors. They were never
seen to labor with their hands, and having no family name, they evaded
the conscription laws with impunity, while the courts of justice
became their humble servants in enforcing the collection of scandalous
debts or in the foreclosure of inflated mortgages.

In 1806 a temporary decree had suspended all legal executions in
certain districts, and many Jews of the better class made ready to bow
before the coming tempest and come to the assistance of the
government. Napoleon, aware that the Old Testament law was civil and
political as well as religious, shrewdly asked advice from these and
other men of the more enlightened sort. It was agreed to call a
council. The Emperor summoned his prefects to name its members, and
appointed a committee to represent the government at its sessions.
Decisions taken by this assembly were to be submitted to a general
Sanhedrim of all Europe. The assembly of French Israelites met in
Paris during the latter part of 1806, and after due deliberation gave
satisfactory answers to a carefully prepared set of questions
propounded by the government commission. In 1807 the economic
situation had nevertheless become graver. The Sanhedrim met early in
February. Its members vied in flattery with the Roman priesthood,
setting the imperial eagle above the ark of the covenant, and blending
the letters N and J with those of the Jehovah in a monogram for the
adornment of their meeting-place. On March fourth they issued a decree
which is still the basis of religious instruction among Jewish youth.
They forbade polygamy, and admitted the principle of civil marriage
without anathema; they ordered all Israelites to treat those who
believe that God is the Creator of heaven and earth as fellow-citizens
and brothers; to obey the civil and military laws, including that of
conscription, and to train their children to industry and handiwork;
they also invited them to enter the learned professions, and to attach
themselves to the country by the purchase of public obligations. Usury
was absolutely forbidden, the Israelite being enjoined as a religious
precept to make no distinction in money transactions between Hebrew
and Christian. The minutest details of the whole transaction were
foreseen and regulated by Napoleon, and may be studied in his
correspondence with his ministers.

A year later, after careful and mature deliberation, there appeared an
imperial decree, not only organizing the Jewish Church and regulating
its relations with the state, but defining the civil and political
status of Hebrews. They were pronounced to be citizens like other men;
but they could not exact higher interest than five per cent., while if
they should demand over ten they should be punished for usury. Every
Jew in the northeastern department must have a license to do business,
and a notarial authorization for pawnbrokerage. Any Jew not domiciled
at the moment in Alsace might not thereafter acquire domicile in that
department, and could do so in others only by becoming a landowner and
tilling the soil. Every Jew should be liable to military service, and,
unlike his Christian fellow-citizens might not provide a substitute;
moreover, he must adopt and use a family name. This stringent law was
rigidly enforced, except in Bordeaux, the Gironde, and the Landes,
where no offense had been given. Its effect was steady and sure.
Before long, first one and then another Israelite was exempted from
its rigors, until finally, in 1812, the department or the man still
subject to its provisions was the exception and not the rule. From
that day to this there has scarcely been in France what is known
elsewhere as the Jewish question. Hebrews are found in every line of
human activity; they have the same civil, political, and religious
standing as men of other blood and confessions; they are illustrious
in finance, in politics, in science, and in the arts. They are,
moreover, passionate patriots, and to the casual observer scarcely
distinguishable in mien and appearance from other citizens. The
temporary contravention of the civil code, both as to spirit and
letter, by the notorious decree above referred to has been so
beneficent that it has for the most part escaped any criticism or even
remark.[15]

         [Footnote 15: See Lemoine: Napoléon et les Juifs.]

While in ways like these the clutch of the usurer was relaxed and the
general well-being promoted, measures were taken to crown the work by
a stable system of finance. It will be recalled that two years before
the Emperor had saved the public credit by the direct expenditure of
the Austrian war indemnity. It was his fixed principle that France
should not pay for his wars, except with her children. He knew too
well the thrift of the whole nation and the greed of the lower classes
to jeopardize their good will either by the emission of paper money or
by the increase of tax rates. The panic of 1805 had been precipitated
by the virtual failure of a bankers' syndicate which made advances to
the government on its taxes and on the annual Spanish contribution as
well. In 1807 the war indemnity exacted from Prussia, Poland, and
Westphalia was used for a double purpose, the creation of two funds:
one to furnish an immediate supply of cash on the outbreak of war, the
other to replace the bankers' syndicate by making advances on the
taxes whenever required. There was therefore no increase in the rate
of taxation, work was abundant, and under the forcing process the
wheels were moving in almost every department of trade and industry.
The price of the imperial bonds on the Bourse rose to ninety-nine, a
price never afterward reached in Napoleon's day.

There was one sharp pinch. Coffee and sugar were no longer luxuries,
but necessities; and through the continental embargo colonial wares
had become, and were likely to remain, very dear and very scarce. Such
substitutes as ingenuity could devise were gradually accepted for the
former; to provide the latter the beet-root industry was fostered by
every means. The Emperor kept a sample of sugar made from beets on his
chimney-piece as an ornament, and occasionally sent gifts of the
precious commodity to his fellow-sovereigns. The story is told that an
official who had been banished from favor recovered his standing
entirely by planting a whole estate with beets. Such traits were
considered evidence of plain, homely common sense by the people, who
enjoyed the sensation that their Emperor shared their feelings and
participated in their daily shifts.


CHAPTER VII

THE NEW FEUDALISM[16]

         [Footnote 16: See Blanc: Napoléon Ier. Taine: Le régime
         moderne. Pasquier: Mémoires, Histoire de mon temps. Méneval:
         Napoléon et Marie-Louise. V^te de Broc: La vie en France sous
         le premier empire. Metternich: Mémoires. Mme. de Rémusat:
         Mémoires.]

     Imperial France -- The Aristocracy -- The Vassal Sovereigns --
     Suppression of the Tribunate -- The Right of Entail -- Evasions
     of Law -- The New Nobility -- Titles and Emoluments -- Style in
     the First Empire -- Theory of the University -- Its Establishment
     -- The Lycées -- Effects of the System -- Regulation of the Court
     -- The Emperor's Moods -- Matrimonial Alliances with Royalty --
     Gloom at Court -- Decline of Talleyrand's Influence -- His New
     Rôle.


[Sidenote: 1807-08]

It was not long before the people of Paris and of all France were in
the best possible humor; they were busy, they were clothed, they were
fed, they were making and saving money. With every hour grew the
feeling that their unity and strength were embodied in the Emperor.
Mme. de Rémusat was tired of his ill-breeding: it shocked her to
observe his coarse familiarity, to see him sit on a favorite's knee,
or twist a bystander's ear till it was afire; to hear him sow
dissension among families by coarse innuendo, and to see him crush
society that he might rule it. But such things would not have shocked
the masses of plain burgher Frenchmen at all. When the querulous lady
opened her troubles to the sympathetic Talleyrand, and bemoaned the
sad fate which kept her at the imperial court to gain a living, his
reply was not consoling. As time passed, the gulf between the ruler
and his venal but soft-spoken minister had been widening, and the
Prince of Benevento had oftentimes to hear taunts and reproaches in
scenes of such violence as were unsuspected even by the complaining
lady in waiting. But nevertheless Talleyrand replied to her that
Napoleon still stood for the unity of France, and it was both his and
her duty to endure and support their monarch.

No doubt the Emperor was perfectly aware of the situation. But he felt
that what was a new aristocracy in truth, though not yet so in name,
must be appeased as well as the people. He was furious at times with
the venality of his associates. Talleyrand once admitted that he had
taken sixty millions from various German princes. Masséna, Augereau,
Brune, and Junot were not so colossal in their greed, but they were
equally ill-disposed, and very successful in lining their coffers.
With Talleyrand Napoleon never joked; but when he wished to give a
warning to the others he drew a bill for some enormous sum on one or
other of them, and deposited it with a banker. There is no evidence
that such a draft was ever dishonored. On one occasion Masséna
disgorged two millions of francs in this way. Of the ancient nobility
the Emperor once said, with a sneer: "I offered them rank in my army,
they declined the service. I opened my antechambers to them, they
rushed in and filled them." To this sweeping statement there were many
noteworthy exceptions, but on the whole Napoleon never classed the
estate of the French nobles lower than they deserved. Still they had a
power which he recognized, and it was with a sort of grim humor that
he began to distribute honors and the sops of patronage among both the
old and the new aristocracy--a process which only made the latter
independent and failed to win the affections of the former.

It was in the hope of securing the good will of the ancient nobility
that he took two steps radical in their direct negation of
Revolutionary principles: the destruction of the tribunate and the
restoration of the right of entail. The connection between the two
lies in the tendency of both: merging tribunate and legislature made
it easy to substitute for an elective senate a hereditary house of
lords. Feeling himself sufficiently strong, Napoleon clearly intended
to gratify in others the weak human pride which, as Montesquieu says,
desires the eternity of a name, and thereby to erect a four-square
foundation for the perpetuity of his own dynasty. The brothers Joseph,
Louis, and Jerome were now no longer Bonapartes, but Napoleons, ruling
as Joseph Napoleon, Louis Napoleon, Jerome Napoleon, over their
respective fiefs. Murat, the brother-in-law, was already provided for
in the same way, and there were three reigning princes among the
satellites of the imperial throne. All these could transmit their name
and dominions in the line of hereditary succession. It may be read in
the "Moniteur" of July, 1810, that, in whatever position they were
placed by Napoleon's politics and the interest of his empire, their
first duty was to him, their second to France. "All your other duties,
even those to the people I may intrust to you, are only secondary."

Ten years earlier General Bonaparte had declared that what the French
wanted was glory and the gratification of their vanity; of liberty, he
said, they knew nothing. The Emperor Napoleon, in one of his spoken
musings, applied the same conception to all continental Europeans,
saying that there were everywhere a few men who knew what freedom was
and longed to secure it; but that the masses needed paternal guidance,
and enjoyed it as long as they were comfortable. The asylum of this
enlightened minority in France was for a time the tribunate; to many
it seemed that, if free government be government by discussion, in
the tribunate alone was any semblance of freedom left; its name had
consequently retained a halo of nobility, and its mere existence was a
comfort to the few who still recalled the ideals of the Revolution.
But, in truth, the body itself had ceased to have any dignity
whatsoever. The system of legislation was briefly this: from the
throne came a message exposing the situation of the country, the
council of state then formulated the measures set forth as necessary,
the tribunate approved them in one or other of its sections, and the
legislature gave the enacting vote. The suppression of the tribunate,
therefore, appeared to the general public like final proceedings in
bankruptcy. Some of the members went into the legislature, some into
official administrative positions, and the right of discussion in
committee behind closed doors was transferred to certain sections of
the legislature. By way of compensation it was "decreed by the
senate," as the formality was called, that no man could thenceforth
sit in the legislature until he had reached the age of forty. Perhaps
Napoleon remembered that his own fiery ambition had made him emperor
before he was thirty-six. The measure was announced to the tribunes as
a mere matter of course, and created no stir at the time. In later
years it was recalled that the English Parliament under the
Plantagenets had never entirely perished, and so was ready for
powerful deeds in more propitious days. But in France's later crisis
the French tribunate could not be revived; with it disappeared forever
the last rallying-point for the scattered remnant still true to the
Revolution.

The complement of this negative measure was the creation of the right
to transmit together, and for an indefinite time, a title and the
realty on which its dignity reposed. Though the restoration of this
institution was slightly anterior in time to the other as to its
beginnings, yet the final decree was not published until 1808, and
logically it is complementary and subsequent to it. To this day many
men of ancient and honorable name in France have not ceased to bemoan
the destruction of primogeniture by the Revolution and the Code
Napoléon. They are proud to transmit their title untarnished to their
descendants, are ready to make serious sacrifices in its behalf, to
exercise the rigid self-denials of family control for its sake, and to
engrave the motto of "noblesse oblige" on their hearts in order to
sustain it; but they bitterly complain that without the majorat, and
the transmission of outward, visible supports in land and houses to
strengthen it, the empty sound carries little weight. The compulsory
subdivision of estates at the death of the owner enables every scion
to live, if not to thrive, on the home stock. The failure of France in
colonization is largely due to the absence of men from good families
among the colonizers, while England sends her younger sons to the ends
of the earth, there to found new houses and perpetuate the old line
under favorable conditions. Hence, too, the petty dimensions of
aristocratic French life: little fortunes, little ambitions, little
establishments, little families, among that very class in society
which by cultivating the sentiment of honor should leaven the
practical, materialistic temper of the multitude. At the present time,
when the burghers amass in trade far greater fortunes than the
aristocracy possess, when the learned secure greater power by
intellectual vigor, when the demagogues grow mightier by the command
of votes, titles alone carry little weight, and the virtues of honor,
of chivalry, of elegance, can with difficulty display their example.

No argument can ever restore general confidence in the institution of
primogeniture, but it dies hard, even in England. In the United
States the absolute liberty of testamentary disposition enables a
wealthy father to found a family almost as perfectly as if the right
of entail existed, and the bulk of large fortunes is constantly left
by will to the most capable son, in order that he may keep up the
family name, the family estates, and the family pride. But under the
provisions of the Code Napoléon such a course is impossible. As the
lawgiver did not hesitate to contravene his own legislation in the
case of the Jews, so he again disregarded it in order to consolidate
that aristocracy of which he hoped to make another strong prop to his
throne; for he already had the Church and the people. "The code," he
said, "was made for the welfare of the people; and if that welfare
demands other measures, we must take them." This was not difficult,
because the imperial power had gradually shaped two instruments
wherewith to act: one was the laws sanctioned by the legislature and
pertaining ordinarily to abstract questions of jurisprudence; the
other was the Emperor's personal decrees, which, though discussed by
the council of state, were the expression of the Emperor's will, and
covered in their scope the whole field of authority.

It was by the latter course that he had intended to create the new
nobility. Ostensibly the measure was to be the last blow of the ax at
the root of feudalism. The new dignities carried no privilege with
them; they were, it was explained, a sort of civic crown to which any
one might aspire, and their creation was therefore in no way
derogatory to the principle of equality. The holders might become too
independent and self-reliant, they might even display a class spirit;
but the Emperor felt himself to be striving upward, these creatures of
his would have to run fast before they could outstrip their master. At
St. Helena the prisoner, recalling with bitterness the ingratitude of
his beneficiaries, declared that he took the unfortunate step in order
to reconcile France with the rest of Europe. He was by that time aware
that though the Legion of Honor was, and would continue to be, an
institution dear to the French heart, this one was not so, and needed
an apology; for his imperial nobility had never been taken seriously
or kindly by the people, who could not draw the nice distinction
between a feudal and an imperial aristocracy. Even in the first steps
of his enterprise he was made to feel the need of caution, and it was
by statute, after all, not by decree, that the whole matter was
finally regulated. So curious is popular fickleness that an Emperor
who could boldly tyrannize in almost any other direction felt that he
dared not take the risk of constituting himself a fountain of honor,
such as legitimate monarchs were.

The system was for the world outside like some fairy wonder completed
overnight, since the duchies had been ready the year before. The
Italian titles were the most honorable and the most highly endowed.
They were either at once or later given as follows: Soult, Duke of
Dalmatia; Mortier, Duke of Treviso; Savary, Duke of Rovigo; Bessières,
Duke of Istria; Duroc, Duke of Friuli; Victor, Duke of Belluno;
Moncey, Duke of Conegliano; Clarke, Duke of Feltre; Masséna, Duke of
Rivoli; Lannes Duke of Montebello; Marmont, Duke of Ragusa; Oudinot,
Duke of Reggio; Macdonald, Duke of Taranto; Augereau, Duke of
Castiglione; Bernadotte, Prince of Ponte Corvo. In Germany there were
created three similar duchies--Auerstädt for Davout, Elchingen for
Ney, and Dantzic for Lefebvre. Berthier was made Prince of Neufchâtel.
So much for the military officials. In civil life there were
corresponding distinctions: Cambacérès, Duke of Parma; Maret, Duke of
Bassano; Lebrun, Duke of Piacenza; Fouché, Duke of Otranto;
Champagny, Duke of Cadore. The members of the senate, the councilors
of state, the presiding officers of the legislature, and the
archbishops were all created counts. Each one of these titles was,
like the others, richly endowed with land from the public domains in
Poland, Germany, and Italy. But the distinction bestowed on the
soldiers was marked in the difference between the accompanying gifts
to them and those to civilians. The only portion of the great force
which had returned to France was the guard, who were instructed to
keep themselves as exclusive as possible. A most lavish
pension-system, as it was considered even in that age of military
splendor, drew from the army chest five hundred francs a year for
soldiers who had lost a limb; officers received as high as ten
thousand francs, according to the nature of their disabilities. But
the marshals were showered with gold. Berthier had a million; Ney,
Davout, Soult, and Bessières, six hundred thousand each; Masséna,
Augereau, Bernadotte, Mortier, and Victor, four hundred thousand
apiece; and the rest two hundred thousand. But even this was nothing
to what some of them secured later by holding several offices at once.
At one time Berthier had a yearly income of a million three hundred
and fifty-five thousand francs; Davout, of nine hundred and ten
thousand; Ney, of seven hundred and twenty-eight thousand; Masséna, of
six hundred and eighty-three thousand. The ministers were able to
secure salaries averaging about two hundred thousand francs, and
ambassadors had incomes corresponding to their dignity. Caulaincourt,
the ablest of all the latter class, had eight hundred thousand francs
at St. Petersburg wherewith to support the imperial state of France.
It is interesting to note from Napoleon's letters that he had
occasionally to admonish some of these gentlemen to make use of their
titles.

The Revolution had chosen to find its artistic expression in the
correct and strict severity of classical forms. Napoleon had from the
beginning of his career been under the spell of Greek and Roman
examples. Thus it happened that the art of the First Empire was what
it is--heavy, conventional, and reminiscent. With the ever-growing
rigidity of censorship, literature sometimes took refuge in
abstractions, or, what is much the same thing, in the contemplation of
events so remote that their discussion could give no offense.
Sometimes authors accepted the curious task of defending the external
forms and results of the Revolution as expressed in the Empire, while
combating every principle from which the movement had sprung. Able men
like Chénier published some of their writings, and locked others in
their desks against a brighter day. In religion the Emperor's
principle was that his subjects should hate the English because they
were heretics, and the Pope because he was a fanatic. The "ideologues"
and "metaphysicians" were anarchists, for the public order was
endangered by their teachings. The newspapers were not only gagged,
but metamorphosed--the "French Citizen" into the "French Courier," the
"Journal of Debates" into the "Journal of the Empire." Their columns
were filled with laudations of the Emperor; their political articles
were virtually composed in the Foreign Office; and there was not a
symptom of anything like the existence of party feeling. A certain
journalist having been allowed to make statements concerning the
luxury at court, the editor of the offending paper was given to
understand that the Emperor would tolerate no such criticism nor any
remarks contrary to his interests.[17]

         [Footnote 17: In general, for the censorship of the press see
         Welschinger: La censure sous le Premier Empire. Sorel: Essais
         d'histoire et de critique.]

But the crowning work of this period was the final realization of the
plan for organizing public instruction in what was designated by the
head of the state as the Imperial University. Though somewhat changed
in name and character, it exists to-day virtually as it came from the
maker's hand. Like the institution of the prefecture, it is a
faultless machine of equalization and centralization, molding the mass
of educated Frenchmen into one form, rendering them responsive and
receptive to authoritative ideas from their youth upward, and passive
in their attitude toward instruction. Joseph de Maistre used to preach
that, all social order depending on the authority of beliefs as well
as on the authority of behavior, no man who denied the supremacy of
the Pope would permanently admit the sovereignty of the state.
Napoleon furnished a standing refutation of this thesis. The whole
system of public instruction in France has under the third republic
not merely been secularized, but it has been made, and for a quarter
of a century has remained, substantially infidel. Twenty-five academic
generations of living French citizens, reckoning each year's output as
a generation, have come out from its laboratory with a minimum of
faith; but state supremacy and state socialism are, in a moderate
form, more prevalent among them than among any similar body of men
elsewhere.

The University of France means literally the totality of all
instruction in the country, organized by successive stages into a
single system, and rigidly controlled from above. The outlines
sketched in the law passed in 1802, and supplemented in 1806, were
carefully followed by Napoleon in his final step, and neither the
theory nor the method need be again discussed. It is significant that
it was an imperial decree, and not a statute, which on March
seventeenth, 1808, created the organism. There was an endowment of
four hundred million francs, and a separate budget, "in order that
instruction might not suffer by passing disturbances in imperial
finances." In order, also, that its doctrine might not feel the
influence of every passing philosophical fashion, the corporation was
subordinate to, but separate from, the ministry, with a grand master,
chancellor, and treasurer of its own, and thirty members, of whom ten
were appointed for life by the Emperor, the rest being annually
designated by the grand master. They made rules for the discipline,
revised the textbooks, and chose the instructors of all the
institutions of learning in all France, except some of the great
ecclesiastical seminaries and a few of the technical schools. At the
outset it was ordered that all the masters, censors, and teachers in
the great intermediate schools or lyceums should be celibates! The
professors might marry, but in that case they could not live in the
precincts of what was virtually a military barrack.

Liberal culture, so far as given, was provided in the lyceums, and
they really form the heart of the university. Under the Empire their
instruction was largely in mathematics, with a sprinkling of Latin. It
is now greatly broadened and elevated. The pupils of the primary
schools felt a quasi-dependence on the Emperor; those of the lyceums
were the very children of patronage, for the cheapness of their
education, combined with their semi-military uniforms and habits,
impressed at every turn on them and their families the immanence of
the Empire. They entered by government examinations; all their letters
passed through the head master's hands; they were put under a
threefold system of espionage culminating in the grand master; the one
hundred and fifty scholarships and bourses in each were paid by the
state; the punishments were, like those of soldiers, arrest and
imprisonment. With the acquisition of military habits the young
_lycéen_ could look forward to military promotion, for two hundred and
fifty of the most select were sent every year to the military schools,
where they lived at the Emperor's expense, expecting professional
advancement by the Emperor's patronage. Others of less merit were
detached for the civil service, and in that also their careers were at
the imperial mercy. They were daily and hourly reminded of Napoleon's
greatness, for twenty-four hundred foreigners from the vassal states
of the Empire were scattered among these institutions, where they were
turned into Frenchmen and docile subjects at the Emperor's expense,
while being virtually held as hostages for the good behavior of their
parents. These powerful engines did not work in vain. During the
comparatively short existence of the Empire their product assumed
enormous proportions, and largely modified the temper of society
throughout France. The youth educated by priests or tutors were found
unable to keep pace with their favored contemporaries from the
government schools, and from the first no prophet was needed to
foretell the destiny of private institutions and ecclesiastical
seminaries. Little by little they made way for or became annexed to
the lyceums which one after another were founded wherever needed. The
charges of the latter were, and are, very low; and thrifty fathers
appreciate the fact. The state is at enormous cost to support them;
but public sentiment, preferring indirect to direct taxation, approves
of the expenditure, while crafty statesmen, whether royalist,
imperialist, or republican, employ them to create citizens of the kind
in power at the time.

Throughout the late summer and autumn of 1807 the imperial court was
more stately than ever before. The old nobility became assiduous in
their attendance, and, as one of the Empress's ladies in waiting is
said to have remarked they "received good company." On his return
Napoleon had found Josephine's extravagance to be as unbounded as
ever; but he could not well complain, because, although for the most
part frugal himself, he had latterly encouraged lavishness in his
family. Still, it was not agreeable to have dressmakers' bills flung
into his carriage when driving in state with his consort, and on one
occasion he sent an unprincipled but clever milliner to the prison of
Bicêtre for having disobeyed his orders in furnishing her wares to the
Empress at exorbitant prices. The person was so indispensable to the
court ladies, however, that they crowded her cell, and she was soon
released. At St. Cloud, Malmaison, the Tuileries, and Fontainebleau
the social vices of courts began to appear; but they were sternly
repressed, especially high play. By way of contrast, the city of Paris
was at that very moment debauched by a profusion of gambling-hells and
houses of prostitution, all licensed at an enormous figure by Fouché
and producing great revenues for the secret police. The gorgeous state
uniforms of the marshals, the rich and elegant costumes of the ladies,
the bespangled and begilt coats of the household, dancing,
theatricals, concerts, and excursions--all these elements should have
combined to create brilliancy and gaiety in the imperial circle, but
they did not.

There was something seriously amiss with the central figure. He was
often sullen and morose, often violent and even hysterical. To calm
his nervous agitation the court physician ordered warm baths, which he
spent hours in taking. Then again he was irregular in his habits,
being often somnolent during the daytime, but as frequently breaking
his rest at midnight to set the pens of his secretaries scampering to
keep pace with the flow of his speech. With old friends he was coarse
and severe: even the brutal Vandamme confessed that he trembled before
that "devil of a man," while Lannes was the only human being who still
dared to use the familiar "thou" in addressing his old comrade. To the
face of his generals the Emperor was merely cold: behind their backs
he sneered--saying, for instance, of Davout that he might give him
never so much renown, he would not be able to carry it; of Ney that he
was disposed to ingratitude and turbulence; of Bessières, Oudinot, and
Victor that they were mere mediocrities. Among all these dazzling
stars he himself moved in simple uniform and in a cocked hat
ornamented with his favorite cheap little cockade. It was a
well-calculated vanity, for with increasing corpulence plainness of
dress called less attention to his waddling gait and growing
awkwardness of gesture.

The summer of 1807 saw the social triumph of the Bonaparte family, the
sometime Jacobins, but now emperor and kings. Jerome Napoleon was
married on August twenty-second to the Princess Catherine of
Würtemberg. The Emperor had already spoken at Tilsit with the Czar
about unions for himself and family suitable to their rank, but the
hint of an alliance with the Romanoffs was coldly received. In the
Emperor's opinion this, however, was a really splendid match. The
Rhine princes and subsidiary monarchs hastened to Paris, and one of
them showed his want of perspicacity by marked attentions to
Josephine, which he hoped would secure her husband's favor. When men
of such lofty and undisputed lineage were joining what was apparently
an irresistible movement, the recusant nobility of France itself could
not well stand aloof any longer. It amused and interested the Emperor
to see them obey Fouché's hint, and throng to be introduced in the
correct way to the new and undisputed sovereign, not merely of France,
but of western Europe.

Moreover, they were no longer impertinent. They remembered the fate
meted out to Mme. de Staël for her solemn innuendos, and did not
forget that the last item in the indictment on which Mme. de Chevreuse
had been banished was a snippish remark to Napoleon's face. Astonished
at the splendor of her diamonds, he had in his own court clumsily
asked if they were all real. "Indeed, sire, I do not know," she
replied; "but they are good enough to wear here." In consequence,
therefore, of this new and now well-intentioned element the court
swelled in numbers and gained in grace, but not in joyousness. The
Empress was already foreboding her fate; there was the stiffness of
inaptitude about everything, even the amusement, and the languid
weariness of the ladies was an unforgiven imperial sin. The quick wit
of the Emperor remarked this annoying fact, and demanded counsel of
Talleyrand. The Prince of Benevento had by this time resigned his
position as minister, and the relations between himself and the
Emperor were strained, but he was not rebuked when he ventured on the
old license of speech. "It is because pleasure will not move at the
drum-tap," was his answer, "and you look as if you would command every
one just as you do the army: 'Ladies and gentlemen, forward march!'"

Talleyrand's numberless intrigues, his venality and self-seeking, his
cynicism and contemptuous airs, had finally destroyed his
preponderance with Napoleon, although he still retained much
influence. No one was better aware of the fact than he was. Thus far
he had reckoned himself an indispensable factor in the administration
of the Empire; now he saw that he was so no longer, that his time had
come.

He had a sterile mind, and was destitute of principle. Constructive
politics were beyond his powers, and he was hopelessly ignorant of
social movements. The real Europe of his time was to him a closed
book; and while Napoleon was well served in every other function of
state, because he himself could assist and supervise, he was
wretchedly betrayed in the matter of permanent gains by diplomacy, in
which he was personally a blunderer and a tyro. Talleyrand was a
distinguished and typical aristocrat of the old French school,
elegant, adroit, smooth-spoken, and sharp. He was an unequaled
courtier, influential by his moderation in word, gesture, and
expression, but a feeble adviser, and utterly incapable of broad
views. His character, being unequal to his skill, was not strong
enough either to curb or guide a headstrong master, for his intellect
was neither productive nor solid. No treaty ever made by him was
lasting, and he must have known that even the peace of Tilsit would
begin to crumble almost before the papers were signed. The balance of
Europe was disturbed but temporarily by that agreement, not
permanently, as had been intended; the attempted seclusion of Prussia
by Napoleon destroyed her old antagonism to other German powers, and
marked the beginning of amalgamation with all her sister states for
the reconstruction of an avenging German nationality.

Something may be forgiven to an adventurer in the storms of
revolution, but Talleyrand trimmed his sails to every wind, outrode
every storm, and made gains in every port. He was a trusted official
of the Republic, the Consulate, the Empire, and the restored monarchy.
Wise in his day and generation, he had long before made ready to
withdraw, if necessary, from active life, by the accumulation of an
enormous fortune, heaped up by means which scandalized even imperial
France. He had been embittered at the close of the Consulate by
Napoleon's determination that his ministers should not be his highest
dignitaries, his arch-officers. The title of "prince," with two
hundred thousand francs a year, was a poor consolation when men like
Lebrun and Cambacérès had the precedence as arch-treasurer and
arch-chancellor, while--most unendurable of all--they drew salaries of
three hundred and fifty thousand francs. Berthier, the Prince of
Neufchâtel, had recently been made vice-constable to represent Louis
Bonaparte, who, though still constable, had left Paris to become Louis
Napoleon, King of Holland. This was Talleyrand's opportunity to resign
from the ministry on his own initiative. He demanded a dignity for
himself similar to that accorded to Berthier. The Emperor told him
that, accustomed to power as he had become, he would be unhappy in a
station which precluded his remaining in the cabinet. But the minister
knew his rôle in the little comedy, and, persisting, was on August
ninth made vice-grand elector, while Champagny, an excellent and
laborious official, took his seat at the council-board as minister of
external relations. Talleyrand's withdrawal had not the slightest
influence on the Emperor's foreign policy; in fact, the quidnuncs at
Fontainebleau declared that he was seen limping into Napoleon's office
almost every evening.[18] But he was so well known in every court, his
circle of personal acquaintances was so large, so timorous, and so
reverential, that superstitious men believed his retirement augured
the turn of Napoleon's fortunes.

         [Footnote 18: Sorel, Vol. VII, pp. 191-2.]


CHAPTER VIII

THE EMPIRES OF LAND AND OCEAN[19]

         [Footnote 19: References as before, and Mahan: Influence of
         Sea Power upon the French Revolution and Empire. Loir: Études
         d'histoire maritime. Clowes: The Royal Navy. Stanhope: Life
         of Hon. William Pitt.]

     Diplomacy at St. Petersburg -- Internal Politics of Russia --
     Alexander's Perplexities -- War between Great Britain and Russia
     -- New Orders in Council -- The Milan Decree -- Position of the
     United States -- The Regeneration of Prussia -- Napoleon's
     Repressive Measures -- Austria's New Army -- Diplomatic Tension
     between Russia and France -- Designs of Napoleon as to Egypt --
     He Temporizes with Alexander -- Caulaincourt and Tolstoi -- The
     Czar's Demands -- Napoleon's Visit to Italy -- Limitations of his
     Ambition -- Visions of Oriental Empire -- Control of the
     Mediterranean -- His Proposition to Russia -- His Complete
     Program.


The diplomatic intrigues at St. Petersburg were intensely amusing
after the peace of Tilsit. Alexander coquetted with the English
agents, and concealed his plans from the conservative Russians. His
lips were sealed about what had occurred at the meeting with Napoleon,
and the charge has been disproved that some of his suite blabbed
enough to the British diplomats to enable them to divine the rest.
Canning's acuteness and his conviction that Napoleon and Alexander had
reached an understanding hostile to England sufficiently account for
the bombardment of Copenhagen, and place the responsibility for it on
his shoulders. But in the interval before that event the Czar cajoled
the English embassy until they felt assured of a triumph, while
almost simultaneously he assured Lesseps, the French consul-general,
how precious Napoleon's society had been to him, and declared that if
England did not yield the two allies would compel her. To the formal
introductory communications of Russia concerning peace, Canning
replied by a demand for the secret articles of Tilsit, and despatched
the fleet to the Baltic. The successful stroke made in September at
Copenhagen filled the Czar with solicitude; for, like his ally, he had
hoped to gain time, and such promptness in imitating Napoleon's
contempt for neutral rights dismayed him. It looked as though this
were the first event in a maritime war which would end by destroying
the shipyards at Cronstadt, or perhaps even St. Petersburg itself. But
instead of further aggression came a new mission from the London
cabinet asking for Alexander's good offices in appeasing Denmark, and
offering every indemnity to that power except the restoration of the
fleet. Great Britain, commanding the Baltic, could be magnanimous.

[Illustration: From the collection of W. C. Crane. Engraved by
Langier.

QUEEN HORTENSE.

Painted by Girodet.]

This conjunction of affairs destroyed Alexander's self-control. He had
played the friend of England to no advantage, and England now asked
for new and impossible proofs of his friendship. He could neither
disclose to her the secret articles nor mediate in her behalf with a
country which had already joined his own system. On the other hand,
Savary, the French ambassador, and Lesseps, the French consul-general,
were daily reminding him of his engagements to Napoleon. There was
little need, for the alliance meant to him the attainment of his most
cherished ambitions: the acquisition of Finland to the westward, and
of the great Danube principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia to the
south. In all contingencies he had to reckon with the wealthy Russian
proprietors, whose prosperity demanded the easy export of their
enormous produce in timber and grain by the same British ships which
supplied them with essential articles that were not manufactured in
Russia. To them the continental blockade was a horror, and many in the
army declared they would not shed their blood to undermine the
national prosperity.

This tension could not last. The English secretly introduced into
Russia a pamphlet charging that the peace of Tilsit had separated the
Czar from both his people and his troops. Savary, mindful of his old
detective arts, discovered its origin and adroitly laid the facts
before Alexander, who burst into angry abuse of the "libel," and
bemoaned the lack of able men to support him both in a wise foreign
policy and in such internal reforms as the abolition of serfdom, which
he was determined to accomplish. Moreover, Napoleon's conduct was such
as to produce serious uneasiness. So far from evacuating Prussia,
French troops still occupied all her harbor towns, and menaced the
Russian frontier as if their commander were a foe and not a friend.
The agreement made with Kalkreuth for the gradual withdrawal of the
French army from Prussia was held to be null, for the Prussians could
not raise the indemnity of a hundred and fifty million francs computed
as the direct cost of the war. To this was added the fact that no move
was made toward the dismemberment of Turkey. The Emperor of the French
had seized and fortified Corfu, but in a preliminary armistice between
Russia and Turkey, due to his intermediation, not a word was said
about the Danubian principalities; although the Russian troops were
still in Wallachia, it was clear that French influence was daily
growing stronger at Constantinople, and might grow strong enough to
thwart the Czar's plans entirely.

Such were the disquieting considerations which finally brought to a
climax the relations of Russia with England. On October twenty-sixth,
Lord Leveson-Gower, the English ambassador, received a note from Count
Rumianzoff to the effect that twice Russia had taken up arms for
England's advantage, and had in vain solicited even such coöperation
as would seem to have been in Great Britain's own interest. She had
not even asked, said the writer, for reinforcements, but merely for a
diversion, and had been chagrined to see that her ally, so far from
maintaining the Czar's cause, had instead, like a cold observer of the
bloody theater where war had been kindled at her behest, despatched
expeditions on her own behalf to seize Egypt and to attack Buenos
Ayres. After all this the Czar had still offered his mediation, but in
vain: Great Britain had replied by an act of unheard-of violence,
despoiling an ancient and dignified monarchy. Could the Czar apologize
for such a deed? It was insulting to expect it. After reciting these
grievances and asserting the principles of the armed neutrality, the
paper announced a rupture of all diplomatic relations until reparation
should be made to Denmark.

War was formally declared by Russia on November seventh, and England
retorted by orders in council, issued on the eighteenth and
twenty-sixth of the same month, which declared that every continental
port closed to her flag was thereafter in a state of blockade. The
neutral states were each and all notified that she would exercise the
right of search to the fullest extent; that all neutral ships must put
into English harbors before proceeding to their destination, and pay a
duty in case of reëxportation of their cargoes. An exception to this
latter regulation was made in the case of the United States, they
being graciously permitted to have direct commercial intercourse with
Sweden, but with Sweden only. This, of course, meant that neutral
states must either carry on England's trade under their own flags or
abandon their commerce altogether.

This measure was in utter contempt of international law, even as then
understood, and was a high-handed outrage against neutral powers, in
particular against the United States. It was treating the ocean
exactly as Napoleon had treated the lands of Europe. But it was a
powerful weapon, for if successfully enforced it would destroy
Napoleon's Continental System entirely. Accordingly, in pursuance of
his policy that fire must be fought with fire, the Emperor retorted
with equal ruthlessness, fulminating the terrible Milan Decree of
December seventeenth, 1807. In it he declared that any vessel which
obeyed the orders of the English admiralty or suffered itself to be
searched was and would be regarded as an English ship. It was
essential, therefore, that any nation desiring exemption from the
enactments of the Berlin and Milan decrees on the one hand and of the
English orders in council on the other must make itself respected by
force of arms. The Americans must either accept the humiliating terms
of England or enter the French system and seek in a maritime war to
capture the continental markets for themselves.

Napoleon, as has already been narrated, intended to force them into
the latter course immediately, but he was not well informed concerning
American affairs. Jefferson was at that time in his second term as
President of the United States. The Democratic party, of which he was
the leader, was vastly more concerned with agricultural than with
commercial interests. They were afraid to increase the public debt,
cared little for the prosperity of New England commerce, and, seeking
to avoid the dilemma arranged for them by England and France, passed
the notorious embargo act forbidding all foreign commerce whatsoever.
American ships must avoid foreign waters, which, like the land, had
become the arena of a bloody duel in which the United States were not
interested--so, at least, the Democrats fondly believed. Exports to
England fell in a single year from forty-nine to nine millions of
dollars. In other words, the embargo, though causing great distress,
could not be perfectly enforced, since the Eastern merchants continued
their humiliating submission to England for the sake of their
lucrative speculations.

At the same time the farmers were suddenly awakened to the fact that
in the end they suffered as much under the prohibition as the traders.
In the resulting agitations Jefferson closed his public career without
éclat. Madison wisely secured a modification of the embargo by the
Non-intervention Act, which opened all foreign commerce except that
with England and France. But the merchants of New England were
rebellious and dissatisfied even with this. The Federalists wanted a
navy and a place in the European system; in other words, a fair share
in the world's carrying-trade for the seafarers of the Atlantic coast.
Matters drifted on in general discontent and mutual recrimination
until 1810. Napoleon in that year shrewdly announced that he had
abandoned his policy, but for all that he actually continued to
enforce it. This empty pretense of friendship embroiled the United
States still further with England, and in the end led to a second war
for independence.

The Czar had no sooner taken the decisive step of finally declaring
war on England than the Napoleonic policy began further to unfold.
Prussia was at once compelled to follow her protector's example, and
before the ensuing season all her harbors were fortified and closed.
In spite of the French occupation, a national reform movement had
begun in this land. In Königsberg was formed the League of Virtue,
which focused the new morality and patriotism of the masses. The pens
of Fichte, Schleiermacher, and other great writers continued to build
up public spirit. Stein accepted office, stipulating that the privy
council should be abolished, and then freed the serfs. Among other
important reforms he destroyed the old distinction between land
tenures, and made transfers simple. Self-government was granted to the
cities. The schools were entirely reconstructed under the direction of
William von Humboldt, and the University of Berlin was founded as a
nursery for the new national spirit.

Under these influences the monarchy of Frederick the Great ceased to
exist; the authority of the "yunker" class which supported it and had
rashly brought on the war with France was temporarily eclipsed by a
wholesome expression of national vigor, and the enlightened liberalism
of Prussia became the stimulus for a similar movement in all Germany.
As to the army, Gneisenau and Scharnhorst entered with zeal upon the
task of reorganization, and the latter was a very genius of reform.
Napoleon at length showed his true colors, forbade his victim to
maintain more than forty-two thousand troops, and declared to the face
of Frederick William's brother in Paris that the occupation of the
fortresses had passed from the narrow domain of particular politics
into the great field of general policy. He meant, of course, that he
was thereby virtually holding in check not merely Prussia, but Russia
and Austria as well. The limitation set by him to the active military
force of the captive state was easily evaded by the subterfuge of
substituting new recruits for those who had completed their training
in the ranks; but the French occupation seemed to be virtually
permanent.

The military reorganization of Austria was already complete, and
Metternich wrote on July twenty-sixth, 1807, to Stadion, the minister
of state, that as the peace of Tilsit had sown broadcast the germs of
its own destruction, the wisdom of his correspondent's administration
would one day bring Austria to the point where three hundred thousand
men united under one will and directed to one goal would play the
first rôle in Europe, "in a moment of universal anarchy, at one of
those epochs which always follow great usurpations, and wipe out the
traces of the conquerors; an epoch of which no one can foretell the
date, but which nothing postpones except the life of a single man, and
which all the genius of that man can so much the less postpone as he
has not yet taken the first step to preclude its certain results."
This reference to Napoleon's childlessness and the dependence of his
system on his single life is clear enough. The Emperor of the French
was himself thoroughly aware of the influence exerted by such a
consideration upon the course of affairs, and in consequence his
dealing with Francis was somewhat less peremptory than that with
Frederick William. Nevertheless, the results were exceedingly
humiliating to Austria's pride. In a treaty concluded at Fontainebleau
on October tenth, 1807, with reference to the Italian frontier, her
dominions were shorn to the quick. At Napoleon's suggestion, Count
Starhemberg, her ambassador in London, intimated that England, in the
interest of peace, ought to restore the Danish fleet and make terms
with France. On the prompt refusal of Great Britain to listen, the
envoy withdrew from London; but he did not leave the English cabinet
in doubt as to the cause. He knew and broadly hinted that though his
master dared not trifle with a Franco-Russian alliance, his heart was
with the English cause. To all outward appearance, therefore, Austria
was quite as subservient as Prussia to the mighty coalition of
France and Russia.

Almost immediately after the rupture with England, Alexander had the
mortification of seeing his worst fears realized. Napoleon had opened
to him at Tilsit a dazzling vista of territorial aggrandizement.
Slowly but surely the desired effect was produced. Aware of all the
dangers he ran, the Czar nevertheless sacrificed every other
consideration, even that of his people's material comfort, in order to
demonstrate his good faith. By declaring war he likewise paid in
advance. But at the earliest possible moment, on November seventh, his
ambassador to France, sent for the purpose, demanded the return--to
wit, the two principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia. Simultaneously
and in another quarter this same demand was made emphatic. Immediately
after the meeting at Tilsit, Guilleminot, a French general, had been
sent as mediator between Russia and Turkey to the seat of war on the
Danube. An armistice was concluded under his direction at Slobozia, in
which were two or three compensatory clauses promising that Russia
would make restitution to Turkey of certain vessels and munitions of
war which had been captured. The Czar professed to take great umbrage
at these stipulations. Shortly afterward he rejected the whole paper,
and the Russian troops remained in Wallachia. This conduct was
intended to indicate his obstinate determination to have the vague
promises of Napoleon defined, and then to secure their performance.

The Emperor of the French had been kept well informed by Savary, and
knew that the Tilsit alliance, being distasteful to the Russian
people, hung on the personal good will of their sovereign. He would
have been glad to put Alexander off with some slight rectification of
the border-line between Russia and Turkey and with further indefinite
promises, but he dared not. Accordingly he devised the plea that the
aggrandizement of the Eastern and Western empires must keep equal
pace, not in the West, for that was his by right, but in those
debatable lands wherewith Russia hoped to secure a permanent seat in
the councils of Europe. He was confirmed in his desire to postpone the
partition of Turkey by finding that Mustapha, the Sultan who had
overthrown Selim in defiance of France, was now ready in turn to make
friends with her and perform her behests. The hope of getting Egypt
was again awakened, but the times were not ripe and delay must be
secured.

In addition to these considerations there was that of immediate
safety. The last two campaigns had seen Napoleon a victor, once over
Austria and Russia combined, again over Prussia and Russia combined;
but in each there had been moments when the coalition of the three
would have overwhelmed him. For this reason he would gladly have
declared at Tilsit that the house of Hohenzollern had ceased to reign,
in order thereby to preclude any future danger from a triple alliance.
This idea he had abandoned for the time in order to gratify Alexander.
His ally secure, he now returned or pretended to return to it. Prussia
was regaining her strength too rapidly; her embittered hostility was
an ever-increasing menace. On the plea that she could never pay the
promised indemnity, and was therefore to be treated as a bankrupt,
Napoleon declared at last that Russia could have the Danube provinces
if France could take Silesia for the grand duchy of Warsaw. "Prussia,"
ran Napoleon's despatch on this subject--"Prussia would have but two
millions of inhabitants; but would not that be enough for the welfare
of the royal family, and is it not in their interest to place her
without delay and with perfect resignation among the inferior
powers, since all their efforts to restore the position she has lost
merely serve to distress their subjects and cherish idle regrets?"
"What the Emperor would prefer," said this same memorandum, "is that
the Turks should remain in peaceable possession of Wallachia and
Moldavia; still he would hand over these provinces to the Czar in
return for a just compensation from Prussian lands; and finally,
though far from wishing a complete partition of Turkey, he desires you
not to condemn utterly the plan, but rather to dwell on the motives
for postponing it. This ancient project of Russian ambition is a tie
which can bind Russia to France."

For the purposes of this difficult negotiation Napoleon had chosen
Caulaincourt, his devoted servant and most adroit diplomat. Having
been concerned in the expeditions to Strasburg and Ettenheim which
captured Enghien, the ambassador had been deeply, though unjustly,
involved in the disrepute of the execution, and that fact was a tie
which bound him to his master. The two seemed thoroughly to understand
each other. Alexander had chosen an envoy who was the very antipodes
of the adroit and elegant Caulaincourt. Count Tolstoi was a bluff
soldier, selected in the belief that he would be uninfluenced by the
intrigues of Paris society, and could secure the utmost return for the
agreement of Tilsit by direct negotiation with the Emperor himself, as
one old soldier talking with another. This officer was instructed to
lay great stress on the liberation of Prussia, but to remember that
the object of his mission was to cement harmony and confidence. On the
journey to Paris he paused at Memel to pay his respects to Frederick
William and his Queen. He found them, considering their station,
actually in want, dependent on the Czar's gifts of clothes and other
necessaries for the little personal comfort they enjoyed. This made a
deep impression on Tolstoi's heart, and though received at Paris with
such distinction as had never been accorded to any other ambassador,
he was cold and distant with both the Emperor and the court. At last
there was positive disagreement between him and the great personages
of the capital; there was even a rumor that Ney and he would fight a
duel. The offensive remarks which led to such tension were due to a
statement by Tolstoi that Russia had been beaten by accident, that
Russian soldiers were invincible, and might one day take their
revenge.

Moreover, the ambassador could not even get on with Napoleon. Both he
and his staff avoided the splendors of Fontainebleau, preferring to
frequent the drawing-rooms of a notorious actress whose name had often
been linked with that of the Emperor. Under such circumstances
diplomacy gathered but little fruit. Napoleon offered both the
Danubian provinces for Silesia, or else the evacuation of Prussia
proper for that of Wallachia; he even mentioned the magic word
"Constantinople" as part of Russia's share in an eventual partition of
the whole Turkish empire. Tolstoi wrote to St. Petersburg that France
was postponing the evacuation of Prussia for selfish purposes, meaning
to dismember her; and from that starting-point depicted the horrors of
a Napoleonic Europe. Such opinions dismayed Alexander, and although he
received Caulaincourt with distinction equal to that which had been
accorded to Tolstoi, he firmly refused the bargain offered by him. He
would not consent to a further dismemberment of Prussia, partly for
sentimental reasons, chiefly because he could not endure the
strengthening of the grand duchy of Warsaw, the new political organism
which suggested the restoration of Poland. As to the principalities,
these he would have. Russian society had for the moment repressed
its hostility to the Czar and his treaty of Tilsit, and was quietly
waiting to see what would be the substantial results. No gain less
than the acquisition of Wallachia and Moldavia would reinstate
Alexander in their good will or make the French alliance endurable.
This was of course a serious crisis; but Caulaincourt, nothing
dismayed, set himself, by the exercise of all those social arts of
which he had such a mastery, to win the aristocratic circles of St.
Petersburg.

In the month of December, 1807, Napoleon was on a royal progress
through his kingdom of Italy, and the news of the diplomatic crisis in
Russia reached him at Venice, which had become his as a result of
Austerlitz and by the treaty of Presburg. Although he had gone thither
for a serious consultation with Joseph, its fascinations were already
weaving curious plans in the Emperor's mind. His rapid journey through
Lombardy and a short visit to Milan, whence he fulminated his reply to
the English admiralty, had convinced him of the firm sovereignty he
exercised throughout these splendid realms. In the few days of his
presence he had further strengthened his power by many generous and
beneficent decrees. It was with a sense of security that he came to
Venice; at once he yielded to her spell, realizing that at last his
control of the Adriatic was complete, inasmuch as now he held both
shores and commanded the entrance by the possession of Corfu. Just
beyond was the brilliant East, ripe for conquest. Could he or should
he lose the opportunity to use such a superb base of operations, win
the gratitude of all Venetia by restoring the ancient glories of her
capital, and thereby lay his hand at last on the bauble which had once
before so dazzled him? Besides, Great Britain, his hated rival,
scorning the terms he had offered, disdaining the continental
blockade, anchored in her strength by the control of Western seas,
was vulnerable in India, and there alone. These considerations
returned with overpowering allurement to his imagination, and four
millions of francs were appropriated to improve the harbor and restore
somewhat the splendors of Venice.

New Year's day found the Emperor again at the Tuileries, in time to
receive a new courier from Russia with still more vigorous
representations of Alexander's desires. The idea of a general
partition of Turkish lands grew stronger, and in an interview with
Metternich, Napoleon hinted that Austria should have a share.
Instructions were sent to Caulaincourt that he should hold out hopes
in order to gain time and to learn whether it was definitely
impossible that matters should remain as the treaty of Tilsit, taken
literally, had arranged them. This procrastinating attitude of mind
had a twofold cause. One appears to have been a gradual realization in
Napoleon's consciousness that dreams and schemes must materialize,
that in the mystery of a life like his one step inevitably leads to
another, that his career must encircle the vast globe, while he
himself was but mortal, finite, and already verging to the utmost
limit of his powers. A year before he had written to Josephine that he
was of all men the most enslaved; "my master has no bowels, and that
master is the nature of things." The other cause was the fearless and
warlike attitude taken in Great Britain by both crown and Parliament
and announced with threats of eternal war at the opening of the
legislative session of 1807. It appears probable, likewise, that
whatever answer should be given by Alexander to his pregnant question,
he felt his only safety now to be in the alliance with the Czar.

Time, time, time--that was the prime necessity; there were only
twenty-four hours in the day, and only a certain quantity of nerve
force in his own system. Before the partition of Turkey, if
Alexander's reply should make it inevitable, two weighty matters must
be settled: first, the road to an Oriental empire must be secured; and
second, the already existing Western empire of Europe must be rounded
out by the "regulation" of Spanish affairs--the appropriation, if it
should seem best, of the whole Iberian peninsula. Any tyro in
geography could see by a glance at the map that as navigation was in
those days--that is, by the propulsion of fickle winds amid the partly
known currents of ocean and sea--the command of Gibraltar and Malta
meant the control of the Levant, and the British held both places.
With Spain in French hands, Gibraltar eventually might be taken, but
the case of Malta was far different. In the possession of a seafaring
nation like the English the island was impregnable. But was this in
reality the only outlet for the French empire to the East? From France
proper, yes; but from Italy, by the Adriatic, there was an admirable
alternative, if not, indeed, the only true line of trade.

Since the first awakening of his ambition, Napoleon had dreamed of
supremacy in the Mediterranean, and every successive treaty made with
Northern powers had looked to some strengthening of French influence
on that sea. Now at last he had Corfu, and the English, straitened for
troops, were withdrawing the forces which occupied Sicily to send them
into Portugal. The squadrons from Brest, Lorient, and Rochefort were
at once ordered to unite in the Mediterranean. This was the moment to
seize Sicily, and with that island added to Corfu, France would
control the best road into Egypt. But the hostile fate which seemed to
attend all Napoleon's undertakings by sea again checkmated him.
English cruisers were found hovering about Corfu, and the landing in
Sicily was temporarily abandoned in order to sweep the English from
the waters of the Ionian Isles. In the event of success, the invasion
of Turkey, the seizure of Egypt, and the gratification of Alexander
would be easy. More remotely, the deadly blow at England could be
struck in Asia. What a conception! What a debauch of the imagination!

But there was one specter which, though laid for intervals, would not
entirely down, and returned with stolid persistency: the existence of
the Western empire hung on the thread of a single life; the very
crowns of France and Italy had no heir. The situation was much
discussed in court circles, sometimes even among the people, and was
becoming acute. In order to solve the problem peace was essential, and
not a remote, but an immediate one, if possible. The Russian
ambassador, returning from London, had reported on his journey through
France that the English were not so envenomed as they seemed. It was
only a straw, yet it was talked of. At once Napoleon seized it, and
announced that his one aim, his most ardently desired goal,
was--peace.

It was now the close of January; Tolstoi was invited to join a
hunting-party, and in the heart of the forest Napoleon found means to
be alone with him. After a long, vague, contradictory, but dramatic
conversation setting forth the same three alternatives,--peace between
Russia and Turkey without the principalities, or the principalities in
exchange for Silesia, or the ultimate but not immediate partition of
Turkey,--the great actor suddenly paused as if in an ecstasy of
sincerity, and snatching his hat off his head with both hands, flung
it on the ground as he said: "Hark you, M. Tolstoi; it is not the
Emperor of the French, but an old general of division that is now
talking to another. May I be thought the vilest of men if I do not
scrupulously fulfil the contract I made at Tilsit, and if I do not
evacuate both Prussia and the duchy of Warsaw as soon as you have
withdrawn your troops from Moldavia and Wallachia! I am neither a fool
nor a child, not to know what I stipulate, and what I stipulate I
always fulfil." Leaving this objurgation time to work its effect, the
Emperor of the French a few days later--on February second--wrote with
his own hand to the Emperor of all the Russias. It was an innocent and
kindly epistle, advising his friend to strengthen his army, and
promising all aid possible in case he should feel that the border-line
of Sweden was too near St. Petersburg. An army of fifty thousand men,
Russian, French, perhaps a "little Austrian," marching into Asia by
way of Constantinople, would not reach the Euphrates before England
would begin to tremble. "I am strong in Dalmatia, you on the Danube.
One month after an agreement we could be on the Bosporus. But our
mutual interests require to be combined and equalized in a personal
conference. Tolstoi is not built on the proportions of Tilsit. We
could have everything ready, you and I, or perhaps Caulaincourt and
Rumianzoff, before March fifteenth, and by May first our troops could
be in Asia at the moment when those of your Majesty were in Stockholm.
We would have preferred peace, you and I, but we must do what is
predestined, and follow whither the irresistible march of events
conducts us."

This letter was a masterpiece. It meant, first, a little European
war, short and sharp, whereby Russia would get Finland as a sop and
have her attention drawn off from Prussia and Spain; secondly, a
menace which would bring England to terms and produce a peace;
thirdly, the neutralization of Austria by inviting her to sit down at
the feast; lastly, the consolidation of Napoleon's dynasty for the
ultimate completion of his designs in the Orient either with or
without Russia's aid. The alternative would be a war of hitherto
unknown dimensions, including not only all Europe, but Asia Minor and
northern Africa; out of such a conflict might result a permanent order
the foundation and copestone of which would be French supremacy.
England would of course rush to the assistance of Sweden, the only
land now left in Europe that had never fallen into the orbit of the
French system. At that moment Spain and Portugal, abandoned to their
fate, must drop into French hands. If England should still prove
resolute, then an expedition to Egypt would sail from Corfu, while
simultaneously the united armies of Russia, France, and Austria would
march to the conquest of Turkey and the seizure of India. It was a
scheme so vast, so logical, so imperial, that it left far behind the
dreams of a Corsican patriot or the visions of an ardent Frenchman.
Successful as a soldier, the Emperor was carried by each new victory
into widening circles of enterprise which could have no relation to
narrow national limits.


CHAPTER IX

FRENCH EMPIRE AND EUROPEAN NATIONALITY[20]

         [Footnote 20: See Oman: Peninsular War. Martins: Historia de
         Portugal. Delagrave: La Campagne de Portugal. Also Memoirs,
         etc., by Barkhäusen, Brandt, Gomm, Moore, Naylies, Roveréa,
         Savary, Miot de Melito.]

     Diplomatic Fencing with Russia -- Caulaincourt and Rumianzoff --
     Plight of the Czar -- Napoleon and the Papacy -- The Pope a
     Prisoner -- The House of Braganza -- Partition of Portugal --
     Flight of the Royal Family -- Junot's Aspirations -- The
     Condition of Spain -- The Court -- The Crown Prince -- The
     Popular Factions -- Napoleon's Plans -- Quarrel of Charles and
     Ferdinand -- Trial of Ferdinand -- Invasion of Spain -- Napoleon
     and Lucien at Mantua -- Napoleon and Joseph at Venice -- Godoy
     Thwarted -- The French Armament -- The Humiliation of Spain --
     Fall of Godoy -- Abdication of the King.


[Sidenote: 1808]

The instructions issued by Napoleon to Caulaincourt in this crisis
reveal the writer's entire political system during the turning-point
of his career: they show him at the height of his powers, promising,
cajoling, suggesting, procrastinating, representing his own actions in
the best light without regard to truth, using Russia as long as she
could serve him, and abandoning her within a few days when she became
recalcitrant; all this to gain time and opportunity. The Czar had been
from the outset instigated by the French ambassador to seize Finland,
but feeling that success in that quarter would weaken his claims on
the principalities, he hesitated. Court intrigue began to thicken
about him once more. With every day the miseries and uncertainties
of his position made him more wretched. At last he behaved with the
inconsistency of distraction and hesitation. Almost while soothing
words were being uttered to the Swedish ambassador, Russian columns
suddenly burst into the Swedish province, and were not withdrawn.
Alexander renewed his demand for the Danube provinces. Napoleon sent
him exquisite presents, Sèvres porcelain or some specimen of choice
armor. At last came the letter of February second. The first
impression made on the Czar by its reading was one of exaggerated joy
and enthusiasm: "Ha! the style of Tilsit! What a great man! What large
ideas!" Such were his exclamations as he read. But calm deliberation
awakened suspicions, and before long a defiant spirit led to a
categorical request that any ultimate design on Silesia should be
formally renounced, whereupon Caulaincourt replied: "The Emperor
Napoleon demands that your Majesty shall not be more urgent with him
than he is with you."

As a preliminary to the second personal interview between the two
monarchs, suggested at Tilsit, and for which proposals were now
renewed from Paris, the two ministers, Caulaincourt and Rumianzoff,
finally began to discuss the terms of a partition of Turkey. The
diplomatic gladiators were well matched; between offer and substitute,
demand and excuse, feint and counterfeint, the days passed in a most
entertaining manner, until suddenly the Czar became aware that time
was flying and that he was not making headway. Somewhat petulantly the
interview was postponed, for it was clear that the ministers would not
agree by the time suggested, and without an agreement Alexander
refused to attend. Meanwhile his troops in Finland had met with bitter
and obstinate resistance. His army had been driven from eastern
Bothnia, and his fleet lay blockaded by that of Great Britain under
Admiral Saumarez. St. Petersburg was terrified by the presence of an
English fleet in the Baltic. The Czar could not weaken his force on
the Danube, lest he should lose the coveted provinces, and he dared
not withdraw troops from Poland, for the French were still in Silesia.
With the understanding that Bernadotte should be their active
auxiliary, the Russian forces had rashly crossed the Swedish border
with inadequate numbers; and in reality the marshal did set out to
join them, but half-way on his march, for some unexplained reason, he
had paused. Caulaincourt said it was because of the difficulties
encountered in crossing the Belt; but the halt was, of course, one
move in Napoleon's game. On April twenty-fifth the latter wrote to
Talleyrand: "Was I to send my soldiers so lightly into Sweden? There
was nothing for me there." Simultaneously the French forces in both
Poland and Prussia were compacted and strengthened, while at the
confluence of the Bug and the Vistula, in the grand duchy of Warsaw,
over against the Russian frontier, were steadily rising the walls of a
powerful fort above which waved the tricolor. What a plight was this
for the White Czar, the grandson of Catherine II, the philosophic
monarch educated by Laharpe, the beneficent despot! Behind him a
disgusted nation, before him illimitable warfare; bound by the letter
of an ambiguous treaty, occupied in a doubtful conquest, thwarted in
his ambitions; in short, if not checkmated, put into a position very
much like that known in the noble game of chess as stalemate!

Napoleon's treatment of the Czar makes the whole situation in northern
Europe and Austria easily comprehensible; it is necessary to examine
from the same standpoint, also, what occurred in the southern states
of Europe, remote as they were; otherwise the course of affairs at
the opposite extremities of Europe seems utterly mysterious. If the
path followed at St. Petersburg was tortuous, what shall be said of
the policy pursued in the Papal States, in Tuscany, in Portugal and in
Spain? During the diplomatic reconnaissance led by Caulaincourt, the
statesmen of these countries had been busy at Fontainebleau. What
Cardinal Bayanne seemed anxious to obtain for Pius VII--namely, the
inviolability of his territories--had been lost even before the
concessions demanded from the Pope were made. The trembling prelate
had consented to join the federation against England, to drive out the
monks, to accept an increased French representation in the College of
Cardinals, and to admit Venetia to the Concordat. But to use
Napoleon's own expression in the decree issued from Vienna on May
seventeenth, 1809, the Western Emperor had already "resumed the grant"
of Charles the Great which had been used against his successor. There
was no longer a hostile strip of land, stretching from sea to sea,
which separated the kingdoms of Naples and Italy, for the three
legations were occupied in December, 1807.

With this fulcrum Bayanne had been moved to negotiate a formal treaty
containing all Napoleon's stipulations. The Pope was exasperated by
the occupation of his lands, and refused his assent to the paper; he
would not even enter the French federative system. This attitude
appears to have been quite as agreeable to the Emperor of the French
as one of submission would have been. Appealing to public opinion on
the ground of necessity, he sent his troops on February second, 1808,
into the city of Rome; in March, Ancona, Macerata, Fermo, and Urbino
were consolidated with the kingdom of Italy; and before the end of
April, the foreign priests were banished, the Pope's battalions were
enrolled under the tricolor, and the guard of nobles was disbanded:
the entire administration was in French hands. For a year the
successor of St. Peter remained a fainéant prince shut up in the
Quirinal. To a demand for the resignation of his temporal power he
replied by a bull, dated June tenth, 1809, excommunicating the
invaders of his states; thereupon he was seized and sent a prisoner to
Grenoble. Napoleon, looking backward in the days of his humiliation,
said that this quarrel with the Pope was one of the most wearing
episodes in all his career. It undid much of the web knitted in the
Concordat, by alienating the Roman Catholics both in France itself and
in his conquered or allied lands.

During the same autumn months of 1807 another treaty was negotiated at
Fontainebleau; namely, a secret compact with Spain for the partition
of Portugal. The house of Braganza, like the other so-called
legitimate monarchies of Europe, had fallen into a moral and physical
decline. The Queen was a lunatic, and her son Don John, who was
regent, though a mild and honorable man, lacked every element of
greatness such as would have enabled him to swim in the troubled
waters of his time. The land, moreover, was saturated with democratic
principles. There had been a tacit understanding that on account of
the enormous tribute paid to France for the acknowledgment of
neutrality she would close one eye to the traffic with England, which
was essential to the prosperity, if not to the very existence, of the
little country. But the Berlin and Milan decrees were intended to be
measures of serious war, and the Emperor now insisted that they should
be enforced. Although the regent was the son-in-law of Charles IV of
Spain, yet after the peace of Tilsit the court of Madrid united with
that of Fontainebleau in an effort to compel the closing of all
Portuguese harbors and the fulfilment of the decrees to the letter,
demanding the dismissal of the English minister, the arrest of all
British subjects, and the confiscation of all English goods. The reply
of John was a consent to everything except the arrest of innocent
traders.

This partial refusal was a sufficient pretext; at once the French
envoy at Lisbon was recalled, Junot was ordered to enter Spain and to
march on Portugal, while the terms of partition were settled at
Fontainebleau with Charles's minister, Izquierdo, in a compact which
Napoleon must have looked upon as the great practical joke of his
life. For fear he should be too quickly found out, he positively
inhibited Charles from communicating it to his ministers. The French
ambassador at Madrid was also kept in ignorance of its terms. Under it
the King of Spain was to be styled Emperor of the Two Americas; and in
return for Etruria, which was at last to be formally incorporated with
the kingdom of Italy, he was to have what he had so long desired, the
virtual sovereignty of Portugal. Over one portion the young King of
Etruria was to reign as a vassal; over a second, the generalissimo and
high admiral of Spain, the Prince of the Peace, the Queen's paramour,
the King's trusted servant, Manuel Godoy; a third was to remain
unappropriated for Charles's disposal at a later date.

The treaty ended with the seemingly innocent stipulation that a new
French army of forty thousand men should be formed at Bayonne, to be
in readiness should Great Britain land troops in Portugal. It was not,
however, to enter Spain without the agreement of both contracting
parties. Meantime Junot, by his Emperor's command, was sending home
maps, plans, topographical sketches, and itineraries of Spain.
Although twenty-five thousand Spaniards were marching with him, he
received orders, dated October thirty-first, three days after the
treaty was signed at Fontainebleau, to seize all the strong places of
Portugal, occupy them with French troops, and not to permit the
Spaniards to garrison a single one. His first object, he had been
already told, should be to capture the fleet lying in the Tagus and to
take the regent prisoner. The clever and ambitious general marched
swiftly, and on November twenty-seventh reached, with his exhausted
troops, Abrantes, a town about eighty miles from Lisbon. The news of
his arrival was unexpected in the capital; worse still, as it appeared
to the dismayed court, were the evidences that he would receive an
enthusiastic reception from many influential elements of the
population, who still considered the word "French" a synonym for
"democratic." Sir Sidney Smith, who commanded the British ships in the
Tagus, addressed a letter to Don John promising that England would
never recognize a rule in Portugal hostile to the house of Braganza,
and strongly urging him to embark the royal family for the Portuguese
dominions in South America. The prince had probably read what had been
published in the "Moniteur" of November thirteenth: to wit--"The
regent of Portugal loses the throne. The fall of the house of Braganza
is a new proof of the inevitable destruction attending those who unite
with England." At any rate the hard-pressed ruler was unnerved, and
issued a jerky, feeble proclamation, declaring that he would never
submit to the tyranny of Napoleon, announcing his flight, naming a
council of regency, and requesting those who were so disposed to
accompany him. A very few faithful subjects joined themselves to the
royal family, and with the mad Queen in their midst the little band
embarked.

The fleet had hardly worked its way out of the river when Junot
reached Lisbon with a small corps of panting, worn-out men. His prey
had escaped, but so had the mad Queen, and from that moment he began
to wonder why a crown would not sit comfortably on his own head. He
had been Bonaparte's faithful confidant from the outset of his career,
and could furnish a queen who boasted an ancestry no less
distinguished than that of the Greek emperors of the Comnenian family.
The people were most friendly, deputations from the powerful secret
society of Freemasons presented addresses, the regency made no
resistance, the commander-in-chief and his army gave in their
submission. But the French general showed no sign of organizing the
liberal government which they so earnestly desired and fully expected.
On the contrary, he established military provinces, seized all the
public moneys, and sought to conciliate his master's debtors at his
master's expense; for, instead of the forty millions indemnity
demanded by Napoleon, he took his pen, like the unjust steward, and
wrote twenty. In return the Portuguese radicals were to ask the
Emperor that he should be made their king. Owing in part to Junot's
insatiable greed and his appropriation of enormous private
treasure,--an example which his army was quick to follow,--in part to
the subsequent disenchantment and a general revulsion of feeling, the
plan came to naught. Before long the Spanish general Bellesca seized
the French governor of Oporto and began a rebellion in favor of Don
John. The commander-in-chief, called from Lisbon to suppress the
insurgents, left the city under a committee at the head of which was
the Bishop of Oporto. The prelate at once applied to England for help,
and in a short time the whole country had organized secret juntas in
order to throw off the French yoke. England responded with alacrity,
sending troops from Sicily and from Ireland; but the strongest
reinforcement of all was the general appointed to command them, Sir
Arthur Wellesley. Before the middle of August, 1808, the Peninsular
war was raging and the laurels were England's.

Meantime the contemplated upheaval had occurred in Spain. It is
impossible to conceive deeper degradation than that into which the
Bourbon monarchy of that country had sunk, and the court had carried
the country with it in its debasement. The population had fallen to
ten millions, and of a nominal army of a hundred and twenty thousand
men not fifty thousand were really effective. The host of
office-holders and privileged nobility which battened like leeches on
an exhausted treasury was equaled in number only by the clergy,
secular and regular, with nuns, novices, and servants, who lived on
the revenues of the ecclesiastical estates, and on what could be
extorted from an impoverished people. By a terrible form of
primogeniture the lands which did not belong to the Church had
gradually fallen into the hands of a few owners, who lived in state at
Madrid and never laid eyes on their farms, forests, or pastures. The
peasantry had no interest to improve what might be taken from them at
the death of the proprietor, or by caprice be appraised at a higher
value on account of their very efforts toward the amelioration of
their lot. The grandees kept gloomy state in vast palaces filled with
hordes of idle servants. The remnants from their lavish but poorly
served tables supported the crowds of beggars that thronged their
gates. Of social life they had little; they were gloomy, lonely, and
sullenly indifferent. In their stables stood herds of mules and hung
stores of gaudy trappings, but these were used only a few times each
year to convey the owners in proper dignity to the great public
functions.

On such a foundation stood the court: the King, generous-minded but
deceived, and jealously attached to the crown servants, impatient of
any annoyance, and always declaring a willingness to resign his
throne; the Queen, clear-headed and ambitious, but self-indulgent,
extravagant, and vicious; Godoy, the Prince of the Peace,--so called
from the treaty which he had negotiated at Basel to conclude the
French and Spanish revolutionary wars,--the real ruler, soothing the
King's sensibilities and gratifying the Queen's passions. To preserve
his ascendancy this trimmer had thrown in his lot with Napoleon; but,
faithless and perfidious, he would gladly have rejected that or any
other protection to fly to one he believed stronger. In any
centralized monarchy the administrative law is the backbone; in Spain
the administration was feeble and corrupt, for every member of it was
engaged in humbly imitating the example of its head, whose house was a
depot of plunder, whence toward the close of his career the spoils
were transferred on pack-mules by night, no one knew whither. It was
said, and many sober men believed it, that Godoy had all the wealth of
Spain.

Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias, and heir apparent to the throne, was a
young widower of good impulses but feeble character. His deceased
wife, married in 1803, had been the daughter of Queen Caroline of
Naples; having quarreled with her mother-in-law, Louisa, she had died
prematurely, probably poisoned. The prince knew the scandals of his
father's household and the abuses of Godoy's administration, but
thought the bonds of degradation too strong to be stricken off by a
weak hand like his own. His followers, however, headed by the Duke del
Infantado and the ambitious Canon Escoiquiz, his former tutor, were
numerous and enlightened. They understood how hollow was the
protection vouchsafed by Napoleon to Godoy, and how faithless was the
pretended friendship of the latter for France. Their plan was that
Ferdinand should refuse the proffered hand of Godoy's sister-in-law,
demand that of a Beauharnais princess, and thus secure the interest
and aid of the French emperor. With such support they might hope to
overthrow the minister and reform the administration. No doubt they
also dreamed of power and place for themselves.

As time passed, the sympathies of the nation rallied more and more to
Ferdinand, until at last he became the leader and representative of
the solid elements in society. Between the waning power of Godoy and
the rising popularity of the crown prince, something like an
equilibrium was at last established, and in 1807 the two embittered
factions stood like gladiators looking for a chance to strike. This
situation was made to Napoleon's hand; but as it gave rise to more and
more serious intrigues, a decision had to be taken promptly. Should he
accede to Ferdinand's desire, formally communicated in a letter sent
by Escoiquiz on October twelfth? Talleyrand and Fouché both urged the
adoption of the policy. What prompted Talleyrand cannot be surmised.
After Austerlitz he had urged moderation, but it was probably because
he was bribed by the vanquished. His judgment and interest may,
however, have kept equal pace in that conclusion. He was most likely
influenced in this one by the Empress, whose position was becoming
desperate, for the Bonaparte family were now persistently and openly
urging a divorce. All Josephine's arts seemed unavailing against her
obdurate enemies, and her last hope was to obtain royal alliances for
her relatives, thus securing new support against those of the Emperor.
She had a charming niece, Mlle. Tascher de la Pagerie, to whom she was
ardently devoted; and to set on the throne of Spain one who was almost
a daughter would both gratify natural affection and fortify her own
position.

There is no indication, however, that Talleyrand's hand was crossed
this time, though again his judgment coincided with his interest in
sound advice. The country was utterly disorganized and a change must
occur; the people were too haughty to endure their humiliation longer;
it would be better to support Ferdinand as a reformer, and thereby
secure for the French system not merely the kingdom proper, but all
her colonial dominions. As Fouché put it, the King had so far been one
of the best of French prefects, and if he were no longer efficient his
legitimate heir had better be continued in the office. But the idea of
securing the Spanish colonies for his Empire dazzled and allured the
Emperor more than the assured support of Spain. Having determined for
that purpose to put one of his brothers on the Spanish throne, he
disregarded both the clamorous calls for aid from the King on one side
and the approaches of Ferdinand on the other. All remonstrance from
his own family was vain, and he proceeded with his scheme. A new
conscription secured the forty thousand men for Bayonne, and General
Clarke was ordered to fortify the frontier.

Exactly in the nick of time the intrigues at Madrid had come to a
head. On October twenty-eighth an armed Spanish force seized the
person and papers of Ferdinand. Godoy feigned illness and kept his
rooms, while the Queen examined what was found. It was said that there
was a cipher code for corresponding with friends; a memorial from
Ferdinand to Napoleon charging Godoy with a design to seize the
throne, and mentioning his mother's shame in covert terms; a memorial
from Escoiquiz asking from the Emperor the hand of a French princess;
and an order under the seal of Ferdinand VII, with blank date, to the
Duke del Infantado, appointing him to the command of New Castile on
the King's death. Two days later Godoy's connection with the seizure
was proved; for, ill as he feigned to be, he was observed entering the
Escorial after nightfall. Next day the King announced the discovery of
this "conspiracy" in a proclamation to his people, and wrote a letter
of similar wording to Napoleon, complaining that Beauharnais, the
French ambassador, had been the center of the intrigue. The charge was
strictly true, for this brother of the Empress's first husband, though
a bluff, honest man, was blindly self-confident, and had fallen into
the trap set for him in Paris. He was not unwilling to gratify
Josephine, he despised Godoy, and his evident friendship for the crown
prince had been largely instrumental in creating the popular
confidence that France would regenerate Spain by means of the
legitimate heir.

Charles also announced his intention of cutting Ferdinand off from the
succession, and humbly requested Napoleon's advice. A commission of
Castilian grandees was appointed to try the culprit, while
simultaneously strenuous efforts were made to force a confession of
conspiracy from him. The latter scheme failed, but the prince obeyed
with alacrity the summons to appear. Exactly what occurred is unknown,
but it can be imagined; some of the facts leaked out, and the result
was a wretched compromise both at court and among the people. The
prince asserted that he had written the suspicious order during his
father's recent illness, basely denounced his accomplices, and by
declaring that it was Beauharnais who had suggested his asking a wife
from the Emperor strengthened the general belief that Napoleon had
instigated his entire course. This was enough to cow the King and
Queen. The offender was at once released, and wrote a formal request
for pardon. His sire issued a proclamation granting the boon. His
friends were formally tried, but Godoy dared not ask questions
compromising the French ambassador, and they were acquitted.

During the trial the "secret hand" was indicated as being still
unknown; some said it was that of the Queen, a few thought the grand
inquisitor had been meddling. Napoleon sent a wily and misleading
epistle declaring that he had never received a letter from the Prince
of Asturias,--which literally was true, though he had been informed of
its existence and of its contents,--and that he had heard nothing but
the vague gossip of palace talk. This letter of Napoleon's was
confided on November thirteenth to one of his shrewdest counselors,
the chamberlain de Tournon, who was carefully instructed to bring home
the most accurate information he could secure regarding the state of
public feeling, and secretly to observe the condition in which he
found the frontier fortresses of Pamplona and Fuenterrabia. On the
same day orders were issued for Dupont to take advantage of the
general excitement incident to the recent events, cross the frontier
with his division, and advance to Vitoria, whence he should
reconnoiter the surrounding country. As if to emphasize his own
indifference, in reality to avoid unpleasant questions and with the
most serious objects in view, the Emperor set out for Italy a few days
earlier; and the day of his arrival in Milan was the date on which
Dupont invaded Spain. During this visit to Venice, which has been
referred to as the time in which Russia was brought to a standstill
and the ultimate method of procedure in the Orient outlined, Napoleon
met the Queen Regent of Etruria. She declared, as was expected of her,
that she could not continue to reign where she did not rule, her
dominions being occupied on the ground of large policy by French
troops; accordingly she was despatched to Madrid with a royal train.
Her sometime kingdom was incorporated with that of Italy, and the
unsuspecting Beauharnais was instructed to have her new Portuguese
realm ready against her arrival.

But the real object of that winter journey to Italy seems to have been
the two interviews which the Emperor had with his brothers Joseph and
Lucien, the former being beckoned from Naples to Venice, the latter
from Rome to Mantua. The younger brother had, after the first juvenile
heats of radicalism, become a moderate republican, holding his
convictions resolutely. Having opposed a hereditary consulate for
Napoleon, and unmindful of any reward he might have claimed for his
services of Brumaire, he withdrew from public life to spend his time
in study and the gratification of his literary tastes. On the death of
his first wife, by whom he had two daughters, he married, in direct
opposition to Napoleon's wishes, the beautiful and accomplished Mme.
de Jauberthon. This was in 1803. Having been importuned to put her
away and lend himself to the project of buttressing the Empire by
accepting a crown and contracting a royal marriage, he had refused. By
far the ablest and most courageous of the Bonaparte brothers, he was
utterly indifferent to the rise of Napoleonic empire, for his
principles were fixed. It was with reluctance that he came to Mantua.
There are two accounts of what happened there: that which has long
been accepted--of Lucien hotly refusing the crown of Portugal, with
the hand of Prince Ferdinand for his daughter Charlotte; and that
which makes Napoleon's first offer to have been Etruria. Both accounts
agree, however, that the Emperor raised his bid to the promise of
Italy--always on condition that his brother should divorce his wife
and rule in the interest of the imperial power. Lucien disdained even
this bribe, declaring that he would accept the crown, but that he
would rule in the interests of his subjects, and that he would in no
case consider a divorce. Angry words were spoken. Napoleon crushed in
his hand a watch with which he had been toying, hissing out that thus
he would crush wills which opposed his. "I defy you to commit a
crime," retorted Lucien. Before parting there was a half
reconciliation, and Napoleon requested that at least his brother's
eldest daughter might be sent to Paris for use in the scheme of royal
alliances. Lucien assented, and the child, a clever girl of about
fourteen, was sent to live with Madame Mère. She was thoroughly
discontented, and wrote bright, sarcastic letters to her stepmother,
whom she loved, depicting the avarice of her grandmother and the
foibles of her other relatives. These, like all other suspected
letters of the time, were intercepted and read in the "cabinet noir";
their contents being made known to Napoleon, he sent the petulant,
witty writer back to her father. Despairing of any support from Lucien
or his family, Napoleon formally adopted his stepson Eugène, the
viceroy, with a view to consolidating and confirming the Italian
feeling of dependence on France.

Joseph's character also had ripened by this time. Experience had
destroyed the adventurous spirit in which he entered on his career; he
had become a gentle, philosophic, industrious monarch, careful of the
best interests of his people, and he was accordingly beloved by them.
Roederer had introduced order into the Neapolitan finances, his own
administrative reforms worked smoothly, and the only discontented
element of his people was composed of the nobles, who chafed at the
repression of their power and the curtailment of their privileges.
There is positive evidence that Joseph was summoned and came to
Venice, but there is no record of the interview, except a marginal
note written by Joseph himself in an existing copy of Miot de
Melito's memoirs, to the effect that Napoleon spoke of the troubles
among the members of the royal family of Spain as likely "to produce
results which he dreaded." The last word is underscored. "I have
enough anxiety prepared," he said; "troubles in Spain can only benefit
the English, who do not desire peace, by destroying the resources
which I find in that ally to carry on the war against them." Over and
above this information there is, however, a high probability that
Joseph was then informed that since Lucien had proved refractory, he
himself was now destined for Spain; that the King expressed at first a
decided unwillingness to accept the unwelcome task; and that, like
Lucien, he departed under his brother's disfavor. Napoleon's offer had
already been discussed at Tilsit as a contingency. Joseph was so
accustomed to obey that a sober second thought led him to repent of
his creditable hesitation; within a week, and before leaving Venice,
he had despatched a confidential messenger to secure Alexander's
formal compliance with his transfer to Spain. He was under the spell
of the magician, for it was probably Napoleon who prompted his
thoughts. After that of Charles the Great, the empire of Charles V had
been the most splendid in Europe, and Joseph perhaps dreamed that if
not first he might be second, eclipsed only by his brother.

Godoy was an adroit diplomat. In reply to Napoleon's letter he
personally asked and urged the bestowal on Ferdinand of a French
princess in marriage, but at the same time he also urged the
publication of what had been stipulated at Fontainebleau. The answer
was most dilatory, and when it was written there was a new tone:
Napoleon would gladly draw the bonds of alliance tighter by such a
match as had been so often suggested, but could such a mark of
confidence be shown to a dishonored son without some proof of his
repentance? He added that it would be premature to publish the
articles of Fontainebleau. In open contempt of that document, a decree
was issued on December twenty-third, 1807, from Milan, appointing
Junot governor of all Portugal. On February second, 1808, this paper
was communicated to the King of Spain by Beauharnais, with the
intimation that the treaty must temporarily remain suspended. The
scales now fell from Godoy's eyes. His agent in Paris informed him
that he had been coldly received by Champagny, the Minister of
External Relations; and soon afterward Mlle. Tascher de la Pagerie was
married to an unimportant member of the Rhenish Confederation, the
Duke of Aremberg. It was thought at Madrid that the Emperor had
abandoned both the court factions; public opinion, whether favorable
to one or the other, was soon united in a common irritation against
France, and before long it was current talk that Napoleon contemplated
the dismemberment of Spain by the connivance of Godoy.

Meantime the new conscription had been carried through, and ever
larger numbers of French striplings, dignified by the name of troops,
appeared at Bayonne, and crossed the border. The sturdy Spaniards
regarded them with amazement and contempt. There was no appearance as
yet of any English invasion, and the army in Portugal was in no need
of assistance; but Moncey followed Dupont with thirty thousand
so-called men; Duhesme led an army corps to Barcelona at one end of
the Pyrenees, while Darmagnac passed the gorge of Roncesvalles into
Navarre with his division, and seized Pamplona; Bessières hurried on
behind with the guard; and Jerome was ordered to levy forty thousand
men in Westphalia. Figueras, San Sebastian, and Valladolid were soon
in French hands. The "Moniteur" of January twenty-fourth explained
that these acts were necessitated by plans of the English to land at
Cadiz. Six days afterward the Emperor estimated that he had eight
hundred thousand men under arms, and that he would soon have eighty
thousand more. In the presence of such facts the Prince of the Peace
was prostrated, while terror overpowered the feeble King and his
wicked consort. Nor was their panic diminished when a second letter
arrived from Napoleon, dated February twenty-fifth, which plainly
showed a determination to quarrel. "Your Majesty asked the hand of a
French princess for the Prince of Asturias; I replied on January tenth
that I consented. Your Majesty speaks no more of this marriage. All
this leaves in the dark many objects important for the welfare of my
peoples." In a few weeks Izquierdo arrived from Paris and reluctantly
explained the appalling truth: that the gossamer bonds of the treaty
he had negotiated at Fontainebleau were blown away, and that Portugal
was to be given entire to one of the Bonapartes. This was the
explanation of the appalling armaments in northern Spain, beyond the
Ebro. Godoy returned an answer refusing all proposals tending to such
a conclusion. Izquierdo carried back this reply, and toward the close
of March Talleyrand was appointed to negotiate with him under the
pretense of finding some compromise.

Talleyrand was heartily sick of his inactivity, and eagerly seized the
opportunity to reassert his importance. Abandoning utterly the
position of semi-resistance to Napoleon which he had held for some
time past, he now used his adroit and clever gift to further the
Emperor's schemes. The document which was finally drawn up by him gave
the French equal rights in the Spanish colonies with Spanish subjects,
and proposed an exchange for Portugal of the great march north of the
Ebro, which had once been held by Charles the Great and was now held
by Napoleon. When Izquierdo heard the hard stipulations he cried out
in dismay, but to every remonstrance came the cool reply that such was
the Emperor's will. Early in March Bessières entered Spain with
thirty-five thousand men. This raised the total number in the
scattered divisions of the French troops now south of the Pyrenees to
about a hundred thousand. The Spaniards were at last thoroughly awake
to the fact of their humiliation. Excitement became more and more
intense, until an eruption of popular violence was imminent.

At this crisis Napoleon took a step of great significance. Murat,
Grand Duke of Berg, arrived at Burgos on March thirteenth, with full
powers as commander-in-chief, and at once assumed command. Ordering a
concentration of all the divisions, he slowly marched on Madrid. The
Prince of the Peace and the King heard their hour striking. Godoy's
first thought was to imitate the example set by the house of Braganza,
and, flying beyond the seas, to establish the Spanish Bourbons in
Mexico or Peru. The Queen was from the first ardent for a project
which would prolong the semblance of power for herself and the
favorite, but it was days before Charles could bring himself to such a
conclusion. At last, on March fifteenth, the council was summoned to
hear his determination, and orders were given to keep open the route
to Cadiz. The populace felt that disgrace could go no further, and,
denouncing Godoy, besought the King to remain.

They could get no satisfactory answer from Aranjuez, where the
vacillating, terrified, and disunited court now was. One day followed
another, and the streets of that town swarmed with angry men whose
pride and scorn found expression in calls for Godoy's death. On the
evening of the seventeenth they began to riot, and the wretched
prince saw his house surrounded. Half clad and half starved, he tried
first one door and then another; all were beset, and he was compelled
to take refuge in the loft, where he remained hidden under a rubbish
heap while the mob worked their will in the handsome rooms below. Next
morning Charles yielded to the popular clamor, and deposed Godoy from
his high offices. For forty-eight hours the minister lay concealed. At
last he could no longer endure the tortures of hunger and thirst;
evading the attention of his own household, he reached the street, and
on the nineteenth was taken in charge by the guards who held it. The
rumor of his capture spread fast, and it required great courage on the
part of the soldiers to protect their prisoner from violence. Their
efforts were only partly successful; they had a bloody and fainting
burden when they reached their barracks and withdrew behind the doors.
In that moment, when it seemed as if the mob would finally break down
even the strong entrance and seize its prey, Charles despatched his
son to calm the storm.

The people adored the Prince of Asturias, and without difficulty he
quieted the rioters and offered life to his enemy. The haughty
grandee, broken by pain, fell on his knees and implored protection;
but he retained enough of interest in the situation to murmur through
his gory lips, "Are you already king?" "Not yet, but I shall be soon,"
was the reply. On a promise that the traitorous betrayer of his
country's honor should be delivered to the courts and tried by the
rigor of the law, the excited populace withdrew. At once Charles began
preparations to carry Godoy beyond their reach; but the fact could not
be kept secret, and once more rioting began. The populace of Madrid
burned all the palaces belonging to the prince, except one, which
they spared because they thought it was the property of their
sovereign. The King submitted to what was inevitable, but determined
to lay down the burden of his royal dignity. On the same day, the
nineteenth, he signed the necessary papers and abdicated in favor of
his son. Next morning, in the presence of a great council summoned to
Aranjuez, he explained that he was overwhelmed by misfortune and the
weight of government, and that for his health's sake he must seek the
ease of private life in a milder clime.


CHAPTER X

THE AWAKENING OF SPAIN[21]

         [Footnote 21: See Baumgarten: Geschichte Spaniens vom
         Ausbruch der Französischen Revolution bis auf unsere Tage.
         Manini: Historia de la marina real española. Arteche y Maro:
         Guerra de la Independencia. Toriño: Guerra de la
         Independencia.

         On the question of the national rising in Spain see an
         article by J. B. Rye and R. A. Bence-Pembroke, of Oxford, in
         the Army Service Corps Quarterly, October, 1905.]

     The National Spirit -- The Spaniards and their Dynasty -- Murat's
     Fatal Blunder -- Louis Napoleon and the Spanish Throne --
     Napoleon's Subterfuge -- A Trap for Charles and Ferdinand -- The
     Course of Savary -- Napoleon and Ferdinand -- Dethronement of the
     Spanish Bourbons -- Quarrels of Father and Son -- The Madrid
     Massacre -- Ferdinand a Prisoner -- Napoleon's Idea of Legitimacy
     -- The Spanish Cortes at Bayonne -- Joseph, King of Spain -- The
     Spanish People -- Agitations in Madrid -- Uprising of Spain.


If there be a time when the turn of Napoleon's fortunes is evident, it
is the spring of 1808. Between the determination to complete his
system of commercial warfare in western Europe and the contempt which
he entertained for the Spanish throne, he appears to have fallen into
a deadly snare--the failure to appreciate how strong and lively was
the popular passion for nationality in Spain, a feeling so long
eclipsed by the failures of Spanish government, the licentiousness of
the Spanish court, and the turbulence of personal ambitions
indifferent to the public welfare. The measures he devised and ordered
taken were ruthless in their purpose to cow officials and monarch, in
their stern repression of disorder, in their intent to give a bitter
lesson to all opposing his designs. But rude as was his procedure,
admirable as were his military dispositions, there is abundant
evidence of his consciousness that ultimately he must reckon with the
national pride of a people which, though crushed to earth, was eager
to rise again. But such reckoning must be postponed until after
conquest and the effort to rise was put forth in the resistance to
invasion with a speed and vigor no one could have foreseen.
Ferdinand's first act as king was to request Napoleon's favor and
protection. His letter was written on March twentieth, and intrusted
to an embassy of three grandees. Charles and Louisa had, however,
repented almost before the formalities of abdication were over, and
the newly arrived Queen of Etruria supported them in their fickleness.
With despicable inconsistency they too despatched an embassy, but to
Murat, imploring his interference on their behalf and his favor for
Godoy. In reply, Murat, whether from slyness or from a desire to gain
time, requested a formal, written demand to that effect. He was
promptly furnished with a paper, signed by both King and Queen,
declaring that they had acted under fear, and begging to be
reinstated. This document was a precious arrow for Napoleon's quiver.
Still, the perplexity of the French commander was great; he knew
nothing of Napoleon's plans, he dared not acknowledge Ferdinand as
king, and he dared not restore Charles, whose sovereignty he had been
virtually menacing by his march. In this dilemma he despatched an
aide-de-camp to Aranjuez with verbal messages of comfort, and,
hurrying forward, entered Madrid with his army on the twenty-third.

Napoleon had frequently enjoined his brother-in-law to enter the city,
recruit his supplies, and give his troops a rest; but with those
injunctions he had likewise given strict commands to allay any fears
in the court. These instructions had not contemplated the revolution
of Aranjuez, and by it every condition was changed. Murat would have
been wise if he had disobeyed the letter of his orders; but he did
not, for new circumstances breed new ideas, and within twenty-four
hours he had made up his mind. Here was a new kingdom; the other men
of the family--Louis, Jerome, and Joseph--all had crowns; the grand
duchy of Berg was very well, but a kingdom was better, and he might
secure that of Spain for himself. For this end he must throw Ferdinand
altogether into the shade, while placing the glory and power of France
in the most brilliant illumination. It was a fatal step to occupy
Madrid, more fatal still for the French general to exhibit himself in
a martial splendor which sadly contrasted with the troops of beardless
boys at his back. He was received by the inhabitants with cool
contempt. Next day Ferdinand made his royal entry. The populace went
mad with delight, and displayed a passionate devotion which augured
ill for the schemes of Prince Joachim of Berg. A less egoistic man
would have seen that a national uprising was imminent. But Murat was
neither modest nor penetrating; he was a great and dashing cavalry
general, at times an excellent commander-in-chief, but he was not a
statesman. His conduct entangled the skeins of Spanish intrigue into a
knot which only war could sever.

His course did not even ultimately lead to the goal, but to
consequences far different. When on March twenty-fifth Napoleon
received the despatch announcing the revolution of Aranjuez and
Murat's neutral attitude, he replied in commendatory language,
instructing his brother-in-law to keep the balance as it was, neither
recognizing the new King until further directions, nor indicating by
any action that the old one had ceased to reign. The same day, the
twenty-fifth, a letter was despatched to King Louis at The Hague,
asking for an answer in categorical terms as to whether he would
accept the Spanish throne. Joseph had hesitated and was momentarily
out of favor, while the perpetual smuggling of the Dutch had convinced
Napoleon that the only means to secure the continental embargo was to
incorporate Holland with France. Three days later Murat received still
higher praise, with a perfectly irrelevant clause interjected: "I
suppose Godoy will come by way of Bayonne." This was, of course, a
hint to send the Prince of the Peace into France. If the commander of
the French forces should act on the suggestion, he would do the work
thoroughly; and under the same date Bessières was instructed to treat
the old King and Queen with distinction if they should pass his way.
Publicly it was to be made known in Madrid that the long-talked-of
visit by the Emperor would not be further postponed. Such was
Napoleon's confidence in the quick apprehension of his subordinates
that henceforward he regarded the whole royal household of Spain as
his prisoners.

There is in existence what purports to be a letter from Napoleon to
Murat, dated March twenty-ninth.[22] It is undoubtedly by Napoleon,
but it was either written at the time, for public effect, and not
sent, or it was a later fabrication intended to mislead posterity,
because its formal style is not used elsewhere in the correspondence.
It explains to "His Imperial Highness" what was not known until ten
years later, namely, that the Spaniards were a people with violent
political passions, capable of indefinite warfare; that the nation
could and must be regenerated only by careful management; and that
nothing must be done precipitately. At the same time it gives the
Protector, as Murat is designated, his own option in regard to a
recognition of Ferdinand, expresses disapproval of the precipitate
seizure of Madrid, and warns him that he must not create an
irrepressible opposition. Whether the letter be authentic or not,
whether it was sent or not, really matters but little as regards our
judgment of the facts. The disorganization of Spain had been its own
work; the court intrigues were already burning before they were fanned
by Napoleon's agents in the hope that, like the royal house of
Portugal, the incapable Spanish Bourbons would fly to America. The
revolution of Aranjuez was a bitter disappointment to the great
schemer, and disconcerted his plans. But Murat's conduct and
Ferdinand's character rendered difficult, if not impossible, any
course which would combine the consummation of his fixed designs with
even the slightest degree of popular good will in Spain. Nothing was
to be gained at such a supreme moment by the ordinary brutal abuse
which the Emperor was accustomed to heap on his brother-in-law for
commonplace offenses; moreover, in view of the disappointing
revolution, Murat's course was perhaps as good as any other. He must,
however, bear whatever responsibility attached to it, and that
responsibility would have been his even without the supposititious
letter which he never received. The contempt of the people for the
boy-soldiers at whose head he had marched into Madrid, combined with
disdain for his own pompousness and with fury at his subsequent
cruelty, goes far to account for much that was disastrous to French
prestige and to France in the sequel.

         [Footnote 22: For a discussion of this letter see Murat, by
         Murat, Paris, 1897, p. 139. Rosebery: The Last Phase, pp. 10
         and 11.]

In order to secure the Spanish crown it was now necessary that both
the quarreling factions should be removed from the scene of their
scandalous intrigues. Perhaps it would be possible, perhaps not.
Napoleon set out on April second for Bayonne, accompanied by his
Empress with a stately suite, and the adroit Savary was despatched to
Madrid. Savary's memoirs indicate that his instructions for this
memorable journey were very vague: the Emperor wished to see whether
the Bourbons merited dethronement; in other words, whether they could
be uncrowned. For himself, Savary naively declared that much of his
own participation in the subsequent events was mere accident. Murat
had obeyed both his verbal and his implied instructions. According to
the former, Charles and his consort were in the Escorial, treated with
all honor, but prisoners. Godoy, also, was aware that he must soon
appear at Bayonne. But Murat had gone further, for he had slyly
suggested to Napoleon that Ferdinand should appear at the same
rendezvous. Beauharnais told Ferdinand to his face that he ought to
meet Napoleon half-way on his journey, in order the better to make his
peace.

This hint was quietly conveyed to Savary before his departure, and he
was at the same time intrusted with a letter to Murat expressing a
desire that the Prince of Asturias should either remain at Madrid or
come out to meet the Emperor, who intended not to enter Spain for the
present, but to wait at Bayonne. The careful plan worked admirably. No
one knows on conclusive evidence what Savary said to Ferdinand, what
hopes he held out, what promises he made in his master's name; but on
April tenth the young King placed Madrid under the administration of a
junta and set out, expecting to meet Napoleon at Burgos. He had been
easily moved to this course, for Murat had so far coldly refused to
recognize him, while Savary was prodigal of obsequiousness and
addressed him as king. His ministers Escoiquiz and Cavallos declare,
in their justificatory writings, that in addition to the impression
produced by his conduct, Savary actually said, as if in a burst of
military frankness, that the Emperor was already on his way to assure
himself whether Ferdinand's dispositions toward the French system were
as sincere as his father's had been, and would of course be favorably
impressed if a personal interview should be sought by the young King
before his guest could reach Madrid.

At Burgos Ferdinand learned that Napoleon was not yet within the
Spanish borders; at Vitoria he was informed that the Emperor had not
yet even passed Bordeaux. His people had utterly disapproved of the
journey, but they acclaimed him joyously on the two days' progress to
Burgos. Thereafter he remarked a change, and the nearer he approached
the frontier the more they showed their irritation at his insensate
folly. At Vitoria, therefore, he summoned Savary, whose carriage was
"accidentally in the King's convoy," and reproached him with deceit.
It was too late; divisions of French soldiers were scattered all
about, among them the splendid cavalry of Bessières. To wheel and
return would have been an open insult to the Emperor, which French
soldiers would not have tolerated. The uneasy young King thereupon
penned and despatched by a special courier a long letter recalling the
facts, and begging the Emperor to terminate the equivocal position in
which he found himself placed.

