from the 1881 Macmillan and Co. edition.


THE LIBRARY


Contents:

PREFATORY NOTE
AN APOLOGY FOR THE BOOK-HUNTER
THE LIBRARY
THE BOOKS OF THE COLLECTOR
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS


Books, books again, and books once more!
These are our theme, which some miscall
Mere madness, setting little store
By copies either short or tall.
But you, O slaves of shelf and stall!
We rather write for you that hold
Patched folios dear, and prize "the small,
Rare volume, black with tarnished gold."
A. D.


PREFATORY NOTE


The pages in this volume on illuminated and other MSS. (with the
exception of some anecdotes about Bussy Rabutin and Julie de
Rambouillet) have been contributed by the Rev. W. J. Loftie, who has
also written on early printed books (pp. 94-95).  The pages on the
Biblioklept (pp. 46-56) are reprinted, with the Editor's kind
permission, from the Saturday Review; and a few remarks on the moral
lessons of bookstalls are taken from an essay in the same journal.

Mr. Ingram Bywater, Fellow of Exeter College, and lately sub-
Librarian of the Bodleian, has very kindly read through the proofs
of chapters I., II., and III., and suggested some alterations.

Thanks are also due to Mr. T. R. Buchanan, Fellow of All Souls
College, for two plates from his "Book-bindings in All Souls
Library" (printed for private circulation), which he has been good
enough to lend me.  The plates are beautifully drawn and coloured by
Dr. J. J. Wild.  Messrs. George Bell & Sons, Messrs. Bradbury,
Agnew, & Co., and Messrs. Chatto & Windus, must be thanked for the
use of some of the woodcuts which illustrate the concluding chapter.
A. L.


AN APOLOGY FOR THE BOOK-HUNTER


"All men," says Dr. Dibdin, "like to be their own librarians."  A
writer on the library has no business to lay down the law as to the
books that even the most inexperienced amateurs should try to
collect.  There are books which no lover of literature can afford to
be without; classics, ancient and modern, on which the world has
pronounced its verdict.  These works, in whatever shape we may be
able to possess them, are the necessary foundations of even the
smallest collections.  Homer, Dante and Milton Shakespeare and
Sophocles, Aristophanes and Moliere, Thucydides, Tacitus, and
Gibbon, Swift and Scott,--these every lover of letters will desire
to possess in the original languages or in translations.  The list
of such classics is short indeed, and when we go beyond it, the
tastes of men begin to differ very widely.  An assortment of
broadsheet ballads and scrap-books, bought in boyhood, was the
nucleus of Scott's library, rich in the works of poets and
magicians, of alchemists, and anecdotists.  A childish liking for
coloured prints of stage characters, may be the germ of a theatrical
collection like those of Douce, and Malone, and Cousin.  People who
are studying any past period of human history, or any old phase or
expression of human genius, will eagerly collect little contemporary
volumes which seem trash to other amateurs.  For example, to a
student of Moliere, it is a happy chance to come across "La Carte du
Royaume des Pretieuses"--(The map of the kingdom of the
"Precieuses")--written the year before the comedian brought out his
famous play "Les Precieuses Ridicules."  This geographical tract
appeared in the very "Recueil des Pieces Choisies," whose authors
Magdelon, in the play, was expecting to entertain, when Mascarille
made his appearance.  There is a faculty which Horace Walpole named
"serendipity,"--the luck of falling on just the literary document
which one wants at the moment.  All collectors of out of the way
books know the pleasure of the exercise of serendipity, but they
enjoy it in different ways.  One man will go home hugging a volume
of sermons, another with a bulky collection of catalogues, which
would have distended the pockets even of the wide great-coat made
for the purpose, that Charles Nodier used to wear when he went a
book-hunting.  Others are captivated by black letter, others by the
plays of such obscurities as Nabbes and Glapthorne.  But however
various the tastes of collectors of books, they are all agreed on
one point,--the love of printed paper.  Even an Elzevir man can
sympathise with Charles Lamb's attachment to "that folio Beaumont
and Fletcher which he dragged home late at night from Barker's in
Covent Garden."  But it is another thing when Lamb says, "I do not
care for a first folio of Shakespeare."  A bibliophile who could say
this could say anything.

No, there are, in every period of taste, books which, apart from
their literary value, all collectors admit to possess, if not for
themselves, then for others of the brotherhood, a peculiar
preciousness.  These books are esteemed for curiosity, for beauty of
type, paper, binding, and illustrations, for some connection they
may have with famous people of the past, or for their rarity.  It is
about these books, the method of preserving them, their enemies, the
places in which to hunt for them, that the following pages are to
treat.  It is a subject more closely connected with the taste for
curiosities than with art, strictly so called.  We are to be
occupied, not so much with literature as with books, not so much
with criticism as with bibliography, the quaint duenna of
literature, a study apparently dry, but not without its humours.
And here an apology must be made for the frequent allusions and
anecdotes derived from French writers.  These are as unavoidable,
almost, as the use of French terms of the sport in tennis and in
fencing.  In bibliography, in the care for books AS books, the
French are still the teachers of Europe, as they were in tennis and
are in fencing.  Thus, Richard de Bury, Chancellor of Edward III.,
writes in his "Philobiblon:" "Oh God of Gods in Zion! what a rushing
river of joy gladdens my heart as often as I have a chance of going
to Paris!  There the days seem always short; there are the goodly
collections on the delicate fragrant book-shelves."  Since Dante
wrote of -


"L'onor di quell' arte
Ch' allumare e chiamata in Parisi,"


"the art that is called illuminating in Paris," and all the other
arts of writing, printing, binding books, have been most skilfully
practised by France.  She improved on the lessons given by Germany
and Italy in these crafts.  Twenty books about books are written in
Paris for one that is published in England.  In our country Dibdin
is out of date (the second edition of his "Bibliomania" was
published in 1811), and Mr. Hill Burton's humorous "Book-hunter" is
out of print.  Meanwhile, in France, writers grave and gay, from the
gigantic industry of Brunet to Nodier's quaint fancy, and Janin's
wit, and the always entertaining bibliophile Jacob (Paul Lacroix),
have written, or are writing, on books, manuscripts, engravings,
editions, and bindings.  In England, therefore, rare French books
are eagerly sought, and may be found in all the booksellers'
catalogues.  On the continent there is no such care for our curious
or beautiful editions, old or new.  Here a hint may be given to the
collector.  If he "picks up" a rare French book, at a low price, he
would act prudently in having it bound in France by a good
craftsman.  Its value, when "the wicked day of destiny" comes, and
the collection is broken up, will thus be made secure.  For the
French do not suffer our English bindings gladly; while we have no
narrow prejudice against the works of Lortic and Cape, but the
reverse.  For these reasons then, and also because every writer is
obliged to make the closest acquaintance with books in the direction
where his own studies lie, the writings of French authorities are
frequently cited in the following pages.

This apology must be followed by a brief defence of the taste and
passion of book-collecting, and of the class of men known
invidiously as book-worms and book-hunters.  They and their simple
pleasures are the butts of a cheap and shrewish set of critics, who
cannot endure in others a taste which is absent in themselves.
Important new books have actually been condemned of late years
because they were printed on good paper, and a valuable historical
treatise was attacked by reviewers quite angrily because its outward
array was not mean and forbidding.  Of course, critics who take this
view of new books have no patience with persons who care for
"margins," and "condition," and early copies of old books.  We
cannot hope to convert the adversary, but it is not necessary to be
disturbed by his clamour.  People are happier for the possession of
a taste as long as they possess it, and it does not, like the demons
of Scripture, possess them.  The wise collector gets instruction and
pleasure from his pursuit, and it may well be that, in the long run,
he and his family do not lose money.  The amusement may chance to
prove a very fair investment.

As to this question of making money by collecting, Mr. Hill Burton
speaks very distinctly in "The Book-hunter:" "Where money is the
object let a man speculate or become a miser. . . Let not the
collector ever, unless in some urgent and necessary circumstances,
part with any of his treasures.  Let him not even have recourse to
that practice called barter, which political philosophers tell us is
the universal resource of mankind preparatory to the invention of
money.  Let him confine all his transactions in the market to
purchasing only.  No good comes of gentlemen-amateurs buying and
selling."  There is room for difference of opinion here, but there
seems to be most reason on the side of Mr. Hill Burton.  It is one
thing for the collector to be able to reflect that the money he
expends on books is not lost, and that his family may find
themselves richer, not poorer, because he indulged his taste.  It is
quite another thing to buy books as a speculator buys shares,
meaning to sell again at a profit as soon as occasion offers.  It is
necessary also to warn the beginner against indulging extravagant
hopes.  He must buy experience with his books, and many of his first
purchases are likely to disappoint him.  He will pay dearly for the
wrong "Caesar" of 1635, the one WITHOUT errors in pagination; and
this is only a common example of the beginner's blunders.
Collecting is like other forms of sport; the aim is not certain at
first, the amateur is nervous, and, as in angling, is apt to
"strike" (a bargain) too hurriedly.

I often think that the pleasure of collecting is like that of sport.
People talk of "book-hunting," and the old Latin motto says that
"one never wearies of the chase in this forest."  But the analogy to
angling seems even stronger.  A collector walks in the London or
Paris streets, as he does by Tweed or Spey.  Many a lordly mart of
books he passes, like Mr. Quaritch's, Mr. Toovey's, or M.
Fontaine's, or the shining store of M.M. Morgand et Fatout, in the
Passage des Panoramas.  Here I always feel like Brassicanus in the
king of Hungary's collection, "non in Bibliotheca, sed in gremio
Jovis;" "not in a library, but in paradise."  It is not given to
every one to cast angle in these preserves.  They are kept for dukes
and millionaires.  Surely the old Duke of Roxburghe was the happiest
of mortals, for to him both the chief bookshops and auction rooms,
and the famous salmon streams of Floors, were equally open, and he
revelled in the prime of book-collecting and of angling.  But there
are little tributary streets, with humbler stalls, shy pools, as it
were, where the humbler fisher of books may hope to raise an
Elzevir, or an old French play, a first edition of Shelley, or a
Restoration comedy.  It is usually a case of hope unfulfilled; but
the merest nibble of a rare book, say Marston's poems in the
original edition, or Beddoes's "Love's Arrow Poisoned," or Bankes's
"Bay Horse in a Trance," or the "Mel Heliconicum" of Alexander Ross,
or "Les Oeuvres de Clement Marot, de Cahors, Vallet de Chambre du
Roy, A Paris, Ches Pierre Gaultier, 1551;" even a chance at
something of this sort will kindle the waning excitement, and add a
pleasure to a man's walk in muddy London.  Then, suppose you
purchase for a couple of shillings the "Histoire des Amours de Henry
IV, et autres pieces curieuses, A Leyde, Chez Jean Sambyx (Elzevir),
1664," it is certainly not unpleasant, on consulting M. Fontaine's
catalogue, to find that he offers the same work at the ransom of 10
pounds.  The beginner thinks himself in singular luck, even though
he has no idea of vending his collection, and he never reflects that
CONDITION--spotless white leaves and broad margins, make the market
value of a book.

Setting aside such bare considerations of profit, the sport given by
bookstalls is full of variety and charm.  In London it may be
pursued in most of the cross streets that stretch a dirty net
between the British Museum and the Strand.  There are other more shy
and less frequently poached resorts which the amateur may be allowed
to find out for himself.  In Paris there is the long sweep of the
Quais, where some eighty bouquinistes set their boxes on the walls
of the embankment of the Seine.  There are few country towns so
small but that books, occasionally rare and valuable, may be found
lurking in second-hand furniture warehouses.  This is one of the
advantages of living in an old country.  The Colonies are not the
home for a collector.  I have seen an Australian bibliophile
enraptured by the rare chance of buying, in Melbourne, an early work
on--the history of Port Jackson!  This seems but poor game.  But in
Europe an amateur has always occupation for his odd moments in town,
and is for ever lured on by the radiant apparition of Hope.  All
collectors tell their anecdotes of wonderful luck, and magnificent
discoveries.  There is a volume "Voyages Litteraires sur les Quais
de Paris" (Paris, Durand, 1857), by M. de Fontaine de Resbecq, which
might convert the dullest soul to book-hunting.  M. de Resbecq and
his friends had the most amazing good fortune.  A M. N- found six
original plays of Moliere (worth perhaps as many hundreds of
pounds), bound up with Garth's "Dispensary," an English poem which
has long lost its vogue.  It is worth while, indeed, to examine all
volumes marked "Miscellanea," "Essays," and the like, and treasures
may possibly lurk, as Snuffy Davy knew, within the battered
sheepskin of school books.  Books lie in out of the way places.
Poggio rescued "Quintilian" from the counter of a wood merchant.
The best time for book-hunting in Paris is the early morning.  "The
take," as anglers say, is "on" from half-past seven to half-past
nine a.m.  At these hours the vendors exhibit their fresh wares, and
the agents of the more wealthy booksellers come and pick up
everything worth having.  These agents quite spoil the sport of the
amateur.  They keep a strict watch on every country dealer's
catalogue, snap up all he has worth selling, and sell it over again,
charging pounds in place of shillings.  But M. de Resbecq vows that
he once picked up a copy of the first edition of La Rochefoucauld's
"Maxims" out of a box which two booksellers had just searched.  The
same collector got together very promptly all the original editions
of La Bruyere, and he even found a copy of the Elzevir "Pastissier
Francais," at the humble price of six sous.  Now the " Pastissier
Francais," an ill-printed little cookery-book of the Elzevirs, has
lately fetched 600 pounds at a sale.  The Antiquary's story of
Snuffy Davy and the "Game of Chess," is dwarfed by the luck of M. de
Resbecq.  Not one amateur in a thousand can expect such good
fortune.  There is, however, a recent instance of a Rugby boy, who
picked up, on a stall, a few fluttering leaves hanging together on a
flimsy thread.  The old woman who kept the stall could hardly be
induced to accept the large sum of a shilling for an original quarto
of Shakespeare's "King John."  These stories are told that none may
despair.  That none may be over confident, an author may recount his
own experience.  The only odd trouvaille that ever fell to me was a
clean copy of "La Journee Chretienne," with the name of Leon
Gambetta, 1844, on its catholic fly-leaf.  Rare books grow rarer
every day, and often 'tis only Hope that remains at the bottom of
the fourpenny boxes.  Yet the Paris book-hunters cleave to the game.
August is their favourite season; for in August there is least
competition.  Very few people are, as a rule, in Paris, and these
are not tempted to loiter.  The bookseller is drowsy, and glad not
to have the trouble of chaffering.  The English go past, and do not
tarry beside a row of dusty boxes of books.  The heat threatens the
amateur with sunstroke.  Then, says M. Octave Uzanne, in a prose
ballade of book-hunters--then, calm, glad, heroic, the bouquineurs
prowl forth, refreshed with hope.  The brown old calf-skin wrinkles
in the sun, the leaves crackle, you could poach an egg on the cover
of a quarto.  The dome of the Institute glitters, the sickly trees
seem to wither, their leaves wax red and grey, a faint warm wind is
walking the streets.  Under his vast umbrella the book-hunter is
secure and content; he enjoys the pleasures of the sport unvexed by
poachers, and thinks less of the heat than does the deer-stalker on
the bare hill-side.

There is plenty of morality, if there are few rare books in the
stalls.  The decay of affection, the breaking of friendship, the
decline of ambition, are all illustrated in these fourpenny
collections.  The presentation volumes are here which the author
gave in the pride of his heart to the poet who was his "Master," to
the critic whom he feared, to the friend with whom he was on terms
of mutual admiration.  The critic has not even cut the leaves, the
poet has brusquely torn three or four apart with his finger and
thumb, the friend has grown cold, and has let the poems slip into
some corner of his library, whence they were removed on some day of
doom and of general clearing out.  The sale of the library of a late
learned prelate who had Boileau's hatred of a dull book was a scene
to be avoided by his literary friends.  The Bishop always gave the
works which were offered to him a fair chance.  He read till he
could read no longer, cutting the pages as he went, and thus his
progress could be traced like that of a backwoodsman who "blazes"
his way through a primeval forest.  The paper-knife generally ceased
to do duty before the thirtieth page.  The melancholy of the book-
hunter is aroused by two questions, "Whence?" and "Whither?"  The
bibliophile asks about his books the question which the
metaphysician asks about his soul.  Whence came they?  Their value
depends a good deal on the answer.  If they are stamped with arms,
then there is a book ("Armorial du Bibliophile," by M. Guigard)
which tells you who was their original owner.  Any one of twenty
coats-of-arms on the leather is worth a hundred times the value of
the volume which it covers.  If there is no such mark, the fancy is
left to devise a romance about the first owner, and all the hands
through which the book has passed.  That Vanini came from a Jesuit
college, where it was kept under lock and key.  That copy of Agrippa
"De Vanitate Scientiarum" is marked, in a crabbed hand and in faded
ink, with cynical Latin notes.  What pessimist two hundred years ago
made his grumbling so permanent?  One can only guess, but part of
the imaginative joys of the book-hunter lies ' in the fruitless
conjecture.  That other question "Whither?" is graver.  Whither are
our treasures to be scattered?  Will they find kind masters? or,
worst fate of books, fall into the hands of women who will sell them
to the trunk-maker?  Are the leaves to line a box or to curl a
maiden's locks?  Are the rarities to become more and more rare, and
at last fetch prodigious prices?  Some unlucky men are able partly
to solve these problems in their own lifetime.  They are constrained
to sell their libraries--an experience full of bitterness, wrath,
and disappointment.

Selling books is nearly as bad as losing friends, than which life
has no worse sorrow.  A book is a friend whose face is constantly
changing.  If you read it when you are recovering from an illness,
and return to it years after, it is changed surely, with the change
in yourself.  As a man's tastes and opinions are developed his books
put on a different aspect.  He hardly knows the "Poems and Ballads"
he used to declaim, and cannot recover the enigmatic charm of
"Sordello."  Books change like friends, like ourselves, like
everything; but they are most piquant in the contrasts they provoke,
when the friend who gave them and wrote them is a success, though we
laughed at him; a failure, though we believed in him; altered in any
case, and estranged from his old self and old days.  The vanished
past returns when we look at the pages.  The vicissitudes of years
are printed and packed in a thin octavo, and the shivering ghosts of
desire and hope return to their forbidden home in the heart and
fancy.  It is as well to have the power of recalling them always at
hand, and to be able to take a comprehensive glance at the emotions
which were so powerful and full of life, and now are more faded and
of less account than the memory of the dreams of childhood.  It is
because our books are friends that do change, and remind us of
change, that we should keep them with us, even at a little
inconvenience, and not turn them adrift in the world to find a dusty
asylum in cheap bookstalls.  We are a part of all that we have read,
to parody the saying of Mr. Tennyson's Ulysses, and we owe some
respect, and house-room at least, to the early acquaintances who
have begun to bore us, and remind us of the vanity of ambition and
the weakness of human purpose.  Old school and college books even
have a reproachful and salutary power of whispering how much a man
knew, and at the cost of how much trouble, that he has absolutely
forgotten, and is neither the better nor the worse for it.  It will
be the same in the case of the books he is eager about now; though,
to be sure, he will read with less care, and forget with an ease and
readiness only to be acquired by practice.

But we were apologising for book-hunting, not because it teaches
moral lessons, as "dauncyng" also does, according to Sir Thomas
Elyot, in the "Boke called the Gouvernour," but because it affords a
kind of sportive excitement.  Bookstalls are not the only field of
the chase.  Book catalogues, which reach the collector through the
post, give him all the pleasures of the sport at home.  He reads the
booksellers' catalogues eagerly, he marks his chosen sport with
pencil, he writes by return of post, or he telegraphs to the vendor.
Unfortunately he almost always finds that he has been forestalled,
probably by some bookseller's agent.  When the catalogue is a French
one, it is obvious that Parisians have the pick of the market before
our slow letters reach M. Claudin, or M. Labitte.  Still the
catalogues themselves are a kind of lesson in bibliography.  You see
from them how prices are ruling, and you can gloat, in fancy, over
De Luyne's edition of Moliere, 1673, two volumes in red morocco,
double ("Trautz Bauzonnet"), or some other vanity hopelessly out of
reach.  In their catalogues, MM. Morgand and Fatout print a
facsimile of the frontispiece of this very rare edition.  The bust
of Moliere occupies the centre, and portraits of the great actor, as
Sganarelle and Mascarille (of the "Precieuses Ridicules"), stand on
either side.  In the second volume are Moliere, and his wife
Armande, crowned by the muse Thalia.  A catalogue which contains
such exact reproductions of rare and authentic portraits, is itself
a work of art, and serviceable to the student.  When the shop of a
bookseller, with a promising catalogue which arrives over night, is
not too far distant, bibliophiles have been known to rush to the
spot in the grey morning, before the doors open.  There are
amateurs, however, who prefer to stay comfortably at home, and pity
these poor fanatics, shivering in the rain outside a door in Oxford
Street or Booksellers' Row.  There is a length to which enthusiasm
cannot go, and many collectors draw the line at rising early in the
morning.  But, when we think of the sport of book-hunting, it is to
sales in auction-rooms that the mind naturally turns.  Here the
rival buyers feel the passion of emulation, and it was in an
auction-room that Guibert de Pixerecourt, being outbid, said, in
tones of mortal hatred, "I will have the book when your collection
is sold after your death."  And he kept his word.  The fever of
gambling is not absent from the auction-room, and people "bid
jealous" as they sometimes "ride jealous" in the hunting-field.
Yet, the neophyte, if he strolls by chance into a sale-room, will be
surprised at the spectacle.  The chamber has the look of a rather
seedy "hell."  The crowd round the auctioneer's box contains many
persons so dingy and Semitic, that at Monte Carlo they would be
refused admittance; while, in Germany, they would be persecuted by
Herr von Treitschke with Christian ardour.  Bidding is languid, and
valuable books are knocked down for trifling sums.  Let the neophyte
try his luck, however, and prices will rise wonderfully.  The fact
is that the sale is a "knock out."  The bidders are professionals,
in a league to let the volumes go cheap, and to distribute them
afterwards among themselves.  Thus an amateur can have a good deal
of sport by bidding for a book till it reaches its proper value, and
by then leaving in the lurch the professionals who combine to "run
him up."  The amusement has its obvious perils, but the presence of
gentlemen in an auction-room is a relief to the auctioneer and to
the owner of the books.  A bidder must be able to command his
temper, both that he may be able to keep his head cool when tempted
to bid recklessly, and that he may disregard the not very carefully
concealed sneers of the professionals.

In book-hunting the nature of the quarry varies with the taste of
the collector.  One man is for bibles, another for ballads.  Some
pursue plays, others look for play bills.  "He was not," says Mr.
Hill Burton, speaking of Kirkpatrick Sharpe, "he was not a black-
letter man, or a tall copyist, or an uncut man, or a rough-edge man,
or an early-English dramatist, or an Elzevirian, or a broadsider, or
a pasquinader, or an old brown calf man, or a Grangerite, {1} or a
tawny moroccoite, or a gilt topper, or a marbled insider, or an
editio princeps man."  These nicknames briefly dispose into
categories a good many species of collectors.  But there are plenty
of others.  You may be a historical-bindings man, and hunt for books
that were bound by the great artists of the past and belonged to
illustrious collectors.  Or you may be a Jametist, and try to gather
up the volumes on which Jamet, the friend of Louis Racine, scribbled
his cynical "Marginalia."  Or you may covet the earliest editions of
modern poets--Shelley, Keats, or Tennyson, or even Ebenezer Jones.
Or the object of your desires may be the books of the French
romanticists, who flourished so freely in 1830.  Or, being a person
of large fortune and landed estate, you may collect country
histories.  Again, your heart may be set on the books illustrated by
Eisen, Cochin, and Gravelot, or Stothard and Blake, in the last
century.  Or you may be so old-fashioned as to care for Aldine
classics, and for the books of the Giunta press.  In fact, as many
as are the species of rare and beautiful books, so many are the
species of collectors.  There is one sort of men, modest but not
unwise in their generations, who buy up the pretty books published
in very limited editions by French booksellers, like MM. Lemerre and
Jouaust.  Already their reprints of Rochefoucauld's first edition,
of Beaumarchais, of La Fontaine, of the lyrics attributed to
Moliere, and other volumes, are exhausted, and fetch high prices in
the market.  By a singular caprice, the little volumes of Mr.
Thackeray's miscellaneous writings, in yellow paper wrappers (when
they are first editions), have become objects of desire, and their
old modest price is increased twenty fold.  It is not always easy to
account for these freaks of fashion; but even in book-collecting
there are certain definite laws.  "Why do you pay a large price for
a dingy, old book," outsiders ask, "when a clean modern reprint can
be procured for two or three shillings?"  To this question the
collector has several replies, which he, at least, finds
satisfactory.  In the first place, early editions, published during
a great author's lifetime, and under his supervision, have authentic
texts.  The changes in them are the changes that Prior or La Bruyere
themselves made and approved.  You can study, in these old editions,
the alterations in their taste, the history of their minds.  The
case is the same even with contemporary authors.  One likes to have
Mr. Tennyson's "Poems, chiefly Lyrical" (London:  Effingham Wilson,
Royal Exchange, Cornhill, 1830).  It is fifty years old, this little
book of one hundred and fifty-four pages, this first fruit of a
stately tree.  In half a century the poet has altered much, and
withdrawn much, but already, in 1830, he had found his distinctive
note, and his "Mariana" is a masterpiece.  "Mariana" is in all the
collections, but pieces of which the execution is less certain must
be sought only in the old volume of 1830.  In the same way "The
Strayed Reveller, and other poems, by A."  (London:  B. Fellowes,
Ludgate Street, 1849) contains much that Mr. Matthew Arnold has
altered, and this volume, like the suppressed "Empedocles on Etna,
and other Poems, by A." (1852), appeals more to the collector than
do the new editions which all the world may possess.  There are
verses, curious in their way, in Mr. Clough's "Ambarvalia" (1849),
which you will not find in his posthumous edition, but which "repay
perusal."  These minutiae of literary history become infinitely more
important in the early editions of the great classical writers, and
the book-collector may regard his taste as a kind of handmaid of
critical science.  The preservation of rare books, and the
collection of materials for criticism, are the useful functions,
then, of book-collecting.  But it is not to be denied that the
sentimental side of the pursuit gives it most of its charm.  Old
books are often literary relics, and as dear and sacred to the lover
of literature as are relics of another sort to the religious
devotee.  The amateur likes to see the book in its form as the
author knew it.  He takes a pious pleasure in the first edition of
"Les Precieuses Ridicules," (M.DC.LX.) just as Moliere saw it, when
he was fresh in the business of authorship, and wrote "Mon Dieu,
qu'un Autheur est neuf, la premiere fois qu'on l'imprime."  All
editions published during a great man's life have this attraction,
and seem to bring us closer to his spirit.  Other volumes are
relics, as we shall see later, of some famed collector, and there is
a certain piety in the care we give to books once dear to
Longepierre, or Harley, or d'Hoym, or Buckle, to Madame de
Maintenon, or Walpole, to Grolier, or Askew, or De Thou, or Heber.
Such copies should be handed down from worthy owners to owners not
unworthy; such servants of literature should never have careless
masters.  A man may prefer to read for pleasure in a good clear
reprint.  M. Charpentier's "Montaigne" serves the turn, but it is
natural to treasure more "Les Essais de Michel Seigneur de
Montaigne," that were printed by Francoise le Febre, of Lyon, in
1595.  It is not a beautiful book; the type is small, and rather
blunt, but William Drummond of Hawthornden has written on the title-
page his name and his device, Cipresso e Palma.  There are a dozen
modern editions of Moliere more easily read than the four little
volumes of Wetstein (Amsterdam, 1698), but these contain reduced
copies of the original illustrations, and here you see Arnolphe and
Agnes in their habits as they lived, Moliere and Mdlle. de Brie as
the public of Paris beheld them more than two hundred years ago.
Suckling's "Fragmenta Aurea" contain a good deal of dross, and most
of the gold has been gathered into Miscellanies, but the original
edition of 1646, "after his own copies," with the portrait of the
jolly cavalier who died aetatis suae 28, has its own allurement.
Theocritus is more easily read, perhaps, in Wordsworth's edition, or
Ziegler's; but that which Zacharias Calliergi printed in Rome
(1516), with an excommunication from Leo X. against infringement of
copyright, will always be a beautiful and desirable book, especially
when bound by Derome.  The gist of the pious Prince Conti's
strictures on the wickedness of comedy may be read in various
literary histories, but it is natural to like his "Traite de la
Comedie selon la tradition de l'Eglise, Tiree des Conciles et des
saints Peres," published by Lovys Billaine in 1660, especially when
the tract is a clean copy, arrayed in a decorous black morocco.

These are but a few common examples, chosen from a meagre little
library, a "twopenny treasure-house," but they illustrate, on a
minute scale, the nature of the collector's passion,--the character
of his innocent pleasures.  He occasionally lights on other literary
relics of a more personal character than mere first editions.  A
lucky collector lately bought Shelley's copy of Ossian, with the
poet's signature on the title-page, in Booksellers' Row.  Another
possesses a copy of Foppens's rare edition of Petrarch's "Le Sage
Resolu contre l'une et l'autre Fortune," which once belonged to Sir
Hudson Lowe, the gaoler of Napoleon, and may have fortified, by its
stoical maxims, the soul of one who knew the extremes of either
fortune, the captive of St. Helena.  But the best example of a book,
which is also a relic, is the "Imitatio Christi," which belonged to
J. J. Rousseau.  Let M. Tenant de Latour, lately the happy owner of
this possession, tell his own story of his treasure:  It was in 1827
that M. de Latour was walking on the quai of the Louvre.  Among the
volumes in a shop, he noticed a shabby little copy of the "Imitatio
Christi."  M. de Latour, like other bibliophiles, was not in the
habit of examining stray copies of this work, except when they were
of the Elzevir size, for the Elzevirs published a famous undated
copy of the "Imitatio," a book which brings considerable prices.
However, by some lucky chance, some Socratic daemon whispering, may
be, in his ear, he picked up the little dingy volume of the last
century.  It was of a Paris edition, 1751, but what was the name on
the fly-leaf.  M. de Latour read a J. J. Rousseau.  There was no
mistake about it, the good bibliophile knew Rousseau's handwriting
perfectly well; to make still more sure he paid his seventy-five
centimes for the book, and walked across the Pont des Arts, to his
bookbinder's, where he had a copy of Rousseau's works, with a
facsimile of his handwriting.  As he walked, M. de Latour read in
his book, and found notes of Rousseau's on the margin.  The
facsimile proved that the inscription was genuine.  The happy de
Latour now made for the public office in which he was a functionary,
and rushed into the bureau of his friend the Marquis de V.  The
Marquis, a man of great strength of character, recognised the
signature of Rousseau with but little display of emotion.  M. de
Latour now noticed some withered flowers among the sacred pages; but
it was reserved for a friend to discover in the faded petals
Rousseau's favourite flower, the periwinkle.  Like a true Frenchman,
like Rousseau himself in his younger days, M. de Latour had not
recognised the periwinkle when he saw it.  That night, so excited
was M. de Latour, he never closed an eye!  What puzzled him was that
he could not remember, in all Rousseau's works, a single allusion to
the "Imitatio Christi."  Time went on, the old book was not rebound,
but kept piously in a case of Russia leather.  M. de Latour did not
suppose that "dans ce bas monde it fut permis aux joies du
bibliophile d'aller encore plus loin."  He imagined that the
delights of the amateur could only go further, in heaven.  It
chanced, however, one day that he was turning over the "Oeuvres
Inedites" of Rousseau, when he found a letter, in which Jean
Jacques, writing in 1763, asked Motiers-Travers to send him the
"Imitatio Christi."  Now the date 1764 is memorable, in Rousseau's
"Confessions," for a burst of sentiment over a periwinkle, the first
he had noticed particularly since his residence at Les Charmettes,
where the flower had been remarked by Madame de Warens.  Thus M.
Tenant de Latour had recovered the very identical periwinkle, which
caused the tear of sensibility to moisten the fine eyes of Jean
Jacques Rousseau.

We cannot all be adorers of Rousseau.  But M. de Latour was an
enthusiast, and this little anecdote of his explains the sentimental
side of the bibliophile's pursuit.  Yes, it is SENTIMENT that makes
us feel a lively affection for the books that seem to connect us
with great poets and students long ago dead.  Their hands grasp ours
across the ages.  I never see the first edition of Homer, that
monument of typography and of enthusiasm for letters, printed at
Florence (1488) at the expense of young Bernardo and Nerio Nerli,
and of their friend Giovanni Acciajuoli, but I feel moved to cry
with Heyne, "salvete juvenes, nobiles et generosi; [Greek text]."

Such is our apology for book-collecting.  But the best defence of
the taste would be a list of the names of great collectors, a
"vision of mighty book-hunters."  Let us say nothing of Seth and
Noah, for their reputation as amateurs is only based on the
authority of the tract De Bibliothecis Antediluvianis.  The library
of Assurbanipal I pass over, for its volumes were made, as Pliny
says, of coctiles laterculi, of baked tiles, which have been
deciphered by the late Mr. George Smith.  Philosophers as well as
immemorial kings, Pharaohs and Ptolemys, are on our side.  It was
objected to Plato, by persons answering to the cheap scribblers of
to-day, that he, though a sage, gave a hundred minae (360 pounds)
for three treatises of Philolaus, while Aristotle paid nearly thrice
the sum for a few books that had been in the library of Speusippus.
Did not a Latin philosopher go great lengths in a laudable anxiety
to purchase an Odyssey "as old as Homer," and what would not Cicero,
that great collector, have given for the Ascraean editio princeps of
Hesiod, scratched on mouldy old plates of lead?  Perhaps Dr.
Schliemann may find an original edition of the "Iliad" at
Orchomenos; but of all early copies none seems so attractive as that
engraved on the leaden plates which Pausanias saw at Ascra.  Then,
in modern times, what "great allies" has the collector, what
brethren in book-hunting?  The names are like the catalogue with
which Villon fills his "Ballade des Seigneurs du Temps Jadis."  A
collector was "le preux Charlemaigne" and our English Alfred.  The
Kings of Hungary, as Mathias Corvinus; the Kings of France, and
their queens, and their mistresses, and their lords, were all
amateurs.  So was our Henry VIII., and James I., who "wished he
could be chained to a shelf in the Bodleian."  The middle age gives
us Richard de Bury, among ecclesiastics, and the Renaissance boasts
Sir Thomas More, with that "pretty fardle of books, in the small
type of Aldus," which he carried for a freight to the people of
Utopia.  Men of the world, like Bussy Rabutin, queens like our
Elizabeth; popes like Innocent X.; financiers like Colbert (who made
the Grand Turk send him Levant morocco for bindings); men of letters
like Scott and Southey, Janin and Nodier, and Paul Lacroix; warriors
like Junot and Prince Eugene; these are only leaders of companies in
the great army of lovers of books, in which it is honourable enough
to be a private soldier.


THE LIBRARY


The Library which is to be spoken of in these pages, is all unlike
the halls which a Spencer or a Huth fills with treasure beyond
price.  The age of great libraries has gone by, and where a
collector of the old school survives, he is usually a man of
enormous wealth, who might, if he pleased, be distinguished in
parliament, in society, on the turf itself, or in any of the
pursuits where unlimited supplies of money are strictly necessary.
The old amateurs, whom La Bruyere was wont to sneer at, were not
satisfied unless they possessed many thousands of books.  For a
collector like Cardinal Mazarin, Naude bought up the whole stock of
many a bookseller, and left great towns as bare of printed paper as
if a tornado had passed, and blown the leaves away.  In our modern
times, as the industrious Bibliophile Jacob, says, the fashion of
book-collecting has changed; "from the vast hall that it was, the
library of the amateur has shrunk to a closet, to a mere book-case.
Nothing but a neat article of furniture is needed now, where a great
gallery or a long suite of rooms was once required.  The book has
become, as it were, a jewel, and is kept in a kind of jewel-case."
It is not quantity of pages, nor lofty piles of ordinary binding,
nor theological folios and classic quartos, that the modern amateur
desires.  He is content with but a few books of distinction and
elegance, masterpieces of printing and binding, or relics of famous
old collectors, of statesmen, philosophers, beautiful dead ladies;
or, again, he buys illustrated books, or first editions of the
modern classics.  No one, not the Duc d'Aumale, or M. James
Rothschild himself, with his 100 books worth 40,000 pounds, can
possess very many copies of books which are inevitably rare.  Thus
the adviser who would offer suggestions to the amateur, need
scarcely write, like Naude and the old authorities, about the size
and due position of the library.  He need hardly warn the builder to
make the salle face the east, "because the eastern winds, being warm
and dry of their nature, greatly temper the air, fortify the senses,
make subtle the humours, purify the spirits, preserve a healthy
disposition of the whole body, and, to say all in one word, are most
wholesome and salubrious."  The east wind, like the fashion of book-
collecting, has altered in character a good deal since the days when
Naude was librarian to Cardinal Mazarin.  One might as well repeat
the learned Isidorus his counsels about the panels of green marble
(that refreshes the eye), and Boethius his censures on library walls
of ivory and glass, as fall back on the ancient ideas of librarians
dead and gone.

The amateur, then, is the person we have in our eye, and especially
the bibliophile who has but lately been bitten with this pleasant
mania of collecting.  We would teach him how to arrange and keep his
books orderly and in good case, and would tell him what to buy and
what to avoid.  By the LIBRARY we do not understand a study where no
one goes, and where the master of the house keeps his boots, an
assortment of walking-sticks, the "Waverley Novels," "Pearson on the
Creed," "Hume's Essays," and a collection of sermons.  In, alas! too
many English homes, the Library is no more than this, and each
generation passes without adding a book, except now and then a
Bradshaw or a railway novel, to the collection on the shelves.  The
success, perhaps, of circulating libraries, or, it may be, the Aryan
tendencies of our race, "which does not read, and lives in the open
air," have made books the rarest of possessions in many houses.
There are relics of the age before circulating libraries, there are
fragments of the lettered store of some scholarly great-grandfather,
and these, with a few odd numbers of magazines, a few primers and
manuals, some sermons and novels, make up the ordinary library of an
English household.  But the amateur, whom we have in our thoughts,
can never be satisfied with these commonplace supplies.  He has a
taste for books more or less rare, and for books neatly bound; in
short, for books, in the fabrication of which ART has not been
absent.  He loves to have his study, like Montaigne's, remote from
the interruption of servants, wife, and children; a kind of shrine,
where he may be at home with himself, with the illustrious dead, and
with the genius of literature.  The room may look east, west, or
south, provided that it be dry, warm, light, and airy.  Among the
many enemies of books the first great foe is DAMP, and we must
describe the necessary precautions to be taken against this peril.
We will suppose that the amateur keeps his ordinary working books,
modern tomes, and all that serve him as literary tools, on open
shelves.  These may reach the roof, if he has books to fill them,
and it is only necessary to see that the back of the bookcases are
slightly removed from contact with the walls.  The more precious and
beautifully bound treasures will naturally be stored in a case with
closely-fitting glass-doors. {2}  The shelves should be lined with
velvet or chamois leather, that the delicate edges of the books may
not suffer from contact with the wood.  A leather lining, fitted to
the back of the case, will also help to keep out humidity.  Most
writers recommend that the bookcases should be made of wood close in
the grain, such as well-seasoned oak; or, for smaller tabernacles of
literature, of mahogany, satin-wood lined with cedar, ebony, and so
forth.  These close-grained woods are less easily penetrated by
insects, and it is fancied that book-worms dislike the aromatic
scents of cedar, sandal wood, and Russia leather.  There was once a
bibliophile who said that a man could only love one book at a time,
and the darling of the moment he used to carry about in a charming
leather case.  Others, men of few books, preserve them in long boxes
with glass fronts, which may be removed from place to place as
readily as the household gods of Laban.  But the amateur who not
only worships but reads books, needs larger receptacles; and in the
open oak cases for modern authors, and for books with common modern
papers and bindings, in the closed armoire for books of rarity and
price, he will find, we think, the most useful mode of arranging his
treasures.  His shelves will decline in height from the lowest,
where huge folios stand at case, to the top ranges, while Elzevirs
repose on a level with the eye.  It is well that each upper shelf
should have a leather fringe to keep the dust away.

As to the shape of the bookcases, and the furniture, and ornaments
of the library, every amateur will please himself.  Perhaps the
satin-wood or mahogany tabernacles of rare books are best made after
the model of what furniture-dealers indifferently call the "Queen
Anne" or the "Chippendale" style.  There is a pleasant quaintness in
the carved architectural ornaments of the top, and the inlaid
flowers of marquetry go well with the pretty florid editions of the
last century, the books that were illustrated by Stothard and
Gravelot.  Ebony suits theological tomes very well, especially when
they are bound in white vellum.  As to furniture, people who can
afford it will imitate the arrangements of Lucullus, in Mr. Hill
Burton's charming volume "The Book-hunter" (Blackwood, Edinburgh,
1862).--"Everything is of perfect finish,--the mahogany-railed
gallery, the tiny ladders, the broad winged lecterns, with leathern
cushions on the edges to keep the wood from grazing the rich
bindings, the books themselves, each shelf uniform with its facings,
or rather backings, like well-dressed lines at a review."  The late
Sir William Stirling-Maxwell, a famous bibliophile, invented a very
nice library chair.  It is most comfortable to sit on; and, as the
top of the back is broad and flat, it can be used as a ladder of two
high steps, when one wants to reach a book on a lofty shelf.  A kind
of square revolving bookcase, an American invention, manufactured by
Messrs. Trubner, is useful to the working man of letters.  Made in
oak, stained green, it is not unsightly.  As to ornaments, every man
to his taste.  You may have a "pallid bust of Pallas" above your
classical collection, or fill the niches in a shrine of old French
light literature, pastoral and comedy, with delicate shepherdesses
in Chelsea china.  On such matters a modest writer, like Mr. Jingle
when Mr. Pickwick ordered dinner, "will not presume to dictate."

Next to damp, dust and dirt are the chief enemies of books.  At
short intervals, books and shelves ought to be dusted by the amateur
himself.  Even Dr. Johnson, who was careless of his person, and of
volumes lent to him, was careful about the cleanliness of his own
books.  Boswell found him one day with big gloves on his hands
beating the dust out of his library, as was his custom.  There is
nothing so hideous as a dirty thumb-mark on a white page.  These
marks are commonly made, not because the reader has unwashed hands,
but because the dust which settles on the top edge of books falls
in, and is smudged when they are opened.  Gilt-top edges should be
smoothed with a handkerchief, and a small brush should be kept for
brushing the tops of books with rough edges, before they are opened.
But it were well that all books had the top edge gilt.  There is no
better preservative against dust.  Dust not only dirties books, it
seems to supply what Mr. Spencer would call a fitting environment
for book-worms.  The works of book-worms speak for themselves, and
are manifest to all.  How many a rare and valuable volume is spoiled
by neat round holes drilled through cover and leaves!  But as to the
nature of your worm, authorities differ greatly.  The ancients knew
this plague, of which Lucian speaks.  Mr. Blades mentions a white
book-worm, slain by the librarian of the Bodleian.  In Byzantium the
black sort prevailed.  Evenus, the grammarian, wrote an epigram
against the black book-worm ("Anthol.  Pal.," ix. 251):-


Pest of the Muses, devourer of pages, in crannies that lurkest,
Fruits of the Muses to taint, labour of learning to spoil;
Wherefore, oh black-fleshed worm! wert thou born for the evil thou
workest?
Wherefore thine own foul form shap'st thou with envious toil?


The learned Mentzelius says he hath heard the book-worm crow like a
cock unto his mate, and "I knew not," says he, "whether some local
fowl was clamouring or whether there was but a beating in mine ears.
Even at that moment, all uncertain as I was, I perceived, in the
paper whereon I was writing, a little insect that ceased not to
carol like very chanticleer, until, taking a magnifying glass, I
assiduously observed him.  He is about the bigness of a mite, and
carries a grey crest, and the head low, bowed over the bosom; as to
his crowing noise, it comes of his clashing his wings against each
other with an incessant din."  Thus far Mentzelius, and more to the
same purpose, as may be read in the "Memoirs of famous Foreign
Academies" (Dijon, 1755-59, 13 vol. in quarto).  But, in our times,
the learned Mr. Blades having a desire to exhibit book-worms in the
body to the Caxtonians at the Caxton celebration, could find few men
that had so much as seen a book-worm, much less heard him utter his
native wood-notes wild.  Yet, in his "Enemies of Books," he
describes some rare encounters with the worm.  Dirty books, damp
books, dusty books, and books that the owner never opens, are most
exposed to the enemy; and "the worm, the proud worm, is the
conqueror still," as a didactic poet sings, in an ode on man's
mortality.  As we have quoted Mentzelius, it may not be amiss to
give D'Alembert's theory of book-worms:  "I believe," he says, "that
a little beetle lays her eggs in books in August, thence is hatched
a mite, like the cheese-mite, which devours books merely because it
is compelled to gnaw its way out into the air."  Book-worms like the
paste which binders employ, but D'Alembert adds that they cannot
endure absinthe.  Mr. Blades finds too that they disdain to devour
our adulterate modern paper.

"Say, shall I sing of rats," asked Grainger, when reading to Johnson
his epic, the "Sugar-cane."  "No," said the Doctor; and though rats
are the foe of the bibliophile, at least as much as of the sugar-
planter, we do not propose to sing of them.  M. Fertiault has done
so already in "Les Sonnets d'un Bibliophile," where the reader must
be pleased with the beautiful etchings of rats devouring an
illuminated MS., and battening on morocco bindings stamped with the
bees of De Thou.  It is unnecessary and it would be undignified, to
give hints on rat-catching, but the amateur must not forget that
these animals have a passion for bindings.

The book-collector must avoid gas, which deposits a filthy coat of
oil that catches dust.  Mr. Blades found that three jets of gas in a
small room soon reduced the leather on his book-shelves to a powder
of the consistency of snuff, and made the backs of books come away
in his hand.  Shaded lamps give the best and most suitable light for
the library.  As to the risks which books run at the hands of the
owner himself, we surely need not repeat the advice of Richard de
Bury.  Living in an age when tubs (if not unknown as M. Michelet
declares) were far from being common, the old collector inveighed
against the dirty hands of readers, and against their habit of
marking their place in a book with filthy straws, or setting down a
beer pot in the middle of the volume to keep the pages open.  But
the amateur, however refined himself, must beware of men who love
not fly leaves neither regard margins, but write notes over the
latter, and light their pipes with the former.  After seeing the
wreck of a book which these persons have been busy with, one
appreciates the fine Greek hyperbole.  The Greeks did not speak of
"thumbing" but of "walking up and down" on a volume ([Greek text]).
To such fellows it matters not that they make a book dirty and
greasy, cutting the pages with their fingers, and holding the boards
over the fire till they crack.  All these slatternly practices,
though they destroy a book as surely as the flames of Caesar's
soldiers at Alexandria, seem fine manly acts to the grobians who use
them.  What says Jules Janin, who has written "Contre l'indifference
des Philistins," "il faut a l'homme sage et studieux un tome
honorable et digne de sa louange."  The amateur, and all decent men,
will beware of lending books to such rude workers; and this
consideration brings us to these great foes of books, the borrowers
and robbers.  The lending of books, and of other property, has been
defended by some great authorities; thus Panurge himself says, "it
would prove much more easy in nature to have fish entertained in the
air, and bullocks fed in the bottom of the ocean, than to support or
tolerate a rascally rabble of people that will not lend."
Pirckheimer, too, for whom Albert Durer designed a book-plate, was a
lender, and took for his device Sibi et Amicis; and Jo. Grolierii et
amicorum, was the motto of the renowned Grolier, whom mistaken
writers vainly but frequently report to have been a bookbinder.  But
as Mr. Leicester Warren says, in his "Study of Book-plates"
(Pearson, 1880), "Christian Charles de Savigny leaves all the rest
behind, exclaiming non mihi sed aliis."  But the majority of
amateurs have chosen wiser, though more churlish devices, as "the
ungodly borroweth and payeth not again," or "go to them that sell,
and buy for yourselves."  David Garrick engraved on his book-plate,
beside a bust of Shakspeare, these words of Menage, "La premiere
chose qu'on doit faire, quand on a emprunte' un livre, c'est de le
lire, afin de pouvoir le rendre plutot."  But the borrower is so
minded that the last thing he thinks of is to read a borrowed book,
and the penultimate subject of his reflections is its restoration.
Menage (Menagiana, Paris, 1729, vol. i. p. 265), mentions, as if it
were a notable misdeed, this of Angelo Politian's, "he borrowed a
'Lucretius' from Pomponius Laetus, and kept it for four years."
Four years! in the sight of the borrower it is but a moment.  Menage
reports that a friend kept his "Pausanias" for three years, whereas
four months was long enough.


"At quarto saltem mense redire decet."


There is no satisfaction in lending a book; for it is rarely that
borrowers, while they deface your volumes, gather honey for new
stores, as De Quincey did, and Coleridge, and even Dr. Johnson, who
"greased and dogs-eared such volumes as were confided to his tender
mercies, with the same indifference wherewith he singed his own
wigs."  But there is a race of mortals more annoying to a
conscientious man than borrowers.  These are the spontaneous
lenders, who insist that you shall borrow their tomes.  For my own
part, when I am oppressed with the charity of such, I lock their
books up in a drawer, and behold them not again till the day of
their return.  There is no security against borrowers, unless a man
like Guibert de Pixerecourt steadfastly refuses to lend.  The device
of Pixerecourt was un livre est un ami qui ne change jamais.  But he
knew that our books change when they have been borrowed, like our
friends when they have been married; when "a lady borrows them," as
the fairy queen says in the ballad of "Tamlane."


"But had I kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,
"A lady wad borrowed thee,
I wad ta'en out thy twa gray een,
Put in twa een o' tree!

"Had I but kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,
"Before ye came frae hame,
I wad ta'en out your heart o' flesh,
Put in a heart o' stane!"


Above the lintel of his library door, Pixerecourt had this couplet
carved -


"Tel est le triste sort de tout livre prete,
Souvent il est perdu, toujours il est gate."


M. Paul Lacroix says he would not have lent a book to his own
daughter.  Once Lacroix asked for the loan of a work of little
value.  Pixerecourt frowned, and led his friend beneath the doorway,
pointing to the motto.  "Yes," said M. Lacroix, "but I thought that
verse applied to every one but me."  So Pixerecourt made him a
present of the volume.

We cannot all imitate this "immense" but unamiable amateur.
Therefore, bibliophiles have consoled themselves with the inventions
of book-plates, quaint representations, perhaps heraldic, perhaps
fanciful, of their claims to the possession of their own dear
volumes.  Mr. Leicester Warren and M. Poulet Malassis have written
the history of these slender works of art, and each bibliophile may
have his own engraved, and may formulate his own anathemas on people
who borrow and restore not again.  The process is futile, but may
comfort the heart, like the curses against thieves which the Greeks
were wont to scratch on leaden tablets, and deposit in the temple of
Demeter.  Each amateur can exercise his own taste in the design of a
book-plate; and for such as love and collect rare editions of
"Homer," I venture to suggest this motto, which may move the heart
of the borrower to send back an Aldine copy of the epic -


[Greek text] {3}


Mr. William Blades, in his pleasant volume, "The Enemies of Books"
(Trubner), makes no account of the book-thief or biblioklept.  "If
they injure the owners," says Mr. Blades, with real tolerance, "they
do no harm to the books themselves, by merely transferring them from
one set of book-shelves to another."  This sentence has naturally
caused us to reflect on the ethical character of the biblioklept.
He is not always a bad man.  In old times, when language had its
delicacies, and moralists were not devoid of sensibility, the French
did not say "un voleur de livres," but "un chipeur de livres;" as
the papers call lady shoplifters "kleptomaniacs."  There are
distinctions.  M. Jules Janin mentions a great Parisian bookseller
who had an amiable weakness.  He was a bibliokleptomaniac.  His
first motion when he saw a book within reach was to put it in his
pocket.  Every one knew his habit, and when a volume was lost at a
sale the auctioneer duly announced it, and knocked it down to the
enthusiast, who regularly paid the price.  When he went to a private
view of books about to be sold, the officials at the door would ask
him, as he was going out, if he did not happen to have an Elzevir
Horace or an Aldine Ovid in his pocket.  Then he would search those
receptacles and exclaim, "Yes, yes, here it is; so much obliged to
you; I am so absent."  M. Janin mentions an English noble, a "Sir
Fitzgerald," who had the same tastes, but who unluckily fell into
the hands of the police.  Yet M. Janin has a tenderness for the
book-stealer, who, after all, is a lover of books.  The moral
position of the malefactor is so delicate and difficult that we
shall attempt to treat of it in the severe, though rococo, manner of
Aristotle's "Ethics."  Here follows an extract from the lost
Aristotelian treatise "Concerning Books":-

"Among the contemplative virtues we reckon the love of books.  Now
this virtue, like courage or liberality, has its mean, its excess,
and its defect.  The defect is indifference, and the man who is
defective as to the love of books has no name in common parlance.
Therefore, we may call him the Robustious Philistine.  This man will
cut the leaves of his own or his friend's volumes with the butter-
knife at breakfast.  Also he is just the person wilfully to mistake
the double sense of the term 'fly-leaves,' and to stick the 'fly-
leaves' of his volumes full of fly-hooks.  He also loves dogs'-ears,
and marks his place with his pipe when he shuts a book in a hurry;
or he will set the leg of his chair on a page to keep it open.  He
praises those who tear off margins for pipe-lights, and he makes
cigarettes with the tissue-paper that covers engravings.  When his
books are bound, he sees that the margin is cut to the quick.  He
tells you too, that 'HE buys books to read them.' But he does not
say why he thinks it needful to spoil them.  Also he will drag off
bindings--or should we perhaps call this crime [Greek text], or
brutality, rather than mere vice? for vice is essentially human, but
to tear off bindings is bestial.  Thus they still speak of a certain
monster who lived during the French Revolution, and who, having
purchased volumes attired in morocco, and stamped with the devices
of the oligarchs, would rip off the leather or vellum, and throw
them into the fire or out of the window, saying that 'now he could
read with unwashed hands at his ease.'  Such a person, then, is the
man indifferent to books, and he sins by way of defect, being
deficient in the contemplative virtue of book-loving.  As to the man
who is exactly in the right mean, we call him the book-lover.  His
happiness consists not in reading, which is an active virtue, but in
the contemplation of bindings, and illustrations, and title-pages.
Thus his felicity partakes of the nature of the bliss we attribute
to the gods, for that also is contemplative, and we call the book-
lover 'happy,' and even 'blessed,' but within the limits of mortal
happiness.  But, just as in the matter of absence of fear there is a
mean which we call courage, and a defect which we call cowardice,
and an excess which is known as foolhardiness; so it is in the case
of the love of books.  As to the mean, we have seen that it is the
virtue of the true book-lover, while the defect constitutes the sin
of the Robustious Philistine.  But the extreme is found in
covetousness, and the covetous man who is in the extreme state of
book-loving, is the biblioklept, or book-stealer.  Now his vice
shows itself, not in contemplation (for of contemplation there can
be no excess), but in action.  For books are procured, as we say, by
purchase, or by barter, and these are voluntary exchanges, both the
seller and the buyer being willing to deal.  But books are, again,
procured in another way, by involuntary contract--that is, when the
owner of the book is unwilling to part with it, but he whose own the
book is not is determined to take it.  The book-stealer is such a
man as this, and he possesses himself of books with which the owner
does not intend to part, by virtue of a series of involuntary
contracts.  Again, the question may be raised, whether is the
Robustious Philistine who despises books, or the biblioklept who
adores them out of measure and excessively, the worse citizen?  Now,
if we are to look to the consequences of actions only (as the
followers of Bentham advise), clearly the Robustious Philistine is
the worse citizen, for he mangles, and dirties, and destroys books
which it is the interest of the State to preserve.  But the
biblioklept treasures and adorns the books he has acquired; and when
he dies, or goes to prison, the State receives the benefit at his
sale.  Thus Libri, who was the greatest of biblioklepts, rescued
many of the books he stole from dirt and misuse, and had them bound
royally in purple and gold.  Also, it may be argued that books
naturally belong to him who can appreciate them; and if good books
are in a dull or indifferent man's keeping, this is the sort of
slavery which we call "unnatural" in our POLITICS, and which is not
to be endured.  Shall we say, then, that the Robustious Philistine
is the worse citizen, while the Biblioklept is the worse man?  But
this is perhaps matter for a separate disquisition."

This fragment of the lost Aristotelian treatise "Concerning Books,"
shows what a difficulty the Stagirite had in determining the precise
nature of the moral offence of the biblioklept.  Indeed, both as a
collector and as an intuitive moralist, Aristotle must have found it
rather difficult to condemn the book-thief.  He, doubtless, went on
to draw distinctions between the man who steals books to sell them
again for mere pecuniary profit (which he would call "chrematistic,"
or "unnatural," book-stealing), and the man who steals them because
he feels that he is their proper and natural possessor.  The same
distinction is taken by Jules Janin, who was a more constant student
of Horace than of Aristotle.  In his imaginary dialogue of
bibliophiles, Janin introduces a character who announces the death
of M. Libri.  The tolerant person who brings the sad news proposes
"to cast a few flowers on the melancholy tomb.  He was a
bibliophile, after all.  What do you say to it?  Many a good fellow
has stolen books, and died in grace at the last."  "Yes," replies
the president of the club, "but the good fellows did not sell the
books they stole . . . Cest une grande honte, une grande misere."
This Libri was an Inspector-General of French Libraries under Louis
Philippe.  When he was tried, in 1848, it was calculated that the
sum of his known thefts amounted to 20,000 pounds.  Many of his
robberies escaped notice at the time.  It is not long since Lord
Ashburnham, according to a French journal, "Le Livre," found in his
collection some fragments of a Pentateuch.  These relics had been in
the possession of the Lyons Library, whence Libri stole them in
1847.  The late Lord Ashburnham bought them, without the faintest
idea of Libri's dishonesty; and when, after eleven years, the
present peer discovered the proper owners of his treasure, he
immediately restored the Pentateuch to the Lyons Library.

Many eminent characters have been biblioklepts.  When Innocent X.
was still Monsignor Pamphilio, he stole a book--so says Tallemant
des Reaux--from Du Monstier, the painter.  The amusing thing is that
Du Monstier himself was a book-thief.  He used to tell how he had
lifted a book, of which he had long been in search, from a stall on
the Pont-Neuf; "but," says Tallemant (whom Janin does not seem to
have consulted), "there are many people who don't think it thieving
to steal a book unless you sell it afterwards."  But Du Monstier
took a less liberal view where his own books were concerned.  The
Cardinal Barberini came to Paris as legate, and brought in his suite
Monsignor Pamphilio, who afterwards became Innocent X.  The Cardinal
paid a visit to Du Monstier in his studio, where Monsignor Pamphilio
spied, on a table, "L'Histoire du Concile de Trent"--the good
edition, the London one.  "What a pity," thought the young
ecclesiastic, "that such a man should be, by some accident, the
possessor of so valuable a book."  With these sentiments Monsignor
Pamphilio slipped the work under his soutane.  But little Du
Monstier observed him, and said furiously to the Cardinal, that a
holy man should not bring thieves and robbers in his company.  With
these words, and with others of a violent and libellous character,
he recovered the "History of the Council of Trent," and kicked out
the future Pope.  Amelot de la Houssaie traces to this incident the
hatred borne by Innocent X. to the Crown and the people of France.
Another Pope, while only a cardinal, stole a book from Menage--so M.
Janin reports--but we have not been able to discover Menage's own
account of the larceny.  The anecdotist is not so truthful that
cardinals need flush a deeper scarlet, like the roses in Bion's
"Lament for Adonis," on account of a scandal resting on the
authority of Menage.  Among Royal persons, Catherine de Medici,
according to Brantome, was a biblioklept.  "The Marshal Strozzi had
a very fine library, and after his death the Queen-Mother seized it,
promising some day to pay the value to his son, who never got a
farthing of the money."  The Ptolemies, too, were thieves on a large
scale.  A department of the Alexandrian Library was called "The
Books from the Ships," and was filled with rare volumes stolen from
passengers in vessels that touched at the port.  True, the owners
were given copies of their ancient MSS., but the exchange, as
Aristotle says, was an "involuntary" one, and not distinct from
robbery.

The great pattern of biblioklepts, a man who carried his passion to
the most regrettable excesses, was a Spanish priest, Don Vincente,
of the convent of Pobla, in Aragon.  When the Spanish revolution
despoiled the convent libraries, Don Vincente established himself at
Barcelona, under the pillars of Los Encantes, where are the stalls
of the merchants of bric-a-brac and the seats of them that sell
books.  In a gloomy den the Don stored up treasures which he hated
to sell.  Once he was present at an auction where he was out-bid in
the competition for a rare, perhaps a unique, volume.  Three nights
after that, the people of Barcelona were awakened by cries of
"Fire!"  The house and shop of the man who had bought "Ordinacions
per los gloriosos reys de Arago" were blazing.  When the fire was
extinguished, the body of the owner of the house was found, with a
pipe in his blackened hand, and some money beside him.  Every one
said, "He must have set the house on fire with a spark from his
pipe."  Time went on, and week by week the police found the bodies
of slain men, now in the street, now in a ditch, now in the river.
There were young men and old, all had been harmless and inoffensive
in their lives, and--all had been bibliophiles.  A dagger in an
invisible hand had reached their hearts but the assassin had spared
their purses, money, and rings.  An organised search was made in the
city, and the shop of Don Vincente was examined.  There, in a hidden
recess, the police discovered the copy of "Ordinacions per los
gloriosis reys de Arago," which ought by rights to have been burned
with the house of its purchaser.  Don Vincente was asked how he got
the book.  He replied in a quiet voice, demanded that his collection
should be made over to the Barcelona Library, and then confessed a
long array of crimes.  He had strangled his rival, stolen the
"Ordinacions," and burned the house.  The slain men were people who
had bought from him books which he really could not bear to part
with.  At his trial his counsel tried to prove that his confession
was false, and that he might have got his books by honest means.  It
was objected that there was in the world only one book printed by
Lambert Palmart in 1482, and that the prisoner must have stolen
this, the only copy, from the library where it was treasured.  The
defendant's counsel proved that there was another copy in the
Louvre; that, therefore, there might be more, and that the
defendant's might have been honestly procured.  Here Don Vincente,
previously callous, uttered an hysterical cry.  Said the Alcalde:-
"At last, Vincente, you begin to understand the enormity of your
offence?"  "Ah, Senor Alcalde, my error was clumsy indeed.  If you
only knew how miserable I am!"  "If human justice prove inflexible,
there is another justice whose pity is inexhaustible.  Repentance is
never too late."  "Ah, Senor Alcalde, but my copy was not unique!"
With the story of this impenitent thief we may close the roll of
biblioklepts, though Dibdin pretends that Garrick was of the
company, and stole Alleyne's books at Dulwich.

There is a thievish nature more hateful than even the biblioklept.
The Book-Ghoul is he who combines the larceny of the biblioklept
with the abominable wickedness of breaking up and mutilating the
volumes from which he steals.  He is a collector of title-pages,
frontispieces, illustrations, and book-plates.  He prowls furtively
among public and private libraries, inserting wetted threads, which
slowly eat away the illustrations he covets; and he broods, like the
obscene demon of Arabian superstitions, over the fragments of the
mighty dead.  His disgusting tastes vary.  He prepares books for the
American market.  Christmas books are sold in the States stuffed
with pictures cut out of honest volumes.  Here is a quotation from
an American paper:-

"Another style of Christmas book which deserves to be mentioned,
though it is out of the reach of any but the very rich, is the
historical or literary work enriched with inserted plates.  There
has never, to our knowledge, been anything offered in America so
supremely excellent as the $5000 book on Washington, we think--
exhibited by Boston last year, but not a few fine specimens of books
of this class are at present offered to purchasers.  Scribner has a
beautiful copy of Forster's 'Life of Dickens,' enlarged from three
volumes octavo to nine volumes quarto, by taking to pieces,
remounting, and inlaying.  It contains some eight hundred
engravings, portraits, views, playbills, title-pages, catalogues,
proof illustrations from Dickens's works, a set of the Onwhyn
plates, rare engravings by Cruikshank and 'Phiz,' and autograph
letters.  Though this volume does not compare with Harvey's Dickens,
offered for $1750 two years ago, it is an excellent specimen of
books of this sort, and the veriest tyro in bibliographical affairs
knows how scarce are becoming the early editions of Dickens's works
and the plates illustrating them. {4}  Anything about Dickens in the
beginning of his career is a sound investment from a business point
of view.  Another work of the same sort, valued at $240, is Lady
Trevelyan's edition of Macaulay, illustrated with portraits, many of
them very rare.  Even cheaper, all things considered, is an extra-
illustrated copy of the 'Histoire de la Gravure,' which, besides its
seventy-three reproductions of old engravings, is enriched with two
hundred fine specimens of the early engravers, many of the
impressions being in first and second states.  At $155 such a book
is really a bargain, especially for any one who is forming a
collection of engravings.  Another delightful work is the library
edition of Bray's 'Evelyn,' illustrated with some two hundred and
fifty portraits and views, and valued at $175; and still another is
Boydell's 'Milton,' with plates after Westall, and further
illustrations in the shape of twenty-eight portraits of the painter
and one hundred and eighty-one plates, and many of them before
letter.  The price of this book is $325."

But few book-ghouls are worse than the moral ghoul.  He defaces,
with a pen, the passages, in some precious volume, which do not meet
his idea of moral propriety.  I have a Pine's "Horace," with the
engravings from gems, which has fallen into the hands of a moral
ghoul.  Not only has he obliterated the verses which hurt his
delicate sense, but he has actually scraped away portions of the
classical figures, and "the breasts of the nymphs in the brake."
The soul of Tartuffe had entered into the body of a sinner of the
last century.  The antiquarian ghoul steals title-pages and
colophons.  The aesthetic ghoul cuts illuminated initials out of
manuscripts.  The petty, trivial, and almost idiotic ghoul of our
own days, sponges the fly-leaves and boards of books for the purpose
of cribbing the book-plates.  An old "Complaint of a Book-plate," in
dread of the wet sponge of the enemy, has been discovered by Mr.
Austin Dobson:- {5}


THE BOOK-PLATE'S PETITION.
By a Gentleman of the Temple.


While cynic CHARLES still trimm'd the vane
'Twixt Querouaille and Castlemaine,
In days that shocked JOHN EVELYN,
My First Possessor fix'd me in.
In days of Dutchmen and of frost,
The narrow sea with JAMES I cross'd,
Returning when once more began
The Age of Saturn and of ANNE.
I am a part of all the past;
I knew the GEORGES, first and last;
I have been oft where else was none
Save the great wig of ADDISON;
And seen on shelves beneath me grope
The little eager form of POPE.
I lost the Third that own'd me when
French NOAILLES fled at Dettingen;
The year JAMES WOLFE surpris'd Quebec,
The Fourth in hunting broke his neck;
The day that WILLIAM HOGARTH dy'd,
The Fifth one found me in Cheapside.
This was a Scholar, one of those
Whose Greek is sounder than their hose;
He lov'd old Books and nappy ale,
So liv'd at Streatham, next to THRALE.
'Twas there this stain of grease I boast
Was made by Dr. JOHNSON'S toast.
(He did it, as I think, for Spite;
My Master call'd him Jacobite!)
And now that I so long to-day
Have rested post discrimina,
Safe in the brass-wir'd book-case where
I watch'd the Vicar's whit'ning hair,
Must I these travell'd bones inter
In some Collector's sepulchre!
Must I be torn from hence and thrown
With frontispiece and colophon!
With vagrant E's, and I's, and O's,
The spoil of plunder'd Folios!
With scraps and snippets that to ME
Are naught but kitchen company!
Nay, rather, FRIEND, this favour grant me:
Tear me at once; but don't transplant me.

CHELTENHAM, Sept. 31, 1792.


The conceited ghoul writes his notes across our fair white margins,
in pencil, or in more baneful ink.  Or he spills his ink bottle at
large over the pages, as Andre Chenier's friend served his copy of
Malherbe.  It is scarcely necessary to warn the amateur against the
society of book-ghouls, who are generally snuffy and foul in
appearance, and by no means so insinuating as that fair lady-ghoul,
Amina, of the Arabian Nights.

Another enemy of books must be mentioned with the delicacy that
befits the topic.  Almost all women are the inveterate foes, not of
novels, of course, nor peerages and popular volumes of history, but
of books worthy of the name.  It is true that Isabelle d'Este, and
Madame de Pompadour, and Madame de Maintenon, were collectors; and,
doubtless, there are other brilliant exceptions to a general rule.
But, broadly speaking, women detest the books which the collector
desires and admires.  First, they don't understand them; second,
they are jealous of their mysterious charms; third, books cost
money; and it really is a hard thing for a lady to see money
expended on what seems a dingy old binding, or yellow paper scored
with crabbed characters.  Thus ladies wage a skirmishing war against
booksellers' catalogues, and history speaks of husbands who have had
to practise the guile of smugglers when they conveyed a new purchase
across their own frontier.  Thus many married men are reduced to
collecting Elzevirs, which go readily into the pocket, for you
cannot smuggle a folio volume easily.  This inveterate dislike of
books often produces a very deplorable result when an old collector
dies.  His "womankind," as the Antiquary called them, sell all his
treasures for the price of waste-paper, to the nearest country
bookseller.  It is a melancholy duty which forces one to introduce
such topics into a volume on "Art at Home."  But this little work
will not have been written in vain if it persuades ladies who
inherit books not to sell them hastily, without taking good and
disinterested opinion as to their value.  They often dispose of
treasures worth thousands, for a ten pound note, and take pride in
the bargain.  Here, let history mention with due honour the paragon
of her sex and the pattern to all wives of book-collecting men--
Madame Fertiault.  It is thus that she addresses her lord in a
charming triolet ("Les Amoureux du Livre," p. xxxv):-


"Le livre a ton esprit . . . tant mieux!
Moi, j'ai ton coeur, et sans partage.
Puis-je desirer davantage?
Le livre a ton esprit . . . tant mieux!
Heureuse de te voir joyeux,
Je t'en voudrais . . . tout un etage.
Le livre a ton esprit . . . tant mieux!
Moi, j'ai ton coeur, et sans partage."


Books rule thy mind, so let it be!
Thy heart is mine, and mine alone.
What more can I require of thee?
Books rule thy mind, so let it be!
Contented when thy bliss I see,
I wish a world of books thine own.
Books rule thy mind, so let it be!
Thy heart is mine, and mine alone.


There is one method of preserving books, which, alas, only tempts
the borrower, the stealer, the rat, and the book-worm; but which is
absolutely necessary as a defence against dust and neglect.  This is
binding.  The bookbinder's art too often destroys books when the
artist is careless, but it is the only mode of preventing our
volumes from falling to pieces, and from being some day disregarded
as waste-paper.  A well-bound book, especially a book from a famous
collection, has its price, even if its literary contents be of
trifling value.  A leather coat fashioned by Derome, or Le Gascon,
or Duseuil, will win respect and careful handling for one specimen
of an edition whereof all the others have perished.  Nothing is so
slatternly as the aspect of a book merely stitched, in the French
fashion, when the threads begin to stretch, and the paper covers to
curl and be torn.  Worse consequences follow, whole sheets are lost,
the volume becomes worthless, and the owner must often be at the
expense of purchasing another copy, if he can, for the edition may
now be out of print.  Thus binding of some sort not only adds a
grace to the library, presenting to the eye the cheerful gilded rows
of our volumes, but is a positive economy.  In the case of our
cloth-covered English works, the need of binding is not so
immediately obvious.  But our publishers have a taste for clothing
their editions in tender tones of colour, stamped, often, with
landscapes printed in gold, in white, or what not.  Covers like
this, may or may not please the eye while they are new and clean,
but they soon become dirty and hideous.  When a book is covered in
cloth of a good dark tint it may be allowed to remain unbound, but
the primrose and lilac hues soon call out for the aid of the binder.

Much has been written of late about book-binding.  In a later part
of this manual we shall have something to say about historical
examples of the art, and the performances of the great masters.  At
present one must begin by giving the practical rule, that a book
should be bound in harmony with its character and its value.  The
bibliophile, if he could give the rein to his passions, would bind
every book he cares to possess in a full coat of morocco, or (if it
did not age so fast) of Russia leather.  But to do this is beyond
the power of most of us.  Only works of great rarity or value should
be full bound in morocco.  If we have the luck to light on a
Shakespeare quarto, on some masterpiece of Aldus Manutius, by all
means let us entrust it to the most competent binder, and instruct
him to do justice to the volume.  Let old English books, as More's
"Utopia," have a cover of stamped and blazoned calf.  Let the binder
clothe an early Rabelais or Marot in the style favoured by Grolier,
in leather tooled with geometrical patterns.  Let a Moliere or
Corneille be bound in the graceful contemporary style of Le Gascon,
where the lace-like pattern of the gilding resembles the Venetian
point-lace, for which La Fontaine liked to ruin himself.  Let a
binding, a la fanfare, in the style of Thouvenin, denote a novelist
of the last century, let panelled Russia leather array a folio of
Shakespeare, and let English works of a hundred years ago be clothed
in the sturdy fashion of Roger Payne.  Again, the bibliophile may
prefer to have the leather stamped with his arms and crest, like de
Thou, Henri III., D'Hoym, Madame du Barry, and most of the
collectors of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.  Yet there
are books of great price which one would hesitate to bind in new
covers.  An Aldine or an Elzevir, in its old vellum or paper
wrapper, with uncut leaves, should be left just as it came from the
presses of the great printers.  In this condition it is a far more
interesting relic.  But a morocco case may be made for the book, and
lettered properly on the back, so that the volume, though really
unbound, may take its place with the bound books on the shelves.  A
copy of any of Shelley's poems, in the original wrappers, should I
venture to think be treated thus, and so should the original
editions of Keats's and of Mr. Tennyson's works.  A collector, who
is also an author, will perhaps like to have copies of his own works
in morocco, for their coats will give them a chance of surviving the
storms of time.  But most other books, not of the highest rarity and
interest, will be sufficiently clothed in half-bindings, that is,
with leather backs and corners, while the rest of the cover is of
cloth or paper, or whatever other substance seems most appropriate.
An Oxford tutor used to give half-binding as an example of what
Aristotle calls [Greek text], or "shabbiness," and when we recommend
such coverings for books it is as a counsel of expediency, not of
perfection.  But we cannot all be millionaires; and, let it be
remembered, the really wise amateur will never be extravagant, nor
let his taste lead him into "the ignoble melancholy of pecuniary
embarrassment."  Let the example of Charles Nodier be our warning;
nay, let us remember that while Nodier could get out of debt by
selling his collection, OURS will probably not fetch anything like
what we gave for it.  In half-bindings there is a good deal of room
for the exercise of the collector's taste.  M. Octave Uzanne, in a
tract called "Les Caprices d'un Bibliophile," gives some hints on
this topic, which may be taken or let alone.  M. Uzanne has noticed
the monotony, and the want of meaning and suggestion in ordinary
half-bindings.  The paper or cloth which covers the greater part of
the surface of half-bound books is usually inartistic and even ugly.
He proposes to use old scraps of brocade, embroidery, Venice velvet,
or what not; and doubtless a covering made of some dead fair lady's
train goes well with a romance by Crebillon, and engravings by
Marillier.  "Voici un cartonnage Pompadour de notre invention," says
M. Uzanne, with pride; but he observes that it needs a strong will
to make a bookbinder execute such orders.  For another class of
books, which our honest English shelves reject with disgust, M.
Uzanne proposes a binding of the skin of the boa constrictor;
undoubtedly appropriate and "admonishing."  The leathers of China
and Japan, with their strange tints and gilded devices may be used
for books of fantasy, like "Gaspard de la Nuit," or the "Opium
Eater," or Poe's poems, or the verses of Gerard de Nerval.  Here, in
short, is an almost unexplored field for the taste of the
bibliophile, who, with some expenditure of time, and not much of
money, may make half-binding an art, and give modern books a
peculiar and appropriate raiment.

M. Ambrose Firmin Didot has left some notes on a more serious
topic,--the colours to be chosen when books are full-bound in
morocco.  Thus he would have the "Iliad" clothed in red, the
"Odyssey" in blue, because the old Greek rhapsodists wore a scarlet
cloak when they recited the Wrath of Achilles, a blue one when they
chanted of the Return of Odysseus.  The writings of the great
dignitaries of the Church, M. Didot would array in violet; scarlet
goes well with the productions of cardinals; philosophers have their
sober suit of black morocco, poets like Panard may be dressed in
rose colour.  A collector of this sort would like, were it possible,
to attire Goldsmith's poems in a "coat of Tyrian bloom, satin
grain."  As an antithesis to these extravagant fancies, we may add
that for ordinary books no binding is cheaper, neater, and more
durable, than a coat of buckram.

The conditions of a well bound book may be tersely enumerated.  The
binding should unite solidity and elegance.  The book should open
easily, and remain open at any page you please.  It should never be
necessary, in reading, to squeeze back the covers; and no book,
however expensively bound, has been properly treated, if it does not
open with ease.  It is a mistake to send recently printed books to
the binder, especially books which contain engravings.  The printing
ink dries slowly, and, in the process called "beating," the text is
often transferred to the opposite page.  M. Rouveyre recommends that
one or two years should pass before the binding of a newly printed
book.  The owner will, of course, implore the binder to, spare the
margins; and, almost equally of course, the binder, durus arator,
will cut them down with his abominable plough.  One is almost
tempted to say that margins should always be left untouched, for if
once the binder begins to clip he is unable to resist the seductive
joy, and cuts the paper to the quick, even into the printed matter.
Mr. Blades tells a very sad story of a nobleman who handed over some
Caxtons to a provincial binder, and received them back MINUS 500
pounds worth of margin.  Margins make a book worth perhaps 400
pounds, while their absence reduces the same volume to the box
marked "all these at fourpence."  Intonsis capillis, with locks
unshorn, as Motteley the old dealer used to say, an Elzevir in its
paper wrapper may be worth more than the same tome in morocco,
stamped with Longepierre's fleece of gold.  But these things are
indifferent to bookbinders, new and old.  There lies on the table,
as I write, "Les Provinciales, ou Les Lettres Ecrites par Louis de
Montalte a un Provincial de ses amis, & aux R.R. P.P. Jesuites.  A
Cologne, Ches PIERRE de la VALLEE, M.DC.LVIII."  It is the Elzevir
edition, or what passes for such; but the binder has cut down the
margin so that the words "Les Provinciales" almost touch the top of
the page.  Often the wretch--he lived, judging by his style, in
Derome's time, before the Revolution--has sliced into the head-
titles of the pages.  Thus the book, with its old red morocco cover
and gilded flowers on the back, is no proper companion for "Les
Pensees de M. PASCAL (Wolfganck, 1672)," which some sober Dutchman
has left with a fair allowance of margin, an inch "taller" in its
vellum coat than its neighbour in morocco.  Here once more, is "LES
FASCHEUX, Comedie de I. B. P. MOLIERE, Representee sur Le Theatre du
Palais Royal.  A Paris, Chez GABRIEL QUINET, au Palais, dans la
Galerie des Prisonniers, a l'Ange Gabriel, M.DCLXIII.  Avec
privilege du Roy."  What a crowd of pleasant memories the
bibliophile, and he only, finds in these dry words of the title.
Quinet, the bookseller, lived "au Palais," in that pretty old arcade
where Corneille cast the scene of his comedy, "La Galerie du
Palais."  In the Geneva edition of Corneille, 1774, you can see
Gravelot's engraving of the place; it is a print full of exquisite
charm (engraved by Le Mure in 1762).  Here is the long arcade, in
shape exactly like the galleries of the Bodleian Library at Oxford.
The bookseller's booth is arched over, and is open at front and
side.  Dorimant and Cleante are looking out; one leans on the books
on the window-sill, the other lounges at the door, and they watch
the pretty Hippolyte who is chaffering with the lace-seller at the
opposite shop.  "Ce visage vaut mieux que toutes vos chansons," says
Dorimant to the bookseller.  So they loitered, and bought books, and
flirted in their lace ruffles, and ribbons, and flowing locks, and
wide canons, when Moliere was young, and when this little old book
was new, and lying on the shelves of honest Quinet in the Palace
Gallery.  The very title-page, and pagination, not of this second
edition, but of the first of "Les Fascheux," had their own fortunes,
for the dedication to Fouquet was perforce withdrawn.  That
favourite entertained La Valliere and the King with the comedy at
his house of Vaux, and then instantly fell from power and favour,
and, losing his place and his freedom, naturally lost the flattery
of a dedication.  But retombons a nos coches, as Montaigne says.
This pleasant little copy of the play, which is a kind of relic of
Moliere and his old world, has been ruthlessly bound up with a
treatise, "Des Pierres Precieuses," published by Didot in 1776.  Now
the play is naturally a larger book than the treatise on precious
stones, so the binder has cut down the margins to the size of those
of the work on amethysts and rubies.  As the Italian tyrant chained
the dead and the living together, as Procrustes maimed his victims
on his cruel bed, so a hard-hearted French binder has tied up, and
mutilated, and spoiled the old play, which otherwise would have had
considerable value as well as interest.

We have tried to teach the beginner how to keep his books neat and
clean; what men and monsters he should avoid; how he should guard
himself against borrowers, book-worms, damp, and dirt.  But we are
sometimes compelled to buy books already dirty and dingy, foxed, or
spotted with red, worn by greasy hands, stained with ink spots, or
covered with MS. notes.  The art of man has found a remedy for these
defects.  I have never myself tried to wash a book, and this care is
best left to professional hands.  But the French and English writers
give various recipes for cleaning old books, which the amateur may
try on any old rubbish out of the fourpenny box of a bookstall, till
he finds that he can trust his own manipulations.  There are "fat
stains" on books, as thumb marks, traces of oil (the midnight oil),
flakes of old pasty crust left in old Shakespeares, and candle
drippings.  There are "thin stains," as of mud, scaling-wax, ink,
dust, and damp.  To clean a book you first carefully unbind it, take
off the old covers, cut the old stitching, and separate sheet from
sheet.  Then take a page with "fat stains" of any kind of grease
(except finger-marks), pass a hot flat iron over it, and press on it
a clean piece of blotting paper till the paper sucks up the grease.
Then charge a camel-hair brush with heated turpentine, and pass it
over the places that were stained.  If the paper loses its colour
press softly over it a delicate handkerchief, soaked in heated
spirits of wine.  Finger-marks you will cover with clean soap, leave
this on for some hours, and then rub with a sponge filled with hot
water.  Afterwards dip in weak acid and water, and then soak the
page in a bath of clean water.  Ink-stained pages you will first dip
in a strong solution of oxalic acid and then in hydrochloric acid
mixed in six times its quantity of water.  Then bathe in clean water
and allow to dry slowly.

Some English recipes may also be given.  "Grease or wax spots," says
Hannett, in "Bibliopegia," "may be removed by washing the part with
ether, chloroform, or benzine, and placing it between pieces of
white blotting paper, then pass a hot iron over it."  "Chlorine
water," says the same writer, removes ink stains, and bleaches the
paper at the same time.  Of chloride of lime, "a piece the size of a
nut" (a cocoa nut or a hazel nut?) in a pint of water, may be
applied with a camel's hair pencil, and plenty of patience.  To
polish old bindings, "take the yolk of an egg, beat it up with a
fork, apply it with a sponge, having first cleaned the leather with
a dry flannel."  The following, says a writer in "Notes and
Queries," with perfect truth, is "an easier if not a better method;
purchase some bookbinder's varnish," and use it as you did the
rudimentary omelette of the former recipe.  Vellum covers may be
cleaned with soap and water, or in bad cases by a weak solution of
salts of lemon.

Lastly, the collector should acquire such books as Lowndes's
"Bibliography," Brunet's "Manuel," and as many priced catalogues as
he can secure.  The catalogues of Mr. Quaritch, Mr. Bohn, M.
Fontaine, M.M. Morgand et Fatout, are excellent guides to a
knowledge of the market value of books.  Other special works, as
Renouard's for Aldines, Willems's for Elzevirs, and Cohen's for
French engravings, will be mentioned in their proper place.
Dibdin's books are inaccurate and long-winded, but may occasionally
be dipped into with pleasure.


THE BOOKS OF THE COLLECTOR


The easiest way to bring order into the chaos of desirable books,
is, doubtless, to begin historically with manuscripts.  Almost every
age that has left any literary remains, has bequeathed to us relics
which are cherished by collectors.  We may leave the clay books of
the Chaldeans out of the account.  These tomes resemble nothing so
much as sticks of chocolate, and, however useful they may be to the
student, the clay MSS. of Assurbanipal are not coveted by the
collector.  He finds his earliest objects of desire in illuminated
manuscripts.  The art of decorating manuscripts is as old as Egypt;
but we need not linger over the beautiful papyri, which are silent
books to all but a few Egyptologists.  Greece, out of all her tomes,
has left us but a few ill-written papyri.  Roman and early Byzantine
art are represented by a "Virgil," and fragments of an "Iliad"; the
drawings in the latter have been reproduced in a splendid volume
(Milan 1819), and shew Greek art passing into barbarism.  The
illumination of MSS. was a favourite art in the later empire, and is
said to have been practised by Boethius.  The iconoclasts of the
Eastern empire destroyed the books which contained representations
of saints and of the persons of the Trinity, and the monk Lazarus, a
famous artist, was cruelly tortured for his skill in illuminating
sacred works.  The art was decaying in Western Europe when
Charlemagne sought for painters of MSS. in England and Ireland,
where the monks, in their monasteries, had developed a style with
original qualities.  The library of Corpus Christi at Cambridge,
contains some of the earliest and most beautiful of extant English
MSS.  These parchments, stained purple or violet, and inscribed with
characters of gold; are too often beyond the reach of the amateur
for whom we write.  The MSS. which he can hope to acquire are
neither very early nor very sumptuous, and, as a rule, MSS. of
secular books are apt to be out of his reach.

Yet a collection of MSS. has this great advantage over a collection
of printed books, that every item in it is absolutely unique, no two
MSS. being ever really the same.  This circumstance alone would
entitle a good collection of MSS. to very high consideration on the
part of book-collectors.  But, in addition to the great expense of
such a collection, there is another and even more serious drawback.
It is sometimes impossible, and is often extremely difficult, to
tell whether a MS. is perfect or not.

This difficulty can only be got over by an amount of learning on the
part of the collector to which, unfortunately, he is too often a
stranger.  On the other hand, the advantages of collecting MSS. are
sometimes very great.

In addition to the pleasure--a pleasure at once literary and
artistic--which the study of illuminated MSS. affords, there is the
certainty that, as years go on, the value of such a collection
increases in a proportion altogether marvellous.

I will take two examples to prove this point.  Some years ago an
eminent collector gave the price of 30 pounds for a small French
book of Hours, painted in grisaille.  It was in a country town that
he met with this treasure, for a treasure he considered the book, in
spite of its being of the very latest school of illumination.  When
his collection was dispersed a few years ago this one book fetched
260 pounds.

In the celebrated Perkins sale, in 1873, a magnificent early MS.,
part of which was written in gold on a purple ground, and which was
dated in the catalogue "ninth or tenth century," but was in reality
of the end of the tenth or beginning of the eleventh, was sold for
565 pounds to a dealer.  It found its way into Mr. Bragge's
collection, at what price I do not know, and was resold, three years
later, for 780 pounds.

Any person desirous of making a collection of illuminated MSS.,
should study seriously for some time at the British Museum, or some
such place, until he is thoroughly acquainted (1) with the styles of
writing in use in the Middle Ages, so that he can at a glance make a
fairly accurate estimate of the age of the book submitted to him;
and (2) with the proper means of collating the several kinds of
service-books, which, in nine cases out of ten, were those chosen
for illumination.

A knowledge of the styles of writing can be acquired at second hand
in a book lately published by Mr. Charles Trice Martin, F.S.A.,
being a new edition of "Astle's Progress of Writing."  Still better,
of course, is the actual inspection and comparison of books to which
a date can be with some degree of certainty assigned.

It is very common for the age of a book to be misstated in the
catalogues of sales, for the simple reason that the older the
writing, the plainer, in all probability, it is.  Let the student
compare writing of the twelfth century with that of the sixteenth,
and he will be able to judge at once of the truth of this assertion.
I had once the good fortune to "pick up" a small Testament of the
early part of the twelfth century, if not older, which was
catalogued as belonging to the fifteenth, a date which would have
made it of very moderate value.

With regard to the second point, the collation of MSS., I fear there
is no royal road to knowing whether a book is perfect or imperfect.
In some cases the catchwords remain at the foot of the pages.  It is
then of course easy to see if a page is lost, but where no such clue
is given the student's only chance is to be fully acquainted with
what a book OUGHT to contain.  He can only do this when he has a
knowledge of the different kinds of service-books which were in use,
and of their most usual contents.

I am indebted to a paper, read by the late Sir William Tite at a
meeting of the Society of Antiquaries, for the collation of "Books
of Hours," but there are many kinds of MSS. besides these, and it is
well to know something of them.  The Horae, or Books of Hours, were
the latest development of the service-books used at an earlier
period.  They cannot, in fact, be strictly called service-books,
being intended only for private devotion.  But in the thirteenth
century and before it, Psalters were in use for this purpose, and
the collation of a Psalter is in truth more important than that of a
Book of Hours.  It will be well for a student, therefore, to begin
with Psalters, as he can then get up the Hours in their elementary
form.  I subjoin a bibliographical account of both kinds of MSS.  In
the famous Exhibition at the Burlington Club in 1874, a number of
volumes was arranged to show how persistent one type of the age
could be.  The form of the decorations, and the arrangement of the
figures in borders, once invented, was fixed for generations.  In a
Psalter of the thirteenth century there was, under the month of
January in the calendar, a picture of a grotesque little figure
warming himself at a stove.  The hearth below, the chimney-pot
above, on which a stork was feeding her brood, with the intermediate
chimney shaft used as a border, looked like a scientific preparation
from the interior anatomy of a house of the period.  In one of the
latest of the MSS. exhibited on that occasion was the self-same
design again.  The little man was no longer a grotesque, and the
picture had all the high finish and completeness in drawing that we
might expect in the workmanship of a contemporary of Van Eyck.
There was a full series of intermediate books, showing the gradual
growth of the picture.

With regard to chronology, it may be roughly asserted that the
earliest books which occur are Psalters of the thirteenth century.
Next to them come Bibles, of which an enormous issue took place
before the middle of the fourteenth century.  These are followed by
an endless series of books of Hours, which, as the sixteenth century
is reached, appear in several vernacular languages.  Those in
English, being both very rare and of great importance in liturgical
history, are of a value altogether out of proportion to the beauty
of their illuminations.  Side by side with this succession are the
Evangelistina, which, like the example mentioned above, are of the
highest merit, beauty, and value; followed by sermons and homilies,
and the Breviary, which itself shows signs of growth as the years go
on.  The real Missal, with which all illuminated books used to be
confounded, is of rare occurrence, but I have given a collation of
it also.  Besides these devotional or religious books, I must
mention chronicles and romances, and the semi-religious and moral
allegories, such as the "Pelerinage de l'Ame," which is said to have
given Bunyan the machinery of the "Pilgrim's Progress."  Chaucer's
and Gower's poetry exists in many MSS., as does the "Polychronicon"
of Higden; but, as a rule, the mediaeval chronicles are of single
origin, and were not copied.  To collate MSS. of these kinds is
quite impossible, unless by carefully reading them, and seeing that
the pages run on without break.

I should advise the young collector who wishes to make sure of
success not to be too catholic in his tastes at first, but to
confine his attention to a single period and a single school.  I
should also advise him to make from time to time a careful catalogue
of what he buys, and to preserve it even after he has weeded out
certain items.  He will then be able to make a clear comparative
estimate of the importance and value of his collection, and by
studying one species at a time, to become thoroughly conversant with
what it can teach him.  When he has, so to speak, burnt his fingers
once or twice, he will find himself able to distinguish at sight
what no amount of teaching by word of mouth or by writing could ever
possibly impart to any advantage.

One thing I should like if possible to impress very strongly upon
the reader.  That is the fact that a MS. which is not absolutely
perfect, if it is in a genuine state, is of much more value than one
which has been made perfect by the skill of a modern restorer.  The
more skilful he is, that is to say the better he can forge the style
of the original, the more worthless he renders the volume.

Printing seems to have superseded the art of the illuminator more
promptly and completely in England than on the Continent.  The dames
galantes of Brantome's memoirs took pleasure in illuminated Books of
Hours, suited to the nature of their devotions.  As late as the time
of Louis XIV., Bussy Rabutin had a volume of the same kind,
illuminated with portraits of "saints," of his own canonisation.
The most famous of these modern examples of costly MSS. was "La
Guirlande de Julie," a collection of madrigals by various courtly
hands, presented to the illustrious Julie, daughter of the Marquise
de Rambouillet, most distinguished of the Precieuses, and wife of
the Duc de Montausier, the supposed original of Moliere's Alceste.
The MS. was copied on vellum by Nicholas Jarry, the great calligraph
of his time.  The flowers on the margin were painted by Robert.  Not
long ago a French amateur was so lucky as to discover the MS. book
of prayers of Julie's noble mother, the Marquise de Rambouillet.
The Marquise wrote these prayers for her own devotions, and Jarry,
the illuminator, declared that he found them most edifying, and
delightful to study.  The manuscript is written on vellum by the
famous Jarry, contains a portrait of the fair Julie herself, and is
bound in morocco by Le Gascon.  The happy collector who possesses
the volume now, heard vaguely that a manuscript of some interest was
being exposed for sale at a trifling price in the shop of a country
bookseller.  The description of the book, casual as it was, made
mention of the monogram on the cover.  This was enough for the
amateur.  He rushed to a railway station, travelled some three
hundred miles, reached the country town, hastened to the
bookseller's shop, and found that the book had been withdrawn by its
owner.  Happily the possessor, unconscious of his bliss, was at
home.  The amateur sought him out, paid the small sum demanded, and
returned to Paris in triumph.  Thus, even in the region of
manuscript-collecting, there are extraordinary prizes for the
intelligent collector.


TO KNOW IF A MANUSCRIPT IS PERFECT


If the manuscript is of English or French writing of the twelfth,
thirteenth, fourteenth, or fifteenth centuries, it is probably
either--(1) a Bible, (2) a Psalter, (3) a book of Hours, or (4), but
rarely, a Missal.  It is not worth while to give the collation of a
gradual, or a hymnal, or a processional, or a breviary, or any of
the fifty different kinds of service-books which are occasionally
met with, but which are never twice the same.

To collate one of them, the reader must go carefully through the
book, seeing that the catch-words, if there are any, answer to the
head lines; and if there are "signatures," that is, if the foot of
the leaves of a sheet of parchment has any mark for enabling the
binder to "gather" them correctly, going through them, and seeing
that each signed leaf has its corresponding "blank."

1.  To collate a Bible, it will be necessary first to go through the
catch-words, if any, and signatures, as above; then to notice the
contents.  The first page should contain the Epistle of St. Jerome
to the reader.  It will be observed that there is nothing of the
nature of a title-page, but I have often seen title-pages supplied
by some ignorant imitator in the last century, with the idea that
the book was imperfect without one.  The books of the Bible follow
in order--but the order not only differs from ours, but differs in
different copies.  The Apocryphal books are always included.  The
New Testament usually follows on the Old without any break; and the
book concludes with an index of the Hebrew names and their
signification in Latin, intended to help preachers to the figurative
meaning of the biblical types and parables.  The last line of the
Bible itself usually contains a colophon, in which sometimes the
name of the writer is given, sometimes the length of time it has
taken him to write, and sometimes merely the "Explicit. Laus Deo,"
which has found its way into many modern books.  This colophon,
which comes as a rule immediately before the index, often contains
curious notes, hexameters giving the names of all the books,
biographical or local memoranda, and should always be looked for by
the collector.  One such line occurs to me.  It is in a Bible
written in Italy in the thirteenth century -


"Qui scripsit scribat.  Vergilius spe domini vivat."


Vergilius was, no doubt, in this case the scribe.  The Latin and the
writing are often equally crabbed.  In the Bodleian there is a Bible
with this colophon -


"Finito libro referemus gratias Christo m.cc.lxv. indict. viij.
Ego Lafracus de Pacis de Cmoa scriptor scripsi."


This was also written in Italy.  English colophons are often very
quaint--"Qui scripsit hunc librum fiat collocatus in Paradisum," is
an example.  The following gives us the name of one Master Gerard,
who, in the fourteenth century, thus poetically described his
ownership:-


"Si Ge ponatur--et rar simul associatur -
Et dus reddatur--cui pertinet ita vocatur."


In a Bible written in England, in the British Museum, there is a
long colophon, in which, after the name of the writer--"hunc librum
scripsit Wills de Hales,"--there is a prayer for Ralph of Nebham,
who had called Hales to the writing of the book, followed by a date-
-"Fes. fuit liber anno M.cc.i. quarto ab incarnatione domini."  In
this Bible the books of the New Testament were in the following
order:- the Evangelists, the Acts, the Epistles of S. Peter, S.
James, and S. John, the Epistles of S. Paul, and the Apocalypse.  In
a Bible at Brussels I found the colophon after the index:- "Hic
expliciunt interpretationes Hebrayorum nominum Do gris qui potens
est p. sup. omia."  Some of these Bibles are of marvellously small
dimensions.  The smallest I ever saw was at Ghent, but it was very
imperfect.  I have one in which there are thirteen lines of writing
in an inch of the column.  The order of the books of the New
Testament in Bibles of the thirteenth century is usually according
to one or other of the three following arrangements:-


(1.)  The Evangelists, Romans to Hebrews, Acts, Epistles of S.
Peter, S. James, and S. John, Apocalypse.

(2.)  The Evangelists, Acts, Epistles of S. Peter, S. James, and S.
John, Epistles of S. Paul, Apocalypse.  This is the most common.

(3.)  The Evangelists, Acts, Epistles of S. Peter, S. James, and S.
John, Apocalypse, and Epistles of S. Paul.

On the fly leaves of these old Bibles there are often very curious
inscriptions.  In one I have this:- "Haec biblia emi Haquinas prior
monasterii Hatharbiensis de dono domini regis Norwegie."  Who was
this King of Norway who, in 1310, gave the Prior of Hatherby money
to buy a Bible, which was probably written at Canterbury?  And who
was Haquinas?  His name has a Norwegian sound, and reminds us of St.
Thomas of that surname.  In another manuscript I have seen


"Articula Fidei:-
Nascitur, abluitur, patitur, descendit at ima
Surgit et ascendit, veniens discernere cuncta."


In another this:-


"Sacramenta ecclesiae:-
Abluo, fumo, cibo, piget, ordinat, uxor et ungit."


I will conclude these notes on MS. Bibles with the following
colophon from a copy written in Italy in the fifteenth century:-


"Finito libro vivamus semper in Christo -
Si semper in Christo carebimus ultimo leto.
Explicit Deo gratias; Amen.  Stephanus de
Tantaldis scripsit in pergamo."


2.  The "Psalter" of the thirteenth century is usually to be
considered a forerunner of the "Book of Hours."  It always contains,
and usually commences with, a Calendar, in which are written against
certain days the "obits" of benefactors and others, so that a well-
filled Psalter often becomes a historical document of high value and
importance.  The first page of the psalms is ornamented with a huge
B, which often fills the whole page, and contains a representation
of David and Goliath ingeniously fitted to the shape of the letter.
At the end are usually to be found the hymns of the Three Children,
and others from the Bible together with the Te Deum; and sometimes,
in late examples, a litany.  In some psalters the calendar is at the
end.  These Psalters, and the Bibles described above, are very
frequently of English work; more frequently, that is, than the books
of Hours and Missals.  The study of the Scriptures was evidently
more popular in England than in the other countries of Europe during
the Middle Ages; and the early success of the Reformers here, must
in part, no doubt, be attributed to the wide circulation of the
Bible even before it had been translated from the Latin.  I need
hardly, perhaps, observe that even fragments of a Psalter, a
Testament, or a Bible in English, are so precious as to be
practically invaluable.

3.  We are indebted to Sir W. Tite for the following collation of a
Flemish "Book of Hours":-


1.  The Calendar.

2.  Gospels of the Nativity and the Resurrection.

3.  Preliminary Prayers (inserted occasionally).

4.  Horae--(Nocturns and Matins).

5.  (Lauds).

6.  (Prime).

7.  (Tierce).

8.  (Sexte).

9.  (None).

10.  (Vespers).

11.  (Compline).

12.  The seven penitential Psalms

13.  The Litany.

14.  Hours of the Cross.

15.  Hours of the Holy Spirit.

16.  Office of the Dead.

17.  The Fifteen Joys of B. V. M.

18.  The seven requests to our Lord.

19.  Prayers and Suffrages to various Saints.

20.  Several prayers, petitions, and devotions.


This is an unusually full example, but the calendar, the hours, the
seven psalms, and the litany, are in almost all the MSS.  The buyer
must look carefully to see that no miniatures have been cut out; but
it is only by counting the leaves in their gatherings that he can
make sure.  This is often impossible without breaking the binding.

The most valuable "Horae" are those written in England.  Some are of
the English use (Sarum or York, or whatever it may happen to be),
but were written abroad, especially in Normandy, for the English
market.  These are also valuable, even when imperfect.  Look for the
page before the commencement of the Hours (No. 4 in the list above),
and at the end will be found a line in red,--"Incipit Horae secundum
usum Sarum," or otherwise, as the case may be.

4.  Missals do not often occur, and are not only very valuable but
very difficult to collate, unless furnished with catch-words or
signatures.  But no Missal is complete without the Canon of the
Mass, usually in the middle of the book, and if there are any
illuminations throughout the volume, there will be a full page
Crucifixion, facing the Canon.  Missals of large size and
completeness contain--(1) a Calendar; (2) "the proper of the
Season;" (3) the ordinary and Canon of the Mass; (4) the Communal of
Saints; (5) the proper of Saints and special occasions; (6) the
lessons, epistles, and gospels; with (7) some hymns, "proses," and
canticles.  This is Sir W. Tite's list; but, as he remarks, MS.
Missals seldom contain so much.  The collector will look for the
Canon, which is invariable.

Breviaries run to an immense length, and are seldom illuminated.  It
would be impossible to give them any kind of collation, and the same
may be said of many other kinds of old service-books, and of the
chronicles, poems, romances, and herbals, in which mediaeval
literature abounded, and which the collector must judge as best he
can.

The name of "missal" is commonly and falsely given to all old
service-books by the booksellers, but the collector will easily
distinguish one when he sees it, from the notes I have given.  In a
Sarum Missal, at Alnwick, there is a colophon quoted by my lamented
friend Dr. Rock in his "Textile Fabrics."  It is appropriate both to
the labours of the old scribes and also to those of their modern
readers:-


"Librum Scribendo--Jon Whas Monachus laborabat -
Et mane Surgendo--multum corpus macerabat."


It is one of the charms of manuscripts that they illustrate, in
their minute way, all the art, and even the social condition, of the
period in which they were produced.  Apostles, saints, and prophets
wear the contemporary costume, and Jonah, when thrown to the hungry
whale, wears doublet and trunk hose.  The ornaments illustrate the
architectural taste of the day.  The backgrounds change from
diapered patterns to landscapes, as the modern way of looking at
nature penetrates the monasteries and reaches the scriptorium where
the illuminator sits and refreshes his eyes with the sight of the
slender trees and blue distant hills.  Printed books have not such
resources.  They can only show varieties of type, quaint
frontispieces, printers' devices, and fleurons at the heads of
chapters.  These attractions, and even the engravings of a later
day, seem meagre enough compared with the allurements of
manuscripts.  Yet printed books must almost always make the greater
part of a collection, and it may be well to give some rules as to
the features that distinguish the productions of the early press.
But no amount of "rules" is worth six months' practical experience
in bibliography.  That experience the amateur, if he is wise, will
obtain in a public library, like the British Museum or the Bodleian.
Nowhere else is he likely to see much of the earliest of printed
books, which very seldom come into the market.

Those of the first German press are so rare that practically they
never reach the hands of the ordinary collector.  Among them are the
famous Psalters printed by Fust and Schoffer, the earliest of which
is dated 1457; and the bible known as the Mazarine Bible.  Two
copies of this last were in the Perkins sale.  I well remember the
excitement on that occasion.  The first copy put up was the best,
being printed upon vellum.  The bidding commenced at 1000 pounds,
and very speedily rose to 2200 pounds, at which point there was a
long pause; it then rose in hundreds with very little delay to 3400
pounds, at which it was knocked down to a bookseller.  The second
copy was on paper, and there were those present who said it was
better than the other, which had a suspicion attaching to it of
having been "restored" with a facsimile leaf.  The first bid was
again 1000 pounds, which the buyer of the previous copy made
guineas, and the bidding speedily went up to 2660 pounds, at which
price the first bidder paused.  A third bidder had stepped in at
1960 pounds, and now, amid breathless excitement, bid 10 pounds
more.  This he had to do twice before the book was knocked down to
him at 2690 pounds.

A scene like this has really very little to do with book-collecting.
The beginner must labour hard to distinguish different kinds of
printing; he must be able to recognise at a glance even fragments
from the press of Caxton.  His eye must be accustomed to all the
tricks of the trade and others, so that he may tell a facsimile in a
moment, or detect a forgery.

But now let us return to the distinctive marks of early printed
books.  The first is, says M. Rouveyre, -

1.  The absence of a separate title-page.  It was not till 1476-1480
that the titles of books were printed on separate pages.  The next
mark is -


2.  The absence of capital letters at the beginnings of divisions.
For example, in an Aldine Iliad, the fifth book begins thus -


[Greek text]


It was intended that the open space, occupied by the small epsilon
([epsilon symbol]), should be filled up with a coloured and gilded
initial letter by the illuminator.  Copies thus decorated are not
very common, but the Aldine "Homer" of Francis I., rescued by M.
Didot from a rubbish heap in an English cellar, had its due
illuminations.  In the earliest books the guide to the illuminator,
the small printed letter, does not appear, and he often puts in the
wrong initial.

3.  Irregularity and rudeness of type is a "note" of the primitive
printing press, which very early disappeared.  Nothing in the
history of printing is so remarkable as the beauty of almost its
first efforts.  Other notes are -

4.  The absence of figures at the top of the pages, and of
signatures at the foot.  The thickness and solidity of the paper,
the absence of the printer's name, of the date, and of the name of
the town where the press stood, and the abundance of crabbed
abbreviations, are all marks, more or less trustworthy, of the
antiquity of books.  It must not be supposed that all books
published, let us say before 1500, are rare, or deserve the notice
of the collector.  More than 18,000 works, it has been calculated,
left the press before the end of the fifteenth century.  All of
these cannot possibly be of interest, and many of them that are
"rare," are rare precisely because they are uninteresting.  They
have not been preserved because they were thought not worth
preserving.  This is a great cause of rarity; but we must not
hastily conclude that because a book found no favour in its own age,
therefore it has no claim on our attention.  A London bookseller
tells me that he bought the "remainder" of Keats's "Endymion" for
fourpence a copy!  The first edition of "Endymion" is now rare and
valued.  In trying to mend the binding of an old "Odyssey" lately, I
extracted from the vellum covers parts of two copies of a very
scarce and curious French dictionary of slang, "Le Jargon, ou
Langage de l'Argot Reforme."  This treatise may have been valueless,
almost, when it appeared, but now it is serviceable to the
philologist, and to all who care to try to interpret the slang
ballades of the poet Villon.  An old pamphlet, an old satire, may
hold the key to some historical problem, or throw light on the past
of manners and customs.  Still, of the earliest printed books,
collectors prefer such rare and beautiful ones as the oldest printed
Bibles:  German, English,--as Taverner's and the Bishop's,--or
Hebrew and Greek, or the first editions of the ancient classics,
which may contain the readings of MSS. now lost or destroyed.
Talking of early Bibles, let us admire the luck and prudence of a
certain Mr. Sandford.  He always longed for the first Hebrew Bible,
but would offer no fancy price, being convinced that the book would
one day fall in his way.  His foreboding was fulfilled, and he
picked up his treasure for ten shillings in a shop in the Strand.
The taste for incunabula, or very early printed books, slumbered in
the latter half of the sixteenth, and all the seventeenth century.
It revived with the third jubilee of printing in 1740, and since
then has refined itself, and only craves books very early, very
important, or works from the press of Caxton, the St. Albans
Schoolmaster, or other famous old artists.  Enough has been said to
show the beginner, always enthusiastic, that all old books are not
precious.  For further information, the "Biography and Typography of
William Caxton," by Mr. Blades (Trubner, London, 1877), may be
consulted with profit.

Following the categories into which M. Brunet classifies desirable
books in his invaluable manual, we now come to books printed on
vellum, and on peculiar papers.  At the origin of printing, examples
of many books, probably presentation copies, were printed on vellum.
There is a vellum copy of the celebrated Florentine first edition of
Homer; but it is truly sad to think that the twin volumes, Iliad and
Odyssey, have been separated, and pine in distant libraries.  Early
printed books on vellum often have beautifully illuminated capitals.
Dibdin mentions in "Bibliomania" (London, 1811), p. 90, that a M.
Van Praet was compiling a catalogue of works printed on vellum, and
had collected more than 2000 articles.  When hard things are said
about Henry VIII., let us remember that this monarch had a few
copies of his book against Luther printed on vellum.  The Duke of
Marlborough's library possessed twenty-five books on vellum, all
printed before 1496.  The chapter-house at Padua has a "Catullus" of
1472 on vellum; let Mr. Robinson Ellis think wistfully of that
treasure.  The notable Count M'Carthy of Toulouse had a wonderful
library of books in membranis, including a book much coveted for its
rarity, oddity, and the beauty of its illustrations, the
"Hypnerotomachia" of Poliphilus (Venice, 1499).  Vellum was the
favourite "vanity" of Junot, Napoleon's general.  For reasons
connected with its manufacture, and best not inquired into, the
Italian vellum enjoyed the greatest reputation for smooth and silky
whiteness.  Dibdin calls "our modern books on vellum little short of
downright wretched."  But the editor of this series could, I think,
show examples that would have made Dibdin change his opinion.

Many comparatively expensive papers, large in format, are used in
choice editions of books.  Whatman papers, Dutch papers, Chinese
papers, and even papier verge, have all their admirers.  The amateur
will soon learn to distinguish these materials.  As to books printed
on coloured paper--green, blue, yellow, rhubarb-coloured, and the
like, they are an offence to the eyes and to the taste.  Yet even
these have their admirers and collectors, and the great Aldus
himself occasionally used azure paper.  Under the head of "large
paper," perhaps "uncut copies" should be mentioned.  Most owners of
books have had the edges of the volumes gilded or marbled by the
binders.  Thus part of the margin is lost, an offence to the eye of
the bibliomaniac, while copies untouched by the binder's shears are
rare, and therefore prized.  The inconvenience of uncut copies is,
that one cannot easily turn over the leaves.  But, in the present
state of the fashion, a really rare uncut Elzevir may be worth
hundreds of pounds, while a cropped example scarcely fetches as many
shillings.  A set of Shakespeare's quartoes, uncut, would be worth
more than a respectable landed estate in Connemara.  For these
reasons the amateur will do well to have new books of price bound
"uncut."  It is always easy to have the leaves pared away; but not
even the fabled fountain at Argos, in which Hera yearly renewed her
maidenhood, could restore margins once clipped away.  So much for
books which are chiefly precious for the quantity and quality of the
material on which they are printed.  Even this rather foolish
weakness of the amateur would not be useless if it made our
publishers more careful to employ a sound clean hand-made paper,
instead of drugged trash, for their more valuable new productions.
Indeed, a taste for hand-made paper is coming in, and is part of the
revolt against the passion for everything machine-made, which ruined
art and handiwork in the years between 1840 and 1870.

The third of M. Brunet's categories of books of prose, includes
livres de luxe, and illustrated literature.  Every Christmas brings
us livres de luxe in plenty, books which are no books, but have gilt
and magenta covers, and great staring illustrations.  These are
regarded as drawing-room ornaments by people who never read.  It is
scarcely necessary to warn the collector against these gaudy baits
of unregulated Christmas generosity.  All ages have not produced
quite such garish livres de luxe as ours.  But, on the whole, a book
brought out merely for the sake of display, is generally a book ill
"got up," and not worth reading.  Moreover, it is generally a folio,
or quarto, so large that he who tries to read it must support it on
a kind of scaffolding.  In the class of illustrated books two sorts
are at present most in demand.  The ancient woodcuts and engravings,
often the work of artists like Holbein and Durer, can never lose
their interest.  Among old illustrated books, the most famous, and
one of the rarest, is the "Hypnerotomachia Poliphili," "wherein all
human matters are proved to be no more than a dream."  This is an
allegorical romance, published in 1499, for Francesco Colonna, by
Aldus Manucius.  Poliam Frater Franciscus Columna peramavit.
"Brother Francesco Colonna dearly loved Polia," is the inscription
and device of this romance.  Poor Francesco, of the order of
preachers, disguised in this strange work his passion for a lady of
uncertain name.  Here is a translation of the passage in which the
lady describes the beginning of his affection.  "I was standing, as
is the manner of women young and fair, at the window, or rather on
the balcony, of my palace.  My yellow hair, the charm of maidens,
was floating round my shining shoulders.  My locks were steeped in
unguents that made them glitter like threads of gold, and they were
slowly drying in the rays of the burning sun.  A handmaid, happy in
her task, was drawing a comb through my tresses, and surely these of
Andromeda seemed not more lovely to Perseus, nor to Lucius the locks
of Photis. {6}  On a sudden, Poliphilus beheld me, and could not
withdraw from me his glances of fire, and even in that moment a ray
of the sun of love was kindled in his heart."

The fragment is itself a picture from the world of the Renaissance.
We watch the blonde, learned lady, dreaming of Perseus, and Lucius,
Greek lovers of old time, while the sun gilds her yellow hair, and
the young monk, passing below, sees and loves, and "falls into the
deep waters of desire."  The lover is no less learned than the lady,
and there is a great deal of amorous archaeology in his account of
his voyage to Cythera.  As to the designs in wood, quaint in their
vigorous effort to be classical, they have been attributed to
Mantegna, to Bellini, and other artists.  Jean Cousin is said to
have executed the imitations, in the Paris editions of 1546, 1556,
and 1561.

The "Hypnerotomachia" seems to deserve notice, because it is the
very type of the books that are dear to collectors, as distinct from
the books that, in any shape, are for ever valuable to the world.  A
cheap Tauchnitz copy of the Iliad and Odyssey, or a Globe
Shakespeare, are, from the point of view of literature, worth a
wilderness of "Hypnerotomachiae."  But a clean copy of the
"Hypnerotomachia," especially on VELLUM, is one of the jewels of
bibliography.  It has all the right qualities; it is very rare, it
is very beautiful as a work of art, it is curious and even bizarre,
it is the record of a strange time, and a strange passion; it is a
relic, lastly, of its printer, the great and good Aldus Manutius.

Next to the old woodcuts and engravings, executed in times when
artists were versatile and did not disdain even to draw a book-plate
(as Durer did for Pirckheimer), the designs of the French "little
masters," are at present in most demand.  The book illustrations of
the seventeenth century are curious enough, and invaluable as
authorities on manners and costume.  But the attitudes of the
figures are too often stiff and ungainly; while the composition is
frequently left to chance.  England could show nothing much better
than Ogilby's translations of Homer, illustrated with big florid
engravings in sham antique style.  The years between 1730 and 1820,
saw the French "little masters" in their perfection.  The dress of
the middle of the eighteenth century, of the age of Watteau, was
precisely suited to the gay and graceful pencils of Gravelot,
Moreau, Eisen, Boucher, Cochin, Marillier, and Choffard.  To
understand their merits, and the limits of their art, it is enough
to glance through a series of the designs for Voltaire, Corneille,
or Moliere.  The drawings of society are almost invariably dainty
and pleasing, the serious scenes of tragedy leave the spectator
quite unmoved.  Thus it is but natural that these artists should
have shone most in the illustration of airy trifles like Dorat's
"Baisers," or tales like Manon Lescaut, or in designing tailpieces
for translations of the Greek idyllic poets, such as Moschus and
Bion.  In some of his illustrations of books, especially, perhaps,
in the designs for "La Physiologie de Gout" (Jouaust, Paris, 1879),
M. Lalauze has shown himself the worthy rival of Eisen and Cochin.
Perhaps it is unnecessary to add that the beauty and value of all
such engravings depends almost entirely on their "state."  The
earlier proofs are much more brilliant than those drawn later, and
etchings on fine papers are justly preferred.  For example, M.
Lalauze's engravings on "Whatman paper," have a beauty which could
scarcely be guessed by people who have only seen specimens on
"papier verge."  Every collector of the old French vignettes, should
possess himself of the "Guide de l'amateur," by M. Henry Cohen
(Rouquette, Paris, 1880).  Among English illustrated books, various
tastes prefer the imaginative works of William Blake, the etchings
of Cruikshank, and the woodcuts of Bewick.  The whole of the last
chapter of this sketch is devoted, by Mr. Austin Dobson, to the
topic of English illustrated books.  Here it may be said, in
passing, that an early copy of William Blake's "Songs of Innocence,"
written, illustrated, printed, coloured, and boarded by the author's
own hand, is one of the most charming objects that a bibliophile can
hope to possess.  The verses of Blake, in a framework of birds, and
flowers, and plumes, all softly and magically tinted, seem like some
book out of King Oberon's library in fairyland, rather than the
productions of a mortal press.  The pictures in Blake's "prophetic
books," and even his illustrations to "Job," show an imagination
more heavily weighted by the technical difficulties of drawing.

The next class of rare books is composed of works from the famous
presses of the Aldi and the Elzevirs.  Other presses have, perhaps,
done work as good, but Estienne, the Giunta, and Plantin, are
comparatively neglected, while the taste for the performances of
Baskerville and Foulis is not very eager.  A safe judgment about
Aldines and Elzevirs is the gift of years and of long experience.
In this place it is only possible to say a few words on a wide
subject.  The founder of the Aldine press, Aldus Pius Manutius, was
born about 1450, and died at Venice in 1514.  He was a man of
careful and profound learning, and was deeply interested in Greek
studies, then encouraged by the arrival in Italy of many educated
Greeks and Cretans.  Only four Greek authors had as yet been printed
in Italy, when (1495) Aldus established his press at Venice.
Theocritus, Homer, AEsop, and Isocrates, probably in very limited
editions, were in the hands of students.  The purpose of Aldus was
to put Greek and Latin works, beautifully printed in a convenient
shape, within the reach of all the world.  His reform was the
introduction of books at once cheap, studiously correct, and
convenient in actual use.  It was in 1498 that he first adopted the
small octavo size, and in his "Virgil" of 1501, he introduced the
type called Aldine or Italic.  The letters were united as in
writing, and the type is said to have been cut by Francesco da
Bologna, better known as Francia, in imitation of the hand of
Petrarch.  For full information about Aldus and his descendants and
successors, the work of M. Firmin Didot, ("Alde Manuce et
l'Hellenisme a Venise:  Paris 1875)," and the Aldine annals of
Renouard, must be consulted.  These two works are necessary to the
collector, who will otherwise be deceived by the misleading
assertions of the booksellers.  As a rule, the volumes published in
the lifetime of Aldus Manutius are the most esteemed, and of these
the Aristotle, the first Homer, the Virgil, and the Ovid, are
perhaps most in demand.  The earlier Aldines are consulted almost as
studiously as MSS. by modern editors of the classics.

Just as the house of Aldus waned and expired, that of the great
Dutch printers, the Elzevirs, began obscurely enough at Leyden in
1583.  The Elzevirs were not, like Aldus, ripe scholars and men of
devotion to learning.  Aldus laboured for the love of noble studies;
the Elzevirs were acute, and too often "smart" men of business.  The
founder of the family was Louis (born at Louvain, 1540, died 1617).
But it was in the second and third generations that Bonaventura and
Abraham Elzevir began to publish at Leyden, their editions in small
duodecimo.  Like Aldus, these Elzevirs aimed at producing books at
once handy, cheap, correct, and beautiful in execution.  Their
adventure was a complete success.  The Elzevirs did not, like Aldus,
surround themselves with the most learned scholars of their time.
Their famous literary adviser, Heinsius, was full of literary
jealousies, and kept students of his own calibre at a distance.  The
classical editions of the Elzevirs, beautiful, but too small in type
for modern eyes, are anything but exquisitely correct.  Their
editions of the contemporary.  French authors, now classics
themselves, are lovely examples of skill in practical enterprise.
The Elzevirs treated the French authors much as American publishers
treat Englishmen.  They stole right and left, but no one complained
much in these times of slack copyright; and, at all events, the
piratic larcenous publications of the Dutch printers were pretty,
and so far satisfactory.  They themselves, in turn, were the victims
of fraudulent and untradesmanlike imitations.  It is for this, among
other reasons, that the collector of Elzevirs must make M. Willems's
book ("Les Elzevier," Brussels and Paris, 1880) his constant study.
Differences so minute that they escape the unpractised eye, denote
editions of most various value.  In Elzevirs a line's breadth of
margin is often worth a hundred pounds, and a misprint is quoted at
no less a sum.  The fantastic caprice of bibliophiles has revelled
in the bibliography of these Dutch editions.  They are at present
very scarce in England, where a change in fashion some years ago had
made them common enough.  No Elzevir is valuable unless it be clean
and large in the margins.  When these conditions are satisfied the
question of rarity comes in, and Remy Belleau's Macaronic poem, or
"Le Pastissier Francais," may rise to the price of four or five
hundred pounds.  A Rabelais, Moliere, or Corneille, of a "good"
edition, is now more in request than the once adored "Imitatio
Christi" (dateless), or the "Virgil"' of 1646, which is full of
gross errors of the press, but is esteemed for red characters in the
letter to Augustus, and another passage at page 92.  The ordinary
marks of the Elzevirs were the sphere, the old hermit, the Athena,
the eagle, and the burning faggot.  But all little old books marked
with spheres are not Elzevirs, as many booksellers suppose.  Other
printers also stole the designs for the tops of chapters, the
Aegipan, the Siren, the head of Medusa, the crossed sceptres, and
the rest.  In some cases the Elzevirs published their books,
especially when they were piracies, anonymously.  When they
published for the Jansenists, they allowed their clients to put
fantastic pseudonyms on the title pages.  But, except in four cases,
they had only two pseudonyms used on the titles of books published
by and for themselves.  These disguises are "Jean Sambix" for Jean
and Daniel Elzevir, at Leyden, and for the Elzevirs of Amsterdam,
"Jacques le Jeune."  The last of the great representatives of the
house, Daniel, died at Amsterdam, 1680.  Abraham, an unworthy scion,
struggled on at Leyden till 1712.  The family still prospers, but no
longer prints, in Holland.  It is common to add duodecimos of
Foppens, Wolfgang, and other printers, to the collections of the
Elzevirs.  The books of Wolfgang have the sign of the fox robbing a
wild bee's nest, with the motto Quaerendo.

Curious and singular books are the next in our classification.  The
category is too large.  The books that be "curious" (not in the
booksellers' sense of "prurient" and "disgusting,") are innumerable.
All suppressed and condemned books, from "Les Fleurs du Mal" to
Vanini's "Amphitheatrum," or the English translation of Bruno's
"Spaccia della Bestia Trionfante," are more or less rare, and more
or less curious.  Wild books, like William Postel's "Three
Marvellous Triumphs of Women," are "curious."  Freakish books, like
macaronic poetry, written in a medley of languages, are curious.
Books from private presses are singular.  The old English poets and
satirists turned out many a book curious to the last degree, and
priced at a fantastic value.  Such are "Jordan's Jewels of
Ingenuity," "Micro-cynicon, six Snarling Satyres" (1599), and the
"Treatize made of a Galaunt," printed by Wynkyn de Worde, and found
pasted into the fly-leaf, on the oak-board binding of an imperfect
volume of Pynson's "Statutes."  All our early English poems and
miscellanies are curious; and, as relics of delightful singers, are
most charming possessions.  Such are the "Songes and Sonnettes of
Surrey" (1557), the "Paradyce of daynty Deuices" (1576), the "Small
Handful of Fragrant Flowers," and "The Handful of Dainty Delights,
gathered out of the lovely Garden of Sacred Scripture, fit for any
worshipful Gentlewoman to smell unto," (1584).  "The Teares of
Ireland" (1642), are said, though one would not expect it, to be
"extremely rare," and, therefore, precious.  But there is no end to
the list of such desirable rarities.  If we add to them all books
coveted as early editions, and, therefore, as relics of great
writers, Bunyan, Shakespeare, Milton, Sterne, Walton, and the rest,
we might easily fill a book with remarks on this topic alone.  The
collection of such editions is the most respectable, the most
useful, and, alas, the most expensive of the amateur's pursuits.  It
is curious enough that the early editions of Swift, Scott, and
Byron, are little sought for, if not wholly neglected; while early
copies of Shelley, Tennyson, and Keats, have a great price set on
their heads.  The quartoes of Shakespeare, like first editions of
Racine, are out of the reach of any but very opulent purchasers, or
unusually lucky, fortunate book-hunters.  Before leaving the topic
of books which derive their value from the taste and fantasy of
collectors, it must be remarked that, in this matter, the fashion of
the world changes.  Dr. Dibdin lamented, seventy years ago, the
waning respect paid to certain editions of the classics.  He would
find that things have become worse now, and modern German editions,
on execrable paper, have supplanted his old favourites.  Fifty years
ago, M. Brunet expressed his contempt for the designs of Boucher;
now they are at the top of the fashion.  The study of old
booksellers' catalogues is full of instruction as to the changes of
caprice.  The collection of Dr. Rawlinson was sold in 1756.  "The
Vision of Pierce Plowman" (1561), and the "Creede of Pierce Plowman"
(1553), brought between them no more than three shillings and
sixpence.  Eleven shillings were paid for the "Boke of Chivalrie" by
Caxton.  The "Boke of St. Albans," by Wynkyn de Worde, cost 1
pounds:  1s., and this was the highest sum paid for any one of two
hundred rare pieces of early English literature.  In 1764, a copy of
the "Hypnerotomachia" was sold for two shillings, "A Pettie Pallace
of Pettie his Pleasures," (ah, what a thought for the amateur!) went
for three shillings, while "Palmerin of England" (1602), attained no
more than the paltry sum of fourteen shillings.  When Osborne sold
the Harley collection, the scarcest old English books fetched but
three or four shillings.  If the wandering Jew had been a collector
in the last century he might have turned a pretty profit by selling
his old English books in this age of ours.  In old French, too,
Ahasuerus would have done a good stroke of business, for the prices
brought by old Villons, Romances of the Rose, "Les Marguerites de
Marguerite," and so forth, at the M'Carthy sale, were truly
pitiable.  A hundred years hence the original editions of Thackeray,
or of Miss Greenaway's Christmas books, or "Modern Painters," may be
the ruling passion, and Aldines and Elzevirs, black letter and
French vignettes may all be despised.  A book which is commonplace
in our century is curious in the next, and disregarded in that which
follows.  Old books of a heretical character were treasures once,
rare unholy possessions.  Now we have seen so many heretics that the
world is indifferent to the audacities of Bruno, and the veiled
impieties of Vanini.

The last of our categories of books much sought by the collector
includes all volumes valued for their ancient bindings, for the mark
and stamp of famous amateurs.  The French, who have supplied the
world with so many eminent binders,--as Eve, Padeloup, Duseuil, Le
Gascon, Derome, Simier, Bozerian, Thouvenin, Trautz-Bauzonnet, and
Lortic--are the chief patrons of books in historical bindings.  In
England an historical binding, a book of Laud's, or James's, or
Garrick's, or even of Queen Elizabeth's, does not seem to derive
much added charm from its associations.  But, in France, peculiar
bindings are now the objects most in demand among collectors.  The
series of books thus rendered precious begins with those of Maioli
and of Grolier (1479-1565), remarkable for their mottoes and the
geometrical patterns on the covers.  Then comes De Thou (who had
three sets of arms), with his blazon, the bees stamped on the
morocco.  The volumes of Marguerite of Angouleme are sprinkled with
golden daisies.  Diane de Poictiers had her crescents and her bow,
and the initial of her royal lover was intertwined with her own.
The three daughters of Louis XV. had each their favourite colour,
and their books wear liveries of citron, red, and olive morocco.
The Abbe Cotin, the original of Moliere's Trissotin, stamped his
books with intertwined C's.  Henri III. preferred religious emblems,
and sepulchral mottoes--skulls, crossbones, tears, and the insignia
of the Passion.  Mort m'est vie is a favourite device of the
effeminate and voluptuous prince.  Moliere himself was a collector,
il n'es pas de bouquin qui s'echappe de ses mains,--"never an old
book escapes him," says the author of "La Guerre Comique," the last
of the pamphlets which flew from side to side in the great literary
squabble about "L'Ecole des Femmes."  M. Soulie has found a rough
catalogue of Moliere's library, but the books, except a little
Elzevir, have disappeared. {7}  Madame de Maintenon was fond of
bindings.  Mr. Toovey possesses a copy of a devotional work in red
morocco, tooled and gilt, which she presented to a friendly abbess.
The books at Saint-Cyr were stamped with a crowned cross, besprent
with fleurs-de-lys.  The books of the later collectors--Longepierre,
the translator of Bion and Moschus; D'Hoym the diplomatist;
McCarthy, and La Valliere, are all valued at a rate which seems fair
game for satire.

Among the most interesting bibliophiles of the eighteenth century is
Madame Du Barry.  In 1771, this notorious beauty could scarcely read
or write.  She had rooms, however, in the Chateau de Versailles,
thanks to the kindness of a monarch who admired those native
qualities which education may polish, but which it can never confer.
At Versailles, Madame Du Barry heard of the literary genius of
Madame de Pompadour.  The Pompadour was a person of taste.  Her
large library of some four thousand works of the lightest sort of
light literature was bound by Biziaux.  Mr. Toovey possesses the
Brantome of this dame galante.  Madame herself had published
etchings by her own fair hands; and to hear of these things excited
the emulation of Madame Du Barry.  She might not be CLEVER, but she
could have a library like another, if libraries were in fashion.
One day Madame Du Barry astonished the Court by announcing that her
collection of books would presently arrive at Versailles.  Meantime
she took counsel with a bookseller, who bought up examples of all
the cheap "remainders," as they are called in the trade, that he
could lay his hands upon.  The whole assortment, about one thousand
volumes in all, was hastily bound in rose morocco, elegantly gilt,
and stamped with the arms of the noble house of Du Barry.  The bill
which Madame Du Barry owed her enterprising agent is still in
existence.  The thousand volumes cost about three francs each; the
binding (extremely cheap) came to nearly as much.  The amusing thing
is that the bookseller, in the catalogue which he sent with the
improvised library, marked the books which Madame Du Barry possessed
BEFORE her large order was so punctually executed.  There were two
"Memoires de Du Barry," an old newspaper, two or three plays, and
"L'Historie Amoureuse de Pierre le Long."  Louis XV. observed with
pride that, though Madame Pompadour had possessed a larger library,
that of Madame Du Barry was the better selected.  Thanks to her new
collection, the lady learned to read with fluency, but she never
overcame the difficulties of spelling.

A lady collector who loved books not very well perhaps, but
certainly not wisely, was the unhappy Marie Antoinette.  The
controversy in France about the private character of the Queen has
been as acrimonious as the Scotch discussion about Mary Stuart.
Evidence, good and bad, letters as apocryphal as the letters of the
famous "casket," have been produced on both sides.  A few years ago,
under the empire, M. Louis Lacour found a manuscript catalogue of
the books in the Queen's boudoir.  They were all novels of the
flimsiest sort,--"L'Amitie Dangereuse," "Les Suites d'un Moment
d'Erreur," and even the stories of Louvet and of Retif de la
Bretonne.  These volumes all bore the letters "C. T." (Chateau de
Trianon), and during the Revolution they were scattered among the
various public libraries of Paris.  The Queen's more important
library was at the Tuileries, but at Versailles she had only three
books, as the commissioners of the Convention found, when they made
an inventory of the property of la femme Capet.  Among the three was
the "Gerusalemme Liberata," printed, with eighty exquisite designs
by Cochin, at the expense of "Monsieur," afterwards Louis XVIII.
Books with the arms of Marie Antoinette are very rare in private
collections; in sales they are as much sought after as those of
Madame Du Barry.

With these illustrations of the kind of interest that belongs to
books of old collectors, we may close this chapter.  The reader has
before him a list, with examples, of the kinds of books at present
most in vogue among amateurs.  He must judge for himself whether he
will follow the fashion, by aid either of a long purse or of patient
research, or whether he will find out new paths for himself.  A
scholar is rarely a rich man.  He cannot compete with plutocrats who
buy by deputy.  But, if he pursues the works he really needs, he may
make a valuable collection.  He cannot go far wrong while he brings
together the books that he finds most congenial to his own taste and
most useful to his own studies.  Here, then, in the words of the old
"sentiment," I bid him farewell, and wish "success to his
inclinations, provided they are virtuous."  There is a set of
collectors, alas! whose inclinations are not virtuous.  The most
famous of them, a Frenchman, observed that his own collection of bad
books was unique.  That of an English rival, he admitted, was
respectable,--"mais milord se livre a des autres preoccupations!"
He thought a collector's whole heart should be with his treasures.


En bouquinant se trouve grand soulas.
Soubent m'en vay musant, a petis pas,
Au long des quais, pour flairer maint bieux livre.
Des Elzevier la Sphere me rend yure,
Et la Sirene aussi m'esmeut.  Grand cas
Fais-je d'Estienne, Aide, ou Dolet.  Mais Ias!
Le vieux Caxton ne se rencontre pas,
Plus qu' agneau d'or parmi jetons de cuivre,
En bouquinant!

Pour tout plaisir que l'on goute icy-bas
La Grace a Dieu.  Mieux vaut, sans altercas,
Chasser bouquin:  Nul mal n'en peult s'ensuivre.
Dr sus au livre:  il est le grand appas.
Clair est le ciel.  Amis, qui veut me suivre
En bouquinant?

A. L.


ILLUSTRATED BOOKS {8}


Modern English book-illustration--to which the present chapter is
restricted -has no long or doubtful history, since to find its first
beginnings, it is needless to go farther back than the last quarter
of the eighteenth century.  Not that "illustrated" books of a
certain class were by any means unknown before that period.  On the
contrary, for many years previously, literature had boasted its
"sculptures" of be-wigged and be-laurelled "worthies," its
"prospects" and "land-skips," its phenomenal monsters and its
"curious antiques."  But, despite the couplet in the "Dunciad"
respecting books where


" . . .  the pictures for the page atone,
And Quarles is saved by beauties not his own;" -


illustrations, in which the designer attempted the actual
delineation of scenes or occurrences in the text, were certainly not
common when Pope wrote, nor were they for some time afterwards
either very numerous or very noteworthy.  There are Hogarth's
engravings to "Hudibras" and "Don Quixote;" there are the designs of
his crony Frank Hayman to Theobald's "Shakespeare," to Milton, to
Pope, to Cervantes; there are Pine's "Horace" and Sturt's "Prayer-
Book" (in both of which text and ornament were alike engraved);
there are the historical and topographical drawings of Sandby, Wale,
and others; and yet--notwithstanding all these--it is with Bewick's
cuts to Gay's "Fables" in 1779, and Stothard's plates to Harrison's
"Novelist's Magazine" in 1780, that book-illustration by imaginative
compositions really begins to flourish in England.  Those little
masterpieces of the Newcastle artist brought about a revival of
wood-engraving which continues to this day; but engraving upon
metal, as a means of decorating books, practically came to an end
with the "Annuals" of thirty years ago.  It will therefore be well
to speak first of illustrations upon copper and steel.


Stothard, Blake, and Flaxman are the names that come freshest to
memory in this connection.  For a period of fifty years Stothard
stands pre-eminent in illustrated literature.  Measuring time by
poets, he may be said to have lent something of his fancy and
amenity to most of the writers from Cowper to Rogers.  As a
draughtsman he is undoubtedly weak:  his figures are often limp and
invertebrate, and his type of beauty insipid.  Still, regarded as
groups, the majority of his designs are exquisite, and he possessed
one all-pervading and un-English quality--the quality of grace.
This is his dominant note.  Nothing can be more seductive than the
suave flow of his line, his feeling for costume, his gentle and
chastened humour.  Many of his women and children are models of
purity and innocence.  But he works at ease only within the limits
of his special powers; he is happier in the pastoral and domestic
than the heroic and supernatural, and his style is better fitted to
the formal salutations of "Clarissa" and "Sir Charles Grandison,"
than the rough horse-play of "Peregrine Pickle."  Where Rowlandson
would have revelled, Stothard would be awkward and constrained;
where Blake would give us a new sensation, Stothard would be poor
and mechanical.  Nevertheless the gifts he possessed were thoroughly
recognised in his own day, and brought him, if not riches, at least
competence and honour.  It is said that more than three thousand of
his drawings have been engraved, and they are scattered through a
hundred publications.  Those to the "Pilgrim's Progress" and the
poems of Rogers are commonly spoken of as his best, though he never
excelled some of the old-fashioned plates (with their pretty borders
in the style of Gravelot and the Frenchmen) to Richardson's novels,
and such forgotten "classics" as "Joe Thompson", "Jessamy," "Betsy
Thoughtless," and one or two others in Harrison's very miscellaneous
collection.

Stothard was fortunate in his engravers.  Besides James Heath, his
best interpreter, Schiavonetti, Sharp, Finden, the Cookes,
Bartolozzi, most of the fashionable translators into copper were
busily employed upon his inventions.  Among the rest was an artist
of powers far greater than his own, although scarcely so happy in
turning them to profitable account.  The genius of William Blake was
not a marketable commodity in the same way as Stothard's talent.
The one caught the trick of the time with his facile elegance; the
other scorned to make any concessions, either in conception or
execution, to the mere popularity of prettiness.


"Give pensions to the learned pig,
Or the hare playing on a tabor;
Anglus can never see perfection
But in the journeyman's labour," -


he wrote in one of those rough-hewn and bitter epigrams of his.  Yet
the work that was then so lukewarmly received--if, indeed, it can be
said to have been received at all--is at present far more sought
after than Stothard's, and the prices now given for the "Songs of
Innocence and Experience," the "Inventions to the Book of Job," and
even "The Grave," would have brought affluence to the struggling
artist, who (as Cromek taunted him) was frequently "reduced so low
as to be obliged to live on half a guinea a week."  Not that this
was entirely the fault of his contemporaries.  Blake was a
visionary, and an untuneable man; and, like others who work for the
select public of all ages, he could not always escape the
consequence that the select public of his own, however willing, were
scarcely numerous enough to support him.  His most individual works
are the "Songs of Innocence," 1789, and the "Songs of Experience,"
1794.  These, afterwards united in one volume, were unique in their
method of production; indeed, they do not perhaps strictly come
within the category of what is generally understood to be
copperplate engraving.  The drawings were outlined and the songs
written upon the metal with some liquid that resisted the action of
acid, and the remainder of the surface of the plate was eaten away
with aqua-fortis, leaving the design in bold relief, like a rude
stereotype.  This was then printed off in the predominant tone--
blue, brown, or yellow, as the case might be--and delicately tinted
by the artist in a prismatic and ethereal fashion peculiarly his
own.  Stitched and bound in boards by Mrs. Blake, a certain number
of these leaflets--twenty-seven in the case of the first issue--made
up a tiny octavo of a wholly exceptional kind.  Words indeed fail to
exactly describe the flower-like beauty--the fascination of these
"fairy missals," in which, it has been finely said, "the thrilling
music of the verse, and the gentle bedazzlement of the lines and
colours so intermingle, that the mind hangs in a pleasant
uncertainty as to whether it is a picture that is singing, or a song
which has newly budded and blossomed into colour and form."  The
accompanying woodcut, after one of the illustrations to the "Songs
of Innocence," gives some indication of the general composition, but
it can convey no hint of the gorgeous purple, and crimson, and
orange of the original.

Of the "Illustrations to the Book of Job," 1826, there are excellent
reduced facsimiles by the recently-discovered photo-intaglio
process, in the new edition of Gilchrist's "Life."  The originals
were engraved by Blake himself in his strong decisive fashion, and
they are his best work.  A kind of deisidaimonia--a sacred awe--
falls upon one in turning over these wonderful productions of the
artist's declining years and failing hand.


"Leaving the old, both worlds at once they view,
That stand upon the threshold of the new,"


sings Waller; and it is almost possible to believe for a moment that
their creator was (as he said) "under the direction of messengers
from Heaven."  But his designs for Blair's "Grave," 1808,
popularised by the burin of Schiavonetti, attracted greater
attention at the time of publication; and, being less rare, they are
even now perhaps better known than the others.  The facsimile here
given is from the latter book.  The worn old man, the trustful
woman, and the guileless child are sleeping peacefully; but the king
with his sceptre, and the warrior with his hand on his sword-hilt,
lie open-eyed, waiting the summons of the trumpet.  One cannot help
fancying that the artist's long vigils among the Abbey tombs, during
his apprenticeship to James Basire, must have been present to his
mind when he selected this impressive monumental subject.

To one of Blake's few friends--to the "dear Sculptor of Eternity,"
as he wrote to Flaxman from Felpham--the world is indebted for some
notable book illustrations.  Whether the greatest writers--the
Homers, the Shakespeares, the Dantes--can ever be "illustrated"
without loss may fairly be questioned.  At all events, the showy
dexterities of the Dores and Gilberts prove nothing to the contrary.
But now and then there comes to the graphic interpretation of a
great author an artist either so reverential, or so strongly
sympathetic at some given point, that, in default of any relation
more narrowly intimate, we at once accept his conceptions as the
best attainable.  In this class are Flaxman's outlines to Homer and
AEschylus.  Flaxman was not a Hellenist as men are Hellenists to-
day.  Nevertheless, his Roman studies had saturated him with the
spirit of antique beauty, and by his grand knowledge of the nude,
his calm, his restraint, he is such an illustrator of Homer as is
not likely to arise again.  For who--with all our added knowledge of
classical antiquity--who, of our modern artists, could hope to rival
such thoroughly Greek compositions as the ball-play of Nausicaa in
the "Odyssey," or that lovely group from AEschylus of the tender-
hearted, womanly Oceanides, cowering like flowers beaten by the
storm under the terrible anger of Zeus?  In our day Flaxman's
drawings would have been reproduced by some of the modern facsimile
processes, and the gain would have been great.  As it is, something
is lost by their transference to copper, even though the translators
be Piroli and Blake.  Blake, in fact, did more than he is usually
credited with, for (beside the acknowledged and later "Hesiod,"
1817) he really engraved the whole of the "Odyssey," Piroli's plates
having been lost on the voyage to England.  The name of the Roman
artist, nevertheless, appears on the title-page (1793).  But Blake
was too original to be a successful copyist of other men's work, and
to appreciate the full value of Flaxman's drawings, they should be
studied in the collections at University College, the Royal Academy,
and elsewhere. {9}

Flaxman and Blake had few imitators.  But a host of clever
designers, such as Cipriani, Angelica Kauffmann, Westall, Uwins,
Smirke, Burney, Corbould, Dodd, and others, vied with the popular
Stothard in "embellishing" the endless "Poets," "novelists," and
"essayists" of our forefathers.  Some of these, and most of the
recognised artists of the period, lent their aid to that boldly-
planned but unhappily-executed "Shakespeare" of Boydell,--"black and
ghastly gallery of murky Opies, glum Northcotes, straddling
Fuselis," as Thackeray calls it.  They are certainly not enlivening-
-those cumbrous "atlas" folios of 1803-5, and they helped to ruin
the worthy alderman.  Even courtly Sir Joshua is clearly ill at ease
among the pushing Hamiltons and Mortimers; and, were it not for the
whimsical discovery that Westall's "Ghost of Caesar" strangely
resembles Mr. Gladstone, there would be no resting-place for the
modern student of these dismal masterpieces.  The truth is, Reynolds
excepted, there were no contemporary painters strong enough for the
task, and the honours of the enterprise belong almost exclusively to
Smirke's "Seven Ages" and one or two plates from the lighter
comedies.  The great "Bible" of Macklin, a rival and even more
incongruous publication, upon which some of the same designers were
employed, has fallen into completer oblivion.  A rather better fate
attended another book of this class, which, although belonging to a
later period, may be briefly referred to here.  The "Milton" of John
Martin has distinct individuality, and some of the needful qualities
of imagination.  Nevertheless, posterity has practically decided
that scenic grandeur and sombre effects alone are not a sufficient
pictorial equipment for the varied story of "Paradise Lost."

It is to Boydell of the Shakespeare gallery that we owe the "Liber
Veritatis" of Claude, engraved by Richard Earlom; and indirectly,
since rivalry of Claude prompted the attempt, the famous "Liber
Studiorum" of Turner.  Neither of these, however--which, like the
"Rivers of France" and the "Picturesque Views in England and Wales"
of the latter artist, are collections of engravings rather than
illustrated books--belongs to the present purpose.  But Turner's
name may fitly serve to introduce those once familiar "Annuals" and
"Keepsakes," that, beginning in 1823 with Ackermann's "Forget-me-
Not," enjoyed a popularity of more than thirty years.  Their general
characteristics have been pleasantly satirised in Thackeray's
account of the elegant miscellany of Bacon the publisher, to which
Mr. Arthur Pendennis contributed his pretty poem of "The Church
Porch."  His editress, it will be remembered, was the Lady Violet
Lebas, and his colleagues the Honourable Percy Popjoy, Lord Dodo,
and the gifted Bedwin Sands, whose "Eastern Ghazuls" lent so special
a distinction to the volume in watered-silk binding.  The talented
authors, it is true, were in most cases under the disadvantage of
having to write to the plates of the talented artists, a practice
which even now is not extinct, though it is scarcely considered
favourable to literary merit.  And the real "Annuals" were no
exception to the rule.  As a matter of fact, their general literary
merit was not obtrusive, although, of course, they sometimes
contained work which afterwards became famous.  They are now so
completely forgotten and out of date, that one scarcely expects to
find that Wordsworth, Coleridge, Macaulay, and Southey, were among
the occasional contributors.  Lamb's beautiful "Album verses"
appeared in the "Bijou," Scott's "Bonnie Dundee" in the "Christmas
Box," and Tennyson's "St. Agnes' Eve" in the "Keepsake."  But the
plates were, after all, the leading attraction.  These, prepared for
the most part under the superintendence of the younger Heath, and
executed on the steel which by this time had supplanted the old
"coppers," were supplied by, or were "after," almost every
contemporary artist of note.  Stothard, now growing old and past his
prime, Turner, Etty, Stanfield, Leslie, Roberts, Danby, Maclise,
Lawrence, Cattermole, and numbers of others, found profitable labour
in this fashionable field until 1856, when the last of the "Annuals"
disappeared, driven from the market by the rapid development of wood
engraving.  About a million, it is roughly estimated, was squandered
in producing them.

In connection with the "Annuals" must be mentioned two illustrated
books which were in all probability suggested by them--the "Poems"
and "Italy" of Rogers.  The designs to these are chiefly by Turner
and Stothard, although there are a few by Prout and others.
Stothard's have been already referred to; Turner's are almost
universally held to be the most successful of his many vignettes.
It has been truly said--in a recent excellent life of this artist
{10}--that it would be difficult to find in the whole of his works
two really greater than the "Alps at Daybreak," and the "Datur Hora
Quieti," in the former of these volumes.  Almost equally beautiful
are the "Valombre Falls" and "Tornaro's misty brow."  Of the "Italy"
set Mr. Ruskin writes:- "They are entirely exquisite; poetical in
the highest and purest sense, exemplary and delightful beyond all
praise."  To such words it is not possible to add much.  But it is
pretty clear that the poetical vitality of Rogers was secured by
these well-timed illustrations, over which he is admitted by his
nephew Mr. Sharpe to have spent about 7000 pounds, and far larger
sums have been named by good authorities.  The artist received from
fifteen to twenty guineas for each of the drawings; the engravers
(Goodall, Miller, Wallis, Smith, and others), sixty guineas a plate.
The "Poems" and the "Italy," in the original issues of 1830 and
1834, are still precious to collectors, and are likely to remain so.
Turner also illustrated Scott, Milton, Campbell, and Byron; but this
series of designs has not received equal commendation from his
greatest eulogist, who declares them to be "much more laboured, and
more or less artificial and unequal."  Among the numerous imitations
directly induced by the Rogers books was the "Lyrics of the Heart,"
by Alaric Attila Watts, a forgotten versifier and sometime editor of
"Annuals," but it did not meet with similar success.

Many illustrated works, originating in the perfection and
opportunities of engraving on metal, are necessarily unnoticed in
this rapid summary.  As far, however, as book-illustration is
concerned, copper and steel plate engraving may be held to have gone
out of fashion with the "Annuals."  It is still, indeed, to be found
lingering in that mine of modern art-books--the "Art Journal;" and,
not so very long ago, it made a sumptuous and fugitive reappearance
in Dore's "Idylls of the King," Birket Foster's "Hood," and one or
two other imposing volumes.  But it was badly injured by modern
wood-engraving; it has since been crippled for life by photography;
and it is more than probable that the present rapid rise of modern
etching will give it the coup de grace. {11}

By the end of the seventeenth century the art of engraving on wood
had fallen into disuse.  Writing circa 1770, Horace Walpole goes so
far as to say that it "never was executed in any perfection in
England;" and, speaking afterwards of Papillon's "Traite de la
Gravure," 1766, he takes occasion to doubt if that author would ever
"persuade the world to return to wooden cuts."  Nevertheless, with
Bewick, a few years later, wood-engraving took a fresh departure so
conspicuous that it amounts to a revival.  In what this consisted it
is clearly impossible to show here with any sufficiency of detail;
but between the method of the old wood-cutters who reproduced the
drawings of Durer, and the method of the Newcastle artist, there are
two marked and well-defined differences.  One of these is a
difference in the preparation of the wood and the tool employed.
The old wood-cutters carved their designs with knives and chisels on
strips of wood sawn lengthwise--that is to say, upon the PLANK;
Bewick used a graver, and worked upon slices of box or pear cut
across the grain,--that is to say upon the END of the wood.  The
other difference, of which Bewick is said to have been the inventor,
is less easy to describe.  It consisted in the employment of what is
technically known as "white line."  In all antecedent wood-cutting
the cutter had simply cleared away those portions of the block left
bare by the design, so that the design remained in relief to be
printed from like type.  Using the smooth box block as a uniform
surface from which, if covered with printing ink, a uniformly black
impression might be obtained, Bewick, by cutting white lines across
it at greater or lesser intervals, produced gradations of shade,
from the absolute black of the block to the lightest tints.  The
general result of this method was to give a greater depth of
colouring and variety to the engraving, but its advantages may
perhaps be best understood by a glance at the background of the
"Woodcock" on the following page.

Bewick's first work of any importance was the Gay's "Fables" of
1779.  In 1784 he did another series of "Select Fables."  Neither of
these books, however, can be compared with the "General History of
Quadrupeds," 1790, and the "British Land and Water Birds," 1797 and
1804.  The illustrations to the "Quadrupeds" are in many instances
excellent, and large additions were made to them in subsequent
issues.  But in this collection Bewick laboured to a great extent
under the disadvantage of representing animals with which he was
familiar only through the medium of stuffed specimens or incorrect
drawings.  In the "British Birds," on the contrary, his facilities
for study from the life were greater, and his success was
consequently more complete.  Indeed, it may be safely affirmed that
of all the engravers of the present century, none have excelled
Bewick for beauty of black and white, for skilful rendering of
plumage and foliage, and for fidelity of detail and accessory.  The
"Woodcock" (here given), the "Partridge," the "Owl," the "Yellow-
Hammer," the "Yellow-Bunting," the "Willow-Wren," are popular
examples of these qualities.  But there are a hundred others nearly
as good.

Among sundry conventional decorations after the old German fashion
in the first edition of the "Quadrupeds," there are a fair number of
those famous tail-pieces which, to a good many people, constitute
Bewick's chief claim to immortality.  That it is not easy to imitate
them is plain from the failure of Branston's attempts, and from the
inferior character of those by John Thompson in Yarrell's "Fishes."
The genius of Bewick was, in fact, entirely individual and
particular.  He had the humour of a Hogarth in little, as well as
some of his special characteristics,--notably his faculty of telling
a story by suggestive detail.  An instance may be taken at random
from vol. I. of the "Birds."  A man, whose wig and hat have fallen
off, lies asleep with open mouth under some bushes.  He is
manifestly drunk, and the date "4 June," on a neighbouring stone,
gives us the reason and occasion of his catastrophe.  He has been
too loyally celebrating the birthday of his majesty King George III.
Another of Bewick's gifts is his wonderful skill in foreshadowing a
tragedy.  Take as an example, this truly appalling incident from the
"Quadrupeds."  The tottering child, whose nurse is seen in the
background, has strayed into the meadow, and is pulling at the tail
of a vicious-looking colt, with back-turned eye and lifted heel.
Down the garden-steps the mother hurries headlong; but she can
hardly be in time.  And of all this--sufficient, one would say, for
a fairly-sized canvas--the artist has managed to give a vivid
impression in a block of three inches by two!  Then, again, like
Hogarth once more, he rejoices in multiplications of dilemma.  What,
for instance, can be more comically pathetic than the head-piece to
the "Contents" in vol. I. of the "Birds"?  The old horse has been
seized with an invincible fit of stubbornness.  The day is both
windy and rainy.  The rider has broken his stick and lost his hat;
but he is too much encumbered with his cackling and excited stock to
dare to dismount.  Nothing can help him but a Deus ex machina,--of
whom there is no sign.

Besides his humour, Bewick has a delightfully rustic side, of which
Hogarth gives but little indication.  From the starved ewe in the
snow nibbling forlornly at a worn-out broom, to the cow which has
broken through the rail to reach the running water, there are
numberless designs which reveal that faithful lover of the field and
hillside, who, as he said, "would rather be herding sheep on Mickle
bank top" than remain in London to be made premier of England.  He
loved the country and the country-life; and he drew them as one who
loved them.  It is this rural quality which helps to give such a
lasting freshness to his quaint and picturesque fancies; and it is
this which will continue to preserve their popularity, even if they
should cease to be valued for their wealth of whimsical invention.

In referring to these masterpieces of Bewick's, it must not be
forgotten that he had the aid of some clever assistants.  His
younger brother John was not without talent, as is clear from his
work for Somervile's "Chace," 1796, and that highly edifying book,
the "Blossoms of Morality."  Many of the tail-pieces to the "Water
Birds" were designed by Robert Johnson, who also did most of the
illustrations to Bewick's "Fables" of 1818, which were engraved by
Temple and Harvey, two other pupils.  Another pupil was Charlton
Nesbit, an excellent engraver, who was employed upon the "Birds,"
and did good work in Ackermann's "Religious Emblems" of 1808, and
the second series of Northcote's "Fables."  But by far the largest
portion of the tail-pieces in the second volume of the "Birds" was
engraved by Luke Clennell, a very skilful but unfortunate artist,
who ultimately became insane.  To him we owe the woodcuts, after
Stothard's charming sketches, to the Rogers volume of 1810, an
edition preceding those already mentioned as illustrated with steel-
plates, and containing some of the artist's happiest pictures of
children and amorini.  Many of these little groups would make
admirable designs for gems, if indeed they are not already derived
from them, since one at least is an obvious copy of a well-known
sardonyx--("The Marriage of Cupid and Psyche.")  This volume,
generally known by the name of the "Firebrand" edition, is highly
prized by collectors; and, as intelligent renderings of pen and ink,
there is little better than these engravings of Clennell's. {12}
Finally, among others of Bewick's pupils, must be mentioned William
Harvey, who survived to 1866.  It has been already stated that he
engraved part of the illustrations to Bewick's "Fables," but his
best known block is the large one of Haydon's "Death of Dentatus."
Soon after this he relinquished wood-engraving in favour of design,
and for a long period was one of the most fertile and popular of
book-illustrators.  His style, however, is unpleasantly mannered;
and it is sufficient to make mention of his masterpiece, the
"Arabian Nights" of Lane, the illustrations to which, produced under
the supervision of the translator, are said to be so accurate as to
give the appropriate turbans for every hour of the day.  They show
considerable freedom of invention and a large fund of Orientalism.

Harvey came to London in 1817; Clennell had preceded him by some
years; and Nesbit lived there for a considerable time.  What
distinguishes these pupils of Bewick especially is, that they were
artists as well as engravers, capable of producing the designs they
engraved.  The "London School" of engravers, on the contrary, were
mostly engravers, who depended upon others for their designs.  The
foremost of these was Robert Branston, a skilful renderer of human
figures and indoor scenes.  He worked in rivalry with Bewick and
Nesbit; but he excelled neither, while he fell far behind the
former.  John Thompson, one of the very best of modern English
engravers on wood, was Branston's pupil.  His range was of the
widest, and he succeeded as well in engraving fishes and birds for
Yarrell and Walton's "Angler," as in illustrations to Moliere and
"Hudibras."  He was, besides, a clever draughtsman, though he worked
chiefly from the designs of Thurston and others.  One of the most
successful of his illustrated books is the "Vicar of Wakefield,"
after Mulready, whose simplicity and homely feeling were well suited
to Goldsmith's style.  Another excellent engraver of this date is
Samuel Williams.  There is an edition of Thomson's "Seasons," with
cuts both drawn and engraved by him, which is well worthy of
attention, and (like Thompson and Branston) he was very skilful in
reproducing the designs of Cruikshank.  Some of his best work in
this way is to be found in Clarke's "Three Courses and a Dessert,"
published by Vizetelly in 1830.

From this time forth, however, one hears less of the engraver and
more of the artist.  The establishment of the "Penny Magazine" in
1832, and the multifarious publications of Charles Knight, gave an
extraordinary impetus to wood-engraving.  Ten years later came
"Punch," and the "Illustrated London News," which further increased
its popularity.  Artists of eminence began to draw on or for the
block, as they had drawn, and were still drawing, for the "Annuals."
In 1842-6 was issued the great "Abbotsford" edition of the "Waverley
Novels," which, besides 120 plates, contained nearly 2000 wood-
engravings; and with the "Book of British Ballads," 1843, edited by
Mr. S. C. Hall, arose that long series of illustrated Christmas
books, which gradually supplanted the "Annuals," and made familiar
the names of Gilbert, Birket Foster, Harrison Weir, John Absolon,
and a crowd of others.  The poems of Longfellow, Montgomery, Burns,
"Barry Cornwall," Poe, Miss Ingelow, were all successively
"illustrated."  Besides these, there were numerous selections, such
as Willmott's "Poets of the Nineteenth Century," Wills's "Poets' Wit
and Humour," and so forth.  But the field here grows too wide to be
dealt with in detail, and it is impossible to do more than mention a
few of the books most prominent for merit or originality.  Amongst
these there is the "Shakespeare" of Sir John Gilbert.  Regarded as
an interpretative edition of the great dramatist, this is little
more than a brilliant tour de force; but it is nevertheless
infinitely superior to the earlier efforts of Kenny Meadows in 1843,
and also to the fancy designs of Harvey in Knight's "Pictorial
Shakespeare."  The "Illustrated Tennyson" of 1858 is also a
remarkable production.  The Laureate, almost more than any other,
requires a variety of illustrators; and here, for his idylls, he had
Mulready and Millais, and for his romances Rossetti and Holman Hunt.
His "Princess" was afterwards illustrated by Maclise, and his "Enoch
Arden" by Arthur Hughes; but neither of these can be said to be
wholly adequate.  The "Lalla Rookh" of John Tenniel, 1860, albeit
somewhat stiff and cold, after this artist's fashion, is a superb
collection of carefully studied oriental designs.  With these may be
classed the illustrations to Aytoun's "Lays of the Scottish
Cavaliers," by Sir Noel Paton, which have the same finished
qualities of composition and the same academic hardness.  Several
good editions of the "Pilgrim's Progress" have appeared,--notably
those of C. H. Bennett, J. D. Watson, and G. H. Thomas.  Other books
are Millais's "Parables of our Lord," Leighton's "Romola," Walker's
"Philip" and "Denis Duval," the "Don Quixote," "Dante," "La
Fontaine" and other works of Dore, Dalziel's "Arabian Nights,"
Leighton's "Lyra Germanica" and "Moral Emblems," and the "Spiritual
Conceits" of W. Harry Rogers.  These are some only of the number,
which does not include books like Mrs. Hugh Blackburn's "British
Birds," Wolf's "Wild Animals," Wise's "New Forest," Linton's "Lake
Country," Wood's "Natural History," and many more.  Nor does it take
in the various illustrated periodicals which have multiplied so
freely since, in 1859, "Once a Week" first began to attract and
train such younger draughtsmen as Sandys, Lawless, Pinwell,
Houghton, Morten, and Paul Grey, some of whose best work in this way
has been revived in the edition of Thornbury's "Ballads and Songs,"
recently published by Chatto and Windus.  Ten years later came the
"Graphic," offering still wider opportunities to wood-cut art, and
bringing with it a fresh school of artists.  Herkomer, Fildes,
Small, Green, Barnard, Barnes, Crane, Caldecott, Hopkins, and
others,--quos nunc perscribere longum est--have contributed good
work to this popular rival of the older, but still vigorous,
"Illustrated."  And now again, another promising serial, the
"Magazine of Art," affords a supplementary field to modern
refinements and younger energies.

Not a few of the artists named in the preceding paragraph have also
earned distinction in separate branches of the pictorial art, and
specially in that of humorous design,--a department which has always
been so richly recruited in this country that it deserves more than
a passing mention.  From the days of Hogarth onwards there has been
an almost unbroken series of humorous draughtsmen, who, both on wood
and metal, play a distinguished part in our illustrated literature.
Rowlandson, one of the earliest, was a caricaturist of inexhaustible
facility, and an artist who scarcely did justice to his own powers.
He illustrated several books, but he is chiefly remembered in this
way by his plates to Combe's "Three Tours of Dr. Syntax."  Gillray,
his contemporary, whose bias was political rather than social, is
said to have illustrated "The Deserted Village" in his youth; but he
is not famous as a book-illustrator.  Another of the early men was
Bunbury, whom "quality"-loving Mr. Walpole calls "the second
Hogarth, and first imitator who ever fully equalled his original
(!);" but whose prints to "Tristram Shandy," are nevertheless
completely forgotten, while, if he be remembered at all, it is by
the plate of "The Long Minuet," and the vulgar "Directions to Bad
Horsemen."  With the first years of the century, however, appears
the great master of modern humorists, whose long life ended only a
few years since, "the veteran George Cruikshank"--as his admirers
were wont to style him.  He indeed may justly be compared to
Hogarth, since, in tragic power and intensity he occasionally comes
nearer to him than any artist of our time.  It is manifestly
impossible to mention here all the more important efforts of this
indefatigable worker, from those far-away days when he caricatured
"Boney" and championed Queen Caroline, to that final frontispiece
for "The Rose and the Lily"--"designed and etched (according to the
inscription) by George Cruikshank, age 83;" but the plates to the
"Points of Humour," to Grimm's "Goblins," to "Oliver Twist," "Jack
Sheppard," Maxwell's "Irish Rebellion," and the "Table Book," are
sufficiently favourable and varied specimens of his skill with the
needle, while the woodcuts to "Three Courses and a Dessert," one of
which is here given, are equally good examples of his work on the
block.  The "Triumph of Cupid," which begins the "Table Book," is an
excellent instance of his lavish wealth of fancy, and it contains
beside, one--nay more than one--of the many portraits of the artist.
He is shown en robe de chambre, smoking (this was before his
regenerate days!) in front of a blazing fire, with a pet spaniel on
his knee.  In the cloud which curls from his lips is a motley
procession of sailors, sweeps, jockeys, Greenwich pensioners, Jew
clothesmen, flunkies, and others more illustrious, chained to the
chariot wheels of Cupid, who, preceded by cherubic acolytes and
banner-bearers, winds round the top of the picture towards an altar
of Hymen on the table.  When, by the aid of a pocket-glass, one has
mastered these swarming figures, as well as those in the foreground,
it gradually dawns upon one that all the furniture is strangely
vitalised.  Masks laugh round the border of the tablecloth, the
markings of the mantelpiece resolve themselves into rows of madly-
racing figures, the tongs leers in a degage and cavalier way at the
artist, the shovel and poker grin in sympathy; there are faces in
the smoke, in the fire, in the fireplace,--the very fender itself is
a ring of fantastic creatures who jubilantly hem in the ashes.  And
it is not only in the grotesque and fanciful that Cruikshank excels;
he is master of the strange, the supernatural, and the terrible.  In
range of character (the comparison is probably a hackneyed one),
both by his gifts and his limitations, he resembles Dickens; and had
he illustrated more of that writer's works the resemblance would
probably have been more evident.  In "Oliver Twist," for example,
where Dickens is strong, Cruikshank is strong; where Dickens is
weak, he is weak too.  His Fagin, his Bill Sikes, his Bumble, and
their following, are on a level with Dickens's conceptions; his Monk
and Rose Maylie are as poor as the originals.  But as the defects of
Dickens are overbalanced by his merits, so Cruikshank's strength is
far in excess of his weakness.  It is not to his melodramatic heroes
or wasp-waisted heroines that we must look for his triumphs; it is
to his delineations, from the moralist's point of view, of vulgarity
and vice,--of the "rank life of towns," with all its squalid tragedy
and comedy.  Here he finds his strongest ground, and possibly,
notwithstanding his powers as a comic artist and caricaturist, his
loftiest claim to recollection.

Cruikshank was employed on two only of Dickens's books--"Oliver
Twist" and the "Sketches by Boz." {13}  The great majority of them
were illustrated by Hablot K. Browne, an artist who followed the
ill-fated Seymour on the "Pickwick Papers."  To "Phiz," as he is
popularly called, we are indebted for our pictorial ideas of Sam
Weller, Mrs. Gamp, Captain Cuttle, and most of the author's
characters, down to the "Tale of Two Cities."  "Phiz" also
illustrated a great many of Lever's novels, for which his skill in
hunting and other Lever-like scenes especially qualified him.

With the name of Richard Doyle we come to the first of a group of
artists whose main work was, or is still, done for the time-honoured
miscellany of Mr. Punch.  So familiar an object is "Punch" upon our
tables, that one is sometimes apt to forget how unfailing, and how
good on the whole, is the work we take so complacently as a matter
of course.  And of this good work, in the earlier days, a large
proportion was done by Mr. Doyle.  He is still living, although he
has long ceased to gladden those sprightly pages.  But it was to
"Punch" that he contributed his masterpiece, the "Manners and
Customs of ye Englyshe," a series of outlines illustrating social
life in 1849, and cleverly commented by a shadowy "Mr. Pips," a sort
of fetch or double of the bustling and garrulous old Caroline
diarist.  In these captivating pictures the life of thirty years ago
is indeed, as the title-page has it, "drawn from ye quick."  We see
the Molesworths and Cantilupes of the day parading the Park; we
watch Brougham fretting at a hearing in the Lords, or Peel holding
forth to the Commons (where the Irish members are already
obstructive); we squeeze in at the Haymarket to listen to Jenny
Lind, or we run down the river to Greenwich Fair, and visit "Mr.
Richardson, his show."  Many years after, in the "Bird's Eye Views
of Society," which appeared in the early numbers of the "Cornhill
Magazine," Mr. Doyle returned to this attractive theme.  But the
later designs were more elaborate, and not equally fortunate.  They
bear the same relationship to Mr. Pips's pictorial chronicle, as the
laboured "Temperance Fairy Tales" of Cruikshank's old age bear to
the little-worked Grimm's "Goblins" of his youth.  So hazardous is
the attempt to repeat an old success!  Nevertheless, many of the
initial letters to the "Bird's Eye Views" are in the artist's best
and most frolicsome manner.  "The Foreign Tour of Brown, Jones, and
Robinson" is another of his happy thoughts for "Punch;" and some of
his most popular designs are to be found in Thackeray's "Newcomes,"
where his satire and fancy seem thoroughly suited to his text.  He
has also illustrated Locker's well-known "London Lyrics," Ruskin's
"King of the Golden River," and Hughes's "Scouring of the White
Horse," from which last the initial at the beginning of this chapter
has been borrowed.  His latest important effort was the series of
drawings called "In Fairy Land," to which Mr. William Allingham
contributed the verses.

In speaking of the "Newcomes," one is reminded that its illustrious
author was himself a "Punch" artist, and would probably have been a
designer alone, had it not been decreed "that he should paint in
colours which will never crack and never need restoration."
Everyone knows the story of the rejected illustrator of "Pickwick,"
whom that and other rebuffs drove permanently to letters.  To his
death, however, he clung fondly to his pencil.  In technique he
never attained to certainty or strength, and his genius was too
quick and creative--perhaps also too desultory--for finished work,
while he was always indifferent to costume and accessory.  But many
of his sketches for "Vanity Fair," for "Pendennis," for "The
Virginians," for "The Rose and the Ring," the Christmas books, and
the posthumously published "Orphan of Pimlico," have a vigour of
impromptu, and a happy suggestiveness which is better than correct
drawing.  Often the realisation is almost photographic.  Look, for
example, at the portrait in "Pendennis" of the dilapidated Major as
he crawls downstairs in the dawn after the ball at Gaunt House, and
then listen to the inimitable context:  "That admirable and devoted
Major above all,--who had been for hours by Lady Clavering's side
ministering to her and feeding her body with everything that was
nice, and her ear with everything that was sweet and flattering--oh!
what an object he was!  The rings round his eyes were of the colour
of bistre; those orbs themselves were like the plovers' eggs whereof
Lady Clavering and Blanche had each tasted; the wrinkles in his old
face were furrowed in deep gashes; and a silver stubble, like an
elderly morning dew, was glittering on his chin, and alongside the
dyed whiskers, now limp and out of curl."  A good deal of this--that
fine touch in italics especially--could not possibly be rendered in
black and white, and yet how much is indicated, and how thoroughly
the whole is felt!  One turns to the woodcut from the words, and
back again to the words from the woodcut with ever-increasing
gratification.  Then again, Thackeray's little initial letters are
charmingly arch and playful.  They seem to throw a shy side-light
upon the text, giving, as it were, an additional and confidential
hint of the working of the author's mind.  To those who, with the
present writer, love every tiny scratch and quirk and flourish of
the Master's hand, these small but priceless memorials are far
beyond the frigid appraising of academics and schools of art.

After Doyle and Thackeray come a couple of well-known artists--John
Leech and John Tenniel.  The latter still lives (may he long live!)
to delight and instruct us.  Of the former, whose genial and manly
"Pictures of Life and Character" are in every home where good-
humoured raillery is prized and appreciated, it is scarcely
necessary to speak.  Who does not remember the splendid languid
swells, the bright-eyed rosy girls ("with no nonsense about them!")
in pork pie hats and crinolines, the superlative "Jeames's," the
hairy "Mossoos," the music-grinding Italian desperadoes whom their
kind creator hated so?  And then the intrepidity of "Mr. Briggs,"
the Roman rule of "Paterfamilias," the vagaries of the "Rising
Generation!"  There are things in this gallery over which the
severest misanthrope must chuckle--they are simply irresistible.
Let any one take, say that smallest sketch of the hapless mortal who
has turned on the hot water in the bath and cannot turn it off
again, and see if he is able to restrain his laughter.  In this one
gift of producing instant mirth Leech is almost alone.  It would be
easy to assail his manner and his skill, but for sheer fun, for the
invention of downright humorous situation, he is unapproached,
except by Cruikshank.  He did a few illustrations to Dickens's
Christmas books; but his best-known book-illustrations properly so
called are to "Uncle Tom's Cabin," the "Comic Histories" of
A'Beckett, the "Little Tour in Ireland," and certain sporting novels
by the late Mr. Surtees.  Tenniel now confines himself almost
exclusively to the weekly cartoons with which his name is popularly
associated.  But years ago he used to invent the most daintily
fanciful initial letters; and many of his admirers prefer the serio-
grotesque designs of "Punch's Pocket-Book," "Alice in Wonderland,"
and "Through the Looking-Glass," to the always correctly-drawn but
sometimes stiffly-conceived cartoons.  What, for example, could be
more delightful than the picture, in "Alice in Wonderland," of the
"Mad Tea Party?"  Observe the hopelessly distraught expression of
the March hare, and the eager incoherence of the hatter!  A little
further on the pair are trying to squeeze the dormouse into the
teapot; and a few pages back the blue caterpillar is discovered
smoking his hookah on the top of a mushroom.  He was exactly three
inches long, says the veracious chronicle, but what a dignity!--what
an oriental flexibility of gesture!  Speaking of animals, it must
not be forgotten that Tenniel is a master in this line.  His
"British Lion," in particular, is a most imposing quadruped, and so
often in request that it is not necessary to go back to the famous
cartoons on the Indian mutiny to seek for examples of that
magnificent presence.  As a specimen of the artist's treatment of
the lesser felidae, the reader's attention is invited to this
charming little kitten from "Through the Looking-Glass."

Mr. Tenniel is a link between Leech and the younger school of
"Punch" artists, of whom Mr. George du Maurier, Mr. Linley
Sambourne, and Mr. Charles Keene are the most illustrious.  The
first is nearly as popular as Leech, and is certainly a greater
favourite with cultivated audiences.  He is not so much a humorist
as a satirist of the Thackeray type,--unsparing in his denunciation
of shams, affectations, and flimsy pretences of all kinds.  A master
of composition and accomplished draughtsman, he excels in the
delineation of "society"--its bishops, its "professional beauties"
and "aesthetes," its nouveaux riches, its distinguished foreigners,-
-while now and then (but not too often) he lets us know that if he
chose he could be equally happy in depicting the lowest classes.
There was a bar-room scene not long ago in "Punch" which gave the
clearest evidence of this.  Some of those for whom no good thing is
good enough complain, it is said, that he lacks variety--that he is
too constant to one type of feminine beauty.  But any one who will
be at the pains to study a group of conventional "society" faces
from any of his "At Homes" or "Musical Parties" will speedily
discover that they are really very subtly diversified and
contrasted.  For a case in point, take the decorously sympathetic
group round the sensitive German musician, who is "veeping" over one
of his own compositions.  Or follow the titter running round that
amused assembly to whom the tenor warbler is singing "Me-e-e-et me
once again," with such passionate emphasis that the domestic cat
mistakes it for a well-known area cry.  As for his ladies, it may
perhaps be conceded that his type is a little persistent.  Still it
is a type so refined, so graceful, so attractive altogether, that in
the jarring of less well-favoured realities it is an advantage to
have it always before our eyes as a standard to which we can appeal.
Mr. du Maurier is a fertile book-illustrator, whose hand is
frequently seen in the "Cornhill," and elsewhere.  Some of his best
work of this kind is in Douglas Jerrold's "Story of a Feather," in
Thackeray's "Ballads," and the large edition of the "Ingoldsby
Legends," to which Leech, Tenniel, and Cruikshank also contributed.
One of his prettiest compositions is the group here reproduced from
"Punch's Almanack" for 1877.  The talent of his colleague, Mr.
Linley Sambourne, may fairly be styled unique.  It is difficult to
compare it with anything in its way, except some of the happier
efforts of the late Mr. Charles Bennett, to which, nevertheless, it
is greatly superior in execution.  To this clever artist's invention
everything seems to present itself with a train of fantastic
accessory so whimsically inexhaustible that it almost overpowers one
with its prodigality.  Each fresh examination of his designs
discloses something overlooked or unexpected.  Let the reader study
for a moment the famous "Birds of a Feather" of 1875, or that
ingenious skit of 1877 upon the rival Grosvenor Gallery and Academy,
in which the late President of the latter is shown as the proudest
of peacocks, the eyes of whose tail are portraits of Royal
Academicians, and whose body-feathers are paint brushes and
shillings of admission.  Mr. Sambourne is excellent, too, at
adaptations of popular pictures,--witness the more than happy
parodies of Herrman's "A Bout d'Arguments," and "Une Bonne
Histoire."  His book-illustrations have been comparatively few,
those to Burnand's laughable burlesque of "Sandford and Merton"
being among the best.  Rumour asserts that he is at present engaged
upon Kingsley's "Water Babies," a subject which might almost be
supposed to have been created for his pencil.  There are
indications, it may be added, that Mr. Sambourne's talents are by no
means limited to the domain in which for the present he chooses to
exercise them, and it is not impossible that he may hereafter take
high rank as a cartoonist.  Mr. Charles Keene, a selection from
whose sketches has recently been issued under the title of "Our
People," is unrivalled in certain bourgeois, military, and
provincial types.  No one can draw a volunteer, a monthly nurse, a
Scotchman, an "ancient mariner" of the watering-place species, with
such absolutely humorous verisimilitude.  Personages, too, in whose
eyes--to use Mr. Swiveller's euphemism--"the sun has shone too
strongly," find in Mr. Keene a merciless satirist of their "pleasant
vices."  Like Leech, he has also a remarkable power of indicating a
landscape background with the fewest possible touches.  His book-
illustrations have been .mainly confined to magazines and novels.
Those in "Once a Week" to a "Good Fight," the tale subsequently
elaborated by Charles Reade into the "Cloister and the Hearth,"
present some good specimens of his earlier work.  One of these, in
which the dwarf of the story is seen climbing up a wall with a
lantern at his back, will probably be remembered by many.

After the "Punch" school there are other lesser luminaries.  Mr. W.
S. Gilbert's drawings to his own inimitable "Bab Ballads" have a
perverse drollery which is quite in keeping with that erratic text.
Mr. F. Barnard, whose exceptional talents have not been sufficiently
recognised, is a master of certain phases of strongly marked
character, and, like Mr. Charles Green, has contributed some
excellent sketches to the "Household Edition" of Dickens.  Mr.
Sullivan of "Fun," whose grotesque studies of the "British
Tradesman" and "Workman" have recently been republished, has
abounding vis comica, but he has hitherto done little in the way of
illustrating books.  For minute pictorial stocktaking and
photographic retention of detail, Mr. Sullivan's artistic memory may
almost be compared to the wonderful literary memory of Mr. Sala.
Mr. John Proctor, who some years ago (in "Will o' the Wisp") seemed
likely to rival Tenniel as a cartoonist, has not been very active in
this way; while Mr. Matthew Morgan, the clever artist of the
"Tomahawk," has transferred his services to the United States.  Of
Mr. Bowcher of "Judy," and various other professedly humorous
designers, space permits no further mention.


There remains, however, one popular branch of book-illustration,
which has attracted the talents of some of the most skilful and
original of modern draughtsmen, i.e. the embellishment of children's
books.  From the days when Mulready drew the old "Butterfly's Ball"
and "Peacock at Home" of our youth, to those of the delightfully
Blake-like fancies of E. V. B., whose "Child's Play" has recently
been re-published for the delectation of a new generation of
admirers, this has always been a popular and profitable employment;
but of late years it has been raised to the level of a fine art.
Mr. H. S. Marks, Mr. J. D. Watson, Mr. Walter Crane, have produced
specimens of nursery literature which, for refinement of colouring
and beauty of ornament, cannot easily be surpassed.  The equipments
of the last named, especially, are of a very high order.  He began
as a landscapist on wood; he now chiefly devotes himself to the
figure; and he seems to have the decorative art at his fingers' ends
as a natural gift.  Such work as "King Luckieboy's Party" was a
revelation in the way of toy books, while the "Baby's Opera" and
"Baby's Bouquet" are petits chefs d'oeuvre, of which the sagacious
collector will do well to secure copies, not for his nursery, but
his library.  Nor can his "Mrs. Mundi at Home" be neglected by the
curious in quaint and graceful invention. {14}  Another book--the
"Under the Window" of Miss Kate Greenaway--comes within the same
category.  Since Stothard, no one has given us such a clear-eyed,
soft-faced, happy-hearted childhood; or so poetically "apprehended"
the coy reticences, the simplicities, and the small solemnities of
little people.  Added to this, the old-world costume in which she
usually elects to clothe her characters, lends an arch piquancy of
contrast to their innocent rites and ceremonies.  Her taste in
tinting, too, is very sweet and spring-like; and there is a fresh,
pure fragrance about all her pictures as of new-gathered nosegays;
or, perhaps, looking to the fashions that she favours, it would be
better to say "bow-pots."  But the latest "good genius" of this
branch of book-illustrating is Mr. Randolph Caldecott, a designer
assuredly of the very first order.  There is a spontaneity of fun,
an unforced invention about everything he does, that is infinitely
entertaining.  Other artists draw to amuse us; Mr. Caldecott seems
to draw to amuse himself,--and this is his charm.  One feels that he
must have chuckled inwardly as he puffed the cheeks of his "Jovial
Huntsmen;" or sketched that inimitably complacent dog in the "House
that Jack Built;" or exhibited the exploits of the immortal "train-
band captain" of "famous London town."  This last is his
masterpiece.  Cowper himself must have rejoiced at it,--and Lady
Austen.  There are two sketches in this book--they occupy the
concluding pages--which are especially fascinating.  On one, John
Gilpin, in a forlorn and flaccid condition, is helped into the house
by the sympathising (and very attractive) Betty; on the other he has
donned his slippers, refreshed his inner man with a cordial, and
over the heaving shoulder of his "spouse," who lies dissolved upon
his martial bosom, he is taking the spectators into his confidence
with a wink worthy of the late Mr. Buckstone.  Nothing more genuine,
more heartily laughable, than this set of designs has appeared in
our day.  And Mr. Caldecott has few limitations.  Not only does he
draw human nature admirably, but he draws animals and landscapes
equally well, so one may praise him without reserve.  Though not
children's books, mention should here be made of his "Bracebridge
Hall," and "Old Christmas," the illustrations to which are the
nearest approach to that beau-ideal, perfect sympathy between the
artist and the author, with which the writer is acquainted.  The cut
on page 173 is from the former of these works.


Many of the books above mentioned are printed in colours by various
processes, and they are not always engraved on wood.  But--to close
the account of modern wood-engraving--some brief reference must be
made to what is styled the "new American School," as exhibited for
the most part in "Scribner's" and other Transatlantic magazines.
Authorities, it is reported, shake their heads over these
performances. "C'est magnifique, mais ce nest pas la gravure," they
whisper.  Into the matter in dispute, it is perhaps presumptuous for
an "atechnic" to adventure himself.  But to the outsider it would
certainly seem as if the chief ground of complaint is that the new
comers do not play the game according to the old rules, and that
this (alleged) irregular mode of procedure tends to lessen the
status of the engraver as an artist.  False or true, this, it may
fairly be advanced, has nothing whatever to do with the matter, as
far, at least, as the public are concerned.  For them the question
is, simply and solely--What is the result obtained?  The new school,
availing themselves largely of the assistance of photography, are
able to dispense, in a great measure, with the old tedious method of
drawing on the block, and to leave the artist to choose what medium
he prefers for his design--be it oil, water-colour, or black and
white--concerning themselves only to reproduce its characteristics
on the wood.  This is, of course, a deviation from the method of
Bewick.  But would Bewick have adhered to his method in these days?
Even in his last hours he was seeking for new processes.  What we
want is to get nearest to the artist himself with the least amount
of interpretation or intermediation on the part of the engraver.  Is
engraving on copper to be reproduced, we want a facsimile if
possible, and not a rendering into something which is supposed to be
the orthodox utterance of wood-engraving.  Take, for example, the
copy of Schiavonetti's engraving of Blake's Death's Door in
"Scribner's Magazine" for June 1880, or the cut from the same source
at page 131 of this book.  These are faithful line for line
transcriptions, as far as wood can give them, of the original
copper-plates; and, this being the case, it is not to be wondered at
that the public, who, for a few pence can have practical facsimiles
of Blake, of Cruikshank, or of Whistler, are loud in their
appreciation of the "new American School."  Nor are its successes
confined to reproduction in facsimile.  Those who look at the
exquisite illustrations, in the same periodical, to the "Tile Club
at Play," to Roe's "Success with Small Fruits," and Harris's
"Insects Injurious to Vegetation,"--to say nothing of the selected
specimens in the recently issued "Portfolios"--will see that the
latest comers can hold their own on all fields with any school that
has gone before. {15}

Besides copperplate and wood, there are many processes which have
been and are still employed for book-illustrations, although the
brief limits of this chapter make any account of them impossible.
Lithography was at one time very popular, and, in books like
Roberts's "Holy Land," exceedingly effective.  The "Etching Club"
issued a number of books circa 1841-52; and most of the work of
"Phiz" and Cruikshank was done with the needle.  It is probable
that, as we have already seen, the impetus given to modern etching
by Messrs. Hamerton, Seymour Haden, and Whistler, will lead to a
specific revival of etching as a means of book-illustration.
Already beautiful etchings have for some time appeared in "L'Art,"
the "Portfolio," and the "Etcher;" and at least one book of poems
has been entirely illustrated in this way,--the poems of Mr. W. Bell
Scott.  For reproducing old engravings, maps, drawings, and the
like, it is not too much to say that we shall never get anything
much closer than the facsimiles of M. Amand-Durand and the
Typographic Etching and Autotype Companies.  But further
improvements will probably have to be made before these can compete
commercially with wood-engraving as practised by the "new American
School."


"Of making many books," 'twais said,
"There is no end;" and who thereon
The ever-running ink doth shed
But probes the words of Solomon:
Wherefore we now, for colophon,
From London's city drear and dark,
In the year Eighteen Eight-One,
Reprint them at the press of Clark.

A. D.


Footnotes:

{1}  This is the technical name for people who "illustrate" books
with engravings from other works.  The practice became popular when
Granger published his "Biographical History of England."

{2}  Mr. William Blades, in his "Enemies of Books" (Trubner, 1880),
decries glass-doors,-- "the absence of ventilation will assist the
formation of mould."  But M. Rouveyre bids us open the doors on
sunny days, that the air may be renewed, and, close them in the
evening hours, lest moths should enter and lay their eggs among the
treasures.  And, with all deference to Mr. Blades, glass-doors do
seem to be useful in excluding dust.

{3}  "Send him back carefully, for you can if you like, that all
unharmed he may return to his own place."

{4}  No wonder the books are scarce, if they are being hacked to
pieces by Grangerites.

{5}  These lines appeared in "Notes and Queries," Jan. 8, 1881.

{6}  In the Golden Ass of Apuleius, which Polia should not have
read.

{7}  M. Arsene Houssaye seems to think he has found them; marked on
the fly-leaves with an impression, in wax, of a seal engraved with
the head of Epicurus.

{8}  This chapter was written by Austin Dobson.--DP

{9}  The recent Winter Exhibition of the Old Masters (1881)
contained a fine display of Flaxman's drawings, a large number of
which belonged to Mr. F. T. Palgrave.

{10}  By Mr. Cosmo Monkhouse.

{11}  These words were written before the "Art Journal" had
published its programme for 1881.  From this it appears that the
present editor fully recognises the necessity for calling in the
assistance of the needle.

{12}  The example, here copied on the wood by M. Lacour, is a very
successful reproduction of Clennell's style.

{13}  He also illustrated the "Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi."  But
this was simply "edited" by "Boz."

{14}  The reader will observe that this volume is indebted to Mr.
Crane for its beautiful frontispiece.

{15}  Since this paragraph was first written an interesting paper on
the illustrations in "Scribner," from the pen of Mr. J. Comyns Carr,
has appeared in "L'Art."