_F._ Do let me see at once, HELENE I [_Looks eagerly._] Ah, yes; all
gone; nothing visible but one smoke-pipe, three stove-pipe hats, four
bits of orange-peel, some pea-nut shells, and thirteen copies of the
_New-York Ledger_. Sad fate! But see! Some dry-goods-no, a young lady
flounders along toward the shore! The bystanders rush up; she is nearly
exhausted; pants rapidly; they congratulate her. A well-dressed young
man approaches. She instantly begins to think of her looks; her hand
flies to her back hair. Heavens! there is so much gone there that she
shrieks in alarm! Her fall in the water has detached her Waterfall!
_That_ gone, every thing is gone! She springs to her feet! Glancing
hurriedly over the watery waste, now plentifully strewn with fans,
little canes, and certain objects which are either mail-bags or
_chignons_, she descries her better part, and with a wild cry, (as when
a mother rescues her babe from tigers,) dashes in and seizes the darling
object! She presses it to her lips, and impetuously breaks for the
shore! Alas! too late, by about ten and a half seconds! "Save it!" she
seems to cry; tosses the wad ashore, and down she goes, with her hand on
the back of her head, her last thoughts, evidently, more or less,
connected with that sympathizing young man on the bank above.

_D._ Father, you talk like a brute! Have you no feeling? Boo-hoo
hoo-hoo!

_F._ Child, I am _all_ feeling. Boo-hoo-hoo-too!

       *       *       *       *       *

HORTICULTURAL HINTS.

KITCHEN GARDEN.--Plant pickles early, if you are up in time; if not,
later. But don't eat them late, unless you are equally fond of
dyspepsia.

In planting peas, select that kind that does not grow hard and yellow;
that is, unless you supply boarding-houses, or have a government
contract for the supply of shot.

Grated turnips, mixed with horse-radish, for the table, will assuage
one's grief for one's grandmother.

Rice-puddings can be grown, ready-made, by sowing rice with cowcumbers.
Try it.

NURSERY.--Transplant from hot-beds to bath-tub as soon as possible,
using sponge with palm-soap and cold water. Top-dress with comb and
brush. Trim limbs according to age. Train with rods. Much depends on
starting right, so start to school right after breakfast.

    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    |                     A, T. STEWART & CO.                      |
    |                                                              |
    |                          HAVE MADE                           |
    |                                                              |
    |                       LARGE ADDITIONS                        |
    |                                                              |
    |                         TO ALL THEIR                         |
    |                                                              |
    |                       Popular--Stocks                        |
    |                                                              |
    |                     Bareges, Organdies,                      |
    |                                                              |
    |           JACONETS, PERCALES, Embroideries, Laces,           |
    |                                                              |
    |                    LADIES AND CHILDREN'S                     |
    |                                                              |
    |                        UNDERGARMENTS,                        |
    |                                                              |
    |                      Dresses, Sacques,                       |
    |                                                              |
    |                      BOURNOUS, SHAWLS,                       |
    |                                                              |
    |                Real India Camels Hair Shawls,                |
    |                                                              |
    |                    53c EACH AND UPWARDS,                     |
    |                                                              |
    |                   PARIS AND DOMESTIC MADE                    |
    |                                                              |
    |                  LADIES' HATS, BONNETS, &C                   |
    |                                                              |
    |                       AND A VARIETY OF                       |
    |                                                              |
    |                     MILLINERY ARTICLES.                      |
    |                                                              |
    |                          BROADWAY,                           |
    |                                                              |
    |              Fourth Ave., Ninth and Tenth Sts.               |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    |                     A, T, STEWART & CO,                      |
    |                                                              |
    |                            OFFER                             |
    |                                                              |
    |                    THE MOST EXTENSIVE AND                    |
    |                                                              |
    |                      SELECT ASSORTMENT                       |
    |                                                              |
    |                        IN THE CITY OF                        |
    |                                                              |
    |                   Ladies' and Gentlemen's                    |
    |                                                              |
    |                       FURNISHING GOODS                       |
    |                                                              |
    |           AND WILL CONTINUE TO RECEIVE BY EACH AND           |
    |                   EVERY STEAMER THE LATEST                   |
    |                                                              |
    |                 PARIS AND LONDON NOVELTIES.                  |
    |                                                              |
    |                          BROADWAY,                           |
    |                                                              |
    |           Fourth Avenue, Ninth and Tenth Streets.            |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    |                     A. T. Stewart & Co.