Twice only he undertook any foreign expeditions, one to Alexandria,
and the other to Achaia; but he abandoned the prosecution of the
former on the very day fixt for his departure, by being deterred both
by ill omens, and the hazard of the voyage. For while he was making
the circuit of the temples, having seated himself in that of Vesta,
when he attempted to rise, the skirt of his robe stuck fast; and he
was instantly seized with such a dimness in his eyes, that he could
not see a yard before him. In Achaia, he attempted to make a cut
through the Isthmus;[154] and, having made a speech encouraging his
pretorians to set about the work, on a signal given by sound of
trumpet, he first broke ground with a spade, and carried off a
basketful of earth upon his shoulders. He made preparations for an
expedition to the Pass of the Caspian mountains, forming a new legion
out of his late levies in Italy, of men all six feet high, which he
called the phalanx of Alexander the Great. These transactions, in part
unexceptionable, and in part highly commendable, I have brought into
one view, in order to separate them from the scandalous and criminal
part of his conduct.


III

THE DEATH OF NERO[155]

(68 A.D.)


He was terrified with manifest warnings, both old and new, arising
from dreams, auspices, and omens. He had never been used to dream
before the murder of his mother. After that event, he fancied in his
sleep that he was steering a ship, and that the rudder was forced from
him: that he was dragged by his wife Octavia into a prodigiously dark
place; and was at one time covered over with a vast swarm of winged
ants, and at another, surrounded by the national images which were set
up near Pompey's theater, and hindered from advancing farther; that a
Spanish jennet he was fond of, had his hinder parts so changed as to
resemble those of an ape; and that having his head only left
unaltered, he neighed very harmoniously. The doors of the mausoleum of
Augustus flying open of themselves, there issued from it a voice,
calling on him by name. The Lares being adorned with fresh garlands on
the calends (the first) of January, fell down during the preparations
for sacrificing to them. While he was taking the omens, Sporus
presented him with a ring, the stone of which had carved upon it the
Rape of Proserpine. When a great multitude of several orders was
assembled, to attend at the solemnity of making vows to the gods, it
was a long time before the keys of the Capitol could be found. And
when, in a speech of his to the senate against Vindex, these words
were read, "that the miscreants should be punished and soon make the
end they merited," they all cried out, "You will do it, Augustus." It
was likewise remarked, that the last tragic piece which he sung, was
OEdipus in Exile, and that he fell as he was repeating this verse:

    "Wife, mother, father, force me to my end."

Meanwhile, on the arrival of the news that the rest of the armies had
declared against him, he tore to piece the letters which were
delivered to him at dinner, overthrew the table, and dashed with
violence against the ground two favorite cups, which he called
Homer's, because some of that poet's verses were cut upon them. Then
taking from Locusta a dose of poison, which he put up in a golden box,
he went into the Servilian gardens, and thence dispatching a trusty
freedman to Ostia, with orders to make ready a fleet, he endeavored to
prevail with some tribunes and centurions of the prætorian guards to
attend him in his flight; but part of them showing no great
inclination to comply, others absolutely refusing, and one of them
crying out aloud,

     "Say, is it then so sad a thing to die?"

