During the time we remained at Biskra we only twice made excursions
beyond the limits of the oasis--once to some hot sulphur springs a few
miles out in the desert--springs of such wonderful efficacy in all
rheumatic affections that were they in Europe they would speedily make
the fortune of any watering-place. Here they are little known: however,
a bath has been formed and roofed in, and our gentlemen enjoyed a dip in
the warm water after their ride across the desert. From this bath one
of them dated the cure of a severe pain in the leg which had caused him
much inconvenience during the journey. Our other excursion was to the
neighboring oasis of Sidi Okba, the ecclesiastical, as Biskra is the
commercial, capital of the Ziban. Judging by appearances, one would say
that commerce must be a much more thriving thing than religion, for Sidi
Okba is in every way inferior to Biskra. The people are more squalid,
the houses more wretched: the very mosque itself is in a dirty,
tumble-down condition. Here we found no Arabs who could speak French;
and at one time, having lost our way among the palms, we were very much
at a loss to know what to do. For some time we tried in vain to catch a
glimpse of the mosque, thinking that it, beacon-like, would guide us
back to the town. Equally in vain we interrogated all the Arabs we met
in all the languages at our command, and it was only at last, inspired
by desperation, that we hit upon the expedient of signs. Assuming the
attitude of prayer, we called out, "Allah! Allah!" An Arab at once
answered "Marabout! marabout!" and then we remembered that this was the
name for mosque, and nodded, "Yes, marabout." He seemed delighted at
having understood us at last, and soon led us to the mosque, from whence
we knew our way to the place where we had left our luncheon. We had
crossed the desert in the early morning, and were obliged to seek a
resting-place in the shade during the hot hours of the day. This we
found in a house belonging to a son of the caid of Biskra. There we ate
the luncheon we had brought with us, and then we reclined upon the
Persian carpets and rested till the hour arrived when we could safely
undertake the return journey.

The day after our visit to Sidi Okba was our last at Biskra. We bade
adieu to it with regret, and we shall always remember the time spent in
this oasis of Sahara as among the white days in our calendar.

    J.P.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] [For the use of the wood-cut presenting a view of the oasis of El
Kantra we are indebted to the kindness of Mr. John Murray of Albemarle
street, London.--ED.]


MODERN KASHMIR.

[Illustration: RUINS OF A TEMPLE OF MÁRTAND (OLD SRINAGAR).]


The topographically inclined among biblical commentators might select a
great many more unlikely spots for the Garden of Eden than Kashmir. The
four rivers are there--the Indus, the Jhelam, the Chenab and the Ravi.
Their banks present the widest possible variety of rock, soil,
vegetation and animal life. The palm and pomegranate are at home in the
valleys, and the dwarf willow and birch are frozen out a long way below
the summits of the mountains. The tiger and the ptarmigan are, measured
vertically, close neighbors, a mile or two apart, within easy calling
distance. Man is equally multiform. All his races are assembled save the
African. His extremes in physiognomy, dress, government and religion are
brought into close communion. Character, in this cosmopolitan district,
gives place to eclecticism. Its features and its occupants represent the
whole world, and might readily refurnish it were all the rest of its
surface laid desolate.

[Illustration: SUBURB OF SRINAGAR.]

Curiously enough, the idea of a garden has always associated itself with
Kashmir. Eastern poets and historians speak of it as a garden
collectively, and lavish their most brilliant powers of description on
the gardens which make it up in detail--the gardens of the terraced
hills, the gardens of the broad alluvial plain, and the floating gardens
of the lakes Wúlar and Dal. These last, more fortunate than those of
Babylon and Nineveh, have maintained their existence to our day, the
aquatic cultivator rowing among his parterres and gathering his melons
over the gunwale. Fertility has never failed. The permanence in beauty
and productiveness designed for Eden has here been sustained by the
harmoniously-acting forces of Nature, and Adam might, for all that the
explorers tell us to the contrary, have lived in Kashmir after his
primitive fashion till now. He would, however, have been compelled in
some degree to modify his taste in regard to clothing, unless he
confined himself the year through to the valley, ninety miles by twenty,
which strictly bears the name. A winter suit would have been
indispensable to his excursions among the bordering mountains, which
swell from an elevation of ten thousand feet above tide to twenty-two,
and even, on the extreme limits of the region now officially named
Kashmir, to twenty-eight thousand. As to antiquity, time is, like
everything else, on a grand scale in Kashmir. Her earliest dynasty, the
Pandu, runs far into the life of the first father, having come to an end
twenty-five hundred years before Christ, after a duration of thirteen
hundred years, if we are to believe Baron Hügel, an archæologist of the
good old German type, who is daunted by no figures, and who simply
"reminds the reader," as he would of what he had for dinner yesterday,
of the stunning chronology here cited. To the epoch of that primeval
dynasty the baron assigns the building of the great temple of Mártand,
the ruins of which delight all travellers and excite to the use of such
epithets as "wonderful" and "glorious" the impassive Wilson. He declares
that they are quite superior to anything architectural around them, and
"might yet vie with the finest remains of Greek and Roman architecture."
The temple stands solitary on a stretch of table-land four hundred feet
above the valley and ten leagues east of the capital. Tradition avers,
partly on the strength of several ancient beaches still distinctly
marked, that the whole valley was under water when the temple was built,
and that it originally stood upon the immediate shore. This generally
unreliable guide even goes into details and grows statistical,
mentioning the year 266 B.C.as the epoch of the sudden shrinking of the
waters to what--or nearly what, for desiccation is said to be still
going on--is seen of them now. This becomes less incredible in the light
of the extraordinary oscillations of level in the streams and lakes with
which the present inhabitants are familiar. In 1858 the Indus rose, at a
point below its exit from the mountains, one hundred and sixty feet in
twenty-four hours, its rise in the narrow defiles above having been of
course greater. A single pool, temporarily formed on the slopes of the
mighty Nanga Parbat by the melting of the snow in 1850, was a mile and a
half long by half a mile wide and three hundred feet deep--just so much
devastation "cocked and primed."

[Illustration: HARI PARBAT, CITADEL OF SRINAGAR.]

The modern state of Kashmir dates from 1846, when the Sikh empire, of
which it was a part, was overthrown by the British. Golab Singh, who had
made himself useful to the Indian government, was placed over it as
maharajah, with a show of independence, but real subordination. He fixed
his capital at Jummoo, in the extreme south of his dominions and within
easy reach of Lahore. The name _Jummoo_ is given by the natives to his
whole territory, although the province of that name is, so far as
geographical extent goes, a mere fragment of it. The provinces of Jummoo
and Kashmir, immediately north of it, comprise together about a third of
the aggregate of sixty-eight thousand square miles. Their share of the
population is infinitely greater in proportion. Out of a total, in 1873,
of 1,534,972 souls, the province of Jummoo contained 861,075--44,000 of
them in the city of that name, the political metropolis. The government
of Kashmir had 491,846, including 136,000 in the city of Srinagar. The
district of Punch, which boasts a rajah of its own, tributary to the
maharajah, had 77,566, and the outlying governments, as they are termed,
of Gilgit in the extreme north-east, Baltistán in the north, and Ladákh,
or Little Tibet, in the east, 104,485 together. In the province of
Kashmir the Mohammedans are in the large majority of six to one. In that
of Jummoo, on the contrary, the excess is slightly in favor of the
Hindús--a circumstance which accounts for the sovereign's choice of a
capital, he being a Hindú and showing in his political acts a preference
for his co-religionists and a corresponding distrust of his Moslem
subjects. In Ladákh, Búdha is supreme, his worshippers numbering 20,254
to 260 followers of Islam and 107 adherents of the Vedas--hardly one to
the square mile of all religions.

[Illustration: KASHMIRI BOATMEN.]

The different creeds get on very comfortably side by side, the mosque
and the idol temple decorating the same street, and the praying-machines
of the Lámas grinding out perpetual bliss without let or hinderance from
those who believe in another way of reaching the ear of the Unknowable.
This Utopian scene of universal toleration has not failed to attract the
representatives of our own faith. The Moravians have long had an
establishment on the south-eastern mountains, and we read of the
conversion of the descendants of the last rajah of Kishtwár by an
American missionary--of what sect is not stated.

Generally speaking, the lines of race coincide but vaguely with those of
creed. The Hindús and Mohammedans are both of Aryan race, and Mohammedan
converts are found among the Mongolian--or rather Turanian--worshippers
of Búdh. The latter process would have made more headway but for the
influence of the reigning dynasty, which discourages it on system. The
change implied in this proselytism is greater in respect of some social
practices than in the abstract principles of religious belief. The
polyandry of the Tibetans is in direct contrast with the polygamy of the
Moslems, and is far more strictly maintained. It is favored by the
circumstance that, contrary to what usually obtains in old countries,
the males in this region considerably outnumber the females; yet, while
that disproportion exists throughout the provinces, polyandry is
confined to the Tibetans. Their wretched lands, verging on the line of
perpetual snow, devoid of fuel, and in many places unable to ripen
grain, keep them poor; and they assign as a justification for the
practice the necessity of repressing population and retaining property
undivided. One mistress of the house and three or four masters, who are
almost always brothers, is their unique remedy for the hardships of
their lot, so lowly and yet (topographically) so elevated. Among their
Mohammedan and Hindú compatriots the "twin barbarism" of a plurality of
wives appears to be confined in practice to a few of the powerful and
wealthy. Until within the last few years its repulsive features were
wont to be brought into more hideous relief by the cruel custom of
suttee, or widow-burning. It is only within half a generation past that
British interference has succeeded in putting a stop to these horrible
immolations. When, in 1843, Suchet Singh, uncle of the present
maharajah, Ranbir Singh, died, his _home_ harem of a hundred and fifty
wives were burned with his body at Ramnagar, and the same execution was
inflicted on his branch establishment of twenty-five at Jummoo. Seven
years after the beginning of British sway the thirty-two widows of a
cousin of the maharajah were burned. This scene was witnessed by Mr.
Drew, an English engineer of eminence who was for ten years employed in
surveying and exploring the new state, and from whose narrative many of
the facts given in this article are drawn. Upon another occasion he saw
the forcible sacrifice of a single widow. The poor woman, shrieking
fearfully, sprang from the funeral pile as the flames surrounded her,
but was instantly seized and thrown back into it by the "scandalized"
priests.

[Illustration: KASHMIRIAN BRAHMANS.]

The guide-book and the locomotive have marked this romantic land for
their own, but their progress is far from complete. The advance of the
latter, indeed, has probably reached its limit, some twenty leagues
outside the extreme south-western corner. The former is still fain to
depend largely on Bernier, the Frenchman who visited Kashmir two
centuries ago in the train of the Mogul emperor Aurengzebe. Bernier kept
his eyes open, and left not only a good account of the manners and life
of the Great Mogul and his court, but a fair itinerary. His description
of Srinagar and its vicinity still holds good, and modern books point us
to the pass of the Pir Panjal so disastrous to the imperial ladies. The
foremost of fifteen elephants, each carrying four women, took fright in
a narrow part of the so-called road and backed the rest over a
precipice. Only three or four of the odalisques were killed by the fall,
but not one elephant was saved. Bernier passed the scene of the accident
two days after, and saw some of the animals still alive, but able only
to trumpet mournfully for assistance.

North of Jummoo the highest type of road accommodates no longer an
elephant, but at most a hill-pony. In the vale of Srinagar the chief
thoroughfares are sluggish rivers, lakes and canals, navigated by a
remarkably sturdy race of boatmen. The chief line of traffic to that
valley, the heart of Kashmir proper, from Jummoo, is hardly practicable
for horses. In its length of a hundred and seventy-seven miles it
crosses two ridges, each nine thousand feet above the sea, with a hollow
between five thousand feet deep. The starting-point, or southern end of
the path, is fifteen hundred feet above tide, and the valley of Srinagar
from fifty-two hundred to sixty-five hundred. These are all trifling
elevations compared to those of the Himáliya on the south-east and the
Karakoram chain, to which England has pushed the maharajah's boundary,
on the north; but they will do very well for Western tourists to "cut
their teeth on," especially as they are interspersed with minor hills of
every grade of height and surface. The varied assortment of climates
also supports the idea of a general training-ground for travellers.
Bernier thought the first summit he crossed, coming from the south, "the
dreadful rim of the world," but the descent of it plumped him, "as if by
enchantment, into the centre of France." In sheltered places with a
southern exposure the tropics reappear, but the vegetation of the
foothills and middle mountains is said to be, but for the deodara cedar
(_Pinus excelsa_) and a few other trees, European in character. The
resemblance of the undergrowth is less marked, and still less that of
the inhabitants, the costume of the mountaineers, notably the tribe
named Gaddis, reasserting Asia. These Oriental Swiss are as hardy as
their Western analogues, thanks to a continual struggle for existence
against Nature and a tolerably frequent one against man. Against the
latter foe they are at present guaranteed by the quiet of English rule,
but the avalanche and the torrent remain unquelled.

[Illustration: DOGRÁS AND MUSSULMANS, JUMMOO.]

The famous vale is an emerald with a rough setting--a jewel always much
sought after, and which would have been carried away long ago had it
been portable. But its mightiest and most fortunate possessors were fain
to come to it by a long and painful path over crags and snows, and to
pass away, one after the other, and leave it in undimmed brightness,
clasped tightly as ever in its frame of rocks. At the beginning of the
fourteenth century its ruler was a Hindú rani, who stabbed herself
rather than marry her traitorous and usurping vizier. Then came the
sway of a Moslem dynasty, two of whose members stand out prominently by
reason of opposite traits. One earned the name of the Image-breaker by
his wanton destruction of the ancient architecture and sculpture. The
balance oscillated toward the good when, in the fifteenth century,
Zein-ul-Abdin introduced the Tibetan goat and the weavers of Turkestan,
and originated the manufacture of the famous shawls. In 1588 the country
was surrendered to the emperor Akbar, who, with the most noted of his
descendants, Jehángír, Shah Jehán and Aurengzebe, made it their favorite
summer-retreat and lavished upon it an expenditure the fruits of which
are yet conspicuous. The Afghans, from beyond the north-west mountains,
seized it in 1752, and were dispossessed by Ranjít Singh in 1819, who
thus restored the supremacy of the ancient religion after more than four
centuries of Moslem rule. The repose now enjoyed by it under the almost
entirely unseen but distinctly felt influence of the English promises to
reproduce something like the palmy days of the Moguls in the matter of
improvement and embellishment, with a security to life and property
under fixed and just laws quite unknown in their time.

[Illustration: FORT AT GILGIT.]

A visitor familiar with all the scenic features of the happy valley
would almost have us believe that artificial decoration has exhausted
itself, and that the art now in demand is simply the art of letting
Nature and antiquity alone:

"The valley of Kashmir, properly so called, remains, as in the
seventeenth century, the largest and the most beautiful bit of
landscape-gardening in the world, a park thirty leagues by ten or
twelve. Everything in it seems planned with supernatural ingenuity to
delight the eye--fields, orchards, dwellings, rivers and lakes sprinkled
with green and flowery islets and ploughed by boats of varied form and
size navigated by _hanjis_ (boatmen) whose intelligent countenances,
sculpturesque figures and graceful costumes harmonize admirably with the
enchanting scenery; innumerable brooks and canals curving capriciously
among lawns and rice-meadows and glittering in the sun like ribbons shot
with silver."

This portrait leaves out the temples and villas, ancient and modern, the
terraces and pavilions edged with the lotus and overhung with vines and
plane trees, the Shalmiar Bagh, or Garden of Delight, and the Mishat
Bagh, or Garden of Pleasure, where wine-loving Jehángír and his
beautiful consort Núr Jahán, the Light of the World, luxuriated in the
summers of long ago. This potentate declared that he would rather lose
all the rest of his vast and affluent empire than Kashmir. It furnished
a place of refreshing retreat for his energies and his conscience, the
load of the latter being fully up to the average of an Eastern
despot's. By these lulling waters and under this embowering verdure he
could shut out from the sight and memory such spectacles as that to
which he had treated his rebellious son Khosrou--a long row of seven
hundred of the latter's accomplices seated in solemn gravity, but not
returning his salute as he was led along, for the sufficient if not
immediately perceptible reason that they sat upon thorns, each upon one
thorn a foot or so long, of iron. We may suppose the father of Frederick
the Great to have had in mind this passage of Oriental life when he
forced the prince to witness the execution of his young friend Katte.

Wilson's preference is for the Garden of Pleasure, notwithstanding the
elegance of that of Delight. It looks out upon Lake Dal, the Golden
Island in front:

"Ten terraces, bounded by magnificent trees and with a stream of water
falling over them, lead up to the latticed pavilion at the end of this
garden. Between the double stories of this pavilion the stream flows
through a marble--or at least a limestone--tank, and the structure is
shaded by great _chunár_ trees, while through a vista of their splendid
foliage we look down the terraces and water-courses upon the lake
below."

A fit dreaming-place this for the lotus-eating monarch of a lotus-eating
people. The lake is so full of the lotus and other water-lilies that
more than sixty thousand tons of the edible nuts are gathered each year
and ground into flour, the root besides serving as a popular esculent.
What is an object of devotion with the Tibetans of the higher Himáliyas
a few days' journey distant, as formerly with the Egyptians, is to the
Kashmiris an article of food and trade. They might draw from the waters,
which cover a very small part of the fertile valley, fish enough to
support, with the nelumbium nuts, nearly the whole of the present
population; but then they are lotus-eaters, and as such improvident and
indolent by all rules of poetry and legend.

Srinagar has been likened to Venice. Standing a mile higher in the
world, water-communication is its dependence for movement of persons and
things almost as exclusively as with the Queen of the Adriatic. For
once, the lean, dry Oriental has his fill of water. Moisture prevails in
excess. The characteristic flat roof of his house gives place to one
with slope enough to shed any shower or number of showers; and that soon
becomes clad with a spontaneous growth of plants. The surplus rainfall,
however, is not so great as it would be were not the stormy south-west
monsoons cut off by the mountains. The English, water-dogs by nature,
and last from the blazing plains of the Panjab, do not complain of
dampness. One of them, indeed, declares that "the air is exceedingly
dry, notwithstanding the immense amount of water in the valley and the
frequent showers of rain."

Srinagar--as the city known for four centuries as Kashmir was anciently
and is again named under Hindú rule--is a little disappointing in the
material employed for most of its structures. Stone is not wanting, but
the deodar timber is more abundant, being floated down cheaply from the
mountains, where it forms immense forests, the carefully preserved
hunting-ground of the Mogul emperors. A Frenchman dubs it a city of
chalets, and recommends the architects of Paris to seek there the most
charming models for kiosks, verandas, turrets, cupolas, etc. The
humblest suburban and rural abodes he pronounces full of the
picturesque. They appear to be much in the Swiss style, so natural to an
alpine region. They, too, are mostly of wood, except on the high slopes,
where that material is scarce or wholly absent, and on the frontiers,
where each hut is a little rock-fort.

[Illustration: MEN OF DARDISTÁN.]

Even the piers of the bridges over the Jhelam are, above the water at
least, formed of large logs, which overlap each other and approach with
their ends the middle of each span after the semblance of an arch.
Parasitic plants, and even considerable trees, take root in their
crevices and disguise the structure in an even more bizarre way than the
mediæval buildings did Old London Bridge. There are seven of these
bridges within the city, about three hundred feet long, and between them
on either hand the houses overhang the water at the expense of all
visible shore, sometimes striding out upon stilt-like piles, their
multiform gables "fantastically set" with a total disregard of
uniformity and extent of façade that would have been the death of Baron
Haussmann or the builder of a Philadelphia block. Nevertheless, there is
a pervading tone and style which would identify a Kashmiri villa
transplanted into Christendom.

Two isolated hills overlooking the city, and visible afar off to the
weary wayfarer, are crowned and flanked with fortifications and temples
of one or the other religion. The list of the latter edifices included,
in Bernier's time, a Hindú pagoda claimed by the inhabitants to have
been built by Solomon, but it has now disappeared as completely as his
better-authenticated effort at Jerusalem. In return, as compensation, a
Mohammedan mosque has given place to a modern fort. The march of
improvement or of change shows itself in a yet more modern array of
cottages erected for the accommodation of English visitors. Here these
gentry hide themselves in an absolute forest of fruit trees of the kinds
familiar at home--apple, apricot, cherry, etc. The lovers of the apricot
may be interested to learn that it is _par excellence_ the fruit of this
soi-disant Eden, this glittering attic-window upon the Roof of the
World, and of all the slopes thereof up to the white-tiled roof-tree. It
flourishes up to ten thousand feet, only the stone-pine, of all edibles,
going higher; and dried apricots are a leading staple among the hillmen,
as dates are with the Arabs.

Upon the bazaars the English architect has laid his heavy hand, and
villas and shops like those of the Thames promise to mark the artistic
renaissance of Kashmir. The pleasure-houses of the emperors before
mentioned have so far escaped him, although it is to be feared he will
soon have the repairing of them. Their principal charms, the turf, the
great trees and the cascades, were never more beautiful, and have rather
gained by the softness with which age has enriched them. The trees have
been steadily growing under all flags and cults, swelling in pride and
strength as they looked contemptuously and calmly down on the storms of
human passion. They need no repairs, and their style, nobody knows how
much older than Thebes or Dendera, will endure no modification.

The level surface of this alluvion is illustrated by the very slight
descent of the Jhelam. From Ismaïlabad, near the head of the valley, and
fifty-four hundred feet above the level of the sea, the fall to
Srinagar, thirty miles, is seventy-five feet; and from the capital to
Lake Wúlar, twenty-four miles below, only fifty-five feet--declivities
in marked contrast with the fall of two thousand eight hundred feet in
eighty miles from the edge of the plateau at Baramúla to the plain of
the Panjab. Besides the ancient beaches which indicate the origin of
this upland meadow, there are traceable other and more recent evidences
of a change of level in the waters, pointing to an elevation, as the
former do to subsidence. In the Manas-Bal, the smallest but deepest of
the Kashmirian lakes, submerged ruins, alleged to be those of a temple,
are clearly visible. At another point, fifteen miles below Srinagar,
ruins and fragments of pottery have been exhumed at a great depth. One
of these oscillations appears to be now, or to have been within two
centuries, in progress. Lake Wúlar has grown shallower, its present
average depth being forty feet.

Man, among these enormous mountains, presents not less notably than
inanimate Nature a singular compound of change and solidity, of the
catastrophic and the secular. The little state of Kashmir, overrun from
time immemorial, in peace or war, by hordes of many races and tongues,
preserves a language and a physiognomy of its own. About forty per cent.
of the words in Kashmiri are Persian, twenty-five Sanscrit, fifteen
Hindústhani, ten Arabic and fifteen Mongol. Its letters resemble those
of the Sanscrit, and are apparently the originals of the Tibetan
characters. They are not much used, the literary capabilities of the
Kashmiris remaining to be developed. Travellers say the men, especially
the upper classes who have maintained the purity of their blood, are the
finest, physically, to be found in the Himáliya. They are stout,
well-built, and pleasing in countenance, resembling Europeans, except in
having a darker complexion. They are more acute and intelligent than the
Sikhs and than the Dográs or Hindús of Jummoo, their present superiors
politically. They are industrious, manufacturing besides shawls other
stuffs and much fancy-work in wood. The beauty of the women is as much
remarked upon now as in the old days, and the late Mr. Moore cannot be
accused of overstepping poetic license on that point.

[Illustration: SKÁRDÚ FORT, BALTISTÁN.]

The higher classes of the Kashmiris having held more firmly to their
religion during Mohammedan sway, most of the non-Moslem inhabitants are
Brahmans, and they live chiefly in the city. Unlike their
co-religionists of the province of Jummoo, many of whose high-caste men
cultivate the soil, the Kashmiri Brahmans contemn manual occupations.
They are largely employed in the offices of the state. The lowest
occupations are left to a class of pariahs called Batals, who are
considered by some to represent a wholly distinct race, a remnant of the
aborigines who were dispossessed by the first Aryan settlers. As it is
easier to procure photographs of individuals belonging to this degraded
class than of those above them, an unjust impression of the physical
traits of the Kashmiris is apt to reach the Western World. The
dancing-girls are Batals, and are pronounced by those who know very
unfavorable specimens of the Kashmiri fair. The Mohammedan women are
always veiled.

But ethnic science, whether based on linguistic, physical, social or
religious distinctions, is in a very unsatisfactory condition.
Surprising yet illusory resemblances are constantly cropping up in the
most unexpected ways and places. Wilson was struck with the Gaelic
traits of the Mongolian Búdhists who inhabit the mountains of Zanskar,
south-east of the valley. "The sound of their language, the brooches
which fasten their plaids, the varieties of tartan which their woollen
clothes present, and even the features of the people (which are of an
Aryan rather than a Tartar type), strongly reminded me of the Scotch
Highlanders." He had the support, too, of one of those imaginative
savants who delight in Welsh, Erse and Gaelic philology, who insisted
"that the names of innumerable places in Tibet and Tartary are identical
with the local names of the Gaelic language." Add to this the fact that
a corps of the maharajah's army is uniformed in an almost critically
exact reproduction of "the garb of old Gaul," and the argument is a good
deal more complete than many on more practically momentous points which
have done service for centuries and are still accepted. We have the
Gauls of Galatia, Galatz, Galicia, Gallia proper and Gaeldoch (or
Caledonia), forming a continuous chain of Gallic settlements from the
Himáliya to the Ultima Thule. And now the circuit is complete. The
current sets back from the West. The slogan, heard so tellingly at
Lucknow, is swelling up the glaciers of the Asiatic fatherland to save
it from the Scythians! Monkbarns lived too soon.

The Mohammedans of Baltistán, on the opposite (or northern) side of
Kashmir, again surprise us by speaking a Tartar tongue. We are not told
that they are Scotch, endowed though they undoubtedly are with some of
the canny and thrifty characteristics of the dwellers ayont the Tweed.
They are inveterate tradesmen, and carry their small wares, including
hill-ponies, all through the mountains. Let us drop in upon them, if
such an expression be applicable to a climb of the most tremendous
description. It takes us up the steps of the steepest and loftiest slope
of the amphitheatre which forms the maharajah's dominions. First,
however, we begin by a gentle and pleasant descent down the Jhelam to
Lake Wúlar. Then begins the trouble. We turn northward, and find
ourselves at the end of the first stage four thousand feet above the
valley, on the brink of an artificial sheet of water surrounded by dense
evergreen woods. Next day we rise 2000 feet higher, and redescend 6500
feet to the banks of the Kischanganga, the chief affluent of the Jhelam,
running mostly parallel to the course of the latter stream. Then we
undulate--if so soft a term be applicable to a route so sharply,
abruptly and irregularly serrate--along the spurs which border the
river, now in the forest and now on a bleak plateau where careful
irrigation avails to grow nothing less hardy than millet, peas and
buckwheat. In crossing to the valley, or rather trench, of the upper
Indus, we have the choice of two passes, one 13,060 and the other 13,500
feet above tide. Having selected the least of these two evils, we swoop
nearly six thousand feet down upon the village of Astor and a new
language, the Dard. The temptation to stop and study either is small. If
we are insatiate of climbing or find the heat at Astor--only 7853 feet
above the sea--oppressive, we have the ice-cone of Nanga Parbat, 26,629
feet high, within ten miles to the west. We are within unpleasantly easy
reach of the western and north-western frontier now; for the opposite
slope of Nanga Parbat and the ridge to which it belongs is held by the
independent Mohammedan tribes of Yaghistán, born marauders since the
beginning of tradition. They have a republican form of government, one
of the fierce democracies numbering only seven houses. Life, liberty and
the pursuit of other people's property is a motto they act up to with a
persistency and consistency highly disagreeable to their neighbors over
the hill. The latter have, in self-defence, evinced a tendency to adopt
the same rule of action, and to steal from their friends by way of
reimbursement for what is stolen by their enemies--a disposition which
is discouraged by the maintenance of a considerable garrison at Astor.

[Illustration: A KÁGÁNI, OR LÁMA MONUMENT.]

The valley of Gilgit, continuous with that of Astor, inasmuch as the two
abut upon the Indus at nearly the same point, one falling and the other
rising, is the core of a tongue of territory projecting north-west into
the heart of Yaghistán, and nearly dividing that turbulent region into
two parts. The British in attaching this corner to Kashmir rather
strained established boundaries in their own favor, and will doubtless
continue the process till all Yaghistán is absorbed and the great
Karakoram range becomes the frontier from the Afghan territory to that
of Chinese Tibet.

At the town of Gilgit we have a reproduction in little of the valley of
Srinagar. Its level is somewhat lower, and, though farther north by two
degrees, it ripens such southern fruits as the pomegranate, etc. Its
attractions will not, however, have full sway so long as the peace of
the region remains precarious. The last attack from Yaghistán was
signally repulsed in 1866. The practice of going armed is still general,
and travellers need an escort. Some of the villages resemble the
casemates, mines and covered-ways of a fortress. The people are of the
same family and religion with those over the border, their foes,
although perhaps less hated by them than their nominal compatriots the
Kashmiris and Dográs. The Dards are an active and proud people, fond of
independence, with features distinctly Caucasian.

Continuing our exploration of the upper benches of the amphitheatre, we
turn to the right and skirt the upper Indus, which runs for several
hundred miles from south-east to north-west close along the southern
foot of the Karakoram, or rather upon a "hip" of the Roof of the World.
Skárdú, on the left bank, was an independent capital down to 1840, and
its aspect is still stormy in a political as in a climatic sense. The
land looks like a petrified storm, the waves of granite and slate dotted
sporadically with huts and microscopic bits of culture. Only in a few of
the deep valleys is Nature less inhospitable. The glaciers descend to an
altitude of 13,500 feet, with an upward extent of twenty-five miles or
more; cultivation, after a fashion, existing at their lower edge, and
grass growing for a season of six or eight weeks much farther up. The
Báltoro glacier leads up to a stupendous peak, the second in height of
all known elevations, but not yet dignified with a name, being only
labelled in the Indian Survey "K. 2." Its height is 28,265 feet, or 687
less than Gaurisankar, the giant of mountains, a peak in the Eastern
Himáliya. The summits next to K.2 are from 25,000 to 27,000 feet. Among
them lies the pass of Mustagh, 18,300 feet above tide, up to 1863 a
high-road between India and Yarkand, practicable for but a few weeks of
summer. The brief interval left by the snow the brigands have
extinguished.

After the abandonment of this pass, that of Karakoram, forty leagues
east of it, became the principal route to Central Asia. The elevation is
exactly the same. Of the five hundred and fifteen miles, divided into
thirty-five marches, between Leh and Yarkand, a hundred and fifty
traverse ice, naked rocks and precipices, wholly devoid of grass or
fuel. Still farther east, in the extreme north-eastern angle of Ladákh
and the Kashmiri states, a third route to Turkestan has been opened. It
is longer than the others, but is practicable for near half the year,
and can be traversed by horses and two-humped camels instead of yaks and
ponies, as at the western crossings. On three stages only are wood and
grass absent. It ascends from the south over a plateau marked by salt or
brackish lakes. It is difficult to say which of the three contestant
empires, Russia, China and England, has easiest or least impracticable
access to the coveted core of Asia.

If the handful of Little Tibetans occupy the gallery of the Kashmiri
theatre, there are wells in it which go down to the level of the
dress-circle. These lower levels have traits of culture--trees, grass,
whitewashed brick or stone dwellings, and nunneries and religious
monuments on the roadside and sometimes arching the road. All, high and
low in rank and topography, are deeply pious, and devote the greater
part of their waking hours to muttering a supplicatory formula of six
syllables, so far translatable by Christians only to the extent of its
meaning something about the Deity and the lotus.

[Illustration: ROCK STATUE OF BÚDH, LADÁKH.]

The trip from New York to Jummoo is about as long in point of time as to
California twenty-five years ago. As many years hence the survivors of
us may be getting up Thanksgiving or Christmas reunions at the old
homestead of the Aryan family. It will never be a hackneyed spot. It
stands too much on end. Steep mountains are never hackneyed: Cook's
Personally Conducted will never permeate Kashmir.

     EDWARD C. BRUCE.


"FOR PERCIVAL."


CHAPTER XXXIX.

SHORT RECKONINGS MAKE LONG FRIENDS.

It was the first of March, and a wild wind was hurrying fragments of
white cloud across the blue. Percival had taken his breakfast in
snatches, performing on his bell meanwhile. Emma had not brought his
boots, and would not so much as come to be told that he wanted them. At
last, despairing, he went out on the landing and shouted his request to
her as she shuffled on some errand below. Turning to go back, he met
Miss Lisle, who had just come down the stairs behind him.

[Illustration]

They stood for a moment exchanging trivial remarks. To them came a
stout, fresh-colored, peculiarly innocent-looking old man, who went by
with a beaming smile and a slight bow.

"That's Mr. Fordham," said Judith: "I don't think I ever saw him so
close before."

"No: one hardly meets him from one week's end to another. He is
unusually late this morning."

"He _looks_ a very quiet, steady--Really, one might take him for rather
a nice old man."

Percival stared blankly at her, and then began to laugh: "Well, Miss
Lisle, I never heard a reputation blighted so completely by a
complimentary sentence before."

Judith blushed a little: "But he isn't very nice, is he?"

"I don't know about _nice_. I should say he was as steady and harmless
an old fellow as ever lived. What _do_ you mean?"

"Well," Judith hesitated, "of course one has no business to judge any
one without really knowing; but his staying out so late at night--"

"'So late at night?'" Percival repeated.

"I suppose he has a latch-key generally. But one or two nights I am sure
Miss Bryant sat up to let him in. I heard them whispering: at least, I
heard her. I don't think that girl could even whisper quietly."

"But there must be some mistake. Fordham comes in quite early, and very
often he doesn't go out at all in the evening."

"He goes out later," said Judith.

"Indeed, no. I could time all his movements. His room is next to mine,
and the wall is not so thick as I could wish. He snores sometimes."

"But--" she persisted, looking scared and white, yet what was Fordham to
her?--"but I have heard him over and over again, Mr. Thorne. I can't be
mistaken."

Percival was disconcerted too. He looked at the carpet, at his slippered
feet--at anything but her face: "You have heard some one, I suppose: I
don't know who comes in late. Not poor old Fordham." He heard Emma on
the stairs, and hurried to meet her. Coming back with his boots in his
hand, he found Judith standing exactly as he had left her.

"I'm sure I beg Mr. Fordham's pardon," she said with a smile. "One does
make curious mistakes, certainly. That nice-looking old man!" And
nodding farewell to young Thorne, she went away.

He did not see her again for two days, though he watched anxiously for
her. Bertie came in and out, and was much as usual. On the third
evening, as Percival was going up stairs, she called after him: "Mr.
Thorne."

He turned eagerly.

"You lent Bertie some money a day or two since?"

Something in her voice or her look made Percival sure that Lisle had
borrowed and spent it without her knowledge, and that it was a trouble
to her. After all, what did it matter? He would sell his watch and pay
Mrs. Bryant. He could not deny Bertie's debt, since she had found it
out, but he could make light of it. So he nodded: "Yes, by the the way,
I believe I did: he hadn't his purse or something." This in a tone of
airy indifference.

"Tell me how much it was, please, and I'll pay it back." Then he saw
that her purse was open in her hand.

"Oh, it doesn't matter," Percival said: "don't pay me off in such a
quick, business-like way, Miss Lisle. I'm not the milkman, nor yet the
washing. Bertie will settle with me one of these days."

"Please tell me, Mr. Thorne. I mean to pay it: I must."

"Well, I'll ask him about it, then."

"_You_ know," with a look of reproach and pleading.

Percival could not deceive her, she looked so sorrowfully resolute. He
met the glance of her gray eyes. "Two pounds," he said; and was certain
that she was relieved at the answer.

"Bertie wasn't sure it wasn't two pounds ten."

"On my honor, no. He asked me for a couple of sovereigns, and I took it
literally."

"If you say so, I am sure. I didn't doubt you: I only told you that you
might understand why I asked." She put the money, a sovereign and two
halves, into his unwilling hand. Then he understood her relief, for,
looking down into the little sealskin purse, he saw that there was no
more gold in it. The last ten shillings must have been counted out in
silver, and he was not quite sure it would not have ended in a
threepenny piece and some halfpence.

"Now I am going to ask a favor," she said. "Don't lend Bertie any more,
please. He has been used to spend just what he liked, and he doesn't
think, poor boy! And it is only wasted. Don't let him have any more."

"But, Miss Lisle," said Percival, "if your brother asks me do you mean
that I am to say 'No'?"

"Please, if you would. He mustn't be extravagant: we can't afford it. He
can't pay you back, and if I lost any of my work--Mrs. Barton's lessons,
for instance--I couldn't either."

"_You_ work to pay _me_!" exclaimed Percival aghast: "I won't hear of
such a thing. Miss Lisle, you mustn't! It's between Bertie and myself,
and I shouldn't be ruined if he didn't pay me till his ship comes home
one of these days. Take it back, please, and he and I will arrange it."

She shook her head: "No: my brother's debts are mine."

"Ah!" said Percival, with a swift, eloquent glance. "Then let me be your
creditor a little longer: I hardly know what it feels like, yet."

"Since when has _your_ ship come home, Mr. Thorne, that you can afford
to be so generous?"

The blood mounted to his forehead at her question, but he answered
quickly: "My ship has not come home. Perhaps if it had I should not dare
to ask you to let me help you. I feel as if our poverty made us all
nearer together."

"It is not every one who would say so in your place," Judith replied. "I
_am_ your debtor for those words. But we Lisles have wronged you too
much already: you shouldn't try to make the load heavier."

"Wronged me?" he faltered.

"Did you think I did not know? My father had your money and ruined you:
deny it if you can! I suspected it, and lately I have been sure. Oh, if
Bertie and I could pay you back! But meanwhile he shall not borrow from
you and waste your earnings on his silly whims. If you lend him any more
you may try to hide it from me, but I shall find it out, and I will pay
it--every farthing. I will find some way, if I have to sit up every
night for a week and work my fingers to the bone."

"God forbid!" said Percival. "He shall have no more from me. But be
generous, and promise me that if you _should_ want help, such as my
poverty can give, you will forget old times and come to me."

"No, I won't promise that. I will remember them and come." She caught
his hand, pressed it one moment in her own, flung it from her and
escaped.

"Judith!" he called after her, but she was gone.

Percival went into his own room. The money had come just in time, for
his landlady's weekly account was lying on the table. He looked at the
three coins with lingering tenderness, and after a moment's hesitation
he took one of them and vowed that he would never part with it. Yet in
the midst of his ardent resolution he smiled rather bitterly to think
that it was not the sovereign, but one of the halves, he meant to keep
for ever. Poverty had taught him many lessons, and among them how to
combine economy and sentiment. "If she had given me the ten shillings'
worth of silver, I suppose I should have saved the threepenny bit!" he
said to himself as he locked his little remembrance in his desk.

A couple of days later, as he was walking home with Bertie, they passed
three or four men who were sauntering idly along, and Thorne felt sure
that his companion received and returned a silent glance of recognition.
He glanced over his shoulder at them, and disliked their look
exceedingly. "Do you know who those fellows were we passed just now?" he
said.

Bertie looked back: "One is the brother of a man in our choir."

"Hm! I wouldn't have one of them for my brother at any price," said
Percival. The matter dropped, but he could not forget it. He fancied
that there was a slight change in Bertie himself--that the boy's face
was keener and haggard, and there was an anxious expression in his eyes.
But he owned frankly that he was not at all sure that he should have
noticed anything if his suspicions had not been previously aroused.

"Come in this evening," said Bertie when they went up stairs. He leant
against the door of Percival's room, and as his friend hesitated he
called to his sister: "Here, Judith! tell Thorne to come and have some
tea with us: they've let his fire out, and his room is as warm and
cheerful as a sepulchre."

"Do you think I order other people about as I do you?" she
replied.--"Will you come, Mr. Thorne? I can, at any rate, promise you a
fire and a welcome."

When she met him she was quite calm, tranquil and clear-eyed. Do the
ripples of the summer sea recall that distant line, the supreme effort
of wind and tide some stormy night? Percival would have thought that it
had been all a dream but for the little coin which that wave had flung
at his feet for a remembrance. And he had called after her "Judith!" The
tide had ebbed, and he did not even think of her as other than Miss
Lisle. Had she heard him that evening? He would almost have hoped not,
but that twilight moment seemed so far away that it must be absurd to
link it with his every-day life.

Apparently, she and Bertie were on their usual footing. Did the young
fellow know of that absurd mistake about old Fordham? Did Percival
really detect a shade of dim apprehension on Judith Lisle's face, as if
she hid an unspoken fear? As Bertie leant forward and the lamplight
shone on his clearly-cut features, Percival was more than ever certain
of the change in him. Could his sister fail to see it?

"Bertie," she said when they had finished their tea and were standing
round the fire--"Bertie, I'm afraid you have lost one of your pupils."

He had his elbow on the chimney-piece, his hand hung loosely open, and
his eyes were fixed upon the leaping flames. When Judith spoke he looked
up inquiringly.

"Miss Nash--Emmeline Nash," said Judith.

Percival happened to be looking at the fire too, and he suddenly saw
Bertie's fingers drawn quickly up. But the young master spoke very
composedly indeed: "Emmeline Nash--why? Has anything happened?"

"No: only Mr. Nash has given in at last, and says she may go home at
Easter for good.--She is older than any of the other pupils, Mr. Thorne:
in fact, she is not treated as a pupil. But her father is--"

"An old fossil," said Bertie.

"Well!--interested in fossils and that sort of thing, and a widower; so
there has not been much of a home for her, and he always fancied she was
better at school. But school can't last for ever."

"Happiest time of one's life!" Bertie ejaculated.

"Oh! do you think so?" said Judith doubtfully.

"Not at all. But I believe it is the right thing to say."

"Stupid boy!--And as she will very soon be twenty, I really think she
ought not to be kept there any longer."

"Of course Miss Nash is delighted," said Percival.

"Yes, but hardly as much so as I expected. One's castles in the air
don't look quite the same when one is close to them. I am afraid, her
home-life won't be very bright."

"Perhaps she will make it brighter," said Thorne. "What is she like? Is
she pretty?"

"Yes," said Bertie.

Judith smiled: "One has to qualify all one's adjectives for her. She is
nice-ish, pretty-ish: I doubt if she is as much as clever-ish."

"No need for her to be any more," Bertie remarked. "Didn't Miss Crawford
say she would come in for a lot of money--some of her mother's--when she
was one-and-twenty?"

"Yes, five or six hundred a year."

"That's why he has kept her at school, I suppose--afraid she should take
up with a curate, very likely."

"Mr. Nash is very rich too, and she is an only child," said Judith,
ignoring Bertie's remark. "But I think it has been hard on Emmeline."

"Well, I'm sorry she is going," said Lisle--"_very_ sorry."

"Is she such a promising pupil?" Thorne inquired.

"She's a nice girl," said Bertie, "but a promising pupil--O Lord!" He
flew to the piano, played an air in a singularly wooden manner, and then
dragged it languidly, yet laboriously, up and down the keys.
"Variations, you perceive." After a little more of this treatment the
unfortunate melody grew very lame indeed, and finally died of
exhaustion. "That's Miss Emmeline Nash," said Bertie, spinning round on
the music-stool and confronting Percival.

"It is very like Emmeline's style of playing," Judith owned.

"Of course it is. Let's have something else for a change." And turning
back to the piano, he began to sing. Then he called Judith to come and
take her turn. She sang well, and Percival, by the fireside, noted the
young fellow's evident pride in her performance, and admired the pair.
(Any one else might have admired the three, for Thorne's grave,
foreign-looking face was just the fitting contrast to the Lisles' fair,
clear features. The morbid depression of a couple of months earlier had
passed, and left him far more like the Percival of Brackenhill. Poverty
surrounded the friends and dulled their lives, but as yet it was only a
burden, not a blight.)

"You sing," said Bertie, looking back. "I remember you were great at
some of those old songs. I'll play for you: what shall it be?"

"I'm sure I hardly know," said Percival, coming forward.

"Let's have 'Shall I, wasting in despair,'" Lisle suggested. "It has
been going in my head all this morning." He played a few notes.

"No, no!" the other exclaimed hurriedly--"not that." Too well he
remembered the tender devotion of more than a year before:

    If she love me, this believe,
    I will die ere she shall grieve.

Sissy and Brackenhill rose before him--the melancholy orchard-walk, the
little hands which lay in his on that November day. He felt a dull pain,
yet what could he do? what could he have done? There was a terrible
mistake somewhere, but he could not say where. If he had married Sissy,
would it not have been there? He woke up suddenly. Young Lisle was
speaking, and Judith was saying, "Let Mr. Thorne choose."

"Oh, I don't mind," said Percival. "Shall it be 'Drink to me only with
thine eyes'?"

He sang it well. His voice was strong and full, and the sweet
old-fashioned courtesy of compliment suited him exactly. The last word
had scarcely left his lips when the door opened, and Emma showed in Mr.
Clifton of St. Sylvester's.

The clergyman came forward, black-coated, smooth-shaven, with watchful
glances which seemed ever looking out for that lay co-operation we hear
so much of now. Lisle looked over his shoulder and sprang up to receive
him. The visitor tried to get his umbrella and two or three books into
the hand which already held his hat, and one little volume fell to the
floor. Percival picked it up and smoothed the pages. "Mr. Thorne--Mr.
Clifton," said the young organist as the book was restored to its owner.
Percival bowed gravely, and Mr. Clifton did not shake hands, as he would
have done if the young man's manner had been less reserved. He was
lavish of such greetings. A clergyman might shake hands with any one.

"I'll not detain you long, Lisle," he said. "But I wanted to speak to
you about the choir-practice to-morrow." And there ensued a little
business-talk between parson and organist. Judith took up a bit of work
and Percival leant against the chimney-piece. Presently Lisle went back
to the piano and tried over a hymn-tune which Mr. Clifton had brought.
The clergyman stood solemnly by. "I met Gordon a few minutes ago," he
said. "He was with his brother and some other men of the same stamp. If
he mixes himself up with that set, he must go."

"You'll miss him in the choir, Mr. Clifton," said Bertie.

"He must choose between such associates and the choir," the other
replied. The words were moderate enough, but the tone was austere.

"Especially at Easter," said Bertie, still playing.

"What of that?" demanded the other. "I would rather have no choir at St.
Sylvester's than have men in it whose way of life during the week made a
mockery of the praises they sang on Sundays."

He spoke in a low voice, and Bertie's playing partially covered the
conversation. "Perhaps, Mr. Clifton, if Gordon understood how much you
disapproved--" the young organist began.

"Gordon? Gordon? it isn't only Gordon who should understand. Every one
should understand my feeling on such a subject without my having to
explain it. But I won't keep you any longer now: it is getting late.
Remember, seven o'clock to-morrow evening." And with a polite remark or
two to the others Mr. Clifton bowed himself out, with Bertie in
attendance. The procession of two might have been more dignified if the
organist had not made a face at Judith and Percival as he went out at
the door, and if he had not danced a fantastic but noiseless dance on
the landing behind the incumbent of St. Sylvester's, who was feeling
feebly in the dim light for the top step of Mrs. Bryant's staircase.

"Is anything the matter with Mr. Clifton?" Judith asked when the boy
came back and executed another war-dance all round the room. "He didn't
seem pleased, I thought."

Bertie brought himself up with a grand flourish opposite the arm-chair,
and sank into it: "Bless you, no! there's nothing the matter with him.
Tumbled out of bed the wrong side this morning--that's all. He does
sometimes."

"Might have got over that by this time of night, one would think," said
Percival, looking at his watch.

"Hold hard! you aren't going yet?" exclaimed Bertie, bounding
up.--"Here, Judith, let's have another song to take the taste of old
Clifton out of our mouths. Whatever possessed him to come here
to-night?"

[Illustration: "DRINK TO ME ONLY WITH THINE EYES."--Page 298.]

They had two or three songs instead of one, and then Percival went off.
Judith put her work away, shut up the piano and laid Bertie's music
straight. He stood meanwhile with his back to the dying fire, idly
chinking some money which he had taken from his waistcoat-pocket, a
half-crown and two or three shillings. His brows were drawn down as if
he were lost in thought. Presently, his half-crown went spinning in the
air: he caught it dexterously--heads. Bertie half smiled to himself, as
who should say, "Well, if Destiny will have it so, what am I that I
should resist it?"

It is very well to toss up if you have already come to a decision which
you cannot quite justify. Should the verdict be adverse, it is no worse
than it was before, for if you have really made up your mind so trivial
an accident will not stop you. It may even be your duty to show that you
attach no superstitious importance to it. And, on the other hand, if
chance favors you, some of your burden of responsibility is transferred
to the shoulders of Fate.

So Bertie smiled, pocketed his half-crown, kissed his sister and went
off to his own room, whistling on his way thither with peculiar
distinctness and perseverance.

Nearly an hour later two figures stood by the dim light in the passage
and conversed in whispers:

"Now, my charming Lydia, how about that key?"

"I'll 'charming Lydia' you!" was the reply. "I like your impudence!"

"I know you do. You shall have some more when I've time to spare. But
now I must really be off. Get me the key, there's a dear girl."

"I can't, then. If you want a latch-key, why don't you go to ma and say
so like a man? There it is, and you'd have it directly."

"O most unreasonable Lydia! How many times must I explain to you that
that wouldn't do, because your ma, while she possesses many of the
charms, is not quite exempt from the weakness of her sex: in short,
Lydia, she talks."

"Well, what then? If I were a man I wouldn't be afraid of my sister. I'd
be my own master."

"So will I," said Bertie Lisle.

"And I'd say what I meant right out. I would!"

"If you knew there'd be a fuss, and people anxious about you, would
you?" He yawned. "No: I'll be my own master, but I like to do things
quietly."

"I don't care so much about that," said Lydia, whose feelings were less
delicate. To struggle openly for an avowed object seemed to her the
most natural thing in the world, and she would have preferred her
independence to be conspicuous. She did not understand that with men of
Bertie's stamp it is not the latch-key itself, but the unsuspected
latch-key, which confers the liberty they love.

"Well?" said he. "Am I to stay here all night?"

"That's just what you'd better do. You won't get any good out of that
lot; and so I tell you. You'll lose your money and get into nasty
drinking ways: don't you go there any more."

"Upon my word, Lydia, you preach as well as old Clifton does."

"And do you just as much good, I dare say."

"Just as much. You've hit it exactly."

"I thought so. You aren't the sort to take any heed. One may preach and
preach--"

"How well you understand me! No, as you say, I am not the sort to get
any good from preaching. You are quite right, Lydia: my character
requires kindness, sympathy and a latch-key--especially requires a
latch-key."

"Especially requires a fiddlestick!" said Lydia; and, disregarding his
smiling "Not at all," she went on in an injured tone: "There's ma
worrying over accounts, and likely to worry for the next hour. How am I
to get a key from under her very nose?"

Lisle seemed to reflect: "Old Fordham doesn't have one, I suppose."

"Gracious! No, not he! If you gave him one he'd drop it as if it was red
hot. He thinks they're wicked."

There was a pause, but after a few moments there stole through the
silence a sweetly insinuating voice: "Then, Lydia--"

Lydia half turned away and put up her left shoulder.

"Then, Lydia, I suppose you wouldn't--"

"You'd better keep on supposing I wouldn't."

"Can't suppose such cruelty for more than a moment--can't really. No,
listen to me"--this with a change of voice: "I must go out this evening.
Upon my soul, it's important. I'm in a fix, Lydia. I've not breathed a
word to any one else, and wouldn't for worlds, but you'll not let it
out, I know. If I'm lucky enough to get out of the scrape to-night, I'll
never get into it again, I can tell you."

"You will," said Lydia.

"I swear I won't. And if not--"

"Well? if not?"

"Why, I must try another plan to get free. I sha'n't like it, but I
must. But there'll be a row, and I shall have to go away. I'd a good
deal rather not."

"What sort of plan?" she asked curiously.

"Desperate," he answered, and shook his head.

"What is it?" Her eyes were widely opened in excitement and alarm. "You
ain't going to be driven to forge something, like people in novels?
Or--or--it isn't a big robbery, is it? Oh, you wouldn't!"

The face opposite looked so smiling and candid and innocent that it made
the words she had hazarded an obvious absurdity, even to herself, as
soon as she had uttered them.

"Why not a murder?" said Lisle. "I think it shall be a murder. Upon my
word, you're complimentary! No, no, I don't mean to try my hand at any
of them." She smiled, relieved. "But I must go out to-night. Lydia, will
you let me in once more?"

"Once more? You won't ask again?"

"Never again."

There was a pause: "Didn't you say that last time?"

"Lydia, you are the unkindest girl--"

"Well, then, I will."

"No, you are the kindest."

"Just this once more. Mind, you tap very gently, and I'll be awake. But
do be careful. It frightens me so!"

When the house was full of lodgers the Bryants stowed themselves away in
any odd corners. At this time Lydia occupied a large cupboard--by
courtesy called a small room--close to their stuffy little back parlor.
Lisle would go to the yard behind the house, which was common to two or
three besides No. 13, and with one foot on a projecting bit of
brick-work could get his hand on the sill and make his signal.

"Some day the police'll take you for a burglar," said Lydia
encouragingly. "Well, go and enjoy yourself."

"It _is_ a shame to keep you up so long, isn't it? What do you do all
the time, eh, Lydia?"

"Sit in the dark, mostly, and think what a fool I'm making of myself."

"Don't do that. Think how good you are to a poor fellow in trouble. That
will be better--won't it? But I must be off. Good-bye, you kind Lydia."

He stooped forward and kissed her, taking her hands in his. He found it
convenient to pay his debt in this coin, his creditor being passably
pretty. Not that Bertie had any taste for indiscriminate kissing. Had he
had five thousand a year, and had Lydia rendered him a service, he would
have recompensed her with some of his superfluous gold. But as he only
had his salary as organist and what he could make by giving
music-lessons, he paid her with kisses instead. He had no particular
objection, and was it not his duty to be economical, for Judith's sake
as well as his own?

"Go along with you!" said Lydia; and the young man, who had achieved his
purpose and had no reason for prolonging the interview, stole laughingly
down stairs, waving a farewell as he vanished round the corner. Lydia
stood as if she were rooted to the ground, listening intently. She heard
the door opened very gently and closed with infinite precautions. She
still stood till she had counted a hundred under her breath, and then,
judging that Mrs. Bryant had not been disturbed by his stealthy exit,
she went down to fasten it. She was prepared with an answer if she
should be caught in the act, but she was glad to get away undetected,
for an excuse which is perfectly satisfactory at the time may be very
unsatisfactory indeed when viewed by the light of later events. So Lydia
rejoiced when she found herself safe in her own room, though she pursued
her usual train of meditation in that refuge. She appraised Lisle's
gratitude and kisses pretty accurately, and was angry with herself that
she should care to have them, knowing that they were worthless. Yet as
she sat there she said his name to herself, "Bertie," as she had heard
his sister call him. And she knew well that it was pleasant to her to be
thrilled by Bertie's eyes and lips, pleasant to feel Bertie's soft palms
and slim strong fingers pressing those hands of hers, on which she had
just been trying experiments with a new wash. Lydia looked thoughtfully
into her looking-glass and took her reflection into her confidence.
"Ain't you a silly?" she said to the phantom which fingered its long
curl and silently moved its lips. "Oh, you are!" said the girl, "and
there's no denying it." She shook her head, and her _vis-à-vis_ shook
its head in the dim dusk, as much as to say, "No more a fool than you
are yourself, Lydia."--"Nobody could be," said Lydia moodily.

She did not deem it prudent to keep her light burning very late, and she
had a long vigil before the signal came, the three soft taps at her
window. She was prepared for it. Every sound had grown painfully
distinct to her anxious ears, and she had been almost certain that she
knew Lisle's hurried yet stealthy step as he turned into the yard. She
crept to the door and opened it, her practised hand recognizing the
fastenings in the dark. The light from the street-lamp just outside fell
on Bertie's white face. "What luck?" she asked in a whisper.

"Curse the luck!" he answered: "everything went against me from first to
last."

"I told you so," she whispered, closing the door. "Didn't I say that?"

"Don't! there's a good girl," said Bertie softly, somewhere in the
shadows.

Lydia was silent, and shot the bolts very skilfully. But the key made a
little grating noise as she turned it, and the two stood for a moment
holding their breath.

"All right," said Lisle after a pause.

"It's late," said Lydia. He could not deny it. "You must take your boots
off before you go up," she continued. "And do be careful."

He obeyed. "Good-night," he whispered. "You'll see that girl calls me
in good time to-morrow? I feel as if I should sleep for a century or
so." He yawned wearily: "I wish I could."

"_I_ ain't to be sleepy, I suppose: why should I be?" she answered, but
added hurriedly, "No, no, you shall be called all right."

"You good girl!" whispered Lisle, and he went noiselessly away. A dim
gaslight burned halfway up the stairs and guided him to his room. He had
only to softly open and close his door, and all was well. Judith had not
been awakened by the catlike steps of the man who was not old Fordham.
She had fallen asleep very happily, with a vague sense of hopefulness
and well-being. She had no idea that Bertie had just flung himself on
his bed to snatch a little rest, with a trouble on his mind which, had
she known it, would have effectually banished sleep from her eyes, and a
hope of escape which would have nearly broken her heart. Her burden had
been laid aside for a few hours, and through her dreams there ran a
golden thread of melody, the unconscious remembrance of that evening's
songs and music.


CHAPTER XL.

BERTIE AT THE ORGAN.

Bertie was duly called, and came down the next morning punctually
enough, but somewhat weary and pale. A slight headache was supposed to
account for his looks. Lydia complained of the same thing over her
breakfast of bacon down stairs. But Fate was partial, for Bertie's
marble pallor and the faint shadow beneath his eyes were utterly unlike
poor Lydia's dull complexion and heavy, red-rimmed eyelids. She was
conscious of this injustice, and felt in a dim way that she had proved
herself capable of one of those acts of self-devotion which are the more
admirable that they are sure not to be admired. But the longer she
thought of it the more she felt that this noble deed was not one to be
repeated. One must set bounds to one's heroism. "I can't go on losing my
beauty-sleep in this fashion," said Lydia to herself. "I do look such a
horrid fright the next day."

When Judith had gone to Standon Square, Bertie yawned, stretched
himself, got out his little writing-case and sat down to write a letter.
He spent some time over it, erasing and interlining, balancing himself
on two legs of his chair, while he looked for stray words on the ceiling
or murmured occasional sentences to judge of the effect. At last it was
finished, and, being copied in a dashing hand, looked very spontaneous
indeed. "I think that ought to do it," he said to himself as he smoked
his pipe, glancing over the pages: "I think it _will_ do it." He smiled,
in the pride of triumphant authorship, but presently there came a line
between his brows and a puzzled expression to his face: "I'll be shot if
I know how it is to be managed afterward. People do it, but how? I
wonder if Thorne knows? If law is at all catching, a year of that musty
office must have given him a touch of it." Lisle considered the matter
for a few minutes, and then shrugged his shoulders: "It won't do, I'm
afraid. I daren't try him. I'm never quite clear how much he sees and
understands, nor what he would do. And Gordon? No." There was another
reverie. Finally, he arose, knocked the ashes out of his pipe and
stretched himself once more: "I've got to depend on myself, it seems to
me. I must set my wits to work and astonish them all. But oh, if yawning
were but a lucrative employment, how easily I could make money and be
quit of the whole affair!"

Bertie took a great interest in his personal appearance, and was frank
and unaffected in his consciousness of his good looks. He caught a
glimpse of his reflection in the bottle-green mirror, and stopped short
in considerable anxiety. "Brain-work and these late hours don't suit
me," he said. "Good Heavens! I look quite careworn. Well, it may pass
for the effect of a gradually breaking heart: why not?"

A glance at his watch roused him to sudden activity. He carefully burnt
every scrap of his original manuscript, feeling sure that Lydia would
read his letter if she had the chance. He looked leniently on this
little weakness of hers. "Very happy to afford you what little amusement
I can in the general way," he soliloquized as he directed an envelope,
"but I really can't allow you to read this letter, Lydia my dear."
Apparently, he was in a distrustful mood, for, after hesitating a
moment, he got some wax and sealed it with a ring he wore. Then, putting
it carefully in his pocket, he tossed a few sheets of blotted
music-paper on the table, left his writing-case wide open, took his hat
and a roll of music, and went out in the direction of St. Sylvester's,
trying to work out his problem as he walked. He was not, however, so
deep in thought that he had no eyes for the passers-by, and his
attention was suddenly attracted by a servant-girl dawdling along the
opposite pavement. He watched her keenly, but furtively, as if to make
quite sure, and when she turned down a side street he followed, and
speedily overtook her.

"This is lucky!" he ejaculated. "I didn't expect to see you, Susan. What
are you doing here?"

She was a slight, plain girl, with a fairly intelligent face whose
expression was doubtful. Sometimes it showed a willingness to please,
oftener it was sullen, now and then merely thoughtful. Just at this
moment, as she looked up at the young organist, it was crafty and
greedy. "I'm taking a note," she said. "Miss Crawford's always a-sending
me with notes or something."

"You don't mind being sent with notes, do you?" said Bertie blandly.

"That's as may be," the girl answered.

"I should have thought it was pleasant work. At any rate, it's as easy
to take two as one, isn't it?"

"I have to take 'em, 'cause I'm paid to, you see, easy or not."

"Oh, of course you ought to be paid." His fingers were in his
waistcoat-pocket, and some coins that chinked agreeably were transferred
to her hand, together with the sealed letter. "You've saved me a walk to
Standon Square," he said.

The girl laughed, looking down at her money: "It wouldn't have hurt
you, I dare say. You oughtn't to make much of a walk there. How about an
answer?"

"Oh, I shall get an answer when I come to-morrow." He nodded a careless
farewell, and went a little out of his way to avoid Gordon's brother,
who was visible in the distance.

Susan turned the missive over in her hand. "It's sealed tight enough,"
she remarked to herself. "What did he want to do that for?" She eyed it
discontentedly: "I hate such suspicious ways. Wouldn't there be a
flare-up if I just handed it over to the old maid? I won't, though, for
she's give me warning, and he's a deal more free with his money than
she'd ever be--stingy old cat! But wouldn't there be a flare-up? My!"
And Susan, who had an ungratified taste for the sensational, looked at
the address and smiled to think of the power she possessed.

Before she slipped the letter into her pocket she sniffed doubtfully at
the envelope, and tossed her head in scorn: "I thought so! Smells of
tobacco." It was true, for Lisle, as we know, had smoked while he
revised his composition. "If I were a young man going a-courting I'd
scent my letters with rose or something nice, and I'd write 'em on pink
paper--I would!" Susan reflected. But Lisle was wiser. There is no
perfume for a young ladies' school like a whiff of cigar-smoke. To that
prim, half convent-like seclusion, where manners are being formed and
the proprieties are strictly observed, it comes as a pleasant suggestion
of something worldly and masculine, just a little wicked and altogether
delightful.

So Lisle went on his way to St. Sylvester's, lighter of heart for having
met Susan and got rid of the letter. While it was still in his pocket
nothing was absolutely settled, in spite of that half-crown which had
represented inexorable Destiny the night before. But now that it was
gone, further thought about it was happily unnecessary, and honor
forbade him to draw back. It was true, however, that he was still face
to face with the difficulty which had been in his mind when he met his
messenger so conveniently.

He caught a street Arab, and promised him twopence if he would come and
blow for him while he practised. But he began by playing absently and
carelessly, for since the letter had been despatched his problem had
become infinitely more urgent, and it thrust itself between him and the
music. His fingers roved dreamily over the keys, his eyes wandered, as
if in spite of himself, to the east end of the church. All at once he
came out with an impatient "How _do_ people manage it?" and he finished
the muttered question with a strong word and a big chord.

A moment more, and his face is illuminated with the inward light of a
sudden idea. He lets his hands lie where they happen to be, he sits
there with parted lips and startled eyes. The idea is almost too
wonderful, too simple, too obvious, and yet--"By Jove!" says Bertie,
under his breath.

His street Arab means to earn his twopence, and in spite of the silence
he pumps away in a cheerful and conscientious manner till he shall be
bidden to stop. The organ protests in a long and dolorous note, and
startles the musician from his reverie. Forthwith he begins to play a
stirring march, and the rejoicing chords arise and rush and crowd
beneath his fingers. Has he indeed found the solution of his great
perplexity? Apparently he thinks so. He seems absolutely hurried along
in triumph on these waves of jubilant harmony. A ray of pale March
sunlight falls on his forehead and shines on his hair as he tosses his
head in the quickening excitement of the moment. His headache is gone,
his weariness is gone. The notes seem to gather like bands of armed men
and rush victoriously through the aisles. But even as he plays he laughs
to himself, a boyish, happy laugh, for this great idea which is to help
him out of all his difficulties is not only a great idea, but a great
joke. And the march rings louder yet, for with every note he plays his
thought grows clearer to his mind, plainer and more feasible. There is
a gay audacity about the laugh which lingers in Bertie's eyes and on his
lips, as if Dan Cupid himself had just been there, whispering some
choice scheme of roguish knavery, some artful artlessness, into the
young man's ear. Bertie does not acknowledge that his inspiration has
come in such a questionable fashion. He says to himself, "It will do: I
feel it will do. Isn't it providential? Just when I was in despair!"
This is a more suitable sentiment for an organist, no doubt, for what
possible business can Dan Cupid have at St. Sylvester's? Louder and
louder yet pours the great stream of music; and that is a joke too, for
Lisle feels as if he were shouting his secret to the four winds, and yet
keeping it locked in his inmost soul, taking the passers-by into his
confidence in the most open-hearted fashion, and laughing at them in his
sleeve. But the musician is exhausted at last, and the end comes with a
thundering crash of chords.

"Here, boy--here's sixpence for you: you may be off. We've done enough
for to-day, and may go home to Bellevue street." But it seems to Bertie
Lisle, as he picks up his roll of music and comes down the aisle, that
Bellevue street too is only a joke now.


CHAPTER XLI.

WHERE THERE'S A WILL THERE'S A WAY.

April had come, and the best of the year was beginning with a yellow
dawn of daffodils. The trees stood stern and wintry, but there were
little leaves on the honeysuckles and the hawthorn hedges, glad
outbursts of song among the branches, and soft, shy caresses in the air.
Sissy Langton, riding into Fordborough, was delicately beautiful as
spring itself. She missed her squire of an earlier April, and his
absence made an underlying sadness in her radiant eyes which had the
April charm. That day her glance and smile had an especial brightness,
partly because spring had come, and, though countless springs have
passed away, each comes with the old yet ever-fresh assurance that it
will make all things new; partly because it was her birthday, and while
we are yet young there is a certain joy of royalty which marks our
birthday mornings; but most of all because that day gave her the power
to satisfy a desire which had lain hidden in her heart through the long
winter months.

It was the Fordborough market-day, and already, though it was but eleven
o'clock, the little town was waking up. Sissy, followed by Mrs.
Middleton's staid servant, rode straight to the principal street and
stopped at Mr. Hardwicke's office. Young Hardwicke, reading the paper in
his room, was surprised when a clerk announced that Miss Langton was at
the door asking for his father. He forgot the sporting intelligence in
an instant: "Well, isn't my father in?"

No: Mr. Hardwicke went out about twenty minutes earlier, and did not say
when he should be back. They had told Miss Langton, and she said,
"Perhaps Mr. Henry--"

Mr. Henry was off like a shot. He found Sissy on her horse at the door,
looking pensively along the street, as if she were studying the effect
of dusky red on palest blue--chimney-pots against the April sky.

"So Mr. Hardwicke is out?" she said when they had shaken hands. "I'm so
sorry! I wanted him so particularly."

"Is it important? Are you in a great hurry?" said Henry. "He won't be
long, or he would certainly have left word--on a market-day especially.
Could you come in and wait a little while?" he suggested. "I suppose I
shouldn't do as well?"

"I don't know," said Sissy, looking a little doubtfully at the tall,
fresh-colored young fellow, who smiled frankly in reply.

"Oh, it isn't at all likely," said Mr. Henry with delightful candor.
"The governor can't, for the life of him, understand how I make so many
blunders. I've a special talent that way, I suppose, but I don't know
how I came by it."

"Then perhaps it had better be Mr. Hardwicke. If it were a waltz,
now--" and she laughed. "But it isn't a waltz: it is something very
important. Do you know anything about wills?"

He looked up in sudden apprehension: "Is it about a will? Mrs.
Middleton's? Is anything the matter?"

"No, it isn't Aunt Middleton's: it's mine," was the composed reply. But
seeing relief, and almost amusement, on his face, she added hastily, "I
_can_ make a will, can't I? I'm twenty-one, you know: it's my birthday
to-day."

"Then I wish you many happy returns of the day."

"Thank you, but can I make a will?"

"Of course you can make a will."

"A will that will be good?" Sissy insisted, still speaking in the low
tone she had adopted when she began to explain the object of her visit.
"Can I make it here and now?"

"Not on horseback, I think," said Hardwicke with a smile. "You would be
tired of sitting here while we took down all your instructions. It isn't
very quick work making ladies' wills. They generally leave no end of
legacies. I suppose they are so good they don't forget anybody."

"Mine won't be like that: mine will be very short," Sissy said. "And I
suppose I am not good, for I shall forget almost everybody in it." She
laughed as she said it, yet something in her voice struck Hardwicke as
curiously earnest. "I will come in, I think, and tell you about it," she
went on. "I want to make it to-day."

"To-day?" he repeated as he helped her to dismount.

"Yes. I'll tell you," said Sissy, entering his room, "and you'll tell
Mr. Hardwicke, won't you? I'll get the Elliotts to give me some
luncheon, and then I can come here again between two and three. I shall
have to sign it, or something, sha'n't I? Do tell your father I want it
all to be finished to-day."

"I'll tell him."

"Tell him it's my birthday, so of course I must do just as I please and
have everything I want to-day. I don't know whether that's the law, but
I'm sure it ought to be."

"Of course it ought to be," Henry replied with fervor. "And I think we
can undertake to say that it shall be our law, anyhow."

"Thank you," said Sissy. "I shall be so very glad! And it can't take
long. I only want him to say that I wish all that I have to go to
Percival Thorne."

"To Percival?" Hardwicke repeated, with a sensation as if she had
suddenly stabbed him. "To Percival Thorne? Yes. Is that all I am to
say?"

"That's all. I want it all to be for Percival Thorne, to do just what he
likes with it. That can't take long, surely."

Hardwicke bit the end of a penholder that he had picked up, and looked
uneasily at her: "You're awfully anxious to get this done, Miss Langton:
you aren't ill, are you?"

"Oh, I'm well enough--much better than I was last year," said Sissy
lightly. "But there's no good in putting things of this sort off, you
know"--she dropped her voice--"as poor Mr. Thorne did. And your father
said once that if I didn't make a will when I came of age my money would
all go to Sir Charles Langton. He doesn't really want any more, I should
think, for they say he is very rich. And he is only a second cousin of
mine, and I have never seen him. It's funny, having so few relations,
isn't it?"

"Very," said Hardwicke.

"And some people have such a lot," said Sissy thoughtfully. "But I
always feel as if the Thornes were my relations."

"I suppose so. At any rate, I don't see that Sir Charles Langton has any
claim upon you." There was silence for a minute, Sissy drawing an
imaginary outline on Hardwicke's carpet with her riding-whip, he
following her every movement with his eyes.

"I shall have to sign both my Christian names, I suppose?" she said
abruptly.

"Have you two? I didn't know. What is the other?"

"Jane."

"Jane! I like that," said Henry. "Yes, sign them both."

"Thank you. I don't want to seem like an idiot to your father. I should
like it best if I could just write 'Sissy' and nothing else, as I do at
the end of my letters. When I see 'Cecilia Jane Langton' I feel inclined
to call out, 'This is none of I!' like the old woman."

She stood up to go: "You won't forget, will you?"

"No, I won't forget."

"Everything to Percival Thorne."

"Percival Thorne is an uncommonly lucky fellow," said the young man,
looking down.

Sissy stopped short, glanced at him and colored. In her anxiety she had
never considered the light in which the bequest might strike Henry
Hardwicke. In fact, she had not thought of him at all except as a
messenger. She was accustomed to take him for granted on any occasion.
She had known him all her life, and he was always, in her eyes, the big
friendly boy with whom she pulled crackers and played blindman's buff at
children's parties. She dreamed of no possible romance with Henry, and
did not imagine that he could have such a dream about her. He was as
harmless as a brother, without a brother's right to question and
criticise. It was precisely that feeling which had been at the root of
the friendliness which the Fordborough gossips took for a flirtation.
They could not have been more utterly mistaken. She liked Henry
Hardwicke--she knew that he was honest and honorable and good--but if
any one had said that he was a worthy young man, I believe she would
have assented. And that is the last adjective which a girl would apply
to her ideal.

Sissy's scheme had been in her mind through all the winter, but she had
always imagined herself stating her intentions in a business-like way to
old Mr. Hardwicke, who was a friend of the family. She had been so
thunder-struck when she found that he was out that she had taken Henry
into her confidence at a moment's warning. She dared not risk any delay.
It would be impossible to go home leaving Percival's future insecure.
Suppose she died that night--and she was struck with the fantastic
coincidence of Mr. Hardwicke's second absence at the critical
moment--suppose she felt herself dying, and knew that the only thing she
could have done for Percival was left undone! She could not face the
possibility of that agony. Indeed, she wondered how she had lived
through the long hours which had elapsed since the clock struck twelve
and the day began which made her twenty-one--not the girl Sissy any
longer, but the woman who held Percival's fortune in her hands. How
could she have gone away with her purpose unfulfilled?

When Henry said "Percival Thorne is an uncommonly lucky fellow," she
colored, but only that transient flush betrayed her, for she answered
readily: "Why, Mr. Hardwicke, what a dreadful thing to say to me! I hope
you don't have second-sight or anything horrible of that sort?"

"Second-sight!" Henry repeated doubtfully, looking down at a little
dangling eye-glass: "what's that?"

"Oh, you must know. Isn't it second-sight when you can tell if people
are going to die? You see them in their winding-sheets, and they are low
down if it will only be rather soon. But if it is to be quite directly
their shrouds are wrapped round them high up. What was mine like, that
you said Percival Thorne was so lucky? Up to here?" And, standing before
him, she smiled and touched her chin.

"God forbid!" said Henry. "How can you say such fearful things?"

"Oh, you didn't see it, then? I'm very glad."

"Good Heavens! no! And I don't believe it. I didn't mean that Thorne
would be lucky if you _died_!"

"I can't do him any good any other way," said Sissy with sweet
composure; "but I don't think I'm going to die, so I don't suppose I
shall do him any good at all. Do you think this is a strange fancy of
mine? The truth is, Aunt Middleton and I have been unhappy about
Percival ever since last May, because we know his grandfather meant to
have done something for him. He isn't rich, and he ought to have had
Brackenhill; so I should like him to have my money if I die. It is only
a chance, because I dare say I may live fifty years or so--only
fancy!--but I would rather Percival had the chance than Sir Charles.
That's all. You'll explain it to your father? It can't do any harm if it
does no good."

"Oh no: I see. It can't do any harm."

"And now I'll be off," laughed Sissy. "How dreadfully I have made you
waste your time! I dare say if I hadn't been here you would have written
ever so many things on parchment and tied them up with red tape."

"Oh yes, quantities!" Hardwicke replied as he escorted her to the door.
"A cartload at least. I'm glad you think I'm so industrious."

Standing outside, he said something about her horse. He did not like
Firefly's look, and he told her so. Moreover, he threatened to tell Mrs.
Middleton his bad opinion of Sissy's favorite.

"Nonsense!" she answered lightly. "There's nothing to be afraid of." But
suddenly she turned and looked at him. "Don't you really think Firefly
is safe?" she said. "Well, I must see about it.--William, I'm not going
back now, and I think I'll walk to Mrs. Elliott's. You had better meet
me here at half-past two."

And with a parting glance at Hardwicke she went away down the sunshiny
street, and he stood looking after her. He would have liked to be her
escort to the Elliotts' house, but he had her message to deliver to his
father, and he knew she would not permit it. Besides, to tell the truth,
she had taken him by surprise, and gone away before he thought of
anything of the kind. So he could only stand bareheaded on the
office-steps watching her as she went on her way. But suddenly his lips
parted to let out a word, which certainly would not have escaped him had
he been by Sissy's side. "There's that Fothergill fellow!" said Henry,
recognizing the captain's slim figure and black moustache. And he turned
on his heel and went in.

He was quite right. It was Fothergill who came sauntering along the
pavement, looking at the shop-windows, at the passers-by, at the
preparations for the market, with quick eyes and an interest which
conveyed the impression of his superiority to it all better than any
affectation of languid indifference. His glances seemed to say, "And
this is a country town--a market--these are farmers--people live here
all their lives!" But when he saw Sissy Langton he came forward eagerly.
And perhaps it was just as well that he was at hand to be her squire
through the busy little street, for the girl was seized with a new and
unaccountable nervousness. A bit of orange-peel lying in the road caused
her a sudden tremor. Two or three meek and wondering cows, which gazed
vacantly round in search of their familiar pasture, appeared to her as a
herd of savage brutes. She looked distrustfully up and down the road,
and waited at the pavement's edge for a donkey-cart to pass before she
dared attempt a crossing. It was just at this moment that the captain
appeared, quickening his pace and lifting his hat, only too ready to
guard her through all the perils of a Fordborough market-day.

Henry Hardwicke hated reading, and had no particular love for the law.
His father said he was a fool, and was inordinately fond of him
nevertheless. It might be that the old lawyer was right on both points.
And, dull as Henry was supposed to be, he was capable of delicate
feelings and perceptions as far as Sissy Langton was concerned. It
seemed to him that accident had revealed to him a hidden wound in her
heart; and the revelation pained him--not selfishly, for he had never
hoped for himself, but because of the secret suffering which it implied.
His one idea was to do her bidding, yet not betray her. He delivered her
message to his father with a tact of which he was himself unconscious.
On his lips it became no less urgent, but he dwelt especially on Sissy's
desire to see justice done to the man who had been accidentally
disinherited; on her feeling that she owed more to the Thornes, whose
home and love she had shared, than to the Langtons, with whom she
shared nothing but a name; and on her impatience of even an hour's
delay, because the squire's sudden death had made a deep impression on
her mind. All this, translated into Harry's blunt and simple speech, was
intelligible enough to Mr. Hardwicke. The girlish whim that all should
be done on her birthday made him smile, but the remembrance of Godfrey
Thorne was present in his mind as in hers. He did not attach much
importance to the whole affair, and felt that he should not be
overwhelmed with surprise should he hear a few months later that Sissy
was going to be married to some one else, and wanted to make some
compromise--perhaps to resign the squire's legacy to Percival. To his
eyes it looked more like an attempt at restitution than anything else.
"She is sorry for him, poor fellow!" thought Mr. Hardwicke. "She did not
know her own mind, and now she would like to atone to him somehow."

Sissy came back alone at the time she had fixed, looking white and
anxious. A client came out as she arrived, and five farmers were waiting
in the office to see Mr. Hardwicke: therefore, though she was ushered in
at once, the interview was brief. The old lawyer paid her a smiling
compliment on her promptitude. "We have to advise people to make their
wills sometimes," he said, "but you are beforehand with us." Sissy
expressed a fear that she had troubled him on a very busy day, and he
assured her that to blame her because her twenty-first birthday happened
to fall on a Friday would be the last thing he should think of doing.
Then the girl looked up at him, and said that old Mr. Thorne had always
been so good to her, and she thought that perhaps if he could see he
would be glad, so she could not put it off. She stopped abruptly, and
her eyes filled. Mr. Hardwicke bent his head in silent acquiescence, the
brief document was duly signed and witnessed, and Sissy went away,
riding home as if she had never known what fear meant. Suppose Firefly
threw her, what then? She had been to Mr. Hardwicke, and though her
"Cecilia Jane Langton" was not all she could have wished, because she
was nervous and Mr. Hardwicke's pen was so scratchy, still there it was.
And was not the paper, thus signed, a talisman against all dread of
death?

So her burden was lighter. But what could lighten the other load which
lay on her heart? She hardly knew whether it were love or fear that she
felt for Percival. The long days which had passed since she saw him had
only deepened the impression of that summer evening when they parted.
His reply to her entreaty that he would come back to her had been
exactly what she had feared--as gentle as he himself had been when they
stood face to face in the old drawing-room at Brackenhill, and as
inflexible. If she could forget him--if she could learn to care for
Captain Fothergill or Walter Latimer--what a bright, easy, sunshiny life
might yet be hers! No, ten thousand times, no! Better to suffer the
weariness of dread and doubt and longing for Percival.

But Percival would have been astonished if he could have seen the darkly
heroic guise in which he reigned over Sissy Langton's dreams.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]


THE BOY ON A HILL-FARM.


There is nothing like a wide horizon to give a boy aspirations--nothing
like a hill-farm to give him hope--especially the hope of leaving it. In
spring, on a day of expectation, when the warm air has not yet brought
out the flowers, and carts go past with loads of young trees whose dry
roots and branches look like emblems of old hopes still unfulfilled, a
boy is working on the top of Ford Hill. The five-inch soil covering the
solid rock that forms the New York hill--the first of all, perhaps, to
show its head above the pristine waters--has nourished a lofty forest
which, battling with everlasting winds, resembles a body of men strong
from incessant toil: its elms and beeches are so tough they defy the
forester, and are fit only for water-wheel shafts. Working among these
adamantine timbers, the boy stops to look across the broad and deep
valley. Not at the old hill-quarries opposite, in whose depths snow lies
all summer, does he look, nor at the hanging woods above the new piece,
nor at the yellow farmhouse and barn; but higher, toward the west,
where, on a level with his eye, 'twixt hills like cloud-banks, he sees a
white streak, the distant lake. Storms are running down the Deerfield
hills. In one of the woody valleys rain-clouds have formed a mirage,
another seeming lake, and from its bosom rise to the clear, fine air of
the hills the muffled clangor and whistle of the New York Central train,
in the boy's mind a glittering image fleeing to splendid cities, and one
that he longs to follow.

A boy has no perception whatsoever of the poetry of farm-life: he
considers a woodman's work crabbed prose. The idea of making poetry out
of any part of it, or out of a herder's work either, is to him stark
idiocy. Sheep-washing, for instance, is simply working a whole spring
day in very chilly water, and sheep-shearing is a task at which he makes
"ridgy" work and endures the horror of seeing the gentle, thin-skinned
creatures bleed under his awkward shears. The boy cannot conceive what
poetry there is about oxen. From the moment a calf hides in the hay with
its mother's help, and makes believe there is no calf born yet, until it
becomes an ox, it cannot for an instant be considered poetic by a boy.
The calf is a creature that insists, whenever it drinks, on thrusting
its head to the bottom of the pail with a splash that deluges the boy
with milk: it drinks until it is out of breath, and then withdraws its
head with another splash and an explosion of milk-steam from its
nostrils--performances which cause the boy's friends to remark wherever
he goes, "You smell of sour milk." The boy likes well enough to feed the
oxen their full measures of meal; he likes to see them get down on their
knees to lick up morsels that roll into corners of the stable-floor; he
stretches his hand in before them for little balls of meal they cannot
reach with their long tongues, at which they draw back with a thwack
against the stanchion, breathing hard and gazing at him with their large
black eyes; and when the off ox tries to capture the nigh ox's portion,
the boy raps him back to his place. Quite a pastoral friendship exists
between the boy and the nigh ox, which, being continually bullied by the
off ox, needs the boy's protection, and is therefore placed next him at
work. But, for all that, he does not see the romance of such matters.

The yoking of oxen is decidedly not matter for a flying smile to a boy.
He lays one end of the yoke's beam on the ground, lifts the other end
with his right hand, and, waving one of the ox-bows in his left, cries
to the nigh ox, "Come under!" The "nigh" slowly obeys, bending its head
low to accommodate the boy's stature, and permitting itself to be
fastened by the ox-bow to the yoke. The boy now lifts the free end of
the yoke's beam as high as he can and calls the off ox to come under. It
also obeys, treading deliberately with its heavy feet, and waiting
patiently for the boy's small fingers to fasten the weighty bow with a
clumsy bow-key. Then the boy lifts the ponderous cart-neap and attaches
it to the ring in the yoke--a labor that causes his heart to "beat like
a tabor;" and thus the beasts are wedded to their daily toil.
Occasionally, however, the ox will not come under at all, but will
require the boy to follow it about the barnyard, dragging the jingling
yoke and waving the bow with infinite fatigue; and occasionally the boy
makes the mistake (no greater could be made) of yoking the off ox first.
The off ox, finding a yoke sans yokefellow dangling at its neck, is much
amazed, not being "broke" to that, and takes to whirling round and round
and galloping up and down the barnyard in a manner suggestive of
nightmare. This is a circumstance that makes a boy hopeful of going
somewhere else.

The yoking of oxen, though difficult, is nothing compared with the
working of oxen. The boy can direct his plough lightly along its
straight furrow, anticipating each movement of his oxen, and he can turn
a corner "straight as a bug's leg;" nevertheless, he would like those
persons who have a Wordsworthian idea of following the plough along the
mountain-side in glory and in joy to witness the struggles of a green
hand learning to plough--of a tramp hired man, say, one of the sort that
can't milk and don't know "haw" from "gee." This miserable being tires
himself out doing nothing. He cannot lay a furrow over sod downward: he
has to stop and turn it over with his hands. He leaves patches of turf.
He does not touch up his oxen scientifically, the "nigh" on the head,
the "off" on the rump: therefore they frequently do not move at all. His
plough-point hits the stones, and his plough-handles knock him in the
ribs and lay him out. If he is ploughing near the barn, which is the
home of the oxen, approaching it, they go like lightning, and he must
drop the plough and rush at their heads to keep them from running
straight into the barn: leaving it, they creep like snails, and perhaps
they take to "pulling"--that is, walking sidewise, with their bodies as
far apart as possible; or to "crowding"--leaning against each other over
the chain that holds the plough to the yoke, and one of them gets its
foot on the chain and proceeds on three feet. If the tramp hired man
goes between them to adjust the chain, the oxen squeeze him flat, and
one ox steps on his toe. The toe goes Pop! and what anguish! The ox
cannot be made to understand that it must step off. No use in saying
"Highst!" or anything else. Nothing but kicking the ox in the leg with
your free foot will stir it. In addition to these troubles of the
ox-driver, the oxen know how to "turn the yoke:" they can twist their
heads in the yoke after a fashion that enables them to stand facing the
plough and staring at the driver. If they "turn the yoke" while drawing
a cart down a side-hill, the cart, with the driver in it, slips about in
front of them, and drags them down the gulf face foremost. The noisiest
being on earth is a man ploughing with a pair of old bulls. At night,
when he comes home to supper, he is scarcely able to whisper, and the
parting blow he gives his beasts is no damage to them nor consolation to
him. A man ploughing green sward with two old plugs of horses is about
as miserable.

Cows, whether the fine old "line-backs" of the hills or scrawny,
beefless Alderneys or milkless Durhams, have one merit with a boy. It is
not that they enjoy fine weather, a good pasture and a green
landscape--have thoughts, notice the sprouting beanfields as they come
up to milking, and the new flag-staff on the green: it is that they are
good at fighting. In every herd there is a queen who can vanquish all
the rest, and a vice-queen who can vanquish all but the queen, and a
second vice-queen who can vanquish all but the first two, and so on down
to the weakest of the herd, who cannot withstand any of the others.
Sometimes there is one that can defeat the queen, but none of the rest;
and other complications occur that give diversity to the cow-fights. The
boy has comfort superintending these combats. He encourages the cowards
and helps the weak by drawing them forward by the horns to attack. When
the queen stops the way at the bars, and will not let the rest through,
or when she amuses herself running up and down the stanchions driving
away the other cows, the boy puts her down and relieves the drove of her
tyranny.

The boy oversees some fighting among the fowls of the hill-farm, where
they still keep the old hawk-colored breed--a breed that fights to the
death--not being over-partial as yet to Shanghais that won't lay and
Leghorns that won't sit. On a large farm, where there are several barns
and as many sets of hens, the boy cultivates the fighting qualities of
the cocks by keeping them around together, and not letting them forget
each other. The turkeys--strange birds! so tender in youth a spring rain
kills them, so tough in age they roost in the tree-tops in winter, and
come down o' mornings covered with frozen sleet and looking as if they
enjoyed it--are objects of no interest to the boy; but for the geese he
has a kindness, not because they fight each other, but because they
fight him. "Can't you let them geese alone?" is the frequent exclamation
of the hired man in the stable to the boy in the mow. The boy is always
perfectly willing to hunt goose-eggs: he has a battle with the biting,
shrieking, wing-flapping goose every time he takes an egg from her nest.
When she begins to sit on her empty nest, it is his business to bring
back a part of her eggs and place them under her, which leads to a
pitched battle. The pea-hen is a different creature: she keeps her nest
a secret even from the peacock, never leaving it save on the wing, and
approaching it with the greatest circumambulation. Nobody but the boy
knows where it is. Should he take up her egg, though he might lay it
down exactly as it was before, she would never lay another egg there.
This he knows. He is acquainted with many things other people have no
idea of. He knows how a roost of poultry looks at morning dusk, when, if
you enter the barn, the entire roost turns one eye at you, and then for
an unknown cause simultaneously shakes its head. He knows how hens catch
mice in the hay-mow--how they gnaw the sucking pigs' tails to the bone
(the hired man says they need the meat). He knows how to obtain
bumblebees' honey, paying for this information with an ear like a garnet
potato, one of the sort that "biles up meller;" and he knows how to find
mushrooms. Life for a boy on an upland farm is to labor, to abstain, to
sweat and to be grievously cold (see Horace); nevertheless, there comes
a soft spring dawn when on the rich spots of the sheep-pasture he finds
a bushel of mushrooms, snow-white on their tops and pink underneath,
crisp, tender, rising full grown from the moist earth, and lifting
bodily away the chips and leaves that overlay them. He brings this
treasure home. He inverts the mushroom-cups in a clean frying-pan, fills
each one with butter and a pinch of salt, cooks them gently a few
minutes--dishes them. Then he dashes more butter and some water from the
tea-kettle into the frying-pan--for he is as fond of gravy as "Todgers'
boarders"--pours this over the mushrooms, and sits down to a feast that
has some poetry about it.

The boy brings a sharp appetite to his few pleasures. All agreeable
thoughts float in his mind during his summer nooning doze when he lies
on the grass after dinner waiting for the sun to strike the west side of
the farmhouse chimneys, which, standing square north and south, serve
for sun-dials. And in haymaking, when he is "mowing away" far above the
"purline beam" in the barn as fast as a man in the hayrack can toss the
hay up to him, and the air is heated like a furnace by the hot haymaking
sun on the shingles close above his head, and his shirt is full of
timothy-seed, and he is almost dying with exhaustion, suddenly he hears
the sound of rain pattering on the roof. The hay in the meadow will be
spoiled, but down he slides to enjoy an hour's rest in the cool lower
world of the barn-floor. And when the Fourth of July comes, and the
farm-boys gather at The Corners and fire off old shot-guns, pistols, an
anvil, a cannon and empty thread-spools, then and there is the poetry of
the whole harvest-season for the boy. The harvest-moon, bringer of hot
days and "bammy" nights to glaze the corn, may be the admiration of
many, but is not so to the boy. It is accompanied by a special grievance
to him: at the end of days' works that take the tuck out of him to the
last fragment he has to go for the cows, and to come home late after
everybody else has washed up and is partly through supper. The hunter's
moon too, large, mild and beaming though it may be, is a thing of
disgust to the boy, for it marks the beginning of the season when, after
chores are finished and the men are sitting comfortably around the
kitchen fire, he has to split kindlings in the woodhouse for the hired
girl, and to fill the four wood-boxes with which the hill farmhouse
warms its kitchen, dining-room, nursery and parlor.

The hill-farmer's mind is rich in suggestions of work for a boy. After
haying, harvesting and everything else is done, you will find that lad
down cellar of a dark morning by the light of a tallow candle cutting
bushels and bushels of potatoes for the cows with a "slice"--one of
those antique long iron shovels used about a brick-oven. You will find
him foddering forty head of cattle before school-time in the morning,
rising at four o'clock for the purpose, and going over the work again
after school; and if he does not ride to the woods on Saturdays with the
choppers, the farmer calls him "dreadful slack." The boy would like to
get the work all finished some time, but on a hill-farm there is no hope
of being done save the hope of being done with it entirely. There is
always plenty of work for the boy. In the vast, dark, lofty,
cathedral-like orchard, whose untrimmed, mossy trees bear profusely on
their interlacing branches the small fair apples for countless barrels
of cider, there is work for him. There is plenty of work at the
cider-mill or in boiling down the sweet cider over the bonfire that
cheers the damp fall weather.

In fact, his tasks are endless. Perhaps it is raining like suds. The sun
for several weeks has reminded the hired man of a drop of hair-oil on a
basin of water. The only weather-sign that occurs to any one is the old
Indian one: "Cloudy all around, and pouring down in the middle." You
might suppose no work could be done in such weather. It is then the
farmer starts the boy off with five hundred dollars in his pocket to pay
various husbandmen for cattle, and with directions to make a détour on
his way back collecting moneys due for other cattle, stopping at the
Chittaninny Tavern to meet a man who will have a sum of cash ready for
him there. The Chittaninny Tavern is in a cutthroat neighborhood. The
man with the cash pays it at the bar in the presence of a crowd of
ruffians, the bartender looking over the boy's shoulder, and a loafer
follows him out to his horse, shows him a pistol and asks him if he
hasn't "one of them things." While the boy dashes homeward through the
rain and night, pursued in imagination by the man with the pistol, he
makes up his mind that a well-lighted city is the place for him to do
business in.

Should the rain lessen, the farmer and the boy set out for town with a
herd of cattle. Having disposed of the herd, on their homeward way,
toward nightfall, the boy, who has walked, as near as he can guess, four
hundred miles around the cattle in the November mud, is dismayed to see
the farmer stop at a house by the wayside. There are more cattle to be
bought and driven home. The master of the wayside house is in some
remote pasture, whither the boy runs to fetch him. After a long bargain
with this man the farmer pulls out a roll of bills, pays down a round
sum, a fresh creature is brought out to the road, and again they pursue
their homeward way. It is a young heifer this time--most difficult of
animals to drive. She runs like a deer: in a minute she is far ahead of
the boy. She takes the wrong road: the boy makes frightful efforts to
overtake her--enters the fields to follow her unseen, and cuts across
lots to head her off. She, being a bright creature, is aware of his
manoeuvres. She watches him over the fences, and contrives to keep
beyond his reach, spite of all he can do. To hold her on the homeward
route is a miracle: still, the trio of farmer, boy and heifer do manage
to reach the home village, where the farmer, who is riding in his
carriage, stops at the bank and tells the boy to be "boss and all hands"
and go on alone with the heifer. This is terrible. Night is at hand, the
demoniac beast is wilder than ever, and the boy knows that, though
palpitating with fatigue through all his frame, there are the chores at
home yet for him to do. Well, it is then he determines to go on a
whaling-voyage or to go and be a stoker for a steam-engine, or a
boiler-maker, or a tramp, or anything but a boy on a farm; and so hope
grows strong in his heart.

An old hill-farmer must be beloved of Hermes, he so understands the arts
of gain. If he wants to buy anything, he takes a sap-bucketful of eggs
to the village, and makes a point of bringing back a part of the money.
When in town he does not dine at a tavern, but on some crackers and
cheese: he says baker's bread tastes like wasps' nests, and city fare in
general is light and dry. He saves more picking up horseshoes when the
snow melts than many persons do in all their lives. He works all the
year round: he thrashes in midwinter with the thermometer below zero.
The hard times affect him no more than a fly would a rhinoceros. This is
perfectly exasperating to the poor spendthrift, good-for-nothing, lazy
part of the community. The tramp hired man is particularly mad about it;
he declares the old farmer wants him to work all day for a sheep's head
and pluck, and sleep under a cart at night. The tramp hired man
entertains inverted financial ideas, and a creed that would probably
read, "Strike a man on his right cheek, and if he don't turn his left,
boot him;" and the tramp hired man lies _en grand_--tells lies two days
long when he finds a listener.

The old hill-farmer never wastes nor wears out things. He has a coat for
butchering-days that belonged to his great-great-grandfather who fought
in the Revolution, and he has an ancient tin lantern that he considers
valuable. He almost quarrels with the young farmer about his corrugated
glass lantern and his large, brilliant, one-paned lantern with the
polished concave tin back, and his brass-mounted globe lantern: they
have resplendent lanterns on the hills. The old farmer says they will
blow up or smash up, whereas his ancient tin lantern is safe. The old
man does not see the boy shinning up a post in the horse-barn (there is
no staircase--nothing but a few pegs stuck over the horses' heads by
which to climb to the hay), the tin lantern swinging on his arm, its
door open and candle flaring. Nor does he see the boy attempt to
increase the lantern's light by filling it with dry leaves. "What has
that darned Irishman been up to now?" says the old farmer, finding it
unsoldered on its shelf.

"The mill-streams that turn the clappers of the world arise in solitary
places." The old hill-farmers are lovers of their country. Their
carefully-saved money and their patriotism sustained our great war.
Whoever was a boy on a hill-farm during the war remembers the neighbors
stumbling over the stony roads at twilight, when the day's work was
done, to hear the daily paper read at the farmhouse on The Corners,
eager to know the worst or the best every night. Hugh used to hold the
candle, while Mark read in a slow, understanding voice about the
marching, fighting, wavering, conquering of those days, now less
remembered than the _Iliad_, when we warmed our hearts at the blaze of
war. At every new local name, "Stop!" the old farmer used to say: "let's
see where that is. Get the map.--Hugh, hold the light.--There 'tis, by
that grease-spot--not the tallow-spot Hugh just dropped--the spot where
people have put their fingers around Washington." Such a prodigious
trampling of fingers on the map followed our armies to battle! What a
memory it is to have in the mind!

The old farmer of the hills, however frugal, fosters some luxuries: one
is horses. He has plenty of them, fat and slow from careful usage, and
for the most part spotless bays.

    Four white feet and a white nose,
    Skin him and give his body to the crows,

says the man of the hills. Melvine, a great horse-breeder, one day took
sides in a quarrel between a horse and its master, fought the man for
abusing his horse--fought him hard and long: 'twas "t'other and which"
with them for a while. "I wouldn't have done it," said his neighbor,
Squire Greffern: "I wouldn't have fought the man. I'd have reasoned with
him kindly. I'd have said, 'See here, now, this horse isn't to blame: he
ain't human,' says I, 'and you ought not to abuse him,' says I. And says
I, 'You ought to know better than to hurt a horse: it injures him,' says
I. 'He has more sense than you have' (getting excited). 'You deserve to
be licked yourself, by hoky! Why, Gosh Almighty! get out, or I'll thrash
the daylights out of your darned rotten hide!'" So ended the squire's
reproof.

The old hill-farmer has an old dog grown from indulgence, like his
horses, in the habit of going his own gait. He _will_ trot to church on
Sundays, and trot, trot, down the aisle after meeting has begun, or, if
he likes, up into the gallery. When two of these obstinate old dogs once
met before the pulpit they indulged in a whirlwind of fight. The
minister requested the sexton to put them out, but they showed him their
teeth and fought until satisfied. Then the minister administered a grave
rebuke to the farmers for desecrating the house of God by bringing dogs
to church. Whether the dogs understood it or not, one of them never went
to church again.

Another luxury of the hill-farmer is unabridged hospitality. He would
agree with Doctor Johnson that nothing promotes happiness so much as
conversation. Blazing fires--beacons of company--often flame up his
best rooms' chimney-stacks, pouring their blue wood-smoke high in the
clear air of the hills. Thanksgiving Day in the hills would do for a
festival in honor of Jupiter, the patron of friendship, 'tis a day of
such hospitality. It is the only day of the year when the boy has enough
to eat. Not that there is not plenty all the year round. It is always
_jam_ and never _satis_ with the boy, to borrow Tom Hood's joke. In
killing-time they put down hecatombs of beef in snow and of ham and
sausage in hot lard, and they have stores of cod-fish to be cooked with
cream, and of chickens for potpies, which are never made properly, for
some mysterious reason, save by a farmer's wife. A fearful fate, though,
has been known to befall a farmhouse among the wintry hills when the
farmer's wife has put too much sage in the sausage. Too much sage all
winter, ah! Nothing short of being "clyed," as the farmer's wife
pronounces it, will satisfy a boy who works on the hills; and that he is
on Thanksgiving. 'Tis a day of perfect bliss to him, when he sleeps
long, and after his morning's work is done goes to skate in his best
clothes on a very glary pond where a crowd of other boys are skating. He
skates until he is tired and hungry, and comes home late, stopping on
the way to climb the fences of the orchards in search of frozen apples,
delicious food to his famished lips. When he reaches home the turkey
smells away out to the gate, and in the kitchen everything is all
cluttered up and "t'other end to," and dinner is nowhere near ready yet.
'Tis a joyous hour for the boy when it is ready, and for the hired man
too. The hired man's pleasure is somewhat damped by hearing the hired
girl remark that his mouth is like a barn-door with a load of hay in it.
"I declare for it if 'taint," says she. He informs her that she is
always "bellerin'" about something, and she requests him not to be so
"putchy;" nor does that end the matter. Guests like the Melvines of
Melvine Farm, the Bligh boys of Bligh's Corners, the Plunkett girls and
Deacon Buckingham's hired girl, and Yem Finny and Sam Bab's folks, are
the kind to invite to a party. They are the kind to keep up a rumble of
talk in the parlor, and in the other rooms a rush of games--Hide the
Handkerchief, Hunt the Slipper, and so on: Achilles's troops did not
play Whirl the Platter on the sands of Troy with a greater gusto.

Very hospitable people are not particular as to who comes to see them,
if only some one comes: therefore, pack-peddlers, stove-peddlers,
drovers, the old crazy man and the old crazy woman, and other wanderers,
are welcome at the hill farmhouse. These vagabonds come from all
directions--up the Red Mill road, down from Windy Row, over from the
Huddle and the Hollow, and across from Ranger's Field Centre, sometimes
meeting two or three together. The boy is glad to see them, particularly
the peddlers, they bring such an uproar of talk with them. The brown
Bohemian or Hungarian receives a bombardment of questions at the
farmhouse that breaks all bounds to his loquacity: he tells everything
he knows of foreign lands, as well as news of what is going on in ten
counties round. Two only of the vagrant tribe the boy dislikes, the
colporteur and the travelling Spiritualist--two cold, shabby, sniffling
beings, each wrapped in a shawl and each driving an old horse afflicted
with poll-evil. Whenever the boy goes to put up one of these men's
horses he wants to break his wagon and whip, and he does give them a few
ferocious shakes in the solitude of the stable. The boy worships the
clockmaker, who comes once a year on a Saturday and stays over Sunday,
mending all the clocks in the house, the tall, timeworn wooden one up in
the boy's bedroom as well as the rest. This fellow has a taste for
pugilism. While working at the clocks he holds discussions with the
hired folks about Heenan, Sayers, Morrissey, dogs, cocks and horses, and
lets out secrets about mills coming off in London and New York next
week. This is delightful. But once let the horse-pitchfork man arrive,
and there is a regular sitting up at night, a grand debauch of talk on
politics, patent-rights, improved agricultural implements and other
themes, the whole interspersed with original jokes. The old farmer is
obtuse about jokes--

    An owl might make him laugh, if only it would wink,

but nothing less could--yet the horse-pitchfork man's jokes penetrate
him.

The boy thinks it dull when there is no company at the farmhouse of a
winter evening. He then sets a pitcher of cider to warm by the fire, and
makes himself as comfortable as he can over a book. The few books he
reads are fastened minutely in his memory. He obtains _The Perfect
Gentleman_ from the district school library, and thenceforth knows what
is proper behavior for an Englishman under all circumstances. He reads
_The Vestiges of Creation_, and in afterlife is amazed to find half the
world fighting the ancient theory of evolution. His love of society
causes him to plunge into the vortex of the mite society and singing
school if he has anything decent to wear. Cheerfully he works in
pantaloons whose legs have been cut off and turned hind side before, in
order that the thin and faded places may come on the back of his legs
and the unfaded ones on his knees; contentedly he sustains them by one
suspender twisted from a solitary button in front around to another on
his right side: he knows the farmer's wife has no time to take care of
his clothes. But when old Mrs. Lyburn, a woman who can no more design a
suit of clothes than a theatre-ceiling fresco, is commissioned to make
him a coat out of an old goose-green overcoat, and a pair of trousers
out of some thick, old light cloth breeches, and when she cuts the legs
of those breeches off at top and bottom, leaving them broad enough for a
Turk, with pockets like large bags hanging down inside of them, then the
boy rebels and refuses to go anywhere. If he goes he takes his road
through Stone's Woods, and comes home the back way by the wagon-house.
The boy has grit, real grindstone grit: therefore he keeps this up, and
sooner or later he has it out with the old farmer about his clothes.
"Well, well, don't rare and pitch like a flax-break: we'll see about
it," says the old gentleman. The old farmer takes the boy to town and
buys him a sleek, shiny black suit--the coat is a long-waisted,
long-tailed frock--and he adds a pair of good "stubbid" shoes, having
strings made of leather.

"You're stuck, and stuck bad," says the hired man compassionately when
he sees the suit. A boy who is as keen as a brier and smart as a whip
cannot be expected to wear "humbly" clothes forever. A neat suit made by
the village tailor, and a necktie, hat and boots that put him into
positively ethereal spirits, are articles that he finally attains. In
these clothes he joins the debating society and the choir. Saul Lapham,
a friend of his, plays the cornet at the choir-rehearsals. Saul lays
down the dignity of a human being to puff out his cheeks, bulge his eyes
and grow red in the face blowing a brass horn. Saul is a tyro in the
business--can't blow softly, though he tries hard to do so, and
completely drowns the singers except when he breaks down, which occurs
rather often, to their extreme relief. The little spats and sensations
of the choir-rehearsals are entertainment for the sylvan boy. One
evening Miss Tway was so "worked up" about failing in a solo she was
trying to sing that she fainted twice, the first time with her mouth
shut, the second time with it open; and Saul, not knowing what else to
do, put a gum-drop into it, which offended Miss Tway, for she thought it
was his finger.

The lad is a gallant figure in his new suit galloping on horseback from
his highlands down to the village on the flats to attend some rustic
diversion. In the tavern ballroom there is a little stage with a curtain
hung across it, and on that stage the boy sees the most charming
performance he ever beholds. It consists of a regular play, with a
ballet between the acts, and a minstrel performance introducing the
celebrated scene of a negro teaching another negro to tune the banjo,
where the pupil climbs up the back of his chair while endeavoring to
ascend the scale; and all ending with a puppet-show, the whole being
done by three young fellows. "Why-ee! 'twas wonderful!" says the boy.

Balzac remarks: "People who are very happy are naturally stupid."
Perhaps it is because he is not stupid that the boy is unhappy on the
many-fountained hills. The longed-for evening soon appears--his last on
the farm. He sleeps no moment that night in his soft farmhouse bed under
homemade blankets hemmed with woollen thread. He does not know that he
will be homesick for his old bedroom--homesick for the Gothic chest, the
picture from _The Pirate and Three Cutters_, and the toilet-table
holding nothing but a hairbrush, which, with its half dozen bristles,
resembles a Captain Cook club. He will be homesick for the very closet
under the roof that makes his clothes smell of hops, wool and dried
apples. How glows the morn when he leaves! He goes to success, for he
carries power--power as great as Fate.

     MARY DEAN.


THE VISION OF THE TARN.


    Alone, in contemplation lost,
      I stood upon a castled height,
    Dark-beetling o'er a lurid tarn
      That glassed the brow of night.

    Between the icy flash of stars,
      Above me sprinkled and beneath,
    The silence of the listening air
      Was counterfeit of death.

    No cloud upon the naked sky,
      No ripple on the lake below;
    But o'er the sluggish waters hung
      A phosphorescent glow,

    That suddenly, all quivering wan,
      As smitten with the throes of birth,
    Upheaving, vanished, to reveal
      A phantom not of earth--

    A lily wonderful as light,
      Unfolded on the balmy deep,
    And, cradled in its bosom, lay
      A presence lost in sleep.

    And tenderly a star remote
      Shed holy lustre o'er the place
    Where innocence and peace displayed
      Such unimagined grace

    That e'en the calm celestial orb,
      Enamored of the dream below,
    With tremulous emotion pale
      Diffused a milder glow.

    And I beheld, in mystery,
      The secret of my vision fair--
    That of a relic sprung the flower
      That bore its image there.

    And from the watchful star above--
      The dwelling of a spirit fled--
    That faithful sentinel of love
      Its vacant shrine surveyed,

    And knew, through all transition seen,
      Its place and habitation dear,
    Still waiting, in the throb of hope,
      Its resurrection here.

    Long had I gazed; but, lo! a cloud,
      Down-sweeping as a bird of night,
    O'erwhelmed me, and the phantasy
      Was blotted from my sight.

     JOHN B. TABB.


THROUGH WINDING WAYS.


CHAPTER VII.

It was the tenth of November when my accident happened: it was late in
February before I again sat up and began to feel once more that I
belonged to the world of flesh and blood, and to take in slowly, with
unaccustomed mind and ear, sights and sounds outside the monotonous
world of pain where I had lived so long that I felt bitterly I had
earned the right to die. Few glimpses of light had enlivened the
terrible blackness of my cruel experience: they had all come from my
mother's smile. Occasionally, for a few moments when I lay with my head
upon her breast, I was reinspired with a desire to live; but at most
times a settled sense of suffering and gloom cut me off from every sweet
source of comfort in life. But after I had sat up once--once parted with
the dreary prospect of the chintz and lace which curtained my bed--I was
a little stronger. Deep was the silence of the icebound shore that day,
sparkling the blue waters across which the sun marked a glittering
track. My mother sat beside me, and Helen knelt by my reclining-chair
watching my face with eager, earnest eyes, divining every wish and
foreseeing all my needs. She served me with such an enthusiasm of
devotion that in my morbid state, with every nerve strained to its
highest tension, I suffered merely in looking at her. But Dr. Sharpe
himself had begged me to let her stay with me, because she fretted so
when away from me. I had but one wish in life, it seemed to me--to get
back to Belfield. The luxury with which I was surrounded was an
oppression to my every sense. I was fed from priceless porcelain, and
the markets were ransacked to find dainties for my taste; my room was
freshly decorated every day with flowers, both cut and growing in pots,
and the air was heavy with their scents; forced fruits from the
greenhouses, heaped in silver baskets on every table toward which I
turned, tempted my dull appetite. I wanted my old room at home: I wanted
to lie in my hard narrow bed and see the walls flush with the reflection
of the dawn in the east--to have Carlo lift the latch of my door, and
enter stealthily and stand at my bedside, wagging his tail and looking
up at me with his solemn brown eyes as he waited for me to stretch out
my hand, that he might lick it all over for his good-morning. There, in
those dear familiar places, I should be able to think over the evil that
had come upon me--might perhaps, out of all my broken threads, regather
one or two.

For from the first I had been told the trials I was to confront. My life
had been saved, although it was at first despaired of, but I must be
permanently lame. It had been a most unlucky fall for me, but a glorious
case for the surgeons--fractures and compound fractures, broken ribs and
dislocated shoulders. In old times, when I had planned out my future, I
had said that I would be a surgeon when I grew up; but now, although all
my doctors--and my experience of doctors had come to be as wide as most
people's--had been most patient, tender and untiring in their study and
treatment of my case, I resigned without one murmur my wish to enter the
profession.

One morning, while I was still absolutely helpless, a fierce gleam of
light reflected up from the sea shot athwart my face. Helen sprang up
and carefully adjusted shades and curtains.

"You are a kind little nurse, Helen," said I. "What does the new
governess think of the way you spend your time?"

"Oh, Mademoiselle Lenoir quite enjoys it," returned my mother, laughing:
"she sits about reading novels and eating bonbons. I will go and see
what she is doing now."

"Do, mother," said I, "and take a walk in the greenhouses
yourself.--Helen, you'll take good care of me, won't you?"

She flung her arm about my neck and pressed her quivering lips against
my hair.

"I wish I could do something for you," she cried plaintively.

"But you do a great deal, Helen. Of course my mother does everything
best of any one, but you come next."

She gave me a piteous little smile. "I wish I could do something better
than any one else," she whispered: "it was all my fault."

"Now, dear little girl, I shall send you away if you say that any more.
Nothing was your fault--nothing. Don't take up that weary strain again.
I want you to tell me all about that morning, though: I never heard yet
how you came to be on the cliff at all. Your grandfather had forbidden
you to go there."

Her lips still quivered. "I am afraid I shall cry," she said with a
little gasp.

"You must not cry: it does me harm to see anybody cry," I answered
imperiously. "Now tell me about it all."

She regained her self-command at once: "Georgy asked me about the cliff,
and I told her that grandpa said I was never to go there--never. But she
took me by the arm and pulled me: she pulled me hard--she is stronger
than I am," said the poor little mite. It was not difficult to guess the
remainder of the story from the child's disjointed words: she struggled
not to blame her cousin. Georgy, on reaching the brow of the precipice,
had amused herself by throwing stones down the ravine, that she might
enjoy their rumble and clatter. When this too mild pleasure shortly
palled upon her, she tried to induce Beppo, the delicate Italian
greyhound, to go down, and finally, vexed with him for not seeking such
a form of suicide, she flung him over--half in sport perhaps, for
Georgy's pastimes were sometimes rather savage. He regained his footing
before he was swallowed up in the abyss, and stood on the little shelf
of rock thirty feet below, whining at first in entreaty, then howling in
such abject terror that Helen, broken-hearted at such misery, slid
fearlessly after him, but found herself unable to retrace her steps.

"Did not Georgy try to help you?" I asked.

"I don't think she did," answered Helen, fixing her great eyes upon me.
"She kept calling to me at first not to be a coward and to come back.
Then she ran away, and I did not see her any more until--"

"How many times did you call me?" I asked.

"I don't know. I seemed to know you would come, but I felt afraid I
could not hold on any longer. Just when I was tired out I heard you
coming."

I had some stirrings of curiosity about my own fate.

"Did you send the people after me?"

"When I saw you going down," said she, growing pale even to her lips, "I
could not move at first. I was not sure what I ought to do. Then I
remembered, and ran as fast as I could to papa. I forget what came
afterward. I remember that grandpa was holding me in his arms and crying
very much, and that papa and Mills and all the men were bringing you
across the lawn."

"Don't tell me any more," said I quickly: "I can't quite bear it."

It was late in April when I finally went back to Belfield, and even by
that time I was so far from possessing strength or health that not only
Mr. Floyd accompanied me, but Dr. Sharpe and Mills as well. Jack Holt
and Harry Dart and Tony Thorpe came about me at once: all the good
people of Belfield thronged to bring me something--words of comfort and
cheer, jellies, Easter lilies, cakes and oranges--but the one I had most
longed to see did not come. Once more at home, I grew stronger both in
body and mind: the spring-time did me good, although welling up within
me all the time, so imperiously, so irresistibly, that I never entirely
lost the pain, was the thought that never before had I failed to watch
the first uncoilings of the fern-fronds beneath the dead leaves of the
former year; the willow catkins, the fragrant arbutus, all the signs of
inspiration from the earliest breaths of spring in the hedges and
meadows and woods about Belfield. But still, as I lay on my sofa and
tried four times a day the great feat of crossing our parlor from wall
to wall, I could guess all the beautiful things that were going on out
of doors, and I was happier for the coming summer-time, for is any state
so sombre, any grief so unquenchable, any burden of despondency so
oppressive, but that the divine gladness of the awakening earth stirs it
with its revivifying breath? My misfortune did not inspire me with
mystical, heavenly resignation, but I began to be able to look its
results in the face.

"Nothing so hampers us in life as the failure to accept our fate with
courage," my guardian said to me once. "Be as brave as you can. Do you
remember what Medea says in reply to that cruel reminder of her
losses?--'Husband, countrymen, riches, all gone from you: what remains?'
She answers, 'Medea remains.'"

It had become evident to me, without interrogations on my part, that my
mother and Mr. Floyd had resigned at least all present hopes of
marriage. All their thoughts seemed to be centred in me, and I felt
myself a hinderance in their plans of happiness. So, while I was still
holding my guardian's hand, I reminded him of our talk on the bluff that
far-off November morning.

"Do you think I would take your mother from you too, my dear boy?" said
he bluntly. "Do you think she would come to me if I wanted to take her?"

"But it seems too much of a sacrifice."

"Get well, then, at once," Mr. Floyd exclaimed, laughing. "As soon as
you can walk up the church-aisle all the Belfield wedding-bells shall
ring their loudest."

Jack Holt brought me some white roses one day in June, which I knew
could never have grown anywhere in Belfield except against the eaves of
a certain Gothic cottage. I asked him if Georgy sent them, and why she
never came to see me.

"I have wondered too why she never comes," he returned; "and I have
asked her, but she tells me her mother bids her stay away from you."

"Georgy was not used to be so obedient," said I. "Ask her to come. I
suppose she thinks I am frightful to behold, but I fancy I'm much the
same, unless I begin to look like a girl. I'm getting into the habit of
doing everything so languidly, so effeminately, Jack, that I wonder
sometimes if there is any masculine vigor left in me. What can I do to
try? I can never run any more: it will be a long time before I can pull
my old stroke with an oar. I might shoot at a mark, and if you and Harry
will come I will hobble out and try to-morrow."

"Floyd," began Jack with some hesitation, "from Georgy's reluctance to
see you I have sometimes thought she was concerned in the matter of your
accident."

"Not in the least," I cried stoutly: "never believe that for a moment.
It was my own affair entirely, and to this day I can't quite decide that
I was not both clumsy and stupid not in some way to keep myself from
falling."

I was sitting alone that evening, toward the late sunset, when Georgy
came. Showers had fallen all the afternoon, but now the clouds had risen
from the west, and, although now and then a few drops fell, the east was
spanned by a rainbow and the turbid masses of cloud above took on colors
of crimson and purple. I heard the gate click, and turning I saw Georgy
Lenox coming in, attended by both Jack Holt and Harry Dart. Each held an
umbrella over her--Jack in earnest, and Harry in joking solicitude for
her bright summer ribbons. It was evident enough that they were all in
high spirits, and I seemed to hear the sparkling impertinences which
issued from her laughing lips as she looked from one to the other of the
boys with many a toss of her yellow curls and shrug of her round
shoulders. They left her at the door, which stood wide open, and I
called to her to come in. She entered, but waited a moment on the
threshold, growing a little pale as she looked at me. Then rallying,
"How do you do, Floyd?" she exclaimed. "You see that I have come at
last?"

"I am glad to see you," I returned. "But come nearer: I want to shake
hands with you."

She approached, and I clasped her hand, looking up into her face. She
had grown more womanly in these last seven months, and far more
beautiful; and, looking in her face, I at first forgot to speak.

"How queer you are!" said she, pouting, but laughing. "Why do you look
at me so?"

I do not know whether I spoke or not, but she bent and kissed me, and
thus answered my feverish longing, the gratification of which
overpowered me with a sudden intoxication like that of wine.

"I only did it because you are ill," said she, putting her hands to her
face and peeping out at me from between her fingers. "You look so thin
and changed, Floyd! I knew you would, and I dreaded to see you: I am
afraid of sick people."

"I am harmless enough. Am I very horrible?"

"You are dreadfully white, and your eyes were not so large before you
were sick. Oh, how many times I have asked the boys how you were!"

"But you never came, Georgy."

"Oh, I am past sixteen now, and mamma will not let me go and see boys."

"I see," said I with an indefinable sigh, "that you are almost a woman.
And Jack is eighteen."

"The boys are so full of their examinations! Do you think Jack will
pass? He is such a stupid old dear! I always feel as if I knew the most,
yet I know nothing--actually nothing at all."

"Jack will pass. Whatever place in the world he tries for will always be
ready and waiting for him. I am more anxious about Harry: he cares so
little about his chances, and trusts always to inspiration and good
luck."

Georgy looked at me somewhat curiously: "Don't you feel badly, Floyd, to
have the boys go to college and leave you behind?"

We three had planned years ago how we were to enter college together,
yet no one of us had yet alluded to my disappointment, and it was
difficult for me to bear her question and answer it unflinchingly.

"This is one of my many hard things to bear, Georgy."

"'Tis dreadful for you," she exclaimed with energy. "To think what you
were, Floyd, a tall, handsome, dandified fellow, and now changed all at
once into a hopeless cripple!"

I even found the strength to endure this and give no sign. In my darkest
hours of dejection I had said these words to myself, but no one had
hitherto uttered them within my hearing.

"I wonder," she went on, "what you will do? Shall you try to be a
doctor, Floyd?"

"No, Georgy: I have given up that idea."

"It does seem wretched. What does Mr. Floyd say?"

"Everything that is most considerate. I have had a hard experience,
Georgy, but I have at last learned how tender and faithful many of my
friends are." I regarded her steadily, and she flushed crimson.

"I suppose you think," she retorted, "that I might have come to see you
oftener. But to tell you the truth, Floyd, I have been almost angry with
you, and so has mamma. Of course it was not your fault that you fell
down the cliff, and I almost felt as if I were to blame a little about
it, although not nearly so much as that silly Helen. To think of her
going after a miserable little dog! Oh, how I hated Mr. Raymond for what
he said to me! You cannot think how cruel he was, Floyd, when I went
back to the house, after hiding away all the morning. The doctors were
up stairs with you, and nobody knew if you were dead or alive. He laid
all the blame on me--all of it--and kissed and petted Helen, and cried
over her as if she had been brought back from the grave. And the
housekeeper went up and packed my things, and I was sent out of the
house as if I were a murderer or thief, or something dreadful. Mr. Floyd
came home with me: he came after your mother. He was in a dreadful state
of mind, and scarcely spoke all the way, except once to tell me that I
was very young, and that I must pray to God to give me a heart. Just as
if I were not crying and sobbing all the time! Then, when mamma saw me
and I had to tell her all about it, she burst out angrily against me,
telling me that I had lost all my chances of having any of Uncle
Raymond's money. I had not thought of that before, and it did seem worse
than anything else. Do you wonder I have felt half angry with you?"

"You teach me to wonder at nothing, Georgy. You must forgive me for
injuring your chances of inheriting Mr. Raymond's money;" and I laughed
with some bitterness. "But take heart," I went on: "little Helen loves
you, and told me to tell you she was sure you meant no harm, and that
she was sorry you were sent away."

"Little proud, stuck-up thing!" exclaimed Georgy. "It makes me so angry
to think of that child's having everything under her orders--all the
servants down on their knees before her, with 'Miss Floyd' this and
'Miss Floyd' that! And then how ridiculously both her father and Uncle
Raymond worship her!"

"She was very generous to you, Georgy."

"And why should she not be? There is no reason why, instead of putting
up with a few rings and chains and dresses, I should not have half of
everything at The Headlands. I am older than she is, and need things
more, and I am prettier than she is: don't you think me prettier,
Floyd?"

"Yes, I think you are," I rejoined quietly. "But everybody says Helen
will grow up to be very beautiful."

"I don't believe it," observed Georgy tartly. "She is too pale, and her
eyes are too big: then she is such a solemn little thing. Don't you like
golden hair best, Floyd?"

"Yes."

"And blue eyes?"

"Well, I don't know. But yes, I do," I added, meeting hers.

"Do you really think that Helen will grow up to be beautiful?" she
pleaded after her momentary triumph.

"Yes, I certainly do," I answered stubbornly.

"We shall see," she exclaimed, tossing her head.

"Don't think," said I, "that I believe that she will be more beautiful
than you, Georgy. I don't imagine any girl could be that, but--"

"Well, what else?" she asked, smiling and dimpling.

"But think of something besides beauty," I ventured humbly. "'Tis so
poor a preparation for a woman's life, Georgy, to care merely for
outside loveliness. I want you to pray for a sweet, loving, grateful
nature, Georgy--not to nurse bad, revengeful thoughts."

She stared at me in profound surprise, then burst out laughing. "I
didn't know you had grown pious," she observed with a shrug; and, seeing
the fruits and confectionery piled on the table at my side, begged me to
offer her some, and fell to eating them ravenously, despite the dignity
of her sixteen years, and after devouring all she could, carried the
rest of them away in her arms.

I sat quietly thinking about her after I was left alone. I smiled to
myself at the thought of her coquettish parting glance, for I was sure
she would have kissed me again had I asked her; but I wanted no more of
her kisses, although I had found them so sweet. I seemed to have
suddenly grown stronger and wiser where she was concerned; yet I suppose
the poor truth of the matter was, that she had stung my vanity keenly,
and said little to endear herself to me in our recent interview. Her
words, instead of harming me, had roused all the resentment of the
strong vital force within me. I felt curiously stirred, almost elated,
in remembering what she had said, and contrasting her prophecies of
impotence and failure with my growing sense of power. When the door-bell
rang presently I myself hobbled across the floor on my crutches and
opened it.

Jack Holt stood there. "Why, 'tis not really you, Floyd?" he exclaimed
in surprise; and taking away one of my crutches, he himself supported
me back to my chair. "I was afraid to come in," he went on, sitting down
by my side, "lest you should already be over-tired; but if you are well
enough to see me I have something to tell you."

"Oh, I am better to-night. In fact, all at once I feel that I am not
always going to be the good-for-nothing fellow I have been of late. I
begin to have a consciousness that somewhere within me life and energy
are stirring again."

"I am so glad!" said he with a voice of some constraint, and looked at
me fixedly. "Georgy was here," he observed presently.

"Yes."

"She did you good."

"I don't know," I returned with an effort at indifference: "she may have
roused me a little."

He started up, and began to pace the floor with a flurried air quite
unusual with him, now and then stopping abruptly and seeming to bend all
his energies to the arrangement of a book or mantel-ornament, as if
their displacement caused him annoyance--conduct so unlike his ordinary
phlegmatic demeanor that I suspected him of extreme embarrassment.

"Speak out, old fellow!" said I briefly. "What's the use of all this
hesitation?"

He turned squarely round and faced me, yet did not meet my eyes, but
looked over and beyond me. I have never forgotten his face as I saw it
then: the heavy features were all fixed in sombre lines; his eyes were
like my dog Carlo's, full of honesty and patience, but I knew that he
was suffering.

"I am older than you, Floyd--" he began.

I assented: "Yes, three years older."

"Old enough," he pursued, "to have thought a good deal about the time
when I shall be an independent man. As soon as I am through college I am
to take the pistol- and rifle-factories off my father's hands. The
papers are already made out, and will be signed on my twenty-first
birthday; so from that time I shall have an income which will entitle me
to marry and settle as early as I please."

I gazed at him in profound surprise.

"You are only fifteen," he went on. "I dare say you have not thought of
marrying anybody yet."

"No indeed!" I burst out petulantly.

"I have," said he dropping his eyes. "I am older, you know, and I have
thought a good deal about it. It has seemed to me for a long time now
that but one thing could possibly happen--that I shall marry Georgy as
soon as I leave college. Her mother will let her marry no one but a man
rich enough to make her life pleasant in the world: my secure prospects
seem to justify my reliance on my chances of winning her."

"I knew you liked her," I muttered hoarsely. His words and manner
overwhelmed me with wonder.

"Yes," he went on, his dull voice gaining softer modulations, "I love
her with all my heart. You know I do: there can be no use in concealing
it. I think of nothing for myself: 'tis all for her. She--" He broke
off, growing furiously red and shamefaced, then recovered his
self-composure. "But notwithstanding all this," said he with a sad,
patient, steady face and voice, "I have decided that I ought to give her
up. It was my intention to have everything settled before I went to
college, but this afternoon I made her tell me the truth about your
accident: since then I feel that you have the first claim upon her."

"I don't know what you mean."

He smiled and shook his head. "You have lost a great deal," he returned
with unwonted tenderness: "you need much happiness, much private,
individual contentment, to enable you to bear the troubles that have
come upon you. Georgy was in a measure concerned in causing them: she
ought to make full atonement for all the harm she has done. Ever since
you came back I have felt that if I could do you any good I would cut
off my right hand to serve you. At last I see a way. If you wish it,
Floyd, the dearest wish of your heart may come to pass."

"The--dearest--wish--of--my--heart?" I stuttered. "I don't know what you
mean."

He laughed quietly. "I suspect you know all about it," he said. "You are
a quiet fellow, but I am not so blind as not to have found out that you
are in love with Georgy. But in spite of that, I used to feel, although
you are handsomer than I, and a thousand times cleverer, that I had the
first claim upon her. You are younger than she is; she will be a grown
woman while you are still a boy: in fact, there were plenty of reasons
why I never hesitated to come before you. But now I feel bound in honor
to tell you that I give her up--that--that you can--"

He paused and looked at me, believing he had said enough, but I was
stupefied by my ignorance, shyness and doubt. "Do you mean," I blurted
out, "that you will give up marrying her--that I can have her in your
place?"

"That is precisely what I mean."

"You will do nothing of the sort," I cried roughly. "Even if she cared
for me--which she does not--nothing could induce me to marry anybody,
and least of all Georgy Lenox."

For she had wounded my pride and vanity to the quick, and even the kiss
she had given me seemed a very Judas kiss of falsehood and betrayal.


CHAPTER VIII.

As soon as the warm weather came we went to the mountains, and when we
returned in the autumn I had put aside one crutch, and felt at times
that I was soon to banish the other. The boys had gone to college, and
Belfield was desolate to me. Georgy was visiting cousins in New York. I
had not seen her since that evening in June when she came to see me, nor
was I to see her again for years. In November my mother and I went to
Jamaica, for I had so outgrown my strength that fresh and alarming
symptoms seemed to threaten me with more fatal ills than being merely
crippled for life. But their only effect was to banish us for two years
from all the familiar old scenes. We were never to go back to Belfield
again and find our home there. Youth and passionate emotion and the
thought of marriage had vanished now from my mother: she had, it
sometimes seemed to me, no other wish than that I should be restored to
health. I fancy she almost hated the memory of that brief time when the
words of Mr. Floyd made her color deepen, her lip tremble and the glad
impulsive tears start to her eyes.

I accepted her willing service and her exclusive love. I needed both,
God knows, in those days of weakness and pain. After a time I began to
mend: then I grew robust and strong. My lameness diminished, and was
comparatively cured, since I could dispense with crutch or stick.
Whether youth or the fine air of those beautiful tropical uplands
wrought the miracle, who shall say? Now, although I have the old limp,
which I shall carry with me to the grave, my misfortune has ceased to be
such to me: it is hard to feel that I was ever justified in regarding it
as a calamity to becloud my life. And my little daughter said to me the
other day, "I am so glad, papa, that you are lame, for I am sure to
catch you up, even if the boys run away from me."

All the more striking characteristics of my nature were changed by my
accident. I had suffered much in body and in mind, and had been refined
by the torture to a point which made me effeminate, since an almost
painful capacity for sympathy, an overwhelming dread of inflicting
suffering, and a somewhat morbid self-depreciation are qualities
scarcely masculine. My early ambition had been for a hard place in the
world, where the world's work would force me to give hard knocks before
I reached success. But now I shrank from the jostle and bustle and harsh
competitions of real life; and as both my mother and Mr. Floyd wished
nothing so much as that I should be guarded from all effort and fatigue
at this epoch, everything conspired to unfit me for an active career,
and to make me a mere looker-on--not a worker, but a musing,
disappointed spectator.

But when I was about eighteen I returned and entered the junior year at
college with Jack Holt and Harry Dart. I had felt some pride in keeping
up with them, and had enjoyed the advantage in Jamaica of the society of
an Oxford graduate who was coaching the two sons of a wealthy planter to
fit them to enter an English university. I read with him, and was well
able to pass my examination.

What it was for me to resume my old familiar intercourse with Holt and
Dart I could never write down here. My two years in the tropics had not
been joyless--indeed, considering all things, they had been singularly
happy years--still, I had felt like a child shut out from the sunshiny
place where his mates are playing. I had become patient, contemplative
and resigned, and in study and in studious observation of Nature in her
rarest beauty and most mighty and invincible development I had almost
forgotten the deliciousness of a selfish and individual hope, the
pleasures of happy and careless youth.

But as soon as I entered college I became sufficiently absorbed in the
actual. Neither Holt nor Dart had changed in the slightest degree,
except that Jack wore trim English whiskers and looked quite
middle-aged, and Harry was engaged in nursing the incipient down of a
moustache, and was the tallest, handsomest, cleverest fellow in his
class. Jack had always been the closest of students, and his old
diligence had not abated here: he kept up with the rest by dint of solid
hard work. Harry flung scholarship to the winds of course, but made a
special career for himself which won him more admiration from everybody
except the faculty than any amount of legitimate industry. He was a
fluent and ready debater; he wrote for the college journal; his high
animal spirits brought everybody about him, and his mind seemed ever
eager and poised for flight: he was ready in wit; decried trifling
subjects, yet would dispute for two hours over an absurdity; was
dexterous and unanswerable in his syllogisms; would advance the crudest
and most untenable theory, defend it, reducing the arguments of his
opponents to meaningless folly, conquer apparently by both wit and
reason, then turn his own hypothesis inside out, confute it, dash it
into senseless atoms, and dismiss it as unworthy of a thought. In short,
among us lads, busy with books and full of admiration of our own
cleverness, he was delightful; and among other ostentatious pedantries
such as prevail at college his passed unrebuked. When he tried his wits
with Mr. Floyd, that gentleman implored him for God's sake to hold his
tongue and to consult Carlyle's _Sartor Resartus_, book 2, chapter 4,
and discover the opinion of sensible men concerning youthful intellects
like his own.

I appeared to poor enough advantage at first, and was almost afraid to
speak in the curious and motley society which thronged our rooms. The
quick wit, the ready epigram and squib, the oppressive and multitudinous
puns in every language,--all served to stun and confuse me, fixed as I
was in grave and quiet habits of mind and thought. It was amazing to me
at first with what ease many of the boys had acquired clear ideas upon
every question of the day, and with what brilliancy they could advance
them, while I was tongue-tied from modesty or reserve. Presently,
however, I discovered that these promising young gentlemen were not so
wondrous wise after all. I dismissed my fears, felt less fastidious
about the emphatic utterance of a thoughtless opinion, and soon was as
loud-tongued as any in my demand that the world should be made over at
once to suit men of our calibre. At first they were all very tender and
patient with me, but when I grew a trifle bolder my little gravities
became the target for everybody's wit, and I dare say I was much
improved by having my mannerisms and elegancies knocked rudely off from
me.

Every boy is fortunate who carries the oldest and best associations of
his life into his university career; and Harry and I were supremely
lucky in always having Jack Holt with us in the old way, and being able
in a world of transient delusions and attractions of absorbing charm to
fall back upon something real--an influence which could not be
overturned by our eagerness for fashion and novelty, and which, if
forgotten for a moment, reasserted itself with vital force to atone for
such a base neglect. Not that Jack claimed anything from us: perhaps his
power over us was commensurate with the modesty and dignity of his
character. His regard was a necessary note in the harmony of our
well-being: his disapprobation was a voice which cried "Shame!" to us,
although he never uttered a reproach. I felt all this as well as Harry,
but he, of course, undisciplined and untrained, possessed more ardor and
a more decided temperament than I: his aberrations were wider; and, as
the pendulum must always swing back to the right as far as it bounded to
the left, he came in his repentance as much closer to his cousin than
did I as his deviations had exceeded mine. No wonder Jack loved him--not
with impetuosity, for Jack was never impetuous: all his feelings were
deep, calm, patient, tender, unconquerable by time or chance. The two
felt that mutual attraction which opposites and counterparts possess.
Harry was the most popular man in his class. Nature had done everything
for him, and lavished those gifts of which she is usually most sparing.
He had a good mind and genial wit; a relish for every form of enjoyment;
a perfect form, the glorious beauty of a Greek god, with crisp golden
curls, brilliant deep-set eyes of blue, noble and chiselled features;
frank manners which none could resist; spirits which nothing could
depress; an impetuous temper, but passing like a flash the moment it was
spent. Jack, on the other hand, had no beauty, and was regarded by those
whom he did not care for as a dull fellow. He was a little slow, and had
slight appreciation of wit except to admire every evidence of it in
Harry. He had certain settled objects in life, and spent none of his
forces on the pleasant distractions which the rest of us sought on the
way. He had been born with a sort of reposeful energy, which had always
impressed me with the conviction that no ordinary situation was enough
for him; and at college there was something disproportionate in his
position among light-hearted boys, so that I never wondered that he
found our aims trivial. He possessed to the full that force of character
by which a man masters himself, always keeps himself in check, and in
times of risk and extremity of peril can suffice unto his own needs and
courageously resist sorrow, misfortune and disappointment.

But while Harry, full of lawless and uncontrollable impulses, had a
stormy and untried future before him, in which he was to be obliged to
work hard for all his successes, Jack's seemed a dazzling vista of
prosperity and ease. He was already engaged to the girl he loved; he was
the only son of a man whose wealth was enormous; and while the rest of
us were to be hungrily gazing into the world's windows with our cold
hands in our empty pockets, he was calmly to take the prettiest girl we
knew by the hand and lead her away into a fairyland whose glories we
might only guess at. But he took all his prospects very quietly: not
even for the sake of love did he neglect his work. He rarely spoke of
Georgy, and I knew that it would never be his fault to illuminate with
too bright a glare the sweet mysteries of the love that must lie between
them. I saw him sometimes writing to her with her picture before him.

"What do you suppose he writes about?" Harry used to ask me on such
occasions. "She cares little enough about fine sentiments, even if he
were given to that sort of thing; and I can't believe that he is very
ostentatious in declaring his passion. I don't think she will ever pass
that criticism upon his epistles that some old party did upon a pudding:
'Too many plums and not enough suet.' I confess I cannot guess how he
contrives to fill his six regulation pages."

"I don't see that it concerns us, at all events."

"Very true. But she would show me his letters if I asked her to. I
wonder how Jack likes a certain ease she has in other men's society?
What claws are to a cat, what the sting is to the bee, what its poison
is to the upas tree, coquetry is to Georgy Lenox. I wish him joy of
her, but wash my hands of the engagement."

He spoke with some heat, which was his wont in every allusion to Jack's
love-affair. But I knew that Harry had a dozen flirtations on hand, and
the fatalest effect of the false is its power of destroying our delicate
and just perception of the true.


CHAPTER IX.

My mother, on her return, had gone at once to her sister, Mrs. Woolsey
of New York, and remained with her until she joined me for a Christmas
visit at Mr. Raymond's. Three years had passed since I was there, and
the three years had changed Helen from a mere child into a slim maiden
of almost fourteen, tall and stately for her years. Mr. Raymond seemed
no older and no feebler: his eyes held the old restless fire, the only
reminiscence of youthful power about him; he was still anxiously served
and tended, and in this cold season huddled before the fires covered
with furs, a tiger-skin over his knees, his pale hands clasping his
wrappings together at the throat. He was considerate for my mother's
comfort, as a host should be, and he betrayed an eager curiosity and
interest concerning my infirmity; which showed his care for me, but
which I resented as an intrusion. For I had reached the point when it
was easy for me to endure the fact that I was unlike other men in my
physical strength, but was not yet sufficiently resigned to it to bear
questioning or sympathy. Helen never alluded to it, and although at
first she tried to save me footsteps, she had tact enough to give up
even that evidence of any knowledge of my weakness. Indeed, she was shy
of me now: she had a governess in these days, and had perhaps been
taught one of the first lessons that young girls learn--to shrink from
every man who is neither her father nor her brother nor her grandfather.
Accordingly, during all that Christmas week I rarely heard the sound of
her voice.

Mr. Floyd had joined us a few hours after we reached The Headlands. The
three years had made more change in him than in any of the rest of us,
if I except myself. He had grown older--was more quiet and languid, and
more tender in his manner. I had often wondered of late, now that I was
strong again and in a measure launched into life, whether he and my
mother would marry. I saw many meanings in my mother's beautiful face of
which she never spoke to me; the two had long talks together every day,
and their manner to each other held all the sweetness of steadfast
affection and true sympathy; yet there was a nameless something which
was never in his tones now.

It was a lovely, quiet Christmas-time. Outside, the winter seas roared
and great masses of ice covered the rocks and bound the shore: heavy
snows fell and the winds whistled cold. But inside, everything went on
in a still, blessed fashion that only comes when people love one
another, and in a stately, comfortable fashion that is only at command
in rich houses where all stores of state and comfort are opened with a
golden key. The greenhouses were in their perfection now: there were
many of them of various temperatures, but all opening from one into the
other. Mr. Floyd and I were walking one day where the oranges, lemons
and cedrats were ripening in different degrees of maturity: they seemed
to blossom and yield as freely as if in their native climates, and our
favorite walk was there these chilly winter afternoons; for Mr. Floyd,
always a shiverer, of late found every place except the tropical
atmosphere of a greenhouse too cold for him. My mother had been with us
picking a few orange-blossoms. My guardian had taken one little spray
and put it against her hair, sighing meanwhile, although he was smiling.

"No orange-blossoms for my white hair," said she, laughing and flushing.
"They are for the dark curls of a young girl."

"Oh, youth! youth! youth!" he exclaimed half bitterly.

"Dear friend," said she very calmly and sweetly, "youth is only so
beautiful when we have lost it. Middle life is stronger, pleasanter,
nobler."

"I might cry for middle life too," Mr. Floyd said lightly, "for I have
lost that as well as youth. I am an old man: I have no to-morrows. Carry
your orange-blossoms away, Mary: their perfume is too strong for me."

I had listened dreamily, without taking much meaning from their words.
My mother went on into the next conservatory and picked roses and
camellias, and Mr. Floyd watched her, shivered, and, passing his arm
within mine, walked back into the first greenhouse, among the bristling
cactuses and broad, silky-leaved bananas.

"As soon as you are free from college, Floyd," said he, "you and I will
go to Europe; that is, if I am alive. The doctors say travel is good for
me--occupation without fever, interest without personal emotion. Yes, a
year from July we will set out, and if Helen can go with us, she and
your mother shall be our companions."

"And how about your position at Washington?"

"After the fourth of March I shall never hold office again. I suppose
that is what is killing me: I have worked too hard and abused my
strength a little."

I looked into his face. I was almost as tall as he now, and Mr. Floyd
had always been a head above other men. I put my hand on his shoulder
and looked steadily into his face.

"I wish you would tell me, sir," said I, "what you mean when you say
these things. Are you really ill? Your allusions to your state of health
are so painful to me, and to my mother too."

"Oh," he returned kindly, "your mother knows all about it." He mused a
little, then cheered up, laughed and clapped me on the shoulder. "If I
were a man in decent health," he affirmed with an air of jollity, "I
should be your father-in-law. No, that is not it: I should be your
stepfather. Thank your stars that I have the modesty not to believe
myself irresistible under present circumstances."

"But why not?" said I, quite in earnest. "If you are less strong than
formerly, all the more need of your having a wife. I should suppose."

"As to my need, that is nothing, nothing. But think: if she cared for me
I should be preparing tortures for her. She would feel nothing but
dread. I may die at any time, Floyd, if I am shocked or startled.
Raptures would not do for me, either: I should be afraid to kiss my
wife, lest my heart should increase its beating by a throb a minute. No:
I shall marry no one now: I have put by the hope, as an old man puts by
all the dreams of his prime."

"It might all have come to pass," I exclaimed bitterly, "had it not been
for me."

"Oh, my boy! my dear boy!" said Mr. Floyd. "When your accident came I
forgot my own wishes at once, thinking only of your need of your mother.
I would have given up more for you than that: I would have given up my
life. Come, come! we have fallen into too serious a vein. Let us talk
about our trip to Europe and the East. I never had the right sort of a
travelling-companion yet: wise men stay at home, but bores and noodles
go abroad."

"But when we start the wise men will no longer be at home."

"You have hit it precisely. There are a few things I want to show
you--some cathedrals, landscapes and pictures. I will save you a world
of trouble, and will instruct you at once to find certain objects
frightful and unworthy of notice or esteem. The zest of travel is taken
out of one by the necessity of muttering vague formulas of meaningless
praise before pictures and statues it is traditional to admire. There's
too much of everything in this world. When a man has reached my age and
my state of health he feels the necessity of getting at the real
substance of things."

"But can one get at it?"

"Oh, don't utter any precocious wisdom. Certainly, one can get at the
substance of things. True, there is enough mystery and perplexity about
the system of the world, and at times all life looms up a terrible
enigma, so increasing in difficulty of solution that Death's key to
knowledge seems the one thing to be desired. But it is well for a man
not to lose himself in labyrinths of conjecture, but to resolutely put
aside his spirit of philosophical inquiry, and do something useful for
himself and his fellow-men. For my own part, I don't think Hamlet a fine
fellow. Don't ask conundrums. Your duty now is to finish your collegiate
course respectably. Take honors or not as it happens, but be a man, and
win yourself the place you ought to take, and keep it like a gentleman.
Then we will travel, and I will remember you are young and let you do
the foolish things youth loves to do. We will have famous times
together. Not that I altogether approve of vagabondizing. Still, what is
there for us to do? I am worn out: you are too young to have duties to
society, and ought to try life, and examine, criticise and become
enlightened. I suppose I shall catch the mania for bric-à-brac and
curiosities, and make them the object of my life, since I have no other.
If I do, I shall be obliged to will them to you, Floyd, for, Goodness
knows, Helen will have enough to set up a museum of art without any help
from me."

"I think so," I rejoined: "this house is so filled with wonderful
things. But Helen--"

"Don't talk about me, please," cried a voice from behind the acacias,
"for I am here;" and the little girl came through the drooping branches
covered with their plumy canary-colored blossoms, and advanced toward us
with that wonderful princess-like gait of hers. She was smiling
demurely. "Listeners hear no good of themselves, they say," she
observed, throwing a laughing glance at me.

"I was only about to remark that you seemed tolerably indifferent to
your possessions."

"The fact is," said Mr. Floyd teasingly, "since Helen found that the
moon and the sea did not belong to her, she gave up, and has not
believed she is so very rich, after all;" and while he laughed and Helen
blushed, and half hid herself, I heard how the child, when she was six
years old, had taken her new nursery-governess around the place, saying,
"This is my pony," "These are my dogs," "This is my conservatory," and
"These are my greenhouses:" then, when she had exhausted the inventory
of her wealth, she had affirmed, "That is my moon" and "That is my
water;" and when it was explained to her that the crescent over the pine
trees in the west belonged alike to all the children on the wide earth,
and that the fickle sea too paid its homage at a thousand shores, she
was quite inconsolable, and nothing could make up to her for her loss.

A very quiet, demure little woman was Helen now-a-days. I deplored the
necessity for the graceful French governess who was polishing her into a
conventional manner and preparing her for the dull routine which other
girls must follow. I never analyzed my impressions of Helen then, but I
am sure I considered her far above any commonplace educational needs,
for I knew that she was so wise, so disciplined, so true to all her
duties, that she was altogether a woman, and not a little girl at all.
It gave me a positive shock to discover that she was ciphering in vulgar
fractions and that her spelling was, to say the least, crude. Not but
that she was childish enough in many things, and so exquisitely docile
with her father that he often scolded her for her over-careful
obedience. I could understand well enough myself how she liked to be led
by the strong man who loved her, and whom she so dearly loved, because
when she was alone with her grandfather she needed to govern, holding a
dreary sway over her little kingdom.

As I have said before, we were not intimate this winter. I was not of an
age to be interested in a little girl in the schoolroom, and
Mademoiselle Blois took care not to allow the little girl in the
schoolroom to take an interest in me. Occasionally, however, when she
was with her father and I joined them, the memories we shared between us
broke through the gossamer web of diffidence which shackled us both, and
for a little while we would be as free as in the old childish
confidential days on the seashore or back among the brown stubble of the
stripped harvest-fields of the uplands. At these times she would ask me
many questions about Georgy Lenox, and when I told her that Georgy was
quite a grown woman now, and engaged to my friend Jack Holt, she thought
it wonderful and strange.

"But why?" I asked. "Georgy is a trifle older than I am, and I am now
almost nineteen."

"Everybody is so old!" she said with a droll little gesture of despair.
"It seems to me I shall never grow up."

"Oh yes, you will soon be fourteen: I have heard you say your mother was
married when she was seventeen: that is only three years off; and Georgy
Lenox is much older, and only just engaged, and will not be married
until Jack is out of college and a partner in his father's business."

"Does he like her very much?" asked Helen solemnly.

"Well, yes: he has loved her ever since she was a very little girl. He
has spent all his money upon her: he knows all her little needs, her
tastes. I have been out shopping with him frequently when he would
devote hours to the matching of a shade of ribbon or the selection of a
peculiar color of gloves. Harry Dart is never tired of making fun of
Jack, for the dear old fellow is a little absurd in his painstaking for
a capricious girl who does not even know her own mind, and is certain to
find fault with even his most fastidious choice."

"I should not like that," said Helen, so decidedly that I looked with
some surprise at the expression of her imperious face. "I should want to
have everything, and give it all to him."

"To whom? to Jack?"

"Oh, dear me, no! You know what I mean."

I understood her, and I made an involuntary grimace in thinking of
mademoiselle's chaste teachings in the schoolroom. Here was a little
girl of fourteen with her mind made up about what she would do for the
lover who was to come out of Shadowland some day.

"Don't you think that would be nicer, Floyd?" she asked.

"For the girl to be rich, that she might make her husband rich? Some men
would like that."

"But what do you think?"

A boy of nineteen is not so glib in speaking of marriage as a girl of
fourteen, but I finally told her that I should not fancy the destiny of
marrying a rich girl: then my imagination warmed, and I let her hear
what my dream would be. She, the girl I loved, should be poor: very
likely life would have been cruel to her, and she would have known cold
and privation. What joy I should have in wrapping her in costly things,
in setting off her beauty with ornaments appropriate and rare! What a
light would shine in her eyes when I led her to the lovely house where
we two were to dwell in Fairyland! Every duty in life should be taken
from her: all she would have to do would be to grow more and more
beautiful. I myself would be chief servant to this dainty little
new-made queen, and not even the winds should be allowed to play too
freely with her hair.

Helen looked at me pensively, and Mr. Floyd, who was writing in the
corner, laughed a low amused laugh which reminded me for a moment of
Mephistopheles.

"So you would like that?" mused Helen. "Do you know, I should not like
it at all."

"Well, you will never be poor," I retorted, "and you will give your
golden key to some man who wants to marry a princess. But, to tell the
truth, Helen, I don't expect to marry anybody: I think it is great
nonsense. Both Harry and I have made up our minds to be bachelors."


CHAPTER X.

I had not seen Georgy Lenox for four years when, the spring we
graduated, she came to visit a cousin of her mother's in Boston, and we
were all invited to an Easter-party at Mrs. Dwight's, the cards being
brought to us by no less a person than Mr. Lenox himself. I was in my
own room writing when I heard Harry's sweet voice calling, and I went
out. Harry was, as usual, sitting on the table before his easel. It had
been one of his guardian's regulations that he should not touch paints
or canvas during his collegiate course, and until within the last few
months he had obeyed orders, and only lately had taken to water-colors
as a sort of negative course of action calculated to give him relaxation
after the monotony of his unnatural deprivation, without infringing upon
his uncle's injunctions. He was painting a girl in a flower-garden, and
over his shoulder was gazing a shabby, jaunty, decayed-looking person,
who was strangely foreign to my eyes, yet irresistibly familiar.

"Don't you remember Mr. Lenox?" asked Harry, staring at me. "Have you
forgotten the pleasures of your boyhood, miserable ingrate? Have you no
recollection of the big kite this benefactor of your youth made you,
which dragged you down the hill and threw you into the ditch?"

"I remember all about it," said I; and indeed I had been shaking hands
with my old friend all the time Harry was speaking.--"And I am delighted
to see you, Mr. Lenox."

I began looking about me for a chair. In fact, finding a chair was the
one trouble of our three lives, and was the only way in which we felt
hospitality to be a tax upon our time. For, although we had as many
chairs as the room would accommodate, they were always full of books,
fruit, cigars or hats and coats. There was one arm-chair, originally
covered with horsehair, which Harry called the "funeral coach:" it might
have been called anything, for it was so dingy, so battered, so broken,
that its _raison d'être_ had come to be a matter of speculation. Into
this seat I now inducted our visitor. He was as shabby as the funeral
coach itself, but had kept up more gentility in his decay. I had not
seen him for four years, and the lack of any change in his appearance
surprised me. There he was, as well shaven, as threadbare, as jaunty
and well-mannered, as in the old days when we used to play the siege of
Troy, using an old packing-case for the wooden horse, and he was our
Trojan victim. I was much impressed by my own age, and said a good deal
in those days about the flight of time and the mutability of human
affairs: I expected anybody who was grown up when I was young to be well
stricken in years; and if Mr. Lenox had been a shrunken old man with
altered aspect and a deep sense of the worthlessness of all efforts
after temporalities, the change would have seemed only a reasonable one
to me.

But, on the contrary, he was just the same as ever, and began talking at
once about a grand coup he was going to make presently by investing in a
silver-mine. He had two thousand dollars, and would buy shares at
forty-nine, and be in time for the dividends of ten per cent. in July.
The stock was going up like a skyrocket: a week ago you could have
bought it for nineteen.

Jack had come in now, and was standing behind his future father-in-law's
chair. "A skyrocket is a bad simile," he remarked. "Everybody knows what
it comes down."

Mr. Lenox appeared so happy it seemed really a pity to wilt his
enthusiasm: he had been beaten so many times that the prediction of
failure was a familiar knell to him. But Jack had no time to waste in
talk of any kind, and at once went into my room to study.

"Never mind Jack," said Harry: "he is a born croaker. I dare say the
silver-mine is made of gold. How about the stock in the ---- Railroad
that your wife holds, Mr. Lenox?" And we both laughed at the old joke.

Mr. Lenox smiled furtively: "It was never safe to trust such a secret to
scatter-brains like yourselves. But don't you know about the great
defalcation? Brown, the president of the road, absconded with over a
million of dollars, and they have not paid a single dividend in three
years. You ought to hear my wife go on about it."

"But you have an easy time: you didn't mind Brown's embezzlement," said
Harry. "What a stroke of luck for you! You can buy back your wife's ten
shares at a low figure, and have a good conscience the rest of your
life."

"By Jove, Harry! you have given me an idea. Just as soon as this new
stock of mine gets above par I will sell out, reinvest and put the
certificates in my wife's bureau-drawer. I should breathe more freely,
there is no doubt of it. I confess to you, boys, it's a deuce of a life
to keep a secret from a woman, she has you at such a disadvantage. Yes,
on my honor, I'll buy in some of that stock: it's utterly worthless for
years to come, and there must be thousands and thousands of shares of it
in the market. Yes, I will do it as soon as I have made two hundred per
cent. on my silver-mine. Yet it does seem a pity--" and he gave us a
prudent nod--"to put money into such a broken-down concern."

"But you are as rich as Croesus," remarked Harry, mixing his colors
meanwhile. "It must be awfully jolly to take two thousand in one's
pocket and go out and buy a silver-mine."

"The fact is," said Mr. Lenox confidentially, "that old Raymond has
shelled out at last. I wrote to him, but he took no notice; so I induced
Georgy to send a note to the little girl at The Headlands, and she
somehow persuaded her grandfather to let me have three thousand dollars.
He sent it in a way which robbed the courtesy of charm; but he is an old
man, and for the sake of little Helen I did not repay him in kind."

"Why, what did he do?"

"Sent me his check pinned to a scrap of paper on which he had scrawled,
'A fool and his money are soon parted.' Of course I sent him my note of
hand, and shall pay him as soon as possible. Do you happen to know,
Floyd, anything of the ultimate disposal of his property--the terms of
the old gentleman's will?"

"I know nothing whatever about it," I answered, "but have no doubt of
Helen's being sole heiress. Why not? There is no other direct heir."

"I am his nephew," said Mr. Lenox with his jauntiest air. "I have no
doubt of my claims or the claims of my daughter being recognized by the
head of my family. By all accounts, too, Helen is a delicate child,
fancifully reared and probably short-lived."

"Where do you get your information? Miss Floyd is a tall girl of fifteen
now, straight as an arrow, and can out-ride and out-walk any girl I
know."

"I wish her no harm," exclaimed Mr. Lenox eagerly. "I love the child as
if she were my own. Georgy has always represented her as delicate and
puny."

"She has not seen her for five years."

"True, true! Don't repeat what I said: you know the code of men of honor
on these points, and what is said between friends is inviolate as the
grave. Little Helen Floyd has been a good friend to my poor girl, who
has none of Fortune's gifts. Not a month passes without a letter with an
enclosure of money; and she begs Georgy to look upon her as a loving
sister who is proud and glad to be of help to her in any way."

"And Miss Georgy accepts the money?" drawled Harry with a well-known
look on his handsome face.

"Of course she does," responded Georgy's father with considerable heat.
"Mr. Raymond ought to do anything for her. The amount of that man's
income is fabulous, sir: I tell you, it is fabulous: he cannot begin to
spend it. I sometimes doubt if he spends more than the interest of his
income. Reflect upon his principal; what must it be!"

"Well, it's his own to do as he likes with, I suppose," said Harry,
rather bored with the subject. "And I am sure you cannot complain, since
you are jingling his money in your pocket this very moment. How did it
happen that when Miss Georgy was at Mr. Raymond's she did not make the
old gentleman take a fancy to her? She turns most people's heads."

"It was always a mystery to me," returned Mr. Lenox mournfully. "But Mr.
Raymond does not like my wife, nor, I sometimes think, does he like me.
The truth of the matter is, that that unlucky Hermetically-Sealed Barrel
Company--"

Harry looked at me. The unlucky Hermetically-Sealed Barrel Company had
been one of our old jokes at Belfield, for we had been compelled to hear
its history a hundred times over. It seemed to me, in my youthful
wisdom, odd and pitiful that while we had grown from boyishness into
something better, leaving follies and weaknesses behind us, this man,
almost thrice our age, still studied the old pages of his book, not
reading them with any clearer vision than before, in spite of all his
experience. Why did he not turn the leaf and take a different story?
Experienced in life as I believed myself in those days, I had not
learned then that we halt groping over one lesson throughout our
careers. Although our harps seem tuned for the most various harmonies,
we strike the same chords over and over again in hopeless iteration.

So we got him off the subject, and talked college-talk, and told him
about the probable appointments for commencement. He was one of our
alumni, liked our gossip, and could supplement our stories with those of
the jollier days twenty-five or thirty years before. Harry and I nearly
died of suppressed laughter as he gravely informed us that he had
expected the valedictory, and was served badly when it was given to
another. It appeared a huge joke that this seedy, broken-down man,
without a person in the wide world to respect him or believe in him,
could ever have been justified in any of our high hopes--could ever have
stood in the places we filled now, and, like us, securely counted on
winning the prizes of life.

Then he produced the little white envelopes which he had hitherto
forgotten, and we read that Mrs. Dwight presented us her compliments and
hoped to see us for a social gathering at her house the next Wednesday
evening.

"Miss Georgy's writing," said Harry, putting his down.

"How do you know, you rascal? She certainly does not write to you
usually."

"No, but she writes to a fellow I know," returned Harry, nodding toward
the next room. We all abated our tones now, and talked softly about
Georgy, not wishing Jack to hear. Mr. Lenox was always eloquent upon
this theme. He had brought her up to town himself three days before, and
the Dwights were charmed with her--could not do enough for her. She was
the one success of his life, and no wonder she was precious to him. A
good deal of his ready money had gone into her outfit, which must be
suitable for an aristocratic house and Easter gayeties, and he had put
off getting a new coat until his stock was ripe for harvest. The Dwights
had not seen him, you may be sure. He knew that such people would think
less of Georgy for having a seedy old father out at elbows, so he was
willing to keep in the background. This very morning, however, Georgy
had come out for a rendezvous in a secluded corner of the Common, and
had taken rare delight in the assignation and pretended he was her lover
whom she was forced to meet in secret.

"I dare say she has tripped out before to meet somebody," said Harry,
who was always cynical regarding women, but especially severe where
Georgy was concerned. "Girls practise those wiles on fathers and
brothers, that they may do the thing neatly when a lover turns up."

"Nonsense! For the matter of that, it has sometimes seemed a little hard
upon my girl that, although she is engaged to the best fellow in the
world, she should have no chance to win lovers from society at large.
Not but that I am glad that her future is so secure--a most fortunate
match for her. I am proud when I think of it."

Well he might be proud. It is something out of the course of every-day
events for a girl to possess the love of a man like Jack, whose nature
combined the strongest masculine qualities with the tenderness and
faithfulness of a woman. Of a woman? Strange how we use phrases which
have outworn their meaning! Jack's tenderness and faithfulness were
altogether without parallel.

     ELLEN W. OLNEY.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]


PERSONAL SKETCHES OF SOME FRENCH LITTÉRATEURS.


Paris, any Frenchman will tell you, is the capital of intellect; and
though this is but one of a hundred things equally flattering to their
country which all Frenchmen believe, yet it happens to be true. In some
societies it is social rank, in others wealth and fine houses, in
others, still, capacity to render service to the state, which makes old
men courted and opens doors to the novice. But in Paris it is brains. If
you have written a book or painted a picture or discovered a scientific
theory, you have at once a reserved seat, as it were, in the social
world, and nobody thinks of asking who your father was, or where you
live, or what your income may be. With the literary society the
political is so closely allied that the two may be said to coincide.
There are coteries of course, but there are also neutral grounds on
which members of all sets meet in peace and separate in harmony; and
especially since the Republic has become firmly established the barriers
based upon party differences have tended steadily to disappear. During
the Empire some of the cleverest writers, such as Sainte-Beuve and
Mérimée and About, were imperialists: now they are all dead or have
changed their politics. During this period, too, the intelligent and
literary opposition was mostly Orleanistic, but the last seven years
have clearly shown not only that the bourgeois monarchy had no roots in
the heart of the people, but also that the conservative Republic
possesses all its advantages, combined with few of its objectionable
qualities. To men like Renan and Laugel, who have been Orleanists all
their lives, and who cherish a personal affection for the party, the
situation appears melancholy, and the wail of Renan in his last book is
sad enough. He is French to the core; supports openly the doctrine, "My
country--right or wrong;" finds the centralization of the French system,
carried to its logical extreme, the ideal government; and hates, above
all things, "Americanism." What strikes an Anglo-Saxon as the merest
commonplace of healthy politics or intellectual life is in his eyes the
most pernicious heresy. We believe that freedom to teach and to write is
the only way to discover the truth, and are confident that in the
struggle of life which opposing systems must pass through the truth is
sure in the end to win. Not so Renan. "The idea that there is a true
knowledge, which must be taught, protected, patronized by the state, to
the exclusion of false knowledge, is losing ground--one of the results
of the general enfeeblement of notions of government." This is bad
enough, but the political situation is even worse than the moral and
intellectual; for M. Renan finds that France has "preferred the
democratic programme, according to which the state, composed of the
agglomeration of individuals, having no other object than the happiness
of these individuals _as they themselves understand it_, gives up all
notion of initiative above their feelings and ideas. The consequence of
such a state of things is the pursuit of prosperity and liberty, the
destruction of whatever remains of the spirit of class, weakening of the
power of the state. Individuals and the subordinate groups of the state,
such as the county and the township, will prosper under such a régime;
but it is to be feared that the nation, the country--France--will lose
every day something of its authority and its strong cohesion. The period
which we are entering upon will be one of liberty _à l'Américaine_."

All this seems mournful to men of Renan's type, and to young men of
fashion who sigh for the "elegance" of the Empire or the Restoration,
and pose consequently as imperialists or as adherents of Henri V. But
the mass of the nation is supremely contented. The peasants say that the
Republic is the only government which does not go to war; the middle
classes, richer and more numerous in France than in any other country,
are happy in having the care of their material interests in their own
hands, and especially in the consciousness that they are now the ruling
class, and that bourgeois intelligence and respectability, rather than
imperial frivolity or royal pietism, is the prevailing idea. Even Renan
admits that "the present hour is sweet:" what troubles him is the
thought of the future. But the republicans are not troubled at all. They
don't intend to carry out any great reforms; they wish to avoid all
foreign complications until the yearned-for hour arrives when Germany
will be forced to disgorge what they are pleased to term its ill-gotten
booty; they have in their ranks almost all the administrative and
oratorical powers of the country; and they tell you that M. Grévy, the
present president of the Chamber of Deputies, will succeed to the
presidency, when the "stupid" MacMahon goes out, with just as little
difficulty as the latter had in coming in, and that he, in turn, will in
all probability be succeeded by Gambetta. These two men are bourgeois to
the tips of their fingers, as was Thiers--modest, leading a regular
life; well-informed on all local matters, and naïvely ignorant of the
rest of the world; not strong believers in political economy; prudent
and anti-clerical. Only, Gambetta, being twenty years younger than
Grévy, is by twenty years more fiery and radical.

The reader must not complain that he has been entrapped into reading a
leader on French politics when he desired nothing of the sort; for,
without bearing in mind these preliminary facts, it is quite impossible
to understand the relations of French literary men among themselves.
Party passion has ever run high in France, and now that everybody can
freely speak his mind, it has become more difficult than ever for even
the oldest friendship to stand the strain of daily discussion. Take the
instance of M. About and M. Taine. They were schoolboys together, and it
would be hard to say which of the two most distinguished himself at this
period of his career. They were both prodigies, but, though rivals, the
fastest friends. After they had emerged from the École Normale they went
and set up housekeeping together in an old house in the Quartier Latin;
and as they were both poor as rats, the difficulties they had in keeping
soul and body together recall the most picturesque and thrilling scenes
in Murger's _Vie de Bohème_. One day they discovered that they had
neither money nor anything to eat, and About started out to scare up
some nutriment for the inner man. After a while he returned laden with a
basket containing a dozen bottles of wine and various packets of
provisions, and followed by an organ-grinder. Taine was of course no
less pleased than astonished, but he demanded an explanation. "Oh," said
About, "I stumbled across a wine-dealer who wanted a first-class
advertisement done in the highest style of art, so I sat down and wrote
it for him, and he gave me fifty francs and this wine."--"But the
organ-grinder?" pursued Taine.--"Heavens!" exclaimed his friend, "you
don't think one can enjoy a banquet without music, do you? Come, fall
to; and you, old buffer, go to work on that divine instrument of yours;"
which the old buffer proceeded to do, probably more to the satisfaction
of his employer than to that of Taine.

Nor was lively companionship and assistance of this sort all that the
future philosopher and critic owed to the friend of his youth: he
probably owes him his life also, and hence the world is, in a sense,
indebted to M. About for the _History of English Literature_ and _Les
Origines de la France contemporaine_. While they were living in the
style above described Taine was taken suddenly ill, and, as the common
purse was not sufficiently full to enable him to consult a physician,
the two went to see a clever medical student of the quartier and
requested his advice. The budding doctor examined Taine carefully, and
finally pronounced that there was but one thing for him to do, and that
thing was to go to the Pyrenees. "You might as well tell me to go to the
moon," said the poor fellow. "Ah, well," replied the student, "you asked
my opinion, and I have given it; and I may add that if you don't do
what I tell you, you are a dead man." It may be imagined that the two
friends did not pass a particularly pleasant evening; but after much
cogitation About hit upon a possible means of relief; which, however, he
kept to himself.

About's youthful talent was as precocious as his matured abilities are
brilliant, and he had at this time published a book. One evening during
the last season the present writer formed one of a group of three to
whom he narrated, in a most charming manner, how he had made the
acquaintance of the great publisher Hachette, a granddaughter of whom
was another of the trio. He had left his manuscript at the
publishing-house, and after some time was informed that the firm would
be happy to publish it, and to pay him in cash for the copyright eight
hundred francs--an offer with which he closed immediately. A week or so
later he was visited, to his astonishment, by the great publisher in
person. "Sir," began the latter, "it is often said that publishers don't
know how to read, and I myself know some who drive a thriving trade on
that principle. But I read occasionally the books which I publish, and I
have read yours. I am unable to approve the contract which my agent has
made with you. You have parted with your copyright for eight hundred
francs: I return to you the contract, you retain the copyright, and I
give you for the edition fifteen hundred francs." About was even more
touched by the publisher's kindness than he was gratified by his
generosity, and the two men mutually pleased each other--a fact which
the younger now proposed to turn to account in aid of his friend Taine.
So he went to M. Hachette with the following proposition: "I have a
friend named Taine, who is very ill, and I want you to send him to the
Pyrenees."--"But, M. About, I don't know your friend, and why, in
Heaven's name, should I send him to the Pyrenees?"--"But he is a genius,
he will be famous one day, and he will make your fortune. Your fortune
is already made, I know, but he will increase it." The publisher then
remarked that the name Taine was familiar to him, and finally dismissed
his enthusiastic author with a promise to consider the matter. In a few
days Taine received a note requesting him to come and dine with M.
Hachette at his country-place just outside of Paris. The two young men
were again in the depths of financial need, and all the money they could
scrape together was barely sufficient to pay for a railway-ticket. Taine
was quite nonplussed by the invitation--did not know what to make of it;
but About persuaded him to accept, saying that he would at least have a
good dinner, which was more than he could expect at home. And so he
went. The publisher was politeness and cordiality itself, complimented
his guest on his successes at the École Normale, and after dinner took
him aside and said: "M. Taine, we want a book written on the Pyrenees,
and we think you are the best man we can get to do it. If you accept our
offer you will start at once for that region, you will deliver us the
manuscript in six months, and we will pay you for it six thousand
francs; of which I have the pleasure of offering you half to-day." This,
the first of Taine's books, duly appeared, and was a great commercial as
well as literary success, so that the publisher had no cause to regret
his generosity.

One might suppose that a friendship founded and sustained in this
fashion would be tolerably secure against the wear and tear of life,
especially if no personal difficulties intervened. And so it might in
any other land; but literary Frenchmen are too much sentimentalists and
doctrinaires to allow friendship or anything else to stand in the way of
the expression of their opinion, in season or out of season, in regard
to what, from their individual standpoint, constitutes the public weal.
Love me, love my dog; subscribe to all my opinions; follow all my
political changes or I disown you,--when people guide their conduct by
this principle all pairs of friends, except such a one as Boswell and
Dr. Johnson's, sooner or later must separate. Taine is an observer, an
investigator, a critic; and having devoted himself in turn to travel and
to the study of metaphysics, of art and of literature, he has now turned
his attention to recent French history; and the book he has written is
not at all to the taste of sentimental politicians of the About type.
The reader will not need to be reminded that there is no country in the
world so favorable to the growth of "legend" as France: the petite
bourgeoisie of Paris, as I found by personal experience, has already
fabricated a complete legendary history of the Commune, and there is no
subject on which the average Frenchman is so ignorant, and on which his
ignorance is so precious to him, as the real character of the Great
Revolution. As France is the guide of nations; as it represents, and
always has represented, the summit of civilization; as it has ever
possessed the greatest hearts, the purest spirits, as well as the most
brilliant intellects of the time,--why, it is nothing less than high
treason for a Frenchman to turn round and begin to show up the weakness
or wickedness of, say, Robespierre. This sort of thing is pardonable
only when the exposure of some historical character is offensive to the
reigning government, as was the case with the early volumes of Lanfrey's
_Napoléon_. About probably knows the truth about the men of '92 and '93
as well as anybody, but he thinks it desirable that the illusions
respecting them should continue. They are, he says, an important
political factor. Whereas Taine, like the late MM. Lanfrey and De
Tocqueville, loving truth for its own sake, slashes away without caring
for the practical result. I was told by an intimate and lifelong friend
of both men that it had required the most persistent efforts of persons
situated like himself to prevent About's sharply attacking Taine in his
paper (since the appearance of _La Révolution_ the radicals have favored
its author with the epithet of "réactionnaire"); in which case a rupture
would have been unavoidable.

Taine does not like German historians nor German methods of working up
history, and he absolutely denies what, to my mind, is their greatest
and most unrivalled excellence--their relative impartiality. Mommsen was
the subject of unsparing denunciation, as having used Roman history as a
mannikin by which he could illustrate certain views on contemporary
German politics. Mommsen is an author of whom I know little, but there
is another German historian, Von Sybel, who seems to me the most
admirable writer in this department with whom I am acquainted; and as
his great work partially covers the same period to which Taine has
recently devoted himself, I ventured to mention his name in this
connection. But I might as well have stirred up a hornet's nest. "Von
Sybel," said Taine, "wrote his book to prove that Prussia was perfectly
right in taking part in the partition of Poland, and some other things
of like nature." He seemed to think this assertion (admitting its truth)
settled Von Sybel's place in literature as definitely as if he had said
he had written a book to prove Friedrich II. to have been the son of
Jupiter or that the Prussians were God's chosen people. One would have
supposed that the fact of a man's holding such an opinion in regard to
the partition of Poland sufficient evidence for sending him to a lunatic
asylum, although most people believe it to be a perfectly established
historic truth. Taine would not even admit the excellence of Von Sybel's
style--well enough, he said, and clear, but the style of a leader-writer
in the ---- (naming an old, soberly, but far from stupidly written Paris
daily--one of the most readable papers in Paris, and the favorite of the
petite bourgeoisie). I mentioned the reputation Von Sybel enjoyed in
Germany as having an excellent style, and the response was, "Very
likely: where all the rest are blind a one-eyed man sees very well"--a
remark true enough as regards the mass of German writers, but very
unjust to the person under discussion. Taine's models are Macaulay and
Froude, but one would hardly think so from reading his _France
contemporaine_. Be their demerits what they may--and they are no doubt
great--the two English historians certainly have the faculty of
presenting a sharply-outlined and vivid picture, while Taine heaps up
hundreds of little facts, so that the reader, as the French say, can
hardly see the wood for the trees. I may add that the French scholar's
opinion of Prescott and Motley and Bancroft is still lower than that
which he cherishes for their German contemporaries.

Taine has more the air of a scholar, and less that of a man of the
world, than any other littérateur whom I met at Paris. During the winter
his wife receives once a fortnight, and he regularly attends the famous
weekly dinners of the Princess Mathilde, and occasionally dines
informally with some intimate friend; but beyond this he goes but little
into society, and takes his opinions of it at second hand; with regard
to which fact Sainte-Beuve once kindly remonstrated with him in an
admirable letter printed in the second volume of the _Correspondance_.
He is fifty years old, and made, some sixteen years ago, what, in
respect to the rank and wealth and amiable and intellectual qualities of
his wife, was a very brilliant marriage. The story of the wooing is a
"romance in real life." They have two children, the usual size of French
families, though About has seven--"toute une famille anglaise," as
Madame About remarked to me--whether with pride or in a half-ashamed
happiness I did not discover. The Taines live handsomely in the midst of
the Faubourg St. Germain, in a house whose windows have a clear view of
the Hôtel des Invalides across the gardens of the Sacre-Coeur. I would
say that I found Taine particularly courteous and cordial, were it not
that I met no French gentleman who in any other society would not be
distinguished for perfection of manner and winning kindness.

Taine has often been urged by friends who have been in America to visit
the United States, both with a view to repair his somewhat shattered
health and to write a book about us after the manner of his _Notes on
England_. He always says he will do so; and it is probable that upon
the completion of the great work, of which the third and last volume is
now nearly finished, he and Madame Taine will set sail for our shores.

One of the peculiarities of Paris, regarded as a _weltstadt_, is, that
it contains no socially disreputable quarters: there is no part of the
city where men of wealth and position do not live. Thus, Theuriet and
Cherbuliez reside in the Quartier du Luxembourg (between the Latin
Quarter and the Faubourg St. Germain), as did Sainte-Beuve, About and
Tourgueneff in the Rue de Douai (toward Montmartre), Girardin and Dumas
in the Champs Élysées, Feuillet in the Rue de Rivoli, etc. Feuillet's
name is, I think, as well known in the United States as that of any
French man of letters except Taine, and if his biography were written he
would be as famous for his eccentricities as was Balzac. An old friend
of his once told me that one day, in calling upon Madame Feuillet, he
expressed his regret that she had no regular reception-day, as in that
case he would be able to see her more frequently. "Well," she answered,
"I should like to have one, but, you see, it is quite impossible. One
can't light the candles till after four o'clock, and before that time it
is so dark here in the entresol that you can't see anybody." (I should
have prefaced this anecdote by saying, for the benefit of those readers
who have never been in Paris, that the entresol is a low story just over
the shops, and that the Rue de Rivoli is one of the noisiest streets in
the city.)--"But Feuillet has leased the third and fourth floors: why
don't you receive up there?" responded the visitor.--"Oh, Octave would
never hear of such a thing. Why, when I merely asked leave to hang some
of my dresses up stairs, he would not let me: 'I have leased this whole
story in order to have silence about me when I write, and the story
overhead to have quiet above me. If you should hang your dresses up
here, your maid would all the time be rummaging round, and that would
derange my thoughts.'" Another of Feuillet's oddities is his hatred of
railways. He has a country-place on the coast in Normandy, and every
summer sends down his wife and children and servant by rail; after
which, like a Russian grand seigneur, he goes down himself with
post-horses. I am inclined to think Feuillet has greater genius than any
other living writer of French fiction, with one exception. His _Monsieur
de Camors_, for instance, is a masterpiece, though one of the most
painful and unhealthy books ever written. But his talent is essentially
dramatic talent, and when he writes a novel his inner consciousness, in
spite of himself, is centred upon the stage effect. Thus, in his last
story, _Les Amours de Philippe_, there is no unity whatever, the book
consisting of three distinct and independent episodes, precisely
corresponding to the three acts of a play. The first of these parts is
one of the most agreeable pieces of writing in French literature, a
really charming little idyl--a Parisian idyl, to be sure, and not
precisely the most suitable reading for young girls. Nothing is more
peculiar than a Frenchman's ideas of morality in literature; for,
strange as it may appear, several of Feuillet's books are considered
highly edifying, and the secretary of the Academy, upon his entrance
into that august body, was able to greet him with the, in France, by no
means negative praise that it was not his fault if there still existed
_mauvaises ménages_. Feuillet, rather by sentiment than by conviction,
it would appear, is an ardent Catholic, and, like Dumas, owes no small
portion of his worldly success to the appreciation of this fact in high
quarters. Another of his peculiarities is, that almost alone among the
writers of the day he cherishes a lingering regret for the pleasant days
of the Empire, when for a long period he was not only a favorite at the
Tuileries and Compiègne, but almost the only man of talent who found it
possible to write.

Another writer whom I used to meet in Paris, at About's and at his own
house, was André Theuriet, favorably known in America by his lovely
little story of _Gérard's Marriage_. I had read that and other almost
equally charming tales of its author, and felt a strong desire to see
him. Of some literary men one creates in his mind's eye a picture of
which the colors are the impressions produced by their books, and I had
imagined Theuriet either a youngish man with a pretty wife or a
gray-haired paterfamilias with two or three grown-up sons and daughters.
Theuriet's hair is partially gray, to be sure, but he is unmarried, and
by no means _bon enfant_ as regards personal appearance. He was born in
1833 at Marly-le-Roi, near Paris, but educated in a little town in
Lorraine, where his mother's family lived, and whither he still returns
two or three times a year, as he said to me, "to run in the woods." He
early entered the civil service, and was long stationed at Auberive, a
place situated in the forest-region on the edge of Burgundy, and about
which is laid the scene of his novels _Gerard_ and _Raymonde_. For the
last eight years his official duties have caused him to live at Paris,
and it is during this period that his works of fiction have been
produced. Theuriet is a poet as well as a novelist, and his poetry is
said by competent critics to be very good; but the public looks with a
more kindly eye upon his novels, and as their author cannot afford to
disdain contemporary profit and reputation, he has been obliged rather
to show the cold shoulder to the Muse. Theuriet's appearance in letters
and his popularity are, I think, to be taken as a sign that a healthy
change is going on in the taste of French readers. His books,
consciously or unconsciously, are a protest against the system in which
young girls are brought up in France, and which most intelligent
Frenchmen deplore. It is less from an innate tendency to that sort of
thing than because young girls of their own rank must not only always be
under the eye of a chaperone, but also are intentionally afflicted with
a deadly ignorance, incapacity to talk or to make themselves agreeable,
that the young men leave them for the society of _cocottes_. Now,
Theuriet has been a good deal in the society of English people, and
while he stoutly maintains that his girl-characters are thoroughly
French, he yet admits that the idea of describing a kind of young girl
that in France is always assumed to be hoydenish and ill-brought-up,
came to him from observing the family-life of his neighbors from across
the Channel. Theuriet is not a great writer: he has none of that power
of analyzing physical and mental emotions in which Balzac and Stendhal
are the great adepts, though their descriptions, while unquestionably
implying great knowledge of the human heart, produce upon the
Anglo-Saxon reader a feeling of pain, of offence, and often of disgust.
I once asked him if he thought France, under the present bourgeois
régime, likely to return to a healthier taste in literature, and
received as answer the assurance that since coarse and sordid realism
_could_ go no further than _L'Assommoir_, a reaction _must_ set in. From
the filthiness of low life, I dare say, but how about the elegant
fleshliness of the previous school? France will have to undergo a
complete turning inside out before this loses its hold upon the national
mind; as a proof of which I may mention the fact that a man who knew as
much of the world and of books as Taine does, one day said to me that
the best advice he could offer to a foreigner who thought of devoting
himself to letters was to carry back with him, to his own country,
Balzac, Stendhal and Mérimée.

Of all the men of letters at Paris, there was no one for whose works I
cherished so hearty an admiration as I did for those of Ivan
Tourgueneff, and none in whose personality I felt so profound an
interest. Tourgueneff is far from being a model novelist, but his tales
are written with wonderful power, and yet are neither indecent nor
melodramatic nor rasping to the nerves. That the burden of strong
natures is in proportion to their strength, that human nature in general
is weak, and that the Devil still sometimes appears incarnate in the
person of lovely woman, seem to form his theory of life. Hence his
stories are ever sad, but they are not depressing; for his weak
characters we sympathize with and do not despise, his strong and
generous ones we sorrow for, his lovely women we reverence. And,
however great one's admiration of Tourgueneff's books may be, the man
Tourgueneff will not appear unworthy of them. What storms may, in
earlier years, have passed over the heart of the now sixty-year-old man
I do not know, but now his rather aged face, fringed with perfectly
white hair and beard, bears an expression of perfect peace. Much of his
time is constantly employed in helping others, and, from all I heard,
Madame Gréville hardly exaggerated when she said to me, "He is a saint,
a nineteenth-century saint!" And withal he is one of the most guileless
of men: whatever he may think of men in general, he never can bring
himself to think ill of any man in particular.

Tourgueneff has now for a long period passed at least six months of the
year in Paris, and only three or four in Russia. He used to spend the
summer at Baden, but since the war he has exchanged Baden for
Carlsbad--whether or not on account of sympathy with France, and hence
hatred of the peacefully-disposed nation which it is pleased to consider
its deadly enemy, I do not know. It might well be, for he feels almost
as strongly as a Frenchman as he does as a Russian, and I met no one in
France who was so enthusiastic a republican as he. The present French
Republic (which he insists is fundamentally and thoroughly different
from the Republics of '93 and '48, as well as from that of the United
States) seems to be his ideal government. In a century, he says, there
won't be a king in Europe, except perhaps in England, and there he will
be nothing but a pageant--a political mummy shown to the populace at so
much a head.

In writing of the great Russian novelist it naturally suggests itself to
say a word upon Madame Émile Durand, or "Henri Gréville," who has lately
achieved so universal a reputation. One of her slightest efforts has
just been crowned by the Academy, and one or more of her tales has been
translated into all the tongues of Europe, including Dutch and Spanish.
The Durands, who are childless, reside in a little _pavillon_, or house
with garden behind the main structure which fronts the street, in the
not very inviting region of Montmartre. Madame Gréville is a
comfortable-looking lady of thirty-five with the air of forty, and is a
most agreeable talker. In her varied experience she has seen a good deal
of the up and downs of life, but has now settled down, as she told me,
"to making her three novels a year." I hardly think she will ever again
reach the level of the _Expiation de Savéli_. Her husband is the Paris
correspondent of a St. Petersburg paper, and incidentally a painter.

No sketch of French literary society, however short, should omit mention
of that most famous of all periodicals, the _Revue des Deux Mondes_. It
is forty-eight years old, and during its long life it has seen perhaps a
hundred rivals rise and fall, while it has itself gone on constantly
increasing in importance, so that it is now become an institution, like
the Academy or the Comédie Française. Its offices are located in a fine
old hôtel not far from the noble faubourg, where M. Charles Buloz (son
of the founder of the _Revue_) and his wife give during the winter
fortnightly receptions to the contributors and their friends, as well as
literary dinner-parties which form, I suppose, the most catholic
reunions in Paris; and for the excellent reason that all opinions except
blatant radicalism and the dogmatic idiocy of Bishop Dupanloup and his
friends are represented by its contributors. By admitting him to its
columns the _Revue_ gives a French author a stamp of approval which
suffices to make him known and respected (at least as regards talent) in
all quarters of the globe. As was the late, so is the present, manager
fully conscious of his power, and feels as independent with regard to
his authors as does the director of the Théâtre Français toward his. A
short time since the most famous of those literary Frenchmen who are not
novelists, and a man who rarely writes for periodical publications, sent
an important contribution to the _Revue_, but neither the name of the
author nor the fact that the contribution was of a character to attract
great attention among the public induced M. Buloz to print what seemed
to him, from a literary point of view, unworthy of a place in the
columns of this journal. The pecuniary rewards of writing for the latter
are but slight: a writer receives nothing at all for his first article,
and afterward the prices vary--not in proportion to the merit of the
production, but in relation to the reputation of the author. Henri
Gréville, for instance, obtained for her _L'Expiation de Savéli_--a
novel which, I am inclined to think, will not only always remain her
masterpiece, but will ever be considered a most perfect work of art--but
one hundred and fifty dollars; and the ordinary price for articles upon
historical or philosophical or art topics is but one dollar to two
dollars per page. It is odd, too, considering the artistic eye and touch
possessed by Frenchmen, and their sensitiveness in regard to such
matters, that the _Revue_, in spite of its large circulation and high
subscription-price, is the worst printed magazine in the world. To
American readers, who have doubtless noticed with pleasure the attention
paid of late years by the _Revue_ to American literature, it will
perhaps be interesting to learn that "Thomas Bentzon," who has
discovered for the French public so many of our authors, is a Madame
Blanc. She was described to me as a woman of great intelligence and the
highest character, the daughter of an old but poor noble family, and
early married to a wealthy banker. This person not proving to be a model
husband, his wife sought a separation; and the fault being obviously on
his side, he was ordered by the court to make Madame Blanc a handsome
allowance. She, however, refused to take the money of a man whom she
could not respect, and having consented to accept only the small annual
sum necessary for their child's education, set bravely but quietly to
work to earn her own living--a task in which she has slowly succeeded.

    ARTHUR VENNER.


HIS GREAT DEED.


In all the old Norse legends we are sure to find the inevitable three
brothers, to the youngest of whom, Grimmel, fall all the adventures, the
dealings with the Devil, and the pot of yellow gold at the end.

Not many years ago there lived in a lonely hut on Mount Mitchell in
North Carolina this identical Grimmel and his brothers. Their father,
John Boyer, was a hunter. When he died the two elder sons, Richard and
Hugh, remained with their mother, farmed a sterile tract on the Black
Mountains and trapped bears and wolves through the great southern ranges
of the Appalachian chain. Twice in the year they came down to the hamlet
at Gray Eagle to exchange their peltry for such goods as they needed.
They were, in short, Grimmel's elder brothers, who sat satisfied in the
chimney-corner while giants, devils and trolls were carousing without.
They wore the cloth which their mother had spun, woven and made up for
them. They shot with their father's rifle, ate the same corn-dodgers,
nodded over the same Bible every evening, and drank plenty of whiskey
from the same secret still back in the gorge. It had never occurred to
them to go down into the world, to learn a trade or profession or to
make money. Why should they? Money was of very little use. They probably
did not handle twenty dollars in the year, yet they had all they wanted.

They were big and slow-moving and serious as the tame bear which lay
before the fire. At forty they always spoke of the house and farm as "my
mother's, Mistress Boyer's," and meekly obeyed the old woman as she
ordered them about with a sharp tongue. The instinct of kinship was as
strong in them as in the old Jews. They would strike a bee-line for each
other through the trackless wilderness when miles apart. This happened
often.

"How do I know where to find Richard?" said Hugh. "I don't know how I
know. Something in my bones tells me."

I think that when the youngest brother, Peter, left the mountains these
older men suffered a kind of physical loss ever after, as if an arm or a
leg had been taken from them. Peter was somewhere out in the world,
living by his wits. God had given him precisely the same kind of wits as
his brothers, but with a single added drop of uneasy leaven. He tumbled
out of his cradle when he was a baby to see what lay beyond. He was
thin, wizened, restless as a strange beast in a cage, though his
brothers tirelessly puzzled their slow brains to soothe and satisfy him.
When he was a boy he was wretched because he was not taken down into the
valley or to far-off towns. His brothers were puzzled, dismayed.

"It is the bird in the bush he wants," said his shrewd old mother. "The
bird in the bush: he will never get it in his hand."

When he was a boy of ten a party of geologists stopped at the log hut.
There was much talk among them of the cities, of science and of
politics. Peter Boyer thought he had found his bird in the bush.

"I must have an education, and a good one, mother," he said.

He was sent to Raleigh to school. Reports came home that no such boy had
ever been taught there. His fellow-students prophesied that Carolina
would some day be proud of her gifted son. Up in the mountains the two
brothers ploughed, trapped, dug ginseng and climbed the peaks for balsam
with hot, steady zeal to earn the little money which was needed to pay
for his schooling. The bare cabin grew barer, mother and brothers went
hungry many a day, but the pittance was always saved and sent to him.

The boy came home in vacations with his moustache, his gorgeous
scarf-pin and his quick, eager talk: he brought, too, piles of gilded
prize-books, and once a silver medal. He did not care much for books or
medal, but Richard wrapped each one carefully in paper and packed them
in the big chest, and when the boy was gone the two broad-shouldered men
would take them out at night and turn them over, and sometimes spell out
a page, with a grave awe and delight.

Presently, the lad sent back their money: he was pushing his own
way--into college, into the University of Virginia, finally--great and
culminating triumph!--into the newspapers. Poems (after Poe, as a matter
of course), political diatribes in Johnsonese periods in _De Bow's
Review_, essays, criticisms,--nothing came amiss to him.

The young man's mind was of that flabby but fidgety kind which throws
off ideas as a crab its shells, one after another--useless, imperfect
moulds of itself. He came home to the mountain-hut in the first flush
and triumph of authorship, bringing every newspaper-clipping in his
pocket-book wherein a mention of his name had appeared. Richard, Hugh
and his mother were never tired of hearing nor he of reading them. The
poems and the clippings were left to be stored away--sacred relics--with
the prize-books and medals. Peter set off to the West.

"The bird in the bush is always out of sight with Peter," said his
mother, whose hair was growing white and her voice feeble. He became a
lawyer, a Congressman. When he made his first speech (on the snags in
the Missouri River) he ran down to Carolina with a copy of it in _The
Congressional Globe_. He had grown portly and red-faced, and talked in a
strident voice. All the towns on his route received him as a conquering
hero. "The Honorable Peter M. Boyer arrived last night," said the
papers, "and received a magnificent public dinner at the ---- Hotel. The
distinguished Senator, one of the favorite sons of the Old North State,
is on his way to visit his parents at their summer retreat in Buncombe
county."

The distinguished and pompous Senator, at home in the hut, walked up
and down with uneasy strides and anxious wandering eyes, just as he had
done when a thin cub of a boy. The Senate Chamber evidently was but as
narrow a cage for this alien beast as the life of a hunter had been.

"I'm not satisfied," he told Hugh and Richard. "Politics are not the
right groove for me. But I'll find it. I know that I have an intellect
different from that of the ordinary man. You can't compare pure gold and
brass, can you? Well, I've tested those fellows at Washington, and they
are brass: they're pot-metal, sir! My brain," tapping his forehead,
"will tell some day on the world: I'll make my mark. I'll hit the bull's
eye yet."

The Senator went back to Iowa. He was not returned for the next term. In
a month or two his mother received a letter from him dated at London.
"When I succeed," he said, "I will come back to you. I have given up
politics and taken to literature. Literature is the only career in which
my brain can reach its full development: all others compress and
constrain me. I shall seek in the Old World for the recognition which
the New did not yield me." All this was Greek to his mother and her
sons, but they knew that it meant that he was gone.

He never came back.

In two years the Honorable Peter was as extinct, so far as the American
Congress, newspapers and people were concerned, as any saurian dead
before the Flood. His mother died. Peter had always been an alien to
her, a perpetual disquiet. But when he was gone the thorn was out of her
flesh. She talked and thought of him as in his babyhood, and left him
her blessing at the last. As year after year crept by, the twin-brothers
ceased to talk of him. But it was because they had begun to think of him
with that strained, tense attention with which we sit and listen for the
steps of one who long delays his coming, and who may be dead by the way.

He might come back any day, with a crown of glory on his head. Or--was
he dead? So many ships went down in that dim outer world--so many
cities were burned; legions of men were swept away in battle; in short,
the millions of graves which dotted the earth's surface only meant to
these Boyers the one possible grave where he might lie. The gray-headed
old men went stealthily alone at night sometimes to the big chest and
turned over again the poems and essays yellow now with age, and the
gilded prize-books. But they never spoke to each other of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

About eighty miles from Black Mountains, in a hamlet on the Nantahela
range, the whereabouts of Peter Boyer was discussed one July day as a
subject of more practical interest. All the men in Sevier--a dozen, all
told--were gathered as usual under the great oak which stood by the pump
in the middle of the square. It was a grassy, weedy square: one or two
cows lay chewing the cud on it, as they did all day long. Why not? There
was never enough noise in the little street which ran round its four
sides to disturb them. In the evening the women went out and milked them
just where they were: occasionally, a meditative sow with her litter, or
a slouching boy, passed them; or a canvas-covered wagon drawn by a steer
would lumber slowly along, stop, and a woman get out of it with a bag of
ginseng or angelica to barter for sugar and shoes; or a farmer in
butternut homespun would jog up the street on his mule, his gun and bag
of rations strapped behind, on his way to the higher peaks to salt his
wild cattle; or a party of Cherokees from Qualla would come in with
baskets to sell; or Seth Keen, the dwarf hunter, would bring in a roll
of wolf-skins, and stay to tell his old stories over for the hundredth
time. But these were rare events: on ordinary days the cows dozed
undisturbed in the sleepy, foggy air, and the men lounged on the trough
by the pump, and smoked from morning until bed-time, and cracked jokes
on each other, and told marvellous stories of the war and its ravages.

"It giv' Sevier a staggerin' blow, gentlemen," old Judge Scroope would
say: "we'll never recover from it. I tell you, Jefferson Davis an'
Lincoln wur men the country hed no use for. Nor the Almighty neyther.
That's my cool jedgment, now that we are out of the fracas. Look at the
ruin them men wrought around you!"

And his audience would look around them, and shift their legs, and shake
their heads with solemn conviction, though they knew, and he knew that
they knew, that since North Carolina began to exist the decrepit frame
houses yonder had turned the same pauper faces to the square in Sevier,
and that their grandfathers in homespun had lounged just as they did on
this very broken trough, and watched their lean cows chew the cud, and
leisurely abused the Federalists for the ruin of the country. Twice a
year the judge and Lawyer Grayson rode down to court and crossed the old
track of Sherman and his raiders, and coming back would tell of levelled
fences and burned barns. For thirteen years they had gone down, and the
barns and fences yet lay as Sherman left them, as unchanged as the
gneiss rocks about them.

On this day, however, they had a new subject to discuss. The
sheepskin-covered chair which sat by the pump day and night the year
round, ready for the judge, had been empty for two weeks. The old man
had pneumonia, and was on his deathbed. Every morning the doctor brought
a full account of his latest symptoms, and the crowd drearily discussed
them during the rest of the day over interminable melancholy games of
backgammon.

On this morning Grayson the lawyer had been sent for.

"The old gentleman's going to make his will," said the doctor, taking a
seat.

The words were like a chilly wind from the grave. The gossips of Sevier
were, after all, a simple affectionate folk. They had grown together
like the mossy logs of their houses: when one was torn away, it left a
gap and a dull, abiding sense of loss for years. There was a long
silence.

"De jedge am bin a class-leader fohty year," said at last old Primus the
barber in the background, shaking his woolly poll.

Nobody answered. The squire noiselessly laid down the dice and shut the
backgammon-board. Major Fetridge rose with a groan: "I'll go over and
get a glass of somethin'. Won't some gentleman join me?"

Nobody joined him. The major's red head and lean little legs moved
unsteadily over the square.

"Sam Fetridge hes hed enough a'ready," said the squire. "He'll follow
the jedge, and that hot foot, ef he don't pull up. D'ye think Dave
Cabarreux will come in for all the Scroope proputty, doc?"

"I don't know. I--don't--know," pulling his beard meditatively. "It'll
be left in a lump: that much the jedge told me himself. 'I'll not part
the proputty,' he says, 'but I'll leave it whar it'll keep up the
standin' of the family.' The old man always hed his sheer of pride in
the Scroopes, you know."

"Dave Cabarreux is his cousin once removed," interrupted Bright the
landlord, who had sauntered back with the major, and engineered that
unsteady worthy to a place on the trough. "He hes no other kin than
Dave, that I know of. David's as genteel a young man as walks Sevier
streets."

"He's a damned cub!" The major staggered to his feet, gesticulating
angrily with his trembling hands.

"Tut, tut, Sam! sit down," said the squire, pulling at his coat-tail.
"You begrudge Dave his pretty little sweetheart. I understand: I've
watched you. Why, Fetridge, you're old enough to be her father, you
moon-calf!"

Sam stiffened his shaky body into a drunken dignity: "Squire, you can
talk of me as you choose: every scrag-end of humanity kin take liberties
with my name now, and does it. But the pump is no place to mention that
lady, nor any lady, sir."

"No, it's not: that's a fact, Sam. I beg her pardon. But Primus tells
me, gentlemen, that the jedge has been talkin' incessant of his nephew
Boyer. Who's Boyer?"

"I've heerd the jedge talk of him frequent, sittin' on that very cheer,"
said Byloe the carpenter. "He's his grand-nephew. Peter Marmyduke Boyer
is the full name. Governor of Iowy. The jedge has told me he was one of
the first men of the present century. He'd all the genius of the Scroope
family. Fact is, I used to think he was a straw man the jedge had made
expressly to hang the honors of the family on."

"What's the jedge callin' on him now for?" said the major.

The doctor glanced around cautiously to the circle of attentive faces,
the silent street beyond, the houses that fenced them in: "It's my
opinion--in strict confidence, gentlemen," lowering his voice: the faces
gathered more closely, Sam's, pimpled and eager, the nearest--"it's my
opinion that the jedge means to cut off Dave without a shilling, and
leave the proputty to this Honorable Peter M. Boyer. But what's the
difference?" he continued after waiting a moment to allow the sensation
produced by his words to subside. "This man Boyer, they tell me, has not
been heard of for years. He didn't even turn up in the war. Undoubtedly,
he's dead."

Major Fetridge sank back against the pump with a drunken chuckle: "Dave
Cabarreux thinks that he's dead, hey? Boyer's not the sort of man to die
as long as a good thing like this is in the dice. Why, Boyer's young,
sir. He's got more brains and experience and vitality than all the
damned wooden Cabarreuxes in a lump."

Byloe squirted tobacco-juice skilfully into the puddle between his feet,
and winked at the squire. "It would go dead ag'in' your chances down at
Calhoun's, major, if Dave gets that proputty," he said gravely. "Old
Tony Calhoun is a full-blood Yankee. He'll never give his daughter to a
man with lean pockets."

The major pulled himself up, half sobered as if by a dash of cold water.
"And what has Cabarreux to make him fit for her?" he demanded shrilly.
"Neither money nor brains. No one of the name ever had energy to earn
salt to his bread. Cabarreux? Bah-h! Boyer is a man! Why, gentlemen, if
Peter Marmaduke Boyer were to appear in Sevier, it would be like the
coming of the eagle among the magpies."

"Sam, you're drunk," said Byloe. "What d'ye know about the man?"

"Know Boyer?" He laughed. The major had a peculiar laugh, which always
put the crowd about the pump in a good-humor--a shrill, pleasant cackle
of exultation. "Why, the whole country knows Boyer. But, if you must
know it, he was a personal friend of mine. He had a great intellect--a
gi-gantic intellect," sweeping the horizon with his arm. "He represented
one of the great Western States in the Senate, Mr. Byloe: ten years ago
he was known through the length and breadth of the Union as North
Carolina's favorite son. To have asked who was Peter M. Boyer then would
have argued yourself unknown."

"Sam's right," said the squire, nodding. "Now, that you speak of it, I
remember him perfectly well. He had a great reputation as a politician.
The Raleigh _Herald_ used to publish his speeches _in extenso_. Queer he
took no part in the war!"

The major chuckled again, delighted: "He did, sir! he did! Beauregard
had no braver officer. To see that man lead his command into the teeth
of the Yankees was a spectacle nobody who saw it can ever forget." The
little man stood up as he talked, gesticulating fiercely as if in the
presence of the foe, his linen coat flapping about his legs, his white
hat set jauntily on one side. "Ha! those were pleasant days, squire,"
wiping his forehead in a glow of triumph. "They brought men up to their
proper level! Boyer was never promoted, though. He was too modest to
push himself, and war was hardly the right groove for him, after all."

"So this great man was a personal friend of yours, Sam?" asked Byloe
with another wink and shrug at the crowd.

The major nodded: "Yes. I wasn't always a drunken loafer in Sevier, nor
Ike Byloe's companion," he said quietly.

There was a laugh of applause. The little man, with all his vaporing,
his windy boasts, his general utter worthlessness, had at bottom a grain
of something genuine which keen Ike Byloe lacked.

"What sort of looking man was this Boyer, Sam?" asked the doctor. "I
confess I have a curiosity about the jedge's heir."

"Oh, a fine-looking fellow--every inch a man," said the major
carelessly. "Voice orotund, magnetic. Easy manners. Good figure;" and he
walked up and down complacently, slapping his own shrunk shank. There
had been a well-shaped leg inside of the ragged linen trousers once, and
the conscious merit which infused every atom of his lean little body
still culminated in his strut.

The sun was setting behind the Balsam Range, and threw a cheerful glow
over the oak and the pump and the little group, when a loose-jointed
figure came across the fields.

"Hyar's Grayson!--Well, colonel, how is he?"

"It's all over, gentlemen. The jedge is gone."

There was a sudden silence. The men asked no questions, as Northern
gossips would have done. Presently, they got up one by one, with a brief
word or two, and went quietly away to their own houses to close them up,
and to tell madam. The Carolinian "madam" may be ugly and shabby and
silly, but she is usually first in her husband's mind all day.

Nobody was left under the oak but Grayson, the major and Byloe, who was
resolved to solve the mystery of the will.

"I s'pose the jedge attended to his earthly affairs before he went off,
Colonel Grayson?" he said.

Grayson nodded.

"Will witnessed, signed--all correct?"

"Yes."

Byloe gave a dolorous cough: "Folks are talkin' a good deal about Dave
Cabarreux as the heir. Dave's the next of kin."

Grayson pushed the ashes into his pipe in imperturbable silence.

"_I_ was suggestin' that Boyer had a chance--Governor Boyer of Iowy: Sam
hyar'd prefer him. Ef Dave gits the proputty, he'll take somethin' else
that Dave's set his heart on, eh?" chuckling. "Sam knows Boyer."

The lawyer looked up quickly. He said nothing, but Byloe noted the
glance. "Boyer is the man!" he thought, and hurried off to tell the
news.

When he was gone Mr. Grayson turned to the major: "Do you really know
this Boyer, Fetridge? Could you find him if he was wanted?"

Sam did not answer immediately. He was looking thoughtfully at the
ground, his palms resting on his knees. He too supposed that Boyer was
the heir, and the news had driven all the braggadocio and drunken fire
out of him. What a weak imitation of a man he was, any how! Grayson
thought, looking at him curiously, and wondering what had moved the
fellow so strangely. Was it possible that he hoped to marry Calhoun's
little girl if Dave lost this money?

The major got up at last, and put on his hat. "If Peter Boyer is
wanted--that is, if the money is really left to him--I can produce the
man, Grayson," he said, and walked slowly away, his head bent and his
hands clasped behind him. The stagey strut was quite gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day after the judge was buried Mr. Calhoun came down in the buggy
from the farm to Sevier, Isabel driving. "I have a new mule in harness,"
he explained to the squire, "and I had to bring Bel to manage him. It's
bad training to use the whip, and he has the temper of the devil. He's
beyond me, but Bel has her ways of making him go."

The old squire, looking up at her, his hat in his hand, said gallantly
there was nothing in Sevier which Miss Isabel couldn't make go; at which
the little girl laughed, and put her foot in his offered hand to jump
down from the buggy. There did not seem to be a large amount of
propelling power in her. She had a childish-looking figure, and went
shyly into the store, blushing nervously as she passed the men outside.
They all stood up and took off their hats, though they did that when any
woman passed; but one after another, from Colonel Grayson to old Primus,
contrived afterward to throw himself in her way, to give her a good-day
respectfully, and have a private glimpse of the beaming face under the
broad-brimmed brown hat. As soon, too, as it was noised about that
Calhoun's wagon was in town the women all came out to find Isabel.
Sevier was dismal enough after the funeral, and needed heartening, and,
as Byloe said, "That young woman hed spirit enough for all Haywood
county." Isabel was an intimate friend of every woman in town. Sue
Grayson hurried her in to read her last love-letter, and Mother Byloe
consulted her about her cherry jam. It was a pity, they thought, that
she had no beauty--there was always a lamentation on that point when she
was gone--and the men agreed that she lacked flesh; but Major Fetridge,
who had known something of the world outside of Sevier in his day, used
to follow her far off to watch her clear, sparkling face. However drunk
he might be, it sobered him. To-day, as she stood among the village
women, whose charms had ripened on the fried meat and black coffee on
which they had been fed since babyhood, she reminded him of a fine proof
engraving among cheap chromos.

How it was that the little Pennsylvanian moved the mules and sluggish
Sevier to life even the major did not know, but it was a fact that she
always left the village more awake and happier than she found it. It was
as if one had sung a stirring song in the market-place.

As she drove away to-day the squire looked after her admiringly. "I
heard you were going to send her North, Mr. Calhoun?" he said to the
paunchy, brisk little man beside him.

"Yes, yes," pulling his black moustache. "Fact is, this is no place for
Isabel, squire. She has no mother: I have to think for the child. She
has kinsfolk in New England, and I'll send her there for a year or two.
To tell you the truth, I can't see her mated with one of these loggish
young ploughmen about Sevier."

"You mean Cabarreux?" said the squire with a significant nod.

"Yes, I mean Cabarreux. 'Twon't do, squire. I've forbidden her to see
him again. Well, what d'ye think of sending her away? I meant to ask
your advice about it."

The squire was more intimate with Mr. Calhoun than any of the other men
in Sevier; but it was the Northerner's practice to take counsel with
them all concerning his endless schemes: he was a friendly, social
fellow, and liked to hear himself explain his plans--just the man to
buttonhole Charon in his boat and get a useful hint or two from him
about the other side. The people of Sevier liked Calhoun, but were a
little afraid of him. His education and mind, they knew, were no better
than theirs; his manners were not as good; but a man who, with but a
hundred dollars in his pocket, could camp down in the woods and evolve
out of the bare earth a farm, a mill, a mica-mine, a house with comforts
and luxuries such as Sevier had never dreamed of, had a quality which
stunned and awed them. A man may know how common are the iron and steel
and coal that go to make up a steam-engine, but none the less does the
mysterious force inside make him stand out of the way.

The squire and Mr. Calhoun sauntered down the street. "I'll not deny,"
said the old man, meditatively, "that Cabarreux has no Northern 'go' in
him. But Dave's a good-natured fellow. He fought like the devil thar in
the Wilderness, and him but sixteen!"

"Yes, and has done nothing since but think of it. Oh, I've no objections
to Carbarreux except that he's of no account: he'll never earn his
bread. I can't see my girl starve."

"They'd be a fine-looking couple," persisted the squire, whose heart
leaned toward the young people. "Dave stands a good chance for the
jedge's property, too. We'll know to-night: the will's to be read this
afternoon."

Mr. Calhoun stopped: "I'll acknowledge, squire, that would make a
difference--that would undoubtedly make a difference. I'm a practical
man. Cabarreux with a steady income would be a dead weight which Bel
might manage to shove along through the world; but Cabarreux with
nothing is a millstone which would grind her to powder. I'd made up my
mind to send her away next week. But if you think--"

"Stay in town until we hear. The will's to be read to-night. Come and
dine with me: the madam has corned beef and succotash to-day."

       *       *       *       *       *

Isabel drove briskly along the mountain-road. When she came to the forks
she stopped and hesitated: either way would take her home--one in half
an hour, the other after a long circuit among the hills. She turned the
mule's head into the longer road, a red flush rising suddenly on her
delicate neck and face. For an hour the narrow path climbed the
mountain-side, then dipped abruptly into the valley. Isabel looked
eagerly down the gorge; her breath came quickly; she began to sing
softly to herself. Yet there was nothing in sight but a little clearing
in the vast stretch of sombre, uninhabited forest, a vacant log house, a
half-built barn.

This was the place which Dave Cabarreux's father had given him years
ago, and which she had heard he was going to work next spring. He would
be drudging here while she was in the North, thinking of her as he
ploughed: she knew that. But she would be gone for ever. It would be all
over then. Isabel stopped the mule, and sat with her hands clasped on
her knees, looking at the meadow and the desolate closed house. It was
nobly done in David to give himself up to hard work. Her heart beat as
high with pride as if he had been the first man who ever undertook at a
late day to earn his living. She had heard in town that he had been down
looking at the place the day before. Perhaps he had walked over that
very meadow. She leaned forward: the ground was soft: surely there were
the marks of footsteps. Only yesterday! Isabel glanced quickly
around--at the lonely road, the mighty hills that shut her in, swathed
in forest, shouldering the clouds, the gray mist creeping through the
gorge. An eagle swept across the opening overhead, frogs croaked in the
swamp yonder: there were no other living things to see her. She sprang
from the wagon, ran across the meadow, put her foot in the deep print:
her bosom heaved, the tears came to her eyes. Isabel was not a
sentimental, silly girl, but a shrewd, hard-working woman. She had not
seen her lover for a long time, and she thought it would be years before
she would see him again.

She walked down to the river--sat down under a walnut tree. Surely she
might rest there a minute. She would never see David's home again.

A tall, dark man gathered himself up from among the deep fern, watching
her breathlessly. Was it possible that she cared to walk over the land
because it was _his_ land? No: she was too cold-blooded a little thing
for that.

"Miss Isabel!"

She sprang to her feet. It was he! Then she spoke coolly, precisely as
if they had met on the street in Sevier: "How did you come here, Mr.
Cabarreux? I thought there was nobody but myself in this valley."

Young Cabarreux stood leaning over her, his hat in his hand: "The truth
is, I was asleep by the branch thar. I came out to look into the quality
of the soil this mornin', but I took a rest instead: I'll have enough of
work hyar next year."

"Yes, you will," with a little sigh, and a quick glance of pity at the
well-knit, handsome figure.

Cabarreux colored high and hesitated: "You--you knew it was my land,
then, Miss Isabel? When you stopped?" He bent so close that she could
feel his breath stir her hair. What could she say? She had never let him
know that she cared for him so much as that. She gave a frightened
glance at the face above her, the mellow olive complexion, the laughing
mouth, the dark, liquid eyes. It seemed to her that one of the early
gods might have had such a face.

"I had heard--I thought you had a farm in this valley," she faltered,
moving away.

Cabarreux did not press the question: he followed her, moving the
branches aside with patient courtesy. He was a sincere man, and he
loved the girl with all his strength. _Did_ she care for him? He would
know now.

He stopped, clearing the dead leaves from a mossy log. "Will you sit
down?" he said with a certain stately grace which even his baggy,
homespun clothes and torn hat did not make absurd. "It _is_ my land, and
it would seem always different to me if you'd rest on it for a minute,
Miss Isabel."

Isabel sat down. The color glowed hot in her face, and her lips moved
unsteadily as she tried to talk. "The laurel blooms late in this gorge,"
she said. "Look at the bush by the rock."

But Cabarreux did not look at the laurel: he did not know what she said.
He stood immovable before her, his sultry eyes lazily reading her face.
There was deep quiet in the little valley, except when a fish leaped in
the water beside them or the call of a mocking-bird rang through the
woods. They had never before, as it happened, been quite alone together.
Now this great silence and solitude shut them in.

He stood erect at last with a long breath. "There is somethin' I've
wished to say to you for a long time," he began in his leisurely drawl.

She stood up pale and fluttering. If she were the man! If she could
speak! She would compel love, she would force confession by sheer
strength of words. But Cabarreux stood deferential, indolent. "I must go
home: it is late," she said, hurrying across the field.

"One moment, Miss Isabel. This will be my home," stopping by the porch
of the little house. "If you would only look at it or walk through it
once--just once! It will be something for me to remember--when you are
gone."

When she was gone? This was the last time. She went hesitatingly up on
to the porch, and stood in the empty room by the bare hearth, Cabarreux
beside her. Once or twice he tried to speak, but the words died on his
lips: when he gave her his hand as she went down the steps his fingers
were icy cold and trembled. Perhaps she guessed the pain that the man
felt at the time, and was quite willing that he should feel it. She
said coolly as they walked through the woods to the road, "It's quite a
pretty little house, and this is very good soil indeed. I shall think of
you as very comfortable here, Mr. Cabarreux, when I am in the North."

"When you are in the North? Great God! do you know what you are sayin'?
Stay! you shall hear me! It's a poor hovel--I know how wretched it looks
in your Northern eyes--but as I lay there this morning I was
plannin'--plannin' how to make a palace of it for you--for you. Why, I'd
work like a slave--"

He stopped short. Dave Cabarreux had never done an honest stroke of work
in his life. Nothing but planning. He remembered that in this imminent
moment, and laughed. "Miss Isabel, I've been a good-for-nothing dog:
that's the truth. Everybody knows it: you know it. But there's a woman
that I love who could put a new soul into my body. If she would."

They had halted by the fence now, and Isabel's hand was on the mossy
rail. He put his own over it. "If she would? Isabel, do you care for
me--at all?"

She looked up at the dark face full of tenderness and power. It seemed
as if the gods were coming very close to her indeed. "Yes, I care for
you," she said gently. "But I must go home--I must have time--I will not
hear more to-day."

But she waited to hear more. He only stooped and reverently kissed her
lips without a word. His brain reeled as it had done when he was going
into battle in the Wilderness. He had never worked, but he would--to win
her! He had not borne himself so badly in that other fight.

He lifted her into the buggy and walked beside her, his hand on the
reins, as the mule crept drowsily along the five miles between the
valley and the Calhoun farm. He spoke little. He was in a rapturous
dream, in which the warm sunlight, the woods, the soft fingers which he
touched now and then, bore a part.

Isabel talked or sang softly to herself, as she always did when she was
happy. Once he heard her say, "I should try oats in that meadow, if I
were you. And I should not be surprised if corundum could be found in
those rocks back of the house."

Oats and corundum?

Tears of vexation stood in her eyes as he looked at her perplexed. "It
is the farm I mean. You don't seem to have heard me. My father is so
practical! Indeed, indeed, it is only by hard work that you can gain his
consent."

"Oh, I understand perfectly," gazing dreamily into her eyes. "I shall go
to work upon that place: I shall tear it all up--next spring." He walked
on beside her. The golden light deepened in the west; the air was full
of delicious resinous odors from the pine forest; now and then he
pressed his lips to the warm, rose-tinted hand. Surely, he thought, this
divine draught which they had just begun to taste was not as sweet to
her as he found it, or she would not care to talk of oats and corundum.

When he left her he sauntered leisurely up the mountain wrapt in a
delirious ecstasy. Suddenly he quickened his steps: "I must go and hear
Uncle Scroope's will. A chance of something thar. No need of grubbing
out my life then in that old sheep-pasture." But he soon slackened his
pace again, thinking with a glow of exultation how true and tender he
would be to his love--how he could fight for her if need be. He wished
there were some foes to fight. No doubt if there had been, Dave would
have done his devoir, for he was as gallant a gentleman as any Sidney of
them all.

Isabel sat on the porch alone that evening. The women, with the men,
were at work ploughing corn on the upland, and her father would not
return from Sevier until late. The sun was going down, throwing the
shadow of a great peak of the Balsam Range over the house and the neat
farm with its Pennsylvania barn and fences. High up on the mountain
heaps of mica outside of the gaping black mouth of a deserted mine
glistened like silver.

A queer little figure was coming up the lonely road. Isabel saw it, and
laughed. Nobody could mistake the consequential strut, the flapping
linen suit, the white hat with its band of crape. But Isabel was in a
happy, tender mood toward all the world to-night; and she had always
been gentle with the poor little major. She only, of all the people in
Sevier, saw beneath the drunken braggart a man who had been sorely
worsted, and that perhaps not fairly, in the long fight. He was quite
sober this evening. But as she rose to meet him she saw signs of an odd
change in him. The linen clothes were scrupulously clean, costly ruby
buttons blazed in his shirt-front, on his fore finger was a curious
antique ring never seen there before: the usual defiant jauntiness of
the man had given way to a more significant self-assertion, as if he had
at last found secure ground beneath his feet.

"My father is not at home, Major Fetridge: I am sorry," said Isabel,
offering him a chair.

But he remained standing, leaning airily against a pillar, looking down
at her. "_I_ am not sorry, Miss Calhoun. It was you that I came to see,"
he said pointedly. A nervous smile showed his teeth; his pale blue eyes
shone: the little man was, she saw, aflame with some secret exultation
as with wine.

"I fancy that you bring me good news, major?" said Isabel, humoring his
mood.

"News? Yes, I bring you news. The will is read--Judge Scroope's will."

"Who is the heir?"

"Peter Marmaduke Boyer, if he is alive. If he is dead, young Cabarreux."

Isabel made no reply for a moment: the work she held fell from her hand.
She had not known of this chance. If David Cabarreux were the heir he
would have every virtue in her father's eyes.

"I hope," she said at last, taking up her work again with a soft,
complacent little laugh, "Mr. Cabarreux may live long to enjoy his good
fortune."

"The fortune is not his," cried Sam excitedly. "You don't understand.
Boyer is the heir--the Honorable Peter M. Boyer. A man who stood in the
Senate of the United States, Miss Calhoun. A man who knows the
world--who will know how to give his wife place and power, and who will
have money now to buy both."

"I thought you said he was dead?"

"No. I--" He paused, grew suddenly pale, and went on hurriedly: "I know
the man. He is alive."

"Then--It does not matter. It is all just as it was before," said Isabel
with a proud smile. But, her thoughts going to her lover in his
disappointment, she almost forgot that the major was there until he
spoke again.

His altered tone startled her into attention. It was sharp with
repressed passion and pain. The poor sot was in earnest--more in
earnest, it seemed to her, even than Cabarreux had been when he had told
her that he loved her to-day. "Miss Calhoun, do you remember one day
three or four years ago, when I was knocked down in a drunken fight at
Sevier, and lay like a beast on the roadside?"

"Major Fetridge--"

"Hush! I must tell you: I never spoke to you about it before. You passed
by. You were a little thing then--the people in Sevier had left me there
like a dead dog--but you tried to rouse me, to take me home; and when
you could not do it, you spread your handkerchief over my face to hide
it. I have it yet. Look there! Such a scrap of a thing!" opening it out.

"Any girl would have done it. Why do you bring up this miserable story
now?" cried Isabel.

"Because on that day I swore before Almighty God that if ever I reached
my place in the world you should stand beside me. Oh!" pacing up and
down with a bitter laugh, "I wasn't always the drunken bummer Sam
Fetridge. I have within me great capabilities--even yet, yet. _You_ saw
that. You saw the man I might have been, and never was. Every word you
have ever spoken to me has showed me that you saw it."

The words and the uncontrollable excitement of the man had a singular
effect upon Isabel. Something in the voice, the words, came from a
strong soul in desperate strait--belonged to a man with intellect and
energy, for whom she could have near sympathy, a sense of alliance; but
before her eyes was only ridiculous Sam Fetridge, the butt of the
village, vaporing up and down.

"It is true," she said frankly, "that your life in Sevier has been
wretched enough. I thank God that you are going to change it. What can I
do to help you?"

"Don't you know? Don't you understand even yet?" The little man came up
before her and took both her hands in his: the tears stood in his
blinking eyes. Isabel looked into them steadily, and she did not take
her hands away. "You see it is a sort of crisis to-night with me, Miss
Calhoun. I've thought for a good while the game was played out for body
and soul. But there's one thing that could make a man of me again, and
to-night I feel as if I had some right to put out my hand and take it."

Her lips moved, but she said nothing.

"It is your love. I've loved you a long time. I'm old enough to be your
father, but I never loved any woman but you, Isabel."

"I thought you meant that," she said under her breath.

"It is not drunken Sam Fetridge that loves you. I have culture,
intelligence, energy. I am a better man at bottom than Dave Cabarreux,
and one nearer akin to yourself."

"I love him: I do not love you." She said it mechanically, her eyes
fixed on his with a frightened, curious look of recognition. It followed
him as he left her, half staggering across the porch: it was on him
still as he came back, and, leaning against the pillar, held out his
hand again to her.

She did not take it now.

"Miss Calhoun, there is not in the United States a man with more
ambition than I have, nor one with a better chance to take his place
among other men if--if I had your hand to hold. Give it to me: be my
wife. For God's sake, don't take the chance from me!"

"Major Fetridge," she said resolutely, but with a strange quaver in her
voice, "I love David Cabarreux. I never can marry you. If there is
anything else that I can do--"

"No, there is nothing you can do," he cried vehemently. "It would have
been better you had thought me a drunken brute like the others, and had
not recognized me. For you did recognize me, you know."

He turned without another word, and walked down the hill with slouching
step and head bent. Isabel tried to think of him as the tippling major,
but it seemed as if she had talked to another man.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Calhoun met Major Fetridge as he came home, but he was in an
ill-humor and did not speak to him. Late that evening Sam lay on a bench
by the pump. He had been drinking heavily, but he was sober. The squire
and Grayson were discussing the event of the day, the will.

"Calhoun is savagely disappointed," said the squire. "If Cabarreux had
had the money, he would have allowed him to marry Isabel, he says. Now
he means to send her North at once."

"Are you sure that this Boyer is alive?" said Grayson.

"Sam says so. He says he is going to bring the man up soon. Well, it's
all up with poor Cabarreux. I'm sorry for them. Bel is a good girl: she
ought to have been a happy wife."

The men went home to bed, leaving the major on the bench. He lay there
for an hour or more. The village had gone to sleep for the night. Dense
fogs wrapped the mountains that shut in the little hamlet, but overhead
the stars were shining in the near heaven.

He rose at last. He was ghastly pale, as if the blood had ceased to flow
in his body, but he stood up, drawing himself to his little height with
a sudden triumph. "Damned if I don't do it! the time has come for the
great deed!" He went with a swagger, as though he walked on air, down
the street.

Two days later young Cabarreux, sauntering leisurely, as usual, across
the square, met the squire and Sam Fetridge coming out of Grayson's
office. Both men were greatly excited, but Sam was silent, while the
squire talked volubly. He grasped Dave by the hand: "Cabarreux, I
congratulate you! You are a lucky dog! I was just saying to Fetridge
hyar, 'What is there that fellow hasn't got?'"

"What's the matter? what have I got?" said Cabarreux.

"The major here hes heerd about that fellow Boyer. He's dead."

"Is this true?" turning to Fetridge.

The major did not answer.

"Of course it's true," said the squire. "Sam has the letter in his
pocket.--Show it to him, Fetridge."

Sam looked up at the handsome, eager face for a full moment. "Boyer is
dead," he said.

"The proputty's yours, Cabarreux," cried the squire.--"By George, he's
off already! Straight for the Calhoun farm! Thar will be as fine a
couple as there is in Carolina. Come, let's drink their health, major.
I'll stand treat."

"Drink their health? No. Good-night. I'm going out of town a bit," he
replied, nodding shortly; and without another word of farewell he turned
his back on Sevier for ever.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no couple better beloved in all that mountain-region than David
Cabarreux and his wife. They live on the farm. Dave lies in the fern a
good part of every day smoking and planning, but as his wife is
satisfied that his dream is one of love for her, she is content:
besides, she wishes him to rest, being careful of his health and in
constant terror lest he may fall a victim to cerebral disease from
overwork, which is so common an ailment in the North. Oats and corundum
both came according to prophecy. The Cabarreux property is turning out
better than any other in that part of the State, both as to soil and
mineral products: there is some talk of a gold-mine, indeed, lately.

"And Bel," her father tells the squire, "will find out the latest
improvements in working it. Bel can bring the best profit out of any
ground, however poor. Even out of Cabarreux himself."

Mr. Calhoun is a little prejudiced still against his Southern
son-in-law.

       *       *       *       *       *

Peter Marmaduke Boyer is dead. He died at home, in the mountain-hut. The
way it came about was this: The two brothers sat alone one night by the
fire after a day's hunting. Suddenly Richard stood up. His practised ear
heard a step far off down the mountain. Then Hugh rose: they looked at
each other. "It is he," they said, and went out into the night to meet
him. Their watch of half a lifetime was over.

Their brother, when they brought him into the house, was very poor and
weak, and looked as if he were an older man than either of them. But he
was full of triumph and good cheer.

"Boys," he said, "I told you I would not come back to you until I had
done a great deed. I have done it."

He never told them what it was, and they were contented with knowing
that he had taken rank above all other men down in the great world
yonder.

He lived for more than a year. It was a very happy year. The brothers
had waited long for it. They listened from morning until night to his
boastful little stories with undoubting faith and pleasure. As for their
hero, he felt that he had made his mark: he had his circle of admirers
and limitless applause: what could life give him more?

The little man wasted away gradually. Just at the last he looked up with
an assuring nod to Richard and Hugh: "You'll not be long behind me,
boys. But I'll be there before: I'll straighten matters a bit for you."
And so he went out with an airy swagger into the other world.

     REBECCA HARDING DAVIS.


A DAY AT TANTAH.


"Tantah, a town of Lower Egypt, in the Delta province and 5 miles S. W.
of Menoof, on the Damietta branch of the Nile. It has a government
school."

This, and nothing more, from the _Gazetteer_. It does not promise much,
and yet Tantah is an important place, and, in spite of the _Gazetteer_,
is _not_ on the Damietta branch, but in the very heart of the Delta,
among the smaller water-courses. On this account it is not often visited
by travellers.

And first I must tell how I came to go to Tantah. In the year 1867 the
sloop-of-war ----, to which I was attached, was cruising in the Levant,
touching now and again at Canea or at Suda Bay to see how the Turks and
the Cretans were getting on with their war, or at Larneka to lend the
"influence of the flag" to that pleasant gentleman, General di Cesnola,
then in the full tide of archæological research in Cyprus. Sometimes we
were sipping fruity wine in Samos or eating "lumps of delight" and
smoking Latakia in Smyrna; and generally we represented the United
States in these uttermost parts with great dignity.

One day while at Smyrna we received orders by the mail-steamer to go at
once to Jaffa, and there afford assistance to certain "distressed
Americans" then sojourning on the Plain of Sharon. We already knew
something about them. These people were the remains--the _sediment_, so
to speak--of a certain "American colony" which had come out from New
England, principally from Maine and New Hampshire, a year or two before,
being the latest crusaders on record, and "bound to occupy the land" on
the way to the Holy City. They had some kind of queer, fanatical belief,
which had been fostered by their leader, one Adams, a long, raw-boned,
bearded Yankee, until they sold their farms or shops and tools of trade,
and placed the proceeds in a common stock under the charge of their
prophet and leader. This Adams was said to have formerly been an actor,
and then a Methodist minister in St. Louis, a Mormon (some people said)
after that; and finally he had invented a creed and founded a sect of
his own. It does not speak very well for the vaunted New England
shrewdness and intelligence that near two hundred and fifty persons of
all ages cast in their lot with him, or, rather, cast in their lots for
him. He chartered a vessel, freighted it with provisions, seed for
planting, agricultural implements and lumber for houses, and forthwith
sailed for the Holy Land at the head of his followers, intending to sow
and reap and prepare for the coming of the nations at the millennium,
supposed by the colonists to be near at hand. Such people are apt to be
useful so long as their enthusiasm lasts, whatever the motives which
prompt them. This even the Turks could see; and a firman had been
procured without difficulty, enabling them to erect their houses and to
lease and cultivate a certain portion of land, planting American
seed-wheat and maize where before grew only _gran turco_, barley,
sesamum and anise.

Thus it came about that there was to be seen the curious contrast of
staring Yankee frame houses and a regulation "meeting-house" peeping
over the orange-groves of Jaffa. Yankee-built farm-wagons passed along
the dusty cactus-hedged lanes in company with panniered donkeys and
laden camels, while Yankee forms and voices were daily seen and heard in
the filthy narrow streets of the old town itself. I wonder how much
these simple, homely people knew of Roman assaults and massacres or of
Napoleon's butcheries enacted on the very ground where their
hearthstones were laid? Not much, I fancy. And it was hard to get them
to talk freely or connectedly on any subject. In fact, their experience
had not been happy; and by this time the Plain of Sharon was dust and
ashes to them, and "their dolls were stuffed with sawdust." Some of the
younger members of the community did confess to a passing knowledge of
Jonah and the whale, and of the ships which brought the cedar of Lebanon
to the port where their lot was cast; but they seemed as much at sea as
Jonah was when the Crusades were mentioned. At any rate, here was this
American-born community ploughing this historic soil, most of the
members of which had never been fifty miles from home before they took
this great blind leap into the dark.

I never knew just how much Adams believed in himself and his mission. On
a previous visit, while all was still _couleur de rose_ with the colony,
I had asked him how he proposed to keep order among his flock and to
settle the disputes and difficulties which must inevitably arise. "Why,
sir," he answered, "we have no disputes; but should any arise, I, with
the elders, will sit and judge them in the gate, just as in Bible
times--just as was done right here twenty-five centuries ago."

We found matters sadly changed since our visit of the year before. It
was now almost harvest-time, and there was little to reap, for little
had been planted. Many of the colonists had fallen sick, and not a few
had laid their bones under the strange soil to mingle with the dust of
ages. Some had been assisted to return to their Western home by a
benevolent member of the party whose pilgrimage is immortalized by Mark
Twain in the _Innocents Abroad_. Some who had privately and wisely
retained a small sum for a "rainy day" had gone off, abandoning their
interest in the common weal. But many had, in the inception, with
unquestioning faith, placed their all in the common stock, and were
unable to extract any part thereof from the custody of Adams, who not
only did not account for the funds, but by this time had taken to drink,
and was generally to be seen (when to be seen at all) in a state either
of maudlin piety or of morose defiance of all questions and demands. Of
course, under these circumstances the business-affairs of the colony
went to rack and ruin. The small number of his disciples who remained
were suffering from want of comforts and from malaria, home-sickness and
disappointment. One or two of the women had taken to themselves Syrian
husbands, and one or two of the men, with Yankee readiness and
adaptation where a penny was to be turned, had taken to "guiding"
travellers to Jerusalem or trading in horseflesh; but nearly all of
those who were left were longing for "home," and would be glad to get
there on any terms.

It was determined very soon after our arrival, in spite of Adams's
covert opposition, that those who wished to leave should be taken on
board our ship and transported to Alexandria, whence they could be sent
by the consul to Liverpool as "distressed American citizens," and thence
to America. Poor people! they had little to bring on board but the
clothes in which they stood--well worn and mended, but generally clean
and decent. Some few had modest bundles, and the younger women had even
retained a little personal finery. Indeed, the women and girls all
showed in their deportment much of the self-respect and quaint good
manners due to their New England birth and training. These were all
provided with private quarters for the short passage in the cabin and
wardroom. The men were quartered upon the different messes among the
crew, and they seemed to have suffered more degradation in their fallen
fortunes than the women. Among the males was to be seen an occasional
_tarboush_ or a pair of baggy trousers and sash; and it was curious to
observe how the wearers of these garments had acquired a loaferish,
_farniente_ air worthy of a native. Our officers and men did what they
could toward assisting these poor people with spare clothing and a
little cash. They seemed, however, to move about in a kind of daze,
receiving the contributions properly enough, but in a quiet,
undemonstrative kind of way; so different from the usual _backsheesh_
transactions to which we were accustomed in this part of the world that
the contrast of itself would have proclaimed them a foreign race. In
one or two cases the women, as soon as they found out what was going on,
made a private request that any cash intended for them might be put into
their own hands, "their men bein' kind of shiftless-like, you see."

A quiet run of thirty hours brought us to the busy port of Alexandria,
where the crowded harbor and the rush and bustle of the Overland traffic
and travel caused a turmoil to which we had been for months
unaccustomed. It must have been fairly bewildering to our passengers,
fresh from their humdrum existence. The arrangements on their behalf
were made in a few hours, and our poor fellow-countrymen were soon off
for England in the steerage of a huge cotton-loaded freight-steamer,
having a new experience in the companionship of Bengalese, Maltese,
Arabs, English navvies and riff-raff of all tongues and complexions. In
fact, the Overland route, at that time especially, afforded about the
most curious aggregation of nationalities and costumes that the world
has ever seen since the Crusades.

"It is an ill wind which blows nobody good." We had earnestly desired,
during two terms of service in the Levant, to visit Egypt, but some
untoward event had always prevented us from doing so. A threatened
massacre at Damascus, some consul's squabble at Sidon or Haïffa, or some
fresh atrocity reported in the course of the Cretan insurrection, or the
desire on the part of our minister to have "the flag shown" at
Constantinople, had invariably barred us from getting to the south. But
here we were at last within sight of Pompey's Pillar, and we felt sure
that we should not leave the East again, as we had done once before,
without a peep at the Pyramids, and at least a glance at the wonderful
work of M. de Lesseps, then approaching completion.

On the day after our arrival, while dining with our consul-general, the
great fair then being held at Tantah became the subject of conversation.
As most of us had never even heard of Tantah, we were informed that it
was a large and flourishing town in the Delta, about halfway between
Alexandria and Cairo, where an annual fair--_the_ fair of Egypt--had
been held time out of mind. That is, out of modern Egyptian mind, which,
in strange contrast with its belongings and residence, does not seem to
remember anything much before the last harvest, the last hatching of
eggs and the last conscription. Lately, the fair had been interdicted by
the viceroy on account of cholera having been introduced by the pilgrims
returning from Mecca and Jeddah, and then spread by the multitude which
congregated there; for the fair was held just at the time that the
pilgrims returned from the "Hadj," and hadjis, as a rule, are not averse
to dealing and turning an honest penny.

This year, however, the fair was in full blast again, and more
frequented than ever on account of its temporary suspension. To this
point were drawn not only the Fellahs of the surrounding Delta, but
Nubians, Soudanese and Copts from the south; Arabs from across the Red
Sea and from Fezzan and Tripoli; Mograbs on their western way from the
Hadj; Turks from Aleppo, Broussa and Constantinople; Greeks, both
Hellenes and Fanariots; Maltese, Italians and Syrians; Armenians and
Jews. The time was late in April, and the weather already very hot, so
that the tribe of winter Nile travellers would be conspicuous by its
absence, and visitors to the fair would be spared their airs and graces,
and have an opportunity to enjoy a scene of genuine local color without
a pervading sense of tourists to spoil it.

The consul-general kindly proposed that we should make up a party for
the next day, undertaking to procure a vice-regal order (Ismail was not
yet khedive) for a special car to be attached to the morning-train, wait
for us, and bring us back to Alexandria in the evening. The
consuls-general of Russia and Belgium, who were present, volunteered to
join the party. Each of them, as well as our own consul, was to be
attended by his two _cavasses_--magnificent persons in costume gay with
color and lace, and bristling with weapons; in addition to which they
carried in the hand a long and heavy rod.

We reached Tantah before nine o'clock, and emerged from the station
under the close inspection of a motley crowd of loafers, to find the
day, as usual, splendidly clear and bright, but already too hot for
comfort. The American vice-consul was in waiting to receive us--a Syrian
merchant of some substance, whose office was a sinecure, and who spoke
no word of English, but to whom the position was of much importance as a
protection from any petty persecution of the local authorities. He
seemed to be quite overwhelmed by the honor done him by the visit, which
would add immensely to his social and business standing.

Forming a sort of procession, we walked slowly toward the centre of the
town, preceded by the six cavasses, who shouted to the motley crowd to
make way for their high lordships, and when the promptest obedience was
not rendered whacked the offenders with their canes with great
impartiality and no light hand. Hardly a curse or a scowl resulted from
this treatment, the crowd mostly seeming to take the stick discipline as
a joke.

The town of Tantah is, for Egypt, a very modern place, on flat ground of
course, containing the usual bazaars, mosques, barracks and pasha's
residence or konak, with some substantial private buildings near the
centre, from which the houses soon dwindle to the ordinary mud residence
of the Fellah. The place was said to contain some fifty or sixty
thousand people, while more than double that number was just now drawn
to it by the fair.

The vice-consul, swelling with pride and shiny with perspiration, led us
straight to his residence, a large house in one of the principal
streets. Here we had breakfast, with coffee and pipes, which occupied an
hour, the whole large establishment seething and working with the
unwonted excitement of entertaining such distinguished guests. This was
evident even to such utter strangers as ourselves, for we were
constantly aware of a scuffling and whispering outside the large room
in which we were entertained, and every now and then became aware of
eyes surveying us curiously from some coign of vantage; which eyes, on
meeting ours, suddenly and silently disappeared.

As soon as possible we sallied out to pay the necessary visit to the
pasha of the district. Our coming had been duly announced, and upon
arriving at his residence we found him at the landing of the staircase
ready to receive us, for consuls-general are great people in Egypt,
having diplomatic functions, and being, in all but name, ministers
resident. The pasha was a small, spare, dark little man, with his black
beard clipped as close as scissors could do it. He was dressed in the
official costume--a single-breasted black coat such as some of our
Episcopal clergymen wear, black trousers, patent-leather boots, and of
course the red fez. The reception-room into which he led us was a large
one--cool by comparison with the outside air, and somewhat dirty and
shabby, as such places are apt to be, according to my experience.
Seating ourselves according to rank on the rather greasy divan which ran
round three sides of the apartment, we were offered cooling drinks and
cigarettes. (Chibouks are things of the past for all ordinary occasions.
It's a pity, for they are better smoking than cigarettes, and certainly
more picturesque.) Compliments were exchanged in bad French, and the
ordinary topics discussed, but nothing was said as to the weather except
that it was warm--a self-evident proposition. The weather is not a
fruitful topic in Egypt. After a little time some officials came in with
a whole pile of papers for signature, and we took the opportunity to
terminate our mutual discomfort, the pasha with a perfunctory grin
shaking hands with everybody, at the same time ordering some of his own
cavasses to join ours as a special bodyguard to clear the way for us
through the narrow, crowded streets.

