Lovers of the mountains, in all parts of our country, will learn with
regret that Congress, remains apparently indifferent to the
conservation of the Rainier National Park and its complete opening to
the public. At the last session, a small appropriation was asked for
much-needed trails through the forests and to the high interglacial
plateaus, now inaccessible save to the toughest mountaineer; it being
the plan of the government engineers to build such trails on grades
that would permit their ultimate widening into permanent roads. Even
this was denied. The Idaho catastrophe last year again proved the
necessity of trails to the protection of great forests. With the
loggers pushing their operations closer to the Park, its danger calls
for prompt action. Further, American tourists, it is said, annually
spend $200,000,000 abroad, largely to view scenery surpassed in their
own country. But Congress refuses the $50,000 asked, even refuses
$25,000, toward making the grandest of our National Parks safe from
forest fires and accessible to students and lovers of nature!

  May 3, 1911.

[Illustration: Winthrop Glacier and St. Elmo Pass, with Ruth Mountain
(the Wedge) on right and Sour-Dough Mountains on left.]

[Illustration: White Glacier and Little Tahoma, with eastern end of
the Tatoosh Range in distance.]


{p.009} CONTENTS.

                                                             Page.

       The Mountain Speaks. Poem    Edna Dean Proctor          15

    I. Mount "Big Snow" and Indian
       Tradition                                               17

   II. The National Park, its Roads
        and its Needs                                          43

  III. The Story of the Mountain                               77

   IV. The Climbers                                           113

    V. The Flora of the Mountain
       Slopes                       Prof. J. B. Flett         129

       Notes                                                  139


ILLUSTRATIONS.


The * indicates engravings made from copyrighted photographs. See
notice under the illustration.


THREE-COLOR HALFTONES.

  Title.                            Photographer.            Page.

  Spanaway Lake, with reflection
    of the Mountain                 A. H. Barnes.       Frontispiece

  View from Electron, showing west
    side of the Mountain            Asahel Curtis              19

  View northward from top of
    Pinnacle Peak                   Dr. F. A. Scott            46

  Looking Northeast from slope
    of Pinnacle Peak                Dr. F. A. Scott            47

  * Ice Cave, Paradise Glacier      A. H. Barnes               73

  * Spray Park, from Fay Peak       W. P. Romans               92

  Crevasse in Carbon Glacier        Asahel Curtis             109

  North Mowich Glacier and the
    Mountain in a storm             George V. Caesar          128


ONE-COLOR HALFTONES.

  * Great crevasses in upper part
    of Cowlitz Glacier              Kiser Photo Co.             6

  On the summit of Eagle Rock in
    winter                          George V. Caesar            7

  Winthrop Glacier and St. Elmo
    Pass                            Asahel Curtis               8

  White Glacier and Little
    Tahoma                          Asahel Curtis               9

  White River Canyon, from
    moraine of White Glacier        Dr. F. A. Scott            12

  Telephoto view from near Electron,
    showing plateau on the summit   Asahel Curtis              13

  View of the Mountain from Fox
    Island                          Charles Bedford            14

  * The most kingly of American
    mountains                       Romans Photographic Co.    16

  Party of climbers on Winthrop
    Glacier                         Asahel Curtis              17

  Ice Terraces, South Tahoma
    Glacier                         Rodney L. Glisan           17

  Mineral Lake and the Mountain     A. H. Denman               18

  Storm King Peak and Mineral
    Lake                            A. H. Barnes               18

  Nisqually Canyon                  Kiser Photo Co.            21

  * North Peak, and South Mowich
    Glacier                         A. H. Waite                22
{p.010}

  * Basaltic Columns, South
    Mowich Glacier                  A. H. Waite                23

  Mountain Goat                     A. H. Barnes               23

  West side of summit, seen from
    Tahoma Fork                     A. H. Barnes               24

  Iron and Copper Mountains in
    Indian Henry's                  A. G. Bowles, Jr.          25

  Cutting steps up Paradise
    Glacier                         Dr. F. A. Scott            25

  Great Crag on ridge separating
    North and South Tahoma Glacier  Dr. F. A. Scott            26

  The Whistling Marmot              Asahel Curtis              26

  View from Beljica, showing west
    side of the Mountain            A. H. Barnes               27

  * Mountain Pine                   E. S. Curtis               28

  * Mount Wow, or Goat Mountain     E. S. Curtis               28

  Rounded Cone of Mt. St Helen's    A. H. Barnes               29

  * View northward from Simlayshe,
    or Eagle Peak                   Pillsbury Picture Co.  30, 31

  * Simlayshe, or Eagle Peak        Linkletter Photographic
                                      Co.                      30

  Exploring Ice Cave, Paradise
    Glacier                         Dr. F. A. Scott            31

  Junction of North and South
    Tahoma Glaciers                 A. H. Denman               32

  Anemones                          Miss Jessie Kershaw        32

  * North Tahoma Glacier            A. H. Waite                33

  * Snow Lake in Indian Henry's     A. H. Barnes               34

  A fair Mountaineer                Asahel Curtis              35

  Indian Henry's, seen from South
    Tahoma Glacier                  A. H. Denman               36

  * Southwest side of the Mountain,
    seen from Indian Henry's        A. H. Barnes               37

  Climbing Pinnacle Peak (2)        Asahel Curtis              38

  A silhouette on Pinnacle Peak     Dr. F. A. Scott            39

  * Rough Climbing                  E. S. Curtis               39

  Ptarmigan                         Asahel Curtis              40

  The Mountain, from Puyallup
    river                           B. L. Aldrich, Jr.         40

  Falls of the Little Mashell
    river                           A. H. Barnes               41

  Old Stage Road to Longmire
    Springs                         A. H. Barnes               42

  On Pierce County road, passing
    Ohop Valley                     S. C. Lancaster            43

  Cowlitz Chimneys                  S. C. Smith                43

  * Old Road near Spanaway          A. H. Barnes               44

  Automobile Party above Nisqually
    Canyon                          Asahel Curtis              49

  Prof. O. D. Allen's Cottage       Dr. F. A. Scott            49

  "Ghost Trees"                     Mrs. H. A. Towne           50

  Government Road in the Forest
    Reserve                         S. C. Lancaster            51

  "Hanging Glacier," an ice fall
    above the Cowlitz               Asahel Curtis              51

  Leaving National Park Inn for
    Paradise                        Linkletter Photo Co.       52

  * On the Summit, showing
    Columbia's Crest                Asahel Curtis              52

  Paradise Valley or "Park," and
    Tatoosh Mountains               A. H. Barnes               53

  On Government Road, a mile above
    Longmires                       Linkletter Photo Co.       54

  Road near "Gap Point"             Linkletter Photo Co.       54

  Snout of Nisqually Glacier, and
    Road Bridge                     Paul T. Shaw               55

  Pony Trail Bridge across the
    Nisqually                       Dr. H. B. Hinman           55

  Road a mile above the Bridge      Asahel Curtis              56

  On the Pony Trail to Paradise     Kiser Photo Co.            56

  Sierra Club lunching on Nisqually
    Glacier                         Asahel Curtis              57

  A Mountain Celery                 Mrs. Alexander Thompson    57

  Narada Falls, on Paradise River   Herbert W. Gleason         58

  Washington Torrents, on Paradise
    River                           A. H. Barnes               59

  Portion of Paradise Park and
    Tatoosh Range                   A. H. Barnes               59

  View of the Mountain from the
    Tatoosh, with key to landmarks  Herbert W. Gleason         60

  Ice Bridge, Stevens Glacier       Dr. F. A. Scott            61

  Tug of War                        Asahel Curtis              61

  * Hiking through Paradise Valley
    in Winter                       J. H. Weer                 62

  * Tatoosh Range, from Reese's
    Camp, in Winter                 J. H. Weer                 62

  * Waterfall above Paradise
    Valley                          Photo, W. E. Averett;
                                    Copyright, Asahel Curtis   63

  Looking from Stevens Glacier to
    Mt. Adams                       Dr. F. A. Scott            64

  Reese's Camp                      C. E. Cutter               64

  Climbing the "Horn" on Unicorn
    Peak                            Asahel Curtis              65

  Stevens Canyon in October         A. H. Barnes               66

  Sluiskin Falls                    A. H. Barnes               67

  Eminent scientist practices the
    simple life                     J. B. Flett                67

  * Nisqually Glacier, with its
    sources                         A. H. Barnes               68

  Sierra Club on Nisqually Glacier  Asahel Curtis              69

  * Lost to the World               Asahel Curtis              69

  "Sunshine" and "Storm" (2)        Mrs. H. A. Towne           70
{p.011}

  Nisqually Glacier, from top of
    Gibraltar                       Asahel Curtis              71

  Measuring the ice flow in
    Nisqually Glacier               Asahel Curtis              72

  * Miss Fay Fuller Exploring a
    Crevasse                        E. S. Curtis               72

  Fairy Falls, in Goat Lick
    Basin                           A. H. Barnes               75

  * Gibraltar and its Neighbors     E. S. Curtis               76

  Crossing Carbon Glacier           Asahel Curtis              77

  * Reflection Lake and the
    Mountain                        E. S. Curtis               77

  Looking up from Cowlitz Chimneys
    to Gibraltar                    Asahel Curtis              78

  Divide of Paradise and Stevens
    Glaciers                        A. H. Barnes               79

  Old Moraine of Stevens Glacier    Asahel Curtis              79

  Preparing for a night at Camp
    Muir                            Asahel Curtis              80

  The Bee Hive                      Asahel Curtis              80

  Mazama Club on Cowlitz Chimneys   Kiser Photo Co.            81

  Climbing Cowlitz Cleaver to
    Gibraltar                       Asahel Curtis              81

  Mazamas rounding Gibraltar        Rodney L. Glisan           82

  Under the walls of Gibraltar      Asahel Curtis              83

  One of the bedrooms at Camp Muir  A. H. Waite                83

  Perilous position on edge of a
    great crevasse                  Charles Bedford            84

  Climbing the "Chute," west side
    of Gibraltar                    Asahel Curtis              85

  Looking from top of Gibraltar to
    the summit                      A. H. Waite                86

  View south from Cowlitz Glacier
    to Mt. Adams                    Charles Bedford            87

  One of the modern craters         Asahel Curtis          88, 89

  Steam Caves in one of the
    craters                         Asahel Curtis              88

  North Peak, or "Liberty Cap."     A. W. Archer               89

  Goat Peaks, glacier summits in
    the Cascades                    Kiser Photo Co             90

  Ice-bound lake in Cowlitz Park    S. C. Smith                93

  Crevasses in Cowlitz Glacier      S. C. Smith                93

  Crossing a precipitous slope on
    White Glacier                   A. W. Archer               94

  * Climbing Goat Peaks in the
    Cascades                        S. C. Smith                94

  Looking up White Glacier to
    Little Tahoma                   Dr. F. A. Scott            95

  The Mountain seen from top of
    Cascade Range                   S. C. Smith                96

  Great Moraine built by Frying-Pan
    Glacier on "Goat Island"        J. B. Flett                96

  Coming around Frying-Pan Glacier,
    below Little Tahoma             Dr. F. A. Scott            97

  Sunrise above the clouds, Camp
    Curtis                          Asahel Curtis              97

  Looking up from Snipe Lake,
    below Interglacier              Dr. F. A. Scott            98

  Passing a big Crevasse on
    Interglacier                    Asahel Curtis              98

  View North from Mt. Ruth to
    Grand Park                      J. B. Flett                99

  Camp on St. Elmo Pass, north side
    of the Wedge                    Asahel Curtis             100

  East Face of Mountain, with route
    to summit                       Asahel Curtis             100

  Admiral Peter Rainier                                       101

  First picture of the Mountain,
    from Vancouver's "Voyage"                                 101

  Climbers on St. Elmo Pass         A. W. Archer              102

  St. Elmo Pass, from north side    A. W. Archer              102

  Russell Peak, from Avalanche
    Camp                            Asahel Curtis             103

  Avalanche Camp                    Asahel Curtis             103

  Looking up Winthrop Glacier from
    Avalanche Camp                  Asahel Curtis             104

  Looking across Winthrop Glacier
    to Steamboat Prow               Asahel Curtis             104

  View south from Sluiskin Mountains
    across Moraine Park             Asahel Curtis             105

  Part of Spray Park                George Caesar             106

  Climbing the séracs on Winthrop
    Glacier                         Dr. F. A. Scott           107

  Ice Pinnacles on the Carbon       A. W. Archer              107

  Among the Ice Bridges of Carbon
    Glacier                         Asahel Curtis             108

  Building Tacoma's electric power
    plant on the Nisqually (3)      George V. Caesar          111

  Hydro-electric plant at Electron                            112

  Cutting canal to divert White
    River to Lake Tapps                                       112

  Mystic Lake, in Moraine Park      Asahel Curtis             113

  Glacier Table on Winthrop
    Glacier                         Asahel Curtis             113

  Carbon River and Mother
    Mountains                       Dr. F. A. Scott           114

  * Oldest and Youngest of the
    Climbers                        C. E. Cutter              115

  * P. B. Van Trump on his old
    Camp Ground                     E. S. Curtis              115

  Lower Spray Park, with Mother
    Mountains beyond                Asahel Curtis             116

  * John Muir, President of the
    Sierra Club                     J. Edward B. Greene       116

  Coasting in Moraine Park          Asahel Curtis             117

  Sunset on Crater Lake             George V. Caesar          117

  * Amphitheatre of Carbon Glacier  Asahel Curtis             118

  * Avalanche falling on Willis
    Wall                            Photo, Lea Bronson;
                                    Copyright, P. V. Caesar   119
{p.012}

  * Birth of Carbon River           A. H. Waite               120

  The Mountaineers building trail
    on Carbon Moraine               Asahel Curtis             121

  The Mountaineers lunching in a
    crevasse                        Asahel Curtis             121

  Looking southeast from Mt. Rose   George V. Caesar          122

  Looking south from Mt. Rose,
    across Crater Lake              George V. Caesar          123

  * Looking up North Mowich Valley  Asahel Curtis             124

  * Spray Falls                     Asahel Curtis             125

  * A Rescue from a Crevasse        E. S. Curtis              126

  Returning from the Summit         Asahel Curtis             126

  * View across Moraine Park and
    Carbon Glacier to Mother
    Mountains                       Asahel Curtis             129

  Senecio                           Mrs. Alexander Thompson   129

  A 14-foot Fir, near Mineral Lake  A. H. Barnes              130

  Indian Pipe                       J. B. Flett               131

  Floral Carpet in Indian Henry's
   Park                             A. H. Barnes              131

  Mosses and Ferns in the Forest
    Reserve                         Charles Bedford           132

  A Bank of White Heather           Asahel Curtis             133

  Hellebore                         Mrs. Alexander Thompson   133

  Alpine Hemlock and Mountain
    Lilies                          Mrs. H. A. Towne          134

  Mountain Asters                   A. H. Barnes              134

  Studying the Phlox                J. B. Flett               135

  Squaw Grass, or Mountain Lily     Miss Jessie Kershaw       135

  Avalanche Lilies                  Asahel Curtis             136

  * Moraine Park, Sluiskin
    Mountains and Mystic Lake       Asahel Curtis             136

  Sunrise in Indian Henry's         A. H. Barnes              137

  Anemone Seed Pods                 Asahel Curtis             138

  Wind-swept Trees on North Side    George V. Caesar          139

  Lupines                           Herbert W. Gleason        139

  * The Mountain, seen from Green
    River Hot Springs               C. E. Cutter              140

  Glacial debris on lower Winthrop  Asahel Curtis             142

  An Alpine Climbers' Cabin        From Whymper's "Chamonix
                                   and Mt. Blanc"             144

[Illustration: White River Canyon, from the terminal moraine of White
Glacier. A fine example of glacial sculpture. The river seen in the
distance is 2,000 feet below the plateau through which the glacier has
carved this valley.]

[Illustration {p.013}: Telephoto view from near Electron, 20 miles,
showing vast summit plateau left when the Mountain blew its head off.
1. Crater Peak, built by the two small, modern craters. 2. South Peak,
or Peak Success. 3. North Peak, or Liberty Cap. 4. North Tahoma
Glacier. 5. Puyallup Glacier. 6. South Mowich Glacier. 7.
North Mowich Glacier. 8. Snow Cap above Carbon Glacier. The summit
peaks (1, 2 and 3) form a triangle, each side of which is two miles or
more in length.]

[Illustration {p.014}: View of the Mountain from Fox Island,
forty-two miles northwest, with part of Puget Sound in the
foreground.]


{p.015} THE MOUNTAIN SPEAKS.


  I am Tacoma, Monarch of the Coast!
      Uncounted ages heaped my shining snows;
  The sun by day, by night the starry host,
      Crown me with splendor; every breeze that blows
      Wafts incense to my altars; never wanes
  The glory my adoring children boast,
      For one with sun and sea Tacoma reigns.

          Tacoma--the Great Snow Peak--mighty name
              My dusky tribes revered when time was young!
          Their god was I in avalanche and flame--
              In grove and mead and songs my rivers sung,
              As blithe they ran to make the valleys fair--
          Their Shrine of Peace where no avenger came
              To vex Tacoma, lord of earth and air.

  Ah! when at morn above the mists I tower
      And see my cities gleam by slope and strand,
  What joy have I in this transcendent dower--
      The strength and beauty of my sea-girt land
      That holds the future royally in fee!
  And lest some danger, undescried, should lower,
      From my far height I watch o'er wave and lea.

          And cloudless eves when calm in heaven I rest,
              All rose-bloom with a glow of paradise,
          And through my firs the balm-wind of the west,
              Blown over ocean islands, softly sighs,
              While placid lakes my radiant image frame--
          And know my worshippers, in loving quest,
              Will mark my brow and fond lips breathe my name:

  Enraptured from my valleys to my snows,
      I charm my glow to crimson--soothe to gray;
  And when the encircling shadow deeper grows,
      Poise, a lone cloud, beside the starry way.
      Then, while my realm is hushed from steep to shore,
  I yield my grandeur to divine repose,
      And know Tacoma reigns forevermore!

  South Framingham, Mass.
  March, 1911.                         Edna Dean Proctor

[Illustration {p.016}: Copyright, 1906, By Romans Photographic Co.
The most kingly of American mountains, seen from beautiful Lake
Washington, Seattle, distance sixty miles.]

{p.017}
[Illustration: A party of climbers on Winthrop Glacier.]


THE MOUNTAIN THAT WAS "GOD."

I.

MOUNT "BIG SNOW" AND INDIAN TRADITION.

  Long hours we toiled up through the solemn wood,
      Beneath moss-banners stretched from tree to tree;
  At last upon a barren hill we stood,
      And, lo, above loomed Majesty.

  --_Herbert Bashford: "Mount Rainier."_


The great Mountain fascinates us by its diversity. It is an
inspiration and yet a riddle to all who are drawn to the mysterious or
who love the sublime. Every view which the breaking clouds vouchsafe
to us is a surprise. It never becomes commonplace, save to the
commonplace.

[Illustration: Ice Terraces on South Tahoma Glacier. These vast steps
are often seen where a glacier moves down a steep and irregular
slope.]

Old Virgil's gibe at mankind's better half--"varium et mutabile semper
femina"--might have been written of this fickle shape of rock and ice
and vapor. One tries vainly, year after year, to define it in his own
mind. The daily, hourly change of distance, size and aspect, tricks
which the Indian's mountain {p.018} god plays with the puny
creatures swarming more and more about his foot; his days of frank
neighborliness, his swift transformations from smiles to anger, his
fits of sullenness and withdrawal, all baffle study. Even though we
live at its base, it is impossible to say we know the Mountain, so
various are the spells the sun casts over this huge dome which it is
slowly chiseling away with its tools of ice, and which, in coming
centuries, it will level with the plain.

[Illustration: Mineral Lake and the Mountain. Distance, eighteen
miles.]

We are lovers of the water as well as the hills, out here in this
northwestern corner of the Republic. We spend many days--and should
spend more--in cruising among the hidden bays and park-like islands
which make Puget Sound the most interesting body of water in America.
We grow a bit boastful about the lakes that cluster around our cities.
Nowhere better than from sea level, or from the lakes raised but
little above it, does one realize the bulk, the dominance, and yet the
grace, of this noble peak. Its impressiveness, indeed, arises in part
from the fact that it is one of the few great volcanic mountains whose
entire height may be seen from tide level. Many of us can recall views
of it from Lake Washington at Seattle, or from American or Spanaway
Lake at Tacoma, or from the Sound, which will always haunt the memory.

[Illustration: Storm King Peak and Mineral Lake, viewed from near
Mineral Lake Inn.]

Early one evening, last summer, I went with a friend to Point
Defiance, Tacoma's fine park at the {p.021} end of the promontory
on which the city is built. We drank in refreshment from the picture
there unrolled of broad channels and evergreen shores. As sunset
approached, we watched the western clouds building range upon range of
golden mountains above the black, Alp-like crags of the Olympics.
Then, entering a small boat, we rowed far out northward into the
Sound. Overhead, and about us, the scenes of the great panorama were
swiftly shifted. The western sky became a conflagration. Twilight
settled upon the bay. The lights of the distant town came out, one by
one, and those of the big smelter, near by, grew brilliant. No Turner
ever dreamed so glorious a composition of sunlight and shade. But we
were held by one vision.

[Illustration {p.019}: View from Electron, showing west side of the
mountain, with a vast intervening country of forested ranges and deep
canyons.]

{p.021}
[Illustration: Nisqually Canyon.

  ... "Where the mountain wall
  Is piled to heaven, and through the narrow rift
  Of the vast rocks, against whose rugged feet
  Beats the mad torrent with perpetual roar:
  Where noonday is as twilight, and the wind
  Comes burdened with the everlasting moan
  Of forests and far-off waterfalls."--Whittier.]

Yonder, in the southeast, towering above the lower shadows of harbor
and hills, rose a vast pyramid of soft flame. The setting sun had
thrown a mantle of rose pink over the ice of the glaciers and the
great cleavers of rock which buttress the mighty dome. The rounded
summit was warm with beautiful orange light. Soon the colors upon its
slope changed to deeper reds, and then to amethyst, and {p.023}
violet, and pearl gray. The sun-forsaken ranges below fell away to
dark neutral tints. But the fires upon the crest burned on, deepening
from gold to burnished copper, a colossal beacon flaming high against
the sunset purple of the eastern skies. Finally, even this great light
paled to a ghostly white, as the supporting foundation of mountain
ridges dropped into the darkness of the long northern twilight, until
the snowy summit seemed no longer a part of earth, but a veil of
uncanny mist, caught up by the winds from the Pacific and floating far
above the black sky-line of the solid Cascades, that

  * * * heaven-sustaining bulwark, reared
  Between the East and West.

[Illustration {p.022}: Copyright, 1900, By A. H. Waite. North Peak,
or Liberty Cap, and South Mowich Glacier in storm, seen from an
altitude of 6,000 feet, on ridge between South Mowich and Puyallup
Glaciers. The glacier, 2,000 feet below, is nearly half a mile wide.
Note the tremendous wall of ice in which it ends.]

[Illustration: Copyright, 1900, By A. H. Waite. Basaltic Columns, part
of the "Colonnade" on south side of South Mowich Glacier. These
curious six-sided columns of volcanic rock are similar to those
bordering the Cowlitz Glacier.]

[Illustration: Mountain Goat, an accidental snap-shot of the fleet and
wary Mazama; godfather of the famous Portland mountain club.]

And when even that apparition had faded, and the Mountain appeared
only as an uncertain bulk shadowed upon the night, then came the
miracle. Gradually, the east, beyond the great hills, showed a faint
silver glow. Silhouetted against this dim background, the profile of
the peak grew definite. With no other warning, suddenly from its
summit the full moon shot forth, huge, majestic and gracious, flooding
the lower world with brightness. Clouds and mountain ranges alike
shone with its glory. But the great peak loomed blacker and more
sullen. Only, on its head, the wide crown of snow gleamed white under
the cold rays of the moon.

[Illustration {p.024}: West Side of the summit, seen from Tahoma Fork
of the Nisqually, on road to Longmire Springs. Note the whiteness of
the glacial water. This stream is fed by the united Tahoma glaciers.
See pp. 32 and 37.]

{p.025}
[Illustration: Iron and Copper Mountains (right) in Indian Henry's.
The top of Pyramid Peak shows in the saddle beyond with Peak Success
towering far above.]

No wonder that this mountain of changing moods, overtopping every
other eminence in the Northwest, answered the idea of God to the
simple, imaginative mind of the Indians who hunted in the forest on
its slopes or fished in the waters of Whulge that ebbed and flowed at
its base. Primitive peoples in every land have deified superlative
manifestations of nature--the sun, the wind, great rivers, and
waterfalls, the high mountains. By all the tribes within sight of its
summit, this pre-eminent peak, variously called by them Tacoma
(Tach-ho´ma), Tahoma or Tacob, as who should say "The Great Snow," was
deemed a power to be feared and conciliated. Even when the
missionaries taught them a better faith, they continued to hold the
Mountain in superstitious reverence--an awe that still has power to
silence their "civilized" and very unromantic descendants.

[Illustration: Cutting steps up Paradise Glacier.]

The Puget Sound tribes, with the Yakimas, Klickitats and others living
just beyond the Cascades, had substantially the same language and
beliefs, though differing much in physical and mental type. {p.026}
East of the range, they lived by the chase. They were great horsemen
and famous runners, a breed of lithe, upstanding, competent men, as
keen of wit as they were stately in appearance. These were "the noble
Red Men" of tradition. Fennimore Cooper might have found many a hero
worthy of his pen among the savages inhabiting the fertile valley of
the Columbia, which we now call the Inland Empire. But here on the
Coast were the "Digger" tribes, who subsisted chiefly by spearing
salmon and digging clams. Their stooped figures, flat faces, downcast
eyes and low mentality reflected the life they led. Contrasting their
heavy bodies with their feeble legs, which grew shorter with disuse, a
Tacoma humorist last summer gravely proved to a party of English
visitors that in a few generations more, had not the white man seized
their fishing grounds, the squatting Siwashes would have had no legs
at all!

[Illustration: Great Crag on the ridge separating the North and South
Tahoma Glaciers, with Tahoma Fork of the Nisqually visible several
miles below. This rock is seen right of center on page 27.]

[Illustration: The Marmot, whose shrill whistle is often heard among
the crags.]

Stolid and uninspired as he seemed to the whites, the Indian of the
Sound was not without his touch of poetry. He had that imaginative
curiosity which marked the native {p.028} American everywhere. He
was ever peering into the causes of things, and seeing the
supernatural in the world around him.[1]

              [Footnote 1: Among those who have studied the Puget
              Sound Indians most sympathetically is the Rev. Mr.
              Hylebos of Tacoma. He came to the Northwest in 1870,
              when the census gave Tacoma a white population of
              seventy-three. In those days, says Father Hylebos, the
              Tacoma tideflats, now filled in for mills and railway
              terminals, were covered each autumn with the canoes of
              Indians spearing salmon. It was no uncommon thing to see
              at one time on Commencement Bay 1,800 fishermen. This
              veteran worker among the "Siwashes" (French
              "_sauvages_") first told me the myths that hallowed the
              Mountain for every native, and the true meaning of the
              beautiful Indian word "Tacoma." He knew well all the
              leaders of the generation before the railways: Sluiskin,
              the Klickitat chief who guided Stevens and Van Trump up
              to the snow-line in 1870; Stanup, chief of the
              Puyallups; Kiskax, head of the Cowlitz tribe; Angeline,
              the famous daughter of Chief Seattle, godfather of the
              city of that name, and many others.]

[Illustration {p.027}: View from Beljica, showing the deeply indented
west side of the Mountain. Beginning at extreme right, the glaciers
are, successively: Kautz, South Tahoma, North Tahoma and Puyallup. In
the left foreground is the canyon of Tahoma Fork of the Nisqually,
which is fed by the Tahoma glaciers.]

[Illustration: Copyright, 1897, By E. S. Curtis. Mountain Pine, one of
the last outposts of the forest below the line of eternal snow.]

To the great Snow Mountain the Indians made frequent pilgrimages, for
they thought this king of the primeval wild a divinity to be reckoned
with. They dreaded its anger, seen in the storms about its head, the
thunder of its avalanches, and the volcanic flashes of which their
traditions told. They courted its favor, symbolized in the wild
flowers that bloomed on its slope, and the tall grass that fed the
mowich, or deer.

[Illustration: Copyright, 1897, By E. S. Curtis. Mount Wow, or Goat
Mountain, above Mesler's.]

As they ascended the vast ridges, the grandeur about them spoke of the
mountain god. There were groves of trees he must have planted, so
orderly were they set out. The lakes of the lofty valleys seemed
calmer than those on the prairies below, the foliage brighter, the
ferns taller and more graceful. The song of the waterfalls here was
sweeter than the music of the tamahnawas men, their Indian sorcerers.
The many small meadows close to the snow-line, carpeted in deepest
green and spread with flowers, were the gardens of the divinity,
tended by his superhuman agents. Strange as it may seem, the
nature-worship of the silent Red Man had many points in common with
that of the imaginative, volatile Greek, who {p.030} peopled his
mountains with immortals; and no wood in ancient Greece was ever
thronged with hamadryads more real than the little gods whom the
Indian saw in the forests watered by streams from Tacoma's glaciers.

[Illustration {p.029}: Rounded Cone of Mt. St. Helens, seen from
Indian Henry's, forty-five miles away.]

[Illustration: View northward in early summer from Eagle Peak, at
western end of the Tatoosh. Gibraltar Rock and Little Tahoma break the
eastern sky-line. On the extreme right lies Paradise Valley, still deep
in snow, with the canyon of Paradise River below it. Next is seen the
Nisqually Glacier, with Nisqually River issuing from its snout. Then
come Van Trump Glacier (an "interglacier"), and the big Kautz Glacier,
dropping into its own deep canyon. Beyond the Kautz, Pyramid Peak and
Iron and Copper Mountains rise on the Indian Henry plateau. The Tahoma
Glaciers close the view westward.]

[Illustration {p.031}: Copyright, 1907, By Pillsbury Picture Co.]

[Illustration: Copyright, 1909, By Linkletter Photo. CO. Eagle Peak
(Indian name, Simlayshe) at west end of the Tatoosh. Altitude about
6,000 feet. A pony trail three miles long leads up from the Inn.]

Countless snows had fallen since the mountain god created and
beautified this home of his, when one day he grew angry, and in his
wrath showed terrible tongues of fire. Thus he ignited an immense fir
forest on the south side of the peak. When his anger subsided, the
flames passed, and the land they left bare became covered with blue
grass and wild flowers--a great sunny country where, before, the dark
forest had been. Borrowing a word from the French _coureurs des bois_
who came with the Hudson's Bay Company, the later Indians sometimes
called this region "the Big Brulé"; and to this day some Americans
call it the same. But for the Big Brulé the Indians had, from ancient
times, another name, connected with their ideas of religion. It was
their Saghalie Illahe, the "Land of Peace," Heaven. Our name,
"Paradise Valley," {p.031} given to the beautiful open vale on the
south slope of the Mountain, is an English equivalent.

Here was the same bar to violence which religion has erected in many
lands. The Hebrews had their "Cities of Refuge." The pagan ancients
made every altar an asylum. Mediæval Christianity constituted all its
churches sanctuaries. Thus, in lawless ages, the hand of vengeance was
stayed, and the weak were protected.

[Illustration: Exploring an Ice Cave, Paradise Glacier.]

So, too, the Indian tradition ordained this home of rest and refuge.
Indian custom was an eye for an eye, but on gaining this mountain
haven the pursued was safe from his pursuer, the slayer might not be
touched by his victim's kindred. When he crossed its border, the
warrior laid down his arms. Criminals and cowards, too, were often
sent here by the chiefs to do penance.

[Illustration: Junction of North and South Tahoma Glaciers, viewed
from Indian Henry's. The main ice stream thus formed, seen in the
foreground, feeds Tahoma Fork of the Nisqually River. The Northern
part of North Tahoma Glacier, seen in the distance beyond the wedge of
rocks, feeds a tributary of the Puyallup.]

The mountain divinity, with his under-gods, figures in much of the
Siwash {p.032} folklore, and the "Land of Peace" is often heard of.
It is through such typical Indian legends as that of Miser, the greedy
hiaqua hunter, that we learn how large a place the great Mountain
filled in the thought of the aborigines.

[Illustration: Anemones, a familiar mountain flower.]

This myth also explains why no Red Man could ever be persuaded to an
ascent beyond the snow line. As to the Greek, so to the Indian the
great peaks were sacred. The flames of an eruption, the fall of an
avalanche, told of the wrath of the mountain god. The clouds that
wrapped the summit of Tacoma spelled mystery and peril. Even so shrewd
and intelligent a Siwash as Sluiskin, with all his keenness for
"Boston chikamin," the white man's money, refused to accompany Stevens
and Van Trump in the first ascent, in 1870; indeed, he gave them up as
doomed, and bewailed their certain fate when they defied the
Mountain's wrath and started for the summit in spite of his warnings.

[Illustration {p.033}: Copyright 1910, A. H. WAITE. North Tahoma
Glacier, flowing out of the huge cleft in the west side, between North
and South Peaks. A great rock wedge splits the glacier, turning part
of the ice stream northward into the Puyallup, while the other part,
on the right pours down to join South Tahoma Glacier. Note how the
promontory of rock in the foreground has been rounded and polished by
the ice. Compare this view with pages 32 and 37.]

[Illustration {p.034}: Snow Lake in Indian Henry's, surrounded by
Alpine firs, which grow close to the snow line. Elevation about 6,000
feet.]

The hero of the Hiaqua Myth is the Indian {p.035} Rip Van
Winkle.[2] He dwelt at the foot of Tacoma, and, like Irving's worthy,
he was a mighty hunter and fisherman. He knew the secret pools where
fish could always be found, and the dark places in the forest, where
the elk hid when snows were deepest. But for these things Miser cared
not. His lust was all for hiaqua, the Indian shell money.

