Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

{541}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 188.]
Saturday, June 4, 1853.
[Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition 5d.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                   Page
    Corrections adopted by Pope from the Dunces, by James
      Crossley                                                541

    Notes on several misunderstood Words, by the Rev.
      W. R. Arrowsmith                                        542

    Devonianisms                                              544

    The Poems of Rowley, by Henry H. Breen                    544

    FOLK LORE:--Legend of Llangefelach Tower--Wedding
      Divination                                              545

    Shakspeare Correspondence:--Shakspearian Drawings
      --Thomas Shakspeare--Passage in Macbeth, Act I.
      Sc. 5.--"Discourse of Reason"                           545

    MINOR NOTES:--The MSS. of Gervase Hollis--Anagrams
      --Family Caul--Numerous Progeny                         546

  QUERIES:--

    Smith, Young, and Scrymgeour MSS.                         547

    Mormon Publications, by W. Sparrow Simpson                548

    MINOR QUERIES:--Dimidiation--Early Christian
      Mothers--The Lion at Northumberland House--The
      Cross in Mexico and Alexandria--Passage in St. James
      --"The Temple of Truth"--Santa Claus--Donnybrook
      Fair--Saffron, when brought into England--
      Isping Geil--Humbug--Franklyn Household Book--
      James Thomson's Will--"Country Parson's Advice
      to his Parishioners"--Shakspeare: Blackstone            548

    MINOR QUERIES WITH ANSWERS:--Turkey Cocks--
      Bishop St. John--Ferdinand Mendez Pinto--Satin--
      Carrier Pigeons                                         550

  REPLIES:--

   "Pylades and Corinna:" Psalmanazar and Defoe, by
      James Crossley                                          551

    Robert Wauchope, Archbishop of Armagh                     552

    Seal of William d'Albini, by E. G. Ballard, &c.           552

   "Will" and "Shall," by William Bates, &c.                  553

    Inscriptions in Books, by Honoré de Mareville, &c.        554

    Bacon's "Advancement of Learning," by Thomas
      Markby                                                  554

    PHOTOGRAPHIC CORRESPONDENCE:--Test for a good
      Lens--Photography and the Microscope--Cement for
      Glass Baths--Mr. Lyte's Mode of Printing                555

    REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES:--Eulenspiegel or Ulenspiegel
      --Lawyers' Bags--"Nine Tailors make a man"
      --"Time and I"--Carr Pedigree--Campvere, Privileges
      of--Haulf-naked--Old Picture of the Spanish
      Armada--Parochial Libraries--How to stain Deal--
      Roger Outlawe--Tennyson--Old Fogie--Errata corrigenda
      --Anecdote of Dutens--Gloves at Fairs--
      Arms: Battle-axe--Enough--Feelings of Age--Optical
      Query--Cross and Pile, &c.                              557

  MISCELLANEOUS:--

    Notes on Books, &c.                                       561

    Books and Odd Volumes wanted                              562

    Notices to Correspondents                                 562

    Advertisements                                            562

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes.

CORRECTIONS ADOPTED BY POPE FROM THE DUNCES.

In Pope's "Letter to the Honourable James Craggs," dated June 15, 1711,
after making some observations on Dennis's remarks on the _Essay on
Criticism_, he says--

    "Yet, to give this man his due, he has objected to one or two lines
    with reason; and I will alter them in case of another edition: I will
    make my enemy do me a kindness where he meant an injury, and so serve
    instead of a friend."

An interesting paper might be drawn up from the instances, for they are
rather numerous, in which Pope followed out this very sensible rule. I do
not remember seeing the following one noted. One of the heroes of the
_Dunciad_, Thomas Cooke, the translator of Hesiod, was the editor of a
periodical published in monthly numbers, in 8vo., of which nine only
appeared, under the title of _The Comedian, or Philosophical Inquirer_, the
first number being for April, and the last for December, 1732. It contains
some curious matter, and amongst other papers is, in No. 2., "A Letter in
Prose to Mr. Alexander Pope, occasioned by his Epistle in Verse to the Earl
of Burlington." It is very abusive, and was most probably written either by
Cooke or Theobald. After quoting the following lines as they then stood:

 "He buys for Topham drawings and designs,
  For Fountain statues, and for Curio coins,
  Rare monkish manuscripts for Hearne alone,
  And books for Mead, and rarities for Sloane,"

the letter-writer thus unceremoniously addresses himself to the author:

    "Rarities! how could'st thou be so silly as not to be particular in the
    rarities of Sloane, as in those of the other five persons? What
    knowledge, what meaning is conveyed in the word _rarities_? Are not
    some drawings, some statues, some coins, all monkish manuscripts, and
    some books, _rarities_? Could'st thou not find a trisyllable to express
    some parts of nature for a collection of which that learned and worthy
    physician is eminent? Fy, fy! correct and write--

     'Rare monkish manuscripts for Hearne alone,
      And books for Mead, and butterflies for Sloane.'

    {542}

    "Sir Hans Sloane is known to have the finest collection of butterflies
    in England, and perhaps in the world; and if rare monkish manuscripts
    are for Hearne only, how can rarities be for Sloane, unless thou
    specifyest what sort of rarities? O thou numskull!"--No. 2., pp.
    15--16.

The correction was evidently an improvement, and therefore Pope wisely
accepted the benefit, and was the channel through which it was conveyed;
and the passage accordingly now stands as altered by the letter-writer.

JAMES CROSSLEY.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES ON SEVERAL MISUNDERSTOOD WORDS.

(_Continued from_ p. 522.)

_Dare_, to lurk, or cause to lurk; used both transitively and
intransitively. Apparently the root of _dark_ and _dearn_.

 "Here, quod he, it ought ynough suffice,
  Five houres for to slepe upon a night:
  But it were for an olde appalled wight,
  As ben thise wedded men, that lie and _dare_,
  As in a fourme sitteth a wery hare."

Tyrwhitt's utterly unwarranted adoption of Speght's interpretation is
"_Dare_, v. Sax. to stare." The reader should always be cautious how he
takes upon trust a glossarist's sly fetch to win a cheap repute for
learning, and over-ride inquiry by the mysterious letters Sax. or Ang.-Sax.
tacked on to his exposition of an obscure word. There is no such Saxon
vocable as _dare_, to stare. Again, what more frequent blunder than to
confound a secondary and derivative sense of a word with its radical and
primary--indeed, sometimes to allow the former to usurp the precedence, and
at length altogether oust the latter: hence it comes to pass, that we find
_dare_ is one while said to imply peeping and prying, another while
trembling or crouching; moods and actions merely consequent or attendant
upon the elementary signification of the word:

 "I haue an hoby can make larkys to _dare_."
    Skelton's _Magnifycence_, vol. i. p.269. l. 1358., Dyce's edition;

on which line that able, but therein mistaken editor's note is, "_to dare_,
i. e. to be terrified, to tremble" (he however also adds, it means to lurk,
to lie hid, and remits his reader to a note at p. 379., where some most
pertinent examples of its true and only sense are given), to which add
these next:

 "    .    .   let his grace go forward,
  And _dare_ vs with his cap, like larkes."
    First Fol., _Henry VIII._, Act III, Sc. 2.

 "Thay questun, thay quellun,
  By frythun by fellun,
  The dere in the dellun,
  Thay droupun and _daren_".
    _The Anturs of Arthur at the Tarnewathelan_,
    St. IV. p. 3. Camden Society's Publications.

 "She sprinkled vs with bitter juice of vncouth herbs, and strake
  The awke end of hir charmed rod vpon our heades, and spake
  Words to the former contrarie. The more she charm'd, the more
  Arose we vpward from the ground on which we _darde_ before."
    The XIIII. Booke of Ouid's _Metamorphosis_,
    p. 179. Arthur Golding's translation: London, 1587.

    "Sothely it _dareth_ hem weillynge this thing; that heuenes weren
    before," &c.

And again, a little further on:

    "Forsothe yee moste dere, one thing _dare_ you nougt (or be not
    unknowen): for one day anentis God as a thousande yeeris, and a
    thousande yeer as one day."--_C^m 3^m Petre 2._, Wycliffe's
    translation:

in the Latin Vulgate, _latet_ and _lateat_ respectively; in the original,
[Greek: lanthanei] and [Greek: lanthanetô]. Now the book is before me, I
beg to furnish MR. COLLIER with the references to his usage of _terre_,
mentioned in Todd's _Dictionary_, but not given (Collier's _Shakspeare_,
vol. iv. p. 65., note), namely, 6th cap. of Epistle to Ephesians, _prop.
init._; and 3rd of that to Colossians, _prop. fin._

       *       *       *       *       *


_Die and live._--This _hysteron proteron_ is by no means uncommon: its
meaning is, of course, the same as live and die, _i. e._ subsist from the
cradle to the grave:

 "    .    .    .   Will you sterner be.
  Than he that _dies and lives_ by bloody drops?"
      First Fol., _As You Like It_, Act III. Sc. 5.

All manner of whimsical and farfetched constructions have been put by the
commentators upon this very homely sentence. As long as the question was,
whether their wits should have licence to go a-woolgathering or no, one
could feel no great concern to interfere: but it appears high time to come
to Shakspeare's rescue, when MR. COLLIER'S "clever" old commentator, with
some little variation in the letters, and not much less in the sense, reads
"kills" for dies; but then, in the _Merry Wives of Windsor_, Act II. Sc.
3., the same "clever" authority changes "cride-game (cride I ame), said I
well?" into "curds and cream, said I well?"--an alteration certainly not at
odds with the host's ensuing question, "said I well?" saving that that, to
liquorish palate, might seem a rather superfluous inquiry.

 "With sorrow they both _die and live_
  That unto richesse her hertes yeve."
      _The Romaunt of the Rose_, v. 5789-90.

 "He is a foole, and so shall he _dye and liue_,
  That thinketh him wise, and yet can he nothing."
      _The Ship of Fooles_, fol. 67., by Alexander Barclay, 1570.

{543}

    "Behold how ready we are, how willingly the women of Sparta will _die
    and live_ with their husbands."--_The Pilgrimage of Kings and Princes_,
    p. 29.

Except in Shakspeare's behalf, it would not have been worth while to
exemplify so unambiguous a phrase. The like remark may also be extended to
the next word that falls under consideration.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Kindly_, in accordance with kind, viz. nature. Thus, the love of a parent
for a child, or the converse, is kindly: one without natural affection
([Greek: astorgos]) is unkind, kindless, as in--

 "Remorselesse, treacherous, letcherous, _kindles_ villaine."
                          _Hamlet_, Act II. Sc. 2.

Thence _kindly_ expanded into its wider meaning of general benevolence. So
under another phase of its primary sense we find the epithet used to
express the excellence and characteristic qualities proper to the idea or
standard of its subject, to wit, genuine, thrifty, well-liking,
appropriate, not abortive, monstrous, prodigious, discordant. In the
Litany, "the _kindly_ fruits of the earth" is, in the Latin versions
"genuinus," and by Mr. Boyer rightly translated "les fruits de la terre
chaqu'un selon son espèce;" for which Pegge takes him to task, and
interprets _kindly_ "fair and good," through mistake or preference adopting
the acquired and popular, in lieu of the radical and elementary meaning of
the word. (_Anonymiana_, pp. 380--1. Century VIII. No. LXXXI.) The
conjunction of this adjective with _gird_ in a passage of _King Henry VI_.
has sorely gravelled MR. COLLIER: twice over he essays, with equal success,
to expound its purport. First, _loc. cit._, he finds fault with _gird_ as
being employed in rather an unusual manner; or, if taken in its common
meaning of taunt or reproof, then that _kindly_ is said ironically; because
there seems to be a contradiction in terms. (Monck Mason's rank distortion
of the words, there cited, I will not pain the reader's sight with.) MR.
COLLIER'S note concludes with a supposition that _gird_ may possibly be a
misprint. This is the misery! Men will sooner suspect the text than their
own understanding or researches. In Act I. Sc. 1. of _Coriolanus_,
dissatisfied with his previous note, MR. COLLIER tries again, and thinks a
_kindly gird_ may mean a gentle reproof. That the reader may be able to
judge what it does mean, it will be necessary to quote the king's _gird_,
who thus administers a kindly rebuke to the malicious preacher against the
sin of malice, _i.e._ chastens him with his own rod:

 "_King._ Fie, uncle Beauford, I have heard you preach,
  That mallice was a great and grievous sinne:
  And will not you maintaine the thing you teache,
  But prove a chief offender in the same?

  _Warn._ Sweet king: the bishop hath a _kindly gyrd_."
    First Part of _King Henry VI._, Act III. Sc. 1. 1st Fol.

A _gird_, akin to, in keeping with, fitting, proper to the cardinal's
calling; an evangelical _gird_ for an evangelical man: what more _kindly_?
_Kindly_, connatural, homogeneous. But now for a bushel of examples, some
of which will surely avail to insense the reader in the purport of this
epithet, if my explanation does not:

    "God in the congregation of the gods, what more proper and
    _kindly_"?--Andrewes' Sermons, vol. v. p. 212. _Lib. Ang.-Cath. Theol._

    "And that (pride) seems somewhat _kindly_ too, and to agree with this
    disease (the plague). That pride which swells itself should end in a
    tumour or swelling, as, for the most part, this disease doth."--_Id._,
    p. 228.

    "And so, you are found; and they, as the children of perdition should
    be, are lost. Here are you: and where are they? Gone to their own
    place, to Judas their brother. And, as is most _kindly_, the sons to
    the father of wickedness; there to be plagued with him for
    ever."--_Id._, vol. iv. p. 98.

    "For whatsoever, as the Son of God, He may do, it is _kindly_ for Him,
    as the Son of Man, to save the sons of men."--_Id._, p. 253.

    "There cannot be a more _kindly_ consequence than this, our not failing
    from their not failing: we do not, because they do not."--_Id._, p.
    273.

    "And here falls in _kindly_ this day's design, and the visible 'per
    me,' that happened on it."--_Id._, p. 289.

