At the end of August, Liebknecht,[26] a member of the Reichstag, set out
in his car for Louvain. He came to a village where there was
considerable excitement going on. The Germans had just found three of
their men lying dead on the road, and accused the peasants of being
responsible for the deed. Liebknecht examined them, and was not long in
obtaining proof that the Germans had been killed by Belgian riflemen. At
Huy there were shots in the night; two soldiers wounded; the populace
accused; the mayor arrested and condemned to death; but he knew that
there were no Allied troops in the neighbourhood, and also that his own
people had not fired a shot. "Shoot me, if you like," he said calmly,
"but not before extracting the bullets from the wounded." The officer,
less of a brute than some, gave his consent to this. The bullets in the
wounds were German bullets. But the Germans do not even require a
pretext to take action. Their first crime, to our knowledge, was on
August 4th. Some officers dashed up to Herve in a car, challenged two
civilians while crossing the bridge and, without giving them time to
answer, shot them down with revolvers.

In their private diaries they accuse one another, each throwing on his
neighbour the responsibility for crimes committed. A cavalryman writes:
"It is unfortunately true that the worst elements of our Army feel
themselves authorised to commit any sort of infamy. This charge applies
particularly to the A.S.C." A bombing officer: "_Rethel_, September 2nd.
Discipline becoming lax. Brandy. Looting. The blame lies with the
_infantry_." An infantry officer: "Discipline in our company
excellent--a contrast with the rest. The _Pioneers_ are not worth much.
As for the _Artillery_, they are a band of brigands." A final extract
seems to be the only one that gives the truth: "Brin ... _troops of all
arms_ are engaged in looting."

It has been possible sometimes to prove premeditation. On the 17th
August, a German officer was billeted with a Belgian magistrate. Their
talk turned on Dinant. "Dinant," said the officer, "is a condemned
town!" M. X ..., of Dinant, happening to be in another town, made the
acquaintance of a German officer, who said to him on August 20th, "You
come from Dinant? Don't go back. It's a bad place, and will be
destroyed." Troops on their march towards Andenne announced in villages
through which they passed that they were going to burn the town and
massacre the inhabitants. At Louvain, a German officer, treated
generously by a middle-class family, and appreciating their courtesy,
rushed to their house on the 25th at 11 o'clock in the morning,[27] and
earnestly pressed his hosts to leave without delay, refusing to give
them any explanation. The family, puzzled and perturbed by his appeal,
went off and so escaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the eyes of the moralist the worst of all their crimes will perhaps
be this, that the wretches tried to dishonour Belgium, after first
assassinating her. They have dared to say, write, and proclaim publicly,
and affirm to Neutrals, that Belgian women and girls had mutilated
German wounded soldiers, blinding them with scissors or with boiling
water. The reports of the Belgian Commission of Enquiry have been
replied to in a counter report[28] published as a German White Book.
This enquiry and these documents will live in history. In centuries to
come they will hang as a heavy weight on the Kaiser's memory and the
conscience of Germany. Listen to the pathetic conclusion of the Belgian
reply: "Before God and before man, the Belgian Government has no
hesitation in giving this as its opinion of the conduct of the German
Government towards the Belgian nation: 'He is twice guilty who violates
the rights of others and then attempts, with singular audacity, to
justify himself by imputing to his victim faults that were never
committed.'"[29]

It still remains to be explained how, by what means, by what deadly
influences, this German nation, consisting of men who, as individuals,
are not all brigands, has reached and been led to this state of
savagery? In the preparations for this _collective madness_ of a
people, what part has been played by its leaders of thought and its
politicians, by race and by education? This is a disturbing phenomenon
which students of mental disease[30] will study later, but on the
examination of which we cannot here embark. It is not for us to seek the
pathological cause for this moral decay--this decadence. We have only to
note its _effects_.


FOOTNOTES:

[24] Need it be noted here that even if in any locality an imprudent
civilian had fired a shot, it would still remain--in accordance with the
Hague Convention, International Law, and plain morality--a veritable
crime to massacre in a heap, haphazard, and without enquiry, so many
innocent souls?

[25] L.H. Grondijs, "Les Allemands en Belgique," p. cxix. (Paris,
Berger-Levrault, Publishers).

[26] Liebknecht was too honest and embarrassing a witness for Germany.
He has been thrown into prison. We salute him.

[27] The martyrdom of Dinant began on August 24th; that of Louvain on
the 25th August, at 5 p.m.

[28] It may be recalled that commissions of enquiry, at which _both_
sides should be represented, were offered by Belgian Socialists to
German Socialists, by Belgian Freemasons to German Freemasons, by
Belgian Bishops to German Bishops. Three proposals. Three refusals!

[29] France has suffered from similar calumny. We alluded above (note,
p. 37) to the declaration of a German army doctor that orders were given
to amputate, as a reprisal, "all wounded limbs." So _we_ are said to have
done that? A monstrous lie, which will be spurned indignantly by all who
know the honourable traditions of our ambulances and of our French
doctors. The _method of systematic lying_ has been shown to the life in
connection with the use of asphyxiating gas. The Boches made immense
preparations for the use of this gas. When their organization was
complete, they took care, before acting, to publish each day for a week
in their communiques, little notes announcing that the enemy were
"making wide use of this new method of warfare,"--a statement contrary
to fact, and known by them to be so, but one that was calculated to
mislead public opinion. When they considered that public opinion was
sufficiently "prepared," they launched their deadly gases and their
flaming liquids; and we needed a long time, needed also to overcome our
moral hesitation, to make sure of our defence and our reply. _Cynical
lying_ with the Germans is not only admitted, but _gloried in_. When it
was completely proved that, in order to start the war of 1870, Bismarck
had committed _forgery_. Professor Hans Delbrück exclaimed, "Blessed is
the hand that forged the Ems despatch."

[30] Who, except the specialist in mental diseases, can deal with this
proclamation of the Kaiser to his Army of the East?: "Remember that you
are the chosen people! The Spirit of the Lord has descended upon me as
Emperor of the Germans! I am the instrument of the Most High. I am His
sword. Woe and death unto those who resist my will! Woe and death unto
those who believe not in my mission!"


THE GERMAN APPEAL


APPEAL TO THE CIVILISED WORLD

Now that we have reached the close of this book of horrors, let us
impanel the 93 Germans of light and learning, and confront them with the
words of their own manifesto:

"As representatives of German Science and Art, we the undersigned,
declare that:--

"It is not true that Germany provoked this War....

"It is not true that we have criminally violated the neutrality of
Belgium....

"It is not true that our soldiers have made any attack on the life or
property of a single Belgian citizen without being forced to it by sheer
necessity....

"It is not true that our troops brutally destroyed Louvain....

"It is not true that we have conducted warfare in defiance of
International Law. Our soldiers commit neither undisciplined acts nor
cruelties....

" ... In this struggle we shall continue to the end to act as a
civilised nation, to whom the heritage of a Goethe, a Beethoven or a
Kant is as sacred as our own hearth and home. We answer for that in our
own name and on our honour."[31]

And since irony is more powerful than abuse, let us set down here,
without a word of comment, a few German utterances:--

The Kaiser: "We are the salt of the earth. God created us to civilise
the world."

The Cardinal-Archbishop of Cologne: "It is with God that our soldiers
set out for this war that has been inflicted upon us, and in which we
are fighting for the sacred treasures of Christianity, and for its own
particular gift, Kultur."

Dryander, a Protestant Minister, and preacher to the Royal Court at
Berlin: "On our side we are fighting with a self-control, a conscience,
and a gentleness unexampled perhaps in the history of the world."

Professor Lasson: "Our characteristics are humanity, gentleness,
conscience--the Christian virtues. In a world of evil, we stand for
love, and God is with us."

And, finally, this older and memorable saying of their great philosopher
Hegel: "The destiny of the German race is to supply the sustaining
pillars of Christian teaching."


FOOTNOTES:

[31] Speaking of honour, it is as well to recall here the reply made by
a German officer to the schoolmaster at Chanteheux. The schoolmaster
quite simply pledged his word of honour that no inhabitant had fired:
"You French pig," the brute shouted, "don't talk of honour--you have
none."


APPEAL BY BELGIAN WORKMEN


800,000 copies of this pamphlet had already been sent out when the world
rang with the tragic appeal of the Belgian workmen to their brother
workers in other lands. This appeal ought to be fixed on the door of
every factory and workshop. Every worker, every citizen, should study
it. We regret that we cannot reprint it here in full, but the following
extracts will at least give an idea of this new crime committed by
Germany:--

    "Workers,--In the name of the international bonds that
    unite all workmen, the working classes of
    Belgium--threatened, without exception, with slavery,
    deportation, and forced labour for the enemy's
    gain--send to the working classes in other lands a
    supreme appeal.

    "Germany, as you know, attacked and terrorised Belgium
    in 1914 for having defended her right to neutrality and
    her faith and honour.

