Produced by Bethanne M. Simms, Barbara Kosker, J Howse and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


WIKKEY

A SCRAP

By YAM

NEW YORK
E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY
31 WEST TWENTY-THIRD STREET
1888


WIKKEY.

A SCRAP.


CHAPTER I.


Mr. Ruskin has it that we are all kings and queens, possessing realms
and treasuries. However this may be, it is certain that there are souls
born to reign over the hearts of their fellows, kings walking about the
world in broad-cloth and fustian, shooting-jackets, ulsters, and what
not--swaying hearts at will, though it may be all unconscious of their
power; and only the existence of some such psychological fact as this
will account for the incident which I am about to relate.

Lawrence Granby was, beyond all doubt, one of these royal ones, his
kingdom being co-extensive with the circle of his acquaintance--not that
he was in the least aware of the power he exercised over all who came in
contact with him, as he usually attributed the fact that he "got on"
with people "like a house on fire" to the good qualities possessed by
"other fellows." Even the comforts by which he was surrounded in his
lodging by his landlady and former nurse, Mrs. Evans, he considered as
the result of the dame's innate geniality, though the opinion
entertained of her by underlings and by those who met her in the way of
business was scarcely as favorable. He was a handsome fellow too, this
Lawrence, six feet three, with a curly brown head and the frankest blue
eyes that ever looked pityingly, almost wonderingly, on the small and
weak things of the earth.

And the boy, Wikkey Whiston, was a crossing-sweeper. I am sorry for
this, for I fancy people are becoming a little tired of the race, in
story-books at least, but as he _was_ a crossing-sweeper it cannot be
helped. It would not mend matters much to invest him with some other
profession, especially as it was while sitting broom in hand, under the
lamp-post at one end of his crossing that he first saw Lawrence Granby,
and if he had never seen Lawrence Granby I should not be writing about
him at all.

It was a winter's morning in 1869, bright as it is possible for such a
morning to be in London, but piercingly cold, and Wikkey had brushed and
re-brushed the pathway--which scarcely needed it, the east wind having
already done half the work--just to put some feeling of warmth into his
thin frame before seating himself in his usual place beneath the
lamp-post. There were a good many passers-by, for it was the time of day
at which clerks and business men are on their way to their early
occupation, and the boy scanned each face in the fashion that had become
habitual to him in his life-long look out for coppers. Presently he saw
approaching a peculiarly tall figure, and looked at it curiously,
tracing its height upward from his own stunted point of view till he
encountered the cheery glance of Lawrence Granby. Wikkey was strangely
fascinated by the blue eyes looking down from so far above him, and
scarcely knowing what he did, he rose and went shambling on alongside of
the young man, his eyes riveted on his face. Lawrence, however, being
almost unconscious of the boy's presence till his attention was drawn to
him by the friend with whom he was walking, who said, laughing and
pointing to Wikkey, "Friend of yours, eh? Seems to know you." Then he
looked down again and met the curious, intent stare fixed upon him.

"Well, small boy! I hope you'll know me again," he said.

To which Wikkey promptly returned in the shrill, aggressively aggrieved
voice of the London Arab: "I reckon it don't do you no harm, guvner; a
cat may look at a king."

Lawrence laughed, and threw him a copper, saying, "You are a cheeky
little fellow," and went on his way.

Wikkey stood looking after him, and then picked up the penny, holding it
between his cold hands, as though it possessed some warming properties,
and muttering: "It seems fur to warm a chap to look at him;" and then he
sat down once more, still pondering over the apparition that had so
fascinated him. Oddly enough the imputation of cheekiness rankled in his
mind in a most unusual fashion--not that Wikkey entertained the faintest
objection to "cheek" in the abstract, and there were occasions on which
any backwardness in its use would betray a certain meanness of spirit:
for instance to the natural enemy of the race--the Bobby--it was only
right to exhibit as much of the article as was compatible with safety.
Indeed, the inventor of a fresh sarcasm, biting in its nature yet
artfully shrouded in language which might be safely addressed to an arm
of the law was considered by his fellows in the light of a public
benefactor. The errand-boy also, who, because he carried a parcel or
basket and happened to wear shoes, thought himself at liberty to cast
obloquy on those whose profession was of a more desultory nature, and
whose clothing was scantier--he must be held in check and his pride
lowered by sarcasms yet more biting and far less veiled. These things
were right and proper, but Wikkey felt uncomfortable under an imputation
of "cheekiness" from the "big chap" who had so taken his fancy, and
wondered at his own feeling. That evening, as Lawrence walked briskly
homeward, after his day's work, he became aware of the pale, wizen face
again looking up into his through the dusk, and of a shrill voice at his
side.

"I say, guvner, you hadn't no call fur to call me cheeky; I didn't mean
no cheek, only I likes the look of yer; it seems fur to warm a chap."

Lawrence stopped this time and looked curiously at the boy, at the odd,
keen eyes gazing at him so hungrily.

"You are a strange lad if you are not a cheeky one," he said. "Why do
you like the look of me?"

"I dunno," said Wikkey, and then he repeated his formula, "it seems to
warm a chap."

"You must be precious cold if that will do it, poor little lad. What's
your name?"

"Wikkey."

"Wikkey? Is that all?"

"No, I've another name about me somewheres, but I can't just mind of it.
They allus calls me Wikkey."

"Poor lad!" Lawrence said again, looking at the thin skeleton frame,
sadly visible through the tattered clothing. "Poor little chap! it's
sharp weather for such a mite as you. There! get something to warm you."
And feeling in his pocket he drew out half-a-crown, which he slipped
into Wikkey's hand, and then turned and walked away. Wikkey stood
looking after him with two big tears rolling down his dirty face; it
was so long since any one had called him a poor little chap, and he
repeated the words over and over as he threaded his way in the darkness
to the dreary lodging usually called "Skimmidges," and kept by a grim
woman of that name.

"It seems fur to warm a chap," he said again, as he crept under the
wretched blanket which Mrs. Skimmidge designated and charged for as a
bed.

From that day forward Wikkey was possessed by one idea--that of watching
for the approach of the "big chap," following his steps along the
crossing, and then, if possible, getting a word or look on which to live
until the next blissful moment should arrive. Nor was he often
disappointed, for Lawrence, having recently obtained employment in a
certain government office, and Wikkey's crossing happening to lie on
the shortest way from his own abode to the scene of his daily labor, he
seldom varied his route, and truth to say, the strange little figure,
always watching so eagerly for his appearance, began to have an
attraction for him. He wondered what the boy meant by it, and at first,
naturally connected the idea of coppers with Wikkey's devotion; but he
soon came to see that it went deeper than that, for with a curious
instinct of delicacy which the lad would probably have been quite unable
to explain to himself, he would sometimes hang back as Lawrence reached
the pavement, and nod his funny "Good night, guvner," from midway on his
crossing, in a way that precluded any suspicion of mercenary motives.

But at last there came a season of desolation very nearly verging on
despair. Day after day for a week--ten days--a fortnight--did Wikkey
watch in vain for his hero. Poor lad, he could not know that Lawrence
had been suddenly summoned to the country, and had arranged for a
substitute to take his duty for a fortnight; and the terrible thought
haunted the child that the big chap had changed his route, perhaps even
out of dislike to his--Wikkey's--attentions, and he should never see his
face again. The idea was horrible--so horrible that as it became
strengthened by each day's disappointment, and at last took possession
of the boy's whole soul, it sapped away what little vitality there was
in the small, fragile frame, leaving it an easy prey to the biting wind
which caught his breath away as he crept shivering around the street
corners, and to the frost which clutched the thinly-clad body. The
cough, which Wikkey scarcely remembered ever being without, increased to
such violence as to shake him from head to foot, and his breathing
became hard and painful; yet still he clung to his crossing with the
pertinacity of despair, scanning each figure that approached with eager,
hungry eyes. He had laid out part of Lawrence's half-crown on a woolen
muffler, which at first had seemed a marvel of comfort, but the keen
north-easter soon found its way even through that, and the hot pies on
which he expended the rest did not warm him for very long; there came a
day, too, when he could only hold his pie between his frozen hands,
dreamily wondering why he felt no wish to eat it, why the sight of it
made him feel so sick. A dreadful day that was. Mechanically, Wikkey
from time to time, swept his way slowly over the crossing, but the
greater part of the time he spent sitting at the foot of the lamp-post
at either end, coughing and shivering, and now and then dozing and
starting up in terror lest the "big chap" should have passed by during
his brief unconsciousness. Dusk came on, and then lamp-light, and still
Wikkey sat there. A policeman passing on his beat saw the haggard face
and heard the choking cough. "You'd best be off home, my lad," he said,
pausing a moment; "you don't look fit to be out on a night like this;"
and Wikkey, taking the remark to be only another form of the oft-heard
injunction to "move on," seized his broom and began sweeping as in an
evil dream--then sank down exhausted on the other side. It was getting
late, later than he usually stayed, but something seemed to warn him
that this might be his last chance, and he remained crouching there,
almost too far-gone to be conscious of the cold; till on a sudden there
came, piercing through the dull mist of returning consciousness, a
voice saying:

"Hullo, Wikkey! you are late to-night."

And starting upward with wild startled eyes the boy saw Lawrence Granby.
He staggered to his feet and gasped out:

"You've come, have you? I've been a watching and a waiting of you, and I
thought as you'd never come again."

Then the cough seized him, shaking him till he could only cling to the
lamp-post for support till it was over, and then slip down in a helpless
heap on the pavement.

"Wikkey, poor little chap, how bad you are," said Lawrence, looking
sadly down on the huddled-up figure; "you oughtn't to be out. You--you
haven't been watching for me like this?"

"I've been a watching and a watching," Wikkey answered, in faint hoarse
tones, "and I thought you'd taken to another crossing and I'd never see
you again."

"Poor little chap! poor little lad!" was all the young man could find to
say, while there rose up in his heart an impulse which his common sense
tried hard to suppress, but in vain. "Wikkey," he said, at last, "you
must come home with me;" and he took one of the claw-like hands in his
warmly gloved one, and walked on slowly, out of compassion for the
child's feeble limbs: even then, however, they soon gave way, and Wikkey
once more slid down crying on the pavement. There was nothing for it but
for Lawrence to gather up the child in his strong arms, and stride on,
wondering whether after all it were not too late to revive the
frozen-out life. For one blissful moment Wikkey felt himself held close
and warm, and his head nestled against the woolly ulster, and then all
was blank.

To say that Lawrence enjoyed his position would be going too far.
Whatever might be Wikkey's mental peculiarities, his exterior differed
in no way from that of the ordinary street Arab, and such close contact
could not fail to be trying to a young man more than usually sensitive
in matters of cleanliness; but Lawrence strode manfully on with his
strange burden, choosing out the least frequented streets, and earnestly
hoping he might meet none of his acquaintances, till at last he reached
his lodgings and admitted himself into a small well-lighted hall, where,
after calling "Mrs. Evans," he stood under the lamp awaiting her
arrival, not without considerable trepidation, and becoming each moment
more painfully conscious how extraordinary his behavior must appear in
her eyes.

"Mrs. Evans," he began, as the good lady emerged from her own domain on
the ground floor. "Mrs. Evans, I have brought this boy"--then he
paused, not knowing how to enter upon the needful explanation under the
chilling influence of Mrs. Evans' severe and respectful silence.

"I dare say you are surprised," he went on at last in desperation; "but
the poor child is terribly ill, dying, I think, and if you could do
anything."

"Of course, Mr. Lawrence, you do as you think proper," Mrs. Evans
returned, preserving her severest manner, though she eyed Wikkey with
some curiosity; "only if you had mentioned when you engaged my rooms
that you intended turning them into a refuge for vagabonds, it would
have been more satisfactory to all parties."

"I know all that. I know its very inconsiderate of me, and I am very
sorry; but you see the little fellow is so bad--he looks just like
little Robin, nurse."

Mrs. Evans sniffed at the comparison, but the allusion to the child she
had so fondly tended, as he sank into an early grave, had its effect;
together with the seldom revived appellation of "nurse," and her
mollified manner encouraged Lawrence to continue.

"If you wouldn't mind getting a hot bath ready in the kitchen, I will
manage without troubling you."

"I hope, Mr. Lawrence, that I know my place better than that," was the
reply, and forthwith Mrs. Evans, who, beneath a somewhat stern exterior,
possessed a really good heart, took Wikkey under her wing, administered
warmth and restoratives, washed the grimy little form, cropped and
scrubbed the matted locks, and soon the boy, dreamily conscious and
wondrously happy, was lying before a blazing fire, clean and fair to
look on, enveloped in one of Mrs. Evans' own night-dresses. Then the
question arose, where was Wikkey to pass the night, followed by a
whispered dialogue and emphatic "Nothing will be safe" from the lady of
the house. All of which the boy perfectly understanding, he remarked:

"I aint a prig; I'll not take nothink."

