However much it may seem contrary to the theory of romantic young men
and women, I am forced to state that notwithstanding her former love for
Hiram Meeker, Emma Tenant had not been six months in Europe before the
wound might be considered healed. As her mind became enlarged by taking
in the variety of scenes which were presented, scenes ever fresh and
changing, she was better enabled to judge how far such a person as Hiram
Meeker could ultimately make her happy. Day by day she saw his character
more clearly and in a truer light, and could thus fully appreciate the
narrow escape she had from a life of wretchedness.

Before she encountered young Lawrence, she had become entirely
disenchanted. The former illusion was fully dispelled, and her heart
left quite free to be engrossed by a new interest.

Young ladies and gentlemen! Am I giving currency to theories which you
are accustomed to consider heretical? I am but recording the simple
truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the time Emma Tenant had reached New York the affianced of Henry
Lawrence (subject, of course, to her parents' approbation), Hiram Meeker
was engaged to--Miss Thorne.

Once decided on his course, Hiram pursued his object with the tenacity
of a slow hound.

He took advantage of every weakness. He operated on her jealous nature
so as to subject her to all the tortures which that spirit begets. By
turns he flattered and browbeat her. He was sunny and amiable, or
crabbed and austere, as suited his purpose. In fact, he so played on
the poor girl, whose vanity and suspicion and jealous fear of a rival
were intense, that he made her life miserable. She was even thwarted in
the quarter where her strength principally lay. For Hiram treated her
fortune as a mere nothing at all. If she, as had been her custom, headed
a subscription for some charity at St. Jude's, Hiram was sure to put
down his name for double the amount in close proximity to hers.

At last her spirit was completely broken by the persevering, unsparing,
flattering, cajoling, remorseless Hiram. So she stopped quarrelling, and
yielded. Then, how charming was our hero! Amiable, kind, desirous to
please, yet despotic to an extent: never yielding the power and
ascendency he had gained over her.

The great point now was to prevent any marriage settlement. Being
married, since Miss Thorne's property was all 'personal,' he could at
once possess himself of it. Prior to the engagement, Hiram had often
repeated that he would many no woman who maintained a separate estate.
And so much did he dwell on this that Miss Thorne was actually afraid to
speak to her solicitor on the subject.

In the summer succeeding the gay season we have spoken of, Hiram Meeker
and Arabella Thorne were united at St. Jude's by the Rev. Charles
Myrtle, in presence of 'the most aristocratic and fashionable concourse
ever assembled on such an occasion.' The Bennetts were present in great
profusion. Mrs. Myrtle, all smiles and tears, stood approvingly by. Mr.
Myrtle, so all declared, never performed the ceremony so well before.
Miss Innis had a conspicuous place in the proceedings, she being the
first of the four bridesmaids who attended Arabella to the altar.

I have never been able to explain her selection of one she had so feared
and hated as a rival, nor Miss Innis's acceptance. But there she stood,
very beautiful, and apparently much interested in what was going on.

       *       *       *       *       *

After they had returned from their wedding tour, Hiram took possession
of his wife's securities. His heart throbbed with excitement and his
eyes glistened as he looked them over.

Mr. Bennett had fallen considerably short of the mark. Here were more
than two hundred and fifty thousand dollars!

Just then real estate had fallen to the extreme lowest point after the
collapse of the former high speculative prices. Hiram took immediate
advantage of this state of things. During the next three months he had
sold out his wife's securities, and invested two hundred thousand
dollars in vacant lots admirably situated in the upper part of the city.
The balance he put into his business.

From that period it did not require a heavy discounting of the future to
write Hiram Meeker a MILLIONAIRE.


END OF PART II.


DEAD!


  Dead--dead--no matter, the skies are blue,
    In their fathomless depths above,
  And the glad Earth's robes are as bright in hue,
  And worn with as regal a grace, and true,
  As they were on the day they were woven new
    By the hand of Infinite Love.

  Hush! hush!--there is music out in the street,
    A popular martial strain;
  While the constant patter of countless feet
  Keeps time to the strokes of the drum's quick beat,
  And the echoing voices that mix and meet
    Swell out in a glad refrain.

  Lost--lost! Oh, why, when the earth is bright,
    And soft is the zephyr's breath,
  Oh! why, when the world is so full of light,
  Should the wild heart, robed in a cloak of night,
  Send up from frozen lips and white
    A desolate cry of death?

  Dead--dead! How wearily drag the days;
    And wearily life runs on!
  The skies look cold, through a misty haze,
  That curdles the gold of the bright sun's rays,
  And the dead leaves cover the banks and braes,
    A shroud of the summer gone.

  Last year--nay! nay! I do not complain;
    There are graves in the heart of all;
  So I do not murmur; 'twere weak and vain;
  I accept in silence my share of pain,
  And the clouds, with their fringes of crimson stain,
    That over my young life fall.

  There were beautiful days last year, I mind,
    When the maple trees turned red,
  They flew away like the sportive wind,
  But I gathered the joys they left behind,
  As I gather the leaves, but to-day I find
    That the joys, like the leaves, _are dead_.

  One year! It is past, and I stand _alone_,
    Where I stood with another then;
  'Tis well--I had scorned to have held _my own_
  From the bloody strife, though my soul had known
  That _his_ life would ebb ere the day was gone,
    Amid thousands of nameless men.

  _Nameless_, yet never a one less dear
    Than the _dearest_ of all the dead;
  I weep--but, Father, my bitter tear
  Falleth not down o'er a _single_ bier--
  I mourn not the joys of the lost last year,
    But the rivers of bright blood shed.


RECONSTRUCTION.


Reconstruction sounds the key note of American politics to-day. It is as
true now as when Webster first said it, that 'the people of this
country, by a vast and countless majority, are attached to the Union.'
Reconstruction is the hope of the Union; and the hope of the Union is
the controlling energy of the war. Hence, naturally, the theories that
prevail in regard to reconstruction begin to define the political
parties of the immediate future. United on the war, which they hold to
be not simply inevitable, but also a war in the combined interests of
liberty and order, and, therefore, just, the people seem likely about to
be divided on questions suggested by the probably speedy termination of
the war. The Union one and indivisible is the fundamental maxim on which
all such questions must be based. So long as the name of Washington is
reverenced among them, the American people will accept no other basis of
settlement. The Union is to them the security and hope of all political
blessings--liberty, justice, political order--which blessings it
insures. Disunion is revolution, and puts them in peril. Therefore, no
theory of reconstruction is practicable which countenances disunion, or
in anywise assails the principle of the eternal oneness and
indivisibility of the Union.


THEORIES OF RECONSTRUCTION.

There are three prominent theories of reconstruction now before the
people. The first, as being in the natural and constitutional order of
things, has shaped the policy of the Administration in its whole conduct
of affairs. It supposes the rebellion to be an armed insurrection
against the authority of the United States, usurping the functions and
powers of various State Governments, and seeking to overthrow the
Nation. So considering it, the whole power of the Nation has been
brought to bear to subdue it, in accordance with the just authority
conferred by the Constitution, which is the organic law of the Nation.
The steadfast prosecution of this policy, upheld and supported by the
people with a unanimity and patient faith that have strengthened the
cause of democratic government all over the earth, has rescued from the
rebellion and restored to their undisputed position in the Union, the
States of Kentucky, Missouri, and now, at last, Tennessee, with a
portion of Virginia. Such are the results to the Union of the natural
and constitutional policy that aims at reconstruction through
restoration.

The two other theories spoken of may be best considered together, as
they originated in a common purpose, namely, the abolition of slavery,
which it is supposed cannot be attained by the ordinary processes of war
under the Constitution. Their advocates, however, contend that they are
strictly constitutional.

The first of these theories supposes that the States included in the
rebellion have, by the fact of rebellion, forfeited all rights as
States. It is argued that States, like individuals, forfeit their rights
by rebellion.

The other theory supposes that the States having rebelled, may be dealt
with as foreign States; so that, according to the laws of war, the
nation may treat them altogether as alien enemies, and in the event of
the Nation's triumph, the States will be in all respects like conquered
provinces.

It will be observed that each of these theories ignores the principle of
the indivisibility of the Union, and presupposes a dismemberment of it
on the part of every rebellious State.


I. THEORY OF STATE SUICIDE.

Probably no one will deny that rebellion works a forfeiture of all
political rights to those engaged in it. The subject who renounces his
allegiance can claim no protection: just as the Government that should
fail to protect its subjects, could not claim their allegiance.
Allegiance and protection are reciprocal and interdependent duties, and
the failure of one involves and works the failure of the other. So that
it might be quite correct to declare, in reference to the Southern
rebellion, that a rebel has no rights which the United States is bound
to respect. It will be perceived that the question of _right_ is here
spoken of, and not the question of _policy_. No feeling of sympathy with
a defeated people, not the thousand-fold natural ties that bind the
North and the South, should blind our eyes to the main question of
right. Any policy toward repentant rebels that is not magnanimous and
honorably befitting our complete triumph, can never find favor with the
American people, nor ought to; but the incalculably precious interests
of the Nation will not admit of any uncertain precedents in regard to
secession. The precedent must be perfectly clear. It must be established
unqualifiedly and unalterably that secession is treason, and that
whoever is concerned in it is a traitor and must expect a traitor's
punishment. It has been common to call secession a political heresy. The
rebellion, the fruit of secession, stamps it as more and worse than
simply a heresy. It is inchoate treason, and only awaits the favorable
conditions to become open and flagrant. The patriotism, therefore, of
any man may fairly be suspected, who, refusing to be taught by the
experience of this war, revealing these things as in the clear light of
midday, can speak softly and with 'bated breath' of secession. His
country's baptism of fire has not regenerated such a man.

The attempt, as the legitimate and inevitable result of secession, to
overthrow a Government whose burdens rested so lightly on its citizens
as to have given rise to a current phrase that they were unfelt; and yet
whose magnificent power gave it rank among the first of nations,
securing full protection to the humblest of its citizens, and causing
the name of American to be as proud a boast as Roman in the day of
Rome's power; and withal being the recognized refuge and hope of liberty
and humanity all over the globe, as vindicating the right royalty of
man;--the attempt to overthrow such a Government must stand forever as
the blackest of crimes. For the Confederate treason is more than treason
against the United States: it is a crime against humanity, and a
conspiracy in the interest of despotism, denying the royalty of man.

But, to return to our argument, a distinction is carefully to be noted
between the consequences of rebellion to the individuals who engage in
it and to the State which it assumes to control. It needs no argument to
show that rebellion against the supreme power of a State does not
necessarily affect the permanence of that power. If the rebellion fails,
the rightful authority resumes its functions. If the rebellion succeeds,
the movers of it assume the powers of the State, and succeed to all its
functions. The civil wars of England furnish abundant illustration of
this principle. However the course of Government may for the time have
been checked, and its whole machinery disarranged, the subsidence of the
tumult left the state, in every case, as an organic whole, the same. The
consequences of unsuccessful rebellion fell only upon the persons
engaged in it. So, in the successive changes that befell France after
the Revolution, the state, as the body politic, remained unchanged. In
dealing with the question of rebellion in our country the same principle
applies, only another element enters into the calculation. That element
results from the peculiar character of our Government in its twofold
relation to the people of State and Nation. The Government springs
directly from the people, who have ordained separate functions for the
two separate organisms, or bodies politic, the State and the Nation.
Strictly considered, there are not two Governments, there is only one
Government. Certain functions of it are ordained to be executed by the
State, and certain other functions by the Nation, How, then, can the
State, as such, assume to set aside the ordained functions of the
Nation? How, on the other hand, might the Nation assume to control the
ordained functions of the State? Each to its own master standeth or
falleth, and that master is the people. Hence, the absurdity of the
doctrine which claims the right of a State to resume powers once
delegated to the Nation. For the State, as such, never delegated those
powers. Hence, the absurdity of secession as a dogma in American
politics. And hence, also, it equally appears how absurd is any claim on
the part of the Nation to visit upon the State organism the penalties of
the treason of individuals against itself.

Let it be remembered that the State derives none of its rights from the
Nation. How, then, can it be said to forfeit its rights to the Nation?
The State is a separate and distinct organism, deriving its rights
directly from the people within its territorial limit. They established
it, and to them alone it is responsible. In the same manner, the people
of the whole country, without regard to the territorial limits of
States, established the Nation. The people of the whole country,
therefore, have a permanent interest in the Nation, and no one portion
of them may rightfully assume to set aside its supreme obligations, in
disregard and violation of the organic law. If certain of the people of
any State have rebelled against the National Government, attempting thus
to set aside its paramount obligations, undoubtedly their lives and
property are forfeit to the Nation. But how can their individual treason
work a forfeiture of the State powers and functions? These have been
usurped, indeed, by the armed combinations of the rebellion, but they
are still complete, only awaiting the overthrow of the armed
combinations to be resumed and controlled by those persons within the
same territorial limit who have not rebelled.

It is objected to this view that it assumes a substratum of loyal people
still existing in the rebel States. The assumption is certainly
warrantable when we read of the scenes--witnesses against the Southern
Confederacy whose eloquence surpasses speech--that have attended the
overthrow of the rebellion in Tennessee; and when we remember that even
in South Carolina there are such names as Judge Pettigrew and Governor
Aiken; and when in New York city alone there is to-day a large body of
Georgians, whose loyalty has made them exiles, and who only await the
day of their State's deliverance to return and restore their State's
loyalty; and when the signs in North Carolina are so positive that a
Union element yet survives there; and when even far-off Texas has her
loyal exiles in our midst. Considering those 'signs of the times,' the
assumption that there are loyal men in the rebellious States seems
certainly a valid and proper one, and one on which fairly to rest an
argument. But it is believed that the argument is good without this
assumption. Suppose that, the rebellion being overthrown, not even one
man remains loyal to the Nation within the territorial limits of any
single State, has the State ceased to exist? A State is called, in the
language of publicists, a body politic. It is, in effect, a sort of
corporation, administered for the benefit of its inhabitants by trustees
whom they appoint. One of the maxims of law is that a trust shall not
fail for lack of a person to execute it. It might, therefore, in such a
case as the one supposed, be competent for the United States to
designate persons who should take charge of the State Government, and
administer it in trust for the children of its former recreant
inhabitants, and as their legal and political successors. Reverting to
the settled principles of the law, we find that the essential idea of a
corporation is its immortality, or individuality, or the perpetual
succession of persons under it, notwithstanding the changes of the
individual persons who compose it. The State, like a corporation, has an
individuality of its own, which is not affected by the changes of the
individual persons composing it. It has an immortality, not affected by
their entire extinction. Its own organic existence is not thereby
extinguished. In other words, the State cannot be merged, or swallowed
up, in the Nation.

It seems, then, that the doctrine of State suicide, as propounded in so
many words, by its author, in the original resolutions offered in
Congress, is equally repugnant to the Constitution and good sense. It
is, in effect, revolutionary; for it would dismember the Union, by
striking out of existence States as purely and completely sovereign
within the sphere of their functions as the Nation itself. It is idle to
deny that it thus recognizes and gives support to the doctrine of
secession; for it accepts the results of secession, and supposes that
accomplished by the rebellion which the war is meant to thwart and
prevent, to wit, the disruption of the ties that bind the States and the
Nation together in one harmonious whole.

What are we fighting for? To restore constitutional order; to vindicate
'the sacredness of nationality.' In other words, to combat the principle
of secession, by force and arms, in its last appeal, just as we have
always combated and opposed it hitherto on the platform and in the
senate. But what right have we to oppose secession by coercion? The
right of self-preservation. For secession loosens the very corner-stone
of our Government, so that the whole arch falls, breaking the Union into
an infinity of wretched States. Admitting secession, our Constitution
is, indeed, no stronger than 'a rope of sand.' We fight to maintain the
Constitution as an Ordinance of Sovereignty (as it has been forcibly
styled) over the whole Nation. We must so maintain it, or surrender our
national existence. This being so, we cannot admit any such right as
secession; for that would be to sanction the revolutionary doctrine
that a body of men, usurping a State Government, and calling themselves
the State, can absolve their fellow citizens from their allegiance to
the Constitution, the supreme law of the land. The rebel States are,
then, still members of the Union. Otherwise, we are waging an unjust
war. Otherwise we falsify and contradict the record of our Revolution,
and are striving to reduce to dependence a people who are equally
striving to maintain their independence. There is no justification for
this war save in the plea for the National Union; no warrant for it save
in the preservation of the Constitution, which is the palladium and
safeguard of the Nation. The Southern rebellion has usurped the
functions and powers of various State Governments: when it is
overthrown, the victims of its usurpation will be restored to their
former rights. _Their_ allegiance is still perfect. Nothing but their
own act can absolve them from it.


II. THEORY OF THE STATES AS ALIEN ENEMIES.

The advocates of the theory that the rebel States are foreign enemies,
and may be treated according to all the laws of war with foreign
nations, seek support for their views in the decision of the Supreme
Court rendered last March in the Hiawatha and other prize cases. The
question was raised in those cases whether we had the right to
confiscate the property of persons resident in the rebel States who
might be non-combatants or loyal men. The Court decided that 'all
persons residing within this territory (the rebellious region) whose
property may be used to increase the revenues of the hostile power, are
_in this contest_ liable to be treated as enemies, _though not
foreigners_.' This decision defines the _status_ of persons in the
rebellion region _bello flagranti_, or while the war lasts. It calls all
persons within that region enemies, because their 'property may be used
to increase the revenues of the hostile power.' Could their property be
so used after the defeat of the rebellious power? The decision does not
assume to determine that question. Nor could it come within the province
of the Court to decide what might at some future time be the condition
and _status_ of loyal men at the South.

It is said that in accordance with this decision all persons in the
rebellious States are to be treated as alien enemies, and the deduction
is hastily made that as to them all the Constitution, like any treaty,
or compact, with foreign States, is, by the fact of rebellion, annulled.
Aside from the fact that the Constitution is not a compact, and when
rightly understood cannot be confounded with a compact, such a
conclusion is at war with that essential principle of our Government,
which denies to any body of men the right to absolve their unwilling
fellow citizens from their allegiance, that is, denies the right of
secession. Such citizens, whose will is overpowered by force, have never
proved false to their fealty. The Constitution is still theirs; they are
still parties to it; and their rights are still sacred under it.

That no such conclusion is warranted by the decision above referred to,
will still further appear from the following considerations:--Our
dealings with foreign nations are regulated by the principles of
international law, and, according to that law, war abrogates all
treaties between belligerents, as of course. But international law
supposes the belligerents to be of equal and independent sovereignty.
This is the very point in dispute in our contest with the rebellion. We
deny to the rebellion the attribute of independent sovereignty, as we
deny it to every one of the States included in the rebellion. Our
Constitution is, in no sense, a treaty between sovereign States. It is
an organic law, establishing a nation, ordained by the people of the
whole country. Therefore, only such persons under it as voluntarily wage
war upon it, can be strictly called enemies: only such persons, on the
defeat of the rebellion, will be liable to be treated as enemies. As to
all men who have not participated in the rebellion, it is not easy to
see how war, rebellion, usurpation, or any power on earth can destroy
their rights under the Constitution.


III. THEORY OF THE CONSTITUTION AND COMMON SENSE.

Reconstruction, then, must come, as the Union came, by the action of the
people within the territorial limits of each recreant State. That it
will so come is, in a manner, assured and made certain by the action of
Kentucky, Missouri, Virginia, and Tennessee. Surely, we cannot expect
the political action of an oppressed minority, in any one of the rebel
States, to anticipate the National forces sent for their deliverance.
The armed combinations in those States have overborne all opposition,
and, during the past two years, have wielded the complete powers of a
military despotism. The Southern confederacy is a monstrous usurpation
in each and every rebel State. The United States is intent on dethroning
that usurpation, for the purpose of restoring, to every man who asks it,
the rights guaranteed to him by the Constitution of his fathers; and for
the equal purpose of asserting its rightful powers as the National
Government under the Constitution. The present Administration, then, has
taken the only course possible to be taken without open and flagrant
violation of the Constitution, which is the sole and sufficient warrant
for the war. For this course Abraham Lincoln is entitled to the
gratitude of the people. His conscientious policy has been the salvation
of the Republic, maintaining its integrity against armed rebellion, on
the one hand, and, on the other hand, saving it from destructives whose
zeal in a noble cause has often blinded their minds to the higher claims
of the Nation: in whose existence, nevertheless, that cause alone has
promise of success.

But, it is asked, does not rebellion affect the institution of slavery?
Not as a State institution, so far as the municipal law of any State is
concerned. That the slaves of rebels may properly be confiscated, as
other property, seems not only reasonable and right, but also in
accordance with well-settled decisions of the Supreme Court. Moreover,
the Constitution gives to Congress the power to prescribe the punishment
of treason, and undoubtedly the Supreme Court will hold the Confiscation
Act under that power to be constitutional and valid.

But does not the Emancipation Proclamation operate to confer freedom on
all slaves within the rebel States? This question must likewise be
brought to the Supreme Court for adjudication. If the Proclamation can
be shown to have the qualities of a legislative act, doubtless it will
operate as a statute of freedom to all slaves within the districts named
in it. But it must be remembered that the Executive cannot make law. The
Proclamation, as an edict of the military commander, can only operate
upon the condition of such slaves as are in a position to take advantage
of its terms. As such military edict, therefore, it might be of no force
outside of the actual military lines of the United States armies.

But the fact of freedom to many thousands of slaves by reason of this
war, and the inevitable speedy breaking down of the institution of
slavery as one of the consequences to slaveholders of their mad folly,
are beyond dispute, and assure us of the wise Providence of Him who
maketh even the wrath of man to praise Him, and the remainder of wrath
He will restrain.


VIRGINIA.


One of the most curious and interesting results of that eclectic spirit
which has brought into suggestive relations the different spheres of
human knowledge and inquiry, is the application of geographical facts to
historical interpretation. The comprehensive researches of Ritter and
the scientific expositions of Humboldt enable us to recognize the vast
influence of local conditions upon social development, and to account
for the peculiar traits of special civilization by the distribution of
land and water, and the agency of climate and position. In the calm
retrospect of the present crisis of our national history, when the
philosopher takes the place of the partisan and the exciting incidents
of the present are viewed in the chastened light of the past, it will be
seen and felt that a kind of poetical justice and moral necessity made
Virginia the scene of civil and physical strife. Of all the States, she
represents, both in her annals and her resources, her scenery, and her
social character, the average national characteristics: natives of each
section of the land find within her limits congenial facts of life and
nature, of manners and industry: like her Southern sisters, she has
known all the consequences of slavery--but at certain times and places,
free labor has thriven; commerce and agriculture, the miner, the
mariner, the tradesman, not less than the planter, found therein scope
for their respective vocations; the life of the sea coast, of the
mountains, and of the interior valleys--the life of the East, West, and
Middle States was there reproduced in juxtaposition with that of the
South. Nowhere in the land could the economist more distinctly trace the
influence of free and slave labor upon local prosperity: nowhere has the
aristocratic element been more intimately in contact with the
democratic. Her colonial record indicates a greater variety in the
original population than any other province: she has given birth to more
eminent statesmen, has been the arena of more fierce conflicts of
opinion, and is associated most directly with problems of government, of
society, and of industrial experiment. On her soil were first landed
African captives; and when the curse thus entailed was dying out, it was
renewed and aggravated by the inducement to breed slaves for the cotton
and sugar plantations. From Virginia flowed the earliest stream of
immigration to the West, whereby a new and mighty political element was
added to the Republic: there are some of the oldest local memorials of
American civilization: for a long period she chiefly represented
Southern life and manners to the North: placed between the extremes of
climate--producing the staples of all the States, except those bordering
on the Gulf--earlier colonized, prominent in legislation, fruitful in
eminent men, she was more visited by travellers, more written about,
better known, and therefore gathered to and grafted upon herself more of
the rich and the reckless tendencies and traits of the country; and
became thus a central point and a representative State--which destiny
seems foreshadowed by her physical resources and her local situation.
Except New England, no portion of our country has been more fully and
faithfully illustrated as to its scenery, domestic life, and social
traits, by popular literature, than Virginia. The original affinity of
her colonial life with the ancestral traditions of England, found apt
expression in Spenser's dedication of his peerless allegory to
Elizabeth, wherein the baptism of her remote territory, in honor of her
virginal fame, was recognized. The first purely literary work achieved
within her borders was that of a classical scholar, foreshadowing the
long dependence of her educated men upon the university culture of Great
Britain; and those once admired sketches of scenery and character which
gave to William Wirt, in his youth, the prestige of an elegant writer,
found there both subjects and inspiration; while the American school of
eloquence traces its early germs to the bar and legislature of the Old
Dominion, where the Revolutionary appeals of Patrick Henry gave it a
classic fame. The most prolific and kindhearted of English novelists,
when he had made himself a home among us and looked round for a
desirable theme on which to exercise his facile art, chose the
Southampton Massacre as the nucleus for a graphic story of family life
and negro character. The 'Swallow Barn' of Kennedy is a genuine and
genial picture of that life in its peaceful and prosperous phase, which
will conserve the salient traits thereof for posterity, and already has
acquired a fresh significance from the contrast its pleasing and naive
details afford to the tragic and troublous times which have since almost
obliterated the traces of all that is characteristic, secure, and
serene. The physical resources and amenities of the State were recorded
with zest and intelligence by Jefferson before Clinton had performed a
like service for New York, or Flint for the West, or any of the numerous
scholars and writers of the Eastern States for New England. The very
fallacy whereon treason based her machinations and the process whereby
the poison of Secession was introduced into the nation's life-blood,
found exposition in the insidious fiction of a Virginian--Mr. George
Tucker--secretly printed years ago, and lately brought into renewed
prominence by the rebellion. 'Our Cousin Veronica,' a graceful and
authentic family history, from the pen of an accomplished lady akin to
the people and familiar with their life, adds another vivid and
suggestive delineation thereof to the memorable illustrations by Wirt,
Kennedy, and James; while a score of young writers have, in verse and
prose, made the early colonial and the modern plantation and waterplace
life of the Old Dominion, its historical romance and social and scenic
features, familiar and endeared; so that the annals and the aspects of
no State in the Union are better known--even to the local peculiarities
of life and language--to the general reader, than those of Virginia,
from negro melody to picturesque landscape, from old manorial estates to
field sports, and from improvident households to heroic beauties; and
among the freshest touches to the historical and social picture are
those bestowed by Irving in some of the most charming episodes of his
'Life of Washington.'

