TOWARDS the end of the twenty-four years thus devoted to study, Akiba
turned his steps homewards, accompanied by a large band of disciples,
which tradition numbers in the thousands. At the rumor that a great
Rabbi was coming, Rachel's heart was all aflutter with hope and
expectation. Perhaps it was he at last! The whole village went out to
meet him, she with the rest. When she saw that it was indeed he, she
fell on her knees before him sobbing and began kissing his feet. The
pupils surrounding Akiba wanted to push her aside, but he said, "Let
her be. What knowledge I possess and what knowledge you possess
belongs to her." When Kalba Sabua heard that a great Rabbi had come to
town, not dreaming that it was his son-in-law, he made up his mind to
go to him and have his vow absolved, for at the sight of his
daughter's misery his heart had softened, and but for his vow he would
long since have taken her back. He came to the Rabbi and the Rabbi
said to him, "If thou hadst known that her husband would one day be a
great scholar, wouldst thou have vowed?" "If he knew even one chapter
or even one Halakah, I would not have vowed," was the reply. "I am
he," said Akiba simply. At these words Kalba Sabua stared in
amazement, and then fell at his feet and begged pardon for all his
past unkindness towards both Akiba and Rachel. To make more
substantial amends he gave them half his fortune and they lived in
comfort ever after. The affluence in which Akiba henceforth lived,
contrasted with the poverty of his student days when he used to cut
wood for a living, is thus quaintly described in the Talmud: "When he
was a student Akiba used to fetch a bundle of wood every day. Half he
sold for food and half for clothing. But before Akiba departed from
this world, he had tables of silver and of gold, and he climbed into
his bed on golden ladders." His wife too had the satisfaction of
receiving from him and wearing the "Golden Jerusalem," that Akiba had
wished he could give her in the days of their poverty. Indeed the
magnificence of Rachel's jewels called forth a protest on the part of
the students of Akiba's academy. "Thou hast put us to shame before our
wives," they said, "for our wives do not possess any such precious
ornaments." "Ah, yes," said Akiba, "but she has suffered much with me
in the Torah."


_Akiba's Virile Ethics and Philosophy_

AKIBA'S philosophical speculations were no less famous than his
Halakic activities. Just about this time all sorts of hybrid religions
made up of decadent Greek philosophy and of dying Pagan creeds were in
vogue--the various forms of Gnosticism. Christianity--Jewish
Gnosticism, that is--was only one of the many perversions that Judaism
had to combat. These religions exercised a particular fascination
because they dealt largely in esoteric doctrines and in theosophic
speculation. There was great danger that Jewish minds might be led
astray, as in fact some were. Of the four great Rabbis, who the Talmud
says entered upon theosophic studies, only Akiba came through safely.
Upon ben Azzai and ben Zoma, both brilliant young students, and upon
Aher (Elisha ben Abuya) it had disastrous effects. Ben Azzai died
young. Ben Zoma went mad and Elisha ben Abuyah repudiated Judaism.
Wherefore the Rabbis never mentioned his name but always spoke of him
as "_Aher_" ("the Other").

Akiba's philosophy and ethics are revealed in the following sayings:

"Labor is honorable to man."

"They err who say I will sin now and repent after. The day of
atonement brings no forgiveness to the insincere." This saying is
strikingly similar to Dante's famous line in the Inferno: "No one can
repent and will at once."

The eternal problem why the righteous suffer and the wicked prosper is
answered by Akiba in this way. The righteous are punished in this
world for their few sins, so that in the next world they may receive
only reward. The wicked on the other hand are rewarded here for what
little good they do, so that in the next world they may receive only
punishment.

"Beloved are Israel, for they are called children of the All-present,
as it is said, 'Ye are children unto the Lord your God.' Beloved are
Israel for unto them was given the desirable instrument by which the
world was created, as it is written 'For I give you good doctrine,
forsake ye not my Torah.'" Israel is therefore the Chosen People. Nay
more. In another place Akiba says, "Even the poorest of Israel are
looked upon as nobles," and even R. Ishmael agreed with him that
"Every Jew is a royal prince." Our motto to-day of "noblesse oblige"
is the same thought in a strange tongue. "By which the world was
created" means that Akiba identified the Torah with "Wisdom," which is
described in Proverbs, in that famous chapter beginning "Doth not
wisdom cry and understanding put forth her voice?" as having been "set
up from everlasting, from the beginning before the earth was."
Adapting the opening verse of John, Akiba could very well have said,
"In the beginning was the Torah and the Torah was with God," but he
certainly would not have said, "and the Torah was God."

"Everything is foreseen," Akiba goes on to say, "yet freedom of choice
is given; and the world is judged by grace, yet all is according to
the amount of work." His doctrine of "grace" and "works" was that
"grace" is acquired through works, or in non-theological language,
God's favor goes to the man of good deeds. This was in opposition to
the Christian teaching that "grace" came through faith alone. God's
justice is tempered with mercy; yet even divine mercy is dealt out
fairly, says Akiba. He had such a strong sense of right that he even
condemned the action of the Israelites in despoiling the Egyptians.
"It is equally wrong to deceive a heathen as to deceive an Israelite,"
he said. Akiba agreed with Hillel that the chief commandment of the
Torah is, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself" (Lev. XIX, 18),
which again is nothing more than an application of the principle of
justice in our dealings with our fellow-men.


_A Man of the People_

IN spite of his great fame Akiba was the most modest of men. While
still a student at Jamnia Akiba was noted for his humility. R.
Jochanan ben Nuri told how he had occasion several times to complain
of Akiba to the Patriarch and how each time Akiba took his reprimand
meekly. Nay more. Despite these reproofs Akiba was all the more
affectionate towards R. Jochanan, so that the latter was moved to
exclaim in admiration, "Reprove a wise man and he will love thee!"
(Prov. IX, 8.) Another notable example of Akiba's modesty is his
speech at the funeral of his son, which was attended by a great
gathering of men, women, and children from all parts of Palestine.
"Brethren of Israel," said Akiba, "listen to me. Not because I am a
learned man have ye appeared here so numerously. There are those here
more learned than I. Nor because I am a rich man. There are those here
far richer than I. The people of the South know Akiba; but whence
should the people of Galilee know him? The men know him; but whence
should the women and children that I see here know him? But I know
full well that ye have not given yourselves the trouble to come but
for the sake of fulfilling a religious precept and to do honor to the
Torah, and your reward will indeed be great." Practising it as he did,
Akiba did not fail likewise to preach modesty. "He who esteems himself
highly on account of his knowledge," said he, "is like a corpse lying
at the wayside; the traveler turns his head away in disgust and walks
quickly by." Again, in words almost identical with Luke (XIV, 8-11),
Akiba says: "Take thou a seat a few places below thy rank until thou
art bidden to take a higher place, for it is better that they should
say to thee: 'Come up higher' than that they should bid thee 'Go down
lower.'"

Akiba was likewise famous for his kindness and charity. He was a man
of the people. His heart was full of charity and affection for the
multitude. His interest in their welfare was so deep and genuine that
he ultimately came to be called the "Hand of the Poor." As overseer of
the poor, Akiba made many long and arduous journeys to collect funds
for their relief. It was his opinion that the funds of charity ought
not to be invested, in order that ready money might always be at hand,
should a poor man present himself. Once Akiba received some money from
R. Tarphon, for the purpose of buying some land. But instead Akiba
distributed the money to the poor. When Tarphon asked him where the
property was, Akiba showed him the verse in Psalms, "He hath
scattered, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth
forever; his horn shall be exalted with honor." Thereupon Tarphon
kissed Akiba on the forehead and exclaimed, "My master and my guide!"


_His Fervent Patriotism_

FOR us to-day, however, the most striking thing about Akiba is his
nationalism. Other Rabbis were men of great intellect, other Rabbis
were learned, modest, and benevolent, other Rabbis lived, worked and
died for Judaism, but no other Rabbi was conspicuously and so
zealously a nationalist. Akiba loved "Eretz Yisrael" passionately, not
only with the visionary fervor of the pious Jew, but with the
practical idealism of a patriot. In all his extended journeys for the
collection of alms, he took care to spread and keep alive in the
breast of his fellow-Jews the desire for the rebuilding of Zion as a
practical and immediate reality.

It was Akiba's spirit that inspired and animated the last great
rebellion against Rome. This "final polemos," as the Talmud calls it,
was preparing for a number of years. Akiba openly acknowledged Bar
Kochba, who was to be the leader of the revolt, as the promised
Messiah, as "the star that would come out of Jacob." All the great
influence, therefore, of Akiba's moral support was behind Bar Kochba's
military preparations. The Jews had indeed much to complain of.
Hadrian had broken faith with them; he had failed to rebuild their
Temple as he had promised, and now (about the year 130), to make
matters worse, he was beginning a systematic persecution of their
religion. He forbade circumcision, the study of the Torah, the keeping
of the Sabbath, the ordination of disciples, in short everything that
went to express the Jewish religion. The Jews determined upon war. But
even before the outbreak of hostilities their greatest loss occurred.
Akiba and several other great Rabbis were captured by the Romans,
imprisoned, condemned to death, and executed. Their crime was simply
that they had continued teaching the Torah in spite of the Imperial
decree.


_"Even Unto Death"_

THIS was the manner of Akiba's death. When he heard that the renowned
R. Ishmael and a certain Simon were captured, he was stirred all the
more to persevere in his teaching. "Prepare ye for death, for terrible
days are awaiting us," said Akiba to his pupils. A certain Pappos ben
Judah met Akiba assembling the people and teaching the Torah in
public. "Dost thou not fear the Government?" said Pappos. "Thou art
considered a wise man, Pappos," answered Akiba, "but verily thou art
but a fool. I shall give thee a parable to the matter. Once a fox was
walking along the edge of a stream. He saw the fishes in commotion,
hurrying hither and thither. 'Before what do ye flee?' said he to
them. 'We are fleeing before the nets of the fishermen that are cast
out to catch us.' 'Would ye be willing to come up on dry land and live
with me, even as your fathers and my fathers were wont to live?' 'Art
thou he who is called the most discerning among beasts? Verily thou
art but a fool. If even in the element that means life to us, we are
fearful of death, how much more so in the element that means our
death.' Even so are we. If even in the time that we are occupied with
the Torah, of which it is said, 'For it is thy life and the length of
thy days,' we are fearful of death, how much more so if even for a
moment we cease its study." Not many days later Akiba was captured and
thrown into prison. Pappos ben Judah also found himself imprisoned
with Akiba. "How camest thou here?" asked Akiba. "Happy art thou,"
replied Pappos, "that thou hast been taken prisoner for the sake of
the Torah; woe is me, Pappos, that I have been taken prisoner for vain
things."

When they led Akiba out to execution it was the hour of the reading of
the "Shema." Tinnius Rufus, the governor, caused his skin to be torn
off with hot irons; but Akiba was directing his heart towards
accepting the yoke of God's kingdom, that he might accept it with
love. He recited the "Shema" with a peaceful smile on his face. Rufus,
astounded at his insensibility to pain, asked him whether he was a
sorcerer. "I am no sorcerer," replied Akiba. "All the days of my life
have I grieved that I could not carry out the commandment, 'Thou
shalt love thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul and with all
thy might,'--even unto death. But now that I am able to fulfill it
shall I not rejoice?" And with the last syllable of the "Shema"--Hear,
Oh Israel, the Lord our God the Lord is One--Akiba expired.

[Illustration: Signature: George J. Horowitz]


        EDITORS' NOTE.--_This is the third in a series of
        sketches of "Jewish Worthies," of which the fourth
        will have "Judah the Prince" for its subject._


        _HEBREWS willingly neglectful of their own inheritance
        cannot hope to be of much value as Americans. Nor is
        the republic interested in suppressing this or any
        other valuable legacy from the past. Our "assimilative
        process" is far off from being the terrible thing
        which European critics sometimes charge against us. We
        do reshape peoples who come to us from the old world,
        but not at the cost of the things they cherish or of
        the gifts they bring. Our civilization is enriched,
        not impoverished, by these diverse race traits,
        loyalty to which helps to make a loyalty worth having.
        If the future world order is to be founded on the
        harmonization of ethnic differences, there should be
        place enough for such differences in our own
        peace-aspiring republic._--_From an Editorial in The
        Boston Herald._


Aspects of Jewish Life and Letters

_As Revealed in Four Noteworthy Books_


I

A SYMPATHETIC STUDY OF PHARISAISM[B]

AS a rule, Jewish readers approach the works of Christian writers upon
Jewish subjects with distrust. They are accustomed to find in them
either the misrepresentations of Anti-Semitic hatred or the
misrepresentations of conversionist love. The present book, based upon
lectures delivered at Oxford upon the Hibbert foundation, is a
representative of the rare group of studies belonging to neither
class. It embodies an earnest and surprisingly successful attempt to
depict justly the religious life of the Jews in the time of the
Talmud. The writer is well prepared for his task by thirty years'
devoted study of Rabbinical literature; he is known as the author of a
careful and scholarly work on "Christianity in Talmud and Midrash."

The book includes a preliminary historical sketch, a study of what the
Rabbis meant by Torah, indicating the true nature of Pharisaic
legalism, chapters on the attitude of Jesus and of Paul toward the
Pharisees, and two final chapters on the Pharisaic theology. The book
is valuable as a Christian reply to Weber, the German author of a
learned, widely-used, and thoroughly unfair presentation of Jewish
theology. Mr. Herford frankly confesses that he is an apologist of the
Pharisees, but his book is in no sense an iconoclastic attack upon the
ideas received among Christians as to the character of the Pharisees.
He freely admits, as any fair-minded Jew would, the dangers of the
Pharisaic system, but he is likewise careful to point out that these
dangers were by no means destructive of true spiritual life. It is
most refreshing to find a book of this sort included in the Crown
Theological Library, along with the erudite but anti-Jewish works of
Bousset and Harnack.


_The Truth About the Pharisees_

MR. HERFORD aims to set forth the truth about the Pharisees rather
than to present new ideas or conclusions. Nevertheless, his book
contains here and there new suggestions. His theory that the men of
the Great Synagogue were identical with the Soferim, though it has a
certain plausibility, is hardly supported by any great weight of
historical evidence. It is interesting to learn that the Synagogue
represents the oldest form of congregational worship, and is the
oldest human institution that has survived without interruption. The
parallel between the Hassidim and the Saints of Cromwell's time (p.
38) is curious. Mr. Herford has the somewhat strange notion (pp. 44-5)
that there is a sign of "mutual distrust" in the weeping of the High
Priest and the representatives of the Beth Din after the former had
taken the oath to observe the regulations concerning the Day of
Atonement. To the ordinary reader of the Mishnah the tears seem a
perfectly natural expression of the emotional strain under which all
the people labored on the great day.

It is hard to part from Mr. Herford's admirable book without quoting a
very fine tribute which he pays to the Jewish people. In speaking of
the influence of Ezra's ideals, he says (p. 55): "The Talmud is the
witness to show how some of his countrymen, some of the bravest, some
of the ablest, some of the most pious and saintly, and a host of
unnamed faithful, were true to those ideals and clung to those hopes;
and how, through good report and ill report, through shocks of
disaster and the ruin of their state, ground down by persecution, or
torn by faction, steadily facing enemies within, they held on to the
religion of the Torah."

[Illustration: Signature: D.S. Blonsheim]

        _University of Illinois_


II

JUDAISM AND PHILANTHROPY[C]

SOME years ago I met a certain Russian Jew at a conference called to
discuss various problems of education. He was an immigrant who had
made his fortune through speculation in real estate, and with his rise
in fortune he had, it was evident, thrown off, one after another, the
social habits, the religious outlook, and the organization of the
daily life which were the heritage he had brought with him from
Russia. He was at that time, he told me, president of a large Jewish
congregation, whose pillars of support were men like himself. He
complained bitterly of their backwardness and illiberality. They would
not introduce an organ and refused to change the prayer book or to
secure an "advanced" rabbi. For himself, he did not care whether they
had a synagogue--I mean temple--at all. He retained no longer any of
the superstitions or narrowness of his colleagues, and if it were not
for the fact that he felt himself out of place among members of the
radically reformed temple he would have attended that long ago. He was
a member of it, of course. His wife had made him join some years ago.
It was a double expense, to be sure, but his wife wanted to be active
in the Women's Council, and the children met other nice children in
the Sunday School. He did not think anyhow that synagogal affiliation
made any difference.

"I am," he said, "a good Jew. I give charity."

The remark took me aback, yet the logical development to the point of
view that he expressed was inevitable. In an environment where the
call of ambition is generally a call toward de-Judaization, the
connection between Jews who prosper and the great masses of the
Jewish people becomes, perforce, an external and artificial one. It is
notorious that the temple has thus far had no appeal to and no message
for the Jewish masses, that its membership is recruited from the
well-to-do and the successful, and that its relation to the great
groups which are destined never to be well-to-do or successful becomes
purely a relation of philanthropy. The elements of brotherhood, of a
common consciousness and a common purpose, fade or get submerged.
Where the masses are concerned the whole corporate essence of reformed
Judaism becomes concentrated in the word "charity."


_Justice vs. Charity in the Jewish Ideal_

YET it is significant that in Hebrew there is no special word for
charity. The term [Hebrew: tzadee-dalet-kuf-hey; transliteration:
tzedakah] (Zedakah) meant originally righteousness, and the
righteousness which the prophets advocated was the substance of social
justice. It was incorporated into the fundamental law of the Jewish
state, which differed from that of other ancient states in the fact
that its intention was to secure freedom and "life" for each
individual man. Charity, as we now understand the word, had no place
in the social conceptions of the prophets and was not acknowledged in
the Law. The three codes which are preserved to us in the Bible from
the covenant in Exodus to the extraordinarily profound legislation of
Leviticus express an evolution of the social sense founded on a right
appreciation of social justice and democracy. "Life," and its
sustenance food, and shelter were regarded as the rights of each and
every man and not as gifts from one man to another. The law concerning
the tenure of land is particularly significant for its insight into
the economic basis of social justice, and the laws concerning
indebtedness and slavery only less so. Charity appears only when the
state disintegrates. It is coincident with the decay of the social
organization and the consequent failings of the sense of corporate
responsibility, and consists substantially of the conversion of a
right into a gift. This change is registered in the new meaning which
the word "Zedakah" receives. For a state in which social justice
prevails there is no room for charity, while a social order which
involves charity is not one which maintains justice. Thus it may be
said that the prophets, because they operated in terms of the
reorganization of the whole of society and not of the incidental
correction of piecemeal evils, were humanists. Their program was
constructive and aimed at the enfranchisement of manhood. The rabbis,
on the other hand, were (relatively only) philanthropists. Their
program was remedial, and they aimed rather at the relief of suffering
than the realization and perfection of human potentialities.

To-day the term "charity" has given way to a new equivalent, with a
somewhat different connotation. This new equivalent is "social
service." That it should be urged, as Mr. Lewis urges it, upon liberal
Judaism is simply another indication of the evanescing adherence of
that sect to the corporate life of the Jewish people. Although "social
service" carries with it more of the sense of justice than the term
charity, it is still, in intention, a charitable thing. It is not a
thing done through the inevitable forms of right social organization,
but through the gracious good will of a kindly individual. It still
maintains the Christian quality of "grace" which is a condescension, a
going down, a philanthropy. It stands in contrast to _law_, which
knows no such qualities, and the call which Mr. Lewis makes to liberal
Judaists for a special kind of social service is itself a
demonstration that "liberal Judaism" thus far has little in common
with the substance of Jewish life. Indeed his whole book is a
demonstration of this fact, for of the six chapters that it contains
only one has anything to say of social service as such in the present
day, while four are analyses, not of charity, but of the law of
righteousness as it operated in the Jewish polity, both in Palestine
and in the Diaspora. Even the actual charity of the Middle Ages
carries a quality of obligation and socially ordained necessity which
is derived from the basic law of the Jewish people.


_The Hope of Liberal Judaism_

BUT to-day, while the great Jewish masses still live, more or less
adequately under the basic law and exercise such righteousness as they
may in the division of obligation which the laws of the Galuth lands
compel, the classes are divorced from its rule altogether. The call
with which Mr. Lewis closes his book,--

        "We must teach the masses of our people, upon whom the
        Judaism of yesterday has lost hold, that their
        salvation lies in liberal Judaism, which is beginning
        to find itself to-day and which will become the
        Judaism of to-morrow,"

--is the best indication of this. Liberal Judaism has not touched the
minds or hearts of the masses. The radicals despise it as a
capitalistic system of compromise with the social environment. To the
rest of the working classes, it makes thus far no appeal whatever. It
is only upon the radicals that the "Judaism of yesterday" has lost its
hold, and to them liberal Judaism can have no appeal. To the rest of
the Jewish people it can be significant and really developed into the
"Judaism of to-morrow" only in so far as it can succeed in
reincorporating itself into the common life. I am an old social
service person, and I am prepared to deny categorically that such a
reincorporation is possible through social service. What is needed is
sympathetic intelligence, insight into the life and aspirations of the
masses, return of the classes to the masses, participation in their
ideals, their traditions, and their common life. It is not by a
cutting off from the past, but by a development out of it that such a
reincorporation can be consummated.

If liberal Judaism is to be a living and growing force at all, it can
become so only by accepting the inevitable conditions which govern all
life. Life is organic; religion is only one of the many organs of
human society, even Jewish society. Its health and vitality are
dependent upon the health and vitality of the social residuum. The
hope of liberal Judaism lies in a reincorporated national life for the
Jews. That alone can preserve the Jewish religion, either from
petrifying as orthodoxy through resistance against environmental
pressure, or from evaporating as reform through submission to
environmental pressure.

        _University of Wisconsin_

[Illustration: Signature: H. M. Kallen]


III

THE HEBREW GENIUS[D]

THIS little volume is five years old, but its review is always timely;
and for THE MENORAH JOURNAL very appropriate. The English language is
extremely poor in popular, yet scholarly and well-written books and
essays on Jewish literature. A great many of those who are thoroughly
versed in Hebrew literature, who regard the study of the original
Rabbinic sources as a work of love if not a profession and a life
work, have not a sufficient command of English or of systematic
exposition to be able to present the spirit of these writings in
acceptable form to the lay reader. The few scientific scholars in our
seminaries and colleges who could if they chose write authoritatively
and withal in an interesting manner concerning the course of Jewish
thought during the past two or three millenia, prefer to devote their
time and energy to the more technical aspects of the subject, which
are not designed for the uninitiated reader. And the men of
journalistic calibre and inclination, even if we had them, are not the
most desirable purveyors of Jewish knowledge. The truth of the matter
is, in the words of Nietzsche, that ears are still growing for the
intelligent American Jewish people so far as Jewish literature--Hebrew
classical literature--is concerned.

The cause of the paucity of works in English on Jewish literary
subjects is really economic. There is no lack of young men among the
people of the Book whose ideal of a well-spent life is one of complete
devotion to a scholarly career in the service of our ancient and
medieval classics. But unfortunately the very young men who give
promise of presenting in a creditable manner our intellectual heritage
for the benefit of the majority otherwise occupied, have no means of
their own, and yet are not ready (as it should not be expected of them
that they should be) to take the vow of poverty and celibacy and form
a Jewish monastic order of St. Haninah. Accordingly not a few of these
choose the Rabbinic career as the most likely profession to enable
them to keep in touch with Jewish learning--more or less a
disappointed hope to the real scholar who has no other fitness for the
modern Rabbinate except his scholarship. Others are completely
side-tracked and lost to Jewish scholarship.

Thus the lack of interest in Jewish learning and scholarship keeps
promising young men away from these unpromising studies. The result is
that the field in English remains uncultivated, which reacts again
unfavorably in a diminution of interest, and the vicious circle is
complete.


_The Need of Encouragement to Jewish Learning_

I HAVE used my text in good old fashion as a pretext for a little
sermon to the intelligent lay reader of THE MENORAH JOURNAL who may be
an influential member of the American Jewish community, pointing out
that we are sorely in need of a great many such books as the present
one, treating various "aspects of the Hebrew Genius"; and they are
sure to come just as soon as there is a real demand for them. The
Jewish students in our colleges and universities whose number is
rapidly increasing have in their midst a great many talented young men
who only need encouragement to devote their best energies to Jewish
learning. These will serve as a leaven to raise the entire Jewish
community of America to a more intelligent Jewish level. What we need
is liberal endowments for Jewish chairs in our universities and for
the promotion of Jewish education generally.

And now to proceed to my proper topic: _Aspects of Hebrew Genius_ is a
very creditable volume consisting of eight well-written essays on
several topics of Jewish history and thought. Norman Bentwich
contributes an article in which he gives an interesting sketch of the
Jewish Alexandrian period of the first two centuries B. C., whose
thought activities culminated in the works of Philo, the first man in
history who attempted an amalgamation of Hebraism and Hellenism. It
was not a success so far as Judaism is concerned, as is evidenced by
the fact that he was neglected and forgotten by his Jewish successors.
He was made use of, however, by the early Christian writers in the
formulation of the Trinitarian dogma, and by early Christian
apologists and theologians in presenting the doctrines of the new
religion in a form likely to appeal to the Græco-Roman world, which
trained as it was in philosophical thought would have been repelled by
the simple narratives of Scripture and the Gospels.


_Representative Men and Tendencies in Jewish Thought_

THE next essay by M. Simon deals with the second and more successful
attempt to enrich Jewish literature by infusing into it the spirit of
rationalistic inquiry originally derived from Greece. This time, in
the ninth and tenth centuries, the scene is placed in Babylonia. The
place of the Greeks is now taken by their medieval successors, the
Mohammedan Arabs, upon whom fell a part of the Hellenic mantle, that
represented by Greek science and philosophy. The æsthetic and literary
aspects of the Greek genius were left severely alone by the Arabs. The
man about whom this sketch centers is the famous Gaon of Sura,
Saadiah. And Mr. Simon lays great stress upon his achievements in
Biblical exegesis. As the Septuagint was the first Jewish translation
of the Bible, so Saadiah's Arabic translation was the second, and it
was enriched by introductions and a commentary in which Saadiah leads
his co-religionists, the Rabbanite Jews, from the Talmud back to an
appreciation of the Bible.

The period of systematic and rationalistic effort culminated in the
legal and philosophical works of Maimonides, the greatest Jew of the
middle ages. The Rev. H. S. Lewis gives a readable and sympathetic
sketch of this pre-eminent Jewish systematizer and rationalist. He
defends him against the strictures of Luzzatto and Graetz and points
out the great influence his thinking had on Judaism and Jews of his
own and subsequent ages, and even on the Christian scholastics.

The following four essays are devoted not to representative men but to
brief and interesting sketches of tendencies in Jewish thought and
departments of Jewish literature. The Rabbinic legalistic lore of the
Mishnah and Talmud, which finds no general treatment in the volume, is
partly represented by the article of Dr. S. Daiches, who gives a
popular account of the post-Talmudic attempts to codify the immense
legal material scattered in Mishnah and Talmud and in later additions.
Maimonides' code naturally occupies an important place in this sketch,
and a novel feature is the important place assigned to Jacob ben Asher
(1280-1340), the author of the _Turim_, who superseded Maimonides and
is popularized by Joseph Caro in his _Shulchan Aruch_.


_Jewish Rationalism and Mysticism_

THE title of the next paper, written by the competent hand of Dr. A.
Wolf, versed in philosophy as well as in Jewish literature, sounds
novel; and as the author says, is the first effort of the kind so far
made. It is well known that the philosophic movement in medieval Jewry
is characterized with few exceptions by the more or less faithful
adaptation of Aristotelian thought as represented in the Arabic
translations of his works and in the compendia and expositions made by
such ardent disciples of the Stagirite as Al Farabi, Avicenna, and
Averroes. Dr. Wolf undertakes briefly and readably to indicate how
much the Jewish medieval philosophers owed to the Greek sage and what
their attitude to him was, and interestingly summarizes the
Aristotelian point of view by the one word rationalism, as
distinguished from dogmatism and mysticism. He rightly points out that
while the specific doctrines borrowed from Aristotle and read into the
Bible by his ardent Jewish disciples are for the most part obsolete,
the spirit of systematic inquiry, the use of the reason in elucidating
disputed problems, "the exalted conception of the place and function
of human thought, the hallowing of intellectual effort," which was the
product of this philosophical activity, is a gain of inestimable value
for all time.

Rationalism and dogmatism, however, do not exhaust the aspects of
Jewish thought and literary endeavor. Parallel with the development of
Mishnah and Talmud and philosophy, there is visible, at first feebly
and in the background, and later, as circumstances favored it, more
aggressively and in full view, the mystic outlook upon life and
religion in its various phases. H. Sperling in a very interesting and
sympathetic manner traces this mystic element in Jewish literature
from the Prophets of the Bible, through the "Maase Bereshit" and
"Maase Merkaba" of the Haggadah down to the Sefer Yezira and the Zohar
and its successors.

There is no treatment of Jewish medieval poetry, and the volume closes
with a brief account of the more critical and historical treatment of
Jewish literature created in the nineteenth century by such men as
Krochmal, Rapaport, Luzzatto, Zunz, Geiger and others. Rev. M. H.
Segal gives a brief but illuminating account of this latest phase of
Jewish writing, which is not yet closed, and is likely to stay with us
for a long while.

E. M. Adler contributes an eloquent introduction by way of connecting
the necessarily independent essays and emphasizing the unity which the
collection in a great measure possesses.

The volume, as we are told in the Preface, "owes its appearance to the
Union of Jewish Literary Societies" in London, and it does credit to
their earnestness and loyalty to the cause of Jewish learning. Let us
hope it may serve as an example and incentive to the revival of Jewish
interests in this country. It is well that all should read this
useful little book and many others of the kind which we hope will
follow. But it is more important that such reading shall inspire the
student with a desire to study at first hand the original depositories
of Jewish thought. For this purpose a serious study of Hebrew is
imperative. And let us cherish the hope that we may witness a revival
of, and a wide-spread interest in, Jewish literature in this country
where next to Russia the greatest number of Jews are found and where,
moreover, they enjoy life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

        _University of Pennsylvania_

[Illustration: Signature: Isaac Husik]


IV

A GENERAL SURVEY OF JEWISH LIFE[E]

THROUGH his _Jewish Life in Modern Times_ Israel Cohen has made a
notable contribution to the literature of Jewish life and thought. In
a single volume of scarce 350 pages of text there is presented a
description and estimate of the Jewish position in the modern world
which may well be considered among the most comprehensive and the most
authoritative now available in the English language.

Taken as a whole, the volume is noteworthy because of three
commendable characteristics. It deals with Jewish life as it appears
in modern times, not as it should be in the light of the literature of
the ancient Hebrews. It presents Jewish life in all its important
aspects and complexities, not on the basis of the theory so widely
prevalent that religion, of all human activities, constitutes the sole
binding force and the only distinguishing characteristic of the
separate Jewish existence. Finally, it aims to picture the life of the
Jews in all corners of the Diaspora, and not their problems and
activities in a single country or section of the globe.


_Jewish Life Not Synonymous With Jewish Religion_

AN exposition of Jewish life as it is actually lived in modern times
helps to clarify a much-beclouded situation. It enables the Jew the
better to know himself; it presents to the outside world a clearer
outline of a figure who must ever, to some extent, remain "strange"
and "unknowable." Moreover, the reader's sense of proportion is
adjusted by a work which does not make Jewish life synonymous with
Jewish religion. Whether there is sufficient evidence of a biological
and anthropological character to support the claim of those who look
upon the Jews as a separate race, whether the Jewish people in their
dispersion may properly be considered as a distinct national group in
spite of the absence of a government and a territory of their own, it
is certainly difficult, in all intellectual honesty, to maintain that
the Jews are merely a religious community. One of our brilliant young
philosophers has strikingly said that a Jew can change his religion,
but that he cannot change his grandfather; nor, he might have added
can he destroy his more general antecedents, that complex of customs,
traditions and ideals which have manifested themselves in the course
of thirty-five centuries of recorded history and which create within
him an ineradicable historic consciousness. Jewish solidarity is not
grounded in religion alone, and the distinctiveness of the Jewish
people manifests itself in activities other than religion.

A work which like the present aims to present the Jew in every
important phase of life, which describes the social, political,
economic, and intellectual aspects of Jewish life, as well as the
religious, deserves commendation because of its mere scope and
completeness. But Mr. Cohen has gone further. He has not fallen into
the error of many of the spokesmen for the cultural or historical
unity of Jewry of denying or even minimizing the potency of religion
as a factor in Jewish survival. Indeed, he everywhere recognizes that
the primary or motor force in the organization of the Jewish
community, which is the concrete expression of Jewish solidarity, is
religious, springing from the desire for public worship. But while
religion is the underlying factor, it is not the only factor. There is
a sane coordination of the leading aspects of Jewish life, a clear
grasp of the relationship between them.

Finally, the work is significant because it seeks to represent the Jew
in all lands, to paint Jewish life in all its diversity. Mr. Cohen, an
Englishman intimately acquainted with conditions in his own country,
travelled extensively on the continent in preparation for his task.
But his knowledge of American conditions was derived from study of
American books and newspapers, and from correspondence, instead of
from personal experience. This accounts for such minor lapses, with
regard to American conditions, as the statement that the Jews are
"excluded from . . . the principal hotels on the east coast of the
United States" and hence "take their holiday in the well-known resorts
of central and southern Europe" (p. 110). On the whole, however, the
attempt to describe Jewish life in all its diversity, as it is lived
by Jews in all lands, is crowned with marked success, and the author
has ample justification for his claim that he has brought "within the
covers of a single book the fullest description yet attempted of all
the main aspects and problems of Jewish life in the present day."


_The Various Aspects of Jewish Life_

A MORE detailed statement of the scope and plan of the work may best
be given in the author's own words. "First, a General Survey is
presented, showing the dispersion and distribution of Jewry in its
countless manifestations, its diversity of composition in political
and spiritual respects, and the solidarity that unifies its disparate
elements. Then follow five main sections, in each of which a leading
aspect of life is investigated--the social, the political, the
economic, the intellectual, and the religious. Under the Social Aspect
are set forth the growth and constitution of the community, the
characteristics and customs of the home, social life and amenities,
morality and philanthropy, and racial and physical conditions. Under
the Political Aspect are related how one-half of the people acquired
civil equality, how the other half is still suffering in bondage, and
what services Israel has rendered to so many countries in both their
government and their defence. Under the Economic Aspect are reviewed
the different spheres of commercial, industrial and professional
activity in which Jews are engaged, the contrasts of material welfare
and predominance of poverty, and the ceaseless currents of migration
from the lands of bondage to the havens of refuge. Under the
Intellectual Aspect are considered the advance made by secular
education among the Jews, the nature of their national intellectual
products in modern times, and the contributions they have rendered to
the progress and culture of humanity. Under the Religious Aspect are
described their ecclesiastical organization and administration, their
traditional faith and observance and the growing divergences
therefrom, and then the drift and apostasy that are assuming ever more
alarming proportions. Finally, the resultant tendency of all the
foregoing manifestations is examined under the National Aspect, the
strength of the forces of assimilation and absorption is contrasted
with the inherent force of conservation, and the realization of the
Zionist ideal is urged as the most effective means of ensuring the
perpetuation of Israel" (pp. viii-ix).

The purpose of the author is thus seen to be, first, to present the
facts of Jewish life, and secondly, to offer an interpretation of
them--"to depict the variegated life of the Jewish people at the
present day in all its intimacy and intensity, and to trace the
evolution that is being produced by modern forces" (p. viii). He is
more successful in the first of these objects than he is in the
second.

His shortcomings in interpretation, however, are negative rather than
positive; they are due to omission rather than to commission. There is
inadequate consideration of the philosophy of Jewish life; external
description has crowded out internal analysis; the point of view is
too largely objective. While, for example, the conclusion is reached
that Zionism is the only permanent and adequate solution of the Jewish
problem--with which we do not disagree--insufficient stress is laid
upon the distinctive Jewish obligation in the Diaspora; the Jewish
contributions to general culture and progress which the author
enumerates with such concreteness and detail are not distinctively
Jewish contributions. Even if Zion is the ultimate destiny of the Jew,
he must, in the meantime, justify his separate existence among the
nations; if he is to remain a Jew as well as a citizen of the world,
his contribution must be that of a Jewish citizen; in addition to the
general obligation of his citizenship, he must fulfil the special
obligation of his Jewishness. But these deficiencies of
interpretation, like the inadequacies of description arising from the
impossibility of treating exhaustively so large a field within so
narrow a compass, but reflect the inherent limitations of the task set
himself by our author.

        _University of Michigan._

[Illustration: Signature: I. Leo Sharfman]


JEWISH STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS

_An Excerpt from Israel Cohen's Book, "Jewish Life in Modern Times,"
pages 105-106:_

"It was not until the last quarter of the nineteenth century that the
Jewish students at any of the principal seats of learning were
numerous enough to form a society of their own. The first
organization was founded in 1882 in Vienna by Jewish students from
Russia, Rumania, and Galicia, who entitled their society _Kadimah_,
which means both 'Eastward' and 'Forward,' as an indication of the
ideal of a resettlement in Palestine which they advocated. Since then,
partly as a result of the advance of Zionism and partly as a result of
the anti-Semitic attitude of the general students' corps on the
Continent, separate societies have been formed by the Jewish students
at almost every university at which they number at least a dozen, and
are now found in Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, Switzerland,
France, and Holland. Some of these societies owe their existence
simply to the exclusion of Jews from the general corporation, and they
adopt a passive attitude on Jewish questions, but the majority are
animated by the ideal of Jewish nationalism and actively foster the
Zionist cause. The Jewish nationalist societies in Germany are grouped
into two organizations, the 'Bund Jüdischer Corporationen,' founded in
1901, with a membership of over 600 (graduates and undergraduates),
and the smaller, 'Kartell Zionistischer Verbindungen,' founded five
years later, with a membership of 250. The Zionist students' societies
in Holland were federated in 1908, but those in other Continental
countries pursue an unattached existence. Established to assert and
promote the principle of Jewish nationalism, these corporations have
nevertheless adopted all the methods and conventions of German
corporations; they each have their distinctive colors, and they hold
'beer evenings' at which the students sing spirited songs in swelling
chorus around tables which they bang with their beer-mugs, presided
over by officers who are accoutred in a gorgeous uniform and armed
with a sword that does duty alternately as chairman's hammer and
conductor's baton. But their songs tell not of Teuton valor but of
Jewish hope, breathing the spirit of a rejuvenated people. Besides
these convivial gatherings the members cultivate the study of Jewish
history, literature, and modern problems, and also practice fencing so
as to be prepared for any duel in which they might be involved in
vindication of the Jewish name. The Jewish societies at the
universities in English-speaking countries are not, like the
Continental corps, the inevitable product of an unfriendly
environment, but voluntary associations for the study of Jewish
questions and for social intercourse. The Jewish students in England,
and to a less extent in the United States, join the societies of their
university; but their racial sympathies prompt them also to fraternize
with one another. Thus, Oxford has its Adler Society and Cambridge its
Schechter Society, whilst at both universities there is also a Zionist
Society. Moreover, in the United States, 'Menorah' societies for the
study of Jewish history and the discussion of Jewish questions have
been formed at twenty-five Universities and organized into an
Intercollegiate 'Menorah' Association with over 1000 members."

        [There are now 37 Menorah Societies, with an
        approximate membership of 3,000.--ED.]

FOOTNOTES:

[B] R. TRAVERS HERFORD: _Pharisaism, Its Aim and Method_. London,
Williams and Norgate; New York, Putnam. $1.50. (Any of the books
reviewed in this article may be ordered through THE MENORAH JOURNAL.)

[C] HARRY S. LEWIS, M.A.: _Liberal Judaism and Social Service_. New
York, Bloch Publishing Co. (The Lewisohn Lectures.) $1.00.

[D] LEON SIMON, Editor: _Aspects of the Hebrew Genius_. Essays by
Elkan Adler, Norman Bentwich, H. S. Lewis, S. Daiches, A. Wolf, H.
Sperling, M. Simon, M. H. Segal. London, Routledge. $1.00.

[E] ISRAEL COHEN: _Jewish Life in Modern Times_. New York: Dodd, Mead
& Co. $3.00.


The Symbolism of the Menorah[F]

BY HYMAN ASKOWITH


AFTER the severe and constantly-expanding test of nearly a decade, the
founders of the first Menorah Society may be permitted to felicitate
themselves on their choice of the name. For it was far truer of the
Menorah than it is of most organizations that the choice of a name was
of vital moment, and the founders were impressed by a number of
considerations which we can all fully appreciate even today. They were
bent upon choosing a name which would not deter any Jewish student
from enrolling under it with avidity; which would not excite
opposition from any source; which would command respect and reverence,
increasing respect and reverence, both from the University public and
the general public; which would be voluntarily adopted by similar
societies in other Universities in preference to any other that might
be suggested; and finally, a name with enough charm and euphony and
significant symbolism to stand constant repetition, to bear living
with day by day, and all the while grow in our imaginations and yield
new beauteous meaning through the years.

From a descriptive standpoint, it would be difficult to find a more
appropriate name for a University society devoted to Hebraic culture
than the name Menorah. For there is hardly another available word in
the entire range of Hebraic history and learning which is so freighted
with sentiment and so symbolic of all that Israel stands for.


_The Most Expressive of All Hebraic Symbols_

TAKEN in a general sense, it is evident that the Menorah or
seven-branched candelabrum, being the distinctive lamp or light of the
ancient Hebrews, serves more distinctively than would the classic
torch or the conventional oil lamp to represent Hebrew enlightenment.
Our aim being to spread the light of Hebraic culture, it is clearly
fitting that we should employ the Hebraic lamp. It should be more
effective, too, inasmuch as its light is sevenfold, and our efforts
are illuminated with a sevenfold splendor.

The word Menorah, it is worth noting, is among exclusively Hebrew
words the only one which would be readily understood by any
considerable number of people aside from students or readers of
Hebrew. It has been made familiar to all by the representation of the
captured Menorah on the Arch of Titus (see _Frontispiece_).

According to the Bible, the original Menorah was of divine pattern. It
was ordained by God in his instructions to Moses for the sacred
paraphernalia of the Holy Tabernacle (_Exodus_ XXV, 31 _et seq._). The
Menorah was thus among the first instruments or tokens of the Hebrew
religion, and the only one which in any sense is in our possession
today--the only one which can be perpetuated. The divine pattern is
still with us and we are repeatedly modeling new copies from it. The
Menorah is today, therefore, the most expressive of all concrete
symbols of the Hebrew race and religion.


_A Favorite Object of Metaphor and Poetic Sentiment_

A HALO of symbolism--almost kaleidoscopic in its manifold
beauty--surrounds the Menorah in Hebraic literature and tradition.
Both the single light or candle, and the distinctive combination of
seven, are the favorite objects of metaphor, interpretation, and
poetic sentiment. In the Bible the word "ner" ([Hebrew: nun-resh;
Transliteration: ner])--candle or light, embodied, of course, in the
word Menorah ([Hebrew: mem-nun-vav-resh-hey; Transliteration:
menorah])--is used metaphorically in many significant senses. God is a
light--enlightening, comforting and honoring his people. The rational
understanding and conscience are lights which search, inform, direct
and judge us. A profession of faith is called a lamp, which renders
men shining and useful and instructors of others. The last two
interpretations certainly cast an appropriate reflection on our choice
of Menorah.

For the number 7, as we all know, the ancient Hebrews had a singular
fondness, attributing to it a magic potency. This may have arisen from
the traditional story of the seven days of Creation, and the
institution of the Sabbath--without a doubt the most important of
Hebrew institutions. This certainly enhanced the reverence for the
number 7, which soon became the most sacred Hebrew number, bearing
nearly always the connotation of holiness and sanctity or mystic
perfection. The acts of atonement and purification were accompanied by
a sevenfold sprinkling. There were seven trumpets, seven priests that
sounded them seven days around Jericho, seven lamps, seven seals, etc.
The seventh day was the Sabbath, the seventh year was the Sabbatical
(still observed to the well-earned emolument of our professors in the
Universities), and seven times seven years brought on the Jubilee. The
seventh month was the holiest month of the year (which we appreciate
now by regarding September as an auspicious month in which to return
to college studies). The number seven soon came to be used also
conventionally as an indefinite or round number, indicating
abundance, completeness, perfection.[1] Cicero calls seven the knot
and cement of all things, as being that by which the natural and
spiritual world are comprehended in one idea.


_The Manifold Symbolism of the Seven Lamps_

BE that as it may, our ancestral learned men seem to have found no end
of significant meanings in the seven lamps of the Menorah. Generally
it was held to represent the creation of the universe in seven days,
the center light symbolizing the Sabbath. Again, the seven branches
are the seven continents of the earth and the seven heavens, guided by
the light of God. According to Philo and others, the seven lights
represent the seven planets which, regarded as the eyes of God, behold
everything.[2] The light in the center, which is especially
distinguished, would signify the sun, as the chief of the planets.
With this was combined the mystic conception of a celestial tree, with
leaves reaching to the sky and fruit typifying the planets.

There would be little difficulty, of course, in extending this
symbolistic catalogue ad infinitum. We could easily and perhaps
profitably select Seven Wonders of Hebraic history or achievement,
seven great epochs in the development of Hebraic culture, seven great
leaders of the race, etc. We might also say that the seven lights
represent the seven chief studies which make up a liberal
education--the Trivium and Quadrivium of the Middle Ages,
substantially the foundation of the university curriculum of today[3].

The words [Hebrew: yud-hey-yud aleph-vav-resh; Transliteration: y'hi
or], "Let there be light," just above the Menorah on our seal, are not
only reminiscent of the first great word of God, pregnant in meaning
for humanity, but stand also for the purpose of this Society--the
relighting of the Menorah in order that it may shed its ancient lustre
and once again illumine the minds of men with the glory and uplift of
Hebraic ideals.

[Illustration: REPRODUCTION (ONE-FOURTH THE SIZE OF THE ORIGINAL) OF
THE MEMBERSHIP SHINGLE OF THE HARVARD MENORAH SOCIETY, ADOPTED IN ITS
FIRST YEAR

(1906-07)]


_The Symbolism of Palm and Olive Branch_

THE seal as originally drawn for the Harvard Menorah Society (see
accompanying illustration of membership shingle) bears two or three
other symbols which deserve a word of interpretation. Below the
Menorah appears the so-called Star of David--lately revived by the
Zionist movement as the only exclusively Jewish figure or geometric
symbol of any national meaning. Entwined below the seal proper are an
olive branch and a date palm, both of which are intimately associated
with the history of the race in Palestine. They are the two most
characteristic trees of the promised land, and provided the chief
staple foods of the Hebrews during their occupation of the country.
The olive, moreover, gave the oil with which the Menorah was lit.
There is also much fascinating symbolism in the olive tree and
the palm. Both are evergreens--standing for the persistency of the
Hebrew race. The date palm, we are told, has a slender and very yielding
stem, so that in a storm it sways back and forth but does not break; and
throughout its length it bears scars showing where leaves have fallen
off. Could anything be more beautifully expressive of the career of the
Jewish nation? Finally, the olive branch has always stood for peace--one
of the most cherished and distinctive Hebraic ideals; and the palm has
always stood for intellectual achievement--and who would deny the palm
to the race that gave the world its Bible and all that it stands for?

[Illustration: Signature: Hyman Askowith]

FOOTNOTES:

[F] This article is based upon a paper delivered at the Seventh Annual
Banquet of the Harvard Menorah Society last May.

[1] _Cf._ Gen. vii, 2; xxi, 28-30; I Kings xviii, 43; Deut. xvi, 9;
Ezek. xl, 22; xli, 3.

[2] _Cf._ Zech. iv, 10.

[3] In the form in which this paper was read before the Harvard
Menorah Society, the following paragraphs of a more local interest
were added at this point:

"And it certainly adds to the eternal fitness of things that there
should be just seven letters in the word MENORAH, just seven letters
in the word HARVARD, and just seven letters in the word SOCIETY;--the
whole name of the society thus forming three times seven, or a
majority.

"That there is something much more Hebraic in Harvard than the mere
mechanical coincidence of seven letters in the name, is well known to
every one who is at all aware of the part played by Hebrew ideals in
the founding, organization and early history of Harvard. The fact that
Harvard took root in Hebraic culture and traditions is a welcome and
gratifying encouragement to this effort to replant the Hebraic
influence on Harvard ground."


The Decennial of the Menorah Movement


The Menorah movement enters upon its decennial with the beginning of
the present academic year, the first Menorah Society having been
organized at Harvard University in 1906.[G] From this Society with an
original membership of sixteen, the Menorah movement has grown
throughout the country so that at the close of the last academic year
there were Societies at thirty-seven colleges and universities with a
membership of some three thousand. Every Society has arisen upon the
initiative of the students themselves, inspired by a desire to pursue
the objects embodied in the Menorah. In January, 1913, the
Intercollegiate Menorah Association was formed for the purpose of
mutual encouragement and co-operation among the several Societies, and
also to carry out enterprises beyond the scope and power of any
individual Society--such as the publication of THE MENORAH JOURNAL.

On the threshold of the decennial, and especially since the present
number of the JOURNAL will come into the hands of many new students
and readers, it may not be amiss again, in brief terms, to review the
purposes of the movement.


_The Three-Fold Purpose of the Menorah Organization_

THE Menorah Societies have been organized by the students in response
to their desire first of all to know more about the history,
literature, religion--in a word, the culture and ideals of the Jewish
people, and the conditions and problems which confront the Jews in the
world today. Being thus educational in primary purpose, every Menorah
Society is open to all the members of its university who have an
interest in Jewish life and thought. And inasmuch as the great
majority, if not all, of the students who have such an interest in
Jewish knowledge and Jewish aspirations are themselves Jews, the
Menorah organization cherishes the second purpose of strengthening the
Jewish idealism and _noblesse oblige_ of the Jewish students, so that
by understanding and carrying forward their Jewish inheritance they
may become better men and women by becoming better Jews. And from this
moral aim there flows still a third purpose, that of patriotic
service to the Republic; for by enriching the common treasury of
American culture and ideals with the spiritual resources of the Jewish
people, the educated Jews of the country may serve America to the
profoundest degree. Animated thus with the spirit and broad purposes
of our universities, the Menorah Societies have been warmly welcomed
and generously assisted by the university authorities.


_The Distinction Between Menorah and Other Student Societies_

THE purposes of the Menorah movement will appear in greater relief
by comparison with the objects of other types of Jewish
organization--social, political, religious--that have arisen at our
colleges and universities. The Menorah Societies are all-inclusive,
non-partisan, non-sectarian. Hence they are to be distinguished in the
first place from the exclusive social organizations, such as the Greek
letter or Hebrew letter fraternities. Being rather educational in
spirit and purpose, the Menorah Societies make no social test for
membership, nor do they pursue any convivial activities except such as
are deemed desirable for the most agreeable and efficient pursuit of
the Menorah objects. Again, the Menorah Societies are clearly
distinguishable from the Zionist Societies, which were united last
June in the Intercollegiate Zionist Association of America; whereas
the Zionist Societies are devoted to a specific political program in
confronting the so-called Jewish Question, the Menorah Societies,
being non-partisan, are neither Zionist nor anti-Zionist, but
perfectly free and open forums for the discussion of all points of
view. The Menorah membership consists of men and women of divers
convictions, as well as of those who have not yet made up their minds
but come to the Menorah for enlightenment and inspiration. Finally,
just because the Menorah appeals to every student who has a liberal
interest in Jewish life and thought--to every Jewish student
particularly, whatever his present beliefs and ideas--the Menorah
Societies are not to be regarded as specifically religious
organizations. Therefore the observance of religious services and
practices is left to those students who desire them, individually or
in appropriate organizations, such as the Jewish Students'
Congregation organized recently under reform auspices at the
University of Michigan. The Menorah Societies are neither reform,
conservative nor orthodox but broadly inclusive of all elements.


_The Catholicity and Comradeship of the Menorah_

INDEED, next to the Menorah idea--the sum of Menorah purposes--the
peculiar strength of the Menorah Societies lies in this catholic
spirit which determines the Menorah "open door." Thereby the Menorah
Societies are enabled to perform more and more an incidental but most
important service apart from the objects to which they are formally
dedicated. With the growth of various Jewish organizations in our
universities--which, whatever the opinion as to their value and
propriety, tend to divide the Jewish students rather than to unite
them--a most important service performed by the all-inclusive Menorah
Societies is to bring the students together, in spite of their various
differences, on a common high plane. As stated over a year ago in the
Association's book on _The Menorah Movement_: "Where, as in almost all
large universities, there are Jewish students of diverse antecedents,
it is one of the most important functions of a non-partisan
organization like the Menorah Society to bring all classes and parties
together upon an academic plane, in order that they may learn each
other's points of view, in order that their prejudices against one
another which are founded on misunderstanding and snobbishness may
wither away, and in order that they may pursue in generous comradeship
the knowledge of their common tradition and the hope of their common
future."


_The Graduate Phase of the Menorah Movement_

IT is becoming increasingly evident, moreover, that such a unifying
force is called for outside of the universities among the graduates
and other educated Jews; and it is hoped that through the graduate
phase of the Menorah movement, this need may be subserved by graduate
Menorah groups in various communities. To quote once more from _The
Menorah Movement_: "Such graduate Menorah organizations, while
academic and non-partisan in their nature, like the university Menorah
Societies, might yet, if properly constituted and conducted, be of
practical as well as of ideal service to their communities. They could
bring together, upon the lofty basis of Jewish idealism, men of
different views in the community, who approach practical Jewish
problems in different, sometimes in mutually antagonistic, ways.
Devoid itself of any sectarian or fraternal or political bias, a
graduate Menorah organization should be ideally fitted to serve as a
kind of intellectual clearing house of the Jewish community, and thus
promote on all sides a deeper understanding of one another, a clearer
vision of the common problems, a greater concord in Jewish life."

In any event, it is hoped during the present year to bring the
graduates and other public-spirited Jewish citizens into closer touch
with the activities and aspirations of the students. At the fourth
annual Convention of the Intercollegiate Menorah Association to be
held during the coming midwinter recess, the idea of graduate Menorah
committees and other forms of possible graduate association with the
Menorah movement will be carefully considered.


_The Year Ahead_

IT may be added that at this Convention, which promises to be the most
important thus far held by the Menorah Societies, there will also be
given a full review of the activities of the Menorah organization
since its inception and a survey of the present opportunities and
demands for Menorah work throughout the country. More and more
emphasis will be laid upon the quality of accomplishment of every
Menorah Society; upon the active participation by all Menorah members
in one phase or another of Jewish study and labor; and, in general,
upon an even greater utilization of the lectures, libraries, study
courses, and other means provided for the accomplishment of Menorah
ends.

In this terrible time for Jewry, amid the general catastrophe, when
hundreds of thousands of Jewish young men are offering their lives
heroically in the contending armies, the members of the Menorah
Societies in this favored country cannot but enter upon the new year
with a solemn sense of added responsibility. More than ever in this
decennial year of the Menorah movement is intellectual and moral
consecration to Jewish ideals demanded of Jewish students in America.

                                         Henry Hurwitz, _Chancellor_
                                        I. Leo Sharfman, _President_

FOOTNOTE:

[G] It should be noted that in 1903 a Jewish literary society was
founded at the University of Minnesota which was later changed to a
Menorah Society and is now one of the constituents of the
Intercollegiate Menorah Association.


Menorah Notes and News


=The International Students' Reunion=

THE Intercollegiate Menorah Association was represented at the
International Students' Reunion, which was held in connection with the
Panama-Pacific International Exposition at San Francisco, the
University of California, and Leland Stanford University, under the
auspices of Corda Fratres Association of Cosmopolitan Clubs, from
August 16th to 21st, 1915. Intercollegiate Vice-President Milton D.
Sapiro read a paper at the session in the Civic Auditorium, San
Francisco, on "The Purposes of the Menorah Movement," submitted by the
Chancellor. Dr. Horace M. Kallen, of the University of Wisconsin,
delivered a discourse at the session at Stanford University on "The
Hebraic Spirit." The following is an abstract of his address:


_Dr. Kallen on "The Hebraic Spirit"_

"A people's spirit is its character, considered not as a cluster of
qualities, but as a spring and form of action--action that expresses
itself in social institutions, in political and economic organization,
in art, in religion and in philosophy; in short, in all that
expressive part of human life we call culture. A people's culture is
organic. However varied its form and media, the varieties springing
from a single source possess an identical and unique quality which is
the quality of that source. They express and reveal it, as generative
power, a force of creation, having good or evil bearing upon the
residual civilization. The process of such revelation is a people's
total history; just as the process of revelation of an individual's
character is his total biography. To find the Hebraic spirit we must
seek its substantial development in the culture and ideals of the
Jewish people--in the unfoldment, in the history of their common
attitude toward the world and toward man, in their theory of life.

"The Jewish theory of life involves three fundamental conceptions,
interdependent, and forming a unit which has no near parallel in
civilization.

"The first of these conceptions defines the nature of God. What is
significant about it is the fact that it makes no distinction between
God and Nature. God is Nature and Nature is God. The two are related
to each other as a force and its operation, and what difference there
exists between them is a difference in completeness and
self-sufficiency, not in kind. God reveals himself thus in and as the
cause of Nature, the whirlwind, the process of life and decay, the
development of history. His essence is Change, Force, Time. There is
hence no Hebrew word for eternal; God's attitude is everlasting. That
is, that which changes yet retains its identity, as a man changes from
infancy to manhood, yet retains his identity.

"God is one, all-inclusive, everlastingly creative. In consequence,
there exists a real distinction between God and man, such that the one
cannot be defined in analogy with anything human. Neither wisdom, nor
goodness, nor justice apply to him; yet the goodness, wisdom and
justice of man depend upon him. Man is a finite speck set over against
divine infinitude. His life is a constant struggle for survival with
forces which have each an equal claim on divine regard with man. Man's
salvation, herein, consists in knowing these facts, in understanding,
using them, and guarding against them. The fear of the Lord, sings the
chorus in Job, is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding.

"To depart from evil is to act as a social being, to be righteous.
Righteousness is acknowledgment of the value and integrity of other
persons. It is the application of justice in all fields of human
endeavor, particularly in fundamental economics. Thus the three
historic constitutions of the Jewish state, the Covenant, Deuteronomy
and the Levitical code, are all directed toward making impossible
other than natural inequalities within the state. Their intention is a
social democracy; and all Jewish law, departing from this fundamental
intention, aims, under various conditions, to realize it. The
prophets, from Amos to Isaiah, preach it; and men like Ferdinand
Lassalle, Karl Marx, Jean de Bloch, simply enhance their tradition.

"The Hebraic spirit carries the principle of democracy beyond the
individual to the group. Men having a common ancestry, history,
culture and ideals, living a common life, have definite contribution
to make to civilization as a group. They constitute a nationality and
the principles of justice that apply among individuals must apply
equally among nationalities. Hence Hebraism, through its prophets,
formulates the conception of an internationalism, consisting of a
co-operative democracy of nationalities, under conditions of universal
peace. The great Isaiah, who flourished in the fifth century B. C., is
the first to formulate this national vision. His people have never
departed from it. In terms of it, they have been the foremost
protagonists of a constructive internationalism, in every land and at
all times. Recently, as they have begun to find that their service to
civilization as a people grows more and more impaired by the Diaspora,
they have formulated a program of national reconcentration in
Palestine, and of the free development there of Hebraic culture and
ideals such as all European peoples carry out in their own homelands
of their culture and ideals. This program is called Zionism. It is the
practical and most expressive incarnation of the Hebraic Spirit."


=California Menorah Society=

THE California Menorah Society met on Monday evening, August 30th, for
its first meeting of the college year. There was an attendance of 125.
Mr. Louis I. Newman gave a short talk on the aims of the Menorah
movement. Milton D. Sapiro, first President of the California Menorah
and now the second Vice-President of the Intercollegiate Menorah
Association, spoke on the history of the movement, tracing the
development of the Menorah idea and the formation of the
Intercollegiate body; and in closing he presented Stanley Arndt, now
President of the Society, with a bronze Menorah, which is to be handed
down from President to President each year. President Arndt, in
accepting the Menorah, said that it suggested the great problem that
the Jews are now facing. The great question at the present time is
whether this Menorah will be a mere symbol of the past glories, the
past achievements of the Jews, whether it is to be a mere monument of
a dying race, or the living emblem of a living race, the soul of a
living people. As an exponent of the latter doctrine, he introduced
Dr. Horace M. Kallen of the University of Wisconsin, Intercollegiate
Menorah Lecturer.

Dr. Kallen spoke on "The Jews and the Great War." He pointed out that
democracy in its essence was the liberation of individuality; that by
being most one's self, a person or a nation does the most for his
neighbors. First of all, therefore, we should know ourselves. Dr.
Kallen then took up the condition of the Jews in Russia. He discussed
the frightful persecutions there as the result of a great anti-Jewish
conspiracy to cover up the graft, the corruption and the inefficiency
of the government. He spoke on the great drive of the Jews from the
Pale by the military authorities and then the drive back again by the
civil authorities. This, he pointed out, involved not only a Jewish
problem, but a great international one besides. The second phase of
the Jewish question was that of a free Jewish life in Palestine. There
the Jewish colonists have practically an autonomy of their own; they
have established a Jewish stage, Jewish art, Jewish music; and the
colonies were founded upon a social democratic basis, upon the same
fundamental conceptions of social democracy that the Hebrew Prophets
had preached. Dr. Kallen concluded with a plea for the Jew's double
responsibility. The Jew commits a crime hot only as a citizen but as a
Jew. The Jews who in length of service to the world are surely an
aristocracy must carry this responsibility.

In the discussion which followed, Professor Simon Litman of Illinois,
who was present, took part.

A Menorah prize of $50. was announced at this meeting. The judges will
be Professor William Popper and Dr. Martin A. Meyer of the Semitics
Department of the University, and Judge Max Sloss of the Supreme Court
of California.

A musical program, followed by an informal reception to the new
members, completed the evening.

N. M. Lyon, the Treasurer of the Intercollegiate, formerly of
Cincinnati, is now a student at California and a member of the
California Menorah.


=Dr. Kallen on the Pacific Coast=

BESIDES his address at the opening meeting of the California Menorah
Society and other informal talks with the students, Dr. Kallen
delivered a series of three addresses at the University of California,
under the auspices of the Department of Philosophy, on the general
subject: "The Hebraic Tradition in Europe." On August 31st, he
lectured upon "The Rise and Significance of the Hebraic Tradition"; on
September 1st, "Hebraism and Democracy"; and September 2nd, "Hebraism
and Art."

On August 30th, Dr. Kallen met a company of graduates and other
public-spirited Jewish citizens in San Francisco at luncheon and
explained the purposes and activities of the Intercollegiate Menorah
Association.

Dr. Kallen addressed the Menorah Society of the University of
Washington in Seattle on August 14th, on "The Jewish Question and the
Great War." He also met at a dinner a company of graduates and other
public-spirited Jewish citizens in Seattle, and explained to them the
purposes and activities of the Intercollegiate Menorah Association.


=Dr. Harry Wolfson of Harvard=

HARRY AUSTRYN WOLFSON, the author of the articles on "Jewish Students
in European Universities," published in the first two numbers of the
Journal, has been appointed Instructor in Jewish Literature and
Philosophy at Harvard University. He received his Ph.D. from Harvard
last June in the field of Semitic Philology, his thesis subject being
"Crescas on the Problems of Infinity and Divine Attributes."

During the ensuing year he will give the following courses:
Post-Biblical Hebrew, Jewish Aramaic, Jewish Literature and Life From
the Second to the End of the Seventeenth Century, and An Introduction
to Medieval Jewish Philosophy.


=Cornell Summer Meeting=

ON August 8, 1915, the Cornell Menorah Society held a meeting for the
summer students. There was an attendance of about 50, both Jews and
non-Jews. Rev. Dr. H. P. Mendes, of New York, gave an address on
"Bible Ideals in Modern Times," and Professor Frank Carney of Denison
University, Professor of Industrial Geography in the Cornell Summer
School, spoke on "The Inorganic Basis of the Hebrew Contribution to
the World." Professor W.A. Hurwitz of Cornell spoke briefly on the
scope of the Menorah movement, and Dr. L. L. Silverman played Kol
Nidre on the violin.


=Hunter Menorah Society=

THE Menorah Society of Hunter College, in New York City, begins its
third year with a marked increase in the enthusiasm and the number of
its members. A program dealing with various phases of Hebrew culture
has been planned for the regular monthly meetings, comprising lectures
on the Bible, the Talmud, Medieval Hebrew Poetry, Modern Hebrew
Literature, Hebrew Music, and Hebrew Art. In addition, the Society
hopes to present a pageant and a reception to freshmen in February
(for Hunter College admits two classes during the year). The lectures
will be preceded by refreshments, and the singing of Hebrew songs by
the Menorah Glee Club.

Besides the regular monthly meetings, the Society is organizing
courses in conversational Hebrew, Bible Study, and Zionism--the first
to meet weekly, the others on alternate weeks.

It is also hoped to have a general informal meeting every week to
discuss modern Jewish problems in connection with the reading of
various newspapers and periodicals.


=College of the City of New York=

THE Menorah Society of the College of the City of New York closed its
activities during the past year with a very interesting meeting held
on May 20, 1915. Rev. Dr. H. Pereira Mendes spoke on "Jewish Ideals of
Peace," and he was introduced by the new President of the College, Dr.
Sidney Edward Mezes, who presided. Dr. Mezes has come to City College
from the University of Texas, and it is gratifying to note that he had
already been made familiar with the Menorah work through the Texas
Menorah Society.

The new year was opened with a forum meeting on September 21st, in the
Menorah alcove, when the Chancellor addressed a number of new men as
well as old, upon the significance and the increasing scope of the
Menorah movement. The week beginning October 3rd will be known as
"Menorah Week" at the College. On Monday, October 4th, the study
circles will meet for the first time; on Tuesday there will be another
meeting of the Menorah forum; on Wednesday a semi-annual smoker will
be held in the City College Club; and on Thursday, Mr. Marcus M.
Marks, President of the Borough of Manhattan, will deliver a lecture
to the student body under the auspices of the Menorah Society.


=Fourth Annual Convention=

IMPORTANT matters touching the development of Intercollegiate
activities, the work and membership of the constituent Societies, the
association of graduates with the Intercollegiate body, the problems
and plans of THE MENORAH JOURNAL, will be among the subjects presented
for discussion and decision at the Fourth Menorah Convention, to be
held during the coming mid-winter recess. The precise days and place
of the Convention will shortly be decided by the Administrative
Council, in accordance with Article II, Section 4, of the
Intercollegiate Constitution. In addition to the business sessions
there will also be a formal dinner and an academic session devoted to
the reading of papers by eminent scholars. It is hoped that a large
number of Menorah men and women from all parts of the country will be
able to attend. Further details will be published in the next number
of the JOURNAL.


=Informal Gathering of Menorah Officers=

ON June 21, 1915, there was an informal gathering at the headquarters
of the Intercollegiate Association, 600 Madison Avenue, New York City,
of Menorah officers who happened to be in New York. There were
present, besides the Chancellor, President I. Leo Sharfman,
Vice-President Abraham J. Feldman, and Secretary Charles K. Feinberg
of the Association, President Stanley Arndt of California, President
Jacob Rubinoff of Pennsylvania, ex-President Leon J. Rosenthal of
Cornell, ex-President George J. Horowitz, President Moses H. Gitelson,
Treasurer Herman I. Trachman of College of the City of New York,
President Bernard J. Reis of New York University (Washington Square),
ex-President Samuel Sussman of Columbia, President Sarah Berenson,
Vice-President Babette Reinhardt, Treasurer Minnie Weiss, and
Secretary Ernestine P. Franklin and ex-Secretary Julia Mitchell of
Hunter, and Dr. H. M. Kallen of Wisconsin.

There was informal discussion of the activities of the various
Societies, the progress of THE MENORAH JOURNAL, the program of the
next Intercollegiate Convention, and the development of the graduate
phase of the Menorah movement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

This text uses both today and to-day. Also used were Roumania and
Rumania.


THE MENORAH JOURNAL

[Illustration]

        VOLUME I                 December
        No. 5                    1915


        Frontispiece: Theodor Herzl        Etching by Hermann Struck

        The Menorah                                    THEODOR HERZL

        The Present Crisis in American Jewry     ISRAEL FRIEDLAENDER

        Our Spiritual Inheritance                     IRVING LEHMAN

        Adam Prometheus, and Other Lyrics        LOUIS K. ANSPACHER

        Sholom Asch: The Jewish Maupassant         PERCY B. SHOSTAC
            A Menorah Prize Essay

        Liberalism and the Jews                       JOSEPH JACOBS

        What Is Judaism?                         MORDECAI M. KAPLAN

        University Menorah Addresses

        Activities of Menorah Societies

       *       *       *       *       *

        =PUBLISHED BY THE INTERCOLLEGIATE MENORAH ASSOCIATION=
        =600 MADISON AVENUE NEW YORK  -:- -:- -:-  25 CTS. A COPY=


INTERCOLLEGIATE MENORAH ASSOCIATION

For the Study and Advancement of Jewish Culture and Ideals


OFFICERS

        Chancellor
        HENRY HURWITZ
        600 Madison Ave., New York

        President
        I. LEO SHARFMAN
        University of Michigan

        First Vice-President
        ISADORE LEVIN
        Harvard University

        Second Vice-President
        MILTON D. SAPIRO
        University of California

        Third Vice-President
        ABRAHAM J. FELDMAN
        University of Cincinnati

        Treasurer
        N. MORAIS LYON
        University of California

        Secretary
        CHARLES K. FEINBERG
        New York University


THE ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL

        Boston University: Maurice Horblit
        Brown University: Ismar Baruch
        Clark University: Max Smelensky
        College of the City of New York: G. J. Horowitz
        Columbia University: M. D. Hoffman
        Cornell University: Leon J. Rosenthal
        Harvard University: Ralph A. Newman
        Hunter College: Sarah R. Friedman
        Johns Hopkins University: Millard Eiseman
        New York University: Charles K. Feinberg
        Ohio State University: Samuel Lesser
        Penn State College: J. K. Miller
        Radcliffe College: Anna Rogovin
        Rutgers College: Louis B. Gittleman
        Tufts College: Philip Marzynski
        University of California: Louis I. Newman
        University of Chicago: David Levy
        University of Cincinnati: Abraham J. Feldman
        University of Colorado: Morris Baskin
        University of Denver: Jacob Butcher
        University of Illinois: Sidney Casner
        University of Maine: Lewis H. Kriger
        University of Michigan: Jacob Levin
        University of Minnesota: Moses Barron
        University of Missouri: J. L. Ellman
        University of North Carolina: Albert Oettinger
        University of Omaha: Jacques Rieur
        University of Pennsylvania: Jacob Rubinoff
        University of Pittsburgh: A. Jerome Levy
        University of Texas: H. J. Ettlinger
        University of Washington: Roy Rosenthal
        University of Wisconsin: H. M. Kallen
        Valparaiso University: Florence Turner
        Western Reserve University: Benjamin Roth
        Yale University: Reuben Horchow
        AND THE OFFICERS

        Office of the Intercollegiate Menorah Association
        600 Madison Avenue, New York


THE MENORAH JOURNAL

        _Published Bi-monthly During the Academic Year By_
        _The Intercollegiate Menorah Association_
        _"For the Study and Advancement of Jewish Culture and Ideals"
        600 Madison Avenue, New York_


        _Editor-in-Chief_
        HENRY HURWITZ

        _Associate Editor_
        I. LEO SHARFMAN

        _Managing Editor_
        H. ASKOWITH

        _Business Manager_
        B. S. POUZZNER


_Board of Consulting Editors_

        DR. CYRUS ADLER
        LOUIS D. BRANDEIS
        DR. LEE K. FRANKEL
        PROF. FELIX FRANKFURTER
        PROF. ISRAEL FRIEDLAENDER
        PROF. RICHARD GOTTHEIL
        DR. MAX HELLER
        DR. JOSEPH JACOBS
        DR. KAUFMANN KOHLER
        JUSTICE IRVING LEHMAN
        JUDGE JULIAN W. MACK
        DR. J. L. MAGNES
        PROF. MAX L. MARGOLIS
        DR. H. PEREIRA MENDES
        DR. MARTIN A. MEYER
        DR. DAVID PHILIPSON
        DR. SOLOMON SCHECHTER
        HON. OSCAR S. STRAUS
        SAMUEL STRAUSS
        JUDGE MAYER SULZBERGER
        MISS HENRIETTA SZOLD
        FELIX M. WARBURG
        DR. STEPHEN S. WISE

       *       *       *       *       *

        VOLUME I       DECEMBER, 1915      NUMBER 5

=CONTENTS=

                                                                PAGE

  _Frontispiece_: THEODOR HERZL   _From an Etching by Hermann Struck_

  THE MENORAH                             _Theodor Herzl_         261
        _Translation by Bessie London Pouzzner_

  THE PRESENT CRISIS IN AMERICAN JEWRY    _Israel Friedlaender_   265

  OUR SPIRITUAL INHERITANCE               _Irving Lehman_         277

  ADAM PROMETHEUS, and OTHER LYRICS       _Louis K. Anspacher_    282

  SHOLOM ASCH: THE JEWISH MAUPASSANT      _Percy B. Shostac_      285
        _A Menorah Prize Essay_

  LIBERALISM AND THE JEWS                 _Joseph Jacobs_         298

  WHAT IS JUDAISM? _Second Paper_         _Mordecai M. Kaplan_    309

  UNIVERSITY MENORAH ADDRESSES                                    319

  INTERCOLLEGIATE MENORAH NOTES                                   322

  ACTIVITIES OF MENORAH SOCIETIES                                 324

  INDEX _to Volume I of THE MENORAH JOURNAL_                      333

       *       *       *       *       *

        25 cents a copy. Subscription, $1.00 a year; in
        Canada, $1.25; abroad, $1.50

        _Copyright, 1915, by The Intercollegiate Menorah
        Association. All rights reserved

        Entered as second class matter January 6, 1915, at the
        New York Post Office, under the Act of March 3, 1879_


[Illustration]

        =DIEGES & CLUST=
        =20 JOHN STREET=
        =NEW YORK CITY, N. Y.=

       *       *       *       *       *

        =Manufacturing Jewelers
        for the Leading Colleges
        Schools and Associations=

_=Class, Fraternity, Club and Society Pins, Medals and Badges, Loving
Cups, Plaques and Trophies of All Descriptions, Diamonds, Watches,
Jewelry, Silverware.=_

       *       *       *       *       *

                              =FOR=
        =KOHUT SCHOOL=   =BOYS=
        =254th St. & Independence Ave. Phone 367 Kingsbridge=
        =Riverdale-on-Hudson        New York City=

_An Ideal Boarding and Day School_

ALL DAY IN THE COUNTRY

Unexcelled Advantages of Refined home Physical training, and outdoor
sports under rigid supervision

Resident Masters and House-mother

Individualized attention in the class-room

Gardening, Manual Training

Bible Study and Elementary Hebrew

For Booklet, Address at School

=HARRY J. KUGEL, Principal.=


=KAMP KOHUT, A Boys' Summer Camp at Oxford, Maine. Under the personal
direction of GEO. A. KOHUT, Ph.D.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The Jews of Russia and Poland

=A Bird's-Eye View of their History and Culture=

        =By Israel Friedlaender, Ph.D.=
                    Professor at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America

=12^o. With a Map. $1.25 net=

A popular account of the Polish and Russian Jews whose Pale of
Settlement is the battleground of Teuton and Slav. It elucidates the
problem of Russian Jewry which, at the termination of the world
struggle, will claim alike the attention of statesman and
humanitarian. It interprets the complex psychology of the Russian Jew
who is becoming an important factor in the life of America.

_ALL BOOKSELLERS_

        =G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS=
        =NEW YORK, 2-6 West 45th Street     LONDON, 24 Bedford Street=

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindly mention The Menorah Journal when writing to advertisers

       *       *       *       *       *


=Until January 15, 1916=

The Menorah Journal will present as a special gift to all new and
renewing subscribers (on request) a copy of the Portrait of Theodor
Herzl from the autographed etching by Hermann Struck (the frontispiece
to this issue), printed on art paper, and admirably suited for
framing. The Portrait will be sent, carefully wrapped, to any address
desired. Present subscribers may secure this gift by remitting now for
an extension of their subscription for one year, regardless of the
date when their present subscription expires. For each subscription
secured from friends, moreover, we will gladly send a copy of the
Portrait either to the subscriber or the sender. Give specific
instructions, and address The Menorah Journal, 52 Vanderbilt Avenue,
New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


=You Would, Wouldn't You--?=

If you knew that there was a tiny little book, just large enough to
slip into your pocket, that you could read through in a few
trolley-car or train rides--and when you got through have an
intelligent, broad, philosophic grasp of the entire history of the
Jews--not just a lot of names and dates, you know, but the big vital
facts that count and that you can remember and talk about, and never
be embarrassed by ignorance,--and best of all, if you could get a
little wonder book like that for just 40 cents, you'd send for it
quick, wouldn't you?

Well we have just such a book, all ready for you--Paul Goodman's
little "_History of the Jews_"--in the Temple Classics (the little
books, you remember, that made Shakespere famous)--beautifully bound,
a joy to handle, and a greater joy to read. Just write your name and
address on this ad, tear it out, and mail to The Menorah Journal, 52
Vanderbilt Avenue, New York (with 40 cents in stamps for each copy you
want--you can have as many as you like--they make dandy little
gifts,--we'll send the other copies direct, if you like, to the
addresses you give us).

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Kranich & Bach]

_Ultra-Quality_ Pianos _and_ Player Pianos

The Choice of Cultured Musicians

Of all the beautiful possessions with which the refined home is
adorned, none other is so indicative of the owner's culture and
musical taste as a GRAND Piano. Those first impressions of
discriminating taste, instantly aroused by the simple beauty of the
Kranich & Bach Grand, are confirmed and enhanced by the exquisite tone
of this matchless instrument.

[Illustration: Small Grand

Price $700

(Freight and handling added)

Deferred Payments Practically at Your Convenience.]

Words can convey little conception of the artistic superiority of the
Kranich & Bach Small Grand. Although only 5'4" long it produces, in a
manner almost unbelievable, all the magnificent qualities of tone that
make "grands" infinitely more satisfying than "upright" pianos. With
its new full-tone scale and the marvelous "Isotonic Pedal," this
superb instrument IS the Small Grand leader of the world--_supreme and
incomparable_.

        _Golden Anniversary Booklet Mailed on Request._
        KRANICH & BACH, 233-243 E. 23d St., New York

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindly mention The Menorah Journal when writing to advertisers

       *       *       *       *       *


A WAR-TIME BOOK BARGAIN

        =The Greatest Word Master in All Literature=

        =Six Attractive Cloth-Bound Volumes to a Set=

        =Good Bible Paper, Large, Clear Type, Gold
        Decorations, Duotone Illustrations=

[Illustration: Photograph, Greatly Reduced]

IMPORTED HUGO SETS

Buy these sets today

=$1.60=

The European War in destroying the book market of England made
possible this great opportunity for you. Nelsons, the famous Bible
publishers over-stocked with new editions, turned to this country for
buyers, and sold the sets for the mere cost of paper and binding. The
opportunity is most unusual--the books are a real bargain--but the
offer is limited, and to get the sets you must act promptly.


=EXTRA SPECIAL!= In connection with our Extraordinary Hugo Offer
above, we announce a limited number of six-volume sets of Famous
Authors, including:

        =Kipling=
        =Dumas=
        =Poe=
        =Shakespeare=
        =Stevenson=
        =Lincoln=
        =Scott=
        =Dickens=

The binding, paper, type and size of these Standard sets are uniform
with the Hugo sets, and the same price--per set including delivery
charges--will prevail as long as the sets on hand last.


=SIX BOOKS FOR THE PRICE OF ONE--ACT NOW=

=STUDENTS!= This is an exceptional opportunity to commence compiling
your library. A good start is half the race won. Fill your empty
book-case with fifty-four volumes of the complete works.


=A SENSIBLE GIFT=

No better gift can be made that will bring a higher sense of
appreciation and be more lasting and a constant reminder of the
generous giver. Your gift portrays your character. Send us your
instructions, when and to whom you want your books sent. The receipt
of your check and instructions will be acknowledged by us, and carried
out with the utmost care and deliberation. Buy one set or the complete
collection of the world famous authors.

The =number of sets on hand is limited=. The readers who send for
these sets may count themselves =lucky=. Six cloth-bound volumes are
offered at a price which is just about what you would ordinarily pay
for _=One Volume=_.

=BUY IT TODAY--Place your order before they are all gone=

_=Grasp this Opportunity Today!=_

=Tear Off Coupon, Fill in, and Sent to Us Now=

[Illustration: Pointing hand]


THE CLASSICS LIBRARY COMPANY 52 Vanderbilt Ave., N. Y. Enclosed find
$______(money order, check, or currency), for which please send me
______ Cloth Bound Sets of Booklovers' Library, checked below:

        ______Dickens    ______Dumas      ______Stevenson
          ______Hugo    ______Kipling    ______Shakespeare
            ______Scott    ______Poe      ______Lincoln

        Name________________________
        Address________________________

Send all charges prepaid. Select one or more sets on this coupon NOW

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindly mention The Menorah Journal when writing to advertisers

       *       *       *       *       *


        _A Message to Representatives,
        Present and Prospective,
        of The Menorah Journal_

=RIGHT NOW is Your Opportunity!--=

--An opportunity to make money--make it easily and pleasantly--and
render _yourself_, _your friends_, and THE MENORAH JOURNAL a
beneficent service.

If you have already tried your hand at subscription-getting for THE
MENORAH JOURNAL, you know how agreeable it is to meet men and women of
the class we desire for subscribers, and how quickly their interest is
awakened when you hand them a copy and they see for themselves the
distinction, beauty, and editorial "meat" of THE JOURNAL.

        The special gift of the Portrait of Theodor Herzl from
        the Struck etching, which we are now offering with all
        new and renewal subscriptions received before January
        15, 1916 (see announcement on page iii of this issue),
        gives you an extra advantage just now in urging your
        prospect to subscribe immediately. Work this for all
        you are worth between now and January 15th, and you
        will add a substantial sum to your financial
        resources. _You_ need the money--and _we_ need the
        subscriptions. The indubitable fact that lots of men
        and women in your neighborhood really need THE MENORAH
        JOURNAL makes the prospects for both of us exceedingly
        bright.

Cash in! The chance is yours for the asking and the taking.

The time is short. Every day you let go by means money lost. Write to
THE MENORAH JOURNAL, 52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, for sample
copies, terms, etc.--but meanwhile read the announcement (in the front
pages) of the good things THE JOURNAL will have in 1916,--and begin
seeing your friends _at once_.

_P. S.--Ask about the special Prizes and Cash Rebates when you write_

       *       *       *       *       *


        =ALL HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
        SINCE THE WORLD BEGAN
        IS _CONCENTRATED_ IN=

        THIS
        ONE
        MIGHTY
        BOOK

        Ask The
        Standard

        It
        Never Fails

=THE FUNK & WAGNALLS=

=New Standard Dictionary=


=KNOW WHAT THE WAR-WORDS MEAN=

        Burgomaster
        Reservist
        Contraband
        Mobilize
        Mitrailleuse
        Moratorium
        Armistice
        Armageddon
        Belligerent
        Entente
        Dreibund
        Enfilade
        Neutrality
        Landsturm
        Landwehr
        Cossack

=Every Word used in War or Peace is fully defined in the NEW Standard=


=The World's Great Wonder Book--=

It gives accurate, concise, and the most recent information on every
Word, Name, Place, Person, and Thing; on every Phrase, Term, and
Expression in the living English language--on everything alive that
can be spelled in English.


=Lavish Expenditure to Make It Superior--=

It cost nearly $1,500,000 to complete; for nearly four years 380 of
the world's foremost editors and specialists labored upon it
unceasingly.


=A Reference Work Beyond Comparison--=

There are over 3,000 pages; 7,000 pictorial illustrations, including
many beautiful colored plates; it defines 450,000 terms, many
thousands more than any other dictionary. It is the only dictionary
the contents of which are arranged in one alphabetical order--an
immense time-saver.


=Most Authoritative Dictionary--=

Six months after publication 75,000 copies had been sold; it is the
dependable authority in all branches of the United States Government,
in Courts of Law, in the leading Universities and Colleges, and in the
Public Schools. In commercial life the NEW Standard is popularly
recognized as the _one_ dictionary that never fails.


=A Superb Christmas Gift=

For the home, the school, the business and professional office, no
present can be more useful or acceptable than this handsome volume; it
will serve for years to come as a constant and valuable reminder of
the giver.


=Send for Descriptive Booklet--_FREE_=

Sign the coupon and mail it to us so that we may send you by mail
interesting information regarding this peerless work, with
descriptions of the different beautiful bindings, prices, and easy
terms of payment.

=FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Publishers, NEW YORK=


=U. S. Commissioner of Education Claxton:=

"This great work can not fail to be a distinct contribution to English
scholarship."


=John Wanamaker,=

_Famous Merchant_:

"Artistic, complete and of unrivaled excellence."

=Earl Kitchener,=

_Secretary of State for War_:

"A valuable book which will be of great utility to me."


=George W. Kirchwey, LL.D.,= _Columbia Univ. Law School_:

"It makes all other dictionaries look pale and insignificant beside
it."

       *       *       *       *       *

        =FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY=
        =Dept. 294,  New York=

Send me free, by mail, Standard Dictionary Booklet and prices.

            _Name_..............................

          _Street_..............................

        _City_..................................

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindly mention The Menorah Journal when writing to advertisers

       *       *       *       *       *


                               =in=
        =_Make Your Dollar Produce More a New York City Hotel_=

IN THE HEART OF THINGS

------TWO SPECIALTIES------

=$2.50 per day=

A pleasant room with private bath, facing large, open court. (Not one
room, but one hundred of them.)

=Also Attractive Rooms, Without Bath, $1.50 Per Day.=

The restaurant prices are most moderate.

_=600 ROOMS=_

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

=$3.00 per day=

An excellent room with private bath, facing street, Southern exposure.
(Not one room, but eighty-seven of them.)

=The most central location in NEW YORK, equally convenient for
amusements, shopping or business.=

_400 BATHS_

       *       *       *       *       *

=HOTEL MARTINIQUE=

=On Broadway, 32d to 33d Street . . . NEW YORK=

_=All Baggage Transferred Free to and from Pennsylvania Station=_

                       =THE HOUSE OF TAYLOR=
                   CHARLES LEIGH TAYLOR, President
 WALTER S. GILSON, Vice-President  WALTER CHANDLER, Jr., General Manager

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

        =The Only Grand Prize
        (Highest Award) given to
        Dictionaries at the
        Panama-Pacific Exposition
        _was granted to_=

        =WEBSTER'S
        NEW INTERNATIONAL=

        =For Superiority of Educational Merit.=

This _=new=_ creation answers with _=final=_ authority all kinds of
puzzling questions such as "How is _Przemysl_ pronounced?" "Where is
_Flanders_?" "What is a _continuous voyage_?" "What is a _howitzer_?"
"What is _white coal_?" and thousands of others.

=More than 400,000 Vocabulary Terms. 30,000 Geographical Subjects.
12,000 Biographical Entries. 6000 Illustrations. 2700 Pages. The only
dictionary with the divided page--a stroke of genius.=

[Illustration]

=REGULAR and INDIA-PAPER EDITIONS.=

=Write= for specimen pages, illustrations, etc. =Free=, a set of
Pocket Maps if you name this paper.

        =G. & C. MERRIAM CO.,
        Springfield, Mass.=

       *       *       *       *       *

        =Member of American Museum of Natural History=

        =B. B. Amrom=

        =Collector and Expert Repairer of=

        =Antiques=

        Chippendale, Sheraton, Heppelwhite, Adams,
        Jacobean Furniture, Works of Art and
        Decorations, Sheffield Plate,
        Bric-a-Brac

        Pewter Historical Plates, Door Knockers and
        Curiosities

        _=Jewish Domestic and Ceremonial Objects=_

        INTERIOR DECORATOR
        AND UPHOLSTERER
        FINE CABINET WORK

        =728 Lexington Ave.    New York=
        =Telephone--Plaza 854=

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindly mention The Menorah Journal when writing to advertisers

       *       *       *       *       *


        =Hotel Cumberland=    New
                                      York

[Illustration]

S. W. CORNER BROADWAY AT 54TH STREET

"Broadway" Cars from Grand Central Depot

       *       *       *       *       *

=Kept by a College Man=

=Headquarters for College Men=

Ten minutes' walk to forty theatres.

Rooms, with bath, $2.50 and up. New, modern and fireproof.

=Special Rates for College Teams and Students=

    H A R R Y  P.  S T I M S O N,  M a n a g e r

=The Cumberland does more college business than any other New York
Hotel=

HEADQUARTERS FOR STUDENTS

       *       *       *       *       *

="THE MENORAH MOVEMENT"=

A book of 180 pages (paper bound) giving a full account of the origin
and development of the Menorah movement which has now extended to 35
colleges and universities throughout the country. The book contains
also addresses by many university heads and leaders in American Jewry.

Only a limited number of copies remain from an edition of 5,000. While
they last copies may be procured on request by those who send in their
subscriptions to The Menorah Journal directly to the office of the
Journal, 600 Madison Avenue, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOTEL LENOX

=Corner Boylston and Exeter Sts., Boston, Mass.=

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindly mention The Menorah Journal when writing to advertisers

       *       *       *       *       *

Columbia

[Illustration]

Double-Disc Records

The finest silver thread of music spun by the wizard bow of Ysaye--the
tears and feeling in the tender depths of Fremstad's noble voice--the
sheer magnificence of a thrilling orchestral _finale_--all these
elusive tonal beauties are caught and expressed in Columbia Records,
from the faintest whisper to the vastest tidal wave of sound.

Volume--TONE--feeling--the most delicate shading of a theme are
perfectly preserved and supremely present in every Columbia Record--an
exquisite tone-perfection that does not vanish with use.

You can test these exclusive qualities in a series of home recitals
such as no concert audience is ever privileged to hear. Arrange your
first recital _to-day_.

        =Columbia Graphophone Company=
        =Woolworth Building, New York=

        =_Prices in Canada Plus Duty_=

[Illustration: _Grafonola 110_

_Price $110_]

[Illustration: Columbia

Note the Notes]

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindly mention The Menorah Journal when writing to advertisers

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: signature: Dr Theodor Herzl

_From an Etching by Hermann Struck, Autographed by Theodor Herzl._

_Reproduced from the Original by Courtesy of the Berlin Photographic
Co._

        _Frontispiece_
        THE MENORAH JOURNAL
        _December, 1915_]


THE

MENORAH JOURNAL

        VOLUME I                 DECEMBER, 1915              NUMBER 5

[Illustration]


The Menorah

BY THEODOR HERZL

_Translated from the German by Bessie London Pouzzner_


DEEP in his soul he began to feel the need of being a Jew. His
circumstances were not unsatisfactory; he enjoyed an ample income and
a profession that permitted him to do whatever his heart desired. For
he was an artist. His Jewish origin and the faith of his fathers had
long since ceased to trouble him, when suddenly the old hatred came to
the surface again in a new mob-cry. With many others he believed that
this flood would shortly subside. But there was no change for the
better; in fact, things went from bad to worse; and every blow, even
though not aimed directly at him, struck him with fresh pain, till
little by little his soul became one bleeding wound. These sorrows,
buried deep in his heart and silenced there, evoked thoughts of their
origin and of his Judaism, and now he did something he could not
perhaps have done in the old days because he was then so alien to
it--he began to love this Judaism with an intense fervor. Although in
his own eyes he could not, at first, clearly justify this new
yearning, it became so powerful at length that it crystallized from
vague emotions into a definite idea which he must needs express. It
was the conviction that there was only one solution for this
_Judennot_--the return to Judaism.

When this came to the knowledge of his closest friends, similarly
situated though they were, they shook their heads gravely and even
feared for his reason. For how could that be a remedy which merely
sharpened and intensified the evil? It seemed to him, on the other
hand, that their moral distress was so acute because the Jew of to-day
had lost the poise which was his father's very being. They ridiculed
him for this when his back was turned--many even laughed openly in his
face; yet he did not allow himself to be misled by the banalities of
these people whose acuteness of judgment had never before inspired his
respect, and he bore their witticisms and their sneers with equal
indifference. And since, in all other respects, he acted like a man in
his senses, they suffered him gradually to indulge in his infatuation,
which a number of them soon began to call by a harsher term than _idée
fixe_.

He continued, however, with characteristic persistence to develop one
idea after another from his fundamental conviction. At this time he
was profoundly moved by several instances of apostasy, though his
pride would not permit him to betray it. As a man and as an artist of
the modern school, he had, of course, acquired many non-Jewish habits
and his study of the cultures of successive civilizations had left an
indelible impress upon him. How was this to be reconciled with his
return to Judaism? Often doubts assailed him as to the soundness of
his guiding thought, his "idée maîtresse," as a French thinker calls
it. Perhaps this generation, having grown up under the influence of
alien cultures, was no longer capable of that return which he had
perceived to be their redemption. But the new generation would be
capable of it, if it were only given the right direction early enough.
He resolved, therefore, that his own children, at least, should be
shown the proper path. They should be trained as Jews in their own
home.

Hitherto he had permitted to pass by unobserved the holiday which the
wonderful apparition of the Maccabees had illumined for thousands of
years with the glow of miniature lights. Now, however, he made this
holiday an opportunity to prepare something beautiful which should be
forever commemorated in the minds of his children. In their young
souls should be implanted early a steadfast devotion to their ancient
people. He bought a Menorah, and when he held this nine-branched
candlestick in his hands for the first time, a strange mood came over
him. In his father's house also, the lights had once burned in his
youth, now far away, and the recollection gave him a sad and tender
feeling for home. The tradition was neither cold nor dead,--thus it
had passed through the ages, one light kindling another. Moreover, the
ancient form of the Menorah had excited his interest. When was the
primitive structure of this candlestick fashioned? Clearly the design
was suggested by the tree--in the centre the sturdy trunk, on right
and left four branches, one below the other, in one plane, and all of
equal height. A later symbolism brought with it the short ninth
branch, which projects in front and functions as a servant. What
mystery had the generations which followed one another read into this
form of art, at once so simple and natural? And our artist wondered to
himself if it were not possible to animate again the withered form of
the Menorah, to water its roots, as one would a tree. The mere sound
of the name, which he now pronounced every evening to his children,
gave him great pleasure. There was a lovable ring to the word when it
came from the lips of little children.

On the first night the candle was lit and the origin of the holiday
explained. The wonderful incident of the lights that strangely
remained burning so long, the story of the return from the Babylonian
exile, the second Temple, the Maccabees--our friend told his children
all he knew. It was not very much, to be sure, but it served. When the
second candle was lit, they repeated what he had told them, and though
it had all been learned from him, it seemed to him quite new and
beautiful. In the days that followed he waited keenly for the
evenings, which became ever brighter. Candle after candle stood in the
Menorah, and the father mused on the little candles with his
children, till at length his reflections became too deep to be
uttered before them.

When he had resolved to return to his people and to make open
acknowledgment of his return, he had only thought he would be doing
the honorable and rational thing. But he had never dreamed that he
would find in it a gratification of his yearning for the beautiful.
Yet nothing less was his good fortune. The Menorah with its many
lights became a thing of beauty to inspire lofty thought. So, with his
practised hand, he drew a plan for a Menorah to present to his
children the following year. He made free use of the motif of the
eight branching arms projecting right and left in one plane from the
central stem. He did not hold himself bound by the rigid traditional
form, but created directly from nature, unconcerned by other
symbolisms also seeking expression. He was on the search for living
beauty. Yet, though he gave the withered branch new life, he conformed
to the law, to the gentle dignity, of its being. It was a tree with
slender branches; its ends were moulded into flower calyxes which
would hold the lights.

The week passed with this absorbing labor. Then came the eighth day,
when the whole row burns, even the faithful ninth, the servant, which
on other nights is used only for the lighting of the others. A great
splendor streamed from the Menorah. The children's eyes glistened. But
for our friend all this was the symbol of the enkindling of a nation.
When there is but one light all is still dark, and the solitary light
looks melancholy. Soon it finds one companion, then another, and
another. The darkness must retreat. The light comes first to the young
and the poor,--then others join them who love Justice, Truth, Liberty,
Progress, Humanity, and Beauty. When all the candles burn, then we
must all stand and rejoice over the achievement. And no office can be
more blessed than that of a Servant of the Light.


The Present Crisis in American Jewry

_A Plea for Reconciliation_

BY ISRAEL FRIEDLAENDER


[Illustration: _ISRAEL FRIEDLAENDER (born in Russia, 1876), attended
the Universities of Berlin and Strassburg (Ph.D., 1901); called to the
Jewish Theological Seminary in 1903, where he is now the Sabato Morais
Professor of Biblical Literature and Exegesis. Professor Friedlaender
is not only the author, editor, and translator of a number of
scholarly works but his wide observation of Jewish life in various
countries, coupled with his broad historic knowledge, have enabled him
to write and speak on present Jewish problems with exceptional
authority and insight, as for example in his new book, "The Jews of
Russia and Poland." His lectures before Menorah Societies have been
particularly stimulating and have made him a great favorite with
University students._]

VARIOUS occurrences of recent date have revealed a rift in American
Jewry which if not healed in time is likely to result in a permanent
schism. The agitation centering around the question of a Jewish
Congress is not the cause of this rift; it is rather an effect or a
symptom betokening the profound difference of opinion and sentiment
which at present divides the Jews of America. In the realignment of
American Jewry which this struggle is calling forth, the Zionists and
the non-Zionists of this country--the former centering around their
local organization, the latter represented by the American Jewish
Committee--have been taking opposite sides. Those of us whose Judaism
is broad enough to embrace with equal loyalty the ideals of Zionism
and the interests of American Judaism, cannot but view with the
deepest concern the possibility of a permanent conflict between these
two sections of American Jewry, a conflict fraught with the gravest
consequences, not only for the Jewish cause in this country in general
but also for the Zionist movement--a conflict, moreover, in which no
victory achieved by either side can be anything but a Pyrrhic victory.

The situation is one that demands careful thought and delicate action.
Only a few of us are in a position to influence the course of events
by acting, but many of us may help to clarify the situation by
thinking. A correct diagnosis is an indispensable preliminary to a
cure, and it is only by finding out whether the issues underlying the
present struggle represent a chronic and perhaps irremediable
conflict, or are rather the effect of an acute and therefore curable
misunderstanding, that a proper solution may be discovered and
proposed. It is from this point of view that an attempt is here made
to analyze the present situation in American Jewry, to trace the
causes which have produced it, and to point out the consequences which
are unavoidable unless a remedy be applied in time.


_The Two Issues in American Jewry_

TO my mind there are two fundamental issues which separate the two
groups in American Jewry from one another. They may be expressed in
the following terms: 1, _Diaspora versus Palestine_; 2, _Religion
versus Nationalism_.

Without any desire to lose myself in philosophic subtleties, I shall,
for the sake of brevity, adopt the Hegelian language and explain the
development of these issues on the principle of _Thesis_, _Antithesis_
and _Synthesis_, i. e., of the initial prevalence of one extreme, of
its yielding subsequently to the opposite extreme, and of the final
harmonization of the two in a higher unity, combining the essential
features of both. I shall endeavor to point out that the Synthesis
forms the ground on which both parties may cooperate, without
sacrificing an iota of their respective convictions.

The first issue, expressed in the formula "Diaspora versus Palestine,"
hinges on the question as to whether the Jewish people finds its best
opportunities for development in the Diaspora, i. e., as an integral
part of the nations in whose midst it lives, or, away from the other
nations, as a separate entity, on its own soil in Palestine.


_The Rise and Fall of "Diaspora Judaism"_

WHEN modern Jewry, after the isolation of centuries, suddenly emerged
from the Ghetto to seek a place in the sun in the midst of the
Christian environment, the thesis adopted by it was _Diaspora_.
Consumed with the desire for emancipation, for sharing the benefits
and attractions of the new life around them, the Jews discarded the
hope for an independent national existence in Palestine, which had
been their lode-star throughout the ages. _Diaspora_ as opposed to
_Palestine_, and as exclusive of it, became the slogan of emancipated
Jewry. The Jewish religion was refitted to harmonize with this new
striving for material and cultural progress. Reform Judaism arose, the
main object of which was to break down the previous separateness of
the Jews; and the theory of a "Jewish mission" sprang into life, not
as a spontaneous growth of Jewish tradition, but as a forced hothouse
product of practical life--a theory which proclaimed that an isolated
Jewish existence in Palestine was subversive of the very essence of
Judaism, that the mission of the Jewish people was to propagate
monotheism among the nations of the earth, and that this mission could
only be carried out in the Dispersion, in the midst of the nations
which were to be the objects of that mission.

As time progressed, however, the "Diaspora" thesis gradually lost its
force. Emancipation failed to fulfill the ardent hopes attached to it.
The nations refused to allow the Jews to participate fully and
unrestrictedly in the general life of the country. Anti-Semitism,
manifesting itself in the crude form of hatred, or under the subtle
guise of prejudice, turned, in many cases, the liberties previously
granted to the Jews into a scrap of paper. On the other hand, the
dangers of this extreme Diaspora Judaism, at first little thought of,
began to loom larger and larger. The rush for emancipation threatened
not only to disrupt the unity of the Jewish people throughout the
world, which had been maintained during the ages of suffering and
persecution, but it also led large and important sections of Jewry to
assimilation, that is, to complete absorption.


_The Antithesis "Palestine" and Its Inadequacy_

AS a protest against the thesis "Diaspora," its opposite came to life,
the antithesis "Palestine." Political Zionism sprang into being,
loudly proclaiming that emancipation was a failure; that Judaism had
no chance of life in the Dispersion, and that the only salvation of
Jewry lay in being transferred to Palestine. _Zionism or assimilation_
was the alternative placed before the Jewish people. All efforts of
Jewry, as the last attempt to escape annihilation, were to be focused
on the obtaining of a publicly and legally assured home in Palestine.
All Jewish endeavors in the Diaspora were deprecated, because
consecrated to a cause which was foredoomed to failure.

It was not long before the antithesis, too, began to reveal its
deficiencies. The difficulties of reaching the Zionist goal very soon
proved far greater than had been anticipated in the blissful ecstasy
of the Zionist honeymoon. The ultimate consummation of the national
hope receded further and further before the longing gaze of the Jewish
people, and no longer held out an immediate remedy for the pressing
needs of suffering Jewry. The conviction also gradually gained ground
that, even under the most favorable of circumstances, Palestine could
only harbor a fraction of the Jewish, people, and that the vast bulk
of Jews would still remain in the lands of the Diaspora. Zionists who
were looking reality in the face could not accept the view of the
extremists, who were ready to save a small portion of the Jewish
people at the cost of abandoning to its fate the enormous majority
thereof.


_Opposing Ideals Fused Into Spiritual Zionism_

AS a result, a new formula asserted itself: Diaspora _plus_ Palestine.
It was the combination between the two extremes of Diaspora existence
and Palestine existence. This synthesis, generally called Cultural or
Spiritual Zionism, proclaimed that Palestine was indispensable for
the continuation of Judaism, for it was the only spot where the spirit
of Judaism, undisturbed by conflicting influences, could develop
normally and unfold all its hidden possibilities, and the only bond of
unity which could save the scattered members of the race from falling
asunder into disjointed fragments. The Diaspora, on the other hand, as
the dwelling place of the overwhelming majority of the Jewish people,
had problems of its own which clamored equally for solution.

Hence the Jewish task became a double one: the Jews in every country,
while participating to the full in the life of their environment--for
the return to the Ghetto was neither desirable nor possible--had to
endeavor to secure a maximum of elbowroom for the development of their
own section of Jewry, while as part of universal Israel they had to
keep up their contact with the Jews throughout the world and labor
with them for the realization of the common Jewish hope, that of a
spiritual center in the historic land of Judaism. _Diaspora without
Palestine_ was impossible, because without the refreshing breath of a
healthy Jewish life in Palestine it was bound to wither and dry up.
_Palestine without the Diaspora_ was equally impossible, because it
lacked the backing of the people as a whole, and was in danger of
becoming a petty and obscure corner in the vast expanse of the Jewish
Dispersion, a sort of Jewish Nigeria.

This synthesis was not a pale cast of thought, the flimsy product of
an imaginative brain. It had its prototype in the actual facts of
history. For during several centuries preceding the dissolution of the
Jewish state, Palestine was the spiritual center of Judaism, in the
sense just indicated. The Jews outside of Palestine were superior, not
only in numbers, but also in wealth and influence, to those of
Palestine. The Jews of Egypt, and the same applies to other countries
of that period, were closely associated with the cultural and material
aspirations of their environment. Philo was one of the most
illustrious representatives of the Hellenic culture of his age; these
Diaspora Jews even found it necessary to translate the Holy Writings
into Greek. Yet they were, at the same time, loyal to Palestine. They
paid their Shekel, they made their annual pilgrimages to Jerusalem,
and looked upon the Holy Land as the spiritual center of all Jewry.


_The Second Issue: Religion vs. Nationalism_

THE other fundamental issue on which Jewish opinion is divided is
closely associated with the preceding one; it hinges on the formula
_Religion versus Nationalism_. From its earliest beginnings down to
the time of modern emancipation, Judaism represented an indissoluble
combination of nationalism and religion. Though ultimately intended to
appeal to the whole of humanity, Judaism was essentially a _national_
religion. Its bearer was a national community which zealously guarded
its racial purity, and its external manifestations assumed the forms
of a national life. Again the Jewish people was, first and foremost, a
_religious_ nation. Its sole reason for existence was, in the belief
of every one of its members, "to know the Lord" and to make Him known
to others. A Jew who did not believe in the fundamentals of the Jewish
creed or who did not observe the fundamentals of the Jewish ceremonial
was as much of a monstrosity as the Jew who denied the common racial
descent of the Jews in the past, or their common national destiny in
the future.

The departure of the Jews from the Ghetto and their entrance into
modern life marked a turning point also in this direction. Filled with
the desire of becoming part of the nations in whose midst they lived,
modern Jews were ready, and thought they were compelled, to deny the
national character of Judaism. The Jews were now labelled as Germans
or Frenchmen of the Mosaic persuasion, who were divided from their
fellow-citizens by the purely spiritual affiliations of religious
faith--the same affiliations which divided the Christian population.
Here, too, Reform Judaism was quick to meet the demands of practical
life. It began to chop off all the elements in Judaism which betrayed
a national character, both in the domain of doctrine and of practice,
though it halted half way, and down to this day still acknowledges, in
flagrant contradiction with its own theory, a number of rites and
ceremonies which bear an unmistakable racial imprint.

This transformation of Judaism, or rather this transformation of
Jewish terminology--for, in many cases, it was merely a question of
terms--was greatly stimulated by the development of nationalism in
Western Europe, where the structure of the modern state excluded, or
was thought to exclude, a diversity of nationalities, while the
principle of religious toleration left enough room for a variety of
religious beliefs. As a result, those Jews who lost their religious
affiliations were bound to feel that they were outcasts in the
religious community of Israel: they became either _konfessionslos_ or,
by a curious perversion of logic and conscience, became members of the
dominant faith.


_The Rapprochement of Religionists and Nationalists_

THE thesis "Judaism as Religion" was followed by the antithesis
"Judaism as Nationalism." It is interesting to observe that the
antithesis came from the Jews of Eastern Europe who, in their
overwhelming majority, were adherents of strict orthodoxy. Those Jews
of Russia and Poland who had drifted away from their religious
moorings were neither psychologically nor physically in a position to
abandon Judaism: psychologically, because they were too strongly
saturated with Jewish culture and Jewish associations to tear
themselves away from the influence of Judaism; physically, because
they were excluded from participating in the life of the environment
and were forced to remain within the fold. Living as the Eastern Jews
did in compact masses, they found it easier, both in theory and in
practice, to emphasize the national aspect of the Jewish community. As
a result, a doctrine sprang up which looked upon Jewry as an
essentially racial or national entity, in which religion was merely
one of the many passing phases of its historical development. If among
the champions of the thesis "Religion" there were Jews who celebrated
the Ninth of Ab as a holiday because it marked, in their eyes, the end
of Jewry as a nation, there were, among the others, the adherents of
the antithesis "Nationalism," Jews who arranged entertainments on the
Day of Atonement, as a public protest against the religious character
ascribed to Judaism.

Here, too, however, the synthesis was gradually paving its way, and
the formula "Religion _plus_ Nationalism" was supplanting the thesis
"Judaism as Religion" and the antithesis "Judaism as Nationalism." The
religionists, that is, the believers in the purely religious character
of Judaism, began to realize the devastating effect of their doctrine
on Jewish life and development, while the nationalists, without
sacrificing their convictions--for religion, least of all sentiments,
can be forced on modern men--began to appreciate the overwhelming
influence of the Jewish religion as a historic factor in the life of
the Jewish people, and were ready to acknowledge the difficulty and
the danger of squeezing an officially nationalistic Jewry into the
narrow frame of the modern _Nationalstaat_.

This mutual _rapprochement_ resulted, gradually, in a tacit
agreement--an agreement far more durable than a legal compact, because
founded on sentiment rather than on law--which implied the recognition
of Judaism as composed of Religion and Nationalism, but left
sufficient room to include the two extreme types of Jews: those whose
loyalty to Judaism was entirely fed from the fountain of religion, and
those whose devotion to Judaism was altogether grounded in race
consciousness.


_The Growth of Diaspora Judaism in America_

THIS development, which may be traced in various countries of modern
Europe, nowhere assumed such huge proportions and such striking
manifestations as it did in America. The struggle, hinging on the two
opposite doctrines, was nowhere else so well defined and nowhere else
fraught with so many tangible consequences as in America, for the
reason that American Jewry, as no other Jewry in the world, was made
up of two different elements, sharply divided in their traditions and
associations, as well as in their mental and psychological complexion.
The Jews hailing from the lands of emancipation in Western Europe, who
are conventionally, though not quite accurately, designated as German
Jews, brought over with them the theses _Diaspora_ as against
_Palestine_, and _Religion_ as against _Nationalism_. The immigrants
from Eastern Europe, the children of the Ghetto, who with equal
inaccuracy are termed Russian Jews, carried with them the antitheses
_Palestine_ as against _Diaspora_ and, as represented by the
extremists among them, _Nationalism_ as against _Religion_. The
fanatics of Diaspora Judaism and of Judaism as a pure faith are to be
found exclusively among the "German" Jews. The radical adherents of
Palestine and of Jewish nationalism are recruited entirely from the
ranks of "Russian" Jews.

These issues were of particular and immediate significance for the
Jews in this country; for America has, in less than one generation,
become the second largest center of the Jewish Diaspora, and bids fair
to become the first, instead of the second, within another generation.
No other country in the world offers, even approximately, such a
favorable combination of opportunities for the development of a
Diaspora Judaism, as does America: economic possibilities, vast and
sparsely populated territories, freedom of action, liberty of
conscience, equality of citizenship, appreciation of the fundamentals
of Judaism, variety of population, excluding a rigidly nationalistic
state policy, and other similar factors. It is no wonder, therefore,
that in no other country did Reform Judaism, as the incarnation of
Diaspora Judaism, attain such luxurious growth as it did in America.
It discarded, more radically than in Europe, the national elements
still clinging to Judaism, and it solemnly proclaimed that Judaism was
wholly and exclusively a religious faith, and that America was the
Zion and Washington the Jerusalem of American Israel.


_The Opposition: The Palestinian Sentiment of Russian Jews_

ON the other hand, the emigrants from Russia brought the antithesis on
the scene. They quickly perceived the decomposing effect of American
life upon Jewish doctrine and practice, and they became convinced more
firmly than ever that Diaspora Judaism was a failure, and that the
only antidote was Palestine and nothing but Palestine. The
nationalists among them beheld in the very same factors in which the
German Jews saw the possibilities of a Diaspora Judaism, the chances
for organizing Jewry on purely nationalistic lines. Nowhere else,
except perhaps in Russia, can be found a greater amount of Palestinian
sentiment, as well as a larger manifestation of a one-sided Jewish
nationalism, than is to be met with in this country.

This conflict of ideas became extraordinarily aggravated by numerous
influences of a personal character. The division between the so-called
German Jews and the so-called Russian Jews was not limited to a
difference in theory. It was equally nourished by far-reaching
differences in economic and social position and in the entire range of
mental development. The German Jews were the natives; the Russian Jews
were the newcomers. The German Jews were the rich; the Russian Jews
were the poor. The German Jews were the dispensers of charity; the
Russian Jews were the receivers of it. The German Jews were the
employers; the Russian Jews were the employees. The German Jews were
deliberate, reserved, practical, sticklers for formalities, with a
marked ability for organization; the Russian Jews were quick-tempered,
emotional, theorizing, haters of formalities, with a decided bent
toward individualism. An enormous amount of explosives had been
accumulating between the two sections, which if lit by a spark might
have disrupted the edifice of American Israel, still in the process of
construction.


_The Promise of Union and Harmony_

AND yet, not only was the conflict averted, but the impending struggle
gave way to hearty and extensive cooperation, such as cannot be
witnessed elsewhere in the whole Jewish world (one recalls
particularly the analogy of England) where East and West seem never to
meet. As the two sections came into closer contact with one another,
they learned to understand one another and to appreciate their
respective points of view. This cooperation was not founded upon the
flimsy framework of political expediency. It was grounded in that
synthesis of Jewish life which combines in a higher unity the
essential elements of the doctrines formerly believed to be exclusive
of one another. The German Jews, while emphasizing the needs of
Diaspora Judaism and anxious to build up its largest manifestation in
America, learned to appreciate the quickening and ennobling effect
upon the Diaspora of a normal Hebrew life in Palestine, and became
interested in the regeneration of the Holy Land. The Russian Jews, on
the other hand, though laying particular stress on the possibilities
of Judaism in Palestine, put their shoulder to the wheel and were
ready to assist in rearing the great structure of Judaism in America.
The so-called religionists, while looking upon Judaism as a faith,
were yet disinclined to repudiate the purely nationalistic Jews, whose
enthusiasm and devotion they admired even though it flowed from a
source they did not officially acknowledge. The so-called
nationalists, basing their Judaism on race consciousness, realized
that a common foundation of Judaism in this country could only be laid
along the lines of religious affiliation.

This cooperation found tangible expression in the recent participation
of American Jews in the upbuilding of Palestine, a participation which
one will vainly look for in a similar group (I am not speaking of
isolated individuals) in other countries. The same desire for a better
understanding was further embodied in the movement toward Kehillah
organization, which, though centering around the Jewish religion,
still clearly implied the national element in Judaism.

There was every reason to hope that this cooperation, which had been
so happily inaugurated between the two sections, would become more
intimate and more extensive, and that the interaction of the
heterogeneous elements of American Jewish life would resolve itself
in a great and strong harmony. America bade fair to become an ideal
Jewish center, where the practical wisdom of emancipated Jewry and the
idealistic intensity of Ghetto Jewry would be merged in one united
Jewish community, fully conscious of its duty as the future leader of
the Jewish Diaspora and acknowledging its indebtedness to the center
of all Jews in the land of our Fathers.


_The Old Conflict Revived_

SUDDENLY, however, a reaction seems to have set in, which threatens to
disrupt the harmony hitherto prevailing. This reaction, which is
fraught with grave consequences for the future of American Judaism no
less than for the Zionist movement, dates from, or at least coincides
with, the struggle centering around the Haifa Technikum. This is not
the place to enter into an analysis of that momentous issue. It is
enough to state that the bond of unity was disrupted with rude hands,
and the old conflict hinging on the issues of Diaspora and Nationalism
broke out with new fury. Again we see Diaspora Judaism pitched against
Palestinian Judaism, and Religion against Nationalism. Reason has
given way to passion, and discrimination to generalization. The Jews
of the new Palestine, who have given of their life-blood to the
rejuvenation of our homeland, are sweepingly declared to be
"anarchists," while, on the other hand, American Jews who, with
single-hearted devotion, have been the builders of the great Jewish
center in the New World, are contemptuously sneered at as
"assimilationists."

In this mood of distrust and prejudice, American Jewry was overtaken
by the great crisis resulting from the World War, and the disharmony
prevailing between the two factions soon found tangible expression in
the struggle over a Jewish Congress. The two elements of American
Jewry were clearly divided on the issue: the German or native Jews,
represented by leading members of the American Jewish Committee, were
opposed to the calling of a congress, while the Russian or immigrant
Jews, speaking largely through the Zionist organization, clamored for
it.

From what has preceded I believe it may be safely concluded that this
demand for a congress on the one hand, and the opposition to it on the
other, are not rooted in diametrically opposed and deeply implanted
theories of Judaism but are rather the expression of different moods
or temperaments. The immigrant Jews who were directly concerned in the
war, since its horrors affected their homelands and the kin they left
behind, and who were impulsive and sentimental, felt the burning need
of crying out in their despair, and were ready to face the
consequences which might result from this outcry. The native Jews,
whose sympathy with their far-off brethren, profound though it was,
could hardly, in the nature of the case, be more than indirect and
whose accustomed reserve and self-restraint enabled them to judge the
issues more calmly, shrunk from the risks which in their opinion were
implied in an open protest of the Jewish people before the inflamed
public opinion of the non-Jewish world. It is not my intention, nor is
it my function, to render judgment in so momentous an hour on an issue
concerning which Jewish opinion is diametrically yet honestly divided.
But it is necessary to point out that whichever side may be in the
right: serious as may be the dangers of holding a congress or not, the
dangers involved in a split over this question are incalculably more
serious. Such a split may not only result in permanent and perhaps
irreparable injury to the Jewish cause in America and to the Zionist
movement in this country, but may also, by aligning the two sections
of American Jewry against one another, spell nothing short of disaster
to the Jewish people as a whole. The stakes involved in this conflict
are infinitely greater than the issue which has given rise to it.


_The Structure of American Judaism Endangered_

SO far as American Judaism is concerned, the practical results of this
strife between Zionists and non-Zionists in America,--to leave aside
all theoretical considerations,--may prove to be fatal. It will reopen
the gap between the two elements of American Jewry which had been
almost filled. The work of American Judaism has been done by both
elements. Prominent non-Zionists and even anti-Zionists have
frequently and gratefully acknowledged the debt which American Israel
owes to the cooperation of the Zionists. The institutions of American
Jewry depend to a large extent for their existence upon the
non-Zionists, who may now by the force of reaction be driven into
anti-Zionism. But the progress of these institutions just as largely
depends upon those who are Zionists. The withdrawal of the Zionists
from American Jewish work--and such withdrawal may become a moral duty
for the Zionists who are loyal to the movement and respect their
convictions--might mean a complete standstill in the life of American
Jewry. Perhaps there are a few among us who are skeptical about the
fate of American Judaism, and who therefore see no harm in hastening
its disintegration. But those of us who are profoundly concerned about
the future of the two and one-half million Jews who are now in
America, and of twice that number who may one day be here, cannot but
view with the utmost anxiety the danger of wrecking what promises to
become the greatest Jewish center in the history of the Jews since
their dispersion.

As for the Zionist movement, one cannot help doubting whether Zionism,
even if it succeeded in defeating its opponents, would thereby obtain
its object. I am not speaking of the very considerable material injury
which the movement will suffer from the indifference and hostility of
the other side. I am rather thinking of the dangers incurred by
Zionism itself if, having repulsed the so-called classes, it becomes
a one-sided movement of the masses. Of course, no Zionist can be
otherwise than deeply gratified by the prospect of Zionism becoming a
cause of the people, but unless it manages to preserve the balance of
power within the Jewish community, it will be exposed to risks from
another source. Zionism is beset with so many difficulties that it
dare not burden itself with problems extraneous to it. The injection
of political or economic issues into the movement is fraught with
incalculable consequences for the future of the movement in this
country. These issues are so extensive in their bearings and so vital
in their manifestations that if superimposed on the delicate structure
of Zionism they may crush it, never to rise again.

Zionism must, therefore, remain neutral. While including all Jews, it
dare not identify itself with any section of them. It dare not be
either a movement of the classes or of the masses. While holding
scrupulously aloof from the issues which divide modern Jewry as part
of modern humanity, it must keep its eye fixed on one point, the
securing of a Jewish center for the Jewish people as a whole, in which
the ills that afflict humanity may be cured in the prophetic spirit of
justice and righteousness.


_A Plea for Peace and Cooperation_

THE practical conclusion of these considerations is clear. It is a
plea for reconciliation, for a return to that Synthesis which was on
the point of becoming the common ground of all American Israel.
American Judaism needs peace to carry out the great task confronting
it. Zionism is no less in need of peace in order to gain the hearts of
those whose hearts are still Jewish. The very possibility of a
conflict has bred a spirit of suspicion and unfriendliness which falls
like a blight upon every attempt at united action. The non-Zionists
may succeed in defeating their opponents; they can never dispense with
Zionism which is a driving force in American Jewish life. The victory
may perch on the banners of the Zionists but they can never forego the
assistance of the non-Zionists who still form the backbone of American
Jewry. Representing the common longings of the Jewish people
throughout the world, Zionism should serve as a leaven, quickening and
stimulating the Jewish activities of this country, and rescue them
from the greatest danger of Diaspora Judaism, the danger of
provincialism, of falling away from the main body of universal Israel.
In the particular situation confronting us Zionism ought to assert the
claims of Palestine, in addition to those of the Diaspora. But the
Zionists cannot replace the present agencies of American Jewish life,
nor can they dispense with the cooperation of the non-Zionists. Such
cooperation, based on the synthesis _Palestine plus Diaspora_, would
be of equal benefit to both parties. Zionism and non-Zionism have only
one real enemy: it is Assimilation, which preaches the suicide of
Judaism. But all those who are concerned about the preservation of
Judaism, in whatever shape or by whatever means, have the right to be
recognized, if not as fellow workers in Zion, at least as fellow
workers in Israel.


_The Supreme Test for the Jews of America_

LASTLY, if cooperation and harmony between the Zionists and the
non-Zionists be permanently needed for the welfare of American
Judaism, they are needed a thousandfold now when the catastrophe which
has overwhelmed the ancient centers of Jewry has turned the eyes and
the hopes of the whole Jewish world toward the Jews of this country.
Ever since the Jews of Russia, fleeing from the wrath of the
oppressor, began to wend their steps toward these hospitable shores,
thoughtful European Jews have been looking upon America as the future
center of the Jewish Diaspora. And as time progressed, as the numbers
and the energies of the Old Jewish World assembled more and more in
the New, American Jewry has been steadily advancing toward this
exalted position of Jewish hegemony. But what, in the natural course
of events, might have been the fruit of slow and gradual ripening, has
now been thrust upon us as the sudden result of the World War.
Crippled European Jewry is now looking, and will look more and more,
to the Jewry of America not only for comfort and support, but also for
light and leading, for spiritual advice and guidance, and the Jewry of
America, the only Jewry of consequence unscathed by the world
struggle, cannot but assume the responsibility.

Nor is the Jewry of America at liberty to choose. There is an ancient
Jewish legend which, with a subtle touch of sarcasm, tells us that
when the Lord, having descended upon Mount Sinai, was about to bestow
the Torah upon the Jews, the latter, shrinking from the obligations
imposed by it, made an attempt to refuse the proffered gift. Thereupon
the Lord lifted the mountain over their heads and angrily exclaimed:
"If ye accept my Law, well and good. If not, ye shall be crushed on
the spot!" And the Jews, yielding no less to the promptings of duty
than to the dictates of wisdom, quickly recanted and declared: "We
will do and obey!" American Jewry will either be the leader of Jewry
or it will not be. Let it fail to respond to the great call of
history,--and it will unfailingly relapse into the obscurity and
sluggishness of its former parochialism. This great world crisis will
be either the making or the unmaking of American Jewry, and no Jew
whose mind is unclouded by the ephemeral passions of party strife can
do aught except ardently pray that the Jews of America may emerge in
triumph from their supreme test.

[Illustration: Signature: Israel Friedlaender]


Our Spiritual Inheritance

BY IRVING LEHMAN


[Illustration: _IRVING LEHMAN (born in New York, 1876), educated at
Columbia (A.B., 1896; A.M., 1897; LL.B., 1898). Justice of the Supreme
Court of New York; associated with a number of Jewish institutions,
including the Jewish Theological Seminary and the Y. M. H. & Kindred
Associations. Justice Lehman has taken a particularly keen interest in
Jewish University students, and as Chairman of the Graduate Menorah
Committee since the formation of the Intercollegiate Menorah
Association, he has been generously helpful in promoting the ideals
which the Menorah movement embodies. Devoted Jew and public-spirited
American, his personal example has been an inspiration to Menorah men
all over the country._]

IF a Jew of the Middle Ages, or even a Jew living to-day in almost
medieval conditions in Poland, were present to-night,[A] he would
certainly say, "What sort of a conference of rabbis is this, at which
a layman is presiding, another layman is to speak on 'The Religion of
the Hebrews,' and a third layman is to speak on a social movement?"

To the old-time Jew a conference of rabbis meant a conference of men
learned in the law and its authoritative interpretation in the
Talmud--men whose duty it was to teach this law and who would confer
among themselves upon the application of its abstruse and technical
rules to the daily needs of their congregations. But they could
recognize no questions and no problems not fully covered by that law;
consequently they could recognize no right in any person not an
authority on that law to take any part in such a conference except to
ask for the advice of the rabbis appointed to teach the law. That was
the attitude of our ancient leaders, and it met with the full and
unqualified approval of the Jewish laymen, because it fulfilled all
the requirements of our medieval condition. Until recent times we were
a people apart, living among the nations of the world, but not a part
of them. We had no right to join in the general civic life. Our life
consisted in the memory of a national past and in the dreams of a
national future. So far as the present was concerned, we were perforce
interested only in the maintenance of our identity and in the
preservation of our ancient law, so that we might be in a position
some day to realize our dreams and to reëstablish our national state,
founded on this ancient law. Deprived as we were of all right to live
in the present, we could justify our existence and continuance as a
separate people and a separate religion only by laying stress on the
importance of our ancient law, and striving to hand it down, pure and
unaltered, to future generations. Therefore in those days the rabbis
were naturally our only leaders, and their right to leadership
depended solely upon their knowledge of the law. The observance of the
Torah embraced all the limits of the life of the Jew.


_New Opportunities and New Obligations_

TO-DAY all this has changed. The Jew of to-day is living in the
present, and the observance of the minutiæ of Jewish law is to the man
active in civic and business life of slight if any importance.

Inconceivable as it would be to a medieval Jew that at a conference of
Jewish rabbis a layman should preside and laymen should make formal
addresses, it would be equally inconceivable to such a Jew that among
the laymen who might make such addresses, there could be a professor
at a great university, a worker in the general social activities of
the city, and a judge. These changed conditions, this wide life now
opened to the Jews, have produced new problems, and we demand of our
rabbis, if they are indeed to remain the teachers and leaders in
Israel, that they help us solve these problems.

As soon as opportunities were offered to us, we eagerly grasped them.
We are too eager, too ambitious, too practical a people to continue to
live in dreams of the past and visions of the future, when the present
is thrown open to us. We have definitely and forever discarded the
concept that we are a peculiar people, the "chosen of the Lord," in so
far as that concept cuts us off from free participation in the life of
the nations among which we live, or from serving in the cause of the
general advance of humanity. We have demanded the opportunity to
exercise civic rights, and as those rights have been granted, we have
recognized that the opportunity confers also an obligation--the
obligation to exercise those rights in no narrow spirit, but for the
benefit of the whole people of which we are now a part.


_Why the Jew Remains a Jew_

AS a result of this change, we no longer take our Judaism for granted,
but day by day perforce are asking ourselves three questions: What
does Judaism mean, and why are we Jews? Will the maintenance of
Judaism be of benefit to the countries in which we live and to
humanity at large? How can Judaism be maintained, since now we not
only live among the nations of the world, but the individual Jew has
become a part of these nations?

We have discarded, as I have said and as I firmly believe, the
ancient concept that Judaism means membership in a peculiar people,
the chosen of the Lord, except possibly in the sense that we have a
peculiar obligation imposed upon us to demonstrate to the world the
power and worth of a spiritual ideal. We Reform Jews have discarded
the view that in any literal sense the Lord revealed himself unto
Moses and gave unto him the tablets of stone. The words "Hear, O
Israel, the Eternal is One, the Lord is One," are still dear to us,
but many who call themselves Jews deny even the existence of a
personal God. Why then do we still remain Jews, why do not those
so-called Jews, who deny the existence of the Lord, frankly join the
ranks of so-called universal philosophers while the rest of us join
the Unitarians?

The answer comes not only from our heads, but from our hearts. Most of
us could not renounce Judaism because deep down in our consciousness,
aside from reason or logic, we know we are not as other men; we know
we are Jews. We hear the cry of the suffering in Belgium and we answer
to that cry because we are men and nothing human is alien to us,--but
when we hear the cry of the suffering Jew in Poland and Palestine,
then the true Jew answers that cry as the cry not only of a fellow
human being, but as the cry of a brother.


_A Nation Founded on a Spiritual Ideal_

IS Judaism then a matter of race? Are we after all and regardless of
our beliefs and special obligations, a peculiar people, perhaps even a
separate nation? The answer to this question lies, I think, in the
study of our history. For centuries past the Jew has been persecuted,
driven from one country to another, despoiled, massacred, and at best
despised and forced to live in the Ghetto clothed in the badges of
disdain. All of this the Jew has suffered and yet survived and kept
his religion intact; willing at all times to remain a man apart
because he knew that in the past the Jews had been a nation founded on
a spiritual ideal; because his tradition taught him that on the slopes
of Mount Sinai, the Lord had entered into a covenant with his
fathers--and not only with them stood there that day, but also "with
him that was not there that day" but who came after them; and that by
virtue of this covenant, Israel became unto the Lord a kingdom of
priests and a holy people; and because the value of this tradition,
the force of this spiritual ideal was greater to him than the
security, the right to live and work freely among his fellow men,
which he could have obtained only by discarding his Judaism.

During all the centuries since the dispersal, the Jews have had a
common history, a common tradition, a common spiritual ideal, and they
have survived by reason of the force of this common inheritance. It is
this common inheritance of a past founded on a spiritual force that
to-day, in my opinion, constitutes Judaism.


_America Demands Adherence to our Spiritual Ideals_

RACIAL Judaism is in one sense, but in the sense of a race that has
stood for a spiritual ideal and is bound together by traditions of the
value of that ideal, and not simply a race that is bound together by
ties of common descent. At all times and in all places a Jew meant not
merely a descendant of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, not merely a
descendant of the people who once ruled over the promised land, but
one who considered himself bound by the covenant of his fathers, at
least to the extent that he would be true to his spiritual ideals,
whatever these ideals might be. Judaism is in that sense a racial
religion, but it is and at all times must be a religion and not simply
a race. True, we now differ among ourselves as to the content of our
religion. True, many of us now deny that that covenant which has kept
alive our race and religion was ever in fact made, but we cannot deny
our history and our past. We cannot deny that by virtue of the
tradition of that covenant our fathers considered themselves under a
peculiar obligation, and that by virtue of that tradition they sought
to become a kingdom of priests and a holy people.

That tradition at least is our own heritage, and he only is a Jew who
recognizes the force of spiritual ideals, and by virtue of that
inheritance also for himself assumes the obligation involved in being
a member of a nation of priests and a holy people.

If that spiritual concept and not merely race constitutes the basis
and the essential content of Judaism, then surely the question of
whether the maintenance of Judaism will be a benefit to the country in
which we live answers itself. In all civic matters we must work and be
as one with our fellow-citizens, but America demands that each citizen
give to its service the best of which he is capable.

Since Judaism means the recognition of a peculiar obligation imposed
upon us by our past; since Judaism is founded upon a spiritual
ideal,--adherence to our ancient faith and endeavor to live up to our
past must be to us a source of greater moral and spiritual
strength--strength that we must bring to the service of our country.


_The Spiritual Value of a New Zion_

OUR problem then becomes really one of how we can maintain Judaism and
keep it alive now that it has become a part and not as formerly the
whole of our lives. Some say that this can be done only by recognizing
that we are not simply a racial religion but actually a nation, and
that we must reëstablish that nation and its capital upon the hills of
Zion.

This is neither the time nor the place to discuss such a matter. For
myself, I wish to say that if in the country where through our fathers
the world first learnt the value of spiritual ideals, where it was
prophesied that "the law shall go forth from Zion and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem--" and "nations shall no longer lift up sword
against nations neither shall they learn war any more," a community of
Jews shall be again established who shall represent and contribute to
the fulfillment of the prophecy, such a community would be from a
spiritual standpoint a living force to keep Judaism alive throughout
the world.

"_Nationally We Are Americans and Americans Only_"

BUT I wish also to state that I cannot for an instant recognize that
the Jews as such constitute a nation in any sense in which that word
is recognized in political science, or that a national basis is a
possible concept for modern Judaism. We Jews in America, bound to the
Jews of other lands by our common faith, constituting our common
inheritance, cannot as American citizens feel any bond to them as
members of a nation, for nationally we are Americans and American
only, and in political and civic matters we cannot recognize any other
ties. We must therefore look for the maintenance of Judaism to those
spiritual concepts which constitute Judaism.

And it is the duty of our rabbis in the present just as it was in the
past to lead us and strengthen us in our Judaism. A conference of
rabbis to-day properly recognizes that Judaism consists no longer in
the minute observances of the law; that the Jewish people are asking
for the inner meaning of their religion, and not for dry formulas. In
all humility as a layman, I say to them that the Jewish people again
needs to be taught that what the Lord requires of them is "to do
justice, to love mercy and to walk humbly with their God."

[Illustration: Signature: Irving Lehman]

        _I AM very much pleased with the excellence of The
        Menorah Journal, which grows better with every number.
        It is conceived in a fine spirit and has a high
        educational value for the Jewish young men in the
        universities throughout the country._

        _The American spirit and the Jewish spirit are in
        entire accord, in fact they supplement one another.
        The Puritan ideals of democracy which lie at the
        foundation of our Government were derived principally
        from the Jewish ideals of democracy, and I cannot
        imagine any American being less an American for being
        a good Jew. On the contrary, he will be a better
        American for being a good Jew, more ready at all times
        to make every sacrifice for his country in peace and
        in war.--Hon. Oscar S. Straus, in a Letter to The
        Menorah Journal._

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote A: This address was delivered at the opening session of the
Eastern Conference of Reform Rabbis, Temple Emanu-El, November 7,
1915, at which Justice Lehman presided.]


Lyrics

BY LOUIS K. ANSPACHER

[Illustration: _LOUIS K. ANSPACHER, poet and playwright, whose most
recent plays, "Our Children" and "The Unchastened Woman," have won
recognition for him as one of the most original and powerful
dramatists of the present day. Born in Cincinnati in 1878, and
educated at City College of New York, and Columbia University (A.M.,
LL.B.), he occupied the vestry pulpit of Temple Emanu-El, New York,
for several years, and has lectured on ethics and the drama. A volume
of his poems, to be published soon, will show more completely the
depth and resourcefulness of the lyric power revealed in the
accompanying verses. The portrait is from an oil painting by
Franzen._]


Adam Prometheus


I

        In olden books 'tis written,
        That he that would discern
        The secret'st truth of things
        Lost paradise eterne.
        He was the first that fed
        On fruit that knowledge brings;
        Exiled from joys, he fled
        And flaming swords did burn
        Behind his path, which led
                To miseries.


II

        Great God, vouchsafe me truth:
        For I am one that smitten
        With the deep mystery of things,
        In learned lore uncouth,
        Out of pure wonder sings
                In harmonies.


III

        Great God, forfend the tooth
        Of deep remorse, and stings
        Of joys that I did spurn:
        Oh, spare the gnawing ruth
        Of memories' torturings,
        Yea proudly did I turn
        From earth to snatch at wings
        To soar and ne'er return
                To life's lees.


IV

        Great God, I too am cursed;
        A destiny from birth,
        Of all dread fates the worst,
        Drives me unrestful, flings
        Me from my Eden bliss,
        Over a barren earth,
        To impious search for things
        Whose heart is an abyss.
        I too am one that clings.
        In lust for a knowledge kiss,
              Upon my knees.


V

        Great God, I've given o'er
        My paradise of ease,
        Allowed my soul to soar
        To mysteries high or deep
        At the world's core;
        Oh, quench its ardent thirst,
        Its hunger, God, appease:--
        Or if Thou dost ignore
        The soul that Thou hast nursed,
        Then smite me as I leap,
        And let Thy rages roar
        On me as in the first
        That fell on sulphur seas.
        Yea, down Hell's sliffy steep
        Thy molten lightnings pour
        Till darkness be immersed;
        Yet know I will not creep
        Though all Thy thunders burst
              In penalties.


My Psalm of Life

        I cannot grow as men would have me grow,
        By ordered plodding to a life complete;
        Climbing the path with slow and heavy beat
        Of tedious footsteps from the world below.
        I cannot like a visible circle flow
        Until by measured compass I can meet
        The place I started from with weary feet.
        That proudly point the obvious path they go.
        Ah no,--mine be the instinct given to trust
        That all will in the outcome fall aright.
        Like a migrant swan still wandering since I must,
        I'll fill a life's full cycle in my flight:
        Though I soar into the clouds or sink to dust,
        My orb will come around; I'll reach my height.


The Vocal Memnon to the Sphynx

        The sands of time drift round me, and within
          There is the knell of passing and decay:
          The sun-smit vastness of the world doth weigh
        Upon my riddling soul like hidden sin,
        And bids it speak. Thou desert art my kin!
          I crumble to thee, waning day by day;
          But I am cursed with questions that betray
        The end of life before death's hours begin,
        My eyes are staring, yet their sight is blind.
          My ears are hollow, yet they hear no sound.
            My knees are buried and my body sinks.
        The stars weave fates that they themselves unwind,
          Traversing the same cycles round and round;
            While I sit gazing at the silent Sphynx.

[Illustration: Louis Anspacher]


Sholom Asch: The Jewish Maupassant

_A Menorah Prize Essay_

BY PERCY B. SHOSTAC


[Illustration: _PERCY B. SHOSTAC, born in 1892, in New York City,
where he attended the Ethical Culture School and High School; graduate
of the University of Wisconsin (1915), where he was an active member
of the Wisconsin Dramatic Society and contributed frequently to the
Wisconsin Play-Book. He is now teaching English at the University of
Kansas. The present Essay was awarded the Wisconsin Menorah Prize for
1915._]


I

THE MAN AND HIS WORK

IT was in the little parlor of a four-room New York flat. The room was
furnished sparsely: a table and a few chairs of bamboo, a long row of
books on the yellow floor along one wall, some Chinese ornaments and
plants, a few Russian embroideries, a rich Persian covering on the
couch, and candles--many candles burning and flickering on their rest
of saucer or glazed clay candlestick. Our hostess seemed part of her
room; she was a Russian Jewess, decidedly Oriental in type, rare in
her beauty and still more rare in her personality and charm.

Sholom Asch sat opposite me smoking his cigarette and sipping his
coffee--a big man of thirty-five, with broad shoulders and a frame
sturdy and substantial; thick black hair, a high forehead, a
characteristically Jewish nose, a firm mouth, a little black
moustache, and deep brown eyes--eyes that at times would seem to be
unaware of anything surrounding them, yet one felt that they saw
everything and understood everything. His complexion was that of a
ruddy boy, yet his large handsome features had the sensitiveness which
classed him unmistakably as an artist.

He was talking in Yiddish. His voice was soft and his sentences
followed each other in musical cadence and beauty.

       *       *       *       *       *

"YES," Asch was saying, "he was the best Jew I ever met. I always
think of him as 'The Light of Damascus.' I was in Damascus last year.
The most beautiful city in the world! The houses on the winding
streets are centuries old. The people seem older than the houses. For
hours I stood in the market-place watching the camels and the asses
pass by. Some had the dust of the desert on their feet and some had
mud and dirt. Each went slowly on its way with its turbaned rider
sitting still as a figure of stone on its back.

"Through the kindness of a friend we entered a house on one of the
strange streets. Like most of the old houses its front was plain and
unattractive. We went through a court and on to a balcony overlooking
an enclosed garden. Such a garden I had never seen! It seemed a
picture transported from the 'Thousand and One Nights.' In the center
was a fountain of extraordinary workmanship, so inlaid with gems that
after the water had gushed out it seemed to splash down again in a
shower of ruby and amethyst. About the fountain were palms and fig
trees. The flowers were more wondrous than the jewelled water or the
many-colored mosaics of the walls and arches.

"On the grass sat a grey-bearded Mohammedan. He smoked his hookah in
silence. Suddenly we heard voices. Three young women came from the
house and bathed in the fountain. Their lord and husband sat stoically
and smoked. They laughed and played in the splashing waters. And as I
watched this old man and these beautiful women, I thought myself back
in the ancient Damascus, in the city that I had thought was dead for a
thousand years.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THAT evening I was walking in the city. Suddenly I saw a light before
me. To my surprise it was an electric bulb--the only one in Damascus.
It was fastened to the head of a donkey and illuminated a painted
advertisement attached to his back. By following the wires I found
they led to a large wholesale warehouse. It hurt me to find this
electric light in Damascus. I was still more hurt when I found that
the man who had installed it was a Jew, a Russian Jew who had come to
the city some years before.

"The next day I visited a shop where hammered gold and silver, for
which Damascus is famous, was sold. With the permission of the
proprietor I went upstairs to the workroom. What I saw there I shall
never forget.

"I found myself in a long but very narrow room, dimly lighted by a few
dirty windows. In two long rows in front of two long tables sat fifty
or sixty little girls huddled so close together that they touched one
another. Each child was bent over the table and each held a little
hammer. She was tapping on a piece of metal. The tapping was
never-ending--a sharp clicking sound like the falling of hail. The
children never spoke nor smiled. Near me sat a little girl. She was
not more than eight years old. Her hammer had stopped tapping and her
eyes were closed. She was asleep. The girl next to her, evidently her
elder sister, seeing the foreman approach, pinched the child sharply.
She opened her eyes and dully began her tapping. As I left this room
of darkness my eyes were wet with tears.

"I found out that only little girls were employed in this industry:
that they began when eight or nine years old. When they were sixteen
they usually were dead from the metal that had entered their lungs.
The children were mostly Jewish, for you must know that when the Jews
become part of a slow Eastern civilization they sink yet lower and
become yet more phlegmatic and listless than the people among whom
they have settled. I was indignant and asked if nothing was being done
to remedy this terrible evil. Then I was told that there was one man
who was devoting his life to freeing these children. It was the Jewish
merchant who used the only electric light in Damascus. He gave every
cent he earned to this work. He maintained an industrial school for
Jewish children and was trying to interest the Jews of the world in
the movement. And then I blessed this man's electric light. I think of
him always as 'The Light of Damascus.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

AND thus Sholom Asch talked. I cannot reproduce his words; I have only
tried to give the spirit of them. He talked in the finished style of a
Maupassant, with all the imagination and all the strength of that
great master. I saw then, before I had read his work, that his title
of "The Jewish Maupassant" was not extravagant. And I saw also that
here was an artist with human sympathy immeasurable, and yet not
lacking sensuous imagery and elemental strength and beauty.

Sholom Asch was born and brought up in a little town in Poland,
Kuttnow, near Lodz. His father was a merchant on a small scale. He
bought sheep and oxen from the peasants and shipped them to be
marketed in Lodz, in Germany, in France. He rode about the country and
sometimes took Sholom with him, whom he loved especially because he
studied so well. Sholom liked the sheep and the cattle, and he loved
the melancholy Polish landscape--mystic, fearful.

His father was a healthy, normal, honorable Jew; not fanatical but
deeply religious. He was philosophic toward life, he cared nothing for
money and was content without it. His mother, on the other hand, was
nervous and worldly. She was dependent on the externals of life and to
her no money was misery. There was a big house with much food, many
new clothes, much hospitality, and many big brothers and sisters;
something like eleven children. The ceremonies of the Jewish faith
were observed beautifully, the holidays kept happily. There was
substance and spirit.

       *       *       *       *       *

AND Sholom absorbed this atmosphere of the old religious rites, and
the paganism of the cattle and nature, and spoke little. When he was
six he was sent to the Jewish school. This was in session from eight
in the morning until five in the evening. He and the other children
used to watch the sun shine on certain spots and know the time. How
they waited for the moment of freedom, little knowing how well one of
their number was to picture for the world each intimate emotion and
thought of their imprisoned souls.

One day a peasant came to his house and Sholom went with him on his
wagon. That was a wonderful day; he played hookey. The next day the
rabbi, who believed in corporal punishment, expressed his views on the
matter of absence.

Asch was extremely clever at learning the Talmud and the old history
and philosophy of the Jews. He learned to reason from the Talmud and
to-day he says, "Art is logic. There must be an 'Urkraft' (elemental
strength) behind a man's work." And if there is one outstanding
characteristic of Asch's work, it is this elemental, this passionately
strong and elemental vein.

Max Reinhardt, whom Asch calls "Ein Dichter im Theater," loves Asch
dearly. In his Deutsches Theater, the most artistic and best equipped
theatre in the world, he produced Asch's _God of Vengeance_. This was
a marked success and is still a most popular play in Germany, Russia,
and in the Yiddish theatres of New York. Asch was only twenty-four
years at this time. From this play he made much money and a whole
village was made happy an entire summer.

Since then his income from his writings has increased steadily. Much
of his work is now translated into Russian and German, but as yet not
into English. The income from his translations far exceeds that from
his Yiddish publications, and he is able to support his wife and four
children in ease and comfort. Although he has been to America a few
times during the last six years, it is only several months ago that
his wife and children arrived from Poland and he settled here
permanently.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN important happening in the history of Jewish literature occurred in
the beginning of April. Perez, the intellectual father of the new
movement, died. Asch and Perez were deep friends. Of all living
writers Perez has had most influence on Asch, both as writer and as
man. When Asch brought him his first story, Perez gave him a volume of
his poems. He said of Asch, "A bird is breaking through the shell--who
knows, is it an eagle or a crow?" It proved to be an eagle. Perez was
a revolutionist, a poet, a dramatist, the defender of the weak, the
inspiration of the talented. A little story of his, "Bonchi the
Silent," about a Jewish workingman who never complained and who took
all his misfortunes as a matter of course, whose desires and hopes
were so thoroughly crushed out of him that on reaching Heaven and
being asked by God to request what he desired most, he said, "I want a
piece of white bread every Friday"--that story, more than any one
influence, caused the formation of the "Bund of the Russian
Revolution." It made the _intelligenzia_ of Russia feel that it was
their duty to teach the workingman to demand the earth.

And now since Perez's death, on Asch's shoulders has fallen the
responsibility of being the greatest Jewish writer living to-day. He
is assuming the added duty of revolutionist as well as artist. For the
serious Jewish writer is a sort of rabbi to his people. Ethically he
stands for the old Jewish ideals. To these Asch has added the beauty
of paganism and the vision of anarchistic communism.

In Paris once he came to a meeting of Zionists. He spoke against the
Zionist idea and was not listened to with great deference. Another
writer, Abraham Raisin, coming in shouted, "Hear! Listen to a great
Jew." Asch was given the floor and finished the speech.

Asch feels that only now is he beginning to drop his Jewish past as
material for his work. He is going out into the future: he is becoming
impressed with a vision of the America to be--the ideal democracy. And
his work is showing it. He is planning a poetic industrial drama, he
is finishing a gripping war play. His deep understanding of the
industrial slavery of our times is shown wonderfully in his novel,
_Motke the Scamp_, which is now appearing in serial form in the New
York Yiddish _Forward_. He begins with Motke's infancy. His mother's
milk is sold to the rich man's baby; Motke is cheated of everything.
Picture after picture of sordid Polish ghetto life follows--intermixed
with wood and river sunshine as only Asch can do it. One feels the sun
resting eternally over all, while man with his laughter and tenderness
and pain struggles toward perfection.

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCH is becoming an exposer and a prophet, but with great beauty of
style and purity of emotion. He is decidedly modern, decidedly
Russian, decidedly Hebraic, and eternally universal. He is bringing
the message of beauty and freedom to the American Yiddish working man.
Asch is not a socialist; he is a real individualist. With a sincere
contribution to the happiness of the world he believes that every
human being is entitled to all the joy of the world, no matter what
form his contribution may assume; shirts, street cleaning, cooking, a
painting, dishes, a poem. He does not preach eight hours and a dollar
more, he demands joy in labor. He wants people to play--to be happy at
their work. He demands freedom in one's personal life and beauty in
mind and body. He is an industrialist plus an artist.

Asch has traveled through Russia talking on various subjects to Jewish
gatherings, not for money but for love of his race. He has visited
Palestine, but with a keen interest in the growth and development of
the Jew--not from a nationalistic standpoint but from a world point of
view.

And this is why he admires America--because it brings to him a vision
of a perfect race, the result of the mixture of all races,
perpetuating the fine traits of all. He is immensely interested in
the public school. He believes in democracy and thinks we have it in
America.

For artists, however, he says this country is not good. The newspapers
in Europe, he says, print what Tolstoi eats and how he sleeps. Here
Rockefeller is the national hero. The artist here lacks artistic
obstinacy; he succumbs to money, he leaves starvation and his _Kunst_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCH loves Shakespere above all other writers; he is his master. For
months he went each night to the Berlin theatres and often, with his
eyes shut, would listen to the words and cadences of Shakespere's
lines. _Hamlet_ he considers the greatest play ever written.
_Midsummer Night's Dream_ and _Romeo and Juliet_ are two of his
favorites. From the ghost scene in _Hamlet_ he can trace Maeterlinck
and all the modern mystics. He says that Shakespere is universal in
his appeal and that his work in translation, when done by a master
like Schlegel, takes on the peculiar flavor of the tongue and people
into which it is translated and loses none of its intrinsic worth.

He loves Gogol and Tolstoi. _Faust_ is one of his favorite dramas. He
loves the old masters Greco and Rembrandt; among the moderns, Cézanne,
Puvis de Chavannes, Manet. In opera he does not care for Wagner, but
he is very fond of _The Magic Flute_, of _Madame Butterfly_, of
_Pagliacci_. He loves music and the theatre. Asch reads in many
languages, German, French, Russian, Polish, Hebrew, and a little
English. But to everybody he talks in Yiddish. He has no ear for other
languages except English, which he says is like his mother tongue!

In the spring Asch goes out to the country and works, in the summer he
loafs, in the winter he lives among his friends. He writes all the
time, being chock full of energy--for work, for love, for friendship,
for happiness. As he says, "I am thankful to God for three things:
first that he gave me life, second that he gave me my talent, third
for my love for you" (this to whomever the lady happens to be).

Like all the artists he is erratic, original, attractive, all-seeing.
But unlike most he has much strength of character and a brilliant
logical faculty that makes him check up his personal relations. He has
much affection in him and a great honesty and integrity which wins him
admiration and respect, and he has many friends among many kinds of
people in many parts of the world.

Sholom Asch is a philosopher, a novelist, a poet, and a dramatist. He
loves the clouds and the sea, he truly loves mankind. Always through
all he writes one feels a deep and elemental strength, an elemental
belief in nature and truth. He is not ahead of his time; he is rather
an interpreter and inspirer of his own day. This makes him the happy
person that he is. He is greatly honored in Russia and in Germany, and
by all writers in Europe.


II

ASCH AS A NOVELIST AND SHORT-STORY WRITER

WITH this brief sketch of Sholom Asch the man, I shall turn to a
consideration of a few of his most important works. As Sir Walter
Raleigh, the eminent English critic, has said, the best way to form a
judgment of an author is to quote his good passages. Accordingly I
have been as liberal as space would allow in my insertion of
translated passages. The most recent works, mentioned in the early
part of this essay, I shall not treat, as it was impossible for me to
procure them at the time of writing. I shall take up each work
individually before making generalizations.

       *       *       *       *       *

_DIE Jüngsten_ is a novel by Asch in which he tries to portray the
character and the influences at work on the younger generation of Jews
in Russia. The plot can be simply set forth. The younger generation is
represented by five characters of three social classes. Mery Lipskaja
is the daughter of a well-to-do Jewish manufacturer--in other words,
she is of the middle or bourgeois class. She has completed her
_gymnasium_ (high-school) education and has absorbed the prevalent
ideas about women and emancipation, and a desire for higher education,
for a broader life, for St. Petersburg. Kowalski is an artist. He,
like Mery, is not interested in the class struggle; all that vitally
concerns him is his art and "living." David and Rahel Lazarus are the
children of a physician who is giving his life to the people of the
"Grube" or ghetto. They have grown up among the suppressed and
impoverished Jews and they are filled with the spirit of the
revolution; David actively and Rahel passively. Mischa, the cousin of
Mery, is a member of the middle class. He has become aware of the
conditions in the Grube and his struggle lies between his middle class
environmental influence, which includes his love for Mery, and his
desire to join the revolution.

At the beginning of the novel Mery has just returned from the
_gymnasium_. She is oppressed and dissatisfied with her provincial
surroundings and longs to go to the university at St. Petersburg.
Mischa, in love with Mery, has also just completed work at the
_gymnasium_, and they plan to go to St. Petersburg together. The
artist Kowalski now comes to the little south Russian village and soon
Mery is in love with him. Mischa is much distressed and suffers
greatly. Kowalski leaves, promising to meet Mery at St. Petersburg.

The second part of the novel opens with Mischa and Mery in St.
Petersburg. The climate does not agree with Mery and Mischa arranges
that they go to a Finnish village. Here they grow very dear to each
other and Mischa is about to propose when Kowalski melodramatically
appears. Kowalski and Mery now give expression to their love. Mischa
returns to St. Petersburg but cannot pursue his studies because the
revolutionary disturbances have closed the university. Kowalski and
Mery return to St. Petersburg soon after and are admitted to the
bohemian life there. Kowalski meanwhile has become famous. The lovers
gradually grow apart and when the revolution breaks out Mery returns
to her home for safety, leaving Kowalski never to see him again.
Mischa has returned home also. After a massacre of the Jews in the
Grube in which Rahel, the sister of David, is outraged, he sees that
in marrying her lies his only means of becoming one of the Jews whom
he was so desirous of helping. So despite the fact that he still loves
Mery and she is now willing to be his wife, he marries Rahel. Mery
after a period of restlessness in the little town returns to St.
Petersburg to join the bohemian group there.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE outstanding excellence of the novel lies in its characterization.
The characters live before us and we see the workings of their minds
and emotions with remarkable clarity. The mental struggles of Mischa
between his love for Mery and his desire to help the oppressed Jews,
always inhibited by inherited powerlessness to act; the carefree,
art-centered, egotistical Kowalski; the adolescent romanticism and
sympathetic insight of Mery; the cynically idealistic and
self-sacrificing Dr. Lazarus--these constitute the real substance and
artistic worth of the book. The pictures of contemporary Russian
Jewish life are of marked interest, especially to the western reader.
The following passages are descriptive of the Grube or ghetto and
characterize the condition of the poorer Jews in the towns throughout
Russia:

        "The sun seldom shone into the valley. Old people lost
        their vision early and the percentage of child
        mortality was enormous. But even those who remained
        alive under these conditions were weak, sick, half
        crippled people; impoverished figures with crooked
        legs, large heads and weak arms crept through the
        streets.

        "And in spite of everything the inhabitants never left
        their grave (Grube) and made no attempt to find a
        better, more healthy home. A sort of sick love bound
        them to their unfortunate homes, and like a curse it
        rested on each who was born in the valley--that he
        could not free himself from it and that until the end
        of his days he must eke out his sad existence there."

After the massacre Mischa walks through the Grube:

        "The murmur of prayers re-echoed to his ears. From the
        little windows of the synagogue came the soft gleam of
        candles. He entered. Deep as in a cellar, as miserable
        and abandoned as themselves, lay the little house of
        prayer of the wretched inhabitants of the Grube. The
        walls were bare. The Ark of the Covenant was hung with
        only a piece of coarse linen. In front of the broken
        'altar' stood an old man in a torn prayer shawl and
        prayed before the small penny candles. The room was
        full of worshippers, all inhabitants of the Grube.
        Their prayer was a groaning, and sighing, and
        screaming, out of tormented hearts. It rose up to the
        low ceiling and hung over them all like a heavy black
        cloud."

And then Mischa knew his people:

        "He felt his strength to bear everything; sorrow and
        misery and persecution. He saw his people doing the
        work of servants through the centuries, from the
        farthest past to the present day. He saw the bare
        walls of the synagogue, the wretched Ark of the
        Covenant, he heard the sad melody of their prayers
        which grew to despairing screams. . . . He had the
        feeling that he was with his people in a large ship.
        For eternities this ship was on a voyage of searching.
        It landed at harbors always new and strange: Egypt,
        Palestine, Babylon, Arabia, Spain, at Turkey, at
        Holland and Russia. And to-day is also a test day for
        the Jews. And also this day will end, and many, many,
        but the ship will always sail on, will carry them all
        to new harbors into the farthest future."

       *       *       *       *       *

BEFORE leaving _Die Jüngsten_, I cannot refrain from translating two
passages concerning Kowalski--the first his longing for the open
country after his long stay in St. Petersburg, and the other his
remarks on clouds:

        "St. Petersburg had become sickening to him. For
        loneliness he longed, for solitude. Solitude, with his
        brush behind the mountains, in the deep woods. To see
        every day sun, mountains, and water! The water that
        pushes blocks of ice before it, and to see the cloud
        shadows which camp on the wide snow fields. To live
        again in the little room with his comrade the
        Lithuanian peasant with whom he studied in the
        academy! To have no money. To eat bread; much good
        black bread with honey which his comrade's father
        would send from the village. For whole days to wander
        about and paint clouds!"

Mery discovers him at work, and looking at his painting he says:

        "Everything is clouds--the warmth that I feel, the
        warmth-- . . . and do you see the pride that such a
        cloud has, the pride, the formality? 'The cloud is no
        small thing,' my fat professor used to say. It is no
        small thing to paint a cloud, for then one must feel
        eternity. As lovingly as a girl's body must one model
        a cloud. And warmth and pride must come to expression.
        To paint a cloud means to step into Heaven, into the
        middle of Heaven and to see a new world which we do
        not know here at all. Such a nobody as I wishes to
        paint a cloud, a Heaven--wishes to have seen God and
        create Him anew with his little art! That is an
        impudence, isn't it?

        "There you see what I have painted. It is nothing--it
        is worthless--something is lacking." He looked
        amusedly at the picture. "Love is lacking. So it is as
        my professor with the fat belly loved to say, 'To
        paint a real cloud one must love.' Yes, yes, to be
        able to create something good one must be in love
        or--do you know what? Or to feel a great sin in one's
        soul. Yes, yes, with a burning sin in one's heart one
        can create big things. When one has entirely
        fallen. . . ."

       *       *       *       *       *

_BILDER aus dem Ghetto_ is a series of sketches dealing with Jewish
life. Many Jewish characters are pictured in dramatic situations but
with very little plot. The characters are all poor; fishmongers,
children of the Ghetto, a Jewish farmer, two mothers, an old married
couple. A few typical plots follow.

"Ein Eilbotte" is really a prose poem describing a sunrise, a storm,
and the reappearing sun--more properly perhaps a series of paintings,
of symphonic word canvases. Let me translate the opening passages:

        "Behind the town ruin which stands on a small hill
        like a national monument, flaming and fiery rises the
        red of the morning and floods with its glow the gray
        clouds that hang in the horizon. It brings a son of
        the sun into the world. The day tears itself from the
        lap of the mother Night.

        "In the little town life is beginning to stir. Here
        and there one sees a peasant wagon on which the dew
        drops of the night are still hanging. Here and there a
        Jew, eyes heavy with sleep. The show windows and house
        doors are for the most part locked. For many of the
        inhabitants the day has not yet begun. . . . This day
        shall be like yesterday, like to-morrow."

        A storm rushes over the woods. The storm comes like a
        mighty giant that wishes to swallow the world or it
        seems as though God himself were spreading out His
        black mantle: "The end of the world! Neither heaven
        nor earth, neither beginning nor end! Black, ominous,
        dull, empty. . . . Suddenly Heaven opens for a
        second. . . . A blinding light has torn the clouds.
        Stabbed by a flaming dagger the giant dies--a confused
        moaning fills the air. It rains." But the storm passes.
        "The Heaven is clear and blue as if nothing had happened.
        The air is clearer and purer, the earth washed clean
        by the water."

       *       *       *       *       *

"DIE Mutter." It is in a little Hebrew school in a small town in
Russia. The rabbi has gone to say the evening prayer, leaving the
small boys to study. Instead they begin to talk of various subjects.
Mothers are discussed and each boy praised his most highly. One pale
little chap with large eyes says, "My mother also . . ." and then stops.
One of the boys laughs uncontrolledly and then there is an
embarrassing silence. The teacher returns. The little Josek, however,
cannot keep his attention on the book:

       "The 'crazy Trajna' stands life-like before him. Out
       there at the well she stands. . . . He sees her
       plainly. . . . All too well he knows that dirty
       sun-burned face plowed through by a thousand wrinkles,
       those great blood-shot eyes with the swollen, sore
       lids. . . .

       "He remembers her, yes, he remembers. . . . He was
       still a little boy then, when the teacher carried him
       to school in his arms. He cried then and hung tightly
       with both hands to the apron of his mother.

       "Mother! . . . this woman his mother?"

And so the emotions of the boy are set forth in memories telling us of
his mother before she was insane and now, when she is known to all
the village as the "crazy Trajna." The time when he found her insane
is described. It was raining and he was hurrying home from school.
Suddenly he sees his mother near his father's house:

        "There at the corner she stands. . . . Trembling for cold
        she seeks protection under any roof. . . . The boy stands
        as rooted to the ground, without turning his gaze from
        her. The water flows in streams from his coat. She has
        turned her glassy eyes on him. Slowly as though
        following some inner force she comes closer to him. He
        is not able to move from the spot; something
        unspeakable gleams in those glassy eyes. . . .

        "Now he feels in her the mother. . . . His heart beats as
        though to break. Always closer to him she comes. A hot
        wave of blood flows through all his limbs and rises to
        his head. He trembles as in fever.

        "Suddenly all fear leaves him. He assumes a waiting
        position and looks directly into her eyes.

        "Now she stands close before him. She looks at him.
        Away! These eyes! this look! He wishes to fall weeping
        into her arms. . . . To weep, yes, to weep . . . to weep
        and to kiss.

        "He is in the impulse to carry out his purpose when
        she suddenly takes his hand. With a quick push he
        tears himself from her embrace and runs away as
        rapidly as he can.

        "It seems as though she ran after him with
        outstretched arms and blowing hair, always faster and
        faster, always grasping more heavily. It seemed to him
        as though he heard her terrible voice, hoarse with
        weariness, calling 'Joselle,' 'Joselle' . . ."

The father has taken a new wife and the "crazy Trajna" is no longer a
member of the household but is driven about the streets. And as he
leaves the schoolroom this evening, Josek is consumed with indignation
and sorrow and resolves not to flee from his mother the next time he
meets her. On his way home he meets her. The tears flow from her eyes;
when she embraces him he again runs away. But that evening he steals a
plate of meat from his home and brings it to her. That night he does
not sleep. The next noon, coming home from school he sees Trajna
standing near the well surrounded by street urchins:

        "One pulls her bonnet from her head. Another jerks at
        her apron. A third tears the prayer book from her
        hand. Some boys cry loudly,

        "'Hurrah! The crazy one, the crazy one!'

        "She looks at her son in surprise. Josek can stand it
        no longer; he goes to his mother and with his fists
        drives away the urchins that torment her.

        "They have run away. Without saying a word Josek
        reaches out both his hands. His face is deathly pale.
        His eyes gleam with fever. The boys laugh. . . . Their
        loud calls press themselves to his ears. . . . Another
        moment and the hands of his mother reach around him as
        in a cramp.

        "The 'crazy one' hugs him, kisses him, now laughing,
        now crying. Suddenly she clutches him and begins to
        dance with him. 'Hurrah! Hurrah! The crazy one is
        dancing with her son!'

        "Josek casts a confused glance at the urchins. He
        draws himself together, tears himself from the embrace
        of his mother with a quick movement and runs away. He
        does not even think of the cap which remains in her
        hand.

        "Even from a distance he hears the calls, 'Hurrah!
        Hurrah! The crazy one dances with her son!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

"DER Wunderrabbi." He is a very stupid shepherd boy. He will not learn
his Hebrew lessons nor prayers. When in the fields he often feels near
to God--and whistles. He is taken to the synagogue on a holiday. His
parents are ashamed of him. He cannot repeat the prayers from the
prayerbook, yet he feels a great desire to praise God. To the
consternation of his parents he walks to the altar, and placing two
fingers in his mouth he voices his praise in a loud, shrill whistle.

        "All stand as though struck by lightning. Who dared to
        whistle in this holy place? The father is about to
        grasp the boy and lead him out, the people clench
        their fists threateningly. But the rabbi turns from
        his place at the east of the synagogue and asks in a
        loud voice, 'Where is the saint? Where is the
        miracle-worker who destroyed the evil forces hanging
        above us, who bored through heaven that our prayers
        might easily penetrate the black clouds to the throne
        of God?'

        "There is no sign of the miracle-worker. He has
        slipped out of the house of prayer and with his shoes
        and stockings over his shoulder is running as fast as
        he can toward the village."

       *       *       *       *       *

"EIN Jüdisch Kind." She is about to be married but will not comply
with the Talmudic law requiring married women to cut off their hair
and wear wigs. She loves her hair and will not part with it. She is
married. Weeks go by and her husband is ostracised. He and his wife
have become more and more estranged and they speak to each other
hardly at all. One day he comes home and with loving words induces her
to let him cut off her black braids.

        "When Chanele awoke the next morning, she looked at
        herself in the mirror that hung opposite her bed.
        Terror seized her and she thought that she had become
        mad and that she lay in the hospital. On the table
        near her bed lay the dead braids. The soul that had
        lived in these braids when they were on her head was
        dead, and they reminded her of death . . . She hid her
        face in both her hands and heart-breaking sobs filled
        the quiet room."

And there are other "Wortbilder" which I shall not treat. This book of
sketches shows Asch at his very best. For the form--one without plot
dealing with character and nature description--is decidedly fitted to
the elemental, passion-laden flow of his style. It is a great wonder
to me that these gems of artistic word portraiture have not yet been
translated into English. In my opinion they rank equal in worth with
the similar work of Daudet, Maupassant, Tchekoff and Turgenieff.

       *       *       *       *       *

_DAS Städtchen_ is also a book of sketches. In this, however, the
different high points--the Sabbath eve, the holidays, the marriage
ceremony and others in Russian Jewish village life, are treated.
Character is not emphasized, although one man appears through all the
sketches. The book does not come up to _Die Bilder aus dem Ghetto_.

Asch is essentially a dramatist. In his sketches, in his novels and in
his stories, the dramatic point of view is not lost. His plays
consequently always move, are always full of action and tense
situation. The same elemental strength and purity of emotion that is
found in his prose is always present in his dramas. In the concluding
part of this essay, I shall touch upon five of his plays in the order
of their importance.

        EDITORS' NOTE--_The third and concluding part of Mr.
        Shostac's prize essay, dealing with Shalom Asch as a
        Dramatist, will appear in the next issue._


        _THOSE of us in England who know how much harshness
        and injustice the Jews have had to suffer will join in
        your hopes that after the war some means may be found
        of permanently ameliorating their lot. You may feel
        the more sure of our sympathy in this because, as you
        know, England is the European country in which, since
        Oliver Cromwell sanctioned their return nearly three
        centuries ago, the Jews have been best treated, being
        freely admitted to all posts of power and honor, and
        not exposed to any sort of social disparagement. They
        have held places in our Cabinets and been among the
        most eminent lawyers and judges. Such a one was Sir
        George Jessel, the famous Master of the Rolls. We have
        no more patriotic citizens, nor more generous
        benefactors to works of charity and to public purposes
        supported by private liberality. With those members of
        the race who have suffered injustice or violence in
        other countries, there has always been a warm sympathy
        in Great Britain._--_Viscount Bryce, in a Letter to The
        Menorah Journal._


=Liberalism and the Jews=

BY JOSEPH JACOBS


[Illustration: _JOSEPH JACOBS (born in New South Wales in 1854), one
of our leading scholars and men of letters; managing editor of the
Jewish Encyclopedia; author of many authoritative books on Jewish
subjects, including "Jews of Angevin England," "Studies in Jewish
Statistics," "Jewish Ideals," etc. The present article is adapted from
a chapter in Dr. Jacobs' forthcoming book which will deal
comprehensively with the contribution of the Jew to modern progress._]

THE eighteenth century was the era of the "benevolent despots," like
Frederick II, Joseph II, Catherine II, who adopted the ruling
principle of the Welfare-State--that the object of government should
be the good of the people--but considered that it could only be
carried out for the people, not by them. The weakness of the principle
consisted in the difficulty of securing a heritable succession of
capable benevolence, and the collapse of Prussia at Jena and of Joseph
II's well-meant but unreflective reforms led, in the nineteenth
century, to the triumph of the principle first enunciated in America
and carried out in France--of government for the people by the people.
The transition to the next stage, from religious toleration to
religious liberty, is marked, as regards the Jews, by the tolerance
edict of Joseph II, in 1781, which for the first time threw open
service in the army to the Jews and placed them to some extent on the
same level with other dissenters from the State-Church of Austria.

But this was still toleration and not liberty, and it was soon cast
into the background by the full religious liberty granted by the
French Revolution in 1791, in imitation of the American constitution
of 1787, which entirely separated State and Church. The granting of
full religious liberty to the Jews had previously been advocated by
Mirabeau, and though Rousseau's influence, which was all-important in
the Revolution, still retained a touch of Genevan intolerance, Jews
came within his religious requirements for citizenship by their belief
in Providence and in future rewards and punishment. It has to be
remembered that in spirit, if not in will-power or influence, Louis
XVI was of the school of the benevolent despots, and it was he who
signed the edict of November 13, 1791, which for the first time in
European history placed Jews on the same level as the adherents of all
other creeds as regards civil and political qualifications. Holland
was appropriately the first country to grant the same religious
equality to its Jews.[B]

The French Revolution, from our present standpoint, is the more
remarkable inasmuch as it is the only great European movement on which
Jews had absolutely no influence, direct or indirect, owing to their
inappreciable numbers and insecure position in the chief centers,
Paris, Lyons, and Marseilles. The Revolution principles spread into
the neighboring countries with the advance of the French arms. In
Venice, the walls of the original Ghetto, from which all the rest
received their name, fell at once on the entry of Napoleon's troops.
No wonder they welcomed with fervor the victories of the French
troops; we can catch, in Heine, echoes of the enthusiasm with which
Napoleon was acclaimed the Liberator.


_Napoleon's Recognition of the Jews_

NAPOLEON'S own attitude was not so uniformly friendly to Jews. On his
way back from Austerlitz in 1805 he learnt at Strassburg of the wide
distress caused in Alsace by the exactions of certain Jewish usurers
in that province, and on his return to Paris issued edicts directed
against the Alsatian Jews, restricting their usurious activity. It is
fair to add that these enactments were obviously directed against the
usury of the Alsatian Jews, and not against the Jews in general, since
they were specifically declared not to apply to the Jews of Bordeaux
in the South or Northern Italy, then under Napoleon's control. It
would indeed have been against the whole tendency of his career to
have made the Jews an exception to that principle of the "carrière
ouverte aux talents," which was the key-note of his whole policy, as
it is logically to all war-lords. It was by no accident that similar
indifference toward the creed of their soldiers, or civil servants,
was shown by William the Silent, Wallenstein, Cromwell, William III,
and Frederick the Great.

Napoleon's attention having thus been drawn to the Jewish Question, he
proceeded with characteristic energy to solve it by summoning to Paris
a representative assembly of the Jews of France, Germany and Italy,
who should determine on what terms Jews could be admitted into a
modern Country-State, which had been freed from the shackles of the
medieval Church-State and only recognized a certain prerogative in the
Church to which the majority of Frenchmen belonged (the Concordat of
1802). After summoning an assembly of Jewish Notables for a
preliminary inquiry, in 1806, a more formal Sanhedrin was summoned in
the following year, to which twelve test questions were
submitted,--among them, whether the French Jews could regard France
as their Fatherland and Frenchmen as their brothers, and the laws of
the State as binding upon them. Further points were raised as to
polygamy, divorce, and mixed marriages; other questions related to the
position of Rabbis and the Jewish laws about usury.

All these problems were decided to the satisfaction of Napoleon,
though some of them aroused much searching of heart among the more
strictly orthodox. The outcome legally recognized that there was
nothing in Jewish law or faith which prevented its adherents from
being legitimate and full members of a modern State which, at that
time, practically recognized Catholicism as the State-Church. The
significance of the decision was far-reaching not alone for the Jews
but for the whole European State system; it was a practical
recognition that the Country, not the Faith, was the foundation of a
nation and thus gave the final blow to the conception of a
Church-Empire, which had upheld the contrary principle. It was not
without significance that simultaneously the Emperor of Austria agreed
to the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire.


_Liberalism Draws the Jews to Its Ranks_

