Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David King, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


THE

TESTIMONY OF THE BIBLE

CONCERNING THE

Assumptions of Destructive Criticism

BY

S.E. WISHARD, D.D.

LOS ANGELES, CAL.

JOHNSON & HANEY

BIBLE INSTITUTE PRESS

1909

Copyright, 1909

By S.E. WISHARD, D.D.


Presentation Copy

       *       *       *       *       *

"In the defence and confirmation of the truth"

--_Phil 1:7_


BIBLE INSTITUTE

Los Angeles, Calif.


FOREWORD.

  _This booklet is sent out
  To all Sabbath-school teachers,
  To the young people of the Christian churches,
  And to all believers in the living Word_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The work of the destructive critics has been widely disseminated in
current literature. Magazines, secular newspapers, and some religious
papers are giving currency to these critical attacks on the Word of God.
The young people of our churches are exposed to the insidious poison of
this skepticism. It comes to them under the guise of a broader and more
liberal scholarship. They have neither the time nor the equipment to
enter the field of criticism, nor is this work demanded of them.

While abler pens are meeting and answering the questions raised by
destructive critics, something may be said that will clear away the fog
produced by them and enable young Christians to come directly to the
truth.

Hence this booklet is an attempt to "give God a chance" to have his say.
The testimony presented is on the divine plan of giving, "Precept upon
precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line," "lest we
forget."

There has been no attempt to cover the whole ground of destructive
criticism in the brief compass of this booklet. It will be enough to
permit God to answer; hence, in the following pages he speaks for
himself. We are content that his voice shall be heard.

S.E. WISHARD.


CONTENTS

                                                     PAGE

   I. OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD DESTRUCTIVE CRITICISM        9

  II. SHOULD REPLY BE MADE?                           17

 III. WAS MOSES A LITERARY FICTION?                   25

  IV. WERE CHRIST AND THE APOSTLES MISTAKEN?          39

   V. THE ATTACK ON THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS             59

  VI. ASSUMPTIONS CONCERNING THE BOOK OF ISAIAH       73

 VII. GOD'S REPLY TO THESE ASSUMPTIONS.               87

VIII. THE HISTORICITY OF THE BOOK OF JONAH           101

  IX. RADICAL EXPOSITION                             111

   X. GOD HIS OWN INTERPRETER                        119


I. OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD DESTRUCTIVE CRITICISM.

_"Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children; and walk in love,
as Christ also hath loved us." Eph. v. 1, 2._

_"Be patient toward all men. See that none render evil for evil unto any
man; but ever follow that which is good, both among yourselves and to
all men." 1 Thess. v. 14, 15._

_"He that believeth shall not make haste." Isa. xxviii. 16._

_"The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments
are sure. They stand fast forever and ever, and are done in truth and
uprightness." Psa. cxi. 7, 8._

_"My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure." Isa, xlvi.
10._


The attitude which God's people should assume toward destructive
criticism has been questioned. It should certainly be a position of calm
patience, that can deliberately weigh valid testimony, and abide by the
decision of intelligent judgment. The history and life of the Church for
nearly two thousand years should go for something. They are not to be
swept away by the bluff, the egoism of what claims to be the only
"Expert Scholarship."

There is no occasion for a panic. Truth that has been, and has builded
noble, goodly life, is truth still, and ever will be. It is not a time
for denunciation. The assumptions of the destructive critics are so
enormous, so radically revolutionary, so directly aimed at vital truth,
that one's heart is stirred. There is danger of yielding to the heat of
a righteous indignation. It is not well to lose one's intellectual and
moral poise, even in a contest involving the honor of God and the
welfare of immortal souls. But "he that believeth shall not make haste."

The lovers of the Book that has safely passed through every storm of
antagonism that the Prince of Darkness could evoke, need not now be
moved to hasty utterance. The eternal foundations of truth, like him who
laid them, are "the same, yesterday, to-day and forever." The Book, with
all its precious doctrines, is here to stay. It can not be destroyed.
Fire has not burned it, water has not quenched it, the edicts of tyrants
and popes have not been able to break its power. The Church of God can
calmly rest on "the word of God, which liveth and abideth forever." (1
Peter i. 23.) Hence we may calmly move on undisturbed in our work.

Further, our attitude should be marked by an intelligent understanding
of the question involved. It is not a question of fair, honest
criticism, for the purpose of a deeper knowledge of God and his truth.
All reverent and helpful study of the Word of God is critical, and is
the kind of criticism that the Book challenges. Our Lord invites it, and
urges us to "search the Scriptures," which testify of him.

It is assumed by the rationalistic critics that we have entered a new
era, that the Bible has never been studied until within recent years.
This is an assumption unworthy of scientific scholarship. Critics who
have not sought to destroy the Word of God, but, by thorough
investigation, to determine its claims, have been at work on the
Scriptures in all the past, seeking to know the mind of the Spirit.
There is, and ever has been a legitimate study of the Bible. Hence,
there are absolutely no grounds for the assumption of the rationalists.
The Church of Christ is not opposed to the application of the best
methods and best scholarship in the investigation of revealed truth.
Indeed, the Protestant Church has ever been the mother of the highest
education, and has had an open ear to the call of God--"Come, let us
reason together."

It is well to understand that the poorly-concealed purpose of the school
of higher critics is not to press the just and holy claims of God's Word
on the human conscience, but to eliminate the supernatural from it. The
Christian Church should understand this. If atheistic scientists can
construct a universe without God, by evolutionary processes, and the
critics can construct a Bible without the supernatural, "the wisdom of
this world" will have pretty thoroughly disposed of God.

In the attitude of the Church toward destructive criticism, sometimes
called historical, or constructive, we must not fail to discover its
bearing on the character of Christ. For the final conflict of all
skepticism of every grade and quality is in reference to the person and
work of Christ. The elimination of the supernatural from the Bible would
be an invalidation of Christ's claims and testimony. It would place him
before the world as a false teacher, a fraud, a charlatan. Loyalty to
the Word, and to the Incarnate Word, demands, therefore, that we should
clearly understand the end to which this rationalism is drifting. For
Christ's testimony concerning the Old Testament Scriptures, which will
be presented later in this discussion, is so thoroughly in conflict with
the modern critical assumptions that it must be disposed of by those
claiming expert scholarship. In the attempt to accomplish that feat,
they put our Lord under such limitations as would rob him of his
character as Teacher and Redeemer.

The "experts" are logically driven to one of two conclusions: either
that Christ did not know the facts of the Old Testament Scriptures,
which he believed and was sent to teach, or, knowing the facts, he
deemed it not important to teach them.

The first assumption puts our Savior on the basis of a fallible human
teacher, and nothing more. The second assumption contradicts all the
professions of the critics. For they affirm to-day that the professed
discoveries of the mistaken views of the Bible are of the utmost
importance, and as honest men they are in conscience obliged to make
them known, while claiming that Christ did not make them known.

Shall we assume that these views, which they deem so important to-day,
were of no importance when the Church of Christ first took form? We may
ask, what estimate should we have of Christ, who, knowing his people
were in error as to the authorship and origin of the Scriptures, would
leave them in darkness for more than eighteen hundred years? Is it to be
assumed that he would wait through the long centuries for the coming of
critics to enlighten his people? That is what we are logically asked to
accept at their hands. It is thus made clear that the issue of this
conflict, as in all the past, is narrowed down to the person and
character of our Savior. It is well to face the issue calmly, and with a
clear understanding of what is pending. Did Christ know truth? Was he
honest? Hence, the attitude of the Church should be taken in view of the
trend of modern critical discussion.


II. SHOULD REPLY BE MADE?

_"If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?" Psa. xi.
3._

_"Prove all things; hold fast that which is good." 1 Thess. v. 21._

_"Buy the truth and sell it not." Prov. xxiii. 23._

_"Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you and exhort you that
you should earnestly contend for the faith that was once delivered unto
the saints." Jude 3._

_"Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have
been taught, whether by word or our epistle." 2 Thess. ii. 15._

_"I am set for the defense of the gospel." Paul, Phil. i. 17._


It is a question among earnest Christian men, who are busily engaged in
the work of the Master, as to whether we should turn aside long enough
to make reply to the destructive critics. It is affirmed that, as the
Word of God has already passed through all the attacks that have been
made upon it, it will defend itself in the future as in the past--that
our duty is to preach the gospel. Certainly the victories of the gospel
are a noble defense of its truth and power to save. There should be no
respite from this work. But there are vast multitudes of people that
permit the critics to do their thinking for them. They are not well
informed concerning the Scriptures, and consequently are not prepared to
repel the attacks of skepticism, nor to reply to the specious arguments
or positive assumptions of the critics. These multitudes are in danger
of casting aside the Word of God, and missing the offer of eternal life.

The fact of the increased activity of the enemies of the truth must be
known to Christian people. Their organized and persistent use of the
press has gained for them a wide hearing. Shall the Christian people
deny themselves this instrumentality of getting a hearing for God and
his truth before the world? Would not silence be construed by the world
as meaning that the cause dear to the heart of God's people is
indefensible?

It should be known to all lovers of the truth that the skepticism widely
sown by the destructive critics has entered the Protestant Church and
many of our institutions of learning.

"Read the utterances of representative men and teachers in her
communion, who deny the Incarnation, repudiate vicarious sacrifice, make
light of the story of the resurrection, and refine the risen Son of God
into nothing more than the spirit and essence of truth; or, at most, the
disembodied ghost of a man who called himself a Messiah, mistaken in his
claims, but authoritative in his morals." (Rev. I.M. Holdeman.)

The author of this statement refers also to the fact that there are
"modern professors of theology who convict the very prophets whom they
hold up as exemplars of righteousness, of absolute literary fraud, and
deliberate piracy." They "demonstrate with cool precision that the
higher critics of to-day are better informed concerning the mistakes of
Moses than was he who claimed that Moses wrote of him, and prove to
their own satisfaction and the belief of many followers that Jesus
Christ, our Lord, was limited in intelligence, and would, if he were
here to-day, deny some of the statements he once so unqualifiedly made."

We may not shut our eyes to the fact that many of our colleges are more
or less infected with this rationalistic criticism. Some of our
theological professors have substituted the theory of evolution for the
Scriptural doctrine of creation by the Word of God. Our young men
preparing for the work of the ministry are under the influence and
instruction of some of these teachers here in our own country.

It is a matter for thanksgiving that we have literary and theological
institutions into which the destructive critics have never
entered--institutions that stand for the Word of God as given by the
Holy Spirit, and believed in by God's servants in the past and to-day.

We do well to recognize the further fact concerning the effort to
eliminate the supernatural from the Bible, that the work of the
rationalists has permeated the literature of the day. In this age of
reading fiction, that form of literature has become a convenient vehicle
for taking everything out of the hands of Providence. It has become easy
to leave God out of his universe and supplant him with the heroic in
man. Hence, the literary appetite, ever craving the human instead of the
divine, turns away from the truth that confronts the conscience of the
reader with God and his claims.

For the defense of truth we have the example of prophets, apostles, and
Christ himself. Much of the work of the prophets of the Old Testament
was devoted to the exposure of the "New Thought" of their times. Moses
dealt thoroughly with the new theology that asserted: "These be thy
gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt." The
heresy was ended as suddenly as it was introduced.

The Epistle to the Galatians was Paul's reply to the Judiazing teachers
who would substitute ceremonials for the doctrine of justification by
faith. His Epistle to the Ephesians was a constructive work, in answer
to Jewish prejudice and teaching, in which he set forth the unity of
Jews and Gentiles in one Church, which is the body of Christ. In his
Epistle to the Corinthians he answered their false views of marriage. He
shamed their partisan spirit, in which some claimed to be of Paul, some
of Apollos, some of Christ. He labored most earnestly to convince them
of their false views concerning the resurrection, and dealt faithfully
with the errorists concerning the inquiry that was coming to the Church
through their magnifying and perverting the use of the gift of tongues.
He showed them a more excellent way.

There should be no turning aside from preaching a full and free gospel,
nor should there be any halting in its defense, or against the effort to
eliminate the supernatural from the Word of God. The critical work that
logically leaves us a Savior ignorant of the Scriptures, or, if knowing
them, afraid to meet Jewish prejudice by correcting their mistakes,
should be kindly, candidly, and manfully met by those to whom the truth
has given life.


III. WAS MOSES "A LITERARY FICTION"?

