FRIEDRICH (_also sits down and grasps her hand, warmly_): Well, see, my
dear Erna, everything can still be undone. In Rudolstadt everybody
believes you are in England with relatives. Even if you have never been
there----

RITA: Often enough. My best engagements.

FRIEDRICH: So much the better. Then you certainly speak English?

RITA: Of course.

FRIEDRICH: And you are acquainted with English customs. Excellent. Oh,
Erna. Your father will be pleased, he once confessed to me, when he had
a little too much wine. You know him: he grows sentimental then.

RITA (_to herself_): They are all that way.

FRIEDRICH: How?

RITA: Oh, nothing. Please continue. Well--I could come back?

FRIEDRICH: Certainly! Fortunately, during these last years, since you
have grown so famous, nobody has----

RITA: I have grown notorious only within a year.

FRIEDRICH: Well, most likely nobody in Rudolstadt has ever seen you on
the boards. In one word, you _must_ return.

RITA: From England?

FRIEDRICH: Yes, nothing lies in the way. And your mother will be
overjoyed.

RITA: Nay, nay.

FRIEDRICH: How well that you have taken a different name.

RITA: Ah, that is it. Yes, I believe that. Then they know that I am Rita
Revera.

FRIEDRICH: I wrote them. They will receive you with open arms. Erna! I
beg of you! I entreat you; come with me! It is still time. To-day. You
cannot know, but anybody from Rudolstadt who knows might come to the
theatre and----

RITA (_decidedly_): No one from Rudolstadt will do that. They are too
well trained for that. You see it by your own person. But go on! If I
would care to, if I really would return--what then?

FRIEDRICH: Then? Well, then, you would be in the midst of the family and
society again--and then----

RITA: And then?

FRIEDRICH: Then, after some time has elapsed and you feel at home and
when all is forgotten, as though nothing had ever happened----

RITA: But a great deal has happened.

FRIEDRICH: Erna, you must not take me for such a Philistine that I would
mind that. At heart I am unprejudiced. No, really, I know (_softly_) my
own fault, and I know Life. I know very well, and I cannot ask it of
you, that you, in a career like yours, you----

RITA: Hm?

FRIEDRICH: Well, that you should have remained entirely faultless. And I
do not ask it of you either.

RITA: You do well at that.

FRIEDRICH: I mean, whatever has happened within these four years--lies
beyond us, does not concern me--but shall not concern you any longer
either. Rita Revera has ceased to be--Erna Hattenbach returns to her
family.

RITA: Lovely, very lovely. Hm!--but then, what then? Shall I start a
cooking school?

FRIEDRICH (_with a gentle reproach_): But, Erna! Don't you understand
me? Could you think of anything else than---- Of course, I shall marry
you then.

(_Rita looks at him puzzled._)

FRIEDRICH: But that is self-evident. Why should I have looked you up
otherwise? Why should I be here? But, dear Erna, don't look so stunned.

RITA (_still stares at him_): "Simply--marry." Strange. (_She turns
around towards the open piano, plays and sings softly_) Farilon, farila,
farilette.

FRIEDRICH (_has risen_): Erna! Do not torment me!

RITA: Torment? No. That would not be right. You are a good fellow. Give
me a kiss. (_She rises._)

FRIEDRICH (_embraces and kisses her_): My Erna! Oh, you have grown so
much prettier! So much prettier!

(_Rita leans her head on his shoulder._)

FRIEDRICH: But now come. Let us not lose one moment.

(_Rita does not move_.)

FRIEDRICH: If possible let everything be.... Come! (_He pushes her with
gentle force_) You cry?

RITA (_hastily wipes the tears from her eyes, controls herself_): O,
nonsense. Rita Revera does not cry--she laughs. (_Laughs forcedly._)

FRIEDRICH: Erna, do not use that name. I do not care to hear it again!

RITA: Oh--you do not want to hear it any more. You would like to command
me. You come here and assume that that which life and hard times have
made of me you can wipe out in a half hour! No! You do not know life and
know nothing of me. (_Harshly_) My name is Revera, and I shall not marry
a merchant from Rudolstadt.

FRIEDRICH: How is that? You still hesitate?

RITA: Do I look as though I hesitated? (_She steps up closer to him._)
Do you know, Fred, that during the years after my escape I often went
hungry, brutally hungry? Do you know that I ran about in the most
frightful dives, with rattling plate, collecting pennies and insults? Do
you know what it means to humiliate oneself for dry bread? You see; that
has been my school. Do you understand that I had to become an entirely
different person or go to ruin? One who owes everything to himself, who
is proud of himself, but who no longer respects anything, above all, no
conventional measures and weights? And do you understand, Fred, that it
would be base on my part were I to follow you to the Philistine?

FRIEDRICH (_after a pause, sadly_): No, I do not understand that.

RITA (_again gaily_): I thought so. Shall I dread there every suspicion
and tremble before every fool, whereas I can breathe free air, enjoy
sunshine and the best conscience. You know that pretty part in the
Walküre? (_She sings_):


     "Greet Rudolstadt for me,
     Greet my father and mother
     And all the heroes....
     I shall not follow you to them!"


Now you know. (_She sits down at the piano again._)

FRIEDRICH (_after silence_): Even if you have lived through hard times,
that still does not give you the right to disregard the duties of morals
and customs.

RITA (_plays and sings_): "Farilon, farila, farilette--"

FRIEDRICH: I cannot understand how you can refuse me, when I offer you
the opportunity of returning to ordered circumstances.

RITA: I do not love the "ordered" circumstances. On the contrary, I must
have something to train.

FRIEDRICH: And I? I shall never be anything to you any more? You thrust
me also aside in your stubbornness.

RITA: But not at all. Why?

FRIEDRICH: How so? Did you not state just now that you would never marry
a merchant from Rudolstadt.

RITA: Certainly----

FRIEDRICH: Do you see? You cannot be so cold and heartless towards me?
(_Flattering_) Why did you kiss me before? I know you also yearn in your
innermost heart for those times in which we secretly saw and found each
other. You also, and, even if you deny it, I felt it before when you
cried. (_Softly_) Erna! Come along, come along with me! Come! Become my
dear wife!

RITA (_looks at him quietly_): No, I shall not do such a thing.

FRIEDRICH (_starts nervously; after a pause_): Erna! Is that your last
word?

RITA: Yes.

FRIEDRICH: Consider well what you say!

RITA: I know what I am about.

FRIEDRICH: Erna! You want--to remain what you are?

RITA: Yes. That's just what I want.

FRIEDRICH (_remains for some time struggling, then grasps his hat_):
Then--adieu! (_He hurries toward the left into the bedroom._)

RITA (_calls smiling_): Halt! Not there.

FRIEDRICH (_returns, confused_): Pardon me, I----

RITA: Poor Fred, did you stray into my bedroom? There is the door.
(_Long pause. Several times he tries to speak. She laughs gently. Then
she sings and plays the song from "Mamselle Nitouche"_):


     A minuit, après la fête,
     Rev'naient Babet et Cadet;
     Cristi! la nuit est complète,
     Faut nous dépêcher, Babet.
     Tâche d'en profiter, grosse bête!
     Farilon, farila, farilette.
     J'ai trop peur, disait Cadet--
     J'ai pas peur, disait Babet--
     Larirette, larire,
     Larirette, larire.-- -- --


(_Friedrich at first listens against his will, even makes a step toward
the door. By and by he becomes fascinated and finally is charmed. When
she finishes, he puts his stiff hat on the table and walks toward her
with a blissful smile._)

RITA: Now? You even smile? Did I impress you?

FRIEDRICH (_drops down on his knees in front of her_): Oh, Erna, you are
the most charming woman on earth. (_He kisses her hands wildly._)

RITA (_stoops down to him, softly and merrily_): Why run away? Why? If
you still love me, can you run off--you mule?

FRIEDRICH: Oh, I'll remain--I remain with you.

RITA: It was well that you missed the door.

FRIEDRICH: Oh, Erna----

RITA: But now you'll call me Rita--do you understand? Well? Are you
going to--are you going to be good?

FRIEDRICH: Rita! Rita! Everything you wish.

RITA: Everything I wish. (_She kisses him._) And now tell me about your
moral demand. Yes? You are delightful when you talk about it. So
delightful.

       *       *       *       *       *

Benj. R. Tucker

Publisher and Bookseller

has opened a Book Store at

225 Fourth Ave., Room 13, New York City


Here will be carried, ultimately, the most complete line of advanced
literature to be found anywhere in the world. More than one thousand
titles in the English language already in stock. A still larger stock,
in foreign languages, will be put in gradually. A full catalogue will be
ready soon of the greatest interest to all those in search of the
literature.


     Which, in morals, leads away from superstition,
     Which, in politics, leads away from government, and
     Which, in art, leads away from Tradition.

       *       *       *       *       *

"LIBERTY"

BENJ. R. TUCKER, Editor


An Anarchistic journal, expounding the doctrine that in Equal Liberty is
to be found the most satisfactory solution of social questions, and that
majority rule, or democracy, equally with monarchical rule, is a denial
of Equal Liberty.

       *       *       *       *       *

APPRECIATIONS


    G. BERNARD SHAW, author of "Man and Superman": "'Liberty' is a
    lively paper, in which the usual proportions of a half-pennyworth of
    discussion to an intolerable deal of balderdash are reversed."


    WILLIAM DOUGLAS O'CONNOR, author of "The Good Gray Poet": "The
    editor of 'Liberty' would be the Gavroche of the Revolution, If he
    were not its Enjolras."


    FRANK STEPHENS, well-known Single-Tax champion, Philadelphia:
    "'Liberty' is a paper which reforms reformers."


    BOLTON HALL, author of "Even As You and I": "'Liberty' shows us the
    profit of Anarchy, and is the prophet of Anarchy."


    ALLEN KELLY, formerly chief editorial writer on the Philadelphia
    "North American": "'Liberty' is my philosophical Polaris. I
    ascertain the variations of my economic compass by taking a sight at
    her whenever she is visible."


    SAMUEL W. COOPER, counsellor at law, Philadelphia: "'Liberty' is a
    journal that Thomas Jefferson would have loved."


    EDWARD OSGOOD BROWN, Judge of the Illinois Circuit Court: "I have
    seen much in 'Liberty' that I agreed with, and much that I disagreed
    with, but I never saw any cant, hypocrisy, or insincerity in it,
    which makes it an almost unique publication."

       *       *       *       *       *

Published Bimonthly. Twelve Issues, $1.00

Single Copies, 10 Cents

Address: R. TUCKER, P. O. Box 1312, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

M. N. Maisel's

BOOK STORE

194 E. Broadway

New York

Special Sale


+Herbert Spencer.+ The Authorized Copyright Works. (Appleton's edition.)
First Principles, 1 vol.; Principles of Biology, 2 vols.; Principles of
Psychology, 2 vols.; Principles of Sociology, 3 vols.; Principles of
Ethics, 2 vols. 8vo. 10 vols., cloth, new Published at $20.00. My Price
$9.50

+Charles Darwin.+ The Authorized Copyright Works. Descent of Man, 1 vol.;
Origin of Species, 2 vols.; Emotional Expressions, 1 vol.; Animals and
Plants under Domestication, 2 vols.; Insectivorous Plants, 1 vol.;
Vegetable Mould, 1 vol.; Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, 2 vols. 10
vols., cloth, new Published at $25.00. My Price, $9.00

I have only a few series of these sets and will not be able to supply at
these prices after stock is gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

+More than 15,000 volumes always on hand.+

       *       *       *       *       *

Fine Sets; Reference Works; General Literature; Scientific,
Philosophical, Liberal, Progressive and Reform Books.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most of the Books in stock, new or second-hand, are sold at from 25 to
75 per cent discount from Publishers price.

       *       *       *       *       *

+Weekly Importations from Germany, Russia, France and England.+

       *       *       *       *       *

MEETINGS

_Progressive Library_ 706 Forsyth Street. Meeting every Sunday evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hugh O. Pentecost_ lectures every Sunday, 11 A. M., at Lyric Hall, Sixth
avenue (near Forty-second street.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brooklyn Philosophical Association._ Meets every Sunday, 3 P. M., at Long
Island Business College, 143 So. 8th street.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sunrise Club._ Meets every other Monday for dinner and after discussion
at some place designated by the President.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Manhattan Liberal Club._ Meets every Friday, 8 P. M., at German Masonic
Hall, 220 East Fifteenth street.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Harlem Liberal Alliance._ Every Friday, 8 P. M., in Madison Hall, 1666
Madison avenue.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Liberal Art Society._ Meets every Friday, 8.30 P. M., at Terrace Lyceum,
206 East Broadway.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mother Earth"

For Sale at all the above-mentioned places.

+10 Cents a Copy+

+One Dollar a Year+

       *       *       *       *       *

+THE BOOKS OF ERNEST CROSBY+

+Garrison the Non-Resistant.+ 16mo, cloth, 144 pages, with photogravure
portrait, 50c.; by mail +55c.+

+Plain Talk In Psalm and Parable.+ A collection of chants in the cause of
justice and brotherhood. 12mo, cloth, 188 pages, $1.50; by mail, $1.62.
Paper, 40c.; by mail +44c.+

+Captain Jinks, Hero.+ A keen satire on our recent wars, in which the
parallel between savagery and soldiery is unerringly drawn. Profusely
illustrated by Dan Beard. 12mo, cloth, 400 pages, postpaid +$1.50+

+Swords and Plowshares.+ A collection of poems filled with the hatred of
war and the love of nature. (Not sold by us in Great Britain.) 12mo,
cloth, 126 pages, $1.20; by mail +$1.29+

+Tolstoy and His Message.+ "A concise and sympathetic account of the life,
character and philosophy of the great Russian."--_New York Press_. "A
genuinely illuminative interpretation of the great philosopher's being
and purpose."--_Philadelphia Item_. (Not sold by us in Great Britain.)
16mo, cloth, 93 pages, 50c.; by mail +54c.+

+Tolstoy as a Schoolmaster.+ An essay on education and punishment with
Tolstoy's curious experiments in teaching as a text. 16mo, cloth, 94
pages, 50c.; by mail +53c.+

+Broad-Cast.+ New chants and songs of labor, life and freedom. This latest
volume of poems by the author of "Plain Talk in Psalm and Parable" and
"Swords and Plowshares" conveys the same message delivered with equal
power. 12mo, cloth, 128 pages, 50c.; by mail +54c.+

+Edward Carpenter, Poet and Prophet.+ An illuminative essay, with
selections and portrait of Carpenter. 12mo, paper, 64 pages, with
portrait of Carpenter on cover, postpaid +20c.+


+THE BOOKS OF BOLTON HALL+

+Free America.+ 16mo, cloth, ornamental, gilt top, 75c.; by mail +80c.+

+The Game of Life.+ A new volume of 111 fables. Most of them have been
published from time to time in _Life_, _Collier's_, _The Outlook_, _The
Century_, _The Independent_, _The Ram's Horn_, _The Pilgrim_, _The
Christian Endeavor World_, _The Rubric_, _The New Voice_, _The
Philistine_ and other papers and magazines. 16mo, cloth, ornamental,
postpaid +$1.00+

+Even as You and I.+ This is a presentation, by means of popular and
simple allegories, of the doctrine of Henry George and the principle
which underlies it. A part of the volume is an account of Tolstoy's
philosophy, drawn largely from the Russian's difficult work, "Of Life."
This section is called "True Life," and follows a series of thirty-three
clever parables. Count Tolstoy wrote to Mr. Hall: "I have received your
book, and have read it. I think it is very good, and renders in a
concise form quite truly the chief ideas of my book." 16mo, cloth,
ornamental, gilt top, 50 c.; by mail +54c.+

       *       *       *       *       *

+Books to be had through Mother Earth+

+Work and Wages.+ By Prof. J. E. Thorold Rogers. Shows that the real wages
of the laborer, as measured by his standard of living, are actually
lower now than in the fifteenth century. Cloth +$1.00+

+Civilization, Its Cause and Cure.+ By Edward Carpenter. Cloth +$1.00+

+England's Ideal, and Other Papers on Social Subjects.+ By Edward
Carpenter. Edward Carpenter is at once a profound student of social
problems, an essayist with a most charming style, and a writer of true
poetic insight. Everything he writes is worth reading. Cloth +$1.00+

+The Social Revolution.+ By Karl Kautsky. Translated by A. M. and May Wood
Simons. Cloth +50c.+

+The Origin and Growth of Village Communities in India.+ By B. H.
Baden-Powell. A scientific study of a remarkable survival of a phase of
primitive communism in the British dominions to-day. Cloth +$1.00+

+American Communities.+ By William Alfred Hinds. Mr. Hinds was for many
years a resident of one of these colonies and has visited, personally,
scores of others, which particularly fits him for the task. Cloth, 433
pages, with 17 full-page illustrations +$1.00+

+The Sale of an Appetite.+ By Paul Lafargue. This book by one of the
foremost socialists of Europe is a notable work of art considered merely
as a story and at the same time it is one of the most stirring
indictments of the capitalist system ever written. Cloth, illustrated
+50c.+

+The Triumph of Life.+ By Wilhelm Boelsche. The German critics of this
book all agree that it is more interesting than his previous work on
"The Evolution of Man," and those who have read the former work will
realize what this means. The book is the story of the victory of life
over the planet earth and is told in a marvelously vivid and picturesque
manner. Cloth +50c.+

+Poems of Walt Whitman.+ We have secured a reprint of Whitman's famous
"Leaves of Grass" for the benefit of those who, having read Mrs.
Maynard's charming introduction, may desire to read the poet. Nearly all
of Whitman's poems are contained therein, and John Burroughs has written
a biographical introduction.

TO YOU, WHOEVER YOU ARE.


     I will leave all, and come and make the hymns of you;
     None have understood you, but I understand you,
     None have done justice to you--you have not done justice to
        yourself.


Cloth, 341 pages +75c.+

+Crime and Criminals.+ By Clarence S. Darrow. This is an address delivered
to the prisoners at the county jail in Chicago. It shows the real cause
of what is called crime and the real way to put an end to it. Paper +10c.+

+Katharine Breshkovsky--"For Russia's Freedom."+ By Ernest Poole. This is
the true story of a Russian woman revolutionist who has been addressing
immense crowds in American cities. "Daughter of a nobleman and earnest
philanthropist; then revolutionist, hard-labor convict, and exile for
twenty-three years in Siberia; and now a heroic old woman of sixty-one,
she has plunged again into the dangerous struggle for freedom." Paper
+10c.+


All Orders, Money Prepaid, to be sent to E. GOLDMAN, Box 217,
Madison Square Station, New York City.