THE BROTHER OF DAPHNE

by

Dornford Yates


  Chapter I       Punch and Judy
  Chapter II      Clothes and the man
  Chapter III     When it was dark
  Chapter IV      Adam and New Year's eve
  Chapter V       The Judgement of Paris
  Chapter VI      Which to adore
  Chapter VII     Every picture tells a story
  Chapter VIII    The Busy Beers
  Chapter IX      A point of honour
  Chapter X       Pride goeth before
  Chapter XI      The love scene
  Chapter XII     The order of the bath
  Chapter XIII    A lucid interval
  Chapter XIV     A private view
  Chapter XV      All found


CHAPTER I

PUNCH AND JUDY

"I said you'd do something," said Daphne, leaning back easily in her
long chair.

I stopped swinging my legs and looked at her.

"Did you, indeed," I said coldly.

My sister nodded dreamily.

"Then you lied, darling.  In your white throat," I said pleasantly.

"By the way, d'you know if the petrol's come?"

"I don't even care," said Daphne.  "But I didn't lie, old chap.  My
word is--"

"Your bond?  Quite so.  But not mine.  The appointment I have in Town
that day--"

"Which day?" said Daphne, with a faint smile.

"The fete day."

"Ah!"

It was a bazaar fete thing.  Daphne and several others--euphemistically
styled workers--had conspired and agreed together to obtain money by
false pretences for and on behalf of a certain mission, to wit the
Banana.  I prefer to put it that way.  There is a certain smack about
the wording of an indictment.  Almost a relish.  The fact that two
years before I had been let in for a stall and had defrauded fellow men
and women of a considerable sum of money, but strengthened my
determination not to be entrapped again.  At the same time I realized
that I was up against it.

The crime in question was fixed for Wednesday or Thursday--so much I
knew.  But no more.  There was the rub.  I really could not toil up to
Town two days running.

"Let's see," I said carelessly, "the fete's on--er--Wednesday, or
Thursday, is it?"

"Which day are you going up to Town?" said Daphne.  I changed my ground.

"The Bananas are all right," I said, lighting a cigarette.

"They only ate a missionary the other day," said my sister.

"That's bad," said I musingly.  "To any nation the consumption of home
produce is of vital--"

"We want to make sixty pounds."

"To go towards their next meal?  How much do missionaries cost?"

"To save their souls alive," said Daphne zealously.

"I'm glad something's to be saved alive," said I.

Before she could reply, tea began to appear. When the footman had
retired to fetch the second instalment of accessories, I pointed the
finger of scorn at the table, upon which he had set the tray.

"That parody emanated from a bazaar," I said contemptuously.

"It does for the garden," said my sister.

"It'd do for anything," said I.  "Its silly sides, its crazy legs-"

"Crazy?" cried Daphne indignantly.  "It'd bear an elephant."

"What if it would?" I said severely.  "It's months since we gave up the
elephants."

"Is the kettle ready?"

"It boils not, neither does it sing."

"For which piece of irreverence you will do something on Thursday."

"My dear girl," I said hurriedly, "if it were not imperative for me to
be in Town--"

"You will do something on Thursday."  I groaned.

"And this," I said, "this is my mother's daughter!  We have been nursed
together, scolded together, dandled in the same arms.  If she had not
been the stronger of the two, we should have played with the same toys."

I groaned again.  Berry opened his eyes.

"The value of a siesta upon a summer afternoon--" he began.

I cut in with a bitter laugh.  "What's he going to do?" I said.

"Take a stall, of course," said Daphne.

"Is he?" said Berry comfortably.  "Is he?  If motoring with Jonah to
Huntercombe, and playing golf all day, is not incompatible with taking
a stall on Thursday, I will sell children's underwear and egg cosies
with eclat.  Otherwise--"

"Golf," I said, "golf!  Why don't I play golf?"

"I know," said Berry; "because--"

"Miserable man!"  said Daphne.

"Who?" said her husband.

"You."

Berry turned to me.  "You hear?" he said.  "Vulgar abuse.  And why?
Simply because a previous engagement denies to me the opportunity of
subscribing to this charitable imposition.  Humble as would have been
my poor assistance, it would have been rendered with a willing heart.
But there!" he sighed--"It may not be.  The Bananas will never know,
never realize how----  By the way, who are the Bananas?"

"The Bananas?" said I.  "Surely you know the--"

"Weren't at Ascot, were they?"

"Not in the Enclosure.  No.  The bold, bad Bananas are in many ways an
engaging race.  Indeed, some of the manners and customs which they
affect are of a quite peculiar interest.  Let us look, brother, for a
moment, at their clothing.  At the first blush--I use the word
advisedly--it would seem that, like the fruit from which they take
their name--"

"I thought you'd better do some tricks," said Daphne, throwing a dark
look in my direction.

"Of course," I said;  "the very thing.  I've always been so good at
tricks."

"I mean it," said Daphne.

"Of course you do.  What about the confidence trick?  Can any lady
oblige me with a public-house?"

"She means trick-cycling, stupid," said Berry.  "Riding backwards on
one wheel while you count the ball-bearings."

"Look here," I said, "if Berry could have come and smoked a cigarette,
I wouldn't have minded trying to flick the ash off it with a
hunting-whip."

"Pity about that golf," mused Berry.  "And you might have thrown knives
round me afterwards.  As it is, you'll have to recite."

In a few telling sentences I intimated that I would do nothing of the
kind.

"I will appear," I said at last, "I will appear and run round
generally, but I promise nothing more."

"Nonsense," said my sister.  "I have promised, and I'm not going to let
you break my word.  You are going to do something definite."

"Desperate?"

"Definite.  You have three days in which to get ready.  There's Jill
calling me.  We're going to run over to Barley to whip up the Ashton
crowd.  D'you think we've enough petrol?"

"I don't even care," said I.

Daphne laughed softly.  Then: "I must go," she said, getting up.  "Give
me a cigarette and tell me if you think this dress'll do.  I'm going to
change my shoes."

"If," said I, producing my cigarette-case, "if you were half as nice as
you invariably look--"

"That's a dear," she said, taking a cigarette.  "And now, good-bye."

I watched her retreating figure gloomily.

Berry began to recite 'We are Seven.'


Thursday morning broke cloudless and brilliant.  I saw it break.
Reluctantly, of course;  I am not in the habit of rising at cock-crow.
But on this occasion I rose because I could not sleep.  When I went to
bed on Wednesday night, I lay awake thinking deeply about what I was to
do on the morrow.  Daphne had proved inexorable.  My brain, usually so
fertile, had become barren, and for my three days' contemplation of the
subject I had absolutely nothing to show.  It was past midnight before
I fell into a fitful slumber, only to be aroused three hours and a half
later by the sudden burst of iniquity with which two or more cats saw
fit to shake the silence of the rose-garden.

As I threw out the boot-jack, I noticed the dawn.  And as further sleep
seemed out of the question, I decided to dress and go out into the
woods.

When I slipped out of Knight's Bottom into the sunlit road to find
myself face to face with a Punch and Judy show, I was not far from
being momentarily disconcerted.  For a second it occurred to me that I
might be dreaming, but, though I listened carefully, I could hear no
cats, so I sat down on the bank by the side of the road and prepared to
contemplate the phenomenon.

When I say 'Punch and Judy show' I am wrong.  Although what I saw
suggested the proximity of a Punch and a Judy, to say nothing of the
likelihood of a show, I did not, as a matter of fact, descry any one of
the three.  The object that presented itself to my view was the tall,
rectangular booth, gaudy and wide-mouthed, with which, until a few
years ago, the streets of London were so familiar.  Were!  Dear old
Punch and Judy, how quickly you are becoming a thing of the past!  How
soon you will have gone the way of Jack-i'-the Green, Pepper's Ghost,
the Maypole, and many another old friend!  Out of the light into the
darkness.  The old order changeth, yielding place to new, and in a
little space men shall be content to wonder at your ancient memory as
their grandfathers marvelled at that of the frolics of my Lord of
Misrule.  However.

There was the booth.  But that was all.  It stood quite alone at the
side of the white road.  I walked round it.  Nothing.  I glanced up and
down the road, but there was no one in sight.  I had been feeling
hungry, for it was seven o'clock; but this was better than breakfast,
and I returned to the bank.  The little red curtains fluttered, as a
passing breeze caught them, and I marked how bright and new they
looked.  It was certainly in good condition--this booth.

"Well?" said a voice.

"Well?" said I.

A pause.  A girl's voice it was:  coming from within the booth.

"You seem rather surprised," said the voice.

"No, no," I said, "not really surprised.  Only a little staggered.  You
see, I know so few booths."

"What are you doing here?"

"To be frank, booth, I'm waiting."

"I'm waiting, too."

"So?" said I.  "I wait, you wait, let us wait, ye shall have been about
to see, they would--"

"What are you waiting for?"

"Developments.  And you?"

"My breakfast."

I looked up and down the road.  "I don't see it coming," I said
anxiously.  "What's it look like?"

"Milk.  You don't happen to have any, I suppose?"

I felt in my pockets.

"There, now," I said, "I must have left it on the piano.  I got up
rather hurriedly this morning," I added apologetically.

"Never mind."

"I'll tell you what, booth, I'll go and get some."

"No, thanks very much.  Don't you bother; it'll come along presently."

"Are you sure?  This isn't 'The Blue Bird.'"

"Yes, it's all right--really."

There was another pause.  Then:

"Hadn't you better be getting back to breakfast?" said the girl.

"Not much," said I.  "I don't run up against booths every day.
Besides--"

"Besides what?"

"Well, booth, I'm awfully curious."

"What do you want to know?"

"You're very good."

"I didn't say I'd tell you."

"I'll risk that.  In a word, why are you?"

"Ah!"

I waited in silence for a few moments.  At length:

"Suppose," she said slowly, "suppose a bet had been made."

"A bet?"

"A bet."

"Shocking!  Go on."

"Well?  Isn't that enough?"

"Nothing like."

"I don't think much of your imagination."

I raised my eyes to heaven.  "A prophet is not without honour," I
quoted.

"Is this your own country?"

"It is."

"Oh, I say, you'd be the very man!"

"I am," I said.  "Refuse substitutes."

It gradually appeared that, in a rash moment, she had  made some silly
wager that she could give a Punch and  Judy show on her own in the
village of Lynn Hammer and the vicinity.  Of course, she had not meant
it. She had spoken quite idly, secure in the very impracticability of
the thing.  But certain evil-disposed persons--referred to mysteriously
as 'they'--had fastened greedily upon her words, and, waving aside her
objection that she had no paraphernalia, deliberately proceeded to
provide the same, that she might have no excuse.  The booth was run up,
the puppets procured.  The gentle hint that she wanted to withdraw had
been let fall at the exact moment with deadly effect, and--the wicked
work was done.  She had been motored over and here set down, complete
with booth, half an hour ago.  They were going to look back later, just
to see how she was getting on.  The ordeal was to be over and the wager
won by six o'clock, and she might have the assistance of a native in
her whimsical venture.

"Right up to the last I believe the brutes thought I would cry off,"
she said.  "I very nearly did, too, when it came to it.  Only I saw
Peter smiling.  It is rather a hopeless position, isn't it?"

"It was.  But now that you've got your native--"

"Oh!" she said.  Then:  "But I've got one."

"Where?"

"He's getting the milk."

"I don't believe he is.  Anyway, you can discharge him and take me on.
I've been out of work for years.  Besides, you've been sent.  In your
advent I descry the finger of Providence."

"I wish I did.  What do you mean?"

"This day," I said, "I am perforce a zealot."

"A what?"

"A zealot--a Banana zealot.  You, too, shall be a zealot.  We will
unite our zeal, and this day light such a candle--"

"The man's mad," she said.  "Quite mad."

I explained.  "You see," I said, "it's like this.  Simply miles away,
somewhere south south and by south of us, there are a lot of heathen.
They're called Bananas.  I don't know very much about it, but there
seems to be a sort of understanding that we should keep them in
missionaries.  So every now and then the 'worker' push here get up a
fete thing and take money off people.  Then they find one and send him
out.  Well, there's one of these stunts on this afternoon, and I've
been let in to do something.  That's why I look so pale and
interesting.  The last day or two I've been desperate about it.  But
now..."

"Now what?"

"If you'd let me help you to-day, we could take the show to the fete
and simply rake it in.  It's a splendid way of winning your bet, too.
Oh, booth, isn't it obvious that you've been sent?"

"It certainly would be nicer than giving performances about the
village," she said musingly.  "If only I knew you--"

"You don't know the fellow who isn't getting the milk," I objected.

"That's different.  He'd be only a servant."

"I would be the same."

There was a pause.  A rabbit loped into the road and blinked curiously
at the booth.  Then he saw me and beat a hasty retreat.

"It is in a good cause," I urged.  "You don't know the Bananas; they're
absurdly--er--straight."

"It's all very well for you," she said; "you know everybody here.  But
it would be an impossible position for me; I don't know a soul.  Now,
if we were both strangers--"

"Well?"

"Well, then they wouldn't worry as to who we were and what we had to do
with one another."

"Then let's both be strangers."

"How can you be strange to order?"

"Hush!"  I said.  "I will disguise me.  At home I have put away a
Pierrot dress not one of them knows anything about, and I think I can
raise a mask.  If I--"

A stifled exclamation from the booth made me look up.  Framed in its
mouth, her arms folded and resting on the ledge, was the girl.

What I could see of her was dressed as a Pierrot.  Her hair was
concealed under a black silk cap, and the familiar white felt conical
hat sat jauntily over one ear.  A straight, white nose, and a delicate
chin, red lips parted and smiling a little, such a smile as goes always
with eyebrows just raised, very alluring--so much only I saw.  For the
rest, a strip of black velvet made an irritating mask.

I made her a low bow.

"I can see this is going to be a big thing," I said.  "Won't you come
down?"

"I haven't even said I'll take you,"

"Please."

"You're sure to be recognized, and then, what about me?"

"Oh, no, I shan't.  If necessary, I'll wear a false nose.  I've got one
somewhere."

"Here's my milk."

I looked round and beheld a small boy approaching with a jug.

"Was that the best you could do in the native line?"

"You needn't sneer.  I'm not over-confident about my second venture."

"Well, a knave's better than a fool, any day."

"I'm sure I hope so."

She slipped down out of sight into the booth again, to reappear a
moment later in the road:  and by her side a beautiful white
bull-terrier, a Toby ruff about his sturdy neck.

"Good man," said my lady, pointing a finger at me.  "Good man."

The dog came forward, wagging his tail.  I stooped and spoke with him.
Then I turned to his mistress.  She had discarded her white hat and
drawn on a long dust-coat, which reached almost to her ankles.  She
held it close about her, as she walked.  It showed off her slim figure
to great advantage.  Below, the wide edges of white duck trousers just
appeared above shining insteps and high heeled shoes.

When the urchin had come up, she took the jug from him with both hands.

"I shall have to drink out of it," she said, raising it to her lips
with a smile.

"Of course.  Why not?  Only ..."

I hesitated.

"What?"

"Hadn't you better--I mean, won't the mask get in your way?"

She lowered the jug and looked at me.  "No; it won't get in the way.
Thanks all the same," she said steadily.  "Not all to-day."

"It's in the way now."

"Not my way."

I saw her eyes watching my face as she drank, and when she took the jug
from her lips she was smiling.

We had some difficulty in persuading the boy to leave us; but at
length, a heavy bribe, coupled with the assurance that we should be at
the fete in the afternoon, had the desired effect, and he went slowly
away.

Thereafter we took counsel together.

As a result, it was decided that we should fold the booth--it shut up
like a screen--and convey it, puppets and all, a little way into the
wood. It was early yet, but some people would be passing along the
road, and we were not yet ready to combat the curiosity that the
appearance of a Punch and Judy show would be sure to arouse.  That
done, she would lie close in the wood with Toby, while I made off home
and changed.

As I started off, after settling her in the bracken, I heard the
village clock strike the half-hour.  Half-past seven.  I gained the
house unobserved.  No one was abroad except the servants, but I heard
Daphne singing in the bathroom.

I had worn the Pierrot dress two years ago at a fancy-dress ball.

There it lay with its mask at the bottom of the wardrobe.  The change
was soon completed, and I stood up a proper Folly, from the skull cap
upon my crown to the pumps upon my feet.  It took some time to find the
nose, but luck was with me, and at last I ran it to earth in an old
collar-box.  Truly an appalling article, it stuck straight out from my
face like a fat, fiery peg, but between that and the mask, my disguise
would defy detection.

Suddenly I had a brilliant idea.  Sitting down, I scribbled a note to
Daphne to the effect that, owing to a sleepless night, my nerve had
forsaken me, and that, unable to face the terror of the bazaar, I had
fled to Town, and should not be back till late.  I added that I should
be with her in the spirit, which, after all, was the main thing.

I put on a long overcoat and a soft hat.  The nose went into one
pocket, the mask into another.  Then I went cautiously downstairs and
into the dining-room.  It was empty, and breakfast was partially laid.

In feverish haste I hacked about a pound of meat off a York ham and
nearly as much off a new tongue.  Wrapping the slices in a napkin, I
thrust them into the pocket with the nose.  To add half a brown loaf to
the mask and drain the milk jug was the work of another moment, and,
after laying the note on Daphne's plate, I slipped out of the French
windows and into the bushes as I heard William come down the passage. A
quarter of an hour later I was back again in the wood.

She was sitting on a log, swinging her legs to and fro.  When I took
off my coat and hat, she clapped her hands in delight.

"Wait till you see the nose," said I.

When presently I slipped that French monstrosity into place, she
laughed so immoderately that her brown hair broke loose from under the
black silk cap and tumbled gloriously about her shoulders.

"There now," she said.  "See what you've done."

"Good for the nose," said I.

"It's all very well to say that, but it took me ages to get it all
under the wretched cap this morning."

"I shouldn't put it back again if I were you.  You see," I went on
earnestly, "everybody will know you're a girl, Judy dear."

"Why, Punch?"  She drew aside the dust coat and revealed the wide
Pierrot trousers she was wearing.

"Priceless," I admitted.  "But what I really love are your feet."

She looked concernedly at her little, high-heeled shoes.

I stooped to flick the dust from their patent leather.

"Thank you, Punch.  What shall I do about my hair, then?"

"Wear it in a pig-tail.  I'll plait it for you.  It'll be worth another
sovereign to the Bananas."

"If you put it like that--" she said slowly.

"I do, Judy."

If the suggestion was not prompted by motives which were entirely
disinterested, I think I may be forgiven.

"I say, Judy," I said a little later, pausing unnecessarily in my work,
and making pretence to comb with my fingers the tresses as yet
ungathered into the plait.

"Yes? What a long time you are!"

Well, there was a knot.

She tried to look round into my face at that, but I vigorously
unplaited about two inches, which seemed to satisfy her.  For me, I
thought of Penelope and her web and the wooers, and smiled.

"Well, what is it, Punch?"

"About the mask."

"No good!"

"But, Judy--"

For the next two minutes I did a little listening.  When she paused for
breath:

"Have some ham," I suggested.

"Bother the ham!  Do you hear what I say?"

"I heard you bother the ham."

"Before that?"

"Something about a mask, was it?"

"Give me back my hair," she demanded.

"No, no," I said hastily, "not that!  I won't ask again."

"Promise."

"I promise."

When I had finished the plaiting, I tied the ends with a piece of
ribbon which she produced, kissed them, and sat down in the grass at
her feet.

We had oceans of time, for the fete did not begin till two.  But we
agreed there must be a rehearsal of some kind.

"What do you know about yourself, Punch?"

"I have a foggy recollection of domestic differences."

"You used to beat me cruelly."

"Ah, but you had a nagging tongue, Judy.  I can hear your defiant
'wootle' now."

Her lips parted in a smile at the reminiscence, and before they closed
again she had slipped something between them.  The next instant the
wood rang with a regular hurricane of toots and wootles.

"Oh, Judy!"

"Wootle?"  she said inquiringly.

"Rather!  But hush--you'll wake the echoes."

"And why not?  They ought to be up and about by now."

I shook my head.

"They're a sleepy folk," I said; "they get so little rest.  The day is
noisy enough, but at night, what with dogs baying the moon, and the
nightjars calling, when owls do cry--"

"When owls do cry--"

"--and the earnest but mistaken chanticleer, they have a rotten time.
Poor echoes!  And they wake very easily here."

"Don't they everywhere?"

"Oh, no!  I know some that are very heavy sleepers.  In fact, it's
hopeless to try and wake them without the welkin."

"The welkin?"

"Yes, you make him ring, you know.  They nearly always hear him.  And
if they don't the first time, you make him ring again."

For a little space she laughed helplessly.  At last:

"I am an idiot to encourage you.  Seriously," she added, "about the
little play."

"Presently by us to be enacted?"

"The plot," I said, "is as follows.  Punch has a row with Judy and
knocks her out.  (Laughter.)  Various well-intentioned and benignant
fools look in on Punch to pass the time of day, and get--very
properly--knocked out for their pains.  (Loud and prolonged laughter.)
This is followed by the side-splitting incident in which a handy clown
not only eludes the thirsty bludgeon, but surreptitiously steals the
inevitable sausages.  Exit clown.  Punch, already irritated at having
missed clown, misses sausages, and exit in high dudgeon.  Re-enter
Judy, followed by sausaged clown, who comforts her. (Oh, Judy!)
Re-enter Punch.  Justifiable tussle.  Punch sees sausages and begins to
find his length.  Clown sees stars and exit.  Punch knocks out Judy
with a left hook.  To him, gloating, enter constable.  It seems Judy's
knock-out more serious than usual.  Constable suggests that Punch shall
go quietly.  Punch does not see it, and retires to fetch persuader.
Constable protests and is persuaded.  (Laughter.) Enter ghost--not
clear whose ghost, but any ghost in a storm.  Punch unnerved.  Ghost
gibbers.  Punch more unnerved.  Ghost gibbers again.  Punch terrified.
Exit ghost and enter hangman, to whom Punch, unstrung by recent
encounter with apparition, falls an easy prey. Curtain.  You bow from
the mouth of the booth.  I adjust nose and collect money in diminutive
tin pail.  How's that?"

"Lovely, Punch!  But where does Toby dear come in?"

At the mention of his name the terrier rose and went to her.  His
mistress stroked his soft head.

"In the background," said I.  "Or the offing (nautical).  I don't think
he'd better act.  Let him be stage-door-keeper."

"All right.  Now open the puppet-box."

It was a nice set of puppets, and they were very simple to manipulate.
They fitted easily on to the hand, the forefinger controlling the head,
and the thumb and second finger the arms.  The old fellow's cudgel was
a dream.

We decided that I had better stick to Punch and Punch alone.  For the
others she would be answerable.

After rehearsing for half an hour, we stopped for breakfast.  In the
absence of cutlery, it was a ragged meal, but what mattered that?  We
were for letting the world slip--we should ne'er be younger.

People were stirring now.  Carts rumbled in the distance, and cars sang
past on the long, white road.  Presently came one that slowed and
slowed and stopped.

It was unfortunate that, but a moment before, I should have grown
impatient of a large piece of crust and thrust it bodily into my mouth.
But although articulation at this interesting juncture was out of the
question, I laid an eloquent hand upon her arm and crowded as much
expression as I could into a swollen and distorted visage.  She glanced
at me and collapsed in silent infectious laughter.  And so it happened
that, while we two conspirators lay shaking in the bracken, her friends
turned their car wonderingly round and drove slowly back into the
village away from her they sought.

Another hour and a half of somewhat desultory rehearsal found us
'wootle' perfect and ready for anything.  So we laid the puppets by,
fed Toby with brown bread and tongue, and rested against the labours of
the afternoon.

The time passed quickly enough--too quickly.


It was a few minutes past one when, having adjusted my mask and slid my
nose into position, I got the booth upon my shoulders and stepped out
into the road.

"Come along," I said encouragingly.

"I'm afraid.  Oh, there's something coming."

"Nonsense!  I wish I hadn't packed that bludgeon."

"I'm nervous, Punch."

"Will you make me drag you along by the hair of your head?  Of course,
it'd be in the picture right enough, but I rather want two hands for
this infernal booth.  However, let me once get a good grip on that soft
pigtail--"

"What--again?"

"Ah, that was in love, Judy."

The next second she had joined me on the white highway, the faithful
Toby a short pace behind her.  His not to reason why.  A good fellow,
Toby.

It was rather a nervous moment.  But, in spite of an approaching
wagonette, she walked bravely beside me with the puppet-box under her
arm.  The occupants of the vehicle began to evince great curiosity as
we drew nearer, but their mare caught sight of my nose at the critical
moment and provided an opportune diversion.

"So perish all our enemies!"  she said with a sigh of relief.

"Stage-fright, Judy, dear.  You'll be all right in a minute.  We're
bound to excite interest.  It's what we're for and what we want.  I'll
keep it going.  Give me your wootler."

She handed me the reed, and I held it ready between my lips.

"Buck up, lass!"

Ten minutes more and we entered the village.  The grounds where the
fete was to be holden lay three-quarters of a mile further on.  The
ball was opened by two small errand boys, on whose hands, as is usual
with the breed, time was lying heavily.  They were engaged in deep
converse as we came up, and it was only when we were close upon them
that they became aware of our presence.  For a few seconds they stared
at us, apparently rooted to the spot, and as if they could not believe
their good fortune.  Then one broke into an explosive bellow of
delight, while the other ran off squeaking with excitement to find
other devils who should share the treasure-trove.  But, unlike his
infamous predecessor, he was not content with seven.  When he returned,
it was but as the van of a fast-swelling rabble.  His erstwhile
companion, who had been backing steadily in front of me ever since he
left, and had, after a hurried consideration of the respective merits
of the booth and the box under Judy's arm, rejected them both in favour
of my nose, kept his eyes fastened greedily upon that organ with so
desperate an air of concentration that I was quite relieved when he
tripped over a brick and fell on his back in the road.

And all this time our following grew.  The news of our advent had
spread like wildfire.  Old men and maidens, young men and boys, the
matron and the maid, alike came running.  Altogether, Lynn Hammer was
set throbbing with an excitement such as it had not experienced since
the baker's assistant was wrongly arrested for petty larceny in 1904.

Amongst those who walked close about us, candid speculation as to the
probable venue of the performance was rife, while its style, length,
value, etc., were all frankly discussed.  Many were the questions
raised, and many the inaccurate explanations accepted as to the reason
of our being; but though my companion came in for some inevitable
discussion, I was relieved to find that my panache and a comic
peculiarity of gait, which I thought it as well from time to time to
affect, proved usefully diverting.

When the crowd had begun to assume considerable proportions, Judy had
slipped her arm in mine, and an answering pressure to my encouraging
squeeze told me that she was trying to buck up as well as she could.
Good little Judy!  It was an ordeal for you, but you came through it
with flying colours, though with a flaming cheek.

When we reached the triangular piece of grass that lay in front of the
village inn, I called a halt with such suddenness as to create great
confusion in the swarming ranks that followed in our wake.  But while
they sorted themselves, I slipped the booth off my shoulders, gave one
long, echoing call upon the reed, and, striking an attitude, made ready
to address the expectant villagers.

After carefully polishing my nose with a silk handkerchief--an action
which met with instant approval--I selected a fat, red-faced drayman,
thanked him, and said that mine was a Bass, an assertion which found
high favour with the more immediate cronies of the gentleman in
question.  Then I got to work.

After dwelling lightly on the renown in which the village of Lynn
Hammer was held throughout the countryside, not to mention a gallant
reference to the wit, beauty, and mirth which was assembled about me, I
plunged into a facetious resume of recent local events. This, of
course, came to me easily enough, but the crowd only saw therein the
lucky ventures of a talkative stranger, and roared with merriment at
each happy allusion.  And so I came to the Bananas.  Yes, we were for
the fete.  There should we be the livelong afternoon, giving free
shows, and only afterwards soliciting contribution from such as could
afford to give in a good cause.  God save the King!

Then I called for mine host, and after ordering ginger beer for Judy
and old ale for myself, slapped silver into his hand, and begged as
many as would so honour her to drink the lady's health.

About that there was no difficulty, and when I had despatched the
original boy--who all this while had never wavered in his constancy to
my proboscis--for a small tin pail, I prepared to get my burden once
more upon my back.  But this was not to be.  Four good fellows insisted
on constituting themselves booth-bearers, and the burly drayman
gallantly relieved my fair companion of the box of puppets.

So we came in state to the grounds where the bazaar was to be held.
The parley with the gatekeeper was of short duration, for the 'workers'
scented money in our admission, and, with an eye to the Bananas' main
chance, made us quickly welcome.  On my explaining our intention to put
our efforts at their service, and any increment that might result into
their pockets, their expression of gratitude was quite touching.

The entrance fee deterred some, and their daily occupation more of
those who had formed our kindly escort, from following us into the
fete, but I believe that most of them contrived to return before six
o'clock.

When I think of all that I said and did on that sunny afternoon, I get
hot all over.

I could not go very far wrong during the actual performance, but it was
afterwards, when Judy sat smiling in the mouth of the booth, and I went
forth, pail in hand, seeking whom I might devour.

I drew my arm familiarly through that of a reluctant curate, and walked
him smartly up and down, discussing volubly the merits of my nose in
tones which suggested that I had no roof to my mouth, Did a lady
protest that she had already contributed, I repeated "Oh, madam!"
reproachfully and crescendo till the hush-money was paid, while in
front of those who affected not to see my out-stretched hand, I stood
as if rooted to the spot.  I borrowed the vicar's wideawake, ostensibly
for a conjuring trick, and wore it assiduously for the rest of the
afternoon and, on his demurring to such use, I explained, in the voice
of G.P.Huntley, that it went so well with the nose.

In short, I played the mountebank to a degree that astonished myself,
but apparently to some purpose, for the money came in properly.

The performances went with a bang, and when, at the conclusion of the
playlet, I lifted Judy to the rickety shelf, so that her head and
shoulders were framed in the mouth of the booth, it was the signal for
a burst of applause.

On one of these occasions:

"It's not fair that I should take every call," she said, looking down
at my upturned face.

"My dear Judy, I have my reward."

"What?"

"Don't I lift you up every time?"

She laughed pleasedly.

"Gallant Punch, you're easily satisfied."

"Am I, Judy--am I?" I said gently, taking her hand.

"Yes," she said, snatching it away.  "You are and will be.  Go out and
get the money."

I adjusted my nose thoughtfully.  Daphne was, of course, in great
evidence.  Anxious to run no unnecessary risk, I avoided her when
possible, and when I did find myself in her proximity, I at once
indulged in some of my more extravagant behaviour.

"Where's your brother?" I heard a worker say.

