The phases exhibited to us by Venus are due to her moving in an orbit
within that of the earth, at one side of which she is between us and
the sun, while at the other this position is exactly reversed. We may
compare her to a performer in a great celestial circus, lit by a
central chandelier, and ourselves to spectators in an external ring,
from which we see her at one time facing us with the light full on
her, at the opposite point in complete shadow, and at the intermediate
ones in varying degrees of illumination according to our changing
views of her. The same illustration may serve to show why Venus is
brightest, not when full, since she is then beyond the sun, and at the
farthest possible point from us, but when she approaches us at
inferior conjunction, more nearly by over one hundred and thirty
million miles, and still shows us a crescent of her illuminated
surface, before passing into the last phase of total obscuration. When
actually nearest to us she is absolutely invisible, being then, like
the new moon, between us and the sun. Her varying degrees of
brilliancy, even when in the same phase, are thus accounted for by her
alternate retreat from and advance towards us as she circles round the
sun. Completing, as she does, her revolution in about seven months and
a half, she would of course go through the whole series of her
metamorphoses in that time, were the earth, from which we observe
them, a fixed point. Their protraction instead, over a term of five
hundred and eighty-four days, or more than nineteen months, is due to
the simultaneous motion of the earth in the same direction, over her
larger orbit in a longer period, causing the same relative position of
the sister planet to recur only as often as she overtakes her in her
career. Thus the hour and minute hands of a watch, moving at different
rates of speed after meeting on the dial plate at twelve o'clock, will
not again come together until five minutes past one, when the swifter
paced of the two will have completed a revolution and a twelfth. But
were we to retard the motion of the latter, reducing it to only twice
that of its companion, they would always meet at the figure twelve, as
it would exactly complete two circuits while the hour hand was
performing one. Venus thus overtakes and passes the earth once in five
hundred and eighty-four days, or nearly two and a half of her own
years, constituting what is called her synodic period of apparent
revolution as seen from this globe. She thus presents to us all the
phases undergone by our own satellite during a lunar month, passing
from new to full, and _vice versa_, through the various intervening
gradations of form.

The phases of Venus are amongst the most beautiful subjects for
observation in a moderate telescope, as her silver bow, gradually
brightening in the evening dusk, or fading in the dawn,

  "On a bed of daffodil sky,"

is, after the two greater luminaries that rule the day and night, the
most brilliant object in the heavens.


III.

THE SILVER CROWN.


The parallel between Venus and

  "That orbed maiden with fire laden,
   Whom mortals call the moon,"

is carried a stage further. Most of us are familiar with the spectacle
in which the Ancient Egyptians saw symbolized Horus on the lap of
Isis, but which we more prosaically term "the old moon in the new
moon's arms." The strongly illuminated half circle next the sun is
then seen embracing with its horns a dusky sphere, contrasting with it
as tarnished silver does with the newly burnished metal. The same
phenomenon is occasionally, though very rarely, exhibited by Venus,
while close to the sun at inferior injunction, when the shadowy form
of the full orb is seen to shine dimly within her crescent with what
is termed "the ashen light." More wonderful still, this "glimmering
sphere" is then crowned, as with a silver halo, by a thin luminous
arch, forming a secondary sickle facing the one nearest the sun, and
doubtless due to the refraction of his rays round the globe of the
planet, through the upper regions of her twilight atmosphere. This
spectacle was first observed by the Jesuit Ricciolo, an opponent of
the Copernican theory, on January 9th, 1643. He describes the planet
as ruddy near the sun, yellowish in the middle, and of greenish blue
on the side remote from the sun; while he also noted the bow of light
limiting the dark hemisphere. Scarcely daring to trust his own
eyesight, he ascribed these appearances, although he recorded them, to
illusory reflection in the telescope.

[Illustration: VENUS AT HER GREATEST BRILLIANCY.]

They were again seen, however, by Derham about 1715, and six years
later by Kirch, in Berlin, who has the following entry in his diary
for Saturday, June 29, 1721:--"I found Venus in a region where the sky
was not very clear. The planet was narrow, and I seemed to see its
dark side, though this is almost incredible. The diameter of Venus was
65", and its sickle seemed to tremble in the atmospheric vapors."
Again, on March 8th, 1726, he records a similar observation. "We
observed Venus with the twenty-six foot telescope. I perceived her
dark side, and its edge seemed to describe a smaller circle than that
of the light side, as is the case of the moon." This effect is due to
irradiation, that is to say, to the glare from a bright surface,
giving a deceptive enlargement to its apparent area. He again saw the
dark side of the planet in October, 1759, as did Harding at Göttingen,
with Herschel's ten-foot reflector, on January 24th, 1806. This latter
observer saw it on this occasion stand out against the background of
the sky as of a pale ashen green, while on February 28th following, it
seemed to him of a pale reddish gray, like the color of the eclipsed
moon.

That the latter body should send to us from her nocturnal shadows
sufficient light to be visible is easily explicable, since she is then
flooded with earth-light reflected on her from a surface thirteen and
one-half times greater than her own, and probably casting on her an
illumination transcending our full moonlight in the same proportion.
But the secondary light of Venus admits of no such explanation, since
earth-light on her surface, diminished by 1/12000th part compared to
what it is on that of the moon, would be quite insufficient to render
her visible to our eyes. The phenomenon was therefore adduced as an
argument for the habitability of the planets by Gruithuisen, of the
Munich Observatory, who, writing early in this century, suggested that
the ashen light of Venus might be due to general illuminations in
celebration by her inhabitants of some periodically recurring
festivity, The materials for a flare-up on so grand a scale would, he
thought, exist in abundance, as he conjectured the vegetation of our
planetary neighbor to be more luxuriant than that of our Brazilian
forests. The phosphorescence of the Aphroditean oceans, warm and
teeming with life, as they are held to be by Zollner, was advanced as
an explanatory hypothesis, with scarcely more plausibility, by
Professor Safarik, while others have resorted to the supposition of
atmospheric or electrical luminosity producing on a large scale some
such display as that of the aurora borealis.

Professor Vogel, of Berlin, who himself saw part of the night-side of
Venus, in its semi-obscurity in November, 1871, ascribed its
visibility to a twilight effect caused by a very extensive atmosphere.
The light thus transmitted to us by aerial diffusion and giving the
ashen light, is reflected sunlight, while that sent by the luminous
arc on its edge is direct sunlight, refracted, or bent round to us,
from behind the planet. The silver selvedge of the dawn edging the
dark limb may consequently be the brightest part of the broken nimbus
that then seems to surround her.

A similar appearance is observed during transits of Venus, when she
passes directly between us and the actual solar disk. A silver thread
is then seen encircling that side of the planet which has not yet
entered on the face of the sun or "a shadowy nebulous ring," as it was
described by Mr. Macdonnell at Eden, surrounds the whole planetary
disk when two-thirds of it have passed the solar edge. As it moves off
it, the same aureole again becomes visible, testifying to the
existence of an atmosphere of considerable extent exterior to the
sharply outlined surface ordinarily visible. The shimmering haze of
reflected sunlight which perpetually enfolds her is only made apparent
to us under exceptional circumstances which cut off some portion of
her more immediate light, just as we see the motes in the air
illuminated by a candle if we hide the actual flame from our eyes. The
perennial twilight which seems to reign over the nocturnal hemisphere
of Venus may compensate, perhaps, for the want of a satellite to
modify its darkness.

The great prolongation at other times of the horns of her crescent, so
as to embrace almost her entire circumference with a tenuous ring of
light, is doubtless due to the same cause, as their visibility should
otherwise be limited to a half segment of a circle. The regions thus
shining to us are obviously those on which the sun has not yet set,
his appearance above the horizon being prolonged, as in our own case,
by refraction, though to a much larger extent. The magnitude of the
sun's disk as seen from Venus, a third larger than it appears to us,
is also adducted by Mr. Proctor in his posthumous work, "The Old and
the New Astronomy," edited and completed by Mr. A.C. Ranyard, as an
element in extending the illumination of Venus to more than a
hemisphere of her surface. As his diameter there is 44-1/4°, a zone
of more than 22° wide outside the sunward hemisphere is he thinks
illuminated by direct though partial sunlight, the orb being
throughout this tract still partially above the horizon.

[Illustration: GEOGRAPHICAL ASPECT OF VENUS.]


[Illustration]


THE STARS

(FROM STARLAND.)

BY SIR ROBERT S. BALL.


[Illustration]

The group of bodies which cluster around our sun forms a little
island, so to speak, in the extent of infinite space. We may
illustrate this by a map in which we shall endeavor to show the stars
placed at their proper relative distances. We first open the compasses
one inch, and thus draw a little circle to represent the path of the
earth. We are not going to put in all the planets. We take Neptune,
the outermost, at once. To draw its path I open the compasses to
thirty inches, and draw a circle with that radius. That will do for
our solar system, though the comets no doubt will roam beyond these
limits. To complete our map we ought of course to put in some stars.
There are a hundred million to choose from, and we shall begin with
the brightest. It is often called the Dog Star, but astronomers know
it better as Sirius. Let us see where it is to be placed on our map.
Sirius is beyond Neptune, so it must be outside somewhere. Indeed, it
is a good deal further off than Neptune; so I try at the edge of the
drawing-board; I have got a method of making a little calculation that
I do not intend to trouble you with, but I can assure you that the
results it leads me to are quite correct; they show me that this board
is not big enough. But could a board which was big enough fit into
this lecture theatre? Here, again, I make my little calculations, and
I find that there would not be room for a board sufficiently great; in
fact, if I put the sun here at one end, with its planets around it?
Sirius would be too near on the same scale if it were at the further
corner. The board would have to go out through the wall of the
theatre, out through London. Indeed, big as London is, it would not be
large enough to contain the drawing-board that I should require. It
would have to stretch about twenty miles from where we are now
assembled. We may therefore dismiss any hope of making a practical map
of our system on this scale if Sirius is to have its proper place. Let
us, then, take some other star. We shall naturally try with the
nearest of all. It is one that we do not know in this part of the
world, but those that live in the southern hemisphere are well
acquainted with it. The name of this star is Alpha Centauri. Even for
this star we should require a drawing three or four miles long if the
distance from the earth to the sun is to be taken as one inch. You see
what an isolated position our sun and his planets occupy. The members
of the family are all close together, and the nearest neighbors are
situated at enormous distances. There is a good reason for this
separation. The stars are very pretty and perfectly harmless to us
where they are at present situated. They might be very troublesome
neighbors if they were very much closer to our system. It is therefore
well they are so far off; they would be constantly making disturbances
in the sun's family if they were near at hand. Sometimes they would be
dragging us into unpleasantly great heat by bringing us too close to
the sun, or producing a coolness by pulling us away from the sun,
which would be quite as disagreeable.


The Stars are Suns.

We are about to discuss one of the grandest truths in the whole of
nature. We have had occasion to see that this sun of ours is a
magnificent globe immensely larger than the greatest of his planets,
while the greatest of these planets is immensely larger than this
earth; but now we are to learn that our sun is, indeed, only a star
not nearly so bright as many of those which shine over our heads every
night. We are comparatively close to the sun, so that we are able to
enjoy his beautiful light and cheering heat. Each of those other
myriads of stars is a sun, and the splendor of those distant suns is
often far greater than that of our own. We are, however, so enormously
far from them that they appear dwindled down to insignificance. To
judge impartially between our sun or star and such a sun or star as
Sirius we should stand halfway between the two; it is impossible to
make a fair estimate when we find ourselves situated close to one star
and a million times as far from the other. After allowance is made for
the imperfections of our point of view, we are enabled to realize the
majestic truth that the sun is no more than a star, and that the other
stars are no less than suns. This gives us an imposing idea of the
extent and magnificence of the universe in which we are situated. Look
lip at the sky at night--you will see a host of stars; try to think
that every one of them is itself a sun. It may probably be that those
suns have planets circling round them, but it is hopeless for us to
expect to see such planets. Were you standing on one of those stars
and looking towards our system, you would not perceive the sun to be
the brilliant and gorgeous object that we know so well. If you could
see him at all, he would merely seem like a star, not nearly as bright
as many of those you can see at night. Even if you had the biggest of
telescopes to aid your vision, you could never discern from one of
these bodies the planets which surround the sun, no astronomer in the
stars could see Jupiter, even if his sight were a thousand times as
powerful as any sight or telescope that we know. So minute an object
as our earth would, of course, be still more hopelessly beyond the
possibility of vision.


The Number of the Stars.

To count the stars involves a task which lies beyond the power of man
to accomplish. Even without the aid of any telescope, we can see a
great multitude of stars from this part of the world. There are also
many constellations in the southern hemisphere which never appear
above our horizon. If, however, we were to go to the equator, then, by
waiting there for a twelve-month, all the stars in the heavens would
have been successively exposed to view. An astronomer, Houzeau, with
the patience to count them, enumerated about six thousand. This is the
naked-eye estimate of the star-population of the heavens; but if
instead of relying on unaided vision, you get the assistance of a
little telescope, you will be astounded at the enormous multitude of
stars which are disclosed.

[Illustration: FIG 1. THE GREAT BEAR AND THE POLE.]

An ordinary opera-glass or binocular is a very useful instrument for
looking at the stars in the heavens. If you employ an instrument of
this sort, you will be amazed to find that the heavens teem with
additional hosts of stars that your unaided vision would never have
given you knowledge of. Any part of the sky may be observed; but, just
to give an illustration, I shall take one special region, namely, that
of the Great Bear (Fig. 1). The seven well-known stars are here shown,
four of which form a sort of oblong, while the other three represent
the tail. I would like you to make this little experiment. On a fine
clear night, count how many stars there are within this oblong; they
are all very faint, but you will be able to see a few, and, with good
sight, and on a clear night, you may see perhaps ten. Next take your
opera-glass and sweep it over the same region; if you will carefully
count the stars it shows, you will find fully two hundred; so that
the opera-glass has, in this part of the sky, revealed nearly twenty
times as many stars as could be seen without its aid. As six thousand
stars can be seen by the eye all over the heavens, we may fairly
expect that twenty times that number--that is to say, one hundred and
twenty thousand stars--could be shown by the opera-glass over the
entire sky. Let us go a step further, and employ a telescope, the
object-glass of which is three inches across. This is a useful
telescope to have, and, if a good one, will show multitudes of
pleasing objects, though an astronomer would not consider it very
powerful. An instrument like this, small enough to be carried in the
hand, has been applied to the task of enumerating the stars in the
northern half of the sky, and three hundred and twenty thousand stars
were counted. Indeed, the actual number that might have been seen with
it is considerably greater, for when the astronomer Argelander made
this memorable investigation he was unable to reckon many of the stars
in localities where they lay very close together. This grand count
only extended to half the sky, and, assuming that the other half is as
richly inlaid with stars, we see that a little telescope like that we
have supposed will, when swept over the heavens, reveal a number of
stars which exceeds that of the population of any city in England
except London. It exhibits more than one hundred times as many stars
as our eyes could possibly reveal. Still, we are only at the beginning
of the count; the very great telescopes add largely to the number.
There are multitudes of stars which in small instruments we cannot
see, but which are distinctly visible from our great observatories.
That telescope would be still but a comparatively small one which
would show as many stars in the sky as there are people living in the
mighty city of London; and with the greatest instruments, the tale of
stars has risen to a number far greater than that of the entire
population of Great Britain.

In addition to those stars which the largest telescopes show us, there
are myriads which make their presence evident in a wholly different
way. It is only in quite recent times that an attempt has been made to
develop fully the powers of photography in representing the celestial
objects. On a photographic plate which has been exposed to the sky in
a great telescope the stars are recorded by thousands. Many of these
may, of course, be observed with a good telescope, but there are not a
few others which no one ever saw in a telescope, which apparently no
one ever could see, though the photograph is able to show them. We do
not, however, employ a camera like that which the photographer uses
who is going to take your portrait. The astronomer's plate is put into
his telescope, and then the telescope is turned towards the sky. On
that plate the stars produce their images, each by its own light. Some
of these images are excessively faint, but we give a very long
exposure of an hour or two hours; sometimes as much as four hours'
exposure is given to a plate so sensitive that a mere fraction of a
second would sufficiently expose it during the ordinary practice of
taking a photograph in daylight. We thus afford sufficient time to
enable the fainter objects to indicate their presence upon the
sensitive film. Even with an exposure of a single hour a picture
exhibiting sixteen thousand stars has been taken by Mr. Isaac Roberts,
of Liverpool. Yet the portion of the sky which it represents is only
one ten-thousandth part of the entire heavens. It should be added that
the region which Mr. Roberts has photographed is furnished with stars
in rather exceptional profusion.

Here, at last, we have obtained some conception of the sublime scale
on which the stellar universe is constructed. Yet even these plates
cannot represent all the stars that the heavens contain. We have every
reason for knowing that with larger telescopes, with more sensitive
plates, with more prolonged exposures, ever fresh myriads of stars
will be brought within our view.

You must remember that every one of these stars is truly a sun, a
lamp, as it were, which doubtless gives light to other objects in its
neighborhood as our sun sheds light upon this earth and the other
planets. In fact, to realize the glories of the heavens you should try
to think that the brilliant points you see are merely the luminous
points of the otherwise invisible universe.

Standing one fine night on the deck of a Cunarder we passed in open
ocean another great Atlantic steamer. The vessel was near enough for
us to see not only the light from the mast-head but also the little
beams from the several cabin ports; and we could see nothing of the
ship herself. Her very existence was only known to us by the twinkle
of these lights. Doubtless her passengers could see, and did see, the
similar lights from our own vessel, and they probably drew the correct
inference that these lights indicated a great ship.

Consider the multiplicity of beings and objects in a ship: the
captain and the crew, the passengers, the cabins, the engines, the
boats, the rigging, and the stores. Think of all the varied interests
there collected and then reflect that out on the ocean, at night, the
sole indication of the existence of this elaborate structure was given
by the few beams of light that happened to radiate from it. Now raise
your eyes to the stars; there are the twinkling lights. We cannot see
what those lights illuminate, we can only conjecture what untold
wealth of non-luminous bodies may also lie in their vicinity; we may,
however, feel certain that just as the few gleaming lights from a ship
are utterly inadequate to give a notion of the nature and the contents
of an Atlantic steamer, so are the twinkling stars utterly inadequate
to give even the faintest conception of the extent and the interest of
the universe. We merely see self-luminous bodies, but of the
multitudes of objects and the elaborate systems of which these bodies
are only the conspicuous points we see nothing and we know very
little. We are, however, entitled to infer from an examination of our
own star--the sun--and of the beautiful system by which it is
surrounded, that these other suns may be also splendidly attended.
This is quite as reasonable a supposition as that a set of lights seen
at night on the Atlantic Ocean indicates the existence of a fine ship.


The Clusters of Stars.

On a clear night you can often see, stretching across the sky, a track
of faint light, which is known to astronomers as the "Milky Way." It
extends below the horizon, and then round the earth to form a girdle
about the heavens. When we examine the Milky Way with a telescope we
find, to our amazement, that it consists of myriads of stars, so small
and so faint that we are not able to distinguish them individually; we
merely see the glow produced from their collective rays. Remembering
that our sun is a star, and that the Milky Way surrounds us, it would
almost seem as if our sun were but one of the host of stars which form
this cluster.

There are also other clusters of stars, some of which are exquisitely
beautiful telescopic spectacles. I may mention a celebrated pair of
these objects which lies in the constellation of Perseus. The sight of
them in a great telescope is so imposing that no one who is fit to
look through a telescope could resist a shout of wonder and admiration
when first they burst on his view. But there are other clusters. Here
is a picture of one which is known as the "Globular Cluster in the
Centaur" (Fig. 2). It consists of a ball of stars, so far off that,
however large these several suns may actually be, they have dwindled
down to extremely small points of light. A homely illustration may
serve to show the appearance which a globular cluster presents in a
good telescope. I take a pepper-caster, and on a sheet of white paper
I begin to shake out the pepper until there is a little heap at the
centre and other grains are scattered loosely about. Imagine that
every one of those grains of pepper was to be transformed into a tiny
electric light, and then you have some idea of what a cluster of stars
would look like when viewed through a telescope of sufficient power.
There are multitudes of such groups scattered through the depths of
space. They require our biggest telescopes to show them adequately. We
have seen that our sun is a star, being only one of a magnificent
cluster that forms the Milky Way. We have also seen that there are
other groups scattered through the length and depth of space. It is
thus we obtain a notion of the rank which our earth holds in the
scheme of things celestial.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. GLOBULAR CLUSTER IN THE CENTAUR.]


The Rank of the Earth as a Globe in Space.

Let me give an illustration with the view of explaining more fully the
nature of the relation which the earth bears to the other globes which
abound through space, and you must allow me to draw a little upon my
imagination. I shall suppose that the mails of our country extend not
only over this globe, but that they also communicate with other
worlds; that postal arrangements exist between Mars and the earth,
between the sun and Orion--in fact, everywhere throughout the whole
extent of the universe. We shall consider how our letters are to be
addressed. Let us take the case of Mr. John Smith, merchant, who lives
at 1001, Piccadilly; and let us suppose that Mr. John Smith's business
transactions are of such an extensive nature that they reach not only
all over this globe, but away throughout space. I shall suppose that
the firm has a correspondent residing--let us say in the constellation
of the Great Bear; and when this man of business wants to write to Mr.
Smith from these remote regions, what address must he put upon the
letter, so that the Postmaster-General of the universe shall make no
mistake about its delivery? He will write as follows:--

  MR. JOHN SMITH,
    1001 Piccadilly,
      London,
        England,
          Europe,
            Earth,
              Near the Sun,
                Milky Way,
                  The Universe.

Let us now see what the several lines of this address mean. Of course
we put down the name of Mr. John Smith in the first line, and then we
will add "1001 Piccadilly" for the second; but as the people in the
Great Bear are not likely to know where Piccadilly is, we shall add
"London" underneath. As even London itself cannot be well known
everywhere, it is better to write "England." This would surely find
Mr. John Smith from any post-office on this globe. From other globes,
however, the supreme importance of England may not be so immediately
recognized, and therefore it is as well to add another line, "Europe."
This ought to be sufficient, I think, for any post-office in the solar
system. Europe is big enough to be visible from Mars or Venus, and
should be known to the post-office people there, just as we know and
have names for the continents on Mars. But further away there might be
a little difficulty; from Uranus and Neptune the different regions on
our earth can never have been distinguished, and therefore we must add
another line to indicate the particular globe of the solar system
which contains Europe. Mark Twain tells us that there was always one
thing in astronomy which specially puzzled him, and that was to know
how we found out the names of the stars. We are, of course, in
hopeless ignorance of the name by which this earth is called among
other intelligent beings elsewhere who can see it. I can only adopt
the title of "Earth," and therefore I add this line. Now our address
is so complete that from anywhere in the solar system--from Mercury,
from Jupiter, or Neptune--there ought to be no mistake about the
letter finding its way to Mr. John Smith. But from his correspondent
in the Great Bear this address would be still incomplete; they cannot
see our earth from there, and even the sun himself only looks like a
small star--like one, in fact, of thousands of stars elsewhere.
However, each star can be distinguished, and our sun may, for
instance, be recognized from the Great Bear by some designation. We
shall add the line "Near the Sun," and then I think that from this
constellation, or from any of the other stars around us, the address
of Mr. John Smith may be regarded as complete. But Mr. Smith's
correspondence may be still wider. He may have an agent living in the
cluster of Perseus or on some other objects still fainter and more
distant; then "Near the Sun" is utterly inadequate as a concluding
line to the address, for the sun, if it can be seen at all from
thence, will be only of the significance of an excessively minute
star, no more to be designated by a special name than are each of the
several leaves on the trees of a forest. What this distant
correspondent will be acquainted with is not the earth or the sun but
only the cluster of stars among which the sun is but a unit. Again we
use our own name to denote the cluster, and we call it the "Milky
Way." When we add this line, we have made the address of Mr. John
Smith as complete as circumstances will permit. I think a letter
posted to him anywhere ought to reach its destination. To perfect it,
however, we will finish up with one line more--"The Universe."


The Distances of the Stars.

I must now tell you something about the distances of the stars. I
shall not make the attempt to explain fully how astronomers make such
measurements, but I will give you some notion of how it is done. You
may remember I showed you how we found the distance of a globe that
was hung from the ceiling. The principle of the method for finding the
distance of a star is somewhat similar, except that we make the two
observations not from the two ends of a table, not even from opposite
sides of the earth, but from two opposite points on the earth's orbit,
which are therefore at a distance of one hundred and eighty-six
million miles. Imagine that on Midsummer Day, when standing on the
earth here, I measure with a piece of card the angle between the star
and the sun. Six months later, on Midwinter Day, when the earth is at
the opposite point of its orbit, I again measure the angle between the
same star and the sun, and we can now determine the star's distance by
making a triangle. I draw a line a foot long, and we will take this
foot to represent one hundred and eighty-six million miles, the
distance between the two stations; then placing the cards at the
corners, I rule the two sides and complete the triangle, and the star
must be at the remaining corner; then I measure the sides of the
triangle, and how many feet they contain, and recollecting that each
foot corresponds to one hundred and eighty-six million miles, we
discover the distance of the star. If the stars were comparatively
near us, the process would be a very simple one; but, unfortunately,
the stars are so extremely far off that this triangle, even with a
base of only one foot, must have its sides many miles long. Indeed,
astronomers will tell you that there is no more delicate or
troublesome work in the whole of their science than that of
discovering the distance of a star.

In all such measurements we take the distance from the earth to the
sun as a conveniently long measuring-rod, whereby to express the
results. The nearest stars are still hundreds of thousands of times as
far off as the sun. Let us ponder for a little on the vastness of
these distances. We shall first express them in miles. Taking the
sun's distance to be ninety-three million miles, then the distance of
the nearest fixed star is about twenty millions of millions of
miles--that is to say, we express this by putting down a 2 first, and
then writing thirteen ciphers after it. It is, no doubt, easy to speak
of such figures, but it is a very different matter when we endeavor to
imagine the awful magnitude which such a number indicates. I must try
to give some illustrations which will enable you to form a notion of
it. At first I was going to ask you to try and count this number, but
when I found it would require at least three hundred thousand years,
counting day and night without stopping, before the task was over, it
became necessary to adopt some other method.

When on a visit in Lancashire I was once kindly permitted to visit a
cotton mill, and I learned that the cotton yarn there produced in a
single day would be long enough to wind round this earth twenty-seven
times at the equator. It appears that the total production of cotton
yarn each day in all the mills together would be on the average about
one hundred and fifty-five million miles. In fact, if they would only
spin about one-fifth more, we could assert that Great Britain produced
enough cotton yarn every day to stretch from the earth to the sun and
back again! It is not hard to find from these figures how long it
would take for all the mills in Lancashire to produce a piece of yarn
long enough to reach from our earth to the nearest of the stars. If
the spinners worked as hard as ever they could for a year, and if all
the pieces were then tied together, they would extend to only a small
fraction of the distance; nor if they worked for ten years, or for
twenty years, would the task be fully accomplished. Indeed, upwards of
four hundred years would be necessary before enough cotton could be
grown in America and spun in this country to stretch over a distance
so enormous. All the spinning that has ever yet been done in the world
has not formed a long enough thread!

There is another way in which we can form some notion of the immensity
of these sidereal distances. You will recollect that, when we were
speaking of Jupiter's moons, I told you of the beautiful discovery
which their eclipses enabled astronomers to make. It was thus found
that light travels at the enormous speed of about one hundred and
eighty-five thousand miles per second. It moves so quickly that within
a single second a ray would flash two hundred times from London to
Edinburgh and back again.

We said that a meteor travels one hundred times as swiftly as a
rifle-bullet; but even this great speed seems almost nothing when
compared with the speed of light, which is ten thousand times as
great. Suppose some brilliant outbreak of light were to take place in
a distant star--an outbreak which would be of such intensity that the
flash from it would extend far and wide throughout the universe. The
light would start forth on its voyage with terrific speed. Any
neighboring star which was at a distance of less than one hundred and
eighty-five thousand miles would, of course, see the flash within a
second after it had been produced. More distant bodies would receive
the intimation after intervals of time proportioned to their
distances. Thus, if a body were one million miles away, the light
would reach it in from five to six seconds, while over a distance as
great as that which separates the earth from the sun the news would be
carried in about eight minutes. We can calculate how long a time must
elapse ere the light shall travel over a distance so great as that
between the star and our earth. You will find that from the nearest of
the stars the time required for the journey will be over three years.
Ponder on all that this involves. That outbreak in the star might be
great enough to be visible here, but we could never become aware of it
till three years after it had happened. When we are looking at such a
star to-night we do not see it as it is at present, for the light that
is at this moment entering our eyes has travelled so far that it has
been three years on the way. Therefore, when we look at the star now
we see it as it was three years previously. In fact, if the star were
to go out altogether, we might still continue to see it twinkling for
a period of three years longer, because a certain amount of light was
on its way to us at the moment of extinction, and so long as that
light keeps arriving here, so long shall we see the star showing as
brightly as ever. When, therefore, you look at the thousands of stars
in the sky to-night, there is not one that you see as it is now, but
as it was years ago.

I have been speaking of the stars that are nearest to us, but there
are others much farther off. It is true we cannot find the distances
of these more remote objects with any degree of accuracy, but we can
convince ourselves how great that distance is by the following
reasoning. Look at one of the brightest stars. Try to conceive that
the object was carried away further into the depths of space, until it
was ten times as far from us as it is at present, it would still
remain bright enough to be recognized in quite a small telescope; even
if it were taken to one hundred times its original distance it would
not have withdrawn from the view of a good telescope; while if it
retreated one thousand times as far as it was at first it would still
be a recognizable point in our mightiest instruments. Among the stars
which we can see with our telescopes, we feel confident there must be
many from which the light has expended hundreds of years, or even
thousands of years, on the journey. When, therefore, we look at such
objects, we see them, not as they are now, but as they were ages ago;
in fact, a star might have ceased to exist for thousands of years, and
still be seen by us every night as a twinkling point in our great
telescopes.

Remembering these facts, you will, I think, look at the heavens with a
new interest. There is a bright star, Vega, or Alpha Lyræ, a beautiful
gem, so far off that the light from it which now reaches our eyes
started before many of my audience were born. Suppose that there are
astronomers residing on worlds amid the stars, and that they have
sufficiently powerful telescopes to view this globe, what do you think
they would observe? They will not see our earth as it is at present;
they will see it as it was years (and sometimes many years) ago. There
are stars from which if England could now be seen, the whole of the
country would be observed at this present moment to be in a great
state of excitement at a very auspicious event. Distant astronomers
might notice a great procession in London, and they could watch the
coronation of a youthful queen amid the enthusiasm of a nation. There
are other stars still further, from which, if the inhabitants had good
enough telescopes, they would now see a mighty battle in progress not
far from Brussels. One splendid army could be beheld hurling itself
time after time against the immovable ranks of the other. They would
not, indeed, be able to hear the ever-memorable "Up, Guards, and at
them!" but there can be no doubt that there are stars so far away that
the rays of light which started from the earth on the day of the
battle of Waterloo are only just arriving there. Further off still,
there are stars from which a bird's-eye view could be taken at this
very moment of the signing of Magna Charta. There are even stars from
which England, if it could be seen at all, would now appear, not as
the great England we know, but as a country covered by dense forests,
and inhabited by painted savages, who waged incessant war with wild
beasts that roamed through the island. The geological problems that
now puzzle us would be quickly solved could we only go far enough into
space and had we only powerful enough telescopes. We should then be
able to view our earth through the successive epochs of past
geological time; we should be actually able to see those great animals
whose fossil remains are treasured in our museums tramping about over
the earth's surface, splashing across its swamps, or swimming with
broad flippers through its oceans. Indeed, if we could view our own
earth reflected from mirrors in the stars, we might still see Moses
crossing the Red Sea, or Adam and Eve being expelled from Eden.

So important is the subject of star distance that I am tempted to give
one more illustration in order to bring before you some conception of
how vast such distances are. I shall take, as before, the nearest of
the stars so far as known to us, and I hope to be forgiven for taking
an illustration of a practical and a commercial kind instead of one
more purely scientific. I shall suppose that a railway is about to be
made from London to Alpha Centauri. The length of that railway, of
course, we have already stated: it is twenty billions of miles. So I
am now going to ask your attention to the simple question as to the
fare which it would be reasonable to charge for the journey. We shall
choose a very cheap scale on which to compute the price of a ticket.
The parliamentary rate here is, I believe, a penny for every mile. We
will make our interstellar railway fares much less even than this; we
shall arrange to travel at the rate of one hundred miles for every
penny. That, surely, is moderate enough. If the charges were so low
that the journey from London to Edinburgh only cost fourpence, then
even the most unreasonable passenger would be surely contented. On
these terms how much do you think the fare from London to this star
ought to be? I know of one way in which to make our answer
intelligible. There is a National Debt with which your fathers are,
unhappily, only too well acquainted; you will know quite enough about
it yourselves in those days when you have to pay income tax. This debt
is so vast that the interest upon it is about sixty thousand pounds a
day, the whole amount of the National Debt being six hundred and
thirty-eight millions of pounds.

If you went to the booking-office with the whole of this mighty sum in
your pocket--but stop a moment; could you carry it in your pocket?
Certainly not, if it were in sovereigns. You would find that after you
had as many sovereigns as you could conveniently carry there would
still be some left--so many, indeed, that it would be necessary to get
a cart to help you on with the rest. When the cart had as great a load
of sovereigns as the horse could draw there would be still some more,
and you would have to get another cart; but ten carts, twenty carts,
fifty carts, would not be enough. You would want five thousand of
these before you would be able to move off towards the station with
your money. When you did get there and asked for a ticket at the rate
of one hundred miles for a penny, do you think you would get any
change? No doubt some little time would be required to count the
money, but when it was counted the clerk would tell you that there was
not enough--that he must have nearly two hundred millions of pounds
more.

That will give some notion of the distance of the nearest star, and we
may multiply it by ten, by one hundred, and even by one thousand, and
still not attain to the distance of some of the more remote stars that
the telescope shows us.

On account of the immense distances of the stars we can only perceive
them to be mere points of light. We can never see a star to be a globe
with marks on it like the moon, or like one of the planets--in fact,
the better the telescope the smaller does the star seem, though, of
course, its brightness is increased with every addition to the
light-grasping power of the instrument.


The Brightness and Color of Stars.

Another point to be noticed is the arrangement of stars in classes,
according to their lustre. The brightest stars, of which there are
about twenty, are said to be of the first magnitude. Those just
inferior to the first magnitude are ranked as the second; and those
just lower than the second are estimated as the third; and so on. The
smallest points that your unaided eyes will show you are of about the
sixth magnitude. Then the telescope will reveal stars still fainter
and fainter, down to what we term the seventeenth or eighteenth
magnitudes, or even lower still. The number of stars of each magnitude
increases very much in the classes of small ones.

Most of the stars are white, but many are of a somewhat ruddy hue.
There are a few telescopic points which are intensely red, some
exhibit beautiful golden tints, while others are blue or green.

There are some curious stars which regularly change their brilliancy.
Let me try to illustrate the nature of these variables. Suppose that
you were looking at a street gas-lamp from a very long distance, so
that it seemed a little twinkling light; and suppose that some one was
preparing to turn the gas-cock up and down. Or, better still, imagine
a little machine which would act regularly so as to keep the light
first of all at its full brightness for two days and a half, and then
gradually turn it down until in three or four hours it declines to a
feeble glimmer. In this low state the light remains for twenty
minutes; then during three or four hours the gas is to be slowly
turned on again until it is full. In this condition the light will
remain for two days and a half, and then the same series of changes is
to recommence. This would be a very odd form of gas-lamp. There would
be periods of two days and a half during which it would remain at its
full; these would be separated by intervals of about seven hours, when
the gradual turning down and turning up again would be in progress.

The imaginary gas-lamp is exactly paralleled by a star Algol, in the
constellation of Perseus (Fig. 3), which goes through the series of
changes I have indicated. Ordinarily speaking, it is a bright star of
the second magnitude, and, whatever be the cause, the star performs
its variations with marvellous uniformity. In fact, Algol has always
arrested the attention of those who observed the heavens, and in early
times was looked on as the eye of a demon. There are many other stars
which also change their brilliancy. Most of them require much longer
periods than Algol, and sometimes a new star which nobody has ever
seen before will suddenly kindle into brilliancy. It is now known that
the bright star Algol is attended by a dark companion. This dark star
sometimes comes between Algol and the observer and cuts off the light.
Thus it is that the diminution of brightness is produced.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. PERSEUS AND ITS NEIGHBORING STARS INCLUDING
ALGOL.]


Double Stars.

Whenever you have a chance of looking at the heavens through a
telescope, you should ask to be shown what is called _a double star_.
There are many stars in the heavens which present no remarkable
appearance to the unaided eye, but which a good telescope at once
shows to be of quite a complex nature. These are what we call double
stars, in which two quite distinct stars are placed so close together
that the unaided eye is unable to separate them. Under the magnifying
power of the telescope, however, they are seen to be distinct. In
order to give some notion of what these objects are like, I shall
briefly describe three of them. The first lies in that best known
constellation, the Great Bear. If you look at his tail, which consists
of three stars, you will see that near the middle one of the three a
small star is situated; we call this little star Alcor, but it is the
brighter one near Alcor to which I specially call your attention. The
sharpest eye would never suspect that it was composed of two stars
placed close together. Even a small telescope will, however, show this
to be the case, and this is the easiest and the first observation that
a young astronomer should make when beginning to turn a telescope to
the heavens. Of course you will not imagine that I mean Alcor to be
the second component of the double star; it is the bright star near
Alcor which is the double. Here are two marbles, and these marbles are
fastened an inch apart. You can see them, of course, to be separate;
but if the pair were moved further and further away, then you would
soon not be able to distinguish between them, though the actual
distance between the marbles had not altered. Look at these two wax
tapers which are now lighted; the little flames are an inch apart. You
would have to view them from a station a third of a mile away if the
distance between the two flames were to appear the same as that
between the two components of this double star. Your eye would never
be able to discriminate between two lights only an inch apart at so
great a distance; a telescope would, however, enable you to do so, and
this is the reason why we have to use telescopes to show us double
stars.

You might look at that double star year after year throughout the
course of a long life without finding any appreciable change in the
relative positions of its components. But we know that there is no
such thing as rest in the universe; even if you could balance a body
so as to leave it for a moment at rest, it would not stay there, for
the simple reason that all the bodies round it in every direction are
pulling at it, and it is certain that the pull in one direction will
preponderate, so that move it must. Especially is this true in the
case of two suns like those forming a double star. Placed
comparatively near each other they could not remain permanently in
that position; they must gradually draw together and come into
collision with an awful crash. There is only one way by which such a
disaster could be averted. That is by making one of these stars
revolve around the other just as the earth revolves around the sun, or
the moon revolves around the earth. Some motion must, therefore, be
going on in every genuine double star, whether we have been able to
see that motion or not.

Let us now look at another double star of a different kind. This time
it is in the constellation of Gemini. The heavenly twins are called
Castor and Pollux. Of these, Castor is a very beautiful double star,
consisting of two bright points, a great deal closer together than
were those in the Great Bear; consequently a better telescope is
required for the purpose of showing them separately. Castor has been
watched for many years, and it can be seen that one of these stars is
slowly revolving around the other; but it takes a very long time,
amounting to hundreds of years, for a complete circuit to be
accomplished. This seems very astonishing, but when you remember how
exceedingly far Castor is, you will perceive that that pair of stars
which appear so close together that it requires a telescope to show
them apart must indeed be separated by hundreds of millions of miles.
Let us try to conceive our own system transformed into a double star.
If we took our outermost planet--Neptune--and enlarged him a good
deal, and then heated him sufficiently to make him glow like a sun, he
would still continue to revolve round our sun at the same distance,
and thus a double star would be produced. An inhabitant of Castor who
turned his telescope towards us would be able to see the sun as a
star. He would not, of course, be able to see the earth, but he might
see Neptune like another small star close to the sun. If generations
of astronomers in Castor continued their observations of our system,
they would find a binary star, of which one component took a century
and a half to go round the other. Need we then be surprised that when
we look at Castor we observe movements that seem very slow?

There is often so much diffused light about the bright stars seen in a
telescope, and so much twinkling in some states of the atmosphere,
that stars appear to dance about in rather a puzzling fashion,
especially to one who is not accustomed to astronomical observations.
I remember hearing how a gentleman once came to visit an observatory.
The astronomer showed him Castor through a powerful telescope as a
fine specimen of a double star, and then, by way of improving his
little lesson, the astronomer mentioned that one of these stars was
revolving around the other. "Oh, yes," said the visitor, "I saw them
going round and round in the telescope." He would, however, have had
to wait for a few centuries with his eye to the instrument before he
would have been entitled to make this assertion.

Double stars also frequently delight us by giving beautifully
contrasted colors. I dare say you have often noticed the red and the
green lights that are used on railways in the signal lamps. Imagine
one of those red and one of those green lights away far up in the sky
and placed close together, then you would have some idea of the
appearance that a colored double star presents, though, perhaps, I
should add that the hues in the heavenly bodies are not so vividly
different as are those which our railway people find necessary. There
is a particularly beautiful double star of this kind in the
constellation of the Swan. You could make an imitation of it by boring
two holes, with a red-hot needle, in a piece of card, and then
covering one of these holes with a small bit of the topaz-colored
gelatine with which Christmas crackers are made. The other star is to
be similarly colored with blue gelatine. A slide made on this
principle placed in the lantern gives a very good representation of
these two stars on the screen. There are many other colored doubles
besides this one; and, indeed, it is noteworthy that we hardly ever
find a blue or a green star by itself in the sky; it is always as a
member of one of these pairs.


How We Find What the Stars are Made of.

Here is a piece of stone. If I wanted to know what it was composed of,
I should ask a chemist to tell me. He would take it into his
laboratory, and first crush it into powder, and then, with his test
tubes, and with the liquids which his bottles contain, and his
weighing scales, and other apparatus, he would tell all about it;
there is so much of this, and so much of that, and plenty of this, and
none at all of that. But now, suppose you ask this chemist to tell you
what the sun is made of, or one of the stars. Of course, you have not
a sample of it to give him; how, then, can he possibly find out
anything about it? Well, he can tell you something, and this is the
wonderful discovery that I want to explain to you. We now put down the
gas, and I kindle a brilliant red light. Perhaps some of those whom I
see before me have occasionally ventured on the somewhat dangerous
practice of making fire-works. If there is any boy here who has ever
constructed sky-rockets, and put the little balls into the top which
are to burn with such vivid colors when the explosion takes place, he
will know that the substance which tinged that fire red must have been
strontium. He will recognize it by the color; because strontium gives
a red light which nothing else will give. Here are some of these
lightning papers, as they are called; they are very pretty and very
harmless; and these, too, give brilliant red flashes as I throw them.
The red tint has, no doubt, been produced by strontium also. You see
we recognized the substance simply by the color of the light it
produced when burning.

Perhaps some of you have tried to make a ghost at Christmas by
dressing up in a sheet, and bearing in your hand a ladle blazing with
a mixture of common salt and spirits of wine, the effect produced
being a most ghastly one. Some mammas will hardly thank me for this
suggestion, unless I add that the ghost must walk about cautiously,
for otherwise the blazing spirit would be very apt to produce
conflagrations of a kind more extensive than those intended. However,
by the kindness of Professor Dewar, I am enabled to show the
phenomenon on a splendid scale, and also free from all danger. I
kindle a vivid flame of an intensely yellow color, which I think the
ladies will unanimously agree is not at all becoming to their
complexions, while the pretty dresses have lost their variety of
colors. Here is a nice bouquet, and yet you can hardly distinguish the
green of the leaves from the brilliant colors of the flowers, except
by trifling differences of shade. Expose to this light a number of
pieces of variously colored ribbon, pink and red and green and blue,
and their beauty is gone; and yet we are told that this yellow is a
perfectly pure color; in fact, the purest color that can be produced.
I think we have to be thankful that the light which our good sun sends
us does not possess purity of that description. There is one substance
which will produce that yellow light; it is a curious metal called
sodium--a metal so soft that you can cut it with a knife, and so light
that it will float on water; while, still more strange, it actually
takes fire the moment it is dropped on the water. It is only in a
chemical laboratory that you will be likely to meet with the actual
metallic sodium, yet in other forms the substance is one of the most
abundant in nature. Indeed, common salt is nothing but sodium closely
united with a most poisonous gas, a few respirations of which would
kill you. But this strange metal and this noxious gas, when united,
become simply the salt for our eggs at breakfast. This pure yellow
light, wherever it is seen, either in the flame of spirits of wine
mixed with salt or in that great blaze at which we have been looking,
is characteristic of sodium. Wherever you see that particular kind of
light, you know that sodium must have been present in the body from
which it came.

We have accordingly learned to recognize two substances, namely,
strontium and sodium, by the different lights which they give out when
burning. To these two metals we may add a third. Here is a strip of
white metallic ribbon. It is called magnesium. It seems like a bit of
tin at the first glance, but indeed it is a very different substance
from tin; for, look, when I hold it in the spirit-lamp, the strip of
metal immediately takes fire, and burns with a white light so dazzling
that it pales the gas-flames to insignificance. There is no other
substance which will, when kindled, give that particular kind of light
which we see from magnesium. I can recommend this little experiment as
quite suitable for trying at home; you can buy a bit of magnesium
ribbon for a trifle at the opticians; it cannot explode or do any
harm, nor will you get into any trouble with the authorities provided
you hold it when burning over a tray or a newspaper, so as to prevent
the white ashes from falling on the carpet.

There are, in nature, a number of simple bodies called elements.
Every one of these, when ignited under suitable conditions, emits a
light which belongs to it alone, and by which it can be distinguished
from every other substance. I do not say that we can try the
experiments in the simple way I have here indicated. Many of the
materials will yield light which will require to be studied by much
more elaborate artifices than those which have sufficed for us. But
you will see that the method affords a means of finding out the actual
substances present in the sun or in the stars. There is a practical
difficulty in the fact that each of the heavenly bodies contains a
number of different elements; so that in the light it sends us the
hues arising from distinct substances are blended into one beam. The
first thing to be done is to get some way of splitting up a beam of
light, so as to discover the components of which it is made. You might
have a skein of silks of different hues tangled together, and this
would be like the sunbeam as we receive it in its unsorted condition.
How shall we untangle the light from the sun or a star? I will show
you by a simple experiment. Here is a beam from the electric light;
beautifully white and bright, is it not? It looks so pure and simple,
but yet that beam is composed of all sorts of colors mingled together,
in such proportions as to form white light. I take a wedge-shaped
piece of glass called a prism, and when I introduce it into the course
of the beam, you see the transformation that has taken place (Fig. 4).
Instead of the white light you have now all the colors of the
rainbow--red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet, marked by
their initial letters in the figure. These colors are very beautiful,
but they are transient, for the moment we take away the prism they
all unite again to form white light. You see what the prism has done;
it has bent all the light in passing through it; but it is more
effective in bending the blue than the red, and consequently the blue
is carried away much further than the red. Such is the way in which we
study the composition of a heavenly body. We take a beam of its light,
we pass it through a prism, and immediately it is separated into its
components; then we compare what we find with the lights given by the
different elements, and thus we are enabled to discover the substances
which exist in the distant object whose light we have examined. I do
not mean to say that the method is a simple one; all I am endeavoring
to show is a general outline of the way in which we have discovered
the materials present in the stars. The instrument that is employed
for this purpose is called the spectroscope. And perhaps you may
remember that name by these lines, which I have heard from an
astronomical friend:--

  "Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
  Now we find out what you are,
  When unto the midnight sky,
  We the spectroscope apply."

[Illustration: FIG. 4. HOW A RAY OF LIGHT IS SPLIT UP.]

I am sure it will interest everybody to know that the elements which
the stars contain are not altogether different from those of which the
earth is made. It is true there may be substances in the stars of
which we know nothing here; but it is certain that many of the most
common elements on the earth are present in the most distant bodies. I
shall only mention one, the metal iron. That useful substance has been
found in some of the stars which lie at almost incalculable distances
from the earth.


The Nebulæ.

In drawing towards the close of these lectures I must say a few words
about some dim and mysterious objects to which we have not yet
alluded. They are what are called nebulæ, or little clouds; and in
one sense they are justly called little, for each of them occupies but
a very small spot in the sky as compared with that which would be
filled by an ordinary cloud in our air. The nebulæ are, however,
objects of the most stupendous proportions. Were our earth and
thousands of millions of bodies quite as big all put together, they
would not be nearly so great as one of these nebulæ. Astronomers
reckon up the various nebulæ by thousands, but I must add that most of
them are apparently faint and uninteresting. A nebula is sometimes
liable to be mistaken for a comet. The comet is, as I have already
explained, at once distinguished by the fact that it is moving and
changing its appearance from hour to hour, while scores of years
elapse without changes in the aspect or position of a nebula. The most
powerful telescopes are employed in observing these faint objects. I
take this opportunity of showing a picture of an instrument suitable
for such observations. It is the great reflector of the Paris
Observatory (Fig. 5).

[Illustration: FIG. 5. A GREAT REFLECTING TELESCOPE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6. THE RING NEBULA IN LYRA, UNDER DIFFERENT
TELESCOPIC POWERS.]

There are such multitudes of nebulæ that I can only show a few of the
more remarkable kinds. In Fig. 6 will be seen pictures of a curious
object in the constellation of Lyra seen under different telescopic
powers. This is a gigantic ring of luminous gas. To judge of the size
of this ring let us suppose that a railway were laid across it, and
the train you entered at one side was not to stop until it reached the
other side, how long do you think this journey would require? I
recollect some time ago a picture in _Punch_ which showed a train
about to start from London to Brighton, and the guard walking up and
down announcing to the passengers the alarming fact that "this train
stops nowhere." An old gentleman was seen vainly gesticulating out of
the window and imploring to be let out ere the frightful journey was
commenced. In the nebular railway the passengers would almost require
such a warning.

Let the train start at a speed of a mile a minute, you would think,
surely, that it must soon cross the ring. But the minutes pass, an
hour has elapsed; so the distance must be sixty miles at all events.
The hours creep on into days, the days advance into years, and still
the train goes on. The years would lengthen out into centuries, and
even when the train had been rushing on for a thousand years with an
unabated speed of a mile a minute, the journey would certainly not
have been completed. Nor do I venture to say what ages must elapse ere
the terminus at the other side of the ring nebula would be reached.

A cluster of stars viewed in a small telescope will often seem like a
nebula, for the rays of the stars become blended. A powerful telescope
will, however, dispel the illusion and reveal the separate stars. It
was, therefore, thought that all the nebulæ might be merely clusters
so exceedingly remote that our mightiest instruments failed to resolve
them into stars. But this is now known not to be the case. Many of
these objects are really masses of glowing gas; such are, for
instance, the ring nebulæ, of which I have just spoken, and the form
of which I can simulate by a pretty experiment.

We take a large box with a round hole cut in one face, and a canvas
back at the opposite side. I first fill this box with smoke, and there
are different ways of doing so. Burning brown paper does not answer
well, because the supply of smoke is too irregular and the paper
itself is apt to blaze. A little bit of phosphorus set on fire yields
copious smoke, but it would be apt to make people cough, and, besides,
phosphorus is a dangerous thing to handle incautiously, and I do not
want to suggest anything which might be productive of disaster if the
experiment was repeated at home. A little wisp of hay, slightly damped
and lighted, will safely yield a sufficient supply, and you need not
have an elaborate box like this; any kind of old packing-case, or even
a bandbox with a duster stretched across its open top and a round hole
cut in the bottom, will answer capitally. While I have been speaking,
my assistant has kindly filled this box with smoke, and in order to
have a sufficient supply, and one which shall be as little
disagreeable as possible, he has mixed together the fumes of
hydrochloric acid and ammonia from two retorts shown in Fig. 7. A
still simpler way of doing the same thing is to put a little common
salt in a saucer and pour over it a little oil of vitriol; this is put
into the box, and over the floor of the box common smelling-salts is
to be scattered. You see there are dense volumes of white smoke
escaping from every corner of the box. I uncover the opening and give
a push to the canvas, and you see a beautiful ring flying across the
room; another ring and another follows. If you were near enough to
feel the ring, you would experience a little puff of wind; I can show
this by blowing out a candle which is at the other end of the table.
These rings are made by the air which goes into a sort of eddy as it
passes through the hole. All the smoke does is to render the air
visible. The smoke-ring is indeed quite elastic. If we send a second
ring hurriedly after the first, we can produce a collision, and you
see each of the two rings remains unbroken, though both are quivering
from the effects of the blow. They are beautifully shown along the
beam of the electric lamp, or, better still, along a sunbeam.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. HOW TO MAKE THE SMOKE RINGS.]

We can make many experiments with smoke-rings. Here, for instance, I
take an empty box, so far as smoke is concerned, but air-rings can be
driven forth from it, though you cannot see them, but you can feel
them even at the other side of the room, and they will, as you see,
blow out a candle. I can also shoot invisible air-rings at a column of
smoke, and when the missile strikes the smoke it produces a little
commotion and emerges on the other side, carrying with it enough of
the smoke to render itself visible, while the solid black looking ring
of air is seen in the interior. Still more striking is another way of
producing these rings, for I charge this box with ammonia, and the
rings from it you cannot see. There is a column of the vapor of
hydrochloric acid, that also you cannot see; but when the visible ring
enters the invisible column, then a sudden union takes place between
the vapor of the ammonia and the vapor of the hydrochloric acid; the
result is a solid white substance in extremely fine dust which renders
the ring instantly visible.


What the Nebulæ are made of.

There is a fundamental difference between the illumination of these
little rings that I have shown you and the great rings in the heavens.
I had to illuminate our smoke with the help of the electric light,
for, unless I had done so, you would not have been able to see them.
This white substance formed by the union of ammonia and hydrochloric
acid has, of course, no more light of its own than a piece of chalk;
it requires other light falling upon it to make it visible. Were the
ring nebula in Lyra composed of this material, we could not see it.
The sunlight which illuminates the planets might, of course, light up
such an object as the ring, if it wrere comparatively near us; but
Lyra is at such a stupendous distance that any light which the sun
could send out there would be just as feeble as the light we receive
from a fixed star. Should we be able to show our smoke-rings, for
instance, if, instead of having the electric light, I merely cut a
hole in the ceiling and allowed the feeble twinkle of a star in the
Great Bear to shine through? In a similar way the sunbeams would be
utterly powerless to effect any illumination of objects in these
stellar distances. If the sun were to be extinguished altogether, the
calamity would no doubt be a very dire one so far as we are concerned,
but the effect on the other celestial bodies (moon and planets
excepted) would be of the slightest possible description. All the
stars of heaven would continue to shine as before. Not a point in one
of the constellations wrould be altered, not a variation in the
brightness, not a change in the hue of any star could be noticed. The
thousands of nebulæ and clusters would be absolutely unaltered; in
fact, the total extinction of the sun would be hardly remarked in the
newspapers published in the Pleiades or in Orion. There might possibly
be a little line somewhere in an odd corner to the effect "Mr.
So-and-So, our well-known astronomer, has noticed that a tiny star,
inconspicuous to the eye, and absolutely of no importance whatever,
has now become invisible."

If, therefore, it be not the sun which lights up this nebula, where
else can be the source of its illumination? There can be no other star
in the neighborhood adequate to the purpose, for, of course, such an
object would be brilliant to us if it were large enough and bright
enough to impart sufficient illumination to the nebula. It would be
absurd to say that you could see a man's face by the light of a candle
while the candle itself was too faint or too distant to be visible.
The actual facts are, of course, the other way; the candle might be
visible, when it was impossible to discern the face which it lighted.

Hence we learn that the ring nebula must shine by some light of its
own, and now we have to consider how it can be possible for such
material to be self-luminous. The light of a nebula does not seem to
be like flame; it can, perhaps, be better represented by the pretty
electrical experiment with Geissler's tubes. These are glass vessels
of various shapes, and they are all very nearly empty, as you will
understand when I tell you the way in which they have been prepared. A
little gas was allowed into each tube, and then almost all the gas was
taken out again, so that only a mere trace was left. I pass a current
of electricity through these tubes, and now you see they are glowing
with beautiful colors. The different gases give out lights of
different hues, and the optician has exerted his skill so as to make
the effect as beautiful as possible. The electricity, in passing
through these tubes, heats the gas which they contain, and makes it
glow; and just as this gas can, when heated sufficiently, give out
light, so does the great nebula, which is a mass of gas poised in
space, become visible in virtue of the heat which it contains.

We are not left quite in doubt as to the constitution of these gaseous
nebulæ, for we can submit their light to the prism in the way I
explained when we were speaking of the stars. Distant though that ring
in Lyra may be, it is interesting to learn that the ingredients from
which it is made are not entirely different from substances we know on
our earth. The water in this glass, and every drop of water, is formed
by the union of two gases, of which one is hydrogen. This is an
extremely light material, as you see by a little balloon which ascends
so prettily when filled with it. Hydrogen also burns very readily,
though the flame is almost invisible. When I blow a jet of oxygen
through the hydrogen, I produce a little flame with a very intense
heat. For instance, I hold a steel pen in the flame, and it glows and
sputters, and falls down in white-hot drops. It is needless to say
that, as a constituent of water, hydrogen is one of the most important
elements on this earth. It is, therefore, of interest to learn that
hydrogen in some form or other is a constituent of the most distant
objects in space that the telescope has revealed.


Photographing the Nebulæ.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. THE PLEIADES.]

Of late years we have learned a great deal about nebulæ, by the help
which photography has given to us. Look at this group of stars which
constitutes that beautiful little configuration known as the Pleiades
(Fig. 8). It looks like a miniature representation of the Great Bear;
in fact, it would be far more appropriate to call the Pleiades the
Little Bear than to apply that title to another quite different
constellation, as has unfortunately been done. The Pleiades form a
group containing six or seven stars visible to the ordinary eye,
though persons endowed with exceptionally good vision can usually see
a few more. In an opera-glass the Pleiades becomes a beautiful
spectacle, though in a large telescope the stars appear too far apart
to make a really effective cluster. When Mr. Roberts took a photograph
of the Pleiades he placed a highly sensitive plate in his telescope,
and on that plate the Pleiades engraved their picture with their own
light. He left the plate exposed for hours, and on developing it not
only were the stars seen, but there were also patches of faint light
due to the presence of nebulæ. It could not be said that the objects
on the plate were fallacious, for another photograph was taken, when
the same appearances were reproduced.

When we look at that pretty group of stars which has attracted
admiration during all time, we are to think that some of those stars
are merely the bright points in a vast nebula, invisible to our
unaided eyes or even to our mighty telescopes, though capable of
recording its trace on the photographic plate. Does not this give us a
greatly increased notion of the extent of the universe, when we
reflect that by photography we are enabled to see much which the
mightiest of telescopes had previously failed to disclose?

Of all the nebulæ, numbering some thousands, there is but a single one
which can be seen without a telescope. It is in the constellation of
Andromeda, and on a clear dark night can just be seen with the unaided
eye as a faint stain of light on the sky. It has happened before now
that persons noticing this nebula for the first time have thought they
had discovered a comet. I would like you to try and find out this
object for yourselves.

If you look at it with an opera-glass it appears to be distinctly
elongated. You can see more of its structure when you view it in
larger instruments, but its nature was never made clear until some
beautiful photographs were taken by Mr. Roberts (Fig. 9).
Unfortunately, the nebula in Andromeda has not been placed in the best
position for its portrait from our point of view. It seems as if it
were a rather flat-shaped object, turned nearly edgewise towards us.
To look at the pattern on a plate, you would naturally hold the plate
so as to be able to look at it squarely. The pattern would not be seen
well if the plate were so tilted that its edge was turned towards you.
That seems to be nearly the way in which we are forced to view the
nebula in Andromeda. We can trace in the photograph some divisions
extending entirely round the nebula, showing that it seems to be
formed of a series of rings; and there are some outlying portions
which form part of the same system. Truly this is a marvellous object.
It is impossible for us to form any conception of the true dimensions
of this gigantic nebula; it is so far off that we have never yet been
able to determine its distance. Indeed, I may take this opportunity of
remarking that no astronomer has yet succeeded in ascertaining the
distance of any nebula. Everything, however, points to the conclusion
that they are at least as far as the stars.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. THE GREAT NEBULA IN ANDROMEDA.]

It is almost impossible to apply the methods which we use in finding
the distance of a star to the discovery of the distance of the
nebulæ. These flimsy bodies are usually too ill-defined to admit of
being measured with the precision and delicacy required for the
determination of distance. The measurements necessary for this purpose
can only be made from one star-like point to another similar point. If
we could choose a star in the nebula and determine its distance, then
of course, we have the distance of the nebula itself; but the
difficulty is that we have, in general, no means of knowing whether
the star does actually lie in the object. It may, for anything we can
tell, lie billions of miles nearer to us, or billions of miles further
off, and by merely happening to lie in the line of sight, appear to
glimmer in the nebula itself.

If we have any assurance that the star is surrounded by a mass of this
glowing vapor, then it may be possible to measure that nebula's
distance. It will occasionally happen that grounds can be found for
believing that a star which appears to be in the glowing gas does
veritably lie therein, and is not merely seen in the same direction.
There are hundreds of stars visible in a good drawing or a good
photograph of the famous object in Andromeda, and doubtless large
numbers of these are merely stars which happen to lie in the same line
of sight. The peculiar circumstances attending the history of one star
seem, however, to warrant us in making the assumption that it was
certainly in the nebula. The history of this star is a remarkable one.
It suddenly kindled from invisibility into brilliancy. How is a change
so rapid in the lustre of a star to be accounted for? In a few days
its brightness had undergone an extraordinary increase. Of course,
this does not tell us for certain that the star lay in the glowing
gas; but the most rational explanation that I have heard offered of
this occurrence is that due, I believe, to my friend Mr. Monck. He has
suggested that the sudden outbreak in brilliancy might be accounted
for on the same principles as those by which we explain the ignition
of meteors in our atmosphere. If a dark star, moving along with
terrific speed through space, were suddenly to plunge into a dense
region of the nebula, heat and light must be evolved in sufficient
abundance to transform the star into a brilliant object. If,
therefore, we knew the distance of this star at the time it was in
Andromeda, we should, of course, learn the distance of that
interesting object. This has been attempted, and it has thus been
proved that the Great Nebula must be very much further from us than is
that star of whose distance I attempted some time ago to give you a
notion.

We thus realize the enormous size of the Great Nebula. It appears that
if, on a map of this object, we were to lay down, accurately to scale,
a map of the solar system, putting the sun in the centre and all the
planets around their true proportions out to the boundary traced by
Neptune, this area, vast though it is, would be a mere speck on the
drawing of the object. Our system would have to be enormously bigger
before it sufficed to cover anything like the area of the sky included
in one of these great objects. Here is a sketch of a nebula, Fig. 10,
and near I have marked a dot, which is to indicate our solar system.
We may feel confident that the Great Nebula is at the very least as
mighty as this proportion would indicate.

[Illustration: FIG. 10. THE SOLAR SYSTEM AS COMPARED WITH A GREAT
NEBULA.]


RAIN AND SNOW

(FROM THE FORMS OF WATER.)

BY JOHN TYNDALL.


Oceanic Distillation.

[Illustration: SNOW CRYSTALS.]

At the equator, and within certain limits north and south of it, the
sun at certain periods of the year is directly overhead at noon. These
limits are called the Tropics of Cancer and of Capricorn. Upon the
belt comprised between these two circles the sun's rays fall with
their mightiest power; for here they shoot directly downwards, and
heat both earth and sea more than when they strike slantingly.

When the vertical sunbeams strike the land they heat it, and the air
in contact with the hot soil becomes heated in turn. But when heated
the air expands, and when it expands it becomes lighter. This lighter
air rises, like wood plunged into water, through the heavier air
overhead.

When the sunbeams fall upon the sea the water is warmed, though not so
much as the land. The warmed water expands, becomes thereby lighter,
and therefore continues to float upon the top. This upper layer of
water warms to some extent the air in contact with it, but it also
sends up a quantity of aqueous vapor, which being far lighter than
air, helps the latter to rise. Thus both from the land and from the
sea we have ascending currents established by the action of the sun.

When they reach a certain elevation in the atmosphere, these currents
divide and flow, part towards the north and part towards the south;
while from the north and the south a flow of heavier and colder air
sets in to supply the place of the ascending warm air.

Incessant circulation is thus established in the atmosphere. The
equatorial air and vapor flow above towards the north and south poles,
while the polar air flows below towards the equator. The two currents
of air thus established are called the upper and the lower trade
winds.

But before the air returns from the poles great changes have occurred.
For the air as it quitted the equatorial regions was laden with
aqueous vapor, which could not subsist in the cold polar regions. It
is there precipitated, falling sometimes as rain, or more commonly as
snow. The land near the pole is covered with this snow, which gives
birth to vast glaciers.

It is necessary that you should have a perfectly clear view of this
process, for great mistakes have been made regarding the manner in
which glaciers are related to the heat of the sun.

It was supposed that if the sun's heat were diminished, greater
glaciers than those now existing would be produced. But the lessening
of the sun's heat would infallibly diminish the quantity of aqueous
vapor, and thus cut off the glaciers at their source. A brief
illustration will complete your knowledge here.

In the process of ordinary distillation, the liquid to be distilled is
heated and converted into vapor in one vessel, and chilled and
reconverted into liquid in another. What has just been stated renders
it plain that the earth and its atmosphere constitute a vast
distilling apparatus in which the equatorial ocean plays the part of
the boiler, and the chill regions of the poles the part of the
condenser. In this process of distillation _heat_ plays quite as
necessary a part as _cold_, and before Bishop Heber could speak of
"Greenland's icy mountains," the equatorial ocean had to be warmed by
the sun. We shall have more to say upon this question afterwards.

The heating of the tropical air by the sun is _indirect_. The solar
beams have scarcely any power to heat the air through which they pass;
but they heat the land and ocean, and these communicate their heat to
the air in contact with them. The air and vapor start upwards charged
with the heat thus communicated.


Tropical Rains.

But long before the air and vapor from the equator reach the poles,
precipitation occurs. Wherever a humid warm wind mixes with a cold dry
one, rain falls. Indeed the heaviest rains occur at those places where
the sun is vertically overhead. We must enquire a little more closely
into their origin.

Fill a bladder about two-thirds full of air at the sea level, and take
it to the summit of Mount Blanc. As you ascend, the bladder becomes
more and more distended; at the top of the mountain it is fully
distended, and has evidently to bear a pressure from within. Returning
to the sea level you find that the tightness disappears, the bladder
finally appearing as flaccid as at first.

The reason is plain. At the sea level the air within the bladder has
to bear the pressure of the whole atmosphere, being thereby squeezed
into a comparatively small volume. In ascending the mountain, you
leave more and more of the atmosphere behind; the pressure becomes
less and less, and by its expansive force the air within the bladder
swells as the outside pressure is diminished. At the top of the
mountain the expansion is quite sufficient to render the bladder
tight, the pressure within being then actually greater than the
pressure without. By means of an air-pump we can show the expansion of
a balloon partly filled with air, when the external pressure has been
in part removed.

But why do I dwell upon this? Simply to make plain to you that the
_unconfined air_, heated at the earth's surface, and ascending by its
lightness, must expand more and more the higher it rises in the
atmosphere.

And now I have to introduce to you a new fact, towards the statement
of which I have been working for some time. It is this: _The ascending
air is chilled by its expansion_. Indeed this chilling is one source
of the coldness of the higher atmospheric regions. And now fix your
eye upon those mixed currents of air and aqueous vapor which rise from
the warm tropical ocean. They start with plenty of heat to preserve
the vapor as vapor; but as they rise they come into regions already
chilled, and they are still further chilled by their own expansion.
The consequence might be foreseen. The load of vapor is in great part
precipitated, dense clouds are formed, their particles coalesce to
rain-drops, which descend daily in gushes so profuse that the word
"torrential" is used to express the copiousness of the rainfall. I
could show you this chilling by expansion, and also the consequent
precipitation of clouds.

Thus long before the air from the equator reaches the poles its vapor
is in great part removed from it, having redescended to the earth as
rain. Still a good quantity of the vapor is carried forward, which
yields hail, rain, and snow in northern and southern lands.


Mountain Condensers.

To complete our view of the process of atmospheric precipitation we
must take into account the action of mountains. Imagine a south-west
wind blowing across the Atlantic towards Ireland. In its passage it
charges itself with aqueous vapor. In the south of Ireland it
encounters the mountains of Kerry: the highest of these is
Magillicuddy's Reeks, near Killarney. Now the lowest stratum of this
Atlantic wind is that which is most fully charged with vapor. When it
encounters the base of the Kerry Mountains it is tilted up and flows
bodily over them. Its load of vapor is therefore carried to a height,
it expands on reaching the height, it is chilled in consequence of
the expansion, and comes down in copious showers of rain. From this,
in fact, arises the luxuriant vegetation of Killarney; to this,
indeed, the lakes owe their water supply. The cold crests of the
mountains also aid in the work of condensation.

Note the consequence. There is a town called Cahirciveen to the
south-west of Magillicuddy's Reeks, at which observations of the
rainfall have been made, and a good distance farther to the
north-east, right in the course of the south-west wind there is
another town, called Portarlington, at which observations of rainfall
have also been made. But before the wind reaches the latter station it
has passed over the mountains of Kerry and left a great portion of its
moisture behind it. What is the result? At Cahirciveen, as shown by
Dr. Lloyd, the rainfall amounts to fifty-nine inches in a year, while
at Portarlington it is only twenty-one inches.

Again, you may sometimes descend from the Alps when the fall of rain
and snow is heavy and incessant, into Italy, and find the sky over the
plains of Lombardy blue and cloudless, the wind at the same time
_blowing over the plain towards the Alps_. Below the wind is hot
enough to keep its vapor in a perfectly transparent state; but it
meets the mountains, is tilted up, expanded, and chilled. The cold of
the higher summits also helps the chill. The consequence is that the
vapor is precipitated as rain or snow, thus producing bad weather upon
the heights, while the plains below, flooded with the same air, enjoy
the aspect of the unclouded summer sun. Clouds blowing _from_ the
Alps are also sometimes dissolved over the plains of Lombardy.

In connection with the formation of clouds by mountains, one
particularly instructive effect may be here noticed. You frequently
see a streamer of cloud many hundred yards in length drawn out from an
Alpine peak. Its steadiness appears perfect, though a strong wind may
be blowing at the same time over the mountain head. Why is the cloud
not blown away? It _is_ blown away; its permanence is only apparent.
At one end it is incessantly dissolved; at the other end it is
incessantly renewed: supply and consumption being thus equalized, the
cloud appears as changeless as the mountain to which it seems to
cling. When the red sun of the evening shines upon these
cloud-streamers they resemble vast torches with their flames blown
through the air.

Architecture of Snow.

We now resemble persons who have climbed a difficult peak, and thereby
earned the enjoyment of a wide prospect. Having made ourselves masters
of the conditions necessary to the production of mountain snow, we are
able to take a comprehensive and intelligent view of the phenomena of
glaciers.

[Illustration: SNOW CRYSTALS.]

A few words are still necessary as to the formation of snow. The
molecules and atoms of all substances, when allowed free play, build
themselves into definite and, for the most part, beautiful forms
called crystals. Iron, copper, gold, silver, lead, sulphur, when
melted and permitted to cool gradually, all show this crystallizing
power. The metal bismuth shows it in a particularly striking manner,
and when properly fused and solidified, self-built crystals of great
size and beauty are formed of this metal.

[Illustration: SNOW-STAR.]

[Illustration: SNOW-STAR.]

If you dissolve salt-petre in water, and allow the solution to
evaporate slowly, you may obtain large crystals, for no portion of the
salt is converted into vapor. The water of our atmosphere is fresh
though it is derived from the salt sea. Sugar dissolved in water, and
permitted to evaporate, yields crystals of sugar-candy. Alum readily
crystallizes in the same way. Flints dissolved, as they sometimes are
in nature, and permitted to crystallize, yield the prisms and pyramids
of rock crystal. Chalk dissolved and crystallized yields Iceland spar.
The diamond is crystallized carbon. All our precious stones, the
ruby, sapphire, beryl, topaz, emerald, are all examples of this
crystallizing power.

[Illustration: SNOW-STAR.]

You have heard of the force of gravitation, and you know that it
consists of an attraction of every particle of matter for every other
particle. You know that planets and moons are held in their orbits by
this attraction. But gravitation is a very simple affair compared to
the force, or rather forces, of crystallization. For here the ultimate
particles of matter, inconceivably small as they are, show themselves
possessed of attractive and repellent poles, by the mutual action of
which the shape and structure of the crystal are determined. In the
solid condition the attracting poles are rigidly locked together; but
if sufficient heat be applied the bond of union is dissolved, and in
the state of fusion the poles are pushed so far asunder as to be
practically out of each other's range. The natural tendency of the
molecules to build themselves together is thus neutralized.

This is the case with water, which as a liquid is to all appearance
formless. When sufficiently cooled the molecules are brought within
the play of the crystallizing force, and they then arrange themselves
in forms of indescribable beauty. When snow is produced in calm air,
the icy particles build themselves into beautiful stellar shapes, each
star possessing six rays. There is no deviation from this type, though
in other respects the appearances of the snow-stars are infinitely
various. In the polar regions these exquisite forms were observed by
Dr. Scoresby, who gave numerous drawings of them. I have observed them
in mid-winter filling the air, and loading the slopes of the Alps. But
in England they are also to be seen, and no words of mine could convey
so vivid an impression of their beauty as the annexed drawings of a
few of them, executed at Greenwich by Mr. Glaisher.

[Illustration: SNOW-STAR.]

It is worth pausing to think what wonderful work is going on in the
atmosphere during the formation and descent of every snow-shower; what
building power is brought into play! and how imperfect seem the
productions of human minds and hands when compared with those formed
by the blind forces of nature!

But who ventures to call the forces of nature blind? In reality, when
we speak thus we are describing our own condition. The blindness is
ours; and what we really ought to say, and to confess, is that our
powers are absolutely unable to comprehend either the origin or the
end of the operations of nature.

But while we thus acknowledge our limits, there is also reason for
wonder at the extent to which science has mastered the system of
nature. From age to age, and from generation to generation, fact has
been added to fact, and law to law, the true method and order of the
Universe being thereby more and more revealed. In doing this science
has encountered and overthrown various forms of superstition and
deceit, of credulity and imposture. But the world continually produces
weak persons and wicked persons; and as long as they continue to exist
side by side, as they do in this our day, very debasing beliefs will
also continue to infest the world.


Atomic Poles.

"What did I mean when, a few moments ago I spoke of attracting and
repellent poles?" Let me try to answer this question. You know that
astronomers and geographers speak of the earth's poles, and you have
also heard of magnetic poles, the poles of a magnet being the points
at which the attraction and repulsion of the magnet are as it were
concentrated.

Every magnet possesses two such poles; and if iron filings be
scattered over a magnet, each particle becomes also endowed with two
poles. Suppose such particles devoid of weight and floating in our
atmosphere, what must occur when they come near each other? Manifestly
the repellent poles will retreat from each other, while the attractive
poles will approach and finally lock themselves together. And
supposing the particles, instead of a single pair, to possess several
pairs of poles arranged at definite points over their surfaces; you
can then picture them, in obedience to their mutual attractions and
repulsions, building themselves together to form masses of definite
shape and structure.

Imagine the molecules of water in calm cold air to be gifted with
poles of this description, which compel the particles to lay
themselves together in a definite order, and you have before your
mind's eye the unseen architecture which finally produces the visible
and beautiful crystals of the snow. Thus our first notions and
conceptions of poles are obtained from the sight of our eyes in
looking at the effects of magnetism; and we then transfer these
notions and conceptions to particles which no eye has ever seen. The
power by which we thus picture to ourselves effects beyond the range
of the senses is what philosophers call the Imagination, and in the
effort of the mind to seize upon the unseen architecture of crystals,
we have an example of the "scientific use" of this faculty. Without
imagination we might have _critical_ power, but not _creative_ power
in science.


Architecture of Lake Ice.

We have thus made ourselves acquainted with the beautiful snow-flowers
self-constructed by the molecules of water in calm, cold air. Do the
molecules show this architectural power when ordinary water is frozen?
What, for example, is the structure of the ice over which we skate in
winter? Quite as wonderful as the flowers of the snow. The observation
is rare, if not new, but I have seen in water slowly freezing
six-rayed ice-stars formed, and floating free on the surface. A
six-rayed star, moreover, is typical of the construction of all our
lake ice. It is built up of such forms wonderfully interlaced.

Take a slab of lake ice and place it in the path of a concentrated
sunbeam. Watch the track of the beam through the ice. Part of the beam
is stopped, part of it goes through; the former produces internal
liquefaction, the latter has no effect whatever upon the ice. But the
liquefaction is not uniformly diffused. From separate spots of the ice
little shining points are seen to sparkle forth. Every one of those
points is surrounded by a beautiful liquid flower with six petals.

Ice and water are so optically alike that unless the light fall
properly upon these flowers you cannot see them. But what is the
central spot? A vacuum. Ice swims on water because, bulk for bulk, it
is lighter than water; so that when ice is melted it shrinks in size.
Can the liquid flowers then occupy the whole space of the ice melted?
Plainly no. A little empty space is formed with the flowers, and this
space, or rather its surface, shines in the sun with the lustre of
burnished silver.

In all cases the flowers are formed parallel to the surface of
freezing. They are formed when the sun shines upon the ice of every
lake; sometimes in myriads, and so small as to require a magnifying
glass to see them. They are always attainable, but their beauty is
often marred by internal defects of the ice. Every one portion of the
same piece of ice may show them exquisitely, while a second portion
shows them imperfectly.

Annexed is a very imperfect sketch of these beautiful figures.

Here we have a reversal of the process of crystallization. The
searching solar beam is delicate enough to take the molecules down
without deranging the order of their architecture. Try the experiment
for yourself with a pocket-lens on a sunny day. You will not find the
flowers confused; they all lie parallel to the surface of freezing. In
this exquisite way every bit of the ice over which our skaters glide
in winter is put together.

I said that a portion of the sunbeam was stopped by the ice and
liquefied it. What is this portion? The dark heat of the sun. The
great body of the light waves and even a portion of the dark ones,
pass through the ice without losing any of their heating power. When
properly concentrated on combustible bodies, even after having passed
through the ice, their burning power becomes manifest.

[Illustration: LIQUID FLOWERS IN LAKE ICE.]

And the ice itself may be employed to concentrate them. With an
ice-lens in the polar regions Dr. Scoresby has often concentrated the
sun's rays so as to make them burn wood, fire gunpowder, and melt
lead; thus proving that the heating power is retained by the rays,
even after they have passed through so cold a substance.

By rendering the rays of the electric lamp parallel, and then sending
them through a lens of ice, we obtain all the effects which Dr.
Scoresby obtained with the rays of the sun.

[Illustration]


THE ORGANIC WORLD

(FROM THE ELEMENTS OF SCIENCE.)

BY ST. GEORGE MIVART F.R.S.


The number of all the various kinds of living creatures is so enormous
that it would be impossible to study them profitably, were they not
classified in an orderly manner. Therefore the whole mass has been
divided, in the first place, into two supreme groups, fancifully
termed kingdoms--the "animal kingdom" and the "vegetal kingdom." Each
of these is subdivided into an orderly series of subordinate groups,
successively contained one a within the other, and named sub-kingdoms,
classes, orders, families, genera and species. The lowest group but
one is the "genus," which contains one or more different kinds termed
"species," as e.g., the species "wood anemone" and the species "blue
titmouse." The lowest group of all--a species--may be said to consist
of individuals which differ from each other only by trifling
characters, such as characters due to difference of sex, while their
peculiar organization is faithfully reproduced by generation as a
whole, though small individual differences exist in all cases.

The vegetal, or vegetable, kingdom, consists of the great mass of
flowering plants, many of which, however, have such inconspicuous
flowers that they are mistakenly regarded as flowerless, as is often
the case with the grasses, the pines, and the yews. Another mass, or
sub-kingdom, of plants consists of the really flowerless plants, such
as the ferns, horsetails (Fig. 1), lycopods, and mosses. Sea and
fresh-water weeds (_algæ_), and mushrooms, or "moulds," of all kinds
(_fungi_), amongst which are the now famous "bacteria," constitute a
third and lowest set of plants.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. HORSE-TAIL (_Equisetum drummondii_).]

The animal kingdom consists, first, of a sub-kingdom of animals which
possess a spinal column, or backbone, and which are known as
vertebrate animals. Such are all beasts, birds, reptiles, and fishes.
There are also a variety of remotely allied marine organisms known as
tunicates, sea-squirts, or ascidians (Fig. 2). There is, further, an
immense group of arthropods, consisting of all insects, crab-like
creatures, hundred-legs and their allies, with spiders, scorpions,
tics and mites. We have also the sub-kingdom of shell-fish or
molluscs, including cuttle-fishes, snails, whelks, limpets, the
oyster, and a multitude of allied forms. A multitudinous sub-kingdom of
worms also exists, as well as another of star-fishes and their
congeners. There is yet another of zoophytes, or polyps, and another
of sponges, and, finally, we have a sub-kingdom of minute creatures,
or animalculæ, of very varied forms, which may make up the sub-kingdom
of _Protozoa_, consisting of animals which are mostly unicellular.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. A TUNICATE (_Ascidia_).]

Multitudinous and varied as are the creatures which compose this
immense organic world, they nevertheless exhibit a very remarkable
uniformity of composition in their essential structure. Every living
creature from a man to a mushroom, or even to the smallest animalcule
or unicellular plant is always partly fluid, but never entirely so.
Every living creature also consists in part (and that part is the most
active living part) of a soft, viscid, transparent, colorless
substance, termed protoplasm, which can be resolved into the four
elements, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon. Besides these four
elements, living organisms commonly contain sulphur, phosphorus,
chlorine, potassium, sodium, calcium, magnesium and iron.

In the fact that living creatures always consist of the four elements,
oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon, we have a fundamental character
whereby the organic and inorganic (or non-living) worlds are to be
distinguished, for as we have seen, inorganic bodies, instead of being
thus uniformly constituted, may consist of the most diverse elements
and sometimes of but two or even of only one.

Again, many minerals, such as crystals, are bounded by plain surfaces,
and, with very few exceptions (spathic and hematite iron and dolomite
are such exceptions) none are bounded by curved lines and surfaces,
while living organisms are bounded by such lines and surfaces.

Yet, again, if a crystal be cut through, its internal structure will
be seen to be similar throughout. But if the body of any living
creature be divided, it will, at the very least, be seen to consist of
a variety of minute distinct particles, called "granules," variously
distributed throughout its interior.

All organisms consist either--as do the simplest, mostly microscopic,
plants and animals--of a single minute mass of protoplasm, or of a
few, or of many, or of an enormous aggregation of such before-mentioned
particles, each of which is one of those bodies named a "cell" (Fig.
3). Cells may, or may not, be enclosed in an investing coat or
"cell-wall." Every cell generally contains within it a denser,
normally spheroidal, body known as the nucleus.

Now protoplasm is a very unstable substance--as we have seen many
substances are whereof nitrogen is a component part--and it possesses
active properties which are not present in the non-living, or
inorganic world. In the latter, differences of temperature will
produce motion in the shape of "currents," as we have seen with
respect to masses of air and water. But in a portion of protoplasm,
an internal circulation of currents in definite lines will establish
itself from other causes.

Inorganic bodies, as we have seen, will expand with heat, as they may
also do from imbibing moisture; but living protoplasm has an
apparently spontaneous power of contraction and expansion under
certain external conditions which do not occasion such movements in
inorganic matter.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. CELL FROM A SALAMANDER. _n_, nucleus; _n'_,
nucleolus embedded in the network of chromatin threads; _k_, network
of the cell external to the nucleus; _a_, attraction-sphere or
archoplasm containing minute bodies called centrosomes; _cl_, membrane
enclosing the cell externally, _nl_, membrane surrounding the nucleus;
_c_, centrosomes.]

Under favoring conditions, protoplasm has a power of performing
chemical changes, which result in producing heat far more gently and
continuously than it is produced by the combustion of inorganic
bodies. Thus it is that the heat is produced which makes its presence
evident to us in what we call "warm-blooded animals," the most
warm-blooded of all being birds.

Protoplasm has also the wonderful power of transforming certain
adjacent substances into material like itself--into its own
substance--and so, in a sense, creating a new material. Thus it is
that organisms have the power to nourish themselves and grow. An
animal would vainly swallow the most nourishing food if the ultimate,
protoplasmic particles of its body had not this power of
"transforming" suitable substances brought near them in ways to be
hereinafter noticed.

Without that, no organism could ever "grow." The growth of organisms
is utterly different from the increase in size of inorganic bodies.
Crystals, as we have seen, grow merely by external increment; but
organisms grow by an increment which takes place in the very innermost
substance of the tissues which compose their bodies, and the innermost
substance of the cells which compose such tissues; this peculiar form
of growth is termed _intussusception_.

Protoplasm, after thus augmenting its mass, has a further power of
spontaneous division, whereby the mass of the entire organism whereof
such protoplasm forms a part, is augmented and so growth is brought
about.

The small particles of protoplasm which constitute "cells" are far
indeed from being structureless. Besides the nucleus already mentioned
there is a delicate network of threads of a substance called
_chromatin_ within it, and another network permeating the fluid of the
cell substance, which invest the nucleus often with further
complications. These networks generally perform (or undergo) a most
complex series of changes every time a cell spontaneously divides. In
certain cases, however, it appears that the nucleus divides into two
in a more simple fashion, the rest of the cell contents subsequently
dividing--each half enclosing one part of the previously divided
nucleus. It is by a continued process of cell division that the
complex structures of the most complex organisms is brought about.

The division of a cell, or particle of protoplasm, is indeed a
necessary consequence of its complete nutrition.

For new material can only be absorbed by its surface. But as the cell
grows, the proportion borne by its surface to its mass, continually
decreases; therefore this surface must soon be too small to take in
nourishment enough, and the particle, or cell, must therefore either
die or divide. By dividing, its parts can continue the nutritive
process till their surface, in turn, becomes insufficient, when they
must divide again, and so on. Thus the term "feeding" has two senses.
"To feed a horse," ordinarily means to give it a certain quantity of
hay, oats or what not; and such indeed is one kind of feeding. But
obviously, if the nourishment so taken could not get from the stomach
and intestines into the ultimate particles and cells of the horse's
body, the horse could not be nourished, and still less could it grow.
It is this latter process, called assimilation, which is the real and
essential process of feeding, to which the process ordinarily so
called is but introductory.

Protoplasm has also the power of forming and ejecting from its own
substance, other substances which it has made, but which are of a
different nature to its own. This function, as before said, is termed
secretion; and we know the liver secretes bile, and that the cow's
udder secretes milk.

Here again we have an external and an internal process. The milk is
drawn forth from a receptacle, the udder, into which it finds its way,
and so, in a superficial sense, it may be called an organ of
secretion. Nevertheless the true internal secretion takes place in
the innermost substance of the cells or particles of protoplasm, of
the milk-land, which particles really form that liquid.

But every living creature consists at first entirely of a particle of
protoplasm. Therefore every other kind of substance which may be found
in every kind of plant or animal, must have been formed through it,
and be, in fact, a secretion from protoplasm. Such is the rosy cheek
of an apple, or of a maiden, the luscious juice of the peach, the
produce of the castor-oil plant, the baleen that lines the whale's
enormous jaws, as well as that softest product, the fur of the
chinchilla. Indeed, every particle of protoplasm requires, in order
that it may live, a continuous process of exchange. It needs to be
continuously first built up by food, and then broken down by
discharging what is no longer needful for its healthy existence. Thus
the life of every organism is a life of almost incessant change, not
only in its being as a whole, but in that of all its protoplasmic
particles also.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. AMOEBA SHOWN IN TWO OF THE MANY IRREGULAR
SHAPES IT ASSUMES. _(After Howes_.)

The clear space within it is a contractile vesicle. The dark body is
the nucleus. In the right-hand figure there is shown a particle of
food, passing through the external surface.]


Prominent among such processes is that of an interchange of gases
between the living being and its environment. This process consists in
an absorption of oxygen and a giving-out of carbonic acid, which
exchange is termed respiration.

Lastly, protoplasm has a power of motion when appropriately acted on.
It will then contract or expand its shape by alternate protrusions and
retractions of parts of its substance. These movements are termed
amoebiform, because they quite resemble the movements of a small
animalcule which is named amoeba. (See Fig. 4.)

Such is the ultimate structure, and such are the fundamental
activities or functions of living organisms, as far as they can here
be described, from the lowest animalcule and unicellular plant, up to
the most complex organisms and the body of man himself.

[Illustration]


INHABITANTS OF MY POOL

(FROM MAGIC GLASSES.)

BY ARABELLA B. BUCKLEY.


The pool lies in a deep hollow among a group of rocks and boulders,
close to the entrance of the cove, which can only be entered at low
water; it does not measure more than two feet across, so that you can
step over it, if you take care not to slip on the masses of green and
brown seaweed growing over the rocks on its sides, as I have done many
a time when collecting specimens for our salt-water aquarium. I find
now the only way is to lie flat down on the rock, so that my hands and
eyes are free to observe and handle, and then, bringing my eye down to
the edge of the pool, to lift the seaweeds and let the sunlight enter
into the chinks and crannies. In this way I can catch sight of many a
small being either on the seaweed or the rocky ledges, and even
creatures transparent as glass become visible by the thin outline
gleaming in the sunlight. Then I pluck a piece of seaweed, or chip off
a fragment of rock with a sharp-edged collecting knife, bringing away
the specimen uninjured upon it, and place it carefully in its own
separate bottle to be carried home alive and well.

Now though this little pool and I are old friends, I find new
treasures in it almost every time I go, for it is almost as full of
living things as the heavens are of stars, and the tide as it comes
and goes brings many a mother there to find a safe home for her little
ones, and many a waif and stray to seek shelter from the troublous
life of the open ocean.

You will perhaps find it difficult to believe that in this rock-bound
basin there can be millions of living creatures hidden away among the
fine feathery weeds; yet so it is. Not that they are always the same.
At one time it may be the home of myriads of infant crabs, not an
eighth of an inch long, another of baby sea-urchins only visible to
the naked eye as minute spots in the water, at another of young
jelly-fish growing on their tiny stalks, and splitting off one by one
as transparent bells to float away with the rising tide. Or it may be
that the whelk has chosen this quiet nook to deposit her leathery
eggs; or young barnacles, periwinkles, and limpets are growing up
among the green and brown tangles, while the far-sailing velella and
the stay-at-home sea-squirts, together with a variety of other
sea-animals, find a nursery and shelter in their youth in this quiet
harbor of rest.

And besides these casual visitors there are numberless creatures which
have lived and multiplied there, ever since I first visited the pool.
Tender red, olive-colored, and green seaweeds, stony corallines, and
acorn-barnacles lining the floor, sea-anemones clinging to the sides,
sponges tiny and many-colored hiding under the ledges, and limpets and
mussels wedged in the cracks. These can be easily seen with the naked
eye, but they are not the most numerous inhabitants; for these we
must search with a magnifying glass, which will reveal to us wonderful
fairy-forms, delicate crystal vases with tiny creatures in them whose
transparent lashes make whirlpools in the water, living crystal bells
so tiny that whole branches of them look only like a fringe of hair,
jelly globes rising and falling in the water, patches of living jelly
clinging to the rocky sides of the pool, and a hundred other forms,
some so minute that you must examine the fine sand in which they lie
under a powerful microscope before you can even guess that they are
there.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. GROUP OF SEAWEEDS.

(Natural size.)

1, _Ulva Linza._ 2, _Sphacelaria filicina._ 3, _Polysiphonia
urceolata._ 4, _Corallina officinalis._]

So it has proved a rich hunting-ground, where summer and winter,
spring and autumn, I find some form to put under my magic glass. There
I can watch it for weeks growing and multiplying under my care; moved
only from the aquarium, where I keep it supplied with healthy
sea-water, to the tiny transparent trough in which I place it for a
few hours to see the changes it has undergone. I could tell you
endless tales of transformations in these tiny lives, but I want
to-day to show you a few of my friends, most of which I brought
yesterday fresh from the pool, and have prepared for you to examine.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. _Ulva lactuca_, A GREEN-SEAWEED, GREATLY
MAGNIFIED TO SHOW STRUCTURE. (_After Orested)._

s, Spores in the cells, _ss_, Spores swimming out. _h_, Holes through
which spores have escaped.]

Let us begin with seaweeds. I have said that there are three leading
colors in my pool--green, olive, and red--and these tints mark roughly
three kinds of weed, though they occur in an endless variety of
shapes. Here is a piece of the beautiful pale green seaweed, called
the Laver or Sea-Lettuce, _Ulva Linza_ (1, Fig. 1),[1] which grows in
long ribbons in a sunny nook in the water. I have placed under the
first microscope a piece of this weed which is just sending out young
seaweeds in the shape of tiny cells, with lashes very like those we
saw coming from the moss-flower, and I have pressed them in the
position in which they would naturally leave the plant. You will also
see on this side several cells in which these tiny spores are forming,
ready to burst out and swim; for this green weed is merely a
collection of cells, like the single-celled plants on land. Each cell
can work as a separate plant; it feeds, grows, and can send out its
own young spores.

[Footnote 1: The slice given in Fig. 2 is from a broader-leaved form,
_U. lactuca_, because this species, being composed of only one layer
of cells, is better seen. _Ulva Linza_ is composed of two layers of
cells.]

This deep olive-green feathery weed (2, Fig. 1), of which a piece is
magnified under the next microscope (2, Fig. 3), is very different. It
is a higher plant, and works harder for its living, using the darker
rays of sunlight which penetrate into shady parts of the pool. So it
comes to pass that its cells divide the work. Those of the feathery
threads make the food, while others, growing on short stalks on the
shafts of the feather, make and send out the young spores.

Lastly, the lovely red threadlike weeds, such as this _Polysiphonia
urceolata_ (3, Fig. 1), carry actual urns on their stems like those of
mosses. In fact, the history of these urns (see 3, Fig. 3), is much
the same in the two classes of plants, only that instead of the urn
being pushed up on a thin stalk as in the moss, it remains on the
seaweed close down to the stem, when it grows out of the plant-egg,
and the tiny plant is shut in till the spores are ready to swim out.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. THREE SEAWEEDS OF FIG. 1 MUCH MAGNIFIED TO SHOW
FRUITS. (_Harvey._)

2, _Sphacelaria filicina._ 3, _Polysiphonia urceolata._ 4, _Corallina
officinalis._]

The stony corallines (4, Figs. 1 and 3), which build so much carbonate
of lime into their stems, are near relations of the red seaweeds.
There are plenty of them in my pool. Some of them, of a deep purple
color, grow upright in stiff groups about three or four inches high;
and others, which form crusts over the stones and weeds, are a pale
rose color; but both kinds, when the plant dies, leaving the stony
skeleton (1, Fig. 4), are a pure white, and used to be mistaken for
corals. They belong to the same order of plants as the red weeds,
which all live in shady nooks in the pools, and are the highest of
their race.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. CORALLINE AND SERTULARIA, TO SHOW LIKENESS
BETWEEN THE ANIMAL SERTULARIA AND THE PLANT CORALLINE.

1, _Corallina officinalis._ 2, _Sertularia filicula._]

My pool is full of different forms of these four weeds. The green
ribbons float on the surface rooted to the sides of the pool, and, as
the sun shines upon it, the glittering bubbles rising from them show
that they are working up food out of the air in the water, and giving
off oxygen. The brown weeds lie chiefly under the shelves of rocks,
for they can manage with less sunlight, and use the darker rays which
pass by the green weeds; and last of all, the red weeds and
corallines, small and delicate in form, line the bottom of the pool in
its darkest nooks.

And now if I hand round two specimens,--one a coralline, and the other
something you do not yet know,--I am sure you will say at first sight
that they belong to the same family, and, in fact, if you buy at the
seaside a group of seaweeds gummed on paper, you will most likely get
both these among them. Yet the truth is; that while the coralline (1,
Fig. 4) is a plant, the other specimen (2), which is called
_Sertularia filicula_, is an animal.

This special sertularian grows up right in my pool on stones or often
on seaweeds, but I have here (Fig. 5) another and much smaller one
which lives literally in millions hanging its cups downwards. I find
it not only under the narrow ledges of the pool sheltered by the
seaweed, but forming a fringe along all the rocks on each side of the
cove near to low-water mark, and for a long time I passed it by
thinking it was of no interest. But I have long since given up
thinking this of anything, especially in my pool, for my magic glass
has taught me that there is not even a living speck which does not
open out into something marvellous and beautiful. So I chipped off a
small piece of rock and brought the fringe home, and found, when I
hung it up in clear sea-water as I have done over this glass trough
(Fig. 5) and looked at it through the lens, that each thread of the
dense fringe, in itself not a quarter of an inch deep, turns out to be
a tiny sertularian with at least twenty mouths. You can see this with
your pocket lens even as it hangs here, and when you have examined it
you can by and by take off one thread and put it carefully in the
trough. I promise you a sight of the most beautiful little beings
which exist in nature.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. _Sertularia tenella_, HANGING FROM A SPLINT OF
ROCK OVER A WATER TROUGH. ALSO PIECE ENLARGED TO SHOW THE ANIMAL
PROTRUDING.]

Come and look at it. It is a horny-branched stem with a double row of
tiny cups all along each side. Out of these cups there appear a row of
tiny cups all along each side (see Fig. 5), Out of these cups there
appear from time to time sixteen minute transparent tentacles as fine
as spun glass, which wave about in the water. If you shake the glass a
little, in an instant each crystal star vanishes into its cup, to come
out again a few minutes later; so that now here, now there, the
delicate animal-flowers spread out on each side of the stem, and the
tree is covered with moving beings. These tentacles are feelers, which
lash food into a mouth and stomach in each cup, where it is digested
and passed, through a hole in the bottom, along a jelly thread which
runs down the stem and joins all the mouths together. In this way the
food is distributed all over the tree, which is, in fact, one animal
with many feeding-cups. Some day I will show you one of these cups
with the tentacles stretched out and mounted on a slide, so that you
can examine a tentacle with a very strong magnifying power. You will
then see that it is dotted over with cells, in which are coiled fine
threads. The animal uses these threads to paralyze the creatures on
which it feeds, for at the base of each thread there is a poison
gland.

In the larger Sertularia the whole branched tree is connected by jelly
threads, running through the stem, and all the thousands of mouths are
spread out in the water. One large form called _Sertularia cupressina_
grows sometimes three feet high and bears as many as a hundred
thousand cups, with living mouths, on its branches.

The next of my minute friends I can only show to the class in a
diagram, but you will see it under the fourth microscope by and by. I
had great trouble in finding it yesterday, though I know its haunts
upon the green weed, for it is so minute and transparent that even
when the weed is in a trough a magnifying-glass will scarcely detect
it. And I must warn you that if you want to know any of the minute
creatures we are studying, you must visit one place constantly. You
may in a casual way find many of them on seaweed, or in the damp ooze
and mud, but it will be by chance only; to look for them with any
certainty you must take trouble in making their acquaintance.

[Illustration: FIG. 6. _Thuricolla folliculata_ and _Chilomonas
amygdalum_. (_Saville Kent_.)

1, _Thuricolla_ erect. 2, Retracted. 3, Dividing. 4, _Chilomonas
amygdalum. hc,_ Horny carapace, _cv_, Contractile vesicle. _v_ Closing
valves.]

Turning then to the diagram (Fig. 6) I will describe it as I hope you
will see it under the microscope--a curious, tiny, perfectly
transparent open-mouthed vase standing upright on the weed, and having
an equally transparent being rising up in it and waving its tiny
lashes in the water. This is really all one animal, the vase _hc_
being the horny covering or carapace of the body, which last stands up
like a tube in the centre. If you watch carefully, you may even see
the minute atoms of food twisting round inside the tube until they are
digested, after they have been swept in at the wide open mouth by the
whirling lashes. You will see this more clearly if you put a little
rice-flour, very minutely powdered and colored by carmine, into the
water; for you can trace these red atoms into some round spaces called
_vacuoles_ which are dotted over the body of the animal, and are
really globules of watery fluid in which the food is probably partly
digested.

You will notice, however, one round clear space _(cv)_ into which they
do not go, and after a time you will be able to observe that this
round spot closes up or contracts very quickly, and then expands again
very slowly. As it expands it fills with a clear fluid, and
naturalists have not yet decided exactly what work it does. It may
serve the animal either for breathing, or as a very simple heart,
making the fluids circulate in the tube. The next interesting point
about this little being is the way it retreats into its sheltering
vase. Even while you are watching, it is quite likely it may all at
once draw itself down to the bottom as in No. 2, and folding down the
valves _w_ of horny teeth which grow on each side, shut itself in from
some fancied danger. Another very curious point is that, besides
sending forth young ones, these creatures multiply by dividing in two
(see No. 3, Fig. 6), each one closing its own part of the vase into a
new home.

There are hundreds of these Infusoria, as they are called, in my pond,
some with vases, some without, some fixed to weeds and stones, others
swimming about freely. Even in the water-trough in which this
Thuricolla stands, I saw several smaller forms, and the next
microscope has a trough filled with the minutest form of all, called a
Monad. These are so small that two thousand of them could lie side by
side in an inch; that is, if you could make them lie at all, for they
are the most restless little beings, darting hither and thither,
scarcely even halting except to turn back. And yet though there are so
many of them, and as far as we know they have no organs of sight, they
never run up against each other, but glide past more cleverly than any
clear-sighted fish. These creatures are mostly to be found among
decaying seaweed, and though they are so tiny, you can still see
distinctly the clear space contracting and expanding within them.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. LIVING DIATOMS.

_a, Cocconema lanceolatum. b, Bacillaria paradoxa. c, Gomphonema
marinum. d, Diatoma hyalina_.]

But if there are so many thousands of mouths to feed, on the tree-like
Sertulariæ as well as in all these Infusoria, where does the food come
from? Partly from the numerous atoms of decaying life all around, and
the minute eggs of animals and spores of plants; but besides these,
the pool is full of minute living plants--small jelly masses with
solid coats of flint which are moulded into most lovely shapes. Plants
formed of jelly and flint! You will think I am joking, but I am not.
These plants, called Diatoms, which live both in salt and fresh water,
are single cells feeding and growing just like those we took from the
water-butt, only that instead of a soft covering they build up a
flinty skeleton. They are so small, that many of them must be
magnified to fifty times their real size before you can even see them
distinctly. Yet the skeletons of these almost invisible plants are
carved and chiselled in the most delicate patterns. I showed you a
group of these in our lecture on magic glasses, and now I have brought
a few living ones that we may learn to know them. The diagram (Fig. 7)
shows the chief forms you will see on the different slides.

The first one, _Sacillaria paradoxa_ (_b_, Fig. 7), looks like a
number of rods clinging one to another in a string, but each one of
these is a single-celled plant with a jelly cell surrounding the
flinty skeleton. You will see that they move to and fro over each
other in the water.

The next two forms, _a_ and _c_, look much more like plants, for the
cells arrange themselves on a jelly stem, which by and by disappears,
leaving only the separate flint skeletons. The last form, _d_, is
something midway between the other forms, the separate cells hang on
to each other and also on to a straight jelly stem.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. A DIATOM (_Diatoma vulgare_) GROWING.

_a, b,_ Flint skeleton inside the jelly-cell. _a, c_ and _d, b_, Two
flint skeletons formed by new valves, _c_ and _d_, forming within the
first skeleton.]

Another species of Diatoma (Fig. 8) called _Diatoma vulgare_, is a
very simple and common form, and will help to explain how these plants
grow. The two flinty valves _a, b_ inside the cell are not quite the
same size; the older one _a_ is larger than the younger one _b_ and
fits over it like the cover of a pill-box. As the plant grows, the
cell enlarges and forms two more valves, one _c_ fitting into the
cover _a_, so as to make a complete box _ac_, and a second, _d_, back
to back with _c_, fitting into the valve _b_, and making another
complete _bd_. This goes on very rapidly, and in this plant each new
cell separates as it is formed, and the free diatoms move about quite
actively in the water.

If you consider for a moment, you will see that, as the new valves
always fit into the old ones, each must be smaller than the last, and
so there comes a time when the valves have become too small to go on
increasing. Then the plant must begin afresh. So the two halves of the
last cell open, and throwing out their flinty skeletons, cover
themselves with a thin jelly layer, and form a new cell which grows
larger than any of the old ones. These, which are spore-cells, then
form flinty valves inside, and the whole thing begins again.

Now, though the plants themselves die, or become the food of minute
animals, the flinty skeletons are not destroyed, but go on
accumulating in the waters of the ponds, lakes, rivers, and seas, all
over the world. Untold millions have no doubt crumbled to dust and
gone back into the waters, but untold millions also have survived. The
towns of Berlin in Europe and of Richmond in the United States are
actually built upon ground called "infusorial earth," composed almost
entirely of valves of these minute diatoms which have accumulated to a
thickness of more than eighty feet! Those under Berlin are fresh-water
forms, and must have lived in a lake, while those of Richmond belong
to salt-water forms. Every inch of the ground under those cities
represents thousands and thousands of living plants which flourished
in ages long gone by, and were no larger than those you will see
presently under the microscope.

These are a very few of the microscopic inhabitants of my pond, but,
as you will confuse them if I show you too many, we will conclude with
two rather larger specimens, and examine them carefully. The first,
called the Cydippe, is a lovely, transparent living ball, which I want
to explain to you because it is so wondrously beautiful. The second,
the Sea-mat or Flustra, looks like a crumpled drab-colored seaweed,
but is really composed of many thousands of grottos, the homes of tiny
sea-animals.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. _Cydippe Pileus_.

1, Animal with tentacles _t_, bearing small tendrils _t'_. 2, Body of
animal enlarged. _m_, Mouth. _c_, Digestive cavity. _s_, Sac into
which the tentacles are withdrawn. _p_, Bands with comb-like plates.
3, Portion of a band enlarged to show the moving plates _p_.]

Let us take the Cydippe first (1, Fig. 9). I have six here, each in a
separate tumbler, and could have brought many more, for when I dipped
my net in the pool yesterday such numbers were caught in it that I
believe the retreating tide must just have left a shoal behind. Put a
tumbler on the desk in front of you, and if the light falls well upon
it you will see a transparent ball about the size of a large pea
marked with eight bright bands, which begin at the lower end of the
ball and reach nearly to the top, dividing the outside into sections
like the ribs of a melon. The creature is so perfectly transparent
that you can count all the eight bands.

At the top of the ball is a slight bulge which is the mouth (_m_ 2,
Fig. 9), and from it, inside the ball hangs a long bag or stomach,
which opens below into a cavity, from which two canals branch out, one
on each side, and these divide again into four canals which go one
into each of the tubes running down the bands. From this cavity the
food, which is digested in the stomach, is carried by the canals all
over the body. The smaller tubes which branch out of these canals
cannot be seen clearly without a very strong lens, and the only other
parts you can discern in this transparent ball are two long sacs on
each side of the lower end. These are the tentacle sacs, in which are
coiled up the tentacles, which we shall describe presently. Lastly you
can notice that the bands outside the globe are broader in the middle
than at the ends, and are striped across by a number of ridges.

In moving the tumblers the water has naturally been shaken, and the
creature being alarmed will probably at first remain motionless. But
very soon it will begin to play in the water, rising and falling, and
swimming gracefully from side to side. Now you will notice a curious
effect, for the bands will glitter and become tinged with prismatic
colors, till, as it moves more and more rapidly these colors,
reflected in the jelly, seem to tinge the whole ball with colors like
those on a soap-bubble, while from the two sacs below come forth two
long transparent threads like spun glass. At first these appear to be
simple threads, but as they gradually open out to about four or five
inches, smaller threads uncoil on each side of the line till there are
about fifty on each line. These short tendrils are never still for
long; as the main threads wave to and fro, some of the shorter ones
coil up and hang like tiny beads, then these uncoil and others roll
up, so that these graceful floating lines are never two seconds alike.

We do not really know their use. Sometimes the creature anchors itself
by them, rising and falling as they stretch out or coil up; but more
often they float idly behind it in the water. At first you would
perhaps think that they served to drive the ball through the water,
but this is done by a special apparatus. The cross ridges which we
noticed on the bands are really flat comb-like plates (_p_, Fig. 9),
of which there are about twenty or thirty on each band; and these
vibrate very rapidly, so that two hundred or more paddles drive the
tiny ball through the water. This is the cause of the prismatic
colors; for iridescent tints are produced by the play of light upon
the glittering plates, as they incessantly change their angle.
Sometimes they move all at once, sometimes only a few at a time, and
it is evident the creature controls them at will.

This lovely fairy-like globe, with its long floating tentacles and
rainbow tints, was for a long time classed with the jelly-fish; but it
really is most nearly related to the sea-anemones, as it has a true
central cavity which acts as a stomach, and many other points in
common with the _Actinozoa_. We cannot help wondering, as the little
being glides hither and thither, whether it can see where it is going.
It has nerves of a low kind which start from a little dark spot (_ng_)
exactly at the south pole of the ball, and at that point a sense-organ
of some kind exists, but what impression the creature gains from it of
the world outside we cannot tell.

I am afraid you may think it dull to turn from such a beautiful being
as this, to the gray leaf which looks only like a dead dry seaweed;
yet you will be wrong, for a more wonderful history attaches to this
crumpled dead-looking leaf than to the lovely jelly-globe.

[Illustration: FIG. 10. THE SEA-MAT OR FLUSTRA (_Flustra foliacea_).

1, Natural size. 2, Much magnified, _s_, Slit caused by drawing in of
the animal _a_.]

First of all I will pass round pieces of the dry leaf (1, Fig. 10),
and while you are getting them I will tell you where I found the
living ones. Great masses of the Flustra, as it is called, line the
bottom and sides of my pool. They grow in tufts, standing upright on
the rock, and looking exactly like hard gray seaweeds, while there is
nothing to lead you to suspect that they are anything else. Yesterday
I chipped off very carefully a piece of rock with a tuft upon it, and
have kept it since in a glass globe by itself with sea-water, for the
little creatures living in this marine city require a very good supply
of healthy water and air. I have called it a "marine city," and now I
will tell you why. Take the piece in your hand and run your finger
gently up and down it; you will glide quite comfortably from the lower
to the higher part of the leaf, but when you come back you will feel
your finger catch slightly on a rough surface. Your pocket lens will
show you why this is, for if you look through it at the surface of the
leaf you will see it is not smooth, but composed of hundreds of tiny
alcoves with arched tops; and on each side of these tops stand two
short blunt spines, making four in all, pointing upwards, so as partly
to cover the alcove above. As your finger went up it glided over the
spines, but on coming back it met their points. This is all you can
see in the dead specimen; I must show you the rest by diagrams, and by
and by under the microscope.

First, then, in the living specimen which I have here, those alcoves
are not open as in the dead piece, but covered over with a transparent
skin, in which, near the top of the alcove just where the curve
begins, is a slit (_s_ 2, Fig. 10) Unfortunately, the membrane
covering this alcove is too dense for you to distinguish the parts
within. Presently, however, if you are watching a piece of this living
leaf in a flat water-cell under the microscope, you will see the slit
slowly open, and begin to turn as it were inside out, exactly like the
finger of a glove, which has been pushed in at the tip, gradually
rises up when you put your finger inside it. As this goes on, a bundle
of threads appears, at first closed like a bud, but gradually opening
out into a crown of tentacles, each one clothed with hairs. Then you
will see that the slit was not exactly a slit after all, but the round
edge where the sac was pushed in. Ah! you will say, you are now
showing me a polyp like those on the sertularian tree. Not so fast, my
friend; you have not studied what is still under the covering skin and
hidden in the living animal. I have, however, prepared a slide with
this membrane removed and there you can observe the different parts,
and learn that each one of these alcoves contains a complete animal,
and not merely one among many mouths, like the polyp on Sertularia.

[Illustration: FIG. 11. DIAGRAM OF THE ANIMAL IN THE FLUSTRA OR
SEA-MAT.

1, Animal protruding. 2, Animal retracted in the sheath, _sh_,
Covering sheath, _s_, Slit. _t_, Tentacles. _m_, Mouth. _th_, Throat,
_st_, Stomach. _i_, Intestine, _r_, Retractor muscle, _e_, Egg-forming
parts. _g_, Nerve-ganglion.]

Each of these little beings (_a_, Fig. 10) living in its alcove has a
mouth, throat, stomach, intestine, muscles, and nerves starting from
the ganglion of nervous matter, besides all that is necessary for
producing eggs and sending forth young ones. You can trace all these
under the microscope (see 2, Fig. 11) as the creature lies curiously
doubled up in its bed, with its body bent in a loop; the intestine
_i_, out of which the refuse food passes, coming back close up to the
slit. When it is at rest, the top of the sac in which it lies is
pulled in by the retractor muscle _r_, and looks, as I have said, like
the finger of a glove with the top pushed in. When it wishes to feed
this top is drawn out by muscles running round the sac, and the
tentacles open and wave in the water (1, Fig. 11).

Look now at the alcoves, the homes of these animals; see how tiny they
are and how closely they fit together. Mr. Gosse, the naturalist, has
reckoned that there are six thousand, seven hundred and twenty alcoves
in a square inch; then if you turn the leaf over you will see that
there is another set, fixed back to back with these, on the other
side, making in all, thirteen thousand, four hundred and forty
alcoves. Now a moderate-sized leaf of flustra measures about three
square inches, taking all the rounded lobes into account, so you will
see we get forty thousand, three hundred and twenty as a rough
estimate of the number of beings on this one leaf. But if you look at
this tuft I have brought, you will find it is composed of twelve such
leaves, and this after all is a very small part of the mass growing
round my pool. Was I wrong, then, when I said my miniature ocean
contains as many millions of beings as there are stars in the heavens?

You will want to know how these leaves grew, and it is in this way.
First a little free swimming animal, a mere living sac provided with
lashes, settles down and grows into one little horny alcove, with its
live creature inside, which in time sends off from it three to five
buds, forming alcoves all round the top and sides of the first one,
growing on to it. These again bud out, and you can thus easily
understand that, in this way, in time a good-sized leaf is formed.
Meanwhile the creatures also send forth new swimming cells, which
settle down near to begin new leaves, and thus a tuft is formed; and
long after the beings in earlier parts of the leaf have died and left
their alcoves empty, those round the margin are still alive and
spreading....

If you can trace the spore-cells and urns in the seaweeds, observe the
polyps in the Sertularia, and count the number of mouths on a branch
of my animal fringe (Sertularia tenella); if you make acquaintance
with the Thuricolla in its vase, and are fortunate enough to see one
divide in two; if you learn to know some of the beautiful forms of
diatoms, and can picture to yourself the life of the tiny inhabitants
of the Flustra; then you will have used your microscope with some
effect, and be prepared for an expedition to my pool, where we will go
together some day to seek new treasures.

[Illustration]


NOTES


AGASSIZ, J.L.R., naturalist, born in Switzerland, 1807; died,
Cambridge, Mass., 1873. In 1846 he came to America, after having
gained a high reputation in Europe, to deliver a course of lectures in
Boston "On the Plan of the Creation," and met with such success that
he spent the rest of his days there, declining an invitation to return
to his native country and to Paris. In 1848 he was elected to the
chair of Natural History at Harvard. In 1850-51 he went on an
expedition to the Florida Reefs. In 1858 he founded and organized the
Museum of Comparative Zoölogy at Cambridge--and, later on, went on his
important voyage to Brazil. In 1872 he founded and organized the
summer school of Natural History at Buzzard's Bay. He wrote "The
Fishes of Brazil," "A Study of Glaciers," "Natural History of the
Fresh Water Fishes of Central Europe," "Contributions to the Natural
History of the United States" (unfinished), and with his wife, "A
Journey in Brazil."

BALL, PROF. SIR R.S., English astronomer, born in Dublin, 1840. Was
appointed Lord Ross's astronomer in 1865. Professor of mathematics and
mechanics at the Royal Irish College of Science in 1873, and is now
astronomer royal for Ireland. He is the author of "The Story of the
Heavens," "Starland," etc., and is well known as a successful lecturer
on astronomical subjects in this country.

DARWIN, CHARLES R., English naturalist, born, 1809; died, 1882. He
first formulated what is known as the principle of Natural Selection.
In 1831 he went in the famous scientific voyage of the _Beagle_ as
naturalist, and afterwards published an account of it. He was one of
the most thorough, careful, and painstaking scientific men of this or
any age. He is the author of many famous books. "The Origin of
Species," "The Descent of Man," "Insectivorous Plants," "The Power of
Movement in Plants," "The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs,"
"Geological Observations on Volcanic Islands." "The Formation of
Vegetable Mould" was his last published work.

FLAMMARION, C., famous French astronomer, born, 1842. He has written
many popular works on astronomy, most of which have been translated
into English. "The Stars," "The World Before the Creation," "Uranus,"
"Comets," "Popular Astronomy," are among his best known.

HOLDEN, PROF. E.S., American astronomer, born at St. Louis, 1846.
Lieutenant engineers, U.S.A., 1870-73; professor mathematics, U.S.N.,
1873-81; director Washburn Observatory, 1881-85; president University
of California, 1883-88; director Lick Observatory, 1888-98. Is a
member of several learned societies of Europe. Is the author of a
"Life of William Herschel," "A Hand-book of the Lick Observatory,"
"Earth and Sky," "Primer of Heraldry," "Elementary Astronomy," "Family
of the Sun," "Essays in Astronomy," "Stories of the Great
Astronomers," etc.

HUXLEY, T.H., English biologist, born, 1825; died, 1895. Went on an
exploring expedition on the _Rattlesnake_, and devoted himself to the
study of marine life. For his scientific researches he received many
honors. His lectures were models of clearness, and he could simplify
the most difficult subjects. He strongly advocated Darwin's views and
evolutionist doctrines. His writings are numerous and many of them
technical. Among some of the most popular are "Man's Place in Nature,"
his "Lay Sermons," "Critiques and Addresses," "American Addresses,"
"Physiography," "Science and Culture," "Lessons in Elementary
Physiology," etc.

KINGSLEY, C., English clergyman and author, born, 1819; died, 1875.
Wrote "Westward, Ho!" which every boy should read, "Hypatia," "Alton
Locke," "Hereward the Wake," etc., and a charming book of travel,
entitled, "At Last." His "Water Babies" is exceedingly popular, and
his "Heroes" is a book much appreciated by the boys and girls alike.

PROCTOR, R.A., English astronomer, born, 1834; died, 1888. He was a
very popular writer, and lectured on astronomical subjects in this
country, and in England and her colonies. A memorial teaching
observatory is erected in his honor near San Diego, Cal. He was a man
of untiring industry, an athlete, a musician, and a chess-player. His
books are numerous. Among them are "Half Hours with the Telescope,"
"Other Worlds than Ours," "Light Science for Leisure Hours," "The
Expanse of Heaven," "The Moon," "The Borderland of Science," "Our
Place Among Infinites," "Myths and Marvels of Astronomy," "The
Universe of Suns," "Other Suns than Ours," etc.

SHALER, N.S., professor of geology at Harvard. Born Newport, Ky.,
1841. Served in the Union Army during the Civil War. Instructor
zoölogy, geology, and paleontology, Lawrence Scientific School, till
1887. Since then at Harvard. Is the author of "Kentucky a Pioneer
Commonwealth," "The Story of Our Continent," "The Interpretation of
Nature," "Feature of Coasts and Oceans," "Domesticated Animals," "The
Individual," "Study of Life and Death," etc.

THOMPSON, SIR C. WYVILLE, English zoölogist, born, 1830; died, 1882.
He conducted scientific dredging expeditions in the _Lightning_ and
_Porcupine_, 1868-69, and was the scientific head of the famous voyage
of 68,900 miles in the _Challenger_ for deep-sea explorations
(1872-76). His books are "The Depths of the Sea," and "The Voyage of
the Challenger."

TYNDALL, JOHN, English physicist, born, 1820. Began his original
researches in 1847, when teacher of physics in Queenwood College. He
and Professor Huxley visited the Alps together, and they wrote a work
on the structure and nature of glaciers. It is impossible to detail
the work he has done; but his inquiries and experiments in connection
with light, heat, sound, and electricity have all had practical
results. He is a popular lecturer, and devoted the proceeds of a
lecturing tour in this country to founding scholarships at Harvard and
Columbia Colleges, for students devoting themselves to original
research. Among his books are "Glaciers of the Alps," "Mountaineering,"
"Heat as a Mode of Motion," "On Radiation," "Hours of Exercise in the
Alps," "Fragments of Science," "The Floating Matter of the Air," and
volumes on Light, Sound, Electricity, and the forms of water.

WALLACE, A.R., English naturalist and traveller, born 1822; was
educated as land surveyor and architect, but afterwards devoted
himself entirely to Natural History. He explored the Valley of the
Amazon and Rio Negro, 1848-52, and travelled in the Malay Archipelago
and Papua, 1854-62, publishing the results of his explorations later
on. He also wrote "Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,"
"Miracles and Modern Spiritualism," "Geographical Distribution of
Animals," "Tropical Nature," "Island Life," etc.

GIBERNE, AGNES, English author--living. Began to write at seven years
old. Her first story for children was published when she was only
seventeen. Her stories for children have not been so popular as her
scientific writings, "Sun, Moon, and Stars," "The Starry Skies,"
"Among the Stars," "The Ocean of Air," "The World's Foundations,"
"Radiant Suns," etc.

WILSON, ANDREW, English physiologist and lecturer, born, 1852. Is the
author of "Studies on Life and Sense," "Leisure Time Studies,"
"Science Stories," "Chapters on Evolution," "Wild Animals," "Brain and
Nerve," etc., and is a constant contributor on scientific subjects to
the magazines and newspapers, contributing weekly "Science Jottings"
to the "Illustrated London News"


WONDERS OF EARTH, SEA, AND SKY

SUGGESTIONS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING


  Wonder Stories of Science
    D.N. BEACH

  Wonders in Monsterland
    EDWARD W.D. CUMING

  Ocean Wonders
    W.E. DAMON

  Among the Stars
    AGNES GIBERNE

  The Scenery of the Heavens
    JOHN ELLARD GORR

  Coal and the Coal Miners
    HOMER GREENE

  Wonders of the Moon
    A. GUILLEMIN

  The Sea and Its Living Wonders.
    G. HARTWIG

  The Wonders of Plant Life Under the Microscope
    SOPHIE B. HERRICK

  Marvels of Animal Life
    CHARLES F. HOLDER

  Old Ocean
    ERNEST INGERSOLL

  Modern Seven Wonders of the World
    C. KENT

  Madam How and Lady Why
    CHARLES KINGSLEY

  Wonders of Optics
    F. MARION

  The Wonders of Science
    HENRY MAYHEW

  Wonders of Man and Nature
    E. MENAULT

  A Century of Electricity
    T.C. MENDENHALL

  The Orbs of Heaven
    ORMSBY S. MITCHELL

  Under Foot
    LAURA D. NICHOLS

  Myths and Marvels of Astronomy
    R.A. PROCTOR

  The Wonders of the World
    CHARLES G. ROSENBERG

  The Wonders of Nature
    PROFESSOR RUDOLPH

  Volcanoes of North America
    ISRAEL COOK RUSSELL

  Aspects of the Earth
    N.S. SHALER

  Wonders of the Bird World
    R.B. SHARPE

  The Wonders of Water
    GASTON TISSANDIER

  Total Eclipses of the Sun
    MABEL L. TODD

  Wonders of Insect Life
    JOSEPH C. WILLET