 DIAGRAM OF MORSE SYSTEM.


513   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


The key by which the messages are transmitted is shown in Fig. 319. M is
a base plate of brass. A is a brass lever, mounted on an arbor G carried
between adjustable set screws D. C is the anvil where contact is made by
depressing the key by the finger piece B of ebonite. E, Fl are adjusting
screws for regulating the vertical play of the lever. H is the switch
for opening or closing the circuit. It is opened for transmission, and
closed for receiving. By screws, L L, with wing nuts, K K, the whole is
screwed down to a table.


Fig. 319. MORSE TELEGRAPH KEY.


In the United States the simplest disposition of apparatus is generally
used. The main line is kept on closed circuit. In it may be included a
large number of relays at stations all along the line, each with its own
local circuit. There may be fifty of such stations. Battery is generally
placed at each end of the line. Very generally gravity batteries are
used, although dynamos now tend to supplant them in important stations.

As relays the ordinary relay is used. Its local circuit includes a
sounder and local battery. The latter is very generally of the gravity
type, but oxide of copper batteries (See Battery, Oxide of Copper) are
now being introduced. At main or central offices, the terminals of the
lines reach switch boards, where by spring-jacks and plugs, any desired
circuits can be looped into the main circuit in series therewith.

In European practise the main line is kept on open circuit. Polarized
relays are used to work the local circuits. The currents for these have
to be alternating in direction. When the line is not in use its ends are
connected to earth at both ends, leaving the battery out of circuit.
Each intermediate station has its own main, or line battery for use when
it desires to send a message. In the American system as first described,
it will be seen that the main batteries are at most two in number.

For the details of the different apparatus, the following definitions
may be consulted: Embosser, Telegraphic--Recorder, Morse--Relay--Relay
Connection--Sounder.


514   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telegraph, Multiplex.
A system of telegraphy by which a number of messages can be transmitted
in both directions over a single wire. The principles underlying the
systems are the following:

Suppose that at the two extremities of a telegraph line two arms are
kept in absolute synchronous rotation. Let the arms in their rotation,
press upon as many conducting segments as there are to be transmissions
over the line. A transmitting and receiving set of instruments may be
connected to one segment at one end of the line, and another set to the
corresponding segment at the distant station. For each pair of segments
two sets can be thus connected. Then if the arm rotates so rapidly that
the contacts succeed each other rapidly enough each pair of sets of
instruments can be worked independently of the others. In practice this
rapid succession is effected by having a number of contacts made for
each pair during a single rotation of the arm or equivalent.

The multiplex system has been perfected by the use of La Cour's phonic
wheel (see Phonic Wheel), and brought into a practical success by
Patrick B. Delany, of New York.

Two phonic wheels rotate at each end of the line. They are kept in
synchronous motion by two vibrating steel reeds of exactly the same
fundamental note, and the axle of each wheel carries an arm whose end
trails over the contacts or distributor segments already spoken of. The
reeds are adjusted to vibrate at such speed that the trailer is in
contact with each segment about 1/500 second. The number of groups of
segments required for each working is determined by the retardation of
the signals owing to the static capacity of the line. To convert the
rapidly recurring impulses of current into practically a single current,
condensers are connected across the coils of the relay. One battery
serves for all the arms.

Multiplex telegraphy can effect from two to six simultaneous
transmissions over one wire. For two or four transmissions the method
only distinguishes it from duplex or quadruplex telegraphy. The terms
diode, triode, tetrode, pentode and hexode working are used to indicate
respectively the simultaneous transmission of two, three, four, five, or
six messages over one wire.

It will be seen that the multiplex process really assigns to each
transmission separate times, but divides these times into such short and
quickly recurring intervals that the work is executed as if there was
continuous contact. In no case is there the popular conception of the
sending of several messages actually simultaneously over one wire. Each
signal in reality has its own time assigned it, divided into short
periods of high frequency, and only utilizes the line when it is free.


515   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telegraph, Over-house.
An English term for telegraph lines led over houses and supported on
standards on the roofs.


Telegraph Pole Brackets.
Arms for carrying insulators, which arms are attached to telegraph poles
or other support. They vary in style; sometimes they are straight bars
of wood gained into and bolted or spiked in place; sometimes they are of
iron.


Telegraph, Printing.
Various telegraphs have been invented for printing in the ordinary
alphabet the messages at the receiving end of the line.

Representative instruments of this class are used for transmitting
different market and stock reports to business offices from the
exchanges. The type faces are carried on the periphery of a printing
wheel, which is rotated like the hand of a dial telegraph, and against
whose face a paper riband is pressed whenever the proper letter comes
opposite to it. As each letter is printed the paper moves forward the
space of one letter. Spacing between words is also provided for. In the
recent instruments two lines of letters are printed on the paper one
above the other.

In England, and on the continent of Europe, printing instruments have
received considerable use for ordinary telegraphic work. Hughes' type
printer and Wheatstone's ABC telegraph meet with extensive use there for
ordinary transmission.


Telegraph, Quadruplex.
Duplex telegraphy is the sending of two messages in opposite directions
simultaneously through the same wire. Duplex telegraphy is the sending
of two messages simultaneously in the same direction. The two combined
constitute quadruplex telegraphy. [SIC]

The system was suggested by Stark of Vienna and Bosscha of Leyden in
1855; the successful problem was solved by Edison in 1874.

The principle is based on the two orders of difference in electric
currents; they may vary in strength or in direction. Thus we may have
one instrument which works with change of strength of current only, the
other with change of direction only. The two can be worked together if
the direction of the current can be altered without alteration of
strength, and if strength can be altered without alteration of
direction. Double current and single current working are so combined
that one relay works by one system of currents and another relay by the
other system. A current is constantly maintained through the line. The
relay operated by change in direction is a simple polarized relay which
works by change of direction of current. The relay operated by change in
strength is the ordinary unpolarized relay.


516   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


For the following description and the cuts illustrating it we are
indebted to Preece and Sivewright. The cut shows the arrangement of the
apparatus and connections for terminal offices.

"Sufficient table room is provided to seat four clerks. The apparatus is
arranged for the two senders to sit together in the centre, the messages
to be forwarded being placed between them. The section on the left of
the switch Q is known as the 'A' side, that on the right as the 'B' side
of the apparatus.

K1 the reversing key, reverses the direction of the current. K2 is a
simple key, known as the increment key; it is used simply to increase
the strength of the current.


Fig. 320. QUADRUPLEX TELEGRAPH CONNECTIONS.


The way in which the keys K1 and K2 combine their action is shown by
Fig. 321. E1 and E2 are the line batteries, the one having two and
one-third (2-1/3) the number of cells of the other, so that if E1 be the
electro-motive force of the smaller, that of the whole combined battery
will be 3.3 E1. The negative pole of E1 is connected to z and z1 of  K1
and the positive pole of E2 to a of K2 through a resistance coil s. A
wire, called the 'tap' wire, connects the positive pole of E1 and the
negative pole of E2 to b of K2. This wire has in it a resistance coil
r2. The springs c and c1 of Kl are connected to the lever L of K2. Now,
when both keys are at rest, the negative pole of E1 is to line through
z, and the positive pole of E1 to earth through b of K2 and c of K1; the
positive pole of E2 being insulated at a of K2.


517   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


There is thus a weak negative current flowing to line. When K1 alone is
worked, the current of E1 is reversed. When K2 is worked alone, c of K1
is transferred from b to a, and the strength of the negative current
going to line is increased through the increase of the electro-motive
force from E1 to 3.3 E1 for the whole battery is brought into play. When
K1 and K2 are depressed together, then the negative pole of E1 goes to
earth through Z1; and the positive pole of E2 to line through a of K2
and c1 of K1 and a positive current, due to the whole electro-motive
force 3.3 E1 goes to line. Hence the effect of working K1 is simply to
reverse the current, whatever its strength, while that of K2 is to
strengthen it, whatever its direction.

The resistance coil s, of 100° resistance, is called a spark coil,
because it prevents the high electro-motive force of the whole battery
from damaging the points of contact by sparking or forming an arc across
when signals are sent; and the resistance r2 is made approximately equal
to the combined resistance of E2 and the spark coil, so that the total
resistance of the circuit may not be altered by the working of the
apparatus.


Fig. 321. QUADRUPLEX TELEGRAPH.


A1 and B1 (Fig. 320) are the relays which are used to respond to the
changes in the currents sent by the keys K1 and K2 at the distant
station.

A, is a simple polarized relay wound differentially, each wire having a
resistance of 200 [omega], and so connected up as to respond to the working of
the reversing key K1 of the distant station. It acts independently of
the strength of the current, and is therefore not affected by the
working of the increment key K2. It is connected up so as to complete
the local circuit of the sounder S1 and the local battery l1 and forms
the receiving portion of the 'A' side.

B, is a non-polarized relay also wound differentially, each coil having
a resistance of 200 [omega]. It responds only to an increase in the
strength of the current, and therefore only to the working of the
increment key K2 of the distant station.

[Transcriber's note: In current usage upper case omega indicates ohms and
lower case omega denotes angular frequency, 2*PI*f.]


518   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


The relay spring is so adjusted that the armatures are not actuated by
the weak current sent from E by the key K1.

In its normal position this relay completes the circuit of the local
battery through the sounder S. This sounder S, called the uprighting
sounder, acts as a relay to a second sounder, S2, called the reading
sounder, which is worked by another local battery, l2. Of course,
normally, the armature of S is held down and that of S2 is up, but when
the tongue t moves, as it does when the increment key K2 is depressed so
as to send the whole current to line, then the current from l is
interrupted, and the circuit of l2 is completed by the rising of the
armature of S, causing the reading sounder S2 to work. This is the 'B'
side.

R is a rheostat for balancing the resistance of the line, as used in
duplex working.

C is a condenser used for compensating the static charge of the line. It
is provided with an adjustable retardation coil, R1, to prolong the
effect of the compensating current from the condenser.

G is a differential galvanometer, used for testing, and for facilitating
adjustment and balancing.

Q is a switch for putting the line to earth, either for balancing, or
for any other purpose. There is on the earth wire leading from Q a
resistance coil, r1, equalling approximately the resistance of the whole
battery, 3.3 E1, and the resistance s.

The connections shown in Fig. 321, are for an 'up' office. At a 'down'
office it is necessary to reverse the wires on the two lower terminals
of the galvanometer and the two battery wires on the reversing key K1.

The keys K1 and K2 are, for repeaters, replaced by transmitters.

The adjustment of this apparatus requires great care and great accuracy.
Its good working depends essentially on technical skill that can only be
acquired by patience and perseverance.

Faults in working generally arise from careless adjustments, dirty
contacts, loose connections, battery failures, and the ordinary line
interruptions, but there are no troubles that are beyond the reach of
ordinary skill, and it can be safely said that, within moderate
distances, wherever and whenever duplex working is practicable, then
quadruplex working is so too."

The above is a typical quadruplex bridge system. There is also a
differential system, the full description of which, in addition to what
has been given, is outside of the scope of this work.


519   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telegraph Repeater.
An extension of the relay system, adopted for long lines. A repeating
station comprises in general terms duplicate repeating apparatus. One
set is connected for messages in one direction, the other for messages
in the opposite direction. The general operation of a repeating set is
as follows. The signals as received actuate a relay which by its local
circuit actuates a key, which in ordinary practise would be the sounder,
but in the repeater its lever opens and closes a circuit comprising a
battery and a further section of the line.

Repeaters are placed at intervals along the line. Each repeater repeats
the signals received for the next section of line with a new battery. It
represents an operator who would receive and repeat the message, except
that it works automatically.

The Indo-European line from London to Teheran, 3,800 miles long, is
worked directly without any hand retransmission, it being carried out by
five repeaters. This gives an average of over 500 miles for each
repeater.
[Transcriber's note: … 650 miles for each repeater.]

Repeaters introduce retardation, and each repeater involves a reduction
in the rate of working. Yet in many cases they increase the speed of a
line greatly, as its speed is about equal to that of its worst section,
which may be far greater than that of the whole line in one.

Synonym--Translater.


Telegraph Signal.
In the telegraph alphabet, a dot, or dash; the signal or effect produced
by one closing of the circuit. A dash is equal in length to three dots.
The space between signals is equal to one dot; the space between letters
to three dots; and the space between words to six dots.


Telegraph, Single Needle.
A telegraph system in which the code is transmitted by the movements of
a needle shaped index which oscillates to right and left, the left hand
deflection corresponding to dots, the right hand deflection to dashes.
The instruments for sending and receiving are combined into one. The
needles are virtually the indexes of vertical galvanometers. In one form
by a tapper key (see Tapper), in another form by a key worked by a
drop-handle (the drop handle instrument), currents of opposite
directions are sent down the line. These pass through both instruments,
affecting both needles and causing them to swing to right or left, as
the operator moves his key.

As galvanometer needle or actuating needle a soft iron needle is
employed, which is polarized by the proximity of two permanent magnets.
This avoids danger of reversal of polarity from lightning, a trouble
incident to the old system.


520   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


The cut, Fig. 322, shows a single needle telegraph instrument of the
tapper form. The action of the tapper can be understood from the next
cut.


Fig. 322. SINGLE NEEDLE TELEGRAPH INSTRUMENT, DOUBLE
TAPPER FORM.


Fig. 323. DOUBLE TAPPER KEY FOR SINGLE NEEDLE TELEGRAPH.


C and Z are two strips of metal to which the positive and negative poles
of the battery are respectively connected. E and L are two metallic
springs; E is connected to earth, L is connected to the line; at rest
both press against Z. If L is depressed so as to touch C, the current
from the battery goes to the line by the key L, goes through the coils
of the distant instrument and deflects the needle to one side, and then
goes to the earth. If the key E is depressed, L retaining its normal
position, the direction of the current is reversed, for the other pole
of the battery is connected to the earth and the reverse current going
through the coils of the distant instrument deflects the galvanometer
needle to the other side.

In the drop-handle type an analogous form of commutator worked by a
single handle produces the same effects.


521   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telegraph, Wheatstone, A. B. C.
A magneto-electric telegraph of the dial system. An alternating current
magneto-generator is turned by hand and by depressing keys its current
is admitted to or cut off from the line and receiver's instrument. The
message is received by a dial instrument working by the escapement
motion described under Telegraph, Dial.


Telegraph, Writing.
A telegraph in which the message is received in written characters. The
transmitter includes a stylus which is held in the hand and whose point
bears against the upper end of a vertical rod. The rod is susceptible of
oscillation in all directions, having at its base a spring support
equivalent to a universal joint.

The stylus is moved about in the shape of letters. As it does this it
throws a series of resistances in and out of the circuit.

At the receiving end of the line the instrument for recording the
message includes two electro-magnets with their cores at right angles to
each other and their faces near together at the point of the angle. An
armature is supported between the faces and through it a vertical rod
carried by a spring at its bottom rises. These magnets receive current
proportional to the resistances cut in and out by the motions of the
other rod at the transmitting end of the line. These resistances are
arranged in two series at right angles to each other, one for each
magnet. Thus the movements of the transmitting stylus and rod are
repeated by the end of the rod in the receiving instrument. A species of
pen is carried at the end of the rod of the receiving instrument, which
marks the letters upon a riband of paper which is fed beneath it.


Telemanometer. Electric.
A pressure gauge with electric attachment for indicating or recording
its indications at a distance.

It is applicable to steam boilers, so as to give the steam pressure in
any desired place.


Telemeter, Electric.
An apparatus for electrically indicating or recording at a distance the
indications of any instrument such as a pressure gauge, barometer or
thermometer, or for similar work. The telemanometer applied to a boiler
comes into this class of instrument.


Telephotography.
The transmission of pictures by the electric current, the requisite
changes in the current being effected by the action of light upon
selenium. The picture is projected by a magic lantern. Its projection is
traversed by a selenium resistance through which the current passes.
This is moved systematically over its entire area, thus constituting the
transmitter, and synchronously with the motion of the selenium a contact
point at the other end of the line moves systematically over a sheet of
chemically prepared paper. The paper, which may be saturated with a
solution of potassium ferrocyanide and ammonium nitrate, is stained by
the passage of the current, and by the variation in intensity of
staining, which variation is due to variations in the current, produced
by the effects of the light upon the selenium, the picture is
reproduced.


522   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telepherage.
An electric transportation system, hitherto only used for the carrying
of ore, freight, etc. Its characteristic feature is that the electric
conductors, suspended from poles, supply the way on which carriages
provided with electric motors run. The motors take their current
directly from the conductors.

There are two conducting lines, running parallel with each other,
supported at the opposite ends of transverse brackets on a row of
supporting poles. At each pole the lines cross over so that right line
alternates with left, between consecutive pairs of poles.

The cars are suspended from pulleys running on one or the other of the
conductors. A train of such cars are connected and the current is taken
in near one end and leaves near the other end of the train. These
current connections are so distant, their distance being regulated by
the length of the train, that they are, for all but an instant at the
time of passing each of the poles, in connection with segments of the
line which are of opposite potential. To carry out this principle the
distance between contacts is equal to the distance between poles. Owing
to the crossing over of the lines the contacts are in connection as
described and thereby the actuating current is caused to go through the
motors.

Cars running in one direction go on the electric conductors on the one
side, those running in the other direction go on the other conductor.

A great many refinements have been introduced, but the system has been
very little used.


Telephone.
An instrument for the transmission of articulate speech by the electric
current. The current is defined as of the undulatory type. (See Current,
Undulatory.)

The cut shows what may be termed the fundamental telephone circuit. A
line wire is shown terminating in ground plates and with a telephone in
circuit at each end. The latter consists of a magnet N S with a coil of
insulated wire H surrounding one end. Facing the pole of the magnet is a
soft iron diaphragm D, held in a frame or mouthpiece T. Any change of
current in the line affects the magnetism of the magnet, causing it to
attract the diaphragm more or less. The magnet and diaphragm really
constitute a little electric motor, the diaphragm vibrating back and
forth through an exceedingly short range, for changes in the magnetic
attraction.

The principle of the reversibility of the dynamo applies here. If the
magnet is subjected to no change in magnetism, and if the diaphragm is
moved or vibrated in front of its poles, currents will be induced in the
wire bobbin which surrounds its end. If two such magnets with bobbins
and diaphragms are arranged as shown, vibrations imparted to one
diaphragm will send currents through the line which, affecting the
magnetism of the distant magnet, will cause its diaphragm to vibrate in
exact accordance with the motions of the first or motor diaphragm. In
the combination one telephone represents a dynamo, the other a motor.

If the vibrations of the diaphragm are imparted by the voice, the voice
with all its modulations will be reproduced by the telephone at the
distant end of the line.


523   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Fig. 324. DIAGRAM OF BELL TELEPHONES AND LINE WITH EARTH CONNECTIONS.


Fig. 325. SECTION OF BELL TELEPHONE.


The above gives the essential features of the Bell telephone. In
practice the telephone is used only as the receiver. As transmitter a
microphone is employed. To give the current a battery, generally of the
open circuit type, is used, and the current in the line is an induced or
secondary one.

The microphone which is talked to, and which is the seat of the current
variations which reproduce original sound, is termed the transmitter,
the telephone in which the sounds are produced at the distant end of the
line is termed the receiver.

Fig. 325 shows the construction of the Bell telephone in universal use
in this country as the receiver. M is a bar magnet, in a case L L. B B
is a bobbin or coil of insulated wire surrounding one end of the magnet.
D is the diaphragm of soft iron plate (ferrotype metal), and E is the
mouthpiece. The terminals of the coil B B connect with the binding
screws C C. The wire in the coil is No. 36, A. W. G., and is wound to a
resistance of about 80 ohms.


524   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


As typical transmitter the Blake instrument may be cited. It is a carbon
microphone. It is shown in section in the cut; a is the mouthpiece and e
is a diaphragm of iron plate, although other substances could be used; f
is a steel spring, with a platinum contact piece at its end. One end
bears against the diaphragm, the other against a carbon block k. The
latter is carried by a brass block p, and pressure is maintained between
these contacts by the spring g and weight of the piece c, which by
gravity tends to press all together. The current passes by way of the
spring f, carbon button k and spring g through the circuit indicated.

A battery is in circuit with these parts. If a telephone is also in
circuit, and the transmitter is spoken against, the diaphragm vibrating
affects the resistance of the carbon-platinum contact, without even
breaking the contact, and the telephone reproduces the sound. The heavy
piece of metal C acts by its inertia to prevent breaking of the contact.
The position of this piece c, which is carried by the brass plate m, is
adjusted by the screw n.


Fig. 326. SECTION OF BLAKE TRANSMITTER.


In practice the transmitter and battery are usually on a local circuit,
which includes the primary of an induction coil. The line and distant
receiving telephone are in circuit with the secondary of the induction
coil, without any battery.

Telephone, Bi-.
A pair of telephones carried at the ends of a curved bar or spring so
that they fit the head of a person using them. One telephone is held
against each ear without the use of the hands.


525   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telephone, Capillary.
A telephone utilizing electro-capillarity for the production of
telephonic effects. The following describes the invention of Antoine
Breguet.

The point of a glass tube, drawn out at its lower end to a capillary
opening dips vertically into a vessel. This vessel is partly filled with
mercury, over which is a layer of dilute sulphuric acid. The end of the
immersed tube dips into the acid, but does not reach the mercury. One
line contact is with mercury in the tube, the other with the mercury in
the vessel. The arrangement of tube and vessel is duplicated, giving one
set for each end of the line. On introducing a battery in the circuit
the level of the mercury is affected by electro-capillarity. The tubes
are closed by plates or diaphragms at their tops, so as to enclose a
column of air. It is evident that the pressure of this air will depend
upon the level of the mercury in the tube, and this depends on the
electro-motive force. On speaking against the diaphragm the sound waves
affect the air pressure, and consequently the level, enough to cause
potential differences which reproduce the sound in the other instrument.


Fig. 327. BREGURT'S CAPILLARY TELEPHONE.


Telephone, Carbon.
A telephone transmitter based on the use of carbon as a material whose
resistance is varied by the degree of pressure brought to bear upon it.
Undoubtedly the surface contact between the carbon and the other
conducting material has much to do with the action. Many carbon
telephones have been invented. Under Telephone the Blake transmitter is
described, which is a carbon telephone transmitter. The Edison carbon
transmitter is shown in section in the cut. E is the mouth piece and D
the diaphragm. I is a carbon disc with adjusting screw V. A platinum
plate B B, with ivory button b, is attached to the upper surface of the
carbon disc. C C is an insulating ring. The wire connections shown bring
the disc into circuit. It is connected like a Blake transmitter. It is
now but little used.


Fig. 328. SECTION OF EDISON CARBON TRANSMITTER.


526   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telephone, Chemical.
A telephone utilizing chemical or electrolytic action in transmitting or
receiving. The electro-motograph is an example of a chemical receiver.
(See Electro-motograph.)


Telephone, Electrostatic.
A telephone utilizing electrostatic disturbances for reproduction of the
voice. In the cut D and C are highly charged electrophori. The
diaphragms A and B when spoken to affect the potential of the
electrophorus so as to produce current variations which will reproduce
the sound. Dolbear and others have invented other forms of transmitters
based on electrostatic action. Receivers have also been constructed. A
simple condenser may be made to reproduce sound by being connected with
a powerful telephone current.


Fig. 329. DIAGRAM OF EDISON'S ELECTROSTATIC TELEPHONE.


Telephone Induction Coil.
The induction coil used in telephone circuits for inducing current on
the main line. It is simply a small coil wound with two separate
circuits of insulated wire. In the Edison telephone the primary coil, in
circuit with the transmitter, is of No. 18 to 24 wire and of 3 to 4 ohms
resistance. The secondary in circuit with the line and receiving
instrument is of No. 36 wire and of 250 ohms resistance. The Bell
telephone induction coil has its primary of No. 18 to 24 wire wound to a
resistance of 1/2 ohm, and its secondary of No. 36 wire, and of 80 ohms
resistance.


527   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Telephone, Reaction.
A form of telephone containing two coils of insulated wire, one of which
is mounted on the disc, and the other on the magnet pole in the usual
way. These coils react upon each other so as to strengthen the effect.


Telephone, Thermo-electric.
A telephone transmitter including a thermo-electric battery, placed in
circuit with the line. A plate of vulcanite faces it. When the sound
waves strike the vulcanite they move it backward and forward. These
movements, owing to the elasticity of the vulcanite, produce minute
changes of temperature in it, which affecting the thermo-electric pile
produce in the circuit currents, which passing through a Bell telephone
cause it to speak. This type of instrument has never been adopted in
practice.


Telephote.
An apparatus for transmitting pictures electrically, the properties of
selenium being utilized for the purpose.

Synonym--Pherope.


Teleseme.
An annunciator, displaying on a dial the object wanted by the person
using it. It is employed to transmit messages from rooms in a hotel to
the office, or for similar functions.


Tele-thermometer.
A thermometer with electric attachment for indicating or recording its
indications at a distance.


Tempering, Electric.
A process of tempering metals by electrically produced heat. The article
is made part of an electric circuit. The current passing through it
heats it, thereby tempering it. For wire the process can be made
continuous. The wire is fed from one roll to another, and if required
one roll may be immersed in a liquid bath or the wire between the rolls
may be led therein. The current is brought to one roll and goes through
the wire to the other. As it does this the wire is constantly fed from
one roll to another. The bath may be used as described to cool it after
the heating. The amount of heating may be regulated by the rate of
motion of the wire.


528   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Ten, Powers of.
This adjunct to calculations has become almost indispensable in working
with units of the C. G. S. system. It consists in using some power of 10
as a multiplier which may be called the factor. The number multiplied
may be called the characteristic. The following are the general
principles.

The power of 10 is shown by an exponent which indicates the number of
ciphers in the multiplier. Thus 10^2 indicates 100; 10^3 indicates 1,000
and so on.

The exponent, if positive, denotes an integral number, as shown in the
preceding paragraph. The exponent, if negative, denotes the reciprocal
of the indicated power of 10. Thus 10^-2 indicates 1/100; 10^-3 indicates
1/1000 and so on.

The compound numbers based on these are reduced by multiplication or
division to simple expressions. Thus: 3.14 X 10^7 = 3.14 X 10,000,000 =
31,400,000. 3.14 X 10^-7 = 3.14/10,000,000 or 314/1000000000. Regard must
be paid to the decimal point as is done here.

To add two or more expressions in this notation if the exponents of the
factors are alike in all respects, add the characteristics and preserve
the same factor. Thus:

  (51X 10^6) + (54 X 10^6) = 105 X 10^6.
  (9.1 X 10^-9) + (8.7 X 10^-9) = 17.8 X 10^-9.

To subtract one such expression from another, subtract the
characteristics and preserve the same factor. Thus:

  (54 X 10^6) - (51 X 10^6) = 3 X 10^6.

If the factors have different exponents of the same sign the factor or
factors of larger exponent must be reduced to the smaller exponent, by
factoring. The characteristic of the expression thus treated is
multiplied by the odd factor. This gives a new expression whose
characteristic is added to the other, and the factor of smaller exponent
is preserved for both,

Thus:
  (5 X 10^7) + (5 X10^9) = (5 X 10^7) + (5 X 100 X 10^7) = 505 X 10^7.

The same applies to subtraction. Thus:
  (5 X 10^9) - (5 X 10^7) = (5 X 100 X 10^7) - (5 X 10^7) = 495 X 10^7.

If the factors differ in sign, it is generally best to leave the
addition or subtraction to be simply expressed. However, by following
the above rule, it can be done. Thus:

Add
  5 X 10^-2 and 5 X 10^3.
  5 X 10^3 = 5 X 10^5 X 10^-2
  (5 X 10^5 X 10^-2) + (5 X 10^-2) = 500005 X 10^-2

This may be reduced to a fraction 500000/100 = 5000.05.

To multiply add the exponents of the factors, for the new factor, and
multiply the characteristics for a new characteristic. The exponents
must be added algebraically; that is, if of different signs the
numerically smaller one is subtracted from the other one, and its sign
is given the new exponent.

Thus;
  (25 X 10^6) X (9 X 10^8) = 225 X 10^14.
  (29 X 10^ -8) X (11 X 10^7) = 319 X 10^-1
  (9 X 10^8) X (98 X 10^2) = 882 X 10^1


529   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


To divide, subtract (algebraically) the exponent of the divisor from
that of the dividend for the exponent of the new factor, and divide the
characteristics one by the other for the new characteristic. Algebraic
subtraction is effected by changing the sign of the subtrahend,
subtracting the numerically smaller number from the larger, and giving
the result the sign of the larger number.
(Thus to subtract 7 from 5 proceed thus; 5 - 7 = -2.)

Thus;
  (25 X 10^6) / (5 X 10^8) = 5 X 10^-2
  (28 X 10^-8) / (5 X 10^3) = 5.6 X 10^-11

[Transcriber's note: I have replaced ordinary exponential notation by
the more compact and simpler "programming" representation. The last two
example would be:
  25E6 / 5E8  = 5E-2
  28E-8 / 5E3 = 5.6E-11
]


Tension.
Electro-motive force or potential difference in a current system is
often thus termed. It is to be distinguished from intensity or current
strength, which word it too greatly resembles.


Tension, Electric.
(a) The condition an electrified body is brought into by
electrification, when each molecule repels its neighbor. The condition
is described as one of self-repulsion.

(b) The voltage or potential difference of a circuit is also thus
termed.


Terminal.
The end of any open electric circuit, or of any electric apparatus; as
the terminals of a circuit, dynamo, or battery.


Terminal Pole.
In telegraph line construction the last pole of a series; one beyond
which the line is not carried. Such pole, as the pull of the wires is
all in one direction, requires special staying or support. The regular
line poles are free from this strain, as the wire pulls in both
directions.


Tetanus, Acoustic.
A term in electro-therapeutics. An effect produced on a nerve by very
rapidly alternating induced currents. The currents are produced by an
induction coil with a vibrator giving a musical note. This is a species
of gauge of proper frequency of alternations.


Theatrophone.
An apparatus worked by automatic paying machinery by which a telephone
connection is made with a theatre or opera by the deposition of a coin
in a slot.


Therm.
A unit of heat. It has been proposed by the British Association and
amounts to a redefinition of the smaller calorie. It is the amount of
heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of water one degree
centigrade, starting at the temperature of maximum density of water.


530   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Thermaesthesiometer.
An electro-therapeutic instrument for testing the sensitiveness of the
surface of the body to changes of temperature. Vessels of mercury are
provided with thermometers to indicate their temperature. One vessel is
surrounded by an electric conductor wound in a number of turns. The
temperature is raised by passing a current through this. By successive
applications of the vessels to the same spot upon the skin the power of
differentiating temperatures is determined.


Thermo Call.
(a) An electric alarm or call bell operated by thermo-electric currents.
It may serve as a fire alarm or heat indicator, always bearing in mind
the fact that differential heat is the requisite in a thermo-electric
couple.

(b) See Thermo-electric Call.


Thermo-chemical Battery.
A voltaic battery in which the electro-motive force is generated by
chemical action induced by heat.

The chemical used generally is sodium nitrate or potassium nitrate. The
positive plate is carbon. On heating the battery the nitrate attacks the
carbon, burning it and produces potential difference. For negative plate
some metal unattacked by the nitrate may be employed.


Fig. 330. POUILLET'S THERMO-ELECTRIC BATTERY.


Thermo-electric Battery or Pile.
A number of thermo-electric couples q. v., connected generally in
series.

In Nobili's pile the metals are bismuth and antimony; paper bands
covered with varnish are used to insulate where required. In Becquerel's
pile copper sulphide (artificial) and German silver, (90 copper, 10
nickel) are the two elements. The artificial copper sulphide is made
into slabs 4 inches long, 3/4 inch wide, and 1/2 inch thick (about).
Water is used to keep one set of junctions cool, and gas flames to heat
the other set. In Fig. 331, c, d represent the binding screws. The
couples are mounted on a vertical standard, with adjusting socket and
screw B, so that its lower end can be immersed in cold water, or raised
therefrom as desired.


531   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


FIG. 331. BECQUEREL'S THERMO-ELECTRIC BATTERIES.


Fig. 332 shows one couple of the battery. S is artificial antimony
sulphide; M is German silver; m is a protecting plate of German silver
to save the sulphide from wasting in the flame.


Fig. 332. ELEMENTS OF BECQUEREL'S THERMOELECTRIC BATTERIES.


Clamond's pile has been used in practical work. The negative element is
an alloy of antimony, 2 parts, zinc, 1 part. The positive element is tin
plate. Mica in some parts, and a paste of soluble glass and asbestus in
other parts are used as insulators. They are built up so as to form a
cylinder within which the fire is maintained. The air is relied on to
keep the outer junctions cool. The temperature does not exceed 200° C.
(392° F.)

Sixty such elements have an electro-motive force of 300 volts and an
internal resistance of 1.5 ohms. Such a battery requires the consumption
of three cubic feet of gas per hour. (See Currents, Thermo-electric. )


532   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Thermo-electric Call.
A thermostat arranged to ring a bell or to give some indication when the
temperature rises or falls beyond certain points. It may be a compound
bar of brass and steel fixed at one end and free for the rest of its
length. Its end comes between two adjustable contacts. As the
temperature rises it bends one way (away from the brass side) and, if
hot enough, touching a contact gives one signal. If the temperature
falls it curves the other way, and if cold enough touches the other
contact, giving another signal. (See Thermostat, Electric.)


Thermo-electric Couple.
If two dissimilar conductors form adjacent parts of a closed circuit,
and their junction is at a different temperature than that of the rest
of the circuit, a current will result. Such pair of conductors are
called a thermo-electric couple. They may be joined in series so as to
produce considerable electro-motive force. (See Thermo-electricity and
other titles in thermo-electricity.)

The efficiency of a thermo-electric couple according to the second law
of thermo-dynamics is necessarily low--not over 10 per cent.


Thermo-electric Diagram.
A diagram indicating the change in potential difference for a fixed
difference of temperature between different metals at different
temperatures. It is laid out with rectangular co-ordinates. On one axis
temperatures are laid off, generally on the axis of abscissas. On the
other axis potential differences are marked. Different lines are then
drawn, one for each metal, which show the potential difference, say for
one degree centigrade difference of temperature between their junctions,
produced at the different temperatures marked on the axis of abscissas.


Fig. 333· THERMO-ELECTRIC DIAGRAM, GIVING POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE IN
C. G. S. UNITS.


Thus taking copper and iron we find at the temperature 0° C. (32° F.) a
difference of one degree C. (1.8° F.) in their junctions will produce a
potential difference of 15.98 micro volts, while at 274.5° C. (526.1°
F.) the lines cross, and zero difference of potential is indicated.
Taking the lead line on the same diagram it crosses the iron line a
little above 350° C. (662° F.), indicating that if one junction is
heated slightly above and the other is heated slightly below this
temperature no potential difference will be produced. Lead and copper
lines, on the other hand, diverge more and more as the temperature
rises.


533   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Thermo-electric Inversion.
The thermo-electric relations of two conductors vary at different
temperatures. Sometimes at a definite point they have no electro-motive
force and after passing this point the positive plate becomes a negative
one and vice versa. This is inversion, or reversal. (See Thermo-electric
Diagram.)

Synonym-- Thermo-electric Reversal.


Thermo-electricity.
Electric energy, electro-motive force or electrification produced from
heat energy by direct conversion. It is generally produced in a circuit
composed of two electric conductors of unlike material, which circuit
must possess at least two junctions of the unlike substances. By heating
one of these to a higher temperature than that of the other, or by
maintaining one junction at a different temperature from that of the
other a potential difference is created accompanied by an electric
current.

In many cases differential application of heat to an identical material
will develop potential difference. This effect, the converse of the
Thomson effect, is not used to produce currents, as in a closed circuit
the potential differences due to differential heating would neutralize
each other.


Thermo-electric Junction.
A junction between two dissimilar conductors, which when heated or
cooled so as to establish a differential temperature, as referred to the
temperature of the other junction, produces potential difference and an
electric current.


Thermo-electric Pile, Differential.
A thermo-electric pile arranged to have opposite faces subjected to
different sources of heat to determine the identity or difference of
temperature of the two sources of heat. It corresponds in use to a
differential air thermometer.


Thermo-electric Power.
The coefficient which, multiplying the difference of temperature of the
ends of a thermo-electric couple, gives the potential difference,
expressed in micro-volts. It has always to be assigned to a mean or
average temperature of the junctions, because the potential difference
due to a fixed difference of temperature between two metals varies with
the average temperature of the two junctions. (See Thermo-electric
Diagram.)

For bismuth and antimony at 19.5° C. (67.1° F.) it is 103 microvolts per
degree Centigrade (1.8° F.). This means that if one junction is heated
to 19° C. and the other to 20° C. (66.2° F. and 68.0° F.) a potential
difference of 103 micro-volts will be produced.

The potential difference is approximately proportional to the difference
of temperature of the two junctions if such difference is small. Hence
for large differences of potential the thermo-electric power coefficient
does not apply.

As a differential function it is thus deduced by Sir William Thomson,
for expressing the E. M. F. in a thermo-electric circuit: If a circuit
is formed of two metals with the junctions at indefinitely near
temperatures, t and t + dt, and dE is the E. M. F. of the circuit, then
the differential coefficient dE/dt is called the thermo-electric power
of the two metals for the temperature t.


534   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Thermo-electric Series.
The arrangement of possible thermoelectric elements, q. v., in a table
in the order of their relative polarity. Bismuth and antimony form a
couple in which when their junction is heated the bismuth acts as the
positive or negatively charged element and antimony as the negative or
positively charged. Between these two extremes according to Seebeck the
series runs as follows:

  Antimony,   Silver,      Copper,
  Arsenic,    Gold,        Platinum,
  Iron,       Molybdenum,  Palladium,
  Steel,      Tin,         Cobalt,
  Cadmium,    Lead,        Nickel,
  Tungsten,   Mercury,     Bismuth.
  Zinc,       Manganese,

A differential temperature of 1° C. (1.8° F.) in a bismuth-antimony
couple maintains a potential difference of 103 micro-volts.

Matthiessen gives a different series; it is arranged in two columns; the
first column has positive coefficients annexed the second has negative.
On subtracting the greater one from the lesser, which, if the two
elements are in different columns, of course amounts to adding after
changing the negative sign, the relative potential difference due to the
combination is obtained.
            +                           -
  Bismuth    25      Gas Coke          0.1
  Cobalt      9      Zinc              0.2
  Potassium   5.5    Cadmium           0.3
  Nickel      5      Strontium         2.0
  Sodium      3.     Arsenic           3.8
  Lead        1.03   Iron              5.2
  Tin         1      Red Phosphorous   9.6
  Copper      1      Antimony          9.8
  Silver      1      Tellurium       179.9
  Platinum    0.7    Selenium        290

Thus the relative E. M. F. of a bismuth-nickel couple, as both are in
the + column, would be 25 - 5 = 20; that of a cobalt-iron couple, one
being in the + column the other in the - column, would be 9 + 5.2 =
14.2. Alloys are not always intermediate to their constituents, and
small amounts of impurities affect the results largely. This may account
for the discrepancies of different observers. Other compounds could be
introduced into the series.

Artificial silver sulphide has been used by Becquerel in a
thermo-electric battery.


535   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Thermo-electric Thermometer.
A species of differential thermometer. It consists of two
thermo-electric junctions connected in opposition with a galvanometer in
the circuit. Any inequality of temperature in the two ends or junctions
produces a current shown by the galvanometer. It may be used to
determine the temperature of a distant place, one of the junctions being
located there and the other being under control of the operator. If the
latter junction is heated until no current is produced its temperature
is evidently equal to that of the distant couple or junction. The
heating may be done with hot water or mercury, or other melted metal.
The temperature of the water, or other substance, gives the temperature
of the distant place.


Thermolysis.
Decomposition by heat; dissociation. All compound bodies are
decomposable by heat if it is intense enough. Hence at very elevated
temperatures there can be no combustion.

Synonym--Dissociation.


Thermometer.
An instrument for indicating the intensity of heat. Three scales of
degrees of heat are used in practise, the Fahrenheit, Réamur, and
Centigrade, each of which is described under its own title. (See Zero,
Thermometric-Zero, Absolute.) The ordinary thermometer depends on the
expansion of mercury; in some cases alcohol is used. Besides these the
compound bar principle as used in the thermostat (see Thermostat,
Electric) is employed.


Thermometer, Electric.
(a) A thermometer whose indications are due to the change of resistance
in conductors with change of temperature. Two exactly similar resistance
coils maybe electrically balanced against each other. On exposing one to
a source of heat, its resistance will change and it will disturb the
balance. The balance is restored by heating the other coil in a vessel
of water when the temperature of the water gives the temperature of both
coils. The coils are enclosed in water-tight metallic cases.

Synonym--Electric Resistance Thermometer.

(b) A differential thermometer may be made by connecting with a pair of
conductors, two thermo-electric couples in opposition to each other, and
including a galvanometer in series. On heating the junction of one
couple more than that of the other a current at once goes through the
galvanometer.

(c) (See Thermometer, Kinnersley's.)

Synonym--Thermo-electrometer.


536   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Fig. 334. KINNERSLEY'S THERMOMETER.


Thermometer, Kinnersley's.
A thermo-electrometer. A large glass tube is mounted on a standard and
communicates with a small tube parallel to it. Water is poured in so as
to rise in the small tube. Two wires terminating in bulbs enter the
large tube by its top and bottom. The upper wire can be adjusted by
moving up and down through a stuffing box. On discharging a Leyden jar
through the space between the knobs on the two wires the water for a
moment rises in the small tube. There is little or no accuracy in the
instrument. It is allied to the electric mortar (see Mortar, Electric)
as a demonstrative apparatus.

Synonyms--Electric Thermometer--Thermo-electrometer.


Thermo-multiplier.
A thermo-electric battery including a number of couples. The term is
generally applied to a small battery with its similar junctions facing
in one direction and used for repeating Melloni's experiments on radiant
energy, or so-called radiant heat.


537   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Thermophone.
An apparatus for reproducing sounds telephonically by the agency of
heat; a receiving telephone actuated by heat. Thus a wire may be
attached to the centre of a diaphragm and kept in tension therefrom, and
the transmitting telephone current may be caused to pass through it. The
wire changes in temperature and consequently in length with the pulses
of current going through it and vibrates the diaphragm, reproducing the
sound. It is to be distinguished from the thermo-electric telephone
which involves the action of potential difference produced by
thermo-electric action.


Thermostat, Electric.
A thermostat or apparatus, similar to a thermometer in some cases, for
closing an electric circuit when heated. It is used in connection with
automatic fire alarms to give warning of fire. For this use a
temperature of 52° C. (125° F.) is an approved one for setting one at,
to complete the circuit. It is also applied to regulation of
temperature, as in incubators.

(a) One kind of thermostat consists of a compound bar wound into a
spiral and fastened at one end, to which a terminal of a circuit is
connected. The bar may be made of two strips of brass and iron riveted
together, and wound into a spiral. When such a bar is submitted to
changes of temperature it bends in different directions, because brass
expands and contracts more under changes of temperature than does iron.
A contact point, to which the other terminal is connected, is arranged
to make contact with the spiral at any desired degree of temperature,
thus closing an electric circuit and ringing a bell, opening or closing
a damper, or doing anything else to notify an attendant or to directly
change the temperature.

If the brass forms the outside of the spiral, increase of temperature
makes the bending of the spiral bring the coils still closer. If the
brass forms the inside, increase of temperature makes the spiral tend to
become less close. As shown in the cut, the brass should lie along the
inside of the spiral.

Sometimes a straight compound bar is used, one of whose ends is fastened
and the other is free. As the temperature changes such a bar curves more
or less, its free end moving to and fro. Two contact screws are
provided, one on each side of its free end. If the temperature falls it
makes contact with one of these; if the temperature rises, it makes
contact with the other. Thus it may close one of two circuits, one for a
fall and the other for a rise in temperature.

It is well to introduce a third bar between the brass and iron ones,
made of some material of intermediate coefficient of expansion.

(b) Another kind of thermostat comprises a vessel of air or other gas,
which, expanding by heat, actuates a piston or other device and closes
an electric circuit. Synonym--Electro-pneumatic Thermostat.

(c) Another form utilizes the expansion of mercury. The mercury is made
part of an open electric circuit. As it expands it comes in contact with
the other terminal of the circuit, thus completing it, when the current
gives an alarm or does as is provided for in the apparatus employed.

Thermostats may be worked on either open or closed circuits; normally
the circuit may be open as described and may close on rise of
temperature, or it may be normally closed and open as the temperature
rises.


Fig. 335. ELECTRIC THERMOSTAT.


538   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Thomson Effect.
In an unequally heated conductor the differential heating is either
increased as in iron, or diminished as in copper by a current. In lead
the phenomenon does not occur. It is termed the Thomson effect. It is
intimately related to the Peltier effect.

In a thermo-electric couple a heated junction is the source of
electro-motive force, if heated more than other parts of the circuit.
The current in a copper-iron junction flows from the copper to the iron
across the heated junction. A hot section of an iron conductor next to a
cold section of the same is a source of thermoelectricity, in the sense
that the hot section is negative to the colder. A current passing from
the hot to the cold iron travels against rising potentials, and cools
the iron in the cooler parts. As it passes to the hotter parts it
travels against falling potentials and hence heats the iron in these
parts. In this way a current intensifies differential heating in an iron
conductor.

In copper the reverse obtains. In it the thermo-electric relations of
hot and cold copper are the reverse of those of iron, and a current
tends to bring all parts of a differentially heated copper conductor to
an identical temperature.

As a current travels in iron from hot to cold it absorbs heat; in copper
traveling from cold to hot it absorbs heat.

The convection of heat by a current of electricity in unequally heated
iron is negative, for it is opposed to that convection of heat which
would be brought about by the flow of water through an unequally heated
tube. In copper, on the other hand, the electric convection of heat is
positive. (Daniell.)

The above effects of the electric current upon an unequally heated
conductor are termed the Thomson effects. In iron, at low red heat, they
are reversed and are probably again reversed at higher temperatures.


539   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Three Wire System.
A system of distribution of electric current for multiple arc or
constant potential service. It is the invention of Thomas A. Edison.

It includes three main wires which start from the central station or
generating plant, and ramify with corresponding reduction in size,
everywhere through the district or building to be lighted. As ordinarily
carried out when dynamos are used, the dynamos are arranged in groups of
two. One lateral lead starts from the negative binding post of one
dynamo. The positive terminal of this dynamo connects to the negative of
the other. Between the two dynamos the central or neutral lead is
connected. The other lateral lead starts from the positive binding post
of the second dynamo.

The lamps or other appliances are calculated for the potential
difference of a single dynamo. They are arranged between the neutral
wire and the laterals, giving as even a disposition as possible to the
two laterals.


Fig. 336. DIAGRAM OF THREE WIRE SYSTEM SHOWING NEUTRAL WIRE.


If evenly arranged and all burning or using current, no current goes
through the neutral wire. If all the lamps situated on one lateral are
on open circuit all the current goes through the neutral wire. In other
cases the neutral wire receives the excess of current only.

The advantages of the system are that it uses smaller wire than the two
wire system for lamps of the same voltage. If lamps of double the
voltage were used the two wire system would be most economical.


540   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Four wire and five wire systems have been more or less used, based on
identical considerations, and involving in each case the coupling of
three or of four dynamos respectively, or else employing a dynamo with
special armature connections to give the requisite three-fold or
four-fold division of total potential. In the five wire system the total
voltage is four times that of a single lamp, the lamps are arranged four
in series across the leads and the central wire is the only one that can
be considered a neutral wire. When lamps are burning entirely from three
side-leads they constitute a sort of three wire system by themselves,
and their central wire may for the time be a neutral wire.

In some of the three wire mains, especially in the larger sizes, the
neutral wire is made of much smaller section than that of a lateral
conductor, because in extensive districts it is practically impossible
that the current should be concentrated in the neutral wire.


Throw.
In a galvanometer the instantaneous deflection of the needle when the
contact or closing of the circuit is instantaneous, or when the
discharge is completed before the needle begins to move. The throw of
the needle is the datum sought when the ballistic galvanometer is used.

Synonym--Elongation.


Throw-back Indicator.
A drop annunciator, whose shutter or drop is electrically replaced.


Thrust-bearings.
Bearings to support the end-thrust or push of a shaft. In disc armatures
where the field-magnets attract the armatures in the direction of their
axis of rotation, thrust-bearings have to be provided. In ordinary
cylinder or drum armatures end-thrust is not applied, as a little end
motion to and fro is considered advantageous as causing more even wear
of the commutator surface.


Thunder.
The violent report which, as we hear it, succeeds the lightning flash in
stormy weather. It is really produced simultaneously with the lightning
and is supposed to arise from disturbance of the air by the discharge.
The rolling noise has been attributed to successive reflections between
clouds and earth, and to series of discharges reaching the ear from
different distances and through air of varying density. The subject is
obscure. By timing the interval from lightning flash to the report of
the thunder an approximate estimate of the distance of the seat of
discharge can be made. The first sound of the thunder should be timed.
An almost concurrence of thunder and lightning indicates immediate
proximity of the discharge.

[Transcriber's note: The speed of sound at sea level is about 5 seconds
per mile.]


Ticker.
A colloquial name for a stock or market report automatic printing
telegraph, which prints its quotations and messages on a long tape.


541   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Time Constant.
(a) When current is first turned into a circuit of considerable
self-induction it is resisted rather by the inductance than by the
resistance. It is governed by the ratio of resistance and self-induction
and this factor represents the time which it takes for the current to
reach a definite fraction of its final strength. This fraction is
(2.7183 - 1)/2.7183  or 0.63. 2.7183 is the base of the Napierian system
of logarithms. Thus if in any circuit we divide the inductance in
henries by the resistance in ohms, the ratio gives the time-constant of
the circuit, or it expresses the time which it will take for the current
to reach 0.63 of its final value.

(b) In a static condenser the time required for the charge to fall to
1/2.7183th part of its original value.


Time Cut-outs.
Cut-outs which automatically cut storage batteries out of the charging
circuit when they are sufficiently charged.


Time-fall.
In a secondary battery the decrease with use of electromotive force
maintained by a primary or secondary battery. As the battery becomes
spent its voltage falls. The conditions of the fall are represented by
its discharging curve. (See Curve, Discharging.)


Time-reaction.
A term in electro-therapeutics; the period of time occupied in the
passage of the effects of an electric current from nerve to muscle.


Time-rise.
In a secondary battery the increase of electromotive force produced
during the charging process. Its rate and conditions are graphically
shown in the charging curve. (See Curve, Charging.)


Tin.
A metal; one of the elements; symbol, Sn; atomic weight, 117.8;
equivalent, 58.9 and 29.5; valency, 2 and 4; specific gravity, 7.3.
It is a conductor of electricity.

  Relative resistance, compressed, (Silver = 1)   8.784
  Specific resistance at 0° C. (32° F.),   13.21   microhms.
  Resistance of a wire at 0° C. (32° F.),
  (a) 1 foot long, weighing 1 grain,       1.380   ohms.
  (b) 1 foot long, 1/1000 inch thick,     79.47     "
  (c) 1 meter long, weighing 1 gram,        .9632   "
  (d) 1 meter long, 1 millimeter thick,     .1682   "
  Resistance of a 1 inch cube at 0° C. (32° F.),   5.202   microhms.
  Percentage of variation in resistance
    per degree C. (1.8° F.), at about 20° C. (68° F.),  .0365
  Electro-chemical equivalent (hydrogen = .0105),   .619   mgs.
                                                    .310   "

542   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Tinnitus, Telephone.
A nervous affection of the ear, of the order of professional cramp; it
is attributed to too much use of the telephone.


Tin Sounders.
A recent addition to the single needle telegraph. (See Telegraph, Single
Needle.) It consists of small tin plates, cut and bent, and so fitted in
pairs to the instrument, that the needle as deflected strikes one or the
other on its right and left hand movements. The sounders can be made to
give sufficiently distinctive sounds to make sound-reading, q. v.,
possible. Commercial tin plate, which is really tinned iron, seems to
give the best results.


Fig. 337. TIN SOUNDERS.


Tissandier's Solution.
A solution for bichromate batteries. It is composed as follows:
  Water,                100 parts by weight
  potassium bichromate,  16 parts
  66° sulphuric acid,    37 parts.


Tongue of Polarized Relay.
The German silver extension of the vibrating or oscillating member of a
polarized relay, corresponding to the armature of an ordinary relay.


Tongue of Polarized Relay, Bias of.
In a Siemens' polarized relay the pole pieces are adjustable so that
they may be brought nearer to or withdrawn from the tongue. One of the
poles is adjusted so as to be nearer the tongue. This one-sided
adjustment is the bias. Its effect is that when the relay is unexcited
this pole attracts the armature so that it normally is drawn towards it.
This ensures the normal contact of the tongue either with the contact
point, or with the insulated stop piece or adjustment screw. Without
bias the armature remains in contact with or drawn towards whichever
pole it was last attracted to. In its usual use a bias is given it.


Top, Magnetic.
A toy illustrating magnetic attraction. It consists of a disc or body of
lead or other material, through which a magnetized steel spindle pointed
at its lower end is thrust. A number of short pieces of iron wire are
used with it. It is spun like an ordinary top upon the point of the
spindle and one of the pieces of iron wire is laid by the side of its
point. As it turns the magnetic adherence causes the piece of wire to be
carried along in one direction by the rotation of the spindle, until the
end is reached, when it goes over to the other side of the spindle and
travels back again.

By using bent pieces of wire of various shapes the most curious effects
are produced. Circles and S shaped pieces give good effects. To increase
the mysterious effect covered iron wire (bonnet wire) may be employed.


Fig. 338. MAGNETIC TOP.


543   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Torpedo, Electric.
(a) A fish, the Raia Torpedo, which possesses the power of giving
electric shocks. (See Ray, Electric.)

(b) An instrument of war; a torpedo whose operations include electrical
discharge or other electric function or factor of operation.


Torpedo, Sims-Edison.
A torpedo driven by an electric motor, and also steered by electricity.
Its motions are all controlled from the shore. The torpedo proper is
carried some distance below the surface of the water by a vessel
immediately above it, from which it is suspended by two rigid bars. In
the torpedo is a cable reel on which the conducting cable is disposed.
An electric motor and controlling gear are also contained within the
torpedo. In its front the explosive is placed. It is driven by a screw
propeller actuated by the electric motor. As it moves it pays out cable
so that it has no cable to draw after it through the water, the cable
lying stationary in the water behind it. This avoids frictional
resistance to its motion. The maintenance of the torpedo at a proper
depth is one of the advantages of the system.


544   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Torque.
A force tending to produce torsion around an axis. An example is the
pulling or turning moment of an armature of an electric motor upon its
shaft. It is often expressed as pounds of pull excited at the end of a
lever arm one foot long.

The expression is due to Prof. James Thompson, then of the University of
Glasgow.

"Just as the Newtonian definition of force is that which produces or
tends to produce motion (along a line), so torque may be defined as that
which produces or tends to produce torsion (around an axis). It is
better to use a term which treats this action as a single definite
entity than to use terms like 'couple' and 'moment,' which suggest more
complex ideas." (S. P. Thompson.)

A force, acting with radius r gives a torque equal to f X r ;  f and r
may be expressed in any units. S. P. Thompson gives the following
equivalents :

To reduce
  dyne-centimeters to gram centimeters, divide by   981
  dyne-centimeters to meter-kilograms   divide by   981E5
  dyne-centimeter, to pound-feet        divide by   13.56E6
  pound-feet to meter-kilograms         divide by   7.23

In each of these compound units the first unit is the force and the
second unit is the radius or lever arm of the torque.

Synonyms--Turning Moment--Moment of Couple--Axial Couple--Angular
Force--Axial Force.


Torsion Balance, Coulomb's.
Originally an apparatus in which electrostatic attraction or repulsion
is measured against the torsion of a filament, often of silk-worm cocoon
fibre. It consists in one form of a cylindrical glass vessel in which a
light shellac needle is suspended horizontally by a fibre. This needle
carries at one end a gilded disc or sphere and is suspended by a fine
wire, or filament. A proof plane, q. v., is excited by touching it to
the body under trial; it is then inserted in the case. The disc on the
needle is first attracted and then repelled. The position finally taken
by the needle is noted. The force of torsion thus produced is determined
by twisting the filament by the torsion head on the top of the apparatus
so as to move the needle a certain distance towards the proof plane. The
more the torsion-head has to be turned to carry the needle through a
specified arc the greater is the torsion effected or the greater is the
repulsion exerted, The torsional force of a wire is proportional to the
angle of torsion; this gives the basis for the measurement.

With magnetic needle it is used to measure magnetic repulsion and
attraction. The best material for the filament is quartz, but the
instrument is not very much used.


Torsion Galvanometer.
A galvanometer in which the torsion required to bring the index back to
zero, when the current tends to displace it, is made the measure of the
current strength or of the electro-motive force. It involves the use of
a torsion head, q. v., or its equivalent.


545   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Torsion Head.
The handle and disc from whose undersurface the filament depends to
which the needle or magnet is attached. It is turned to measure the
torsional effect, the edge of the disc being marked or graduated so as
to give the angle of deflection required to overcome the effect of the
torque of the needle.


Torsion Suspension.
Suspension by one or more wires, fibres, or ribands, involving the
restitutive force of torsion. Thus fibre suspension, q. v., is a variety
of torsion suspension.

Often a single riband of steel stretched horizontally and secured at
both ends is used, the suspended object, e. g., a balance beam, being
attached at its own centre to the centre of the stretched riband. Quite
sensitive balances are constructed on this principle. It is peculiarly
available where an electric current is to be transmitted, as absolute
contact is secured, as in William Thomson's ampere balances.


Touch.
A term applied to methods of magnetization, as "single touch," "double
touch," or "separate touch," indicating how the poles of the inducing
magnet or magnets are applied to the bar to be magnetized. Under the
titles of Magnetization the different methods are described.


Tourmaline.
A mineral; a subsilicate; characterized by the presence of boric
trioxide, which replaces aluminum oxide. It is notable for possessing
pyro-electric properties. (See Pyro-electricity.)


Tower, Electric.
The tower used in the tower system, q. v., of arc light illumination.


Tower System.
In electric lighting the system of lighting extended areas by powerful
arc lamps placed on high towers, generally of iron or steel frame-work.
The lights are thus maintained at a high elevation, giving greater
uniformity of illumination than if they were lower, but at the expense
of considerable light which is lost. Sometimes wooden masts are employed
instead of towers.

The principle involved is that the intensity of light at any place given
by a source of illumination varies with the square of its distance from
the place in question. Hence in using strong arc lights it is an object
to have the distances of all parts of the area illuminated at as nearly
uniform distances from the light as possible. An approximation to
uniformity is secured by placing the lamps at a very high elevation.


546   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Transformer.
In alternate current lighting the induction coil by which the primary
current with high initial electro-motive force is caused to produce a
secondary current with low initial electromotive force.

A typical transformer consists of a core of thin iron sheets. The
primary is of comparatively thin wire and often of ten or more times as
many turns as the secondary. The latter is of thicker wire. Where the
ratio of 10 to 1 as regards number of turns in the primary and secondary
obtains, the initial E. M. F. of the secondary is one-tenth that of the
primary circuit.

The cores are laminated, as described, to avoid the formation of
Foucault currents.

The counter-electro-motive force of the transformer when the secondary
circuit is open, prevents any but the slightest current from passing
through the primary. In proportion as the secondary is closed and its
resistance diminished, as by lighting more lamps in parallel, the
counter-electro-motive force of the transformer falls and more current
passes through the primary.


Fig. 339. FERRANTI'S TRANSFORMER.

The economy of the apparatus is in the fact that counter-electromotive
force reduces current through a conductor without absorbing any energy.
A resistance coil cuts down a current, but absorbs energy equal to the
current multiplied by the potential difference between the terminals of
the coil. This electric energy is converted into heat energy and is
wasted. But the counter-electromotive force of a transformer is exerted
to reduce current without production of heat and with little waste of
energy. This is one of the advantages of the alternating current system
of distribution of electric energy.

The object of a transformer being to secure safety to the person or to
life by the separation of the high potential primary or street circuit,
and the low potential house circuit, any contact of the two circuits in
the converter is a source of danger. Special care should be taken to
ensure absence of leakage, as it is termed. Mica or other insulation is
sometimes employed to prevent the wires from coming in contact by
piercing or sparking with the core and with each other.


547   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Transformer, Commuting.
A type of continuous current transformer, resembling a dynamo with
armature and field both stationary, but with revolving commutator, by
which the magnetic polarity of a double wound armature is made to
rotate. This secures the desired action, of a change or lowering of
potential.


Transformer, Continuous Alternating.
An apparatus for transforming a continuous into an alternating current
or the reverse. The combination of a continuous current dynamo with an
alternating current one is sometimes employed. It is a form of motor
dynamo.

Another type is a regular dynamo with ordinary commutator and with, in
addition thereto, two, three or four contact rings, connecting to as
many symmetrically disposed points in the winding of the armature. This
will give out or receive alternating currents of two, three or four
phases according to the number of collecting rings. One winding serves
for both alternating and continuous currents.


Transformer, Continuous Current.
A machine of the dynamo type for changing the potential of a circuit. In
one form two armatures are mounted on one shaft in a single field or in
separate fields; one is a motor armature driven by the original current;
the other generates the new current. This is a motor dynamo. In 1874
Gramme constructed a machine with ring armature with two windings, of
coarse and fine wire respectively, and with independent commutators.
Such dynamo could transform currents up or down.

Continuous current transformers have attained an efficiency of 83 per
cent. at full load, and of 75 per cent. at half load. Owing to the
balancing of the self-inductions of the two windings these machines do
not spark. As the driven and driving parts are contained in one rotating
part their friction is very slight.


Transformer, Core.
A transformer wound upon an enclosed core, such as the hedgehog
transformer (see Transformer, Hedgehog), or common induction coil.


548   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Transformer, Hedgehog.
An induction coil transformer whose iron core is composed of a bundle of
iron wires, which after the wire windings are in place have their ends
spread out to reduce to some extent the reluctance of the circuit, which
at the best is high, as the air acts as the return circuit.

This transformer has a low degree of hysteresis; and its efficiency for
very small loads or for no load is superior to that of the closed
magnetic circuit transformer.


Fig. 340. SWINBURNE'S HEDGEHOG TRANSFORMER.


Transformer, Multiple.
A transformer connected in parallel with others between the two leads of
the primary circuit. The term refers to the connection only and not to
any peculiarity of the transformer itself.


Transformer, Oil.
A transformer with oil insulation. The advantage of this insulation is
that if pierced it at once closes, so that no permanent injury ensues.
It is a self-healing form of insulation.


Transformer, Series.
Transformers connected in series upon the primary circuits. The term,
like "multiple transformers," only applies to the connection, not to the
transformer. Series transformers are but little used.


Transformer, Shell.
A transformer with its iron core entirely outside of and enclosing the
primary and secondary winding. It may be made by the use of outer iron
wire windings as core.


Transformer, Welding.
The transformer used for electric welding. (See Welding, Electric.) It
is a transformer with very long primary and exceedingly short and thick
secondary. It is used with the alternating current in the primary, and
produces in the secondary circuit which includes the bars to be welded a
very low potential difference.

Owing to the very low resistance of the secondary circuit this low
electro-motive force produces a very strong current, which develops the
requisite heat. The same type of transformer is used for brazing and
similar purposes.


549   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Transmitter.
In general electric phraseology, any instrument which produces signals
to be transmitted through a line or circuit is a transmitter. Thus the
Morse key in telegraphy or the Blake transmitter in telephony are
examples of such.


Transmitter, Carbon.
A form of microphone used as a telephone transmitter. (See Carbon
Telephone.)


Transposing.
A method of laying metallic circuits for telephoning. The wires at short
intervals are crossed so that alternate sections lie on opposite sides
of each other. It is done to avoid induction.


Transverse Electro-motive Force.
Electro-motive force in a substance in which electric displacement is
taking place, produced by a magnetic field. It is sometimes assigned as
the cause of the Hall effect, q. v.


Trimmer, Brush.
A shears for cutting off evenly and squarely the ends of copper dynamo
brushes. The brushes when uneven from wear are removed from the brush
holders, and their ends are sheared off in the trimmer.


Trolley.
A grooved metallic pulley or set of pulleys which runs along an active
wire of a circuit, a lead from which trolley goes to earth or connects
with another wire, so that the trolley takes current generally for
operating a street car motor placed upon the circuit leading from it; a
rolling contact with an electric lead.

Trolleys are principally used on electric railroads, and are now
universally of the sub-wire system, being at the end of a pole which is
inclined backward and forced upward by springs, so as to press the
trolley against the bottom of the wire. Thus the trolley does not
increase the sagging of the wire, but tends to push it up a little in
its passage.


Trolley, Double.
A trolley with two rollers or grooved wheels, placed side by side, and
running on two parallel leads of wire. It is adapted to systems
employing through metallic trolley lines with the motors in multiple
arc, connecting or across the two leads.


Trolley Section.
An unbroken or continuous section of trolley wire.


Trouvé's Solution.
An acid exciting and depolarizing solution for a zinc-carbon battery.
Its formula is as follows: Water, 80 parts; pulverized potassium
bichromate, 12 parts; concentrated sulphuric acid, 36 parts; all parts
by weight. The pulverized potassium bichromate is added to the water,
and the acid is added slowly with constant stirring. As much as 25 parts
potassium bichromate may be added to 100 parts of water. The heating
produced by the acid and water dissolves nearly all the potassium salt.
Use cold.


550   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


True Contact Force.
A species of electro-motive force whose existence is supposed to be
proved by the Peltier effect. The lowering in temperature of a contact
of dissimilar metals is attributed to a force that helps the current on
its way if in the direction of thermo-current proper to the junction and
opposing it if in the reverse. The true contact force is taken to
explain this phenomenon; thermo-electric force cannot, as there is no
heat or cold applied to the junction.


Trumpet, Electric.
An apparatus consisting of a vibrating tongue, kept in motion by
electricity as in the buzzer, q. v., placed in the small end of a
trumpet-shaped tube.


Trunking Switchboard.
A telephone switchboard arranged in sections, which sections are
connected by trunk lines, through which trunk lines the desired
connections
are made.


Trunk Lines.
In telephone distribution systems, the lines connecting different
stations, or different sections of a switch-board and used by anyone
requiring such connections; one trunk line answers for a number of
subscribers.


Tube, Electric.
A tube of glass around which is pasted a series of tinfoil circles,
diamonds, or little squares, or other form of interrupted conductor. The
pieces generally are placed in the line of a spiral. When a static
discharge of electricity takes place along the conductor a row of bright
sparks is produced at the breaks in the conductor. These by reflection
are multiplied apparently, and a beautiful effect of intersecting or
crossing spirals of sparks is presented.

The experiment is in line with the luminous pane and lightning jar, and
is used merely as a demonstration, or lecture experiment.

Synonym--Luminous Tube.


Tubular Braid.
A braid woven of tissue or worsted, and tubular or hollow. Its object is
to provide a covering which can be drawn over joints in covered wires.
In making the joint the ends of the wires are necessarily bared, and a
short piece of tubular braid is used for covering them. It is drawn by
hand over the joint.


Turns.
An expression applied to the convolutions of wire in a solenoid,
electro-magnet, or other apparatus or construction of that kind. A turn
indicates a complete encircling of the core or axis of the object. Thus
a wire wound five times around a bar gives five turns.

While this is its primary meaning the term if compounded may refer to
virtual turns. Thus an ampere-turn means one ampere passing through one
turn. But ten ampere-turns may mean ten amperes passing through ten
turns, five amperes passing through two turns, and so on. This use is
analogous to a dimension of length in a compound word, as foot-pound.

[Transcriber's note: "But ten ampere-turns may mean ten amperes passing
through ONE turn or one ampere through ten turns, and so on."]

There may be a number of kinds of turns qualified by descriptive
adjectives, as series-turns, the turns of wire in a series circuit of a
compound dynamo. In the same way there are shunt-turns. If series
ampere-turns or shunt ampere-turns are meant the word ampere should be
included.


551   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Turns, Dead, of a Dynamo.
The rotations of a dynamo armature while it is building itself up or
exciting itself. The expression is a bad one, as it is likely to be
confounded with the dead turns of armature wire.


Turns, Primary Ampere-.
The ampere-turns in a primary circuit of an induction coil or
transformer. In an electric welding transformer, or in the transformer
used in the alternating current system, where efficiency is an important
element, the ampere-turns in primary and secondary for an efficiency of
100 per cent. should be equal. In the case of an experimental induction
coil other considerations outweigh that of mere efficiency. Insulation,
including security from piercing, and the production of as long a spark
as possible, are, in these cases, the controlling consideration.

[Transcriber's note: A 100 per cent efficient transformer is impossible,
but over 99 per cent is common. At room temperature there is always some
lost flux, eddy currents and resistive losses.]


Turns, Secondary Ampere-.
The ampere-turns on the secondary circuit of an induction coil or
transformer. These depend on the path provided for the current. If of
negligible inductance, such as a number of incandescent lamps would
provide, the ampere-turns should be equal to those of the primary coil.
(See Turns, Primary Ampere.)


Typewriter, Electric.
A typewriter in which the work of printing or of pressing the type faces
against the paper, or printing ribbon, is done by electro-magnetic
attraction. The keys close electric circuits, throwing the
electro-magnetic action into play. This involves the use of electricity
for what is ordinarily only a mechanical process. The strength of the
impression, however, is independent of the touch of the operator. It has
not come into very extensive use.

[Transcriber's note: IBM introduced widely used electric typewriters in
1935.]


Ultra-gaseous Matter.
Gas so rarefied that its molecules do not collide or very rarely do so.

Experiments of very striking nature have been devised by Crookes and
others to illustrate the peculiar phenomena that this matter presents.
The general lines of this work are similar to the methods used in
Geissler tube experiments, except that the vacua used are very much
higher.

When the vacuum is increased so that but one-millionth of the original
gas is left the radiant state is reached. The molecules in their kinetic
movements beat back and forth in straight lines without colliding, or
with very rare collisions. Their motions can be guided and rendered
visible by electrification. A tube or small glass bulb with platinum
electrodes sealed in it, is exhausted to the requisite degree and is
hermetically sealed by melting the glass. The electrodes are connected
to the terminals of an induction coil or other source of high tension
electrification. The molecules which come in contact with a negatively
electrified pole are repelled from it in directions normal to its
surface. They produce different phosphorescent or luminous effects in
their mutual collisions.

Thus if they are made to impinge upon glass, diamond or ruby, intense
phosphorescence is produced. A piece of platinum subjected to molecular
bombardment is brought to white heat. A movable body can be made to move
under their effects. Two streams proceeding from one negative pole repel
each other. The stream of molecules can be drawn out of their course by
a magnet.

The experiments are all done on a small scale in tubes and bulbs,
resembling to a certain extent Geissler tubes.

[Transcriber's note: These effects are caused by plasma--ionized gas and
electrons.]


552   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Unbuilding.
The loss of its charge or excitation by a self-exciting dynamo. It is
the reverse of building-up. The latter indicates the exciting of the
field by the action of the machine itself; the former the spontaneous
loss of charge on open circuit or from other cause.


Underground Conductor.
An electric conductor insulated and placed under the surface of the
earth, as distinguished from aerial conductors.


Underground Electric Subway.
A subway for the enclosing of electric telegraph and other conductors
under the surface, generally in the line of streets, to do away with
telegraph poles and aerial lines of wire. Many systems have been
devised. The general type includes tubes called ducts in sets, called
conduits, bedded in concrete or otherwise protected. Every two or three
hundred feet the sets lead into a cistern-like cavity called a manhole.
The insulated wires or cables, generally sheathed with a lead alloy are
introduced into the tubes through the man-holes. A rope is first fed
through the tube. To do this short rods which screw together are
generally employed. One by one they are introduced, and each end one is
screwed to the series of rods already in the duct. When the end of the
duct is reached the rope is fastened to the last rod, and the rods are
then drawn through, unscrewed one by one and removed, the rope following
them. By means of the rope a windlass or capstan may be applied to draw
the cable into the duct. At least at every second man-hole the cables
have to be spliced.

Each cable may contain a large number of conductors of small size for
telephoning, or a smaller number for electric light and power. The
tendency is now to separate the different classes of wires in important
lines, placing the heavier wires on one side of the street and the
telephone and telegraph wires on the other. This of course necessitates
two separate conduits.

The advantage of underground distribution affects not only the
appearance of streets in doing away with unsightly telegraph poles, but
it also removes an element of danger at fires. Aerial wires interfere
greatly with the handling of ladders at fires, and expose the firemen
who attempt to cut them to danger to their lives from shock.


533   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Unidirectional. adj.
Having one direction as a "unidirectional current" or "unidirectional
leak." The term is descriptive, and applicable to many cases.


Uniform. adj.
Unvarying; as a uniform potential difference, uniform current or
conductor of uniform resistance per unit of length. The term is
descriptive, and its application and meaning are obvious.


Uniform Field of Force.
A field of evenly distributed force; one in which the number of lines of
force per unit of area of any equipotential surface is the same.


Unipolar. adj.
Strictly speaking this term means having only one pole, and is applied
to magnets, armatures and the like. In its use a solecism is involved,
for there is no such condition possible as unipolar magnetism or
distribution of magnetism. An example of its use is shown in unipolar
magnets. (See Magnet, Unipolar.)


Unipolar Armature.
An armature of a unipolar dynamo; an armature whose windings
continuously cut the lines of force about the one pole, and hence whose
polarity is unchanged in its rotation.


Unipolar Current Induction.
Current induction produced by moving a conductor through a magnetic
field of force so that it always cuts the lines in similar relation to
itself. Thus it produces a constant current through its own circuit, if
a closed one, and no commutator is required. As this case always in
practice amounts to the cutting of lines of force in the neighborhood of
a single pole the term unipolar is employed to designate the action.

The simplest representation of unipolar induction is the rotating of a
conductor around the end of a bar magnet, its axis of rotation
corresponding with the axis of the magnet.


Unipolar Dynamo.
A dynamo in which one part of the conductor slides on or around the
magnet, so as always to cut lines of force near the same pole of the
magnet.


Unit.
A directly or indirectly conventional and arbitrary quantity, in terms
of which measurements of things with dimensions expressible in the
chosen units are executed.

Thus for length the c. g. s. unit is the centimeter; the B. E. unit is
the foot.


554   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Unit, Absolute.
A unit based on the three fundamental units of length, mass and time.
These units are the centimeter, gram and second. Each one in itself may
be termed a fundamental absolute unit. The system of such units is
termed the centimeter-gram-second system.


Unit, Angle.
A factor or datum in angular velocity, q. v. It is the angle subtended
by a portion of the circumference equal in length to the radius of the
circle. It is equal very nearly to 57.29578° or 57° 17' 44.8".


Unit, B. A.
This term, while logically applicable to any of the British Association
units, is often restricted to the ohm as formerly defined by the British
Association, the B. A. Unit of Resistance, q. v.


Unit, Fundamental.
The three units of length, mass and time, the centimeter, gram and
second, are termed fundamental units. On them is based the absolute
system of units, and on multiples of them the practical system of units.


Unit Jar.
A Leyden jar which is used as a unit of measure of charge.

It consists of a Leyden jar about 4 inches long and 3/4 inch diameter,
with about 6 square inches of its outer and the same of its inner
surface coated with tinfoil. It is placed between a source of
electricity and a larger jar or battery of jars which is to be charged.
The inner coating connects with the machine; the outer coating with the
jars to be charged. Short conductors terminating in knobs connect with
inner and outer coatings, and the knobs are adjusted at any desired
distance apart.

By the charging operation the large jar or battery of jars receives a
charge by induction, and the charge of the small jar is at first equal
to this quantity. After a while a spark passes from knob to knob,
discharging the small jar. This indicates the reception by the large
jars of the quantity of electricity represented by the charge of the
small jar. The charging goes on, and for every spark approximately the
same quantity of electricity is received by the larger jars.

The sparking distance m is directly proportional to the quantity of
electricity, and inversely proportional to the area of coated surface,
or is proportional to the potential difference of the two coats. This is
only true for short sparking distance, hence for accuracy the knobs
should be adjusted not too far from each other.


555   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Unit of Supply.
A commercial unit for the sale of electric energy, as defined
provisionally by the English Board of Trade; 1,000 amperes flowing for
one hour under an E. M. F. of 1 volt; 3,600,000 volt-coulombs, or 1,000
watt-hours, are its equivalent. It is equal to 1000/746 = 1.34 electric
horse power.

Synonym--Board of Trade Unit.

[Transcriber's note: Now called a kilowatt-hour.]


Units, Circular.
A system of units of cross-sectional area, designed especially for use
in describing wire conductors. The cross-sectional area of such is
universally a circle, and the areas of two wires of different sizes vary
with the square of their radii or diameters. Hence if the area of a
circle of known diameter is determined it may be used as a unit for the
dimensions of other circles. Any other circle will have an area
proportioned to the area of the unit circle, as the squares of the
diameters are to each other.

In practise the commonest circular unit is the circular mil. This is the
area of a circle one mil, 1/1000 inch, in diameter and is equal to
.0000007854 square inch. A wire two mils in diameter has an area of four
circular mils; one ten mils in diameter has an area of one hundred
circular mils.

Thus if the resistance of a given length of wire 1 mil in diameter is
stated, the corresponding resistance of the same length of wire of the
same material, but of other diameter, is given by dividing the first
wire's resistance by the square of the diameter in mils of the wire in
question.

As it is a basic unit, most conveniently applied by multiplication, the
smaller units are used; these are the circular mil, and circular
millimeter.


Units, Derived.
Units derived by compounding or other processes, from the three
fundamental units. Such are the units of area, volume, energy and work,
momentum and electric units generally. In some cases the dimensions of
the derived unit may reduce to those of a simple unit as inductance
reduces to length, but the unit, as deduced from the fundamental ones,
is still a derived unit.


Units, Practical.
A system of units employed in practical computation. The absolute units,
especially in electricity, have been found too large or too small, and
the attempt to make them more convenient has resulted in this system. It
is based on exactly the same considerations as the absolute system of
units, except that multiples of the original fundamental units of
length, mass, and time have been taken as the base of the new system.
These basic units are multiples of the fundamental units. They are the
following: The unit of length is 1E9 centimeters; the unit of mass is
1E-11 gram; the unit of time remains 1 second.

While this has conduced to convenience in giving better sized units,
micro- and mega-units and other multiples or fractions have to be used.
The following are the principal practical electric units:

                             Electrostatic     Electromagnetic
                             C. G. S Units.    C. G. S. Units.
Intensity-Ampere   equal to     3E9               1E-1
Quantity-Coulomb     "          3E9               1E-1
Potential-Volt       "         (1/3)* E-2         1E8
Resistance-Ohm       "         (1/9)* E-11        1E9
Capacity-Farad       "         9E11               1E-9


556   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Universal Battery System.
A term in telegraphy. If several equal and high resistance telegraphic
circuits are connected in parallel with each other from terminal to
terminal of a battery of comparatively low resistance each circuit will
receive the same current, and of practically the same strength as if
only one circuit was connected. This is termed the universal battery
system. It is a practical corollary of Ohm's law. The battery being of
very low resistance compared to the lines the joining of several lines
in parallel practically diminishes the total resistance of the circuit
in proportion to their own number. Thus suppose a battery of ten ohms
resistance and ten volts E. M. F. is working a single line of one
hundred ohms resistance. The total resistance of the circuit is then one
hundred and ten ohms. The total current of the circuit, all of which is
received by the one line is 10/110 = .09 ampere, or 90 milliamperes. Now
suppose that a second line of identical resistance is connected to the
battery in parallel with the first. This reduces the external resistance
to fifty ohms, giving a total resistance of the circuit of sixty ohms.
The total current of the circuit, all of which is received by the two
lines in equal parts, is 10/60 = .166 amperes. But this is equally
divided between two lines, so that each one receives .083 ampere or 83
milliamperes; practically the same current as that given by the same
battery to the single line. It will be seen that high line resistance
and low battery resistance, relatively speaking, are required for the
system. For this reason the storage battery is particularly available.
The rule is that the resistance of the battery shall be less than the
combined resistance of all the circuits worked by it.


Unmarked End.
The south-seeking pole of a magnet, so called because the other end,
called the marked end, is usually marked with a scratch or notch by the
maker, while the south pole is unmarked.


V.
(a) Symbol for velocity.

(b) Symbol or abbreviation for volume.

(c) Symbol or abbreviation for volt.


557   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


V. A.
Symbol or abbreviation for voltaic alternatives, q. v.


Vacuum.
A space destitute of any substance. The great pervading substance is in
general sense the atmosphere. It is the gaseous mixture which surrounds
and envelopes the earth and its inhabitants. It consists of a simple
mixture of oxygen, 1 part, nitrogen, 4 parts, with 4 to 6 volumes of
carbonic acid gas in 10,000 volumes of air, or about one cubic inch to
one cubic foot. It presses with a force of about 14.7 lbs. per square
inch under the influence of the force of gravity. The term vacuum in
practise refers to any space from which air has been removed. It may be
produced chemically. Air may be displaced by carbonic acid gas and the
latter may be absorbed by caustic alkali or other chemical. The air may
be expelled and the space may be filled with steam which is condensed to
produce the vacuum. Of course in all cases the space must be included in
an hermetically sealed vessel, such as the bulb of an incandescent lamp.
But the universal method of producing a vacuum is by air pumps. An
absolute vacuum means the entire absence of gas or air, something almost
impossible to produce. A high vacuum is sometimes understood to mean one
in which the path of the molecules is equal in length to the diameter of
the containing vessels, as in Crookes' Radiometer and other apparatus
for illustrating the radiant condition of matter. The air left after
exhaustion is termed residual air or residual atmosphere.

[Transcriber's note: Dry air is about .78 nitrogen, .21 oxygen, .01
argon, .00038 carbon dioxide, and trace amounts of other gases. Argon
was suspected by Henry Cavendish in 1785. It was discovered in 1894 by
Lord Rayleigh and Sir William Ramsay.]


Vacuum, Absolute.
A space free of all material substance. It is doubtful whether an
absolute vacuum has ever been produced.


Vacuum, High.
An approximate vacuum, so nearly perfect that the molecules of the
residual gas in their kinetic motions rarely collide, and beat back and
forth between the walls of the containing vessel, or between any solid
object contained in the vessel and the walls of the vessel. The gas in
such a vacuum is in the radiant or ultra-gaseous state. (See
Ultra-gaseous Matter.)


Vacuum, Low.
A vacuum inferior to a high vacuum; a vacuum in which the molecules
collide with each other and do not move directly from side to side of
the containing vessel.


Vacuum, Partial.
A space partially exhausted of air so as to contain less than an equal
volume of the surrounding atmosphere. It really should come below a low
vacuum, but is often treated as synonymous therewith.


Vacuum, Torricellian.
The vacuum existing above the mercurial column in a barometer tube. The
principle of this vacuum is applied in the Geissler and other air pumps.
(See Pump, Geissler--Pump, Sprengel--Pump, Swinburne.)


558   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Valency.
The relative power of replacing hydrogen or combining therewith
possessed by different elements; the number of atomic bonds belonging to
any element. Thus oxygen has a twofold valency, is bivalent or is a
dyad, and combines with two atoms of hydrogen because the latter has a
unitary atomicity, is monovalent or is a monad.


Valve, Electrically Controlled.
A valve which is moved by or whose movements are regulated by
electricity.

In the block system of railroad signaling the semaphores are worked by
weights and pneumatic cylinders and pistons. The valves for admitting or
releasing the compressed air are operated by coil and plunger mechanism.
There are many other instances of the control of valves by the electric
current.


Vapor Globe.
A protecting glass globe surrounding an incandescent lamp, when the lamp
is to be used in an atmosphere of explosive vapor, as in mines or
similar places; or when in a place where it is exposed to dripping water
which would break the hot lamp bulb if it fell upon it.


Variable Period.
The period of adjustment when a current is started through a conductor
of some capacity. It is the period of duration of the variable state, q.
v., in a conductor. As indicated in the next definition in a cable of
high electrostatic capacity a variable period of nearly two minutes may
exist. This indicates the retardation in signaling to be anticipated in
cables and other lines of high capacity.


Variable State.
When an electric circuit is closed the current starts through the
conductor with its full strength from the point of closure, and advances
with a species of wave front so that some time elapses before it attains
its full strength in the most distant parts of the conductor, owing to
its having to charge the conductor to its full capacity at the given
potential. The state of the line while the current thus varies is called
the variable state.

A long telegraph line when a message is being transmitted may be always
in the variable state. The current at the receiving end may never attain
its full strength.

In the case of such a conductor as the Atlantic cable, 108 seconds would
be required for a current to attain 9/10 of its full strength at the
distant end, and but 1/5 second to attain 1/100 of its final value.
During the period of increase of current the variable state exists.


Variation of the Compass.
The declination of the magnetic needle. (See Elements, Magnetic.) As the
declination is subject to daily, annual and secular variations, it is
unfortunate that this term is synonymous with declination. Thus the
variation of the compass means its declination, while there is also the
variation of the declination and of other elements. The term variation
of the compass is more colloquial than the more definite expression
"declination," or "magnetic declination."


559   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Variometer.
An apparatus used in determining the relative values of the horizontal
component of the earth's magnetic field in different places.


Varley's Condenser.
A static condenser whose conducting surfaces are platinum electrodes
immersed in dilute sulphuric acid. When the potential difference is
1/50th that of a Daniell's cell, two square inches of platinum have a
capacity equal to that of an air condenser whose plates have an area of
80,000,000 square inches, and separated 1/8th of an inch from each
other. As the E. M. F. increases the capacity also increases.


Varley's Resistances.
Variable resistances formed of discs of carbonized cloth, q. v., piled
up, and pressed together more or less firmly to vary the resistance as
desired.


Varnish.
A glossy transparent coating of the nature of paint, applied as a
protective, or ornamental coating to objects.


Varnish, Electric.
Alcoholic or etherial varnishes are the best for electrical apparatus.
They dry quickly and perfectly, and tend to form surfaces unfavorable to
the hygroscopic collection of water. Sealing wax dissolved in alcohol,
or shellac dissolved in the same solvent are used for electrical
apparatus, although the first is rather a lacquer than a varnish.
Etherial solution of gum-copal is used to agglomerate coils of wire. It
is well to bake varnished objects to harden the coating.


Varnish, Red.
A solution of sealing wax in 90 per cent. alcohol. It is best made thin
and applied in several coats, each coat being allowed to dry perfectly
before the next is applied. It is often seen on Leyden jars. It is a
protector from surface leakage.


Vat.
A vessel for chemical or other solutions. A depositing vat is one in
which a plating solution is worked, for the deposition of electroplate
upon articles immersed in the liquid, and electrolyzed by an electric
current.


Velocity.
The rate of motion of a body. It is usually expressed in distance
traversed per second of time. The absolute unit is one centimeter per
second or kine. The foot per second is very largely used also.

The dimensions of velocity are length (L) divided by time (T) or L/T.


Velocity, Angular.
Velocity in a circle defined by the unit angle, or the angle which
subtends a circular arc equal in length to itself. The radius of the
circle traversed by the moving body does not enter into this definition,
as the real velocity of the object is not stated. If its angular
velocity and the radius of the path it travels are given its actual
velocity can be deduced.


560   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Velocity of Signaling.
The speed of transmission of electric signals is affected by the nature
of the line, as regards its static capacity, and by the delicacy of the
receiving instruments, which may need a more or less strong current to
be affected. Thus of an original current one per cent. may suffice to
operate a sensitive instrument. This might give almost the velocity of
light, while if the instrument would only respond to the full current
nearly two minutes (see Variable State) might be required for the
production of a signal.


Velocity Ratio.
A term applied to the ratios existing between the electrostatic and
electro-magnetic units. If we take as numerators the dimensions of the
different qualities in the electrostatic system, and their dimensions in
the electro-magnetic system as denominators, the fractions thus obtained
reduce to expressions containing only velocity or V in some form. Thus
if we divide the dimensions of the electrostatic quantity by the
dimensions of electro-magnetic quantity the quotient is simply V or
velocity. A like division for potential, electrostatic and
electro-magnetic gives (1/V), and so on.

The value of the velocity ratio is very nearly 3E10 (sometimes given as
2.98E10) centimeters per second. This is almost exactly that of light
(2.9992E10 centimeters per second.) This is one of the proofs of Clerk
Maxwell's magnetic theory of light. (See Maxwell's Theory of Light.)

[Transcriber's note: The SI metre was defined in 1983 such that the
speed of light in a vacuum is exactly 299,792,458 metres per second or
about 186,282.397 miles per second.]


Ventilation of Armature.
In a dynamo or motor ventilation of the armature is often provided for
by apertures through it in order to prevent heating. This heating is
caused by Foucault currents. By proper disposition of the interior of
the armature with properly disposed vanes and orifices an action like
that of a fan blower can be produced, which by creating a current of air
cools the machine very efficiently.


Verticity, Poles of.
Points upon the earth's surface where the horizontal component of
magnetic force disappears, leaving only the vertical component active.
The term is derived from the verticity of the dipping needle when over
either of them.


561   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Vibration Period.
In electrical resonance the period of a vibration in an electrical
resonator. The length of this period indicates the quality of the
resonator in responding to electrical oscillations by sympathetic
vibration. For conductors of small resistance the period is thus
calculated. Let T be the period of one-half a full vibration; L the
absolute coefficient of self-induction expressed in centimeters or in
henries X 10-9; C the electrostatic capacity of the terminals, also
expressed in the same unit; v the velocity of light in centimeters per
second. Then we have the formula

  T = PI * SquareRoot( L * C ) / v

[Transcriber's note: If the inductance is in henries and the capacitance
in farads, frequency in hertz = 1/(2 * PI * squareRoot( L * C ) )]


Vibration, Sympathetic.
A vibration in a cord or other body susceptible of elastic vibration
produced by the vibrations of exactly the same period in a neighboring
vibrating body. Thus if two tuning forks are tuned to precisely the same
pitch, and are placed near each other, if one is sounded it will start
the other into vibration by sympathy.

In electricity its application is found in electric resonance
experiments. The resonator has a definite period of electric resonance,
and is made to give a spark by the exciter of identical period. This is
by what may be called electric sympathetic vibration, and is exactly
analogous to the action of the tuning forks upon each other.


Vibrator, Electro-magnetic.
The make and break mechanism used on induction coils, or other similar
apparatus in which by alternate attractions by and releases from an
electro-magnet an arm or spring is kept in motion. In most cases the
work is done by a single magnet, whose armature is attracted to the
magnet, when the latter is excited, but against the action of a spring
which tends to pull it away from the magnet. In its motions a make and
break action is produced, to give the requisite alternations of
attraction and release. Two electro-magnets may be connected so as
alternately to be excited and keep an arm carrying a mutual armature in
vibration, or the same result may be attained by a polarized relay. The
make and break is illustrated under Bell, Electric--Coil, Induction--
Anvil.


Villari's Critical Value.
Magnetization induced or residual in a wire is diminished on stretching,
provided that the magnetization corresponds to an inducing force above a
certain critical value, known as above; this being (Sir Wm. Thomson)
about 24 times the terrestrial intensity. Below that critical value
tension increases the magnetization of a magnetized wire. The effects of
transverse expansive stress are opposed to those of longitudinal
stretching. (Daniell.)


Viole's Standard of Illuminating Power.
A standard authorized by the International Congress of 1881. It is the
light given by one square centimeter of platinum, melted, but just at
the point of solidification. It is equal to 20 English standard candles
almost exactly.

It has not been very widely accepted, the tendency among photometrists
being to adhere to the old standards, carcel or candle. It is obvious
that actual use of the Viole would be very inconvenient and would
involve expensive apparatus, difficult to work with.

Synonym--Viole.


562   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Vis Viva.
The kinetic energy of a body in motion; "mechanical energy."


Vitreous Electricity.
Positive electricity; the electricity produced on the surface of glass
by rubbing it with silk and other substances. (See Electrostatic
Series.)

The term "positive electricity" should be allowed to supplant it. It is
the analogue and opposite of resinous electricity.


Vitriol, Blue.
A colloquial or trade name for copper sulphate (Cu SO4).


Vitriol, Green.
A colloquial or trade name for ferrous sulphate (Fe SO4).


Vitriol, White.
A colloquial or trade name for zinc sulphate (Zn SO4).


Volt.
The practical unit of electro-motive force or potential difference. It
may be referred to various data.

An electro-motive force of one volt will cause a current of one ampere
to flow through a resistance of one ohm.

A condenser of one farad capacity charged with one coulomb will have a
rise of potential of one volt.

The cutting of 100,000,000 lines of force per second by a conductor
induces one volt E. M. F.

A Daniell's battery gives an E. M. F. of 1.07 volts; about the most
familiar approximate standard that can be cited.

It is equal to 1/300 absolute electrostatic unit.

It is equal to 1E8 absolute electro-magnetic units.

[Transcriber's note: The SI definition of a volt: The potential
difference across a conductor when a current of one ampere dissipates
one watt of power.]


Voltage.
Potential difference or electro-motive force expressed in volts; as a
voltage of 100 volts. Thus voltage may express the electro-motive force
absorbed in a conductor, while electro-motive force is a term generally
applied where it is produced, evolved or present in the object. The term
voltage of a lamp expresses simply the volts required, but does not
suggest the possession of electromotive force.


563   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Voltage, Terminal.
The voltage or potential difference at the terminals of an electric
current generator, such as a dynamo, as distinguished from the total
electro-motive force of the dynamo or generator.

In batteries the distinction is not generally made in practice; the
total electro-motive force of the battery is made the basis of
calculations.


Voltaic. adj.
This adjective is used to qualify a great many things appertaining to or
connected with current electricity. It is derived from Volta, the
inventor of the voltaic battery, and now tends to displace the term
"galvanic," formerly in general use.


Voltaic Alternatives.
A term used in electro-therapeutics or medical electricity to indicate
an alternating battery current.

Synonym--Alternative current.


Voltaic Effect.
The potential difference developed by contact of different conductors.
It is the basis of the contact theory, q. v., of electricity, although
it may be accepted as the expression for a condition of things by those
who reject the above theory. This potential difference is slight when
the conductors are separated, but it is calculated that it would be
enormous could the metals be so quickly separated as to hold each its
own charge.

Thus if a copper and a zinc plate are assumed to be in contact, really
1/20000000 centimeter or 1/50000000 inch apart, they may be treated as a
pair of condenser plates. Being so near, their density of charge, which
is a strongly bound charge, is enormous. If it were possible to separate
them without permitting any discharge, their potential would rise by the
separation, on the principle of Epinus' condenser, q. v., to such an
extent that they would spark through twenty feet of air. (See Volta's
Fundamental Experiment.)


Voltaic Electricity.
Electricity of low potential difference and large current intensity;
electricity such as produced by a voltaic battery; current or dynamic
electricity as opposed to static electricity.


Voltameter.
In general an apparatus for determining the quantity of electricity
passing through a conductor by measuring the electrolytic action it can
perform.


Voltameter, Copper.
An apparatus which may be of similar construction with the silver
voltameter (see Voltameter, Silver), but in which a copper anode and a
solution of copper sulphate are substituted for the silver anode and
silver nitrate solution. One coulomb corresponds to .329 milligram or
.005084 grain of copper deposited. It is not accepted as of as high a
standard as the silver voltameter.

The electrodes should be placed half an inch from each other. Two square
plate electrodes may conveniently be used, and not less than two square
inches on each plate should be the area per ampere of current.


564   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Voltameter, Differential, Siemens'.
A volume or gas voltameter with duplicate eudiometers and pairs of
electrodes. It is used for determining the resistance of the platinum
conductor used in his pyrometer. A current divides between the two
voltameters; in one branch of the circuit the platinum conductor is
placed, in the other a known resistance. The current strength varying
inversely with the resistance, the resistances of the two conductors are
inversely proportional to the gas evolved.


Voltameter, Gas.
A voltameter whose indications are based on the electrolysis of water,
made an electrolyte by the addition of sulphuric acid. The gases evolved
are measured. It may take several forms.

In one form it is an apparatus consisting of a single eudiometer or
graduated glass tube with upper end closed and its lower end or mouth
open, collecting the mixture of hydrogen and oxygen.

In the form shown in the cut three tubes are connected, the side tubes
representing eudiometers. For each side tube there is a platinum
electrode. In this apparatus the oxygen and hydrogen are connected in
opposite tubes. A is an open tube filled with dilute sulphuric acid. By
opening the cocks on B and C they can both be completely filled with
acid. As shown in the cut, this operation is not yet completed. The
hydrogen alone may in this case be measured.

The mixed gas voltameter has only one eudiometer.

The exact equivalents are only approximately known. The volume of mixed
gases per coulomb is given as .1738 cubic centimeters (Ayrton); .172
cubic centimeters (Hospitalier); and other values by other authorities.
The hydrogen is equal to 1/3 of the mixed gases almost exactly.

Synonyms--Volume Voltameter--Sulphuric Acid Voltameter.

The gas is measured at 0º (32º F.) and 76 centimeters, or 30 inches
barometer.


Fig. 341. GAS VOLTAMETER.


565   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


If the gas is measured in cubic inches, the temperature in degrees F.,
and the barometric height in inches, the following formula may be used
for reduction to standard pressure and temperature. It is the volume
corresponding to one coulomb.
  ( .01058 * 30 * (491 + Fº - 32) ) / (h* 491)

For the metric measurements and degrees C.
  (.1738 * 76 * (273 + Cº)) / (h X 273)


Voltameter, Silver.
An apparatus consisting of a platinum vessel containing a solution of
silver nitrate into which solution a silver anode dips, whose end is
wrapped in muslin to prevent the detachment of any particles. When a
current is passed by connecting one terminal to the dish and the other
to the rod, securing a proper direction of current, silver will be
deposited on the dish and the same amount will be dissolved from the
rod. The dish is weighed before and after the test. Its increase in
weight gives the silver deposited.


FIG. 342. SILVER VOLTAMETER.


In the cut Ag is the silver anode, Pt is the platinum dish, r is the
conducting rod, p is a wooden standard, Cu is a copper plate on which
the dish rests and which also serves as a conductor and contact surface,
b is a muslin cloth to place over the silver plate to prevent detached
particles falling in the dish; s s' are the binding screws.

The weight of silver corresponding to a coulomb is given variously by
different authorities. Ayrton and Daniell take 1.11815 milligrams or
.017253 grain of metallic silver. Other determinations are as follows:
  1.1183 milligrams   (Kohlrausch).
  1.124   "           (Merscart).

The solution of silver nitrate should be from 15 to 30 per cent. of
strength. The current should not exceed one ampere per six square
inches; or in other words not more than about 3/1000 grain of silver
should be deposited per second on a square inch area of the dish. The
edge of the silver disc or anode should be about equidistant from the
side and bottom of the dish. The latter notes are due to Lord Rayleigh.


566   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Voltameter, Weight.
A voltameter in which the amount of decomposition is determined by
weighing the products, or one of the products of the electrolysis. The
titles Voltameter, Copper, and Voltameter, Silver, may be cited.


Fig. 343. WEIGHT VOLTAMETERS.


In the cuts are shown examples of weight gas voltameters. These are
tubes light enough to be weighed when charged. Each contains a
decomposition cell T, with its platinum electrodes, and charged with
dilute sulphuric acid, while t is calcium chloride or other drying agent
to collect any water carried off as vapor or as spray by the escaping
gases; c are corks placed in position when the weighing is being
executed, so as to prevent the calcium chloride from absorbing moisture
from the air.

In use the tubes are weighed. They are then connected to the circuit,
after removal of the corks, and the decomposition proceeds. After a
sufficient time they are removed, the corks put in place, and they are
weighed again. The loss gives the water decomposed.

The water corresponding to one coulomb is
  .09326 milligram   .001430 grain,   Ayrton,
  .092      "                         Hospitalier,
  .0935     "                         Daniell.


567   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Voltametric Law.
The law on which voltameters are based. The amount of chemical
decomposition produced by an electric current in a given electrolyte is
proportional to the quantity of electricity passed through the solution.


Fig. 344. VOLTA'S FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIMENT.


Volta's Fundamental Experiment.
The moistened finger is placed on the upper plate of a condensing or
electrophorous electroscope. The other hand holds a plate of zinc z,
soldered to a plate of copper c. The lower plate is touched with the
copper. On removing the cover the gold leaves l diverge and with
negative electricity. Hence zinc is supposed to be positively
electrified when in contact with copper. The experiment is used to
demonstrate the contact theory of electricity.


568   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Volta's Law of Galvanic Action.
The electro-motive force between any two metals in an electro-chemical
series (see Electro-Chemical Series) is equal to the sum of the
electro-motive forces between all the intervening metals.


Volta's Law of Thermo-electricity.
In a compound circuit, consisting of a number of different metals, all
points of which are at the same temperature, there is no current.


Volt, B. A.
The volt based on the B. A. ohm. It is equal to .9889 legal volt.


Volt, Congress.
The volt based upon the congress or legal ohm; the legal volt.


Volt-coulomb.
The unit of electric work; the watt-second; it is equivalent to
  1.0E7     ergs.
   .24068   gram degree C. (calorie)
   .737337  foot lbs.,
   .00134   horse power seconds.


Volt Indicator.
A form of easily read voltameter for use in electric light stations and
for similar work.


Volt, Legal.
The legal volt based upon the legal ohm. It is equal to 1.00112 B. A.
volt.


Voltmeter.
An instrument for determining the potential difference of any two
points.

In many cases it is a calibrated galvanometer wound with a coil of high
resistance. The object to be attained is that it shall receive only an
insignificant portion of current and that such portion shall suffice to
actuate it. If connected in parallel with any portion of a circuit, it
should not noticeably diminish its resistance.

The divisions into which ammeters range themselves answer for
voltmeters. In practice the same construction is adopted for both. The
different definitions of ammeters in disclosing the general lines of
these instruments are in general applicable to voltmeters, except that
the wire winding of the coils must be of thin wire of great length. The
definitions of ammeters may be consulted with the above understanding
for voltmeters.

In the use made of voltmeters there is a distinction from ammeters. An
ammeter is a current measurer and all the current measured must be
passed through it. But while a voltmeter is in fact a current measurer,
it is so graduated and so used that it gives in its readings the
difference of potential existing between two places on a circuit, and
while measuring the current passing through its own coils, it is by
calibration made to give not the current intensity, but the
electro-motive force producing such current.

In use it may be connected to two terminals of an open circuit, when as
it only permits an inconsiderable current to pass, it indicates the
potential difference existing between such points on open circuit. Or it
may be connected to any two parts of a closed circuit. Owing to its high
resistance, although it is in parallel with the intervening portion of
the circuit, as it is often connected in practice, it is without any
appreciable effect upon the current. It will then indicate the potential
difference existing between the two points.


569    STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Voltmeter, Battery.
A voltmeter for use in running batteries. In one form (Wirt's) it is
constructed for a low range of voltage, reading up to two and a half
volts and having exactly one ohm resistance, thus giving the battery
some work to do.


Voltmeter, Cardew.
A voltmeter in which the current passing through its conductor heats
such conductor, causing it to expand. Its expansion is caused to move an
index needle. By calibration the movements of the needle are made to
correspond to the potential differences producing the actuating currents
through it. The magnetic action of the current plays no part in its
operation. It is the invention of Capt. Cardew, R. E.

The construction of the instrument in one of its most recent forms is
shown in the cut. On each side of the drum-like case of the instrument
are the binding screws. These connect with the blocks m and n. To these
the fine wire conductor is connected and is carried down and up over the
two pulleys seen at the lowest extremity, its centre being attached to
c. From c a wire is carried to the drum p, shown on an enlarged scale on
the left of the cut. A second wire from the same drum or pulley connects
to the spring S. The winding of the two wires is shown in the separate
figure of c, where it is seen that they are screwed fast to the
periphery of the little drum, and are virtually continuations of each
other. By the screw A the tension of the spring S is adjusted.

On the shaft of the little drum p is a pinion, which works into the
teeth of the cog-wheel r. The shaft of r is extended through the dial
of the instrument, and carries an index. The dial is marked off for
volts; g g and h h are standards for carrying the pulleys.


570   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


The action of the instrument is as follows. The current passing through
the wire heats it. This current by Ohm's law is proportional to the
electro-motive force between the terminals. As it is heated it expands
and as it cools contracts, definite expanding and contracting
corresponding to definite potential differences. As the wire expands and
contracts the block or pin c moves back and forth, thus turning the drum
p and cogwheel r one way or permitting it to turn the other way under
the pull of the spring S.


Fig. 345. CARDEW VOLTMETER.


In this construction for a given expansion of the wire the piece c only
moves one half as much. The advantage of using a wire twice as long as
would be required for the same degree of movement were the full
expansion utilized is that a very thin wire can be employed. Such a wire
heats and cools more readily, and hence the instrument reaches its
reading more quickly or is more deadbeat, if we borrow a phraseology
properly applicable only to instruments with oscillating indexes.

In the most recent instruments about thirteen feet of wire .0025 inch in
diameter, and made of platinum-silver alloy is used.


571   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


If the potential difference to be measured lies between 30 and 120 volts
the wire as described suffices. But to extend the range of the
instrument a resistance in series is required. If such resistance is
double that of the instrument wire, and remains double whether the
latter is hot or cold the readings on the scale will correspond to
exactly twice the number of volts. This is brought about in some
instruments by the introduction in series of a duplicate wire, precisely
similar to the other wire, and like it, carried around pulleys and kept
stretched by a spring.

[Transcriber's note: If the series resistance is twice that of the
voltmeter, the indicated voltage will be ONE THIRD of the total
voltage.]

Thus whatever ratio of resistance exists between the two wires cold, it
is always the same at any temperature, as they both increase in
temperature at exactly the same rate. Tubes are provided to enclose the
stretched wires and pulleys, which tubes are blackened.

The voltmeter is unaffected by magnetic fields, and, as its
self-induction is very slight, it is much used for alternating currents.
The tubes containing the wire may be three feet long.

Its disadvantages are thus summarized by Ayrton. It absorbs a good deal
of energy; it cannot be constructed for small potential differences, as
the wire cannot be made thicker, as it would make it more sluggish;
there is vagueness in the readings near the zero point and sometimes
inaccuracy in the upper part of the scale.


Volts, Lost.
The volts at the terminals of a dynamo at full load fall short of their
value on open circuit. The difference of the two values are termed lost
volts.


Voltmeter, Electrostatic.
A voltmeter based on the lines of the quadrant electrometer. It includes
two sets of quadrants, each oppositely excited by one of the two parts,
whose potential difference is to be determined. They attract each other
against a controlling force as of gravity.

One form has the two sets poised on horizontal axes, bringing the parts
so that the flat quadrants move in vertical planes.

In another form a number of quadrants are used in each set, the members
of the two sets alternating with each other. One set is fixed, the
others move and carry the index.


Vulcanite.
Vulcanized india rubber which by high proportion of sulphur and proper
vulcanization has been made hard. It is sometimes distinguished from
ebonite as being comparatively light in color, often a dull red, while
ebonite is black. For its electrical properties see Ebonite.

Both substances have their defects, in producing surface leakage.
Washing with weak ammonia, or with dilute soda solution, followed by
distilled water, is recommended for the surface, if there is any trouble
with surface leakage. It may also be rubbed over with melted paraffine
wax.


572   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


W.
(a) A symbol or abbreviation for watt.

(b) A symbol or abbreviation for work.

(c) A symbol or abbreviation for weight.


Wall Bracket.
A telegraph bracket to be attached to the external walls of buildings to
which wires are attached as they come from the poles to reach
converters, or for direct introduction into a building.


Wall Sockets.
Sockets for incandescent lamps constructed to be attached to a wall.


Ward.
Direction in a straight line; a term proposed by Prof. James Thompson.
The words "backward" and "forward" indicate its scope.


Water.
A compound whose molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom
of oxygen; formula, H2 O.

Its specific gravity is 1, it being the base of the system of specific
gravities of solids and liquids.

If pure, it is almost a non-conductor of electricity. If any impurity is
present it still presents an exceedingly high, almost immeasurable true
resistance, but becomes by the presence of any impurity an electrolyte.


Water Equivalent.
In a calorimeter of any kind the weight of water which would be raised
as much as is the calorimeter with its contents by the addition of any
given amount of heat received by the calorimeter.


Waterproof Lamp Globe.
An outer globe for incandescent lamps, to protect them from water.


Watt.
(a) The practical unit of electric activity, rate of work, or rate of
energy. It is the rate of energy or of work represented by a current of
one ampere urged by one volt electro-motive force; the volt-ampere.

It is the analogue in electricity of the horse power in mechanics;
approximately, 746 watts represent one electric horse power.

Ohm's law, taken as C = E/R, gives as values for current, C and E/R, and
for electro- motive force C R. In these formulas, C represents current
strength, R represents resistance and E represents electro-motive force.
Then a watt being the product of electro-motive force by current
strength, we get the following values for rate of electric energy, of
which the watt is the practical unit: (1) E2/R -- (2) C*E -- (3) C2 * R.


The equivalents of the watt vary a little according to different
authorities. Ayrton gives the following equivalents: 44.25 foot pounds
per minute--.7375 foot pounds per second--1/746 horse power. These
values are practically accurate. Hospitalier gives .7377 foot pounds per
second. Hering gives .737324 foot pounds per second, and 1000/745941
horse power.


573   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


It is equal to 1E7 ergs per second.

Synonym--Volt-ampere.

(c) It has been proposed to use the term as the unit of energy, instead
of activity or rate of energy (Sir C. W. Siemens, British Association,
1882); this use has not been adopted and may be regarded as abandoned.

[Transcriber's note; Watt is a unit of POWER--energy per unit of time.]


Watt-hour.
A unit of electric energy or work; one watt exerted or expended for one
hour.

It is equivalent to :
   866.448  gram-degrees C. (calories)
  2654.4    foot lbs.
  3600      watt-seconds or volt-coulombs.
    60      watt-minutes.


Watt-minute.
A unit of electric energy or work; one watt exerted or expended for one
minute.

It is equivalent to
  14.4408  gram-degrees C. (calories),
  44.240   foot pounds,
  60       watt seconds or volt-coulombs,
  1/60     watt hour.


Watts, Apparent.
The product in an alternating current dynamo of the virtual amperes by
the virtual volts. To give the true watts this product must be
multiplied by the cosine of the angle of lead or lag. (See Current,
Wattless.)

[Transcriber's note: This is now called a volt-amp. The usual usage is
KVA, or kilovolt-ampere.]


Watt-second.
A unit of electric energy or work. One watt exerted or expended for one
second.

It is equivalent to
  .24068     gram degree C. (calorie),
  .000955    lb. degree F.,
  .737337    foot lbs.,
  .0013406   horse power second (English),
  .0013592   horse power second (metric).

Synonym--Volt-coulomb.


Waves, Electro-magnetic.
Ether waves caused by electromagnetic disturbances affecting the
luminiferous ether. (See Discharge, Oscillatory--Maxwell's Theory of
Light--Resonance. Electric.)

[Transcriber's note: The Michaelson-Morley experiment (1887) had already
called ether into question, but quantum theory and photons are decades
in the future.]


574   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Weber.
(a.) A name suggested by Clausius and Siemens to denote a magnet pole of
unit strength. This use is abandoned.

(b.) It has been used to designate the unit of quantity--the coulomb.
This use is abandoned.

(c.) It has been used to designate the unit of current strength the
ampere. This use is abandoned.

[Transcriber's note: Definition (a) is now used. One weber of magnetic
flux linked to a circuit of one turn produces an electromotive force of
1 volt if it is reduced to zero at a uniform rate in 1 second.]


Weber-meter.
An ampere-meter or ammeter. The term is not used since the term "weber,"
indicating the ampere or coulomb, has been abandoned.


Welding, Electric.
Welding metals by heat produced by electricity. The heat may be produced
by a current passing through the point of junction (Elihu Thomson) or by
the voltaic arc. (Benardos & Olzewski.)


Fig. 346. ELECTRIC WELDING INDUCTION COIL.


The current process is carried out by pressing together the objects to
be united, while holding them in conducting clamps. A heavy current is
turned on by way of the clamps and rapidly heats the metals at the
junction, which is of course the point of highest resistance. As the
metal softens, it is pressed together, one of the clamps being mounted
with feed motion, flux is dropped on if necessary, and the metal pieces
unite.

The most remarkable results are thus attained; almost all common metals
can be welded, and different metals can be welded together. Tubes and
other shapes can also be united. In many cases the weld is the strongest
part.


575   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


The alternating current is employed. A special dynamo is sometimes used
to produce it. This dynamo has two windings on the armature. One is of
fine wire and is in series with the field magnets and excites them. The
other is of copper bars, and connects with the welding apparatus, giving
a current of high intensity but actuated by low potential.

Where the special dynamo is not used, an induction coil or transformer
is used. The primary includes a large number of convolutions of
relatively fine wire; the secondary may only be one turn of a large
copper bar.

The cut shows in diagram an electric welding coil. P is the primary coil
of a number of turns of wire; S S is the secondary, a single copper bar
bent into an almost complete circle. It terminates in clamps D D for
holding the bars to be welded. B C, B' C are the bars to be welded. They
are pressed together by the screw J. The large coil I of iron wire
surrounding the coils represents the iron core.

The real apparatus as at present constructed involves many
modifications. The diagram only illustrates the principle of the
apparatus.

In welding by the voltaic arc the place to be heated is made an
electrode of an arc by connection with one terminal of an electric
circuit. A carbon is connected to the other terminal. An arc is started
by touching and withdrawal of the carbon. The heat may be used for
welding, soldering, brazing, or even for perforating or dividing metal
sheets.


Welding Transformer.
The induction coil or transformer used in electric welding. For its
general principles of construction, see Welding, Electric.


Wheatstone's Bridge.
A system of connections applied to parallel circuits, including
resistance coils for the purpose of measuring an unknown resistance. A
single current is made to pass from A through two parallel connected
branches, joining together again at C. A cross connection B D has a
galvanometer or other current indicator in circuit. In any conductor
through which a current is passing, the fall of potential at given
points is proportional to the resistance between such points. Referring
to the diagram a given fall of potential exists between A and C. The
fall between A and B is to the fall between A and C as the resistance r
between A and B is to the resistance r + r' between A and C. The same
applies to the other branch, with the substitution of the resistances s
and S' and the point D for r r' and B. Therefore, if this proportion
holds, r : r' : : s : S'. No current will go through B D , and the
galvanometer will be unaffected. Assume s' to be of unknown resistance,
the above proportion will give it, if r, r' and s are known, or if the
ratio of r to r' and the absolute value of s is known.


576   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


In use the resistances r, r', and s are made to vary as desired. To
measure an unknown resistance it is introduced at S', and one of the
other resistances is varied until the galvanometer is unaffected. Then
the resistance of S' is determined by calculation as just explained. The
artificial resistances may be resistance coils, q. v., or it is enough
to have one unknown resistance at s. Then if the length of wire ABC is
accurately known, the point B can be shifted along it until the balance
is attained. The relative lengths A B, and B C, will then give the ratio
r : r' needed for the calculation. This assumes the wire ABC to be of
absolutely uniform resistance. This is the principle of the meter-bridge
described below. The use of coils is the more common method and is
carried out by special resistance boxes, with the connections arranged
to carry out the exact principle as explained. The principle of
construction and use of a resistance box of the Wheatstone bridge type,
as shown in the cut, is described under Box Bridge, q. v.


FIG. 347. WHEATSTONE BRIDGE CONNECTIONS.


FIG. 348. TOP OF BOX BRIDGE.


577   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


The next cut shows the sliding form of bridge called the meter bridge,
if the slide wire is a meter long or a half- or a quarter-meter bridge,
etc., according to the length of this wire. It is described under Meter
Bridge, q. v. Many refinements in construction and in proper proportion
of resistances for given work apply to these constructions.

Synonyms--Electric Balance--Resistance Bridge--Wheatstone's Balance.


Fig. 349. METER BRIDGE.


Whirl, Electric.
(a) A conductor carrying an electric current is surrounded by circular
lines of force, which are sometimes termed an electric whirl.

(b) The Electric Flyer. (See Flyer, Electric.)


Wimshurst Electric Machine.
An influence machine for producing high potential or static electricity.

Two circular discs of thin glass are mounted on perforated hubs or
bosses of wood or ebonite. Each hub has a groove turned upon it to
receive a cord. Each disc is shellacked. They are mounted on a
horizontal steel spindle so as to face and to be within one-eighth of an
inch of each other. On the outside of each disc sixteen or eighteen
sectors of tinfoil or thin metal are cemented.


578   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Two curved brass rods terminating in wire brushes curved into a
semi-ellipse just graze the outer surfaces of the plates with their
brushes. They lie in imaginary planes, passing through the axis of the
spindle and at right angles from each other.

Four collecting combs are arranged horizontally on insulating supports
to collect electricity from the horizontal diameters of the discs. These
lie at an angle of about 45° with the other equalizing rods. Discharging
rods connect with the collecting combs.

The principle of the machine is that one set of sector plates act as
inductors for the other set. Its action is not perfectly understood.

It works well in damp weather, far surpassing other influence machines
in this respect. On turning the handle a constant succession or stream
of sparks is produced between the terminals of the discharging rods.


Windage.
In a dynamo the real air gap between the armature windings and pole
pieces is sometimes thus termed.


Wind, Electric.
The rush of air particles from a point connected to a statically charged
condenser.


Winding, Compound.
A method of winding a generator or motor in which a shunt winding is
used for the field magnets and in which also a second winding of the
magnet is placed in series with the outer circuit. (See Winding,
Series--Winding, Shunt.)


Fig. 350. CHARACTERISTIC CURVES OF SHUNT AND SERIES WINDING.


The object of compound winding is to make a self-regulating dynamo and
this object is partly attained for a constant speed.

The characteristic curves of shunt and series winding are of opposite
natures. The first increases in electro-motive force for resistance in
the outer circuit, the latter decreases under the same conditions. If
the windings are so proportioned that these conditions for each one of
the two windings are equal and opposite, it is evident that the
characteristic may be a straight line. This, however, it will only be at
a single speed of rotation.


579   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Winding, Disc.
A winding which (S. P. Thompson) may be treated as a drum winding
extended radially, the periphery corresponding to the back end of the
drum. The magnet poles are generally placed so as to face the side or
sides of the disc.


Winding, Lap.
A method of winding disc and drum armatures. It consists in lapping back
each lead of wire towards the preceding lead upon the commutator end of
the armature. Thus taking the letter U as the diagrammatical
representation of a turn of wire in connecting its ends to the
commutator bars they are brought towards each other so as to connect
with contiguous commutator bars. This carries out the principle of
keeping the two members of the U moving in regions of opposite polarity
of field, so that the currents induced in them shall have opposite
directions, thus producing a total current in one sense through the bent
wire.


Winding, Long Shunt.
A system of compound winding for dynamos and motors. The field is wound
in series and, in addition thereto, there is a shunt winding connected
across from terminal to terminal of the machine, and which may be
regarded either as a shunt to the outer circuit, or as a shunt to the
series-field and armature winding. (See Winding, Short Shunt.)

Synonyms--Series and Long Shunt Winding.


Winding, Multiple.
A winding of an electro-magnet, in which separate coils are wound on the
core, so that one or any number may be used as desired in parallel or in
series. For each coil a separate binding post should be provided.


Winding, Multipolar.
Winding adapted for armatures of multi-polar dynamos or motors.


Winding, Series.
A method of winding a generator or motor, in which one of the
commutator-brush connections is connected to the field-magnet winding;
the other end of the magnet winding connects with the outer circuit. The
other armature-brush connects with the other terminal of the outer
circuit.


Winding, Series and Separate Coil.
A method of automatic regulation applied to alternating current dynamos.


Winding, Short Shunt.
A method of compound winding for dynamos and motors. The field is wound
in series, and in addition thereto there is a shunt winding connected
from brush to brush only, thus paralleling the armature. (See Winding,
Long Shunt.)

Synonyms--Series and Short Shunt Winding.


580   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Winding, Shunt.
A method of winding a generator or motor. Each commutator-brush has two
connections. One set are the terminals of the outer circuit, the other
set are the terminals of the field-magnet windings. In other words, the
field-magnet windings are in shunt or in parallel with the outer
circuit.


Winding, Shuttle.
A method of dynamo or motor-armature winding. A single groove passes
longitudinally around the core and in this the wire is continuously
wound. The system is not now used. The old Siemens' H armature
illustrates the principle.


Winding, Wave.
A method of winding disc and drum armatures. It consists in advancing
the commutator ends of the U shaped turns progressively, so that as many
commutator bars intervene between any two consecutive commutator
connections of the wire as there are leads of wire on the drum between
consecutive leads of the wire. This is carried out with due regard to
the principle that taking the letter U as the diagrammatical
representation of a turn of wire, its two members must move through
regions of the field of opposite polarity.


Wire Finder.
A galvanometer or other instrument used for identifying the ends of a
given wire in a cable containing several.


Work.
When a force acts upon a body and the body moves in the direction of the
force, the force does work. Hence, work is the action of a force through
space against resistance.

It is generally expressed in compound units of length and weight, as
foot-pounds, meaning a pound raised one foot.


Work, Electric, Unit of.
The volt-coulomb, q. v., or watt-second, as it is often termed.


Working, Diode.
In multiplex telegraphy the transmission of two messages,
simultaneously, over one wire. (See Telegraphy, Multiple.)


Working, Contraplex.
A variety of duplex telegraphy in which the messages are sent from
opposite ends of the line, simultaneously, so as to be transmitted in
opposite directions. (See Working, Diplex.)


Working, Diplex.
In duplex telegraphy the sending of two independent messages from the
same end of the line in the same direction.


581   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Working, Double Curb.
A method of working telegraph lines. When a signal is sent the line is
charged. This has to be got rid of, and is an element of retardation. In
double curb working it is disposed of by sending a momentary current
first in the reverse, and then in the same, and finally in the reverse
direction. This is found to reduce the charge to a very low point.


Working, Hexode.
In multiplex telegraphy the transmission of six messages simultaneously
over one wire. (See Telegraphy, Multiplex.)


Working, Pentode.
In multiplex telegraphy the transmission of five messages simultaneously
over one wire. (See Telegraphy, Multiplex.)


Working, Reverse Current.
A method of telegraphy, in which the currents are reversed or alternated
in direction.


Working, Single Curb.
A simpler form of telegraph signaling than double curb working. It
consists in sending a reverse current through the line for each signal
by reversing the battery connection.


Working, Tetrode.
In multiplex telegraphy the transmission of four messages simultaneously
over the same line. (See Telegraphy, Multiplex.)


Working, Triode.
In multiplex telegraphy the transmission of three messages
simultaneously over the same wire. (See Telegraphy, Multiplex.)


Work, Unit of.
The erg, q. v. It is the same as the unit of energy, of which work is
the corelative, being equal and opposite to the energy expended in doing
it. There are many other engineering units of work, as the foot-pound
and foot-ton.


Yoke.
In an electro-magnet, the piece of iron which connects the ends furthest
from the poles of the two portions of the core on which the wire is
wound.


Zamboni's Dry Pile.
A voltaic pile or battery. It is made of discs of paper, silvered or
tinned on one side and sprinkled on the other with binoxide of
manganese. Sometimes as many as 2,000 of such couples are piled up in a
glass tube and pressed together with two rods which form the terminals.
They maintain a high potential difference, but having very high
resistance and slight polarization capacity, give exceedingly small
quantities.

Zero.
(a) The origin of any scale of measurement.

(b) An infinitely small quantity or measurement.


582   STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.


Zero, Absolute.
From several considerations it is believed that at a certain temperature
the molecules of all bodies would touch each other, their kinetic motion
would cease, and there would be no heat. This temperature is the
absolute zero. It is put at -273° C. (-459° F.)

[Transcriber's note; The modern value is 0° Kelvin,  -273.15° C, or
-459.67° F. The lowest reported temperature observed is 1E-10° K.]


Zero, Potential.
Conventionally, the potential of the earth. True zero potential could
only exist in the surface of a body infinitely distant from other
electrified bodies.


Zero, Thermometric.
There are three thermometric zeros. In the Réaumur and centigrade
scales, it is at the temperature of melting ice; in the Fahrenheit
scale, it is 32° F. below that temperature, or corresponds to -17.78° C.

The third is the absolute zero. (See Zero, Absolute.)


Zinc.
A metal; one of the elements; atomic weight, 65.1;
specific gravity, 6.8 to 7.2.

                                                   microhms.
Resistance at 0° C. (32° F.), per centimeter cube,   5.626
Resistance at 0° C. (32° F.), per inch cube,         2.215

Relative resistance (silver = 1),                    3.741

                                                        ohms.
Resistance of a wire, 1 foot long, weighing 1 grain,   .5766
  (a) 1 foot long, 1 millimeter diameter,            33.85
  (b) 1 meter long, weighing 1 gram,                   .4023
  (c) 1 meter long, 1 millimeter diameter,             .07163

Zinc is principally used in electrical work as the positive plate in
voltaic batteries.


Zincode.
The terminal connecting with the zinc plate, or its equivalent in an
electric circuit; the negative electrode; the kathode. A term now little
used.


Zinc Sender.
An apparatus used in telegraphy for sending a momentary reverse current
into the line after each signal, thus counteracting retardation.


Zone, Peripolar.
In medical electricity, the region surrounding the polar zone, q. v.


Zone, Polar.
In medical electricity, the region surrounding the electrode applied to
the human body.


583-624  INDEX.

  Page
A  7
Absolute  7
Absolute Calibration  97
Absolute Electric Potential  429
Absolute Electrometer  222
Absolute Galvanometer  266
Absolute Measurement  8
Absolute Potential  428
Absolute Temperature  8
Absolute Unit  554
Absolute Unit Resistance, Weber's   468
Absolute Vacuum  557
Absolute Zero  581
Abscissa  7
Abscissas, Axis of   54
Absorption, Electric   8
A. C. C.  8
Acceleration  8
Accumulator  8
Accumulator, Electrostatic  8
Accumulator, Water Dropping   9
Acetic Acid Battery   58
Acheson Effect   208
Acid, Carbonic  108
Acid, Chromic, Battery  61
Acid, Hydrochloric, Battery   66
Acid, Spent  491
Acid, Sulphuric    497
Acidometer  10
Acierage  494
Aclinic Line  10
Acoustic Telegraphy   10
Acoutemeter  10, 53
Action, Electrophoric   230
Action, Local  331
Action, Magne-crystallic   335
Action, Refreshing  454
Action, Secondary  477
Actinic Photometer  411
Actinic Rays.   11
Actinism  11
Actinometer, Electric   11
Active Electric Circuit,   123
Activity  11
Actual Horse Power  290
Adapter  11
A. D. C.,   11
Adherence, Electro-magnetic   11
Adherence, Magnetic  338
Adjuster, Cord   152
Adjustment of Brushes  90
Admiralty Rules of Heating  12
AEolotropic  34
Aerial Cable  95
Aerial Conductor  12
Affinity  12
Affinity, Molecular   380
After Current,.   159
Agglomerate Leclanché Battery  66
Agir Motor   13
Agone  13
Agonic Line,   13
Air  13
Air Blast  13
Air Condenser  14
Air Field  252
Air Gaps  15
Air Line Wire  15
Air Pump, Heated   15
Air Pump, Mercurial   16
Air Pumps, Short Fall   16
Alarm, Burglar   16
Alarm, Electric  17
Alarm, Fire, Electric Automatic   257
Alarm, Fire and Heat  17
Alarm, Overflow   18
Alarm, Water Level   18
Alcohol, Electric Rectification of   18
Alignment,   18
Allotropy  18
Alloy  18
Alloy, Platinum  419
Alloy, Platinum-Silver  419
Alloys, Paillard  400
Alphabet, Telegraphic   19
Alternating  23
Alternating Current  159
Alternating Current Arc  23
Alternating Current Dynamo  193
Alternating Current Generator or Dynamo  24
Alternating Current Meter  373
Alternating Current System  23
Alternating Field  252
Alternative Current  563
Alternative Path  24
Alternatives, Voltaic   563
Alternator  24
Alternator, Constant Current   24
Alternator, Dead Point of an   177
Alternation  23
Alternation, Complete   23
Alternation, Cycle of   175
Alum Battery  58
Aluminum  24
Aluminum Battery  58
Amalgam  24
Amalgamation  25
Amber  25
American Twist Joint   309
Ammeter  26
Ammeter, Ayrton   26
Ammeter, Commutator   26
Ammeter, Cunynghame's   26
Ammeter, Eccentric Iron Disc  27
Ammeter, Electro-magnetic  27
Ammeter, Gravity  27
Ammeter, Magnetic Vane  27
Ammeter, Magnifying Spring   28
Ammeter, Permanent Magnet   28
Ammeter, Reducteur for   453
Ammeter, Solenoid   28
Ammeter, Spring   28
Ammeter, Steel Yard  28
Ammunition Hoist, Electric   29
Amperage  29
Ampere  29
Ampere- and Volt-meter Galvanometer  274
Ampere Arc   30
Ampere Balance  56
Ampere Currents  30
Ampere Feet  30
Ampere-hour  30
Amperes, Lost   30
Ampêre's Memoria Technica   30
Ampere Meters  26, 30
Ampere Meter, Balance  391
Ampere Meter, Neutral Wire   391
Ampere-minute  30
Ampere Ring  30
Ampere-second  30
Ampere's Theory of Magnetism  354
Ampere-turns  31
Ampere-turns, Primary   31
Ampere-turns, Secondary   31, 551
Ampere Windings  31
Ampérian Currents  165
Amplitude of Waves  31
Analogous Pole  31, 425
Analysis  31
Analysis, Electric  32
Analysis, Electrolytic  214
Analyzer, Electric   32
Anelectrics  32
Anelectrotonus  32
Angle of Declination  32, 177
Angle of the Polar Span  32
Angle of Inclination or Dip  33
Angle of Lag  33-318
Angle of Lead  33
Angle of Maximum Sensitiveness  479
Angle of Polar Span  423
Angle, Polar   423
Angle, Unit  554
Angular Currents  165
Angular Currents, Laws of   165
Angular Force  544
Angular Velocity  32, 559
Animal Electricity  33
Animal System, Electric Excitability of   247
Anion  33
Anisotropic  34
Annealing, Electric  34
Annular Electro-magnet  216
Annunciator  34
Annunciator Clock  35
Annunciator Clock, Electric   127
Annunciator Drop  35
Annunciator, Gravity Drop   35
Annunciator, Needle  35
Annunciator, Swinging or Pendulum  35
Anodal Diffusion  35
Anode  36
Anodic Closure Contraction  36
Anodic Duration Contraction  36
Anodic Opening Contraction  36
Anodic Reactions  36
Anomalous Magnet  335
Anti-induction Conductor   36, 145
Anti-magnetic Shield  37
Antilogous Pole,   425
Antimony  37
Anvil  37
A. O. C.  38
Aperiodic  38
Aperiodic Galvanometer  266
Apparent Coefficient of Magnetic Induction  346
Apparent Resistance  297, 462
Apparent Watts  573
Arago's Disc  88
Arc  39
Arc, Ampere   30
Arc, Compound.   39
Arc, Electric Blow-pipe   84
Arc, Metallic  39
Arc, Micrometer   39, 376
Arc, Multiple   387
Arc, Simple  39
Arc, Voltaic   39
Arc Box, Multiple   387
Arc Lamp  319
Arc Lamp, Differential   320
Arc Lamp, Double Carbon   191
Areometer  41
Areometer, Bead   41
Argyrometry  41
Arm   41
Armature  41
Armature, Bar   42
Armature, Bipolar   42
Armature Bore  42
Armature Chamber  42
Armature, Closed Coil   43
Armature Coil, or Coils   43
Armature Conductors, Lamination of   319
Armature Core  43
Armature, Cylinder   43
Armature, Cylindrical   45
Armature, Disc   43
Armature, Drum  45
Armature Factor  45
Armature, Flat Ring   45
Armature, Girder   49
Armature, H  49
Armature, Hinged   45
Armature, Hole  45
Armature, Intensity   45
Armature Interference  45
Armature, Load of   46
Armature, Multipolar   46
Armature, Neutral   46
Armature, Neutral Relay  46, 390
Armature, Non-polarized   46
Armature of Influence Machine  46
Armature of Leyden Jar or Static Condenser  46
Armature, Open Coil   46
Armature, Perforated   45
Armature, Pivoted   47
Armature Pockets  47
Armature, Polarized   47
Armature, Pole   47
Armature, Quantity   47
Armature, Radial   47
Armature Reactions  41
Armature, Revolving, Page's   47
Armature, Ring   48
Armature, Rolling  49
Armatures, Gyrostatic Action of   288
Armature, Shuttle  49
Armature, Siemens' Old  49
Armature, Spherical  49
Armature, Stranded Conductor   49
Armature, Unipolar  50, 553
Armature, Ventilation of   560
Armor of Cable  50
Arm, Rheostat   472
Arms, Proportionate   436
Arms, Ratio  437
Arms, Rocker  50-474
Arrester, Lightning   328
Arrester, Lightning, Counter-electro-motive Force   329
Arrester, Lightning, Plates   329
Arrester, Lightning, Vacuum.   329
Arrester Plate  417
Arrester, Spark   489
Arrival Curve  168
Articulate Speech  50
Artificial Carbon  106
Artificial Magnet  335
Ascending Lightning  330
Assymmetrical Resistance  462
Astatic  50
Astatic Circuit  12
Astatic Couple  157
Astatic Galvanometer  266
Astatic Needle  50
Astronomical Meridian,   372
Asymptote  51
Atmosphere  51
Atmosphere, Residual  51, 460
Atmospheric Electricity  51
Atom  52
Atomic Attraction   52
Atomic Current  160
Atomic Energy  238
Atomic Heat  52-285
Atomic Weight  53
Atomicity   52
Attracted Disc Electrometer  223
Attraction  53
Attraction, Atomic  52
Attraction, Magnetic   338
Attraction, Molar   380
Attraction, Molecular  380
Attraction and Repulsion, Electro-dynamic  211
Attraction and Repulsion, Electro-magnetic  217
Attraction and Repulsion, Electro-static   234
Attraction and Repulsion, Electro-static, Coulomb's Law of   155
Audiometer  53
Aura, Electrical   53
Aurora  53
Austral Pole  54
Autographic Telegraph  510
Automatic Circuit Breaker  121
Automatic Cut Out  175, 475
Automatic Drop  192
Automatic Electric Bell  78
Automatic Electric Fire Alarm  257
Automatic Switch   500
Automatic Telegraph  504
A. W. G.,    54
Axial Couple  514
Axial Force  544
Axial Magnet  336
Axis, Electric   54
Axis, Magnetic   338
Axis of Abscissas   54
Axis of Ordinates  54, 397
Axis of X  54
Axis of Y  54, 397
Ayrton's Ammeter  26
Azimuth    54
Azimuth Circle  54
Azimuth Compass  141
Azimuth, Magnetic   338

B   55
B. A.   55
Back Electro-motive Force of Polarization  156
Back Induction  55
Back Shock or Stroke of Lightning  55
Back Stroke  55
Bagration Battery  59
Balance  55
Balance, Ampere  56
Balance Ampere Meter  391
Balance, Electric  577
Balance, Inductance   293
Balance, Plating  417
Balance, Slide  374
Balance, Thermic   85
Balance, Torsion, Coulomb's   544
Balance, Wheatstone's  577
Balata  56
Ballistic Galvanometer  567
Balloon Battery  59
B. and S. W. G.   56
Banked Battery  59
Bank of Lamps  323
B. A. Ohm  394
Barad  56
Bar, Armature   42
Bar, Bus  94
Bar Electro-magnet  217
Bar Magnet  336
Barometer  56
Bar, Omnibus   94
Bar Photometer  411
Bars, Commutator   56, 140
Bath  57
Bath, Bipolar Electric   57
Bath, Copper  152
Bath, Copper Stripping   152
Bath, Electric Head   284
Bath, Electric Shower   57
Bath, Gold  279
Bath, Gold Stripping  279
Bath, Multipolar Electric   57
Bath, Nickel  391
Bath, Plating  418
Baths, Electro-medical   222
Bath, Silver  484
Bath, Silver Stripping   484
Bath, Stripping  57
Bath, Unipolar Electric   57
Batten  57-58
Battery, Acetic Acid   58
Battery, Alum  58
Battery, Aluminum  58
Battery, Bagration  59
Battery, Balloon   59
Battery, Banked  59
Battery, Bichromate   59
Battery, Bunsen   59
Battery, Cadmium   60
Battery, Callan  60
Battery, Camacho's   60
Battery, Carré's   60
Battery, Cautery   61
Battery Cell, Element of a   237
Battery, Chloric Acid  61
Battery, Chloride of Lime   61
Battery, Chromic Acid   61
Battery, Closed Circuit   61
Battery, Column   61
Battery, d'Arsonval's   62
Battery, de la Rue  .62
Battery, de la Rive's Floating   179
Battery, Dry  63
Battery, Elements of   63
Battery, Faradic  63
Battery, Ferric Chloride   63
Battery, Fuller's  63
Battery, Gas  63
Battery, Gas, Grove's   281
Battery Gauge  64
Battery, Gravity   64
Battery, Grenet   65
Battery, Grove's  65
Battery, Hydrochloric Acid   66
Battery, Lalande & Chaperon   69
Battery, Lalande-Edison   69
Battery, Lead Chloride   66
Battery, Lead Sulphate  66
Battery, Leclanché   66
Battery, Leclanché Agglomerate  66
Battery, Local   66, 831
Battery, Magnetic   338
Battery, Main  66
Battery, Marié Davy's   67
Battery, Maynooth's   67
Battery, Medical  67
Battery, Meidinger's  68
Battery, Mercury Bichromate   63
Battery Mud  68
Battery, Multiple Connected   68
Battery, Niaudet's  61
Battery, Nitric Acid   68
Battery of Dynamos  6S
Battery of Leyden Jars,   68
Battery, Open Circuit  68
Battery or Pile, Thermo-electric   530
Battery, Oxide of Copper   68
Battery, Peroxide of Lead   69
Battery, Platinized Carbon   69
Battery, Plunge   69
Battery, Pneumatic   69
Battery, Primary   69, 434
Battery, Pulvermacher's Electro-medical   69
Battery, Sal Ammoniac   69
Battery, Salt, or Sea Salt  69
Battery, Sand  70
Battery, Secondary  70
Battery, Secondary, Planté's   72
Battery, Secondary, Real Efficiency of   205
Battery, Sir William Thomson's   72
Battery, Siemens and Halske's  72
Battery, Skrivanow   72
Battery, Smee's   73
Battery Solutions, Chromic Acid   73
  119, 178, 192, 232, 318, 421, 542, 549
Battery, Spiral  73
Battery, Split   73
Battery, Sulphate of Mercury   67
Battery System, Universal  556
Battery, Thermo-chemical   530
Battery, Trough  73
Battery, Trouvé's Blotting Paper   73
Battery, Tyer's  74
Battery, Upward's  75
Battery, Varley's  76
Battery, Volta's   76
Battery, Voltaic or Galvanic   76
Battery Voltmeter  569
Battery, Water  77
Battery, Wollaston  78
B. A. Unit,  554
B. A. Unit of Resistance  78, 462
B. A. Volt  568
B. E.   78
Bead Areometer  41
Becquerel's Laws of Thermo-electricity   78
Beaumé Hydrometer  78
Bed-piece  78
Bell, Automatic Electric    78
Bell, Call   78, 98
Bell Call  79
Bell Call, Extension   248
Bell, Circular  79
Bell, Differentially Wound   79
Bell, Electric  79
Bell, Electro-mechanical    80
Bell, Indicating   80, 297
Bell, Magneto  80
Bell, Magneto Call   361
Bell, Night  392
Bell-shaped Magnet,   336
Bells, Relay  80, 457
Bell, Trembling   78
Bell, Vibrating.    78
Belts, Joints in  311
Bennett's Electroscope  233
Bias  80
Bias of Tongue of Polarized Relay  542
Bichromate Battery  59
Bichromate Mercury Battery  63
Bifilar Suspension  498
Bifilar Winding  81
Binary Compound  81
Binding   81
Binding Posts or Screws  81
Binnacle  81
Biology, Electro-  208
Bioscopy, Electric   82
Bipolar Armature  42
Bipolar Electric Bath  57
Bisected Coils  132
Bismuth  82
Bi-telephone  82, 524
Black, Platinum   419
Blasting, Electric  83
Bleaching, Electric   83
Block, Branch   87
Block, Cross-over   158
Block System  83
Block Wire  83
Blotting Paper Battery, Trouvé's   73
Blow-pipe  83
Blow-pipe, Electric Arc   84
Blue Magnetism  355
Bluestone  84
Blue Vitriol   562
Board, Cross-connecting   157
Board, Fuse   263
Board, Hanger   284
Board, Key   313
Board, Multiple Switch   387
Board of Trade Ohm  394
Board of Trade Unit  555
Board, Switch  500
Boat, Electric   84
Bobbins  84
Body Protector  84
Bohenberger's Electroscope  233
Boiler Feed, Electric  84
Boiling   84
Boll  85
Bolometer   85
Bombardment, Molecular   380
Bore, Armature   42
Boreal Pole  85
Bot  85
Bound Charge  115
Box Bridge  85
Box, Cable  95
Box, Cooling  151
Box, Distributing   190
Boxes, Flush  258
Box, Fishing  311
Box, Fuse  263
Boxing the Compass  86
Box, Junction  311
Box, Multiple Arc   387
Box, Resistance  462
Box, Resistance, Sliding   463
Box Sounding Relay  457
Box, Splice   492
Bracket, Saddle   475
Bracket, Wall   572
Braid, Tubular  550
Brake, Electro-magnetic   86
Brake, Magneto-electric   362
Brake, Prony  435
Branch   87
Branch Block  87
Branch Circuit  121
Branch Conductor  87
Branding, Electric   87
Brassing  87
Brazing, Electric   87
Break  88
Break, Circuit Loop   125
Break-down Switch  88
Breaker, Automatic Circuit   121
Breaker, Circuit  121
Breaker, Circuit, File   121
Breaker, Contact  121, 146
Break Induced Current  162
Breaking Weight  89
Break, Loop    332
Break Shock  482
Breath Figures, Electric   89
Breeze, Electric   89
Breeze, Static  493
Breguet Unit of Resistance  463
Bridge   89
Bridge, Box  89
Bridge, Inductance   293
Bridge, Induction   293
Bridge Key   313
Bridge, Magnetic  338
Bridge, Meter  373
Bridge, Resistance   577
Bridge, Reversible    472
Bridge, Slide  374
Bridge, Wheatstone .   575
Bridge, Wheatstone, Commercial   36
British Association Bridge  89
Britannia Joint  309
Broadside Method  89
Broken Circuit  125
Bronzing  89
Brush  90
Brush, Carbon  90
Brush, Collecting  90
Brush, Discharge   187
Brushes, Adjustment of   90
Brushes, Lead of   90
Brushes, Negative Lead of   324
Brushes, Scratch   476
Brush, Faradic   251
Brush Holders  91
Brush, Pilot  91
Brush, Rotating    91
Brush, Third  91
Brush Trimmer  549
Brush, Wire Gauge   92
Buckling  92
Bug  92
Bug Trap  92
Bunched Cable  95
Bunsen Battery  59
Bunsen Disc  92
Bunsen's Photometer   412
Buoy, Electric  93
Burglar Alarm  16
Burner, Electric Gas   93
Burning  94
Bus Bar  94
Bus Rod  94
Bus Wire  94
Butt Joint  310
Button, Call   98
Button, Press   94
Button, Push   93, 98
Buzzer  94
B. W. G.  94

C  95
C. C.  109
Cable  95
Cable, Aerial  95
Cable, Armature of   50
Cable, Armor of   50
Cable Box  95
Cable, Bunched  95
Cable, Capacity of   95
Cable Clip  97
Cable Core  96
Cable, Duplex   96
Cable, Flat   96
Cablegram  96
Cable Grip  96
Cable Hanger  96
Cable Hanger Tongs  97
Cable, Suspension Wire of   97
Cable Tank  97
Cadmium Battery  60
Calamine  97
Cal Electricity  208
Calibration  97
Calibration, Absolute   97
Calibration, Invariable   97
Calibration, Relative  98
Call Bell  78, 79, 98
Call Bell, Extension   248
Call Bell, Magneto   361
Call Button  98
Call, Thermo  530
Call, Thermo-electric   531
Callan Battery   60
Calling Drop  98
Calorie or Calory  98
Calorimeter  98
Calorimetric Photometer  412
Calory or Calorie  98
Cam, Listening   330
Camacho's Battery  60
Candle  99
Candle, Concentric   99
Candle, Debrun   99
Candle, Decimal  99
Candle, Electric   99
Candle-foot  259
Candle, German Standard   99
Candle Holder  99
Candle, Jablochkoff   100
Candle, Jamin   100
Candle, Meter    374
Candle Power  100
Candle Power, Nominal   101
Candle Power, Rated  101
Candle Power, Spherical   101
Candle, Standard   101
Candle, Wilde   101
Caoutchouc  101
Cap, Insulator  306
Capacity, Carrying   108
Capacity, Dielectric   102
Capacity, Electric or Electrostatic   102
Capacity, Instantaneous  102
Capacity, Magnetic Inductive   346, 349
Capillarity, Electro-  209
Capillary Electrometer  224
Capacity of a Telegraph Conductor  103
Capacity of Cable  95
Capacity of Polarization of a Voltaic Cell  103
Capacity, Polarization  424
Capacity, Residual  103
Capacity, Specific Inductive   103
Capacity, Storage  105, 495
Capacity, Unit of   105
Capillarity  105
Capillary Telephone  525
Carbon  106
Carbon, Artificial  106
Carbon Brush  90
Carbon, Concentric  107
Carbon, Cored   107
Carbon Dioxide  107
Carbon Holders  107
Carbonic Acid,   108
Carbonic Acid Gas  108
Carbonization  107
Carbonized Cloth  107
Carbon, Platinized, Battery   69
Carbon Resistance   463
Carbon, Retort    471
Carbons, Lamp, Flashing of Incandescent   257
Carbon, Telephone  525
Carbon Transmitter  549
Carbon, Volatilization of   108
Carburetted Hydrogen, Heavy   397
Carcel  108
Carcel Gas Jet  108
Carcel Lamp  108
Card, Compass   142
Cardew Voltmeter  569
Carré's Battery  60
Carrying Capacity  108
Cascade  108
Cascade, Charging and Discharging Leyden Jars in   108
Cascade, Gassiot's   275
Case-hardening, Electric   109
Cataphoresis  109
Catch, Safety  175
Cathode, etc. See Kathode   312
Caustry, Galvano  109
Cautery Battery   61
Cautery, Electric  109
Cautery, Galvano  109
Cautery, Galvano-electric  109
Cautery, Galvano-thermal   109
Cell, Battery, Element of a   237
Cell, Constant  109
Cell, Electrolytic   109
Cell, Porous    427
Cell, Selenium   478
Cell, Standard Voltaic  109
Cell, Standard Voltaic, Daniells'  109
Cell, Standard Voltaic, Latimer Clark's  110
Central Station  493
Central Station Distribution or Supply  112
Centre of Gravity  112
Centre of Gyration  112
Centre of Oscillation  112
Centre of Percussion  112
Centrifugal Force  112
Centrifugal Governor  113
C. G. S.  113
Chain, Molecular  380
Chamber, Armature  42
Chamber of Incandescent Lamp  113
Change, Chemical  116
Changer, Pole  425
Changing Over Switch  500
Changing Switch  500
Chaperon, Lalande &, Battery   69
Characteristic  169
Characteristic Curve  113, 168
Characteristic Curve, External  171
Characteristic Curve of Converter  169
Characteristic, Drooping   114
Characteristic, External   114
Characteristic, Internal   114
Characteristics of Sound  114
Charge  114
Charge and Discharge Key    313
Charge, Bound   115
Charge Current  160
Charge, Density of   115, 180
Charge, Dissipation of   115
Charge, Distribution of   115
Charge, Free  115
Charge, Negative  389
Charge, Residual   116
Charging Curve  170
Chatterton's Compound  116
Chemical Change  116
Chemical Electric Meter   375
Chemical, Electro-, Equivalents   244
Chemical Element  236
Chemical Energy  239
Chemical Equivalent  244
Chemical, Cautery Galvano   265
Chemical Recorder  117
Chemical Telephone  526
Chemical Equivalent, Thermo-   245
Chemistry  118
Chemistry, Electro-   209
Cheval, Force de  260
Chicle  56
Chimes, Electric   118
Chloric Acid Battery  61
Chloride, Ferric, Battery   63
Chloride, Lead, Battery  66
Chloride of Lime Battery  61
Chlorimeter   73
Choking Coil  132
Chronograph, Electric   118
Chromic Acid Battery   61
Chromic Acid Battery Solutions  73
Chromoscope  119
Chutaux's Solution  119
Cipher Code  130
Circle, Azimuth   54
Circle, Delezenne's  133
Circle, Galvanic or Voltaic   119
Circle, Magic  119
Circuit  120
Circuit, Astatic   120
Circuit, Branch  121
Circuit Breaker  121
Circuit Breaker, Automatic   121
Circuit Breaker, File  121
Circuit Breaker, Mercury  121
Circuit Breaker, Pendulum  121
Circuit Breaker, Tuning-fork  121
Circuit, Broken  125
Circuit Changing Switch  500
Circuit, Closed, Battery   61
Circuit, Derivative  123
Circuit, Derived   123
Circuit, Electrostatic   123
Circuit, Electric, Active   123
Circuit, External   123
Circuit, Grounded   123
Circuit, Incomplete  125
Circuit Indicator  298
Circuit Induction, Open   303
Circuit, Leg of   325
Circuit, Local   331
Circuit, Loop  125
Circuit, Loop Break  125
Circuit, Magnetic  340
Circuit, Magnetic Double   340
Circuit, Main  125
Circuit, Main Battery   125
Circuit, Metallic  125
Circuit, Negative Side of   125
Circuit, Open  125
Circuit, Positive Side of   125
Circuit, Recoil   125
Circuit, Return  125
Circuits, Forked   126
Circuit, Short   482
Circuit, Shunt   123, 126
Circuit, Simple  126
Circuits, Parallel   123, 126
Circuit, Voltaic  126
Circuit Working, Short   482
Circular Bell,  79
Circular Current,   160
Circular, Mil   379
Circular Units  126, 555
Circumflux  126
Clamp  126
Clark's Compound  126
Cleansing, Fire   257
Clearance Space,   489
Cleat, Crossing   127
Cleats  127
Cleavage, Electrification by   127
Clip, Cable  97
Clock, Annunciator   35
Clock, Controlled   127
Clock, Controlling   127
Clock, Electric Annunciator   127
Clock, Electrolytic   128
Clock, Master  127
Clock, Secondary  127
Clock, Self-winding, Electric  128
Clockwork Feed  128
Cloisons  128
Closed Circuit Battery  61
Closed Coil Armature  43
Closure  128
Closure Contraction, Kathodic   312
Cloth, Carbonized  107
Club-foot Electro-magnet  217
Clutch  128
Clutch, Electro-magnetic  128
Coatings of a Condenser, or Prime Conductor  129
Cockburn Fuse   263
Code, Cipher  130
Code, S. N.   486
Code, Telegraphic   130, 511
Coefficient  130
Coefficient, Apparent, of Magnetic Induction   346
Coefficient, Economic   130, 204, 205
Coefficient of Electrical Energy  205
Coefficient of Expansion  247
Coefficient of Induced Magnetization  359, 354
Coefficient of Magnetic Induction  346, 349
Coefficient of Mutual Induction  301
Coefficient of Self-induction  298
Coercitive Force  471
Coercive Force   471
Coercive or Coercitive Force  131
Coil and Plunger  131
Coil and Coil Plunger  131
Coil and Plunger, Differential    132
Coil, Armature   43
Coil, Choking   132
Coil, Earth   133
Coil, Electric    133
Coil, Exploring   350
Coil, Flat   133
Coil, Induction   133
Coil, Induction, Inverted    136
Coil, Induction, Telephone   137
Coil. Kicking  132
Coil, Magnet  336
Coil, Magnetizing   137
Coil, Reaction   132
Coil, Resistance    137
Coil, Resistance, Standard   464
Coil, Rhumkorff   138
Coil, Ribbon   138
Coils, Bisected  132
Coils, Compensating   138
Coils, Sectioned   138
Coils, Henry's   138
Coils, Idle  295
Coil, Single, Dynamo   202
Coil, Spark   489
Coil, Sucking  132
Collecting Brush  90
Collecting Ring  139
Collector  139
Colombin,  139
Colophony  460
Colors of Secondary Plates  478
Column Battery  61
Column, Electric    139
Comb  140
Combined Resistance  464
Comb Protector  437
Commercial Efficiency   204
Commercial Efficiency of Dynamo  195
Commercial Wheatstone Bridge  86
Common Reservoir  460
Communicator  140
Commutation, Diameter of   182
Commutator  140
Commutator Ammeter  26
Commutator Bars  140, 56
Commutator, Flats in   140
Commutator, High Bars of   289
Commutator, Neutral Line of   390
Commutator, Neutral Point of   390
Commutator of Current Generators and Motors  140
Commutators, Bars of   56
Commutator Segments  56
Commutator, Split Ring   141
Commuted Current  160
Commuter  140
Commuting Transformer  547
Compass  141
Compass, Azimuth  141
Compass, Boxing the   86
Compass Card,  142
Compass, Declination   142
Compass, Inclination   142
Compass, Mariners'  142
Compass, Points of the   143
Compass, Spirit  143
Compass, Surveyors   143
Compass, Variation of the   32, 558
Compensating Coils  138
Compensating Magnet  336
Compensating Poles  426
Compensating Resistance  144
Complementary Distribution  144
Complete Alternation  23
Component  144
Components of Earth's Magnetism  356
Composition of Forces  260
Compound Arc  39
Compound, Binary  81
Compound, Chatterton's   116
Compound, Clark's   126
Compound Dynamo  195
Compounding, Over-   399
Compound Magnet  336
Compound or Compound Wound Motor  382
Compound Winding   578
Concentration of Ores, Magnetic   340
Concentrator, Magnetic    340
Concentric Candle  99
Concentric Carbon  107
Condenser  144
Condenser, Coatings of a, or Prime Conductor   129
Condenser, Epinus'   242
Condenser, Plate  417
Condenser, Sliding  144
Condenser, Varley's   559
Condensing Electroscope  233
Conductance  144
Conductance, Magnetic  340
Conduction  144
Conduction, Electrolytic    215
Conductive Discharge  187
Conductivity  144
Conductivity, Magnetic   340
Conductivity, Specific  145
Conductivity, Unit of   145
Conductivity, Variable   145
Conductor  145
Conductor, Anti-induction   145
Conductor, Branch  87
Conductor, Capacity of a Telegraph  103
Conductor, Conical  145
Conductor, Imbricated   146
Conductor, Interpolar  307
Conductor, Leakage   325
Conductor, Prime  146, 434
Conductors, Equivalent  146
Conductors, Lamination of Armature  319
Conductors, Service  481
Conductor, Underground   552
Congress Ohm  395
Congress Volt   568
Conical Conductor  145
Conjugate  146
Connect  146
Connection, Cross   158
Connection, Relay   457
Connector   146
Consequent Points  422
Consequent Poles  146, 478
Conservation of Electricity  146
Conservation of Energy  239
Constant Current  160
Constant Current Alternator  24
Constant Current Regulation  454
Constant, Dielectric  183
Constant, Galvanometer   268
Constant Potential  429
Constant Potential Regulation  455
Constant, Time    54l
Contact Breaker  121, 146
Contact, Electric   147
Contact Electricity  147
Contact Faults  147
Contact Key, Double   314
Contact Key, Sliding    316
Contact Lamp  320
Contact, Line of   330
Contact Point  147
Contact Potential Difference  147
Contact Ring  473
Contact Spring  148
Contact Series  147
Contact Theory  148
Continuity, Magnetic   340
Continuous Alternating Transformer  547
Continuous Current  161
Continuous Current Transformer  384, 547
Contraction, Anodic Closure  36
Contraction, Anodic Duration   36
Contraction, Anodic Opening  36
Contraction, Kathodic Closure   312
Contraction, Kathodic Duration  312
Contractures  148
Contraplex Working  580
Control, Electro-magnetic   218
Control, Gravity   281
Controlled Clock,  127
Controlling Clock  127
Controlling Field  148
Controlling Force  148
Controlling Magnet  185, 336
Control, Magnetic   341
Control, Spring  492
Convection, Electric   149
Convection, Electrolytic   149, 214
Convection of Heat, Electric   149
Convective Discharge  187
Conversion, Efficiency of   205
Converter  149
Cooling Box  151
Co-ordinates, Origin of   391
Co-ordinates, System of   150
Copper  151
Copper Bath  152
Copper Stripping Bath  152
Copper Voltameter  563
Cord Adjuster  152
Cord, Flexible   152
Cord, Pendant   405
Core  152
Core, Armature   43
Core, Cable    96
Cored Carbon  107
Core-discs  152
Core-discs, Perforated   154
Core-discs, Pierced   152
Core-discs, Toothed   154
Core, Laminated   154
Core, Magnet   336
Core Ratio  154
Core, Ribbon   154
Core, Ring  155
Cores, Krizik's   318
Core, Stranded   155
Core, Tangentially Laminated   155
Core Transformer  155
Core, Tubular  155
Corpusants  155
Corresponding Points  422
Coulomb  155
Coulomb's Law of Electrostatic Attraction and Repulsion  155
Coulomb's Law of Magnetic Attraction and Repulsion  338
Coulomb's Torsion Balance  544
Coulomb, Volt-   568
Counter, Electric   156
Counter Electro-motive Force  156, 228
Counter-electro-motive Force Lightning Arrester  329
Counter Inductive Effect  204
Couple  156
Couple, Astatic  157
Couple, Axial  544
Couple, Magnetic    341
Couple, Moment of  544
Couple, Thermo-electric   532
Couple, Voltaic or Galvanic   156
Coupling  259
Coupling of Dynamo  201
C. P.  157
Crater  157
Creep, Diffusion   184
Creeping  157
Creeping, Magnetic  341
Creeping of Magnetism  356
Crith  157
Critical Current  161
Critical Distance of Alternative Path  190
Critical Resistance  464
Critical Speed  157
Critical Value, Villari's   561
Crookes' Dark Space  489
Cross  157
Cross-connecting Board  157
Cross Connection  158
Cross Induction  298
Crossing Cleat  127
Crossing Wires  158
Cross-magnetizing Effect  158, 298
Cross-over Block  158
Cross, Peltier's  405
Cross Talk  158
Crucible, Electric    158
Crystallization, Electric   158
Cube, Faraday's   249
Culture. Electro-  209
Cunynghame's Ammeter  26
Cup, Mercury   371
Cup, Porous   159, 426
Current  159
Current, After  159
Current, Alternating  159
Current, Alternating System   23
Current, Alternative  563
Current Arc, Alternating   23
Current, Atomic  160
Current, Break Induced   162
Current, Charge  160
Current, Circular   160
Current, Commuted   160
Current, Constant   160
Current, Continuous  161
Current, Continuous, Transformer   384
Current, Critical   161
Current, Daniel  161
Current, U. S. or Siemens' Unit   161
Current, Demarcation   161
Current Density  161
Current, Derived   164
Current, Diacritical   161
Current, Diaphragm   161
Current, Direct  162
Current, Direct Induced   162
Current, Direction of  162
Current, Displacement   162
Current, Extra   162
Current, Faradic   162
Current, Field of Force of a   255
Current, Foucault   163
Current, Franklinic   163
Current Generator  277
Current, Induced  163
Current Induction  163
Current Induction, Unipolar   553
Current Intensity  163
Current, Inverse Induced   163
Current, Jacobi's Unit of   163
Current, Joint   163
Current, Linear   164
Current, Make and Break   164, 367
Current, Make Induced   163
Current Meter  164, 375
Current Meter, Alternating   373
Current, Negative  164
Current, Nerve and Muscle   164
Current, Opposed   164
Current, Partial   164
Current, Polarizing   164
Current, Positive   164
Current, Power of Periodic   433
Current, Pulsatory  164
Current, Rectified   164
Current, Rectilinear   165
Current, Redressed   165
Current Regulation, Constant    454
Current, Reverse Induced   163
Current Reverser  165
Currents, Ampere  30
Currents, Ampérian   165
Currents, Angular.   165
Currents, Angular, Laws of   165
Currents, Earth   166
Current, Secondary  166
Current, Secretion   166
Currents, Eddy   163
Currents, Eddy Displacement  162
Currents in Parallel Circuits, Independence of   297
Current, Sinuous   166
Current, Sheet   166
Current, Shuttle   483
Currents, Local   163
Currents, Local  331
Currents, Multiphase   166
Currents, Natural   166, 389
Currents, Nerve   390
Currents of Motion  167
Currents of Rest  167
Currents, Orders of   167
Currents, Parasitical   163
Currents, Polyphase   167
Currents, Rotatory  167
Currents, Thermo-electric   167
Current Streamlets  495
Current, Swelling   167
Current, Tailing  501
Current, Undulatory   167
Current, Unit  167
Current, Wattless   168
Curve, Arrival  168
Curve, Characteristic   113, 168
Curve, Characteristic, of Converter   169
Curve, Charging   170
Curve, Discharging   170
Curve, Elastic  206
Curve, Electro-motive Force   170
Curve, External Characteristic   . 171
Curve, Harmonic  174, 485
Curve, Horse Power   171
Curve, Isochasmen   171
Curve, Life    171
Curve, Load  172
Curve, Magnetization   172
Curve of Distribution of Potential in Armature  172
Curve of Dynamo  173
Curve of Saturation of Magnetic Circuit  174
Curve of Sines  173, 485
Curve of Torque  174
Curve, Permeability Temperature   174
Curve, Sine   174, 485
Curve, Sinusoidal  174, 485
Curves, Magnetic   341
Cut In  174
Cut Out  174
Cut Out, Automatic   175, 475
Cut Out, Magnetic  175
Cut Out, Plug   175
Cut Out, Safety  175
Cut Out, Spring Jack   493
Cut Outs, Time  541
Cut Out, Wedge  175
Cutting of Lines of Force  175
Cycle of Alternation  175
Cycle of Magnetization  360
Cylinder, Armature  43
Cylinder, Electric Machine   333
Cylindrical Armature  45
Cystoscopy  175

Damper  176
Damping  176
Damping Magnet  336
Daniell's Standard Voltaic Cell  109
Dark Space, Faraday's   249
D'Arsonval's Battery  62
Dash-pot  176
Dead Beat  38, 176
Dead Beat Discharge  187
Dead Earth  176, 203
Dead Point of an Alternator  177
Dead Turns  177
Dead Turns of a Dynamo  551
Dead Wire  177
Death, Electrical   177
Debrun Candle  99
Decalescence  177
Decay of Magnetism  356
Deci  177
Decimal Candle  99
Declination, Angle of   32-177
Declination Compass  142
Declination, Magnetic   342
Declination Map  309
Declination of the Magnetic Needle  178
Decomposition  178
Decomposition, Electrolytic   178
Decrement  178
De-energize  178
Deflagration  178
Deflagrator, Hare's   73
Deflecting Field  178
Deflection  178
Deflection Method  178
Deflection of Magnet  337
Degeneration, Reaction of   179
Degradation of Energy  239
Deka  179
De la Rive's Floating Battery  179
De la Rue Battery  62
Delaurier's Solution  179
Delezenne's Circle  133
Demarcation Current  161
Demagnetization  179
Density, Current   161
Density, Electrical  115
Density, Electric Superficial   180
Density, Field   252
Density, Magnetic   342
Density of Charge  115, 180
Dental Mallet, Electric   180
Deposit, Electrolytic   180
Deposit, Nodular   392
Depolarization  180
Depolarizing Fluid  258
Derivation, Points of   180, 423
Derivative Circuit  123
Derived Circuit  123
Derived Current  164
Derived Units  555
Desk Push  180
Detector  180
Detector, Lineman's  180
Deviation of Discharge  188
Deviation, Quadrantal   180
Deviation, Semi-circular   181
Device, Safety  475
Dextrotorsal  181
Diacritical  181
Diacritical Current  161
Diagometer  181
Diagnosis, Electro-  181, 210
Diagram, Thermo-electric   532
Dial Telegraph  505
Diamagnetic  181
Diamagnetic Polarity  181, 423
Diamagnetism  182
Diameter of Commutation  182
Diapason, Electric  182
Diaphragm  182
Diaphragm Current  161
Dielectric,  182
Dielectric Capacity   102
Dielectric Constant  183
Dielectric, Energy of   183
Dielectric Polarization  183
Dielectric Resistance  183, 464
Dielectric Strain  183
Dielectric Strength  183
Dielectric Stress  496
Differential Arc Lamp  320
Differential Coil and Plunger  132
Differential Galvanometer  268
Differentially Wound Bell,   79
Differential Magnetometer  365
Differential Motor  382
Differential Relay  457
Differential Thermo-electric Pile  533
Differential Winding Working  183
Diffusion  184
Diffusion, Anodal .   35
Diffusion Creep  184
Digney Unit of Resistance  464
Dimensions and Theory of Dimensions  184
Dimmer  185
Diode Working  580
Dioxide, Carbon   107
Dioxide, Sulphur  497
Dip, Magnetic  342, 346
Dip of Magnetic Needle  185
Dipping  185
Dipping Needle  185
Direct Current  162
Direct Current Dynamo  197
Direct Induced Current,  .  162
Direct Reading Galvanometer  269
Directing Magnet  185
Direction  185
Direction of Current  162
Direction, Positive   428
Directive Power  187
Disc, Arago's   38
Disc, Armature  43
Disc, Bunsen   92
Disc, Dynamo  197
Disc, Faraday's  249
Discharge and Charge Key  313
Discharge, Brush  187
Discharge, Conductive  187
Discharge, Convective  187
Discharge, Dead Beat   187
Discharge, Disruptive   187
Discharge, Duration of   188
Discharge, Glow  187
Discharge, Impulsive   188
Discharge Key, Kempe's   315
Discharge, Lateral  188
Discharge of Magnetism  356
Discharge, Oscillatory  188
Discharger  188
Discharger, Henley's Universal   189
Discharger, Universal  189
Discharger, Universal, Henley's  189
Discharge, Silent  187, 189, 206
Discharge, Spark   189
Discharge, Surging   188
Discharging Curve  170
Discharging Rod  189
Discharging Tongs  189
Disconnection  189
Discontinuity, Magnetic  342
Discovery, Oerstedt's  394
Disc Winding  579
Dispersion Photometer  412
Displacement Current  162
Displacement, Electric   188
Displacement, Oscillatory   398
Disruptive Discharge  187
Disruptive Tension  189
Dissimulated Electricity  189
Dissipation of Charge  115
Dissociation  189, 535
Distance, Critical, of Alternative Path   190
Distance, Explosive   190
Distance, Sparking   190
Distance, Striking    496
Distant Station  493
Distillation  190
Distortion of Field  252
Distributing Box  190
Distributing Switches  190
Distribution, Complementary   144
Distribution, Isolated   309
Distribution of Charge  115
Distribution of Electric Energy, Systems of   190
Distribution of Magnetism, Lamellar,   357
Distribution of Magnetism, Solenoidal  358
Distribution of Supply, Central Station   112
Door Opener, Electric   190
Dosage, Galvanic  190
Double Break Switch  500
Double Carbon Arc Lamp  191
Double Contact Key  314
Double Curb Working  581
Double Fluid Theory  191
Double Fluid Voltaic Cell  191
Double Magnetic Circuit  340
Double Needle Telegraph  506
Double Plug  191
Double Pole Switch  500
Double Tapper Key  314
Double Touch, Magnetization by  358
Double Trolley  549
Double Wedge  191
Doubler  191
D. P.  191
Drag  191
Drag of Field  254
Dreh-Strom  191
Drill, Electric   191
Drip Loop  192
Driving Horns  192
Dronier's Salt  192
Drooping Characteristic  114
Drop, Annunciator   35
Drop, Automatic   192
Drop, Calling   98
Drum Armature  45
Drum, Electric   193
Dry Battery  63
Dry Pile, Zamboni's   581
Dub's Laws  193
Duct  193
Duplex Bridge Telegraph  506
Duplex Cable  96
Duplex Differential Telegraph  507
Duplex Telegraph,  506
Duration Contraction, Kathodic  312
Duration of Electric Spark  490
Dyad  193
Dyeing, Electric  193
Dynamic Electricity  193
Dynamic, Electro-   211
Dynamic Induction, Magnetic   347
Dynamo, Alternating Current   193
Dynamo, Alternating Current Regulation of   195
Dynamos, Battery of    68
Dynamo, Commercial Efficiency of   195
Dynamo, Compound   195
Dynamo, Coupling of   201
Dynamo, Curve of  173
Dynamo, Dead Turns of a   551
Dynamo, Direct Current   197
Dynamo, Disc  197
Dynamo-electric Machine  197
Dynamo, Electroplating  198
Dynamo, Equalizing  198
Dynamo, Field and Armature Reaction of  450
Dynamo, Far Leading  198
Dynamo or Magneto-electric Generator, Flashing in a   257
Dynamo, Inductor   199
Dynamo, Interior Pole  199
Dynamo, Iron Clad  200
Dynamo, Ironwork Fault of a   308
Dynamo, Motor  200
Dynamo, Multipolar   200
Dynamo, Non-polar   200
Dynamo, Open Coil  200
Dynamo, Overtype  399
Dynamos, Regulation of   455
Dynamo, Ring  200
Dynamo, Self Exciting  201
Dynamo, Separate Circuit  201
Dynamo, Separately Excited   201, 479
Dynamo, Series   201
Dynamo, Shunt   202
Dynamo, Single Coil  202
Dynamo, Tuning Fork   202
Dynamo, Unipolar  202, 553
Dynamograph  199
Dynamometer  200
Dyne  203

Earth  203
Earth Coil  133
Earth Currents  166
Earth, Dead  176, 203
Earth, Magnetization by   359
Earth, Partial  203, 404
Earth Plate  203
Earth Return  203
Earth's Magnetism, Components of   356
Earth, Solid  203
Earth, Swinging    203
Earth, Total   203
Ebonite  203
Eccentric Iron Disc Ammeter  27
Economic Coefficient  130, 204, 205
Eddy Currents  163
Eddy Displacement Currents  162
Ediswan  204
Edison Effect  204
Edison-Lalande Battery  69
Eel, Electric  204
Effect, Acheson  208
Effect, Counter-inductive   204
Effect, Cross-magnetizing   158, 298
Effect, Edison  204
Effect, Faraday   249
Effect, Ferranti   251
Effect, Hall   284
Effect, Joule   311
Effect, Kerr  235, 312
Effect, Mordey   381
Effect, Page   401
Effect, Peltier  404
Effect, Photo-voltaic   415
Effect, Seebeck  478
Effect, Skin  486
Effect, Thomson   538
Effect, Voltaic   563
Efficiency  204
Efficiency, Commercial   204
Efficiency, Electrical   205
Efficiency, Gross  205
Efficiency, Intrinsic  205
Efficiency, Net  205
Efficiency of Conversion  205
Efficiency of Secondary Battery Quantity   205
Efficiency of Secondary Battery, Real   205
Efflorescence  206
Effluvium, Electric   206
Egg, Philosopher's   409
Elastic Curve  206
Elasticity, Electric   206
Electrepeter   206
Electric, Absolute, Potential   429
Electric Absorption  8
Electric Actinometer  11
Electric Alarm  17
Electrical Classification of Elements   237
Electrically Controlled Valve  558
Electric Ammunition Hoist  29
Electric Analysis  32
Electric Analyzer  32
Electric Annealing  34
Electric Annunciator Clock  127
Electric Arc Blow-pipe  84
Electric Aura  53
Electric Automatic Fire Extinguisher  257
Electric Axis  54
Electric Balance  577
Electric Bath, Bipolar  57
Electric Bath, Multipolar   57
Electric Bath, Unipolar   57
Electric Bell  79
Electric Bell, Automatic   78
Electric Bioscopy  82
Electric Blasting  83
Electric Bleaching  83
Electric Boat  84
Electric Boiler Feed  84
Electric Branding  87
Electric Brazing  87
Electric Breath Figures  89
Electric Breeze  89
Electric Buoy  93
Electric Candle  99
Electric Case Hardening  109
Electric Cautery  109
Electric Chimes  118
Electric Chronograph  118
Electric Circuit, Active  123
Electric Clock, Self-winding    128
Electric Coil  133
Electric Column  139
Electric Contact  147
Electric Convection  149
Electric Convection of Heat  149, 286
Electric Counter  156
Electric Crucible  158
Electric Crystallization  158
Electric Death  177
Electric Density  115
Electric Dental Mallet  180
Electric Diapason  182
Electric Displacement  189
Electric Door Opener  190
Electric Double Refraction  454
Electric Drill   191
Electric Drum  193
Electric Dyeing  193
Electric Eel  204
Electric Efficiency   205
Electric Effluvium  206
Electric Elasticity  206
Electric Endosmose  238
Electric Energy  239
Electric Energy, Coefficient of  205
Electric Energy, Systems of Distribution of   190
Electric Engraving  245
Electric Entropy  242
Electric Etching  245
Electric Evaporation  246
Electric Excitability of Animal Systems  247
Electric Exosmose  247
Electric Expansion  247
Electric Fire Alarm, Automatic  257
Electric Floor Matting  369
Electric Fluid  258
Electric Fly or Flyer  259
Electric Fog  259
Electric Furnace  263
Electric Fuse  264
Electric Gas Burners  93
Electric Headlight  285
Electric Head Bath  284
Electric Heat  285
Electric Heater  286
Electric Horse Power  290
Electric Image  296
Electric Incandescence  297
Electric Influence  305
Electric Insulation  305
Electricities, Separation of   479
Electricity  206
Electricity, Animal   33
Electricity, Atmospheric    51
Electricity, Cal  208
Electricity, Conservation of   146
Electricity, Contact  147
Electricity, Dissimulated   189
Electricity, Dynamic   193
Electricity, Frictional   262
Electricity, Latent   323
Electricity, Negative   389
Electricity, Plant   317
Electricity, Positive  428
Electricity, Specific Heat of   491
Electricity, Static  493
Electricity, Storage of   495
Electricity, Voltaic   563
Electricity, Vitreous   562
Electric Machine, Plate  417
Electric Machine, Wimshurst   577
Electric Mains  367
Electric Mass  368
Electric Matter  368
Electric Meter, Chemical   375
Electric Meter, Thermal   375
Electric Meter, Time   375
Electric Mortar  382
Electric Motor  382
Electric or Electrostatic Capacity  102
Electric Organ  397
Electric Oscillations  398
Electric Osmose  398
Electric Pen  405
Electric Pendulum  405
Electric Piano  415
Electric Picture   415
Electric Pistol  416
Electric Popgun  282
Electric Portrait  415
Electric Potential Difference   429
Electric Potential, Unit of   432
Electric Power   433
Electric Pressure  434
Electric Probe  435
Electric Prostration  437
Electric Protector   437
Electric Radiometer  447
Electric Ray  450
Electric Rectification of Alcohol  18
Electric Reduction of Ores  453
Electric Reduction of Phosphorous   410
Electric Register  454
Electric Residue  116, 460
Electricity, Resinous   461
Electric Resonance   468
Electric Resonator  470
Electric Rings  392
Electrics  208
Electric Saw  476
Electric Screen,   476
Electric Shadow   480
Electric Shock  482
Electric Shower Bath   57
Electric Soldering  487
Electric Spark, Duration of   490
Electric Sphygmophone  491
Electric Storms  495
Electric Striae  496
Electric Subway   496
Electric Subway, Underground   552
Electric Sunstroke   497
Electric Superficial Density  180
Electric Swaging  499
Electric Tele-barometer  504
Electric Telemanometer   521
Electric Telemeter  521
Electric Tempering  527
Electric Tension  529
Electric Thermometer  535
Electric Thermostat  537
Electric Torpedo  543
Electric Tower  545
Electric Transmission of Energy  240
Electric Trumpet  550
Electric Tube  550
Electric Typewriter  551
Electric Unit of Work  580
Electric Varnish  559
Electric Welding   574
Electric Whirl  577
Electric Wind  578
Electrification  208
Electrification by Cleavage  127
Electrification by Pressure  434
Electrified Body, Energy of an   . 241
Electrization  208
Electro-biology  208
Electro-capillarity  209
Electro-chemical Equivalents  209, 244
Electro-chemical Series  209
Electro-chemistry   209
Electro-culture  209
Electrode  210
Electrode, Indifferent   210
Electrodes, Erb's Standard of   210
Electrodes, Non-polarizable  210
Electrodes, Shovel   483
Electrode, Therapeutic   210
Electro-diagnosis  181, 210
Electro-dynamic  211
Electro-dynamic Attraction and Repulsion,   211
Electro-dynamic Rotation of Liquids  474
Electro-dynamometer, Siemens'  212
Electro-gilding  277
Electro-kinetic  211
Electrolier  212
Electrolysis  212
Electrolysis, Laws of   213
Electrolyte  214
Electrolytic Analysis  214
Electrolytic Cell  109
Electrolytic Clock  128
Electrolytic Conduction  215
Electrolytic Convection  149, 214
Electrolytic Deposit  180
Electrolytic Iron  308
Electrolytic Resistance  464
Electro-magnet  215, 337
Electro-magnet, Annular   216
Electro-magnet, Bar  217
Electro-magnet, Club-foot   217
Electro-magnet, Hinged  217
Electro-magnet, Hughes'    291
Electro-magnetic Ammeter  27
Electro-magnetic and Magnetic Equipotential Surface  244
Electro-magnetic Attraction and Repulsion  217
Electro-magnetic Brake  86
Electro-magnetic Clutch  128
Electro-magnetic Control  218
Electro-magnetic Eye  248
Electro-magnetic Field of Force  218
Electro-magnetic Force  260
Electro-magnetic Gun  282
Electro-magnetic Induction  218, 299
Electro-magnetic Inertia  305
Electro-magnetic Induction, Mutual  302
Electro-magnetic Interrupter for Tuning Fork  307
Electro-magnetic Leakage  219
Electro-magnetic Lines of Force  219
Electro-magnetic Liquids, Rotation of   475
Electro-magnetic Meter  375
Electro-magnetic Quantity  445
Electro-magnetic Quantity, Practical Unit of   445
Electro-magnetic Shunt  .483
Electro-magnetic Stress  219, 496
Electro-magnetic Theory of Light  219
Electro-magnetic Unit of Energy  220
Electro-magnetic Vibrator  561
Electro-magnetic Waves,   573
Electro-magnet, Ironclad   219
Electro-magnetism  220
Electro-magnet, Joule's  337
Electro-magnet, Long Range  220
Electro-magnet, One Coil  219
Electro-magnet, Plunger  220
Electro-magnet, Polarized  220
Electro-magnets, Interlocking   221
Electro-magnets, Multiple Wire Method of Working   388
Electro-magnet, Stopped Coil  221
Electro-magnets, Surgical   222
Electro-mechanical Bell  80
Electro-mechanical Equivalent  244
Electro-medical Baths  222
Electro-medical Battery, Pulvermacher's  69
Electro-metallurgy  222
Electrometer  222
Electrometer, Absolute  222
Electrometer. Attracted Disc   223
Electrometer, Capillary  224
Electrometer Gauge  226
Electrometer, Lane's   226
Electrometer, Quadrant   226
Electrometer, Thermo-   536
Electrometer, Weight  223
Electro-motive Force  227
Electro-motive Force, Counter-   228
Electro-motive Force Curve  170
Electro-motive Force, Impressed   297
Electro-motive Force, Motor  384
Electro-motive Force. Oscillatory  398
Electro-motive Force, Transverse  549
Electro-motive Force, Unit   228
Electro-motive Intensity  228
Electro-motive Potential Difference  429
Electro-motive Series  228
Electro-motograph  229
Electro-motor  229
Electro-muscular Excitation  229
Electro-negative   229
Electro-optics  229
Electrophoric Action  230
Electrophorus  230
Electro-physiology  231
Electroplating  231, 418
Electroplating Dynamo  198
Electro-pneumatic Signals  231
Electropoion Fluid  232
Electro-positive  232
Electro-puncture  232
Electro-receptive  232
Electroscope  232
Electroscope, Bennett's   233
Electroscope, Bohenberger's   233
Electroscope, Condensing  233
Electroscope, Gold Leaf   233
Electroscope, Pith Ball  234
Electrostatic Attraction and Repulsion  234
Electrostatic Attraction and Repulsion. Coulomb's Law of   155
Electrostatic Circuit  123
Electrostatic Equipotential Surface  244
Electrostatic Field of Force  254
Electrostatic Force  260
Electrostatic Induction  302
Electrostatic Induction, Coefficient of   234
Electrostatic Induction, Mutual   303
Electrostatic Lines of Force  234
Electrostatic Quantity  445
Electrostatic Refraction  235
Electrostatics  235
Electrostatic Series  235
Electrostatic Stress  236, 496
Electrostatic Telephone  526
Electrostatic Voltmeter  571
Electro-thermal Equivalent  245
Electro-therapeutics or Therapy  236
Electrotonic State  493
Electrotonus  236
Electrotype  236
Element, Chemical   236
Element, Galvanic  264
Element, Mathematical   237
Element, Negative  390
Element of a Battery Cell  237
Element, Positive  277
Elements, Electrical Classification of   237
Elements, Magnetic   342
Elements of Battery  63
Elements, Thermo-electric   237
Element, Voltaic  237
Elias' Method of Magnetization  360
Elongation  237, 540
Elongation, Magnetic   344
Embosser, Telegraph   237
E. M. D. P.  238
E. M. F.  238
Energy  238
Energy, Atomic  238
Energy, Chemical  239
Energy, Conservation of    239
Energy, Degradation of   239
Energy, Electric  239
Energy, Electrical, Coefficient of   205
Energy, Electric Transmission of   240
Energy, Electro-magnetic, Unit of   220
Energy, Kinetic  241
Energy, Mechanical   241
Energy Meter  375
Energy, Molar  241
Energy, Molecular   241
Energy of an Electrified Body  241
Energy of Dielectric  183
Energy of Position  211
Energy of Stress  241
Energy, Physical   241
Energy, Potential, or Static   241
Energy, Radiant    446
Energy, Thermal   242
End-on Method  238
End or Pole, Marked  368
Endosmose, Electric   238
End Play  238
End, Unmarked   556
English Absolute or Foot Second Unit of Resistance  465
Engraving, Electric   245
Entropy  242
Entropy, Electric  242
Epinus Condenser  242
E. P. S.  243
Equator, Magnetic   344
Equator of Magnet   337
Equipotential  244
Equipotential Surface  498
Equipotential Surface, Electrostatic  244
Equipotential Surface, Magnetic and Electro-magnetic   244
Equalizer  243
Equalizer, Feeder  251
Equalizing Dynamo  198
Equivalent, Chemical   116, 244
Equivalent Conductors  146
Equivalent, Electro-thermal   245
Equivalent, Joule's  311
Equivalent Resistance  465
Equivalents, Electro-chemical  209, 244
Equivalent, Thermo-chemical   245
Equivalent, Water   572
Equivolt  245
Erb's Standard of Electrodes  210
Erg   245
Erg-ten  245
Error, Heating  286
Escape  245
Essential Resistance  465, 466
Etching, Electric   245
Ethene  397
Ether  246
Eudiometer   246
Evaporation, Electric  246
Ewing's Theory of Magnetism  356
Exchange, Telephone  246
Excitation, Electro-muscular   229
Excitability, Faradic   246
Excitability, Galvanic   247
Excitability of Animal System, Electric   247
Exciter  247
Exosmose, Electric  247
Expansion, Coefficient of   247
Expansion, Electric  247
Experiment, Franklin's   261
Experiment, Hall's   284
Experiment, Kerr's  312
Experiment, Matteueci's   369
Experiments, Hertz's  470
Experiment, Volta's Fundamental  567
Experiment with Frog, Galvani's   262
Exploder  247
Explorer  247
Exploring Coil  350
Explosive Distance  190
Extension Bell Call  248
Extension, Polar  423
External Characteristic  114
External Characteristic Curve  171
External Circuit  123
External Resistance  465, 467
Extinguisher, Automatic Electric Fire    257
Extra Current  162
Extra-polar Region  454
Eye, Electro-magnetic  248
Eye, Selenium  478

Facsimile Telegraph  510
Factor, Armature   45
Fahrenheit Scale  248
Fall of Potential  430
False Poles, Magnetic   350
Farad  248
Faraday, Effect   249
Faraday's Cube  249
Faraday's Dark Space  249, 489
Faraday's Disc  249
Faraday's Net  250
Faraday's Ring  473
Faraday's Transformer  250
Faraday's Voltameter  250
Faradic  250
Faradic Battery  63
Faradic Brush  251
Faradic Current  162
Faradic Excitability  246
Faradization   251
Faradization, Galvano-  265
Far Leading Dynamo  198
Fault of a Dynamo, Ironwork   308
Faults  251
Faults, Contact   147
Feed Clockwork  128
Feeder  251
Feeder, Equalizer   251
Feeder, Main or Standard   251
Feeder, Negative   251
Feeder, Neutral   251
Feeder, Positive   251
Feeder, Switch   500
Feet, Ampere   30
Ferranti Effect  251
Ferric Chloride Battery  63
Ferro-magnetic  252
Fibre and Spring Suspension   252
Fibre Suspension  252
Field, Air  252
Field, Alternating   252
Field and Armature Reaction of Dynamo,  450
Field, Controlling    148
Field, Deflecting   178
Field Density  252
Field, Distortion of   252
Field, Drag of  254
Field, Intensity of a Magnetic   306
Field Magnet  337
Field of Force  .  254
Field of Force, Electro-magnetic  218
Field of Force, Electrostatic   254
Field of Force, Magnetic   344
Field of Force of a Current  255
Field of Force, Uniform   553
Field, Pulsatory   256
Field, Rotating   256
Field, Stray  256, 495
Field, Uniform  256
Field, Uniform Magnetic   345
Field, Waste   256
Figure of Merit  256
Figures, Haldat's   284
Figures, Lichtenberg's   327
Figures, Magnetic   345
Filament  256
Filament, Magnetic   345
Filaments, Paper   402
File, Circuit Breaker   121
Finder, Position   427
Finder, Range   447
Finder, Wire  580
Fire Alarm, Electric Automatic  257
Fire and Heat Alarm  17
Fire Extinguisher, Electric Automatic  257
Fire Cleansing  257
Fire, St. Elmo's   494
Fishing Box  311
Flashing in a Dynamo or Magneto-Electric Generator  257
Flashing of Incandescent Lamp Carbons  257
Flashing Over  258
Flash, Side   484
Flat Cable  96
Flat Coil  133
Flat Ring Armature  45
Flats  258
Flats in Commutator  140
Flexible Cord  152
Floating Battery, De la Rive's   179
Floating Magnets, Meyer's  370
Floor Matting, Electric  369
Floor Push  258
Fluid, Depolarizing   258
Fluid, Electric  258
Fluid, Electropoion   232
Fluid, Insulator.   306
Fluid, North Magnetic   357
Fluids, Magnetic  345
Fluid, South Magnetic  356
Fluid Theory, Single   486
Fluorescence  258
Flush Boxes  258
Fluviograph  259
Flux, Magnetic  345
Fly or Flyer, Electric   259
Foci Magnetic  259
Fog, Electric  259
Following Horns  259
Foot-candle  259
Foot, Mil-  379
Foot-pound  259
Foot-step  259
Force  259
Force, Annular  544
Force, Axial  544
Force, Centrifugal   112
Force, Coercive or Coercitive   131-471
Force, Controlling  148
Force, Counter-electro-motive   156
Force de Cheval  260
Force, Electro-magnetic  260
Force, Electro-motive   227
Force, Electro-motive, Transverse   549
Force, Electrostatic   260
Force, Field of  254
Force, Field of, of a Current   255
Force, Field of, Electrostatic  254
Force, Kapp Line of   312
Force, Lines of  330
Force, Magnetic  346
Force, Magnetic Field of   344
Force, Magnetic Lines of   348
Force, Magneto-motive  365
Force, Motor Electro-motive   384
Force of Polarization, Back Electro-motive  156
Force, Oscillatory, Electro-motive   398
Force, Photo-electro-motive   410
Forces, Composition of   260
Forces, Parallelogram of   260
Forces, Resolution of  261
Force, True Contact   549
Force, Tubes of   261
Force, Unit of  261
Forked Circuits  126
Fork, Tuning, Dynamo   202
Forming  261
Formula of Merit  256
Foucault Current  163
Foundation Ring  261
Fourth State of Matter  261
Frame  261
Frame, Resistance   465
Franklinic Current  163
Franklin's Experiment  261
Franklin's Plate  262
Franklin's Theory  262-486
Free Charge  115
Free Magnetism  356
Frequency  262
Frequency, High  289
Frictional Electricity  262
Frictional Electric Machine  333
Frictional Heating  262
Friction Gear, Magnetic   276
Friction, Magnetic  295-346
Fringe  262
Frog, Galvani's Experiment with   262
Frog, Rheoscopic   262
Frying  263
Fulgurite  263
Fuller's Battery  63
Fulminating Pane  262
Fundamental Unit  554
Furnace, Electric   263
Fuse Block  175
Fuse Board  263
Fuse Box  263
Fuse, Cockburn   263
Fuse, Electric   264
Fuse Links  330
Fuse, Safety   175-475

Galvanic  264
Galvanic Action, Volta's Law of  568
Galvanic Dosage  190
Galvanic Element  264
Galvanic Excitability  247
Galvanic or Voltaic Battery  76
Galvanic or Voltaic Circle  119
Galvanic or Voltaic Couple  156
Galvanic Polarization  265
Galvani's Experiment with Frog  262
Galvanism  265
Galvanization  265
Galvanization, Labile   265
Galvanized Iron  265
Galvano-cautery  109
Galvano-cautery, Chemical   265
Galvano-electric Cautery  109
Galvano-faradization  265
Galvanometer  265
Galvanometer, Absolute   266
Galvanometer, Aperiodic   266
Galvanometer, Astatic   266
Galvanometer, Ballistic   267
Galvanometer Constant  268
Galvanometer, Differential   268
Galvanometer, Direct Reading   269
Galvanometer, Marine   269
Galvanometer, Mirror   271
Galvanometer, Potential  269
Galvanometer, Proportional   269
Galvanometer, Quantity   269
Galvanometer, Reflecting   270
Galvanometer, Shunt   271-483
Galvanometer, Sine  271
Galvanometer, Tangent    272
Galvanometer, Torsion   273-544
Galvanometer, Upright   274
Galvanometer, Vertical  274
Galvanometer, Volt and Ampere Meter  274
Galvano-plastics   275
Galvano-puncture  232-275
Galvanoscope  275
Galvano-thermal Cautery  100
Gap, Spark   490
Gas Battery  63
Gas Battery, Grove's   281
Gas Burner, Electric   93
Gas, Carbonic Acid   108
Gas, Electrolytic  275
Gases, Magnetism of   357
Gases, Mixed  275
Gas Jet, Carcel   108
Gas, Olefiant  397
Gassing   275
Gassiot s Cascade  275
Gastroscope  275
Gas Voltameter  564
Gauge, Battery  64
Gauge, Electrometer   226
Gauss  275
Gauss' Principle  276
Gauss, Tangent Positions of   276
Gauze Brush, Wire  92
Gear, Magnetic  346
Gear, Magnetic Friction    276
Geissler Pump  437
Geissler Tubes  276
Generating Plate  277
Generator, Current   277
Generator Inductor  199
Generator, Magneto-electric  362
Generator, Magneto-electric, Flashing in a Dynamo or   257
Generator, Motor  384
Generator, Pyromagnetic.   442
Generators and Motors, Commutator of Current  140
Generator, Secondary   277-477
Geographic Meridian  372
German Mile Unit of Resistance  466
German Silver  277
German Standard Candle  99
Gilding, Electro-  277
Gilding Metal   277
Gimbals  278
Girder Armature  49
Glass  278
Globe or Globular Lightning  330
Glow Discharge  187
Gold  278
Gold Bath  279
Gold Leaf Electroscope  233
Gold Stripping Bath  279
Governor, Centrifugal   113
Governor, Rate   449
Graduator  279
Gram  280
Gram-atom  280
Gram-molecule  280
Graphite  280
Gravitation  280
Gravity, Acceleration of   280
Gravity Ammeter  27
Gravity Battery  64
Gravity, Centre of   112
Gravity Control  281
Gravity Drop Annunciator  35
Grease Spot  92
Green Vitriol  562
Grenet Battery  65
Grid  281
Grid Plug   420
Grip, Cable   96
Gross Efficiency  205
Ground  281
Grounded Circuit  123
Ground Plate  417
Ground Wire  281
Grove's Battery  65
Grove's Gas Battery  281
Guard Ring  282
Guard Tube  282
Gun, Electro-magnetic   282
Gutta Percha  282
Gyration, Centre of   112
Gyrostatic Action of Armatures  283

H   283
H Armature  49
Haarlem Magnet  337
Hair, Removal of, by Electrolysis   283
Haldat's Figures  284
Hall Effect  284
Hall Effect, Real  284
Hall Effect, Spurious   284
Halleyan Lines  308
Hall's Experiment  284
Halske's and Siemens' Battery  72
Hand Hole  190
Hanger Board  284
Hanger, Cable   96
Hanger, Cable, Tongs  97
Harcourt's Pentane Standard  406
Hare's Deflagrator  73
Harmonic   23
Harmonic Curve  174, 485
Harmonic Motion, Simple   486
Harmonic Receiver  284, 451
Head Bath, Electric   284
Head-light, Electric  285
Head, Torsion   544
Heat  285
Heat and Fire Alarm  17
Heat, Atomic   52, 285
Heat, Electric   285
Heat, Electric, Convection of   149, 286
Heat, Irreversible.  286
Heat, Mechanical Equivalent of  286
Heat, Molecular  286
Heat, Specific  286
Heat, Specific, of Electricity   288
Heat Units  288
Heater, Electric  286
Heating, Admiralty Rules of  12
Heating Error  286
Heating, Frictional   262
Heating Magnet  286
Heavy Carburetted Hydrogen,   397
Hecto  288
Hedgehog Transformer  548
Heliograph  288
Helix  288
Henley's Universal Discharger  189
Henry  288
Henry's Coils  138
Hermetically Sealed   289
Hertz's Experiments  470
Heterostatic Method  280
Hexode Working  581
High Bars of Commutator  289
High Frequency  289
High Vacuum  557
Hinged Armature  45
Hinged Electro-magnet  217
Hissing  289
Hittorf's Resistance  466
Hittorf's Solution  289
Hoffer's Method of Magnetization  360
Hole Armature  45
Hole, Hand   190
Holders  289
Holder, Brush   91
Holder, Candle   99
Holders, Carbon   107
Holophote Lamp  321
Holtz's Influence Machine  334
Home Station  493
Hood  290
Horizontal Induction  302
Horns  290
Horns, Driving   132
Horns, Following   259
Horns, Leading   324
Horns, Trailing   259
Horse Power  290
Horse Power, Actual   290
Horse Power Curve  171
Horse Power, Electric   290
Horse Power Hour  290
Horse Power, Indicated   290
Horseshoe Magnet  337
Hour, Ampere-  30
Hour, Horse Power   290
H. P.  290
Hughes' Electro-magnet  291
Hughes' Induction Balance  291
Hughes' Sonometer  488
Hughes' Telegraph   511
Hughes' Theory of Magnetism  357
Hughes' Type Printer  511
Human Body, Resistance of   467
Hydrochloric Acid Battery  66
Hydro-electric  293
Hydro-electric Machine  293
Hydrogen  294
Hydrogen, Carburetted, Heavy  397
Hydrometer, Beaumé   78
Hygrometer  294
Hyperbolic Logarithms  389
Hysteresis  295
Hysteresis, Magnetic   294
Hysteresis, Static  295
Hysteresis, Viscous   295, 356

Idioelectrics  295
Idiostatic Method  295
Idle Coils  295
Idle Poles  296
Idle Wire  291
Igniter  296
I. H P.  296
Illuminating Power  296
Illuminating Power, Spherical  296
Illuminating Power, Standard of, Viole's   561
Illumination, Unit of   296
Image, Electric  296
Imbricated Conductor  146
Immersion, Simple  185
Impedance  297, 462
Impedance, Impulsive   297
Impedance, Oscillatory   297
Impressed Electro-motive Force  297
Impulse  297
Impulsive Discharge  188
Impulsive Impedance  297
In-and-out, Soaking  486
Incandescence, Electric   297
Incandescent Lamp  321
Incandescent Lamp Carbons, Flashing of   257
Incandescent Lamp, Chamber of   113
Incandescent Lamp, Life of   327
Incandescent Lamp, Three Filament   322
Inclination Compass  142
Inclination, Magnetic   346
Inclination Map  297
Inclination or Dip, Angle of   33
Incomplete Circuit  125
Increment Key  314
Independence of Currents in Parallel Circuits  297
India Rubber  102
Indicated Horse Power  290
Indicating Bell   80, 297
Indicator  298
Indicator, Circuit  298
Indicator, Throw-back   540
Indicator, Volt  568
Indifferent Electrode  210
Indifferent Point  421
Induced Current  163
Induced Magnetization, Coefficient of  354, 359
Inductance  298
Inductance Balance  293
Inductance Bridge  293
Induction, Anti-, Conductor   36
Induction, Back  55
Induction Balance, Hughes  291
Induction, Coefficient of Magnetic  349
Induction, Coefficient of Mutual   301
Induction, Coefficient of Self-   298
Induction Coil  133
Induction Coil, Inverted   136
Induction Coil, Telephone   137, 526
Induction, Cross   298
Induction Current  163
Induction, Electro-magnetic   218, 299
Induction, Electrostatic  302
Induction, Electrostatic, Coefficient of  234
Induction, Horizontal   302
Induction, Lateral   302
Induction, Lines of   330
Induction, Magnetic   302, 346
Induction, Magnetic, Apparent Coefficient of  346
Induction, Magnetic, Coefficient of  346
Induction, Magnetic Dynamic   347
Induction, Magnetic, Self-  352
Induction, Magnetic Static   347
Induction, Magnetic, Tube of   347
Induction, Mutual, Electro-magnetic   302
Induction, Mutual, Electrostatic  303
Induction, Open Circuit   303
Induction, Oscillatory  398
Induction Protector, Mutual   481
Induction, Self-   303
Induction Sheath  303
Induction. Unipolar   304
Induction, Unit of Self-   304
Induction, Vertical  304
Inductive Capacity, Magnetic   346, 349
Inductive Effect, Counter-   204
Inductive Resistance  466
Inductophone  304
Inductor  305
Inductor Dynamo  199
Inductor Generator  199
Inductor, Magneto-  363
Inductor, Pacinotti's   400
Inductorium  138
Inertia  305
Inertia, Electro-magnetic   305
Inertia, Magnetic  347
Infinity Plug  305, 420
Influence, Electric   305
Influence Machine  334
Influence Machine, Armature of   46
Influence Machine, Holtz   334
Influence, Magnetic  346
Installation  305
Instantaneous Capacity  102
Insulating Stool  305
Insulating Tape  305
Insulating Varnish  306
Insulation, Electric   305
Insulation, Magnetic   347
Insulation, Oil  396
Insulation Resistance  466
Insulator  306
Insulator Caps  306
Insulator, Fluid   306
Insulator, Line or Telegraph   306
Intensity  306
Intensity Armature  45
Intensity Current  163
Intensity, Electro-motive   228
Intensity, Magnetic  348
Intensity of a Magnetic Field  306
Intensity of Magnetization  360
Intensity, Poles of  426
Inter-air Space  489
Intercrossing  307
Interference, Armature   45
Interferric Space  489
Interior Pole Dynamo  191
Interlocking- Electro-magnets.   229
Intermediate Metals, Law of   323
Intermittent,  307
Internal Characteristic  114
Internal Resistance  466
lnterpolar Conductor  307
Interpolar Region  307
Interpolation  307
Interrupter, Electro-magnetic, for Tuning Fork   307
Intrinsic Efficiency  205
Invariable Calibration   97
Inverse Induced Current  163
Inverse Squares, Law of   323
Inversion, Thermo-electric   533
Ions  307
Iron  308
Ironclad Dynamo  200
Ironclad Electro-magnet,   219
Ironclad Magnet  356
Iron Disc Ammeter, Eccentric   27
Iron, Electrolytic   308
Iron, Galvanized   265
Ironwork Fault of a Dynamo  308
Irreversible Heat  286
Isochasmen Curve  171
Isochronism  308
Isoclinic Lines  308
Isoclinic Map  308
Isodynamic Lines  308
Isodynamic Map  308
Isoelectric Points  422
Isogonal Lines  308
Isogonic Map  309
Isolated Distribution  309
Isolated Plant  309
Isolated Supply  309
Isotropic  309
Isthmus Method of Magnetization  360
I. W. G.,   309

J  309
Jablochkoff Candle  160
Jack. Spring-  492
Jacketed Magnet  356
Jacobi's Law  309
Jacobi's Method of Magnetization  360
Jacobi's Unit of Current  163
Jacobi's Unit of Resistance   466
Jamin Candle  100
Jar, Leyden   325
Jar, Lightning   330
Jar, Luminous  332
Jars, Leyden, Charging and Discharging   108
Jar, Unit   554
Jewelry  309
Joulad  311
Joule  311
Joule Effect  311
Joule's Electro-magnet  337
Joule's Equivalent,   311
Joint, American Twist  309
Joint, Britannia   309
Joint, Butt   310
Joint Current  160
Joint, Lap  310
Joint, Marriage   310
Joint, Resistance   464
Joints in Belts  311
Joint, Sleeve   310
Joint, Splayed   311
Junction Box  311
Junction, Thermo-electric   533

K.   311
Kaolin  311
Kapp. Line of Force   312
Kathelectrotonus  312
Kathode  312
Kathodic Closure Contraction  312
Kathodic Duration Contraction  312
K. C. C.  312
K. D. C.  312
Kempe's Discharge Key  315
Keeper  312
Kerr Effect  235, 312
Kerr's Experiment  312
Key  313
Key Board  313
Key, Bridge   313
Key, Double Contact  314
Key, Double Tapper  314
Key, Charge and Discharge   313
Key, Increment  314
Key, Kempe's Discharge   315
Key, Magneto-electric   315
Key, Make and Break   316
Key, Plug   316
Key, Reversing  316
Key, Sliding-contact   316
Key, Telegraph   316
Kicking Coil  132
Kilo  316
Kilodyne  316
Kilogram  317
Kilojoule  317
Kilometer  317
Kilowatt  317
Kine  317
Kinnersley's Thermometer  536
Kinetics, Electro-   211
Kinetic Energy  241
Kirchoff's Laws  317
Knife Break Switch  501
Knife Edge Suspension  317
Knife Edge Switch  501
Knife Switch  501
Knot  317
Kohlrausch's Law  317
Kookogey's Solution   318
Krizik's Cores  318

L  318
Lag, Angle of   33, 318
Lag, Electric   332
Lag, Magnetic   348
Lalande & Chaperon Battery  69
Lalande-Edison Battery  69
Lamellar Distribution of Magnetism  357
Laminated  318
Laminated Core  154
Laminated Core, Tangentially   155
Lamination  318
Lamination of Armature Conductors  319
Lamination of Magnet  361
Lamp, Arc  319
Lamp, Arc, Double Carbon   191
Lamp Carbons, Flashing of Incandescent   257
Lamp, Carcel   108
Lamp, Contact  320
Lamp, Differential Arc   320
Lamp Globe, Waterproof   572
Lamp, Holophote  321
Lamp-hour  321
Lamp, Incandescent   321
Lamp, Incandescent, Chamber of   113
Lamp, Incandescent, Three Filament  322
Lamp, Life of Incandescent   327
Lamp, Lighthouse   322
Lamp, Monophote   321
Lamp, Pilot  323
Lamp, Polyphote  323
Lamp, Semi-Incandescent   323
Lamp-socket  323
Lamps, Bank of  323
Lane's Electrometer  226
Langdon Davies' Rate Governor or Phonophone  450
Lenz's Law  325
Lap Joint  310
Lap Winding  570
Latent Electricity  323
Lateral Discharge  188
Lateral Induction  302
Latitude, Magnetic   348
Law, Jacobi's  309
Law, Kohlrausch's   317
Law, Lenz's  325
Law of Angular Currents  165
Law of Electrolysis  213
Law of Intermediate Metals  323
Law of Inverse Squares  323
Law of Magnetic Attraction and Repulsion. Coulomb's   338
Law of Successive Temperatures  324
Law, Magnus'   367
Law, Ohm's  396
Law, Pflüger's.   409
Law, Right Handed Screw  324
Law, Sine  486
Laws, Kirchoff's  317
Laws of Thermo-electricity, Becquerel's   78
Law, Tangent   502
Law, Voltametric   567
Lead  324
Lead, Angle of   33
Lead Chloride Battery  66
Lead of Brushes  90
Lead of Brushes, Negative  324
Lead, Peroxide of, Battery   69
Lead Sulphate Battery  66
Lead Tee  504
Leading Horns  324
Leading-in Wires  324
Leak  324
Leakage  324
Leakage Conductor  325
Leakage, Electro-magnetic   219
Leakage, Magnetic.   348
Leakage, Surface  498
Leclanché Agglomerate Battery  66
Leclanché Battery  66
Leg of Circuit  325
Legal Ohm  395
Legal Quadrant  444
Legal Volt  568
Length of Spark  490
Letter Boxes, Electric   325
Leyden Jar  325
Leyden Jar, Armature of   46
Leyden Jars, Battery of   68
Leyden Jars, Charging and Discharging  108
Leyden Jars, Sir William Thomson's   326
Lichtenberg's Figures  327
Life Curve  171
Life of Incandescent Lamp  327
Light, Electro-magnetic, Theory of   219
Light, Maxwell's Theory of  369
Lighthouse Lamp  322
Lightning  327
Lightning Arrester  328
Lightning Arrester, Counter-electro-motive Force  329
Lightning Arrester Plates  329
Lightning Arrester, Vacuum   329
Lightning, Ascending  330
Lightning, Globe or Globular   330
Lightning Jar  330
Lightning, Back Stroke or Shock of  55
Lime, Chloride of, Battery   61
Limit, Magnetic  348
Limit of Magnetization  361
Linear Current  164
Lineman's Detector  180
Line of Commutator, Neutral   300
Line of Contact  330
Line of Force, Kapp  312
Line of Magnet, Neutral  361
Line or Telegraph Insulator  306
Lines, Halleyan   308
Lines, Isoclinic  308
Lines, Isodynamic  308
Lines, Isogonal   308
Lines, Isogonic   308
Lines of Force  330
Lines of Force, Cutting of  175
Lines of Force, Electro-magnetic  219
Lines of Force, Electrostatic   234
Lines of Force, Magnetic   348
Lines of Induction  330
Lines of Slope  330
Lines or Points of Least Sparking  490
Lines, Trunk   550
Links, Fuse  330
Liquids, Electro-dynamic Rotation of   474
Liquids, Electro-magnetic Rotation of    475
Liquor, Spent   491
Listening Cam  330
Lithanode  331
Load  331
Load Curve  172
Load of Armature  46
Local Action  331
Local Battery  331
Local Circuit  331
Local Currents  163, 331
Localization  331
Locus  331
Lodestone  332
Logarithm  332
Logarithms, Hyperbolic   389
Logarithms, Napierian  389
Local Battery  66
Long Coil Magnet   361
Long Range Electro-magnet  220
Long Shunt and Series Winding  579
Long Shunt Winding  579
Loop  332
Loop Break  332
Loop, Circuit   125
Loop, Drip   192
Lost Amperes  30
Lost Volts  571
Low Vacuum  557
Luces  332
Luminous Jar  332
Luminous Pane  401
Luminous Tube  550
Lux  332

M  332
Machine, Cylinder Electric  333
Machine, Electric, Wimshurst   577
Machine, Frictional Electric   333
Machine, Holtz Influence   334
Machine, Hydro-electric   293
Machine, Influence  334
Machine, Nairne's Electrical   389
Machine, Plate Electrical   417
Machine, Rheostatic  472
Machine, Toeppler-Holtz   334
Machine, Wimshurst  335
Mack  335
Magic Circle  119
Magne-crystallic Action  335
Magnet  335
Magnet, Anomalous   335
Magnet, Artificial  335
Magnet, Axial   336
Magnet, Bar  336
Magnet, Bell Shaped   336
Magnet Coils, Sheath for   481
Magnet, Compensating   336
Magnet, Compound   336
Magnet, Controlling   185, 336
Magnet, Damping   336
Magnet, Deflection of   337
Magnet, Directing   185
Magnet, Electro-   215, 337
Magnet, Equator of   337
Magnet, Field   337
Magnet, Haarlem   337
Magnet, Heating   286
Magnet, Horseshoe   337
Magnet, Ironclad   356
Magnet, Joule's Electro-   337
Magnet-keeper  361
Magnet, Lamination of   361
Magnet, Long Coil  361
Magnet, Natural  361
Magnet, Neutral Line of   361
Magnet, Normal   361
Magnet Operation  365
Magnet, Permanent  365
Magnet Pole  365
Magnet, Portative Power of   366
Magnet, Projecting Power of a   435
Magnet, Relay   457
Magnet, Simple   366
Magnet, Solenoidal   366
Magnet, Sucking   366
Magnet, Unipolar  366
Magnet Coil  336
Magnet Core  336
Magnet Poles, Secondary   366
Magnet Pole, Unit  366
Magnetic Adherence  338
Magnetic and Electro-magnetic Equipotential Surface  244
Magnetic Attraction  338
Magnetic Attraction and Repulsion, Coulomb's Law of   338
Magnetic Axis  338
Magnetic Azimuth  338
Magnetic Battery  338
Magnetic Bridge  338
Magnetic Circuit  340
Magnetic Circuit, Curve of Saturation of   174
Magnetic Concentration of Ores  340
Magnetic Concentrator  340
Magnetic Continuity  340
Magnetic Conductance and Conductivity  340
Magnetic Control  341
Magnetic Couple  341
Magnetic Creeping  341
Magnetic Curves  341
Magnetic Cut Out  175
Magnetic Declination  342
Magnetic Density  342
Magnetic Dip  342, 346
Magnetic Discontinuity  342
Magnetic Double Circuit  340
Magnetic Eye, Electro-   248
Magnetic Elements  342
Magnetic Elongation  344
Magnetic Equator  344
Magnetic False Poles  350
Magnetic, Ferro-  252
Magnetic Field, Intensity of a   306
Magnetic Field of Force  344
Magnetic Field, Uniform   345
Magnetic Figures  345
Magnetic Filament  345
Magnetic Fluid, North   357
Magnetic Fluids  345
Magnetic Flux  345
Magnetic Force  346
Magnetic Friction  295, 346
Magnetic Friction Gear   276
Magnetic Fluid, South   356
Magnetic Foci  259
Magnetic Gear  346
Magnetic Hysteresis  294
Magnetic Inclination  346
Magnetic Induction  302
Magnetic Induction, Apparent Coefficient of   346
Magnetic Induction, Coefficient of   346-349
Magnetic Induction, Dynamic   347
Magnetic Induction, Static   347
Magnetic Induction, Tube of   347
Magnetic Inductive Capacity  349
Magnetic Inertia  347
Magnetic Influence  346
Magnetic Insulation  347
Magnetic Intensity   348
Magnetic Lag  348
Magnetic Latitude  348
Magnetic Leakage  348
'Magnetic Limit  348
Magnetic Lines of Force  348
Magnetic Mass  349
Magnetic Matter  349
Magnetic Memory  349
Magnetic Meridian  349
Magnetic Moment  349
Magnetic Needle  349
Magnetic Needle, Declination of the  178
Magnetic Needle, Dip of   185
Magnetic Needle, Oscillation of a   397
Magnetic Output  399
Magnetic Parallels  349
Magnetic Permeability  349
Magnetic Perturbations  350
Magnetic Poles  350
Magnetic Potential  350, 431
Magnetic Proof Piece  350
Magnetic Proof Plane  350
Magnetic Quantity  350
Magnetic Reluctance  351, 458
Magnetic Reluctivity  351
Magnetic Remanence  358
Magnetic Repulsion  338
Magnetic Resistance  458
Magnetic Retentivity  351
Magnetic Rotatory Polarization  351
Magnetic Saturation  251
Magnetic Screen  351
Magnetic Self-induction  352
Magnetic Separator  352
Magnetic Shell  352
Magnetic Shell, Strength of   352
Magnetic Shield  353
Magnetic Shunt  353
Magnetic Storms  353
Magnetic Strain  354
Magnetic Stress  354
Magnetic Susceptibility  254, 359
Magnetic Tick  354
Magnetic Top  542
Magnetic Twist  354
Magnetic Vane Ammeter  27
Magnetic Variations  354
Magnetism, Ampere's Theory of   354
Magnetism, Blue  355
Magnetism, Components of Earth's   356
Magnetism, Creeping of   356
Magnetism, Decay of   356
Magnetism, Discharge of   356
Magnetism, Electro  220
Magnetism, Ewing's Theory of  356
Magnetism, Free   356
Magnetism, Hughes' Theory of  357
Magnetism, Lamellar Distribution of  357
Magnetism of Gases  357
Magnetism, Red  357
Magnetism, Residual  358
Magnetism, Solenoidal Distribution of   358
Magnetism, Sub-permanent   358
Magnetism, Terrestrial  358
Magnetism, Weber's Theory of   358
Magnetization by the Earth  359
Magnetization by Double Touch  358
Magnetization by Separate Touch  359
Magnetization by Single Touch  359
Magnetization, Coefficient of Induced  359
Magnetization Curve  172
Magnetization, Cycle of  360
Magnetization, Elias' Method of   360
Magnetization, Hoffer's Method of   360
Magnetization, Intensity of   360
Magnetization, Isthmus Method of  360
Magnetization, Jacobi's Method  360
Magnetization, Limit of  361
Magnetization, Maximum   361
Magnetization, Specific   361
Magnetization, Surface   356
Magnetizing Coil   127
Magneto  361
Magneto Bell  80
Magneto Call Bell  361
Magneto-electric  361
Magneto-electric Brake  362
Magneto-electric Generator  362
Magneto-electric Generator, or Dynamo, Flashing in a   257
Magneto-electric Key  315
Magneto-electric Telegraph  512
Magnetograph  363
Magneto-inductor  363
Magnetometer  363
Magnetometer, Differential   365
Magnetometry  364
Magneto-motive Force  365
Magnetophone  367
Magnetoscope  365
Magnifying Spring Ammeter  28
Magnus' Law  367
Main Battery  66
Main Battery Circuit  125
Main Circuit  125
Main or Standard Feeder  251
Mains, Electric   367
Make   367
Make and Break Current  164, 367
Make and Break Key  316
Make-induced Current  163
Malapterurus  367
Map, Declination   309
Map, Inclination   297
Map, Isoclinic   308
Map, Isodynamic   308
Map, Isogonic  309
Marié Davy's Battery  67
Marine Galvanometer  269
Mariner's Compass  142
Marked End or Pole  368
Marriage Joint  310
Mass, Electric   368
Mass, Magnetic   349
Master Clock  127
Mathematical Element  237
Matteueci's Experiment  369
Matter, Electric  368
Matter, Fourth State of   261
Matter, Magnetic   349
Matter, Radiant  368
Matter, Ultra Gaseous  551
Matthiessen's Meter-gram Standard Resistance,.   466
Matthiessen's Unit of Resistance   466
Matting, Electric Floor   369
Maximum Magnetization  361
Maxwell's Theory of Light  369
Mayer's Floating Magnet  370
Maynooth's Battery  67
Measurement, Absolute   8
Measurements  370
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat  286
Mechanical Energy  241
Mechanical Equivalent, Electro-   244
Medical Battery  67
Medium, Polarization of the   424
Meg or Mega  370
Meidinger's Battery  68
Memoria Technica, Ampére's   30
Memory, Magnetic   349
Mercury  371
Mercury Bichromate, Battery  63
Mercury Circuit Breaker  121
Mercury Cups  371
Mercury, Sulphate of, Battery   67
Mercurial Air Pump  16
Meridian, Astronomical   372
Meridian, Geographic   372
Meridian, Magnetic.   349
Merit, Figure of   256
Merit, Formula of   256
Metal, Gilding   277
Metallic Arc  39
Metallic Circuit  125
Metallochromes  392
Metallurgy, Electro-  222
Metals, Law of Intermediate  323
Meter. Alternating Current   373
Meter, Ampere and Volt, Galvanometer .   274
Meter, Balance Ampere   391
Meter Bridge  373
Meter Bridge, Slide   486
Meter Candle  374
Meter, Chemical Electric   375
Meter, Current  375
Meter, Electro-magnetic   375
Meter, Energy  375
Meter Gram Standard Resistance, Matthiesen's   466
Meter-millimeter  375
Meter-millimeter Unit of Resistance   466
Meter, Neutral Wire Ampere.   391
Meter, Quantity  445
Meters. Ampere  39
Meter, Thermal-Electric   375
Meter, Time Electric   375
Meter, Watt  375
Method, Broadside   89
Method, Deflection   178
Method, End on   238
Method, Idiostatic   295
Method, Multiple Wire  388
Method, Null  393
Method of Magnetization, Elias'  360
Method of Magnetization, Isthmus   360
Method of Magnetization, Jacobi's   360
Methven Standard or Screen  376
Mho,   376
Mica  376
Mica, Moulded   376
Micro  376
Micrometer  376
Micrometer, Arc   39, 376
Micrometer, Spark   470
Micron  376
Microphone  376
Microphone Relay  377, 457
Microscope. Photo-electric   410
Microtasimeter  377
Mil  379
Mil, Circular   379
Mil-foot  379
Mil-foot Unit of Resistance  467
Milli  379
Milligram  379
Millimeter  379
Milli-oerstedt  380
Mil, Square  379
Minute, Ampere-  30
Mirror Galvanometer.   271
Mixed Gases  275
mm.  380
Molar  380
Molar Energy  241
Molecular Affinity  380
Molecular Attraction  380
Molecular Bombardment  380
Molecular Chain  380
Molecular Energy  241
Molecular Heat  286
Molecular Rigidity  380, 473
Molecular Shadow  480
Molecule  380
Moment  381
Moment, Magnetic   349
Moment of Couple  544
Moment, Turning   544
Monophote Lamp  321
Mordey Effect  381
Morse Receiver  381
Morse Recorder  451
Morse Telegraph  512
Mortar, Electric   382
Motion, Currents of   167
Motograph, Electro-   229
Motor. Compound or Compound Wound,.   382
Motor, Differential   382
Motor, Dynamo   200
Motor, Electric   382
Motor, Electro-   229
Motor, Electro-motive Force   384
Motor-generator  384
Motor, Multiphase  384
Motor, Overtype   399
Motor, Prime  385
Motor, Pulsating  386
Motor, Pyromagnetic   442
Motor, Reciprocating   385
Motor, Series   386
Motor, Shunt   386
Moulded Mica  376
Moulding  58
Movable Secondary  477
Mud, Battery  68
Multiphase Currents  166
Multiphase Motor  384
Multiple  386
Multiple Arc  387
Multiple Arc Box  387
Multiple Connected Battery  68
Multiple-series  387, 480
Multiple Switch  501
Multiple Switch Board  387
Multiple Transformer  548
Multiple Winding  579
Multiple Wire Method  388
Multiplex Harmonic Telegraph  510
Multiplex Telegraph  514
Multiplex Telegraphy  388
Multiplier, Schweigger's  476
Multiplying Power  347, 349
Multiplying Power of a Shunt  388
Multipolar Armature  46
Multipolar Dynamo  200
Multipolar Electric Bath  57
Multipolar Winding  579
Muscular Pile  388
Mutual Electro-magnetic Induction  302
Mutual Electrostatic Induction  303
Mutual Induction, Coefficient of   301
Mutual Induction Protector  481
Myria  388

Nairne's Electrical Machine  389
Napierian Logarithms  389
Nascent State  389
Natural Currents  166, 389
Natural Magnet  361
Needle  389
Needle Annunciator  35
Needle, Astatic   50
Needle, Dipping  185
Needle, Magnetic  349
Needle, Orientation of a Magnetic   397
Needle of Oscillation  389
Needle Telegraph, Single   519
Needle, Telegraphic  389
Negative Charge  389
Negative Current  164
Negative Electricity  389
Negative, Electro-   229
Negative Element  390
Negative Feeder  251
Negative Lead of Brushes  324
Negative Plate  417
Negative Pole  425
Negative Potential  432
Negative Side of Circuit  125
Nerve and Muscle Current  164
Nerve Currents  390
Net Efficiency  205
Net, Faraday's   250
Network  390
Neutral Armature  46
Neutral Feeder  251
Neutral Line of Commutator  390
Neutral Line of Magnet  361
Neutral Point  421
Neutral Point of Commutator  390
Neutral Point, Thermo-electric   390
Neutral Relay Armature  46, 390
Neutral Temperature  390
Neutral Wire  390
Neutral Wire Ampere Meter  391
N. H. P.  391
Niaudet's Battery   61
Nickel  391
Nickel Bath  391
Night Bell  392
Nitric Acid Battery  68
Nobili's Rings  392
Nodal Point  422
Nodular Deposit  392
Nominal Candle Power  101
Non-conductor  392
Non-essential Resistance  465-467
Non-inductive Resistance  467
Non-polar Dynamo   200
Non-polarizable Electrodes  210
Non-Polarized Armature  46
Normal Magnet  361
North Magnetic Fluid  357
North Pole  392
North Seeking Pole  393
Null Method  393
Null Point  422

Occlusion  393
Oerstedt  394
Oerstedt's Discovery  394
Oerstedt, Milli-  380
Ohm  394
Ohmage  394
Ohm, B. A.  394
Ohm, Board of Trade   394
Ohm, Congress   395
Ohmic Resistance  394, 467
Ohm, Legal  395
Ohmmeter  395
Ohm, Rayleigh   396
Ohm's Law  396
Ohm, True  396
Oil Insulation  396
Oil Transformer  548
Old Armature, Siemens'   49
Olefiant Gas  397
Omnibus Bar  94
Omnibus Rod  94
Omnibus Wire  94
One Coil Electro-magnet  219
Open  397
Open Circuit  125
Open Circuit Battery  68
Open Circuit Induction  303
Open Circuit Oscillation  397
Open Coil Armature  46
Open Coil Dynamo  200
Opening Shock  482
Operation, Magnet  365
Opposed Current  164
Optics, Electro-   229
Orders of Currents  167
Ordinate  397
Ordinates, Axis of  54, 397
Ores, Electric Reduction of  453
Ores, Magnetic Concentration of   340
Organ, Electric  397
Orientation of a Magnetic Needle  397
Origin of Co-ordinates  397
Oscillation, Centre of  112
Oscillation, Electric  398
Oscillation, Needle of   389
Oscillation, Open Circuit   397
Oscillatory  23
Oscillatory Discharge  188
Oscillatory Displacement  398
Oscillatory Electro-motive Force  398
Oscillatory Impedance  297
Oscillatory Induction  398
Osmose, Electric  398
Outlet  399
Output  399
Output, Magnetic   399
Output, Unit of   399
Over-compounding  399
Over, Flashing   258
Overflow Alarm  18
Over-house Telegraph  515
Overload  399
Overtype Dynamo or Motor  399
Oxide of Copper Battery  68
Ozone  399

Pacinotti's Inductor   400
Pacinotti's Ring  400
Pacinotti Teeth  400
Page Effect  401
Page's Revolving Armature  47
Paillard Alloys  400
Palladium  401
Pane, Fulminating   262
Pane, Luminous   401
Pantelegraphy  402, 510
Paper Filaments  402
Parabola  402
Parabolic Reflector  402
Paraffine  402
Paraffine Wax  402
Paragrêles  403
Parallax  403
Parallel  403
Parallel Circuits  123-126
Parallelogram of Forces  260
Parallels, Magnetic  349
Paramagnetic  403
Paramagnetism   404
Parasitical Currents  163
Parchmentizing  404
Partial Current  164
Partial Earth  203, 404
Partial Vacuum  557
Passive State  404
Path, Alternative   24
P. D.  404
Peltier's Cross  405
Peltier Effect  404
Pen, Electric   405
Pendant Cord  405
Pendulum Circuit Breaker  121
Pendulum, Electric  405
Pendulum or Swinging Annunciator  35
Pentane Standard, Harcourt's   406
Pentode Working  581
Percussion, Centre of   112
Perforated Armature  45
Perforated Core Discs  154
Perforator  407
Period   407
Period, Vibration   560
Periodic  23
Periodic Current, Power of   433
Periodicity  262, 408
Peripolar Zone  582
Permanency  408
Permanent Magnet  365
Permanent Magnet Ammeter  28
Permanent State  408
Permeability  346-349
Permeability-temperature Curve,   174
Permeameter  408
Permeance  408
Peroxide of Lead Battery  69
Perturbations, Magnetic   350
Pflüger's Law  409
Phantom Wires  409
Phase  409
Phase, Retardation of   471
Phenomenon, Porret's   427
Pherope  409, 527
Philosopher's Egg  409
Phonautograph,   409
Phone   409
Phonic Wheel  409
Phonograph  410
Phonophone or Rate Governor, Langdon Davies'   450
Phonozenograph  410
Phosphorescence  410
Phosphorous, Electrical Reduction of   410
Photo-electric Microscope  410
Photo-electricity  410
Photo-electro-motive Force  410
Photometer  411
Photometer, Actinic   411
Photometer, Bar  411
Photometer, Bunsen's  412
Photometer, Calorimetric   412
Photometer, Dispersion  412
Photometer, Shadow  414
Photometer, Translucent Disc   412
Photophore  415
Photo-voltaic Effect  415
Physical Energy  241
Physiology, Electro-   231
Piano, Electric   415
Pickle  415
Picture, Electric   415
Piece, Bed  78
Piece, Magnetic Proof  350
Piece, Pole   423
Pierced Core-discs,   152
Pile  415
Pile, Differential Thermo-electric   533
Pile, Muscular  388
Pile or Battery, Thermo-electric   530
Pilot Brush  91
Pilot Lamp  323
Pilot Transformer  415
Pilot Wires  415
Pistol, Electric  416
Pith  416
Pith Ball Electroscope  234
Pith-balls  416
Pivoted Armature  47
Pivot Suspension  416
Plane, Magnetic Proof   350
Plant  417
Plant Electricity  417
Plant, Isolated   309
Planté's Secondary Battery,   72
Plate, Arrester   417
Plate Condenser  417
Plate, Earth  203
Plate Electrical Machine  417
Plate, Franklin's  262
Plate, Generating   277
Plate, Ground   417
Plate, Negative   417
Plate, Positive   277, 417
Plating Balance  417
Plating Bath  418
Plating, Electro-   418
Platinized Carbon Battery  69
Platinoid  418
Platinum  419
Platinum Alloy  419
Platinum Black  419
Platinum Silver Alloy  419
Platinum Sponge  419
Play, End  238
Plow  420
Plücker Tubes  420
Plug  420
Plug Cut Out  175
Plug, Double  191
Plug, Grid   420
Plug, Infinity   305, 420
Plug Key  316
Plug Switch  420
Plumbago  421
Plunge Battery  69
Plunge  421
Plunger and Coil  131
Plunger and Coil, Differential   132
Plunger, Coil and  131
Plunger Electro-magnet   220
Pneumatic Battery  69
Pneumatic Signals, Electro-   231
P.O.  421
Pockets, Armature  47
Poggendorf's Solution  421
Point, Contact  147
Point, Indifferent   421
Point, Neutral  421
Point. Nodal  422
Point, Null   422
Point of Commutator, Neutral   390
Point Poles  422
Points, Consequent   422
Points, Corresponding   422
Points, Iso-electric   422
Points of Derivation  180, 423
Point, Thermo-electric Neutral   390
Polar Angle   423
Polar Extension  423
Polarity, Diamagnetic   181, 423
Polarity, Resultant   470
Polarization  423
Polarization, Back Electro-motive force of   156
Polarization Capacity  424
Polarization, Dielectric   183
Polarization, Galvanic  265
Polarization, Magnetic Rotary   351
Polarization of the Medium  424
Polarized Armature  47
Polarized Electro-magnet  220
Polarized Relay  458
Polarized Relay, Tongue of   542
Polarizing Current  164
Polar Region  424
Polar Span  424
Polar Span, Angle of   32, 423
Polar Tips  423
Polar Zone  582
Pole, Analogous   31, 425
Pole, Antilogous   425
Pole, Armature   47
Pole, Austral  54
Pole, Boreal   85
Pole Brackets, Telegraph   515
Pole Changer  425
Pole Changing Switch,   501
Pole Dynamo, Interior   199
Pole, Magnet   366
Pole, Negative   425
Pole, North  392
Pole, North-seeking  393
Pole or End, Marked   368
Pole Piece  423
Pole Pieces  425
Pole, Positive   425
Pole, Salient  426
Pole, Terminal   529
Pole Tips  290, 426
Pole, Traveling  426
Pole, Unit Magnet   366
Poles  425
Poles, Compensating   426
Poles, Consequent   146
Poles, Idle  296
Poles, Magnetic  350
Poles, Magnetic, False   350
Poles of Intensity  426
Poles of Verticity  426, 560
Poles, Point  422
Poles, Secondary  478
Poles, Secondary Magnet   366
Polyphase Currents  167
Polyphote Lamp  323
Popgun, Electric  282
Porous Cell  427
Porous Cup  159, 426
Porret's Phenomenon  427
Portative Power of Magnet  366
Portelectric Railroad  427
Portrait, Electric  415
Position, Energy of   241
Position Finder  427
Position, Sighted   484
Positive Current  164
Positive Direction  428
Positive Electricity  428
Positive Element  277
Positive Feeder  251
Positive Plate  277, 417
Positive Pole  425
Positive Potential  432
Positive Side of Circuit  125
Post Office  428
Posts, Binding, or Screws  81
Potential  428
Potential, Absolute   428
Potential, Constant  429
Potential Difference, Contact   147
Potential Difference, Electric   429
Potential Difference, Electro-motive   429
Potential, Electric Absolute  429
Potential, Fall of  430
Potential Galvanometer  269
Potential in Armature, Curve of Distribution of   172
Potential, Magnetic   350, 431
Potential, Negative  432
Potential or Static Energy  241
Potential, Positive  432
Potential Regulation, Constant   455
Potential, Unit of Electric   432
Potential, Zero   432, 582
Potentiometer   432
Poundal  433
Pound-foot  259
Power  438
Power, Candle   100
Power, Directive   187
Power, Electric   433
Power, Horse  290
Power, Illuminating  296
Power, Multiplying  349
Power of Magnet, Portative   366
Power of Periodic Current  433
Powers of Ten  527
Power, Stray  495
Power, Thermo-electric   533
Press Button  94
Pressel  434
Pressure  434
Pressure, Electric  434
Pressure, Electrification by   434
Primary  434
Primary Ampere-turns  31, 551
Primary Battery  69, 434
Prime  434
Prime Conductor  146, 434
Prime Conductor, Coatings of a  129
Prime Motor   385
Principle, Gauss'   276
Printing Telegraph  515
Probe, Electric  435
Projecting Power of a Magnet  435
Prony Brake  435
Proof Piece, Magnetic  350
Proof-plane  436
Proof Plane, Magnetic   350
Proof-sphere  436
Proportional Galvanometer  269
Proportionate Arms  436
Prostration, Electric  437
Protector, Body   84
Protector, Comb   437
Protector, Electric    437
Pull  437
Pulsatory Current  164
Pulsatory Field  256
Pulsating Motor  386
Pulvermacher's Electro-medical Battery  69
Pump, Geissler   437
Pump, Sprengel   439
Pump, Swinburne   440
Pumping  439
Puncture-electro  232
Puncture-galvano  232
Push Button  93. 98, 440
Push, Desk   180
Push, Floor  258
Pyro-electricity  441
Pyromagnetic Generator  442
Pyromagnetic Motor  441
Pyromagnetism  443
Pyrometer, Siemens' Electric   443

Q  443
Quad  288, 443
Quadrant  288, 443
Quadrantal Deviation  180
Quadrant, Legal  444
Quadrant, Standard   444
Quadrature   444
Quadruplex Telegraph  515
Qualitative  444
Quality of Sound  444
Quantitative  444
Quantity  444
Quantity Armature  47
Quantity, Electric  444
Quantity, Electro-magnetic  445
Quantity, Electro-magnetic, Practical Unit of   445
Quantity, Electrostatic  445
Quantity Galvanometer  269
Quantity, Magnetic  350
Quantity Meter  445
Quartz  445
Quicking  446

