  At ploughin' they're able,
    Or drainin' a fen,
  They'll muck out a stable
    As well as the men.
  Their praises I'm hymnin',
    For where would ha' bin,
  If it weren't for the wimmin,
    John Buckham, at Lynn?

W.H.O.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Mrs Green. to Mrs. Jones_ (_who is gazing at an
aeroplane_). "MY WORD! I SHOULDN'T CARE FOR ONE OF _THEM_ FLYING THINGS TO
SETTLE ON ME."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The Cairo Governorate has engaged white-washers to whiten plate-forms
    of points from which streets branch which will be compelled by the end
    of next week, before the commencement of the gaz lanterns decrease take
    place."--_Egyptian Gazette._

The Sphinx has been requested to furnish an explanation.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR INDOMITABLES.

"THE ENGLISH GIRL.

"STANDING IN WITNESS-BOX WITHOUT A QUIVER.

    "Rose ----, sixty-seven, ---- road, South Tottenham, a young girl, was
    a witness in a London county court when the boom of guns and detonation
    of bombs were heard."--_Daily Paper._

Our English girls to-day are only as old as they feel.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Mrs. A. Thomson writes a vigorous protest against the carelessness
    with which the W.F.L. resolution urging the Prime Minister to make
    Woman Suffrage an integral part of the Bill, was acknowledged on his
    behalf. The acknowledgment was as follows:--

    "'I am directed by the Prime Minister to acknowledge the receipt of the
    resolution which you have forwarded on the subject of the formation of
    a Maternity Department in the new Ministry of Health.'"--_The Vote._

But was it carelessness, or humour?

       *       *       *       *       *

HEART-TO-HEART TALKS.

    (_Herr Schultze and Herr Müller, privates in a Prussian regiment of
    Infantry._)

_Schultze._ Leave will soon be over now and we shall have to go back to the
fighting.

_Müller._ Yes; it is not a very cheerful prospect.

_Schultze._ No; that is a very true saying. And, what is more, there seems
no possible end to this War, though (_dropping his voice and looking
round_) we all hate it from the bottom of our hearts.

_Müller._ Yes, we all hate it. Indeed the hatred between me and the War
gets worse and worse every day. I don't care who hears me.

_Schultze._ Don't be too bold; one never knows who may be listening.

_Müller._ It is to become mad. Why did we ever let the ALL-HIGHEST MAJESTY
begin such a war? We were all so comfortable, and then suddenly the
Austrian ARCHDUKE gets himself murdered and, piff-paff, we Germans must go
to war against Russia and France and England. I am very sorry for the
ARCHDUKE, but there were other Archdukes to supply his place, and even if
there had not been I do not think he himself was worth the four millions of
killed, wounded and prisoners whom we have lost since the guns began to go
off.

_Schultze._ It is terrible to think of. And the sausages get worse and
worse, and the beer costs more and more and is not like beer at all.

_Müller._ And the English have good guns and plenty of them, and know
colossally well how to use them; and they have millions of men--more than
we have; and their soldiers are brave--almost as brave as our own soldiers.
They have certainly won some victories, it seems.

_Schultze._ So it seems; but our Generals have not told us much about it.

_Müller._ And we all thought they had only a contemptible little army.

_Schultze._ Yes, that was what the ALL-HIGHEST said.

_Müller._ The ALL-HIGHEST has also said several times that our soldiers
would be back in their homes before the leaves fell from the trees, and
here are you and I doomed to go away from our homes in the third year of
the war. It would be better, I think, if the ALL-HIGHEST did not always
speak so much and tried honestly to bring us a good solid peace.

_Schultze_ (_with a deep sigh_). Peace? I do not think we shall ever have
peace again. And the winning of victories seems to push it always further
away from us. At that rate what is the use of victories?

_Müller._ Then you don't believe that the U-boats can starve England into
surrender?

_Schultze._ Certainly I don't. Do you know anyone that does believe in that
fairy story? All that the U-boats have really effected up to the present
has been to bring in America on the side of our enemies.

_Müller._ That doesn't matter. The Americans have no army.

_Schultze._ Wasn't that what we said about the English? You yourself said
it as loudly as anyone else at the beginning.

_Müller._ The fact is this War has gone on too long. A war for six weeks,
that one can endure; but when it goes on for years--

_Schultze._ Yes, that is not so pleasant, though the KAISER is always
talking about hacking through and having an iron fist and being a wall of
steel and other things of that sort.

_Müller._ Oh, he! I'm tired to death of his speeches and his prancing
about. Again I say I don't care who hears me. We have done enough for
glory; isn't there something we can do for peace?

_Schultze._ No, nothing--and you know it. It is more likely we shall end in
prison if we talk like this.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "I WARN YOU, SIR! THE DISCOURTESY OF THIS BANK IS BEYOND ALL
LIMITS. ONE WORD MORE AND I--I WITHDRAW MY OVERDRAFT."]

       *       *       *       *       *

"NAVAL APPOINTMENTS.

"ROYAL NAVAL RESERVE.

    "Mr. J.R. MACDONALD entered as Skipper (temp.)"--_The Times._

If this is how the Government hopes to get the Member for Leicester to
Petrograd there is still the difficulty of enlisting a crew (temp.)

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Successful raids were carried out by us during the night east of
    Lagnicourt (two or three metres south of Bullecourt)."--_Evening Times
    and Echo._

For the sake of precision we could have wished that the measurement had
been worked out to inches.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Thousands on foot and in every kind of vehicle visited the grisly
    relic. A Sunday school teacher marched the girls of her class to the
    place. Some 80ft. of her nose-end is stuck aslant in the air."--_Daily
    Mail._

Not every woman is so well-equipped for showing contempt of the enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Wanted, Coachman-Chauffeur, 'Over-land' Car (Protestant), over
    military age."--_Londonderry Sentinel._

Whatever its religion a car of this age must be almost past praying for.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The sort of women who literally make ducks and drakes of their duty as
    the family administrator."--_Spectator._

Having regard to the high price of poultry might not the new
Food-Controller get these women to explain how they do it?

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BUFFER'S VINDICATION.

  I haven't fought, I haven't dug, I've worn no special caps,
    Too little has my country, sure, had from me;
  _But_ I've never talked of "strafe-ing" anyone for any lapse,
    And I've never called a fighting man a "Tommy."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Old Soldier_ (_trying to "swing the lead"_). "WELL, SIR, I
CAN'T NEITHER EAT, SLEEP NOR DRINK, SIR."

_M.O._ (_in a spasm of enthusiasm_). "MY GOOD MAN! THE ARMY WANTS A
BATTALION LIKE YOU!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WATCH DOGS.

LXII.

MY DEAR CHARLES,--I've become so artful these days in disguising identities
under assumed names that I'm hanged if I can remember myself which of my
people is which. Still I daresay your own memory isn't too good, so we'll
call him Ross this time, and trust to luck that that is what we called him
last time. He is that one of my friends and fellow sinners who was plugging
along nicely at the Bar in 1914, and was just about to take silk, when he
changed his mind, came to France and got mixed up in what he calls "this
vulgar brawl on the Continent." After nearly three years of systematic
warfare in the second line he has at last achieved the rank of full
lieutenant, which is not so bad for a growing lad of forty-five; and is
running one of those complicated but fascinating side-shows which, to
oblige Their Exigencies, we have to label Queer Trades, and leave at that.

Whether his department is or is not making history it is certainly one
which calls for a vast amount of special knowledge in its _personnel_.
Ross, having been at the Bar, knows nothing and knows that he knows
nothing, but is able to pretend to know just enough to keep his end up with
Thos. J. Brown, who, disguised as a corporal, really runs the business.
"Our Mr. Brown," as Ross calls him, is one of those nice old gentlemen who
wear large spectacles and cultivate specialist knowledge on the intensive
system. Owing to his infallibility in all details and upon all occasions he
was much sought after in peace time by the larger commercial houses. When
War broke out our Mr. Brown disdained peace. He made at once for the Front;
but his aged legs, though encased in quite the most remarkable puttees in
France, were found to be less reliable than his head, and he was held up on
his way to the trenches and diverted to the stool of Ross's office.

He began by putting some searching and dreadfully intelligent questions to
Ross; dissatisfied with Ross's answers, he concentrated his mind on the
business for twenty-four consecutive hours, at the end of which period he
was the master of it in more senses than one. Since that time Ross has
ensured the efficient running of his office by keeping out of it when it is
busy. When for appearance sake he has to be there he does as his Mr. Brown
tells him, and never wastes the latter's time by arguing.

In the Army, all fleas have bigger fleas upon their backs to bite 'em. Were
this not so somebody would have to act upon his own responsibility, and
that, as you will admit, would make war an impossibility. Accordingly in
every department there is a series of authorities, starting with "other
ranks" at the bottom, proceeding in an ascending scale of dignity and
worth, and disappearing through a cloud of Generals into an infinite of
which no man knoweth the nature. Thus, with Ross's business (to take the
tail end of it) the letter which the Corporal writes the Lieutenant signs
on behalf of the Major. It is when the Major wants to do something more
active that trouble arises. Let us take an incidental matter of
administrative detail for example, setting it forth, as all military
matters should be set forth, in paragraphs, separately numbered:--

1. Lt. Ross possessed a bicycle, motor, one. No. 54321 L/Cpl. Burt
possessed feet, two, only. Ross had no occasion, ability or disposition to
ride a motor bicycle. No. 54321 could neither do his business nor enjoy
life afoot. Accordingly, No. 54321 rode the bicycle, while, for the
purposes of what is known to better people than ourselves as Establishment,
Ross owned it. But that was in the good old days, before Traffic and Police
and all the Others interested themselves.

2. The first thing Traffic did was to say that all owners of motor bicycles
must own cards, and produce them when demanded. That was easy: No. 54321
got the card. Then Police issued some vague but menacing literature with
regard to the fate of people who stole other people's property or failed to
stick to their own. There was no difficulty about this; Ross publicly
fathered the thing.

3. Traffic, issuing new cards, said next that all owners of cards must also
own bicycles. Realising the quandary, Ross was for saying he wouldn't play
any more, but would declare a separate peace. His Mr. Brown however got up
a long and intricate correspondence, at the end of which Ross was still
owner and No. 54321 was still rider; both had cards, and all the
authorities had, unknowingly, made themselves parties to the fraud.

Suddenly the Major declared his intention of putting the whole of Ross's
establishment (including bicycle) on what he called a satisfactory basis by
a series of orders which he proposed to draft himself. Ross, always ready
to be put on a satisfactory basis by anybody, took note of the draft, and
laid it before his Mr. Brown. The latter was aghast, and proved, by
infallible reasons, the fatal results which would follow if the matter was
stirred up. Ross made a careful note of the reasons, and laid them before
the Major. The Major explained gently that discipline was discipline. And
so Ross went to and fro between the two, until the Major said, "Really,
Ross!" and his Mr. Brown said, "I'm very sorry, Sir, but there it is;" and
yet Ross couldn't sack his Major, and he couldn't break away from his Mr.
Brown.

He was between the Devil and the Deep Sea. What was he to do about it?
Well, he just told the Deep Sea to keep calm a little longer, and went and
waited outside the Devil's Mess. He saluted and asked the Devil if he'd
care to come for a walk, and, the latter consenting, he led him to the Deep
Sea. Then, when the Devil himself had been introduced to the Deep Sea
itself, Ross slipped off and left them in his office to fix it up between
themselves.

Ross dined with the Major that night, and the latter said he wasn't feeling
at all well. The way Ross's Mr. Brown had licked his thumb and the
lightning speed with which he had turned up exactly the right
correspondence, office minute or Routine Order, had nearly given the Major
heart disease. Besides, he'd lost the argument. "I was too heavily
handicapped from the start," said he, "by not being in a position to lick
_my_ thumb or to stick _my_ pencil behind my ear."

It was a good idea to introduce the Major and Mr. Brown, wasn't it,
Charles? The Major says he was the first to suggest it, and Ross is careful
to leave the credit with the Major, because he is sure that the idea really
originated in the fertile and masterful brain of his Mr. Brown.

Yours ever,

HENRY.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MISS DAISY DIMPLE, THE REVUE FAVOURITE, SELLS FLAGS.]

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER IMPENDING APOLOGY.

From a South African Parish Magazine:--

    "Many thanks to the Rev. ---- and the Rev. ---- for coming to St. ----
    during the past month. The Rector went off to Clifton and Park Town,
    and enjoyed the change almost as much as the congregation."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "A bird flew into Willesden Court yesterday and perched above the
    magistrate's head.

    "Alderman Pinkham: 'It's not often we 'get the bird' on the bench.'"

But the "Beak" is there all the time.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS: LATEST INVERSION.

{CONSERVATISM, LIBERALISM, LABOUR.}
"DON'T FORGET, DEAR LADY, WHEN THE TIME COMES, THAT IT
WAS _I_ WHO GAVE YOU THE APPLE."]

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

_Monday, June 18th._--Arising out of the dethronement of TINO a cloud-burst
of questions descended upon Lord ROBERT CECIL, who took refuge under a
wide-spreading umbrella of official ignorance. Mr. LYNCH was annoyed
because his question whether the Allies would oppose the foundation of a
Greek Republic was dismissed as "hypothetical," but Lord ROBERT assured him
that there was "nothing abusive" in the epithet. But is that so? Suppose he
were to describe Mr. LYNCH as a "hypothetical statesman"?

