There is a panel by his hand, wrought in distemper, wherein is a Madonna
upon the lap of S. Anne, with the Child in her arms. This panel is
to-day in S. Ambrogio in Florence, in the chapel that is beside the door
that leads to the parlour of the nuns. And in the tramezzo[14] of the
Church of S. Niccolò, on the other side of the Arno, there is a panel by
the hand of Masaccio, painted in distemper, wherein, besides the
Madonna, who is receiving the Annunciation from the Angel, there is a
building with many columns, drawn in perspective and very beautiful,
seeing that, besides the drawing of the lines, which is perfect, he made
it recede by means of the colouring, in a manner that little by little,
almost imperceptibly, it is lost to view; thus showing clearly his
knowledge of perspective. In the Badia of Florence, on a pilaster
opposite to one of those that support the arch of the high-altar, he
painted in fresco S. Ivo of Brittany, representing him within a niche,
in order that the feet might appear foreshortened to the eye below;
which device, not having been used so well by others, acquired for him
no small praise. And below the said Saint, over another cornice, he made
a throng of widows, orphans, and beggars, who receive assistance from
that Saint in their needs. In S. Maria Novella, also, below the
tramezzo[15] of the church, he painted a Trinity in fresco, which is
placed over the altar of S. Ignazio, with Our Lady on one side and S.
John the Evangelist on the other contemplating Christ Crucified. On the
sides are two figures on their knees, which, in so far as it can be
determined, are portraits of the men who had the picture painted; but
little is seen of them, for they have been covered with a gilt ornament.
But the most beautiful thing, apart from the figures, is a barrel-shaped
vaulting, drawn in perspective and divided into squares filled with
rosettes, which are foreshortened and made to diminish so well that the
wall appears to be pierced. In S. Maria Maggiore, also, near the
side-door that leads to S. Giovanni, on the panel of a chapel, he
painted a Madonna, with S. Catherine and S. Julian. On the predella he
made some little figures, connected with the life of S. Catherine, with
S. Julian murdering his father and mother; and in the middle he made the
Nativity of Christ, with that simplicity and vividness which were
characteristic of his work.

[Footnote 14: See note on p. 57, Vol. I.]

[Footnote 15: See note on p. 57, Vol. I.]

In the Church of the Carmine in Pisa, on a panel that is in a chapel in
the tramezzo,[16] there is a Madonna with the Child, by his hand, and at
her feet are certain little angels sounding instruments, one of whom,
playing on a lute, is listening attentively to the harmony of that
sound. On either side of the Madonna are S. Peter, S. John the Baptist,
S. Julian, and S. Nicholas, all very lifelike and vivacious figures. In
the predella below are scenes from the lives of those Saints, with
little figures; and in the centre are the three Magi offering their
treasures to Christ. In this part are some horses portrayed from life,
so beautiful that nothing better can be desired; and the men of the
Court of those three Kings are clothed in various costumes that were
worn in those times. And above, as an ornament for the said panel, there
are, in several squares, many saints round a Crucifix. It is believed
that the figure of a saint, in the robes of a Bishop and painted in
fresco, which is in that church, beside the door that leads into the
convent, is by the hand of Masaccio; but I hold it as certain that it is
by the hand of Fra Filippo, his disciple.

[Footnote 16: See note above.]

[Illustration: THE TRINITY

(_After the fresco by_ Masaccio. _Florence: S. Maria Novella_)

_Anderson_]

Returning from Pisa to Florence, he wrought there a panel containing a
man and a woman, nude and of the size of life, which is to-day in the
Palla Rucellai Palace. Then, not feeling at ease in Florence, and
stimulated by his affection and love for art, he determined to go to
Rome, in order to learn and to surpass others; and this he did. And
having acquired very great fame there, he painted for Cardinal San
Clemente a chapel in the Church of S. Clemente, wherein he made in
fresco the Passion of Christ, with the Thieves on the Cross, and the
stories of S. Catherine the martyr. He also made many panels in
distemper, which have been all lost or destroyed in the troublous times
of Rome; one being in the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, in a little
chapel near the sacristy, wherein are four saints, so well wrought that
they appear to be in relief, and in the midst of them is S. Maria della
Neve, with the portrait from nature of Pope Martin, who is tracing out
the foundations of that church with a hoe, and beside him the Emperor
Sigismund II. Michelagnolo and I were one day examining this work, when
he praised it much, and then added that these men were alive in
Masaccio's time. To him, while Pisanello and Gentile da Fabriano were
labouring in Rome for Pope Martin on the walls of the Church of S.
Gianni, these masters had allotted a part of the work, when he returned
to Florence, having had news that Cosimo de' Medici, by whom he was much
assisted and favoured, had been recalled from exile; and there he was
commissioned to paint the Chapel of the Brancacci in the Carmine, by
reason of the death of Masolino da Panicale, who had begun it; but
before putting his hand to this, he made, by way of specimen, the S.
Paul that is near the bell-ropes, in order to show the improvement that
he had made in his art. And he demonstrated truly infinite excellence in
this picture, for in the head of that Saint, who is Bartolo di Angiolino
Angiolini portrayed from life, there is seen an expression so awful that
there appears to be nothing lacking in that figure save speech; and he
who has not known S. Paul will see, by looking at this picture, his
honourable Roman culture, together with the unconquerable strength of
that most divine spirit, all intent on the work of the faith. In this
same picture, likewise, he showed a power of foreshortening things
viewed from below upwards which was truly marvellous, as may still be
seen to-day in the feet of the said Apostle, for this was a difficulty
that he solved completely, in contrast with the old rude manner, which,
as I said a little before, used to make all the figures on tip-toe;
which manner lasted up to his day, without any other man correcting it,
and he, by himself and before any other, brought it to the excellence of
our own day.

It came to pass, the while that he was labouring at this work, that the
said Church of the Carmine was consecrated; and Masaccio, in memory of
this, painted the consecration just as it took place, with terra-verde
and in chiaroscuro, over the door that leads into the convent, within
the cloister. And he portrayed therein an infinite number of citizens in
mantles and hoods, who are following the procession, among whom he
painted Filippo di Ser Brunellesco in wooden shoes, Donatello, Masolino
da Panicale, who had been his master, Antonio Brancacci, who caused him
to paint the chapel, Niccolò da Uzzano, Giovanni di Bicci de' Medici,
and Bartolommeo Valori, who are all also portrayed by the hand of the
same man in the house of Simon Corsi, a gentleman of Florence. He also
painted there Lorenzo Ridolfi, who was at that time the ambassador of
the Florentine Republic in Venice; and not only did he portray there the
aforesaid gentlemen from the life, but also the door of the convent and
the porter with the keys in his hand. This work, truly, shows great
perfection, for Masaccio was so successful in placing these people, five
or six to a file, on the level of that piazza, and in making them
diminish to the eye with proportion and judgment, that it is indeed a
marvel, and above all because we can recognize there the wisdom that he
showed in making those men, as if they were alive, not all of one size,
but with a certain discretion which distinguishes those who are short
and stout from those who are tall and slender; while they are all
standing with their feet firmly on one level, and so well foreshortened
along the files that they would not be otherwise in nature.

After this, returning to the work of the Chapel of the Brancacci, and
continuing the stories of S. Peter begun by Masolino, he finished a part
of them--namely, the story of the Chair, the healing of the sick, the
raising of the dead, and the restoring of the cripples with his shadow
as he was going to the Temple with S. John. But the most notable among
them all is that one wherein S. Peter, at Christ's command, is taking
the money from the belly of the fish, in order to pay the tribute, since
(besides the fact that we see there in an Apostle, the last of the
group, the portrait of Masaccio himself, made by his own hand with the
help of a mirror, so well that it appears absolutely alive) we can
recognize there the ardour of S. Peter in his questioning and the
attentiveness of the Apostles, who are standing in various attitudes
round Christ, awaiting his determination, with gestures so vivid that
they truly appear alive. Wonderful, above all, is the S. Peter who,
while he is labouring to draw the money from the belly of the fish, has
his head suffused with blood by reason of bending down; and he is even
more wonderful as he pays the tribute, for here we see his expression as
he counts it, and the eagerness of him who is receiving it and looking
at the money in his hand with the greatest pleasure. There, also, he
painted the resurrection of the King's son, wrought by S. Peter and S.
Paul; although by reason of the death of Masaccio the work remained
unfinished, and was afterwards completed by Filippino. In the scene
wherein S. Peter is baptizing, a naked man, who is trembling and
shivering with cold among the others who are being baptized, is greatly
esteemed, having been wrought with very beautiful relief and sweet
manner; which figure has ever been held in reverence and admiration by
all craftsmen, both ancient and modern. For this reason that chapel has
been frequented continually up to our own day by innumerable draughtsmen
and masters; and there still are therein some heads so lifelike and so
beautiful, that it may truly be said that no master of that age
approached so nearly as this man did to the moderns. His labours
therefore deserve infinite praise, and above all because he gave form in
his art to the beautiful manner of our times. And that this is true is
proved by the fact that all the most celebrated sculptors and painters,
who have lived from his day to our own, have become excellent and famous
by exercising themselves and studying in this chapel--namely, Fra
Giovanni da Fiesole, Fra Filippo, Filippino, who finished it, Alesso
Baldovinetti, Andrea dal Castagno, Andrea del Verrocchio, Domenico del
Ghirlandajo, Sandro di Botticello, Leonardo da Vinci, Pietro Perugino,
Fra Bartolommeo di San Marco, Mariotto Albertinelli, and the most divine
Michelagnolo Buonarroti; likewise Raffaello da Urbino, who owed to this
chapel the beginning of his beautiful manner, Granaccio, Lorenzo di
Credi, Ridolfo del Ghirlandajo, Andrea del Sarto, Rosso, Franciabigio,
Baccio Bandinelli, Alonso Spagnuolo, Jacopo da Pontormo, Pierino del
Vaga, and Toto del Nunziata; and in short, all those who have sought to
learn that art have ever gone to this chapel to learn and to grasp the
precepts and the rules for good work from the figures of Masaccio. And
if I have not named many foreigners and many Florentines who have gone
to that chapel for the sake of study, let it suffice to say that where
the heads of art go, the members also follow. But although the works of
Masaccio have ever been in so great repute, it is nevertheless the
opinion--nay, the firm belief--of many, that he would have produced even
greater fruits in his art, if death, which tore him from us at the age
of twenty-six, had not snatched him away from us so prematurely. But
either by reason of envy, or because good things rarely have any long
duration, he died in the flower of his youth, and that so suddenly, that
there were not wanting people who put it down to poison rather than to
any other reason.

[Illustration: MASACCIO: THE MADONNA ENTHRONED WITH ANGEL MUSICIANS]

(_Collection of Rev. A. F. Sutton. Panel_)

It is said that Filippo di Ser Brunellesco, hearing of his death,
exclaimed, "We have suffered a very great loss in Masaccio," and that it
grieved him infinitely, for he had spent much time in demonstrating to
Masaccio many rules of perspective and of architecture. He was buried in
the same Church of the Carmine in the year 1443, and although, since
he had been little esteemed when alive, no memorial was then placed over
his tomb, yet after his death there were not wanting men to honour him
with these epitaphs:


                 BY ANNIBAL CARO.

   PINSI, E LA MIA PITTURA AL VER FU PARI;
     L'ATTEGGIAI, L'AVVIVAI, LE DIEDI IL MOTO,
     LE DIEDI AFFETTO. INSEGNI IL BUONARROTO
   A TUTTI GLI ALTRI, E DA ME SOLO IMPARI.

                 BY FABIO SEGNI.

   INVIDA CUR LACHESIS PRIMO SUB FLORE JUVENTAE
     POLLICE DISCINDIS STAMINA FUNEREO?
   HOC UNO OCCISO INNUMEROS OCCIDIS APELLES;
     PICTURAE OMNIS OBIT, HOC OBEUNTE, LEPOS.
   HOC SOLE EXTINCTO, EXTINGUUNTUR SIDERA CUNCTA.
     HEU! DECUS OMNE PERIT, HOC PEREUNTE, SIMUL.

[Illustration: THE TRIBUTE MONEY

(_After the fresco by_ Masaccio. _Florence: S. Maria del Carmine_)

_Anderson_]


FILIPPO BRUNELLESCHI


LIFE OF FILIPPO BRUNELLESCHI

[_FILIPPO DI SER BRUNELLESCO_]

SCULPTOR AND ARCHITECT


Many men are created by nature small in person and in features, who have
a mind full of such greatness and a heart of such irresistible
vehemence, that if they do not begin difficult--nay, almost
impossible--undertakings, and bring them to completion to the marvel of
all who behold them, they have never any peace in their lives; and
whatsoever work chance puts into their hands, however lowly and base it
may be, they give it value and nobility. Wherefore no one should turn up
his nose when he encounters people who have not, in their aspect, that
primal grace or beauty which nature should give, on his coming into the
world, to a man who works at any art, seeing that there is no doubt that
beneath the clods of the earth are hidden veins of gold. And very often,
in those who are most insignificant in form, there are born so great
generosity of mind and so great sincerity of heart, that, if nobility be
mingled with these, nothing short of the greatest marvels can be looked
for from them, for the reason that they strive to embellish the ugliness
of the body with the beauty of the intellect; as it is clearly seen in
Filippo di Ser Brunellesco, who was no less insignificant in person than
Messer Forese da Rabatta and Giotto, but so lofty in intellect that it
can be truly said that he was sent to us by Heaven in order to give new
form to architecture, which had been out of mind for hundreds of years;
for the men of those times had spent much treasure to no purpose, making
buildings without order, with bad method, with sorry design, with most
strange inventions, with most ungraceful grace, and with even worse
ornament. And Heaven ordained, since the earth had been for so many
years without any supreme mind or divine spirit, that Filippo should
bequeath to the world the greatest, the most lofty, and the most
beautiful building that was ever made in modern times, or even in those
of the ancients, proving that the talent of the Tuscan craftsmen,
although lost, was not therefore dead. Heaven adorned him, moreover,
with the best virtues, among which was that of kindliness, so that no
man was ever more benign or more amiable than he. In judgment he was
free from passion, and when he saw worth and merit in others he would
sacrifice his own advantage and the interest of his friends. He knew
himself, he shared the benefit of his own talent with many, and he was
ever succouring his neighbour in his necessities. He declared himself a
capital enemy of vice, and a friend of those who practised virtue. He
never spent his time uselessly, but would labour to meet the needs of
others, either by himself or by the agency of other men; and he would
visit his friends on foot and ever succour them.

It is said that there was in Florence a man of very good repute, most
praiseworthy in his way of life and active in his business, whose name
was Ser Brunellesco di Lippo Lapi, who had had a grandfather called
Cambio, who was a learned person and the son of a physician very famous
in those times, named Maestro Ventura Bacherini. Now Ser Brunellesco,
taking to wife a most excellent young woman from the noble family of the
Spini, received, as part payment of her dowry, a house wherein he and
his sons dwelt to the day of their death. This house stands opposite to
one side of S. Michele Berteldi, in a close past the Piazza degli Agli.
The while that he was occupying himself thus and living happily, in the
year 1398 there was born to him a son, to whom he gave the name Filippo,
after his own father, now dead; and he celebrated this birth with the
greatest gladness possible. Thereupon he taught him in his childhood,
with the utmost attention, the first rudiments of letters, wherein the
boy showed himself so ingenious and so lofty in spirit that his brain
was often in doubt, as if he did not care to become very perfect in
them--nay, it appeared that he directed his thoughts on matters of
greater utility--wherefore Ser Brunellesco, who wished him to follow his
own vocation of notary, or that of his great-great-grandfather, was very
much displeased. But seeing him continually investigating ingenious
problems of art and mechanics, he made him learn arithmetic and writing,
and then apprenticed him to the goldsmith's art with one his friend, to
the end that he might learn design. And this gave great satisfaction to
Filippo, who, not many years after beginning to learn and to practise
that art, could set precious stones better than any old craftsman in
that vocation. He occupied himself with niello and with making larger
works, such as some figures in silver, whereof two, half-length
prophets, are placed at the head of the altar of S. Jacopo in Pistoia;
these figures, which are held very beautiful, were wrought by him for
the Wardens of Works in that city; and he made works in low-relief,
wherein he showed that he had so great knowledge in his vocation that
his intellect must needs overstep the bounds of that art. Wherefore,
having made acquaintance with certain studious persons, he began to
penetrate with his fancy into questions of time, of motion, of weights,
and of wheels, and how the latter can be made to revolve, and by what
means they can be set in motion; and thus he made some very good and
very beautiful clocks with his own hand.

Not content with this, there arose in his mind a very great inclination
for sculpture; and this took effect, for Donatello, then a youth, being
held an able sculptor and one of great promise, Filippo began to be ever
in his company, and the two conceived such great love for each other, by
reason of the talents of each, that one appeared unable to live without
the other. Whereupon Filippo, who was most capable in various ways, gave
attention to many professions, nor had he practised these long before he
was held by persons qualified to judge to be a very good architect, as
he showed in many works in connection with the fitting up of houses,
such as the house of Apollonio Lapi, his kinsman, in the Canto de' Ciai,
towards the Mercato Vecchio, wherein he occupied himself greatly while
the other was having it built; and he did the same in the tower and in
the house of Petraia, at Castello without Florence. In the Palace that
was the habitation of the Signoria, he arranged and distributed all
those rooms wherein the officials of the Monte had their office, and he
made doors and windows there in the manner copied from the ancient,
which was then little used, for architecture was very rude in Tuscany.
In Florence, a little later, there was a statue of lime-wood to be made
for the Friars of S. Spirito, representing S. Mary Magdalene in
Penitence, to be placed in a chapel; and Filippo, who had wrought many
little things in sculpture, desiring to show that he was able to succeed
in large works as well, undertook to make the said figure, which, when
put into execution and finished, was held something very beautiful; but
it was destroyed afterwards, together with many other notable works, in
the year 1471, when that church was burnt down.

He gave much attention to perspective, which was then in a very evil
plight by reason of many errors that were made therein; and in this he
spent much time, until he found by himself a method whereby it might
become true and perfect--namely, that of tracing it with the ground-plan
and profile and by means of intersecting lines, which was something
truly most ingenious and useful to the art of design. In this he took so
great delight that he drew with his own hand the Piazza di S. Giovanni,
with all the compartments of black and white marble wherewith that
church was incrusted, which he foreshortened with singular grace; and he
drew, likewise, the building of the Misericordia, with the shops of the
Wafer-Makers and the Volta de' Pecori, and the column of S. Zanobi on
the other side. This work, bringing him praise from craftsmen and from
all who had judgment in that art, encouraged him so greatly that it was
not long before he put his hand to another and drew the Palace, the
Piazza, and the Loggia of the Signori, together with the roof of the
Pisani and all the buildings that are seen round that Piazza; and these
works were the means of arousing the minds of the other craftsmen, who
afterwards devoted themselves to this with great zeal. He taught it, in
particular, to the painter Masaccio, then a youth and much his friend,
who did him credit in this art that Filippo showed him, as it is
apparent from the buildings in his works. Nor did he refrain from
teaching it even to those who worked in tarsia, which is the art of
inlaying coloured woods; and he stimulated them so greatly that he was
the source of a good style and of many useful changes that were made in
that craft, and of many excellent works wrought both then and
afterwards, which have brought fame and profit to Florence for many
years.

[Illustration: THE CRUCIFIXION

(_After_ Filippo Brunelleschi. _Florence: S. Maria Novella_)

_Alinari_]

Now Messer Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli, returning from his studies,
and chancing one evening to be at supper in a garden with some of his
friends, invited Filippo, who, hearing him discourse on the mathematical
arts, formed such an intimacy with him that he learnt geometry from
Messer Paolo; and although Filippo had no learning, he reasoned so well
in every matter with his instinct, sharpened by practice and experience,
that he would many times confound him. And so he went on to give
attention to the study of the Christian Scriptures, never failing to be
present at the disputations and preachings of learned persons, from
which he gained so much advantage, by reason of his admirable memory,
that the aforesaid Messer Paolo was wont to extol him and to say that in
hearing Filippo argue he appeared to be hearing a new S. Paul. He also
gave much attention at this time to the works of Dante, which he
understood very well with regard to the places described and their
proportions, and he would avail himself of them in his conversations,
quoting them often in making comparisons. He did naught else with his
thoughts but invent and imagine ingenious and difficult things; nor
could he ever find an intellect more to his satisfaction than that of
Donato, with whom he was ever holding familiar discourse, and they took
pleasure in one another and would confer together over the difficulties
of their vocation.

Now in those days Donato had finished a Crucifix of wood, which was
placed in S. Croce in Florence, below the scene of the child being
restored to life by S. Francis, painted by Taddeo Gaddi, and he wished
to have the opinion of Filippo about this work; but he repented, for
Filippo answered that he had placed a ploughman on the Cross; whence
there arose the saying, "Take wood and make one thyself," as it is
related at length in the Life of Donato. Whereupon Filippo, who would
never get angry, whatever might be said to him, although he might have
reason for anger, stayed in seclusion for many months until he had
finished a Crucifix of wood of the same size, so excellent, and wrought
with so much art, design, and diligence, that Donato--whom he had sent
to his house ahead of himself, as it were to surprise him, for he did
not know that Filippo had made such a work--having an apron full of eggs
and other things for their common dinner, let it fall as he gazed at the
work, beside himself with marvel at the ingenious and masterly manner
that Filippo had shown in the legs, the trunk, and the arms of the said
figure, which was so well composed and united together that Donato,
besides admitting himself beaten, proclaimed it a miracle. This work is
placed to-day in S. Maria Novella, between the Chapel of the Strozzi and
that of the Bardi da Vernia, and it is still very greatly extolled by
the moderns. Wherefore, the talent of these truly excellent masters
being recognized, they received a commission from the Guild of Butchers
and from the Guild of Linen-Manufacturers for two figures in marble, to
be made for their niches, which are on the outside of Orsanmichele.
Having undertaken other work, Filippo left these figures to Donato to
make by himself, and Donato executed them to perfection.

[Illustration: THE SACRIFICE OF ISAAC

(_After_ Lorenzo Ghiberti. _Florence: Bargello_)

_Brogi_]

After these things, in the year 1401, now that sculpture had risen to so
great a height, it was determined to reconstruct the two bronze doors of
the Church and Baptistery of S. Giovanni, since, from the death of
Andrea Pisano to that day, they had not had any masters capable of
executing them. This intention being, therefore, communicated to those
sculptors who were then in Tuscany, they were sent for, and each man was
given a provision and the space of a year to make one scene; and among
those called upon were Filippo and Donato, each of them being required
to make one scene by himself, in competition with Lorenzo Ghiberti,
Jacopo[17] della Fonte, Simone da Colle, Francesco di Valdambrina, and
Niccolò d'Arezzo. These scenes, being finished in the same year and
being brought together for comparison, were all most beautiful and
different one from the other; one was well designed and badly wrought,
as was that of Donato; another was very well designed and diligently
wrought, but the composition of the scene, with the gradual diminution
of the figures, was not good, as was the case with that of Jacopo della
Quercia; a third was poor in invention and in the figures, which was the
manner wherein Francesco di Valdambrina had executed his; and the worst
of all were those of Niccolò d'Arezzo and Simone da Colle. The best was
that of Lorenzo di Cione Ghiberti, which had design, diligence,
invention, art, and the figures very well wrought. Nor was that of
Filippo much inferior, wherein he had represented Abraham
sacrificing Isaac; and in that scene a slave who is drawing a thorn
from his foot, while he is awaiting Abraham and the ass is browsing,
deserves no little praise.

[Footnote 17: _I.e._, Jacopo della Quercia.]

[Illustration: THE SACRIFICE OF ISAAC

(_After_ Filippo Brunelleschi. _Florence: Bargello_)

_Anderson_]

The scenes, then, being exhibited, Filippo and Donato were not satisfied
with any save with that of Lorenzo, and they judged him to be better
qualified for that work than themselves and the others who had made the
other scenes. And so with good reasons they persuaded the Consuls to
allot the work to Lorenzo, showing that thus both the public and the
private interest would be best served; and this was indeed the true
goodness of friendship, excellence without envy, and a sound judgment in
the knowledge of their own selves, whereby they deserved more praise
than if they had executed the work to perfection. Happy spirits! who,
while they were assisting one another, took delight in praising the
labours of others. How unhappy are those of our own day, who, not sated
with injuring each other, burst with envy while rending others. The
Consuls besought Filippo to undertake the work in company with Lorenzo,
but he refused, being minded rather to be first in an art of his own
than an equal or a second in that work. Wherefore he presented the scene
that he had wrought in bronze to Cosimo de' Medici, who after a time had
it placed on the dossal of the altar in the old Sacristy of S. Lorenzo,
where it is to be found at present; and that of Donato was placed in the
Guild of the Exchange.

The commission being given to Lorenzo Ghiberti, Filippo and Donato, who
were together, resolved to depart from Florence in company and to live
for some years in Rome, to the end that Filippo might study architecture
and Donato sculpture; and this Filippo did from his desire to be
superior both to Lorenzo and to Donato, in proportion as architecture is
held to be more necessary for the practical needs of men than sculpture
and painting. After he had sold a little farm that he had at Settignano,
they departed from Florence and went to Rome, where, seeing the grandeur
of the buildings and the perfection of the fabrics of the temples,
Filippo would stand in a maze like a man out of his mind. And so, having
made arrangements for measuring the cornices and taking the ground-plans
of those buildings, he and Donato kept labouring continually, sparing
neither time nor expense. There was no place, either in Rome or in the
Campagna without, that they left unvisited, and nothing of the good that
they did not measure, if only they could find it. And since Filippo was
free from domestic cares, he gave himself over body and soul to his
studies, and took no thought for eating or sleeping, being intent on one
thing only--namely, architecture, which was now dead (I mean the good
ancient Orders, and not the barbarous German, which was much in use in
his time). And he had in his mind two vast conceptions, one being to
restore to light the good manner of architecture, since he believed that
if he could recover it he would leave behind no less a name for himself
than Cimabue and Giotto had done; and the other was to find a method, if
he could, of raising the Cupola of S. Maria del Fiore in Florence, the
difficulties of which were such that after the death of Arnolfo Lapi
there had been no one courageous enough to think of raising it without
vast expenditure for a wooden framework. Yet he did not impart this his
invention to Donato or to any living soul, nor did he rest in Rome till
he had considered all the difficulties connected with the Ritonda,
wondering how the vaulting was raised. He had noted and drawn all the
ancient vaults, and was for ever studying them; and if peradventure they
had found pieces of capitals, columns, cornices, and bases of buildings
buried underground, they would set to work and have them dug out, in
order to examine them thoroughly. Wherefore a rumour spread through
Rome, as they passed through the streets, going about carelessly
dressed, so that they were called the "treasure-seekers," people
believing that they were persons who studied geomancy in order to
discover treasure; and this was because they had one day found an
ancient earthenware vase full of medals. Filippo ran short of money and
contrived to make this good by setting jewels of price for certain
goldsmiths who were his friends; and thus he was left alone in Rome, for
Donato returned to Florence, while he, with greater industry and labour
than before, was for ever investigating the ruins of those buildings.
Nor did he rest until he had drawn every sort of building--round,
square, and octagonal temples, basilicas, aqueducts, baths, arches,
colossea, amphitheatres, and every temple built of bricks, from which
he copied the methods of binding and of clamping with ties, and also of
encircling vaults with them; and he noted the ways of making buildings
secure by binding the stones together, by iron bars, and by
dove-tailing; and, discovering a hole hollowed out under the middle of
each great stone, he found that this was meant to hold the iron
instrument, which is called by us the ulivella,[18] wherewith the stones
are drawn up; and this he reintroduced and brought into use afterwards.
He then distinguished the different Orders one from another--Doric,
Ionic, and Corinthian; and so zealous was his study that his intellect
became very well able to see Rome, in imagination, as she was when she
was not in ruins. In the year 1407 the air of that city gave Filippo a
slight indisposition, wherefore, being advised by his friends to try a
change of air, he returned to Florence. There many buildings had
suffered by reason of his absence; and for these, on his arrival, he
gave many designs and much advice.

[Footnote 18: This was probably something like the modern lewis.]

In the same year a congress of architects and engineers of the country
was summoned by the Wardens of Works of S. Maria del Fiore and by the
Consuls of the Guild of Wool, to discuss methods for raising the cupola.
Among these appeared Filippo, giving it as his advice that it was
necessary, not to raise the fabric directly from the roof according to
the design of Arnolfo, but to make a frieze fifteen braccia in height,
with a large round window in the middle of each of its sides, since not
only would this take the weight off the supports of the tribunes, but it
would become easier to raise the cupola; and models were made in this
way, and were put into execution. Filippo, being restored to health
after some months, was standing one morning in the Piazza di S. Maria
del Fiore with Donato and other craftsmen, when they began to talk of
antiquities in connection with sculpture, and Donato related how, when
he was returning from Rome, he had made the journey through Orvieto, in
order to see that marble façade of the Duomo, a work greatly celebrated,
wrought by the hands of diverse masters and held to be something notable
in those times; and how, in passing afterwards by Cortona, he entered
the Pieve and saw a very beautiful ancient sarcophagus, whereon there
was a scene in marble--a rare thing then, when there had not been
unearthed that abundance which has been found in our own day. And as
Donato went on to describe the method that the master of that work had
used in its execution, and the finish that was to be seen therein,
together with the perfection and the excellence of the workmanship,
Filippo became fired with an ardent desire to see it, and went off on
foot just as he was, in his mantle, cap, and wooden shoes, without
saying where he was going, and allowed himself to be carried to Cortona
by the devotion and love that he bore to art. And having seen the
sarcophagus, and being pleased with it, he made a drawing of it with the
pen, and returned with that to Florence, without Donato or any other
person knowing that he had been away, for they thought he must have been
drawing or inventing something.

Having thus returned to Florence, he showed him the drawing of the
sarcophagus, which he had made with great patience, whereat Donato
marvelled not a little, seeing how much love Filippo bore to art. After
this he stayed many months in Florence, where he kept making models and
machines in secret, all for the work of the cupola, exchanging jokes the
while with his fellow-craftsmen--for it was then that he played the jest
of "the Fat Man and Matteo"--and going very often, for recreation, to
assist Lorenzo Ghiberti in polishing some part of his doors. But hearing
that there was some talk of providing engineers for the raising of the
cupola, and being taken one morning with the idea of returning to Rome,
he went there, thinking that he would be in greater repute and would be
more sought for from abroad than he would be if he stayed in Florence.
When he was in Rome, therefore, the work came to be considered, and so,
too, the great acuteness of his intellect, for he had shown in his
discourse such confidence and such courage as had not been found in the
other masters, who, together with the builders, were standing paralyzed
and helpless, thinking that no way of raising the cupola could ever be
found, nor beams to make a bridge strong enough to sustain the framework
and the weight of so great an edifice; and having determined to make an
end of the matter, they wrote to Filippo in Rome, praying him to come to
Florence. He, desiring nothing better, returned with great readiness;
and the Wardens of Works of S. Maria del Fiore and the Consuls of the
Guild of Wool, assembling on his arrival, explained to Filippo all the
difficulties, from the greatest to the smallest, which were being raised
by the masters, who were in his presence at the audience together with
them. Whereupon Filippo spoke these words: "My Lords the Wardens, there
is no doubt that great enterprises ever present difficulties in their
execution, and if any ever did so, this of yours presents them, and even
greater than perchance you are aware of, for the reason that I do not
know whether even the ancients ever raised a vault so tremendous as this
will be; and although I have often pondered over the framework necessary
both within and without, and how it may be possible to work at it
securely, I have never been able to come to any resolution, and I am
aghast no less at the breadth than at the height of the edifice, for the
reason that, if it could be made round, we might use the method used by
the Romans in raising the dome over the Pantheon in Rome, that is, the
Ritonda, whereas here we must follow the eight sides, and bind the
stones together with ties and by dove-tailing them, which will be
something very difficult. But remembering that this is a temple
consecrated to God and to the Virgin, I am confident, since this is
being done in memory of her, that she will not fail to infuse knowledge
where it is lacking, and to give strength, wisdom, and genius to him who
is to be the author of such a work. But how can I help you in this
matter, since the task is not mine? I tell you, indeed, that if the work
fell to me, I would have resolution and courage enough to find the
method whereby the vault might be raised without so many difficulties;
but as yet I have given no thought to it, and you would have me tell you
the method! And when at last your Lordships determine to have it raised,
you will be forced not only to make trial of me, for I do not think
myself able to be the sole adviser in so great a matter, but also to
spend money and to ordain that within a year and on a fixed day many
architects shall come to Florence, not merely Tuscans and Italians, but
Germans, French, and of every other nation; and to propose this work to
them, to the end that, after discussing and deciding among so many
masters, it may be begun, being entrusted to him who shall give the most
direct proof of ability or possess the best method and judgment for
such an undertaking. Nor could I give you other counsel or a better plan
than this."

The plan and the counsel of Filippo pleased the Consuls and the Wardens
of Works, but they would have liked him in the meanwhile to have made a
model and to have given thought to the matter. But he showed that he
cared nothing for it; nay, taking leave of them, he said that he had
received letters soliciting him to return to Rome. Whereupon the
Consuls, perceiving that their prayers and those of the Wardens did not
avail to detain him, caused many of his friends to entreat him; but
Filippo would not give way, and one morning (on May 26, 1417) the
Wardens decreed him a present of money, which is found entered to the
credit of Filippo in the books of the Office of Works; and all this was
to conciliate him. But he, steadfast in his resolution, took his
departure none the less from Florence and returned to Rome, where he
studied continuously for that undertaking, making arrangements and
preparing himself for the completion of the work, thinking, as was true,
that no other than himself could carry it out. And as for his counsel
that new architects should be summoned, Filippo had advanced it for no
other reason but that they might serve to prove the greatness of his own
intellect, and not because he thought that they would be able to vault
that tribune or to undertake such a charge, which was too difficult for
them. And thus much time was consumed before those architects arrived
from their countries, whom they had caused to be summoned from afar by
means of orders given to Florentine merchants who dwelt in France, in
Germany, in England, and in Spain, and who were commissioned to spend
any sum of money, if only they could obtain the most experienced and
able intellects that there were in those regions from the Princes of
those countries, and send them to Florence.

By the year 1420, all these ultramontane masters were finally assembled
in Florence, and likewise those of Tuscany and all the ingenious
craftsmen of design in Florence; and so Filippo returned from Rome. They
all assembled, therefore, in the Office of Works of S. Maria del Fiore,
in the presence of the Consuls and of the Wardens, together with a
select body of the most ingenious citizens, to the end that these might
hear the mind of each master on the question and might decide on a
method of vaulting this tribune. Having called them, then, into the
audience, they heard the minds of all, one by one, and the plan that
each architect had devised for that work. And a fine thing it was to
hear their strange and diverse opinions about the matter, for the reason
that some said that piers must be built up from the level of the ground,
which should have the arches turned upon them and should uphold the
wooden bridges for sustaining the weight; others said that it was best
to make the cupola of sponge-stone, to the end that the weight might be
less; and many were agreed that a pier should be built in the centre,
and that the cupola should be raised in the shape of a pavilion, like
that of S. Giovanni in Florence. Nor were there wanting men who said
that it would have been a good thing to fill it with earth mingled with
small coins, to the end that, when it had been raised, anyone who wanted
some of that earth might be given leave to go and fetch it, and thus the
people would carry it away in a moment without any expense. Filippo
alone said that it could be raised without so much wood-work, without
piers, without earth, without so great expenditure on so many arches,
and very easily without any framework.

It appeared to the Consuls, who were expecting to hear of some beautiful
method, and to the Wardens of Works and to all those citizens, that
Filippo had talked like a fool; and deriding him with mocking laughter,
they turned away, bidding him talk of something else, seeing that this
was the plan of a madman, as he was. Whereupon Filippo, feeling himself
affronted, answered: "My Lords, rest assured that it is not possible to
raise the cupola in any other manner than this; and although you laugh
at me, you will recognize, unless you mean to be obstinate, that it
neither must nor can be done in any other way. And it is necessary, if
you wish to erect it in the way that I have thought of, that it should
be turned with the curve of a quarter-acute arch, and made double, one
vault within, and the other without, in such wise that a man may be able
to walk between the one and the other. And over the corners of the
angles of the eight sides the fabric must be bound together through its
thickness by dove-tailing the stones, and its sides, likewise, must be
girt round with oaken ties. And it is necessary to think of the lights,
the staircases, and the conduits whereby the rain-water may be able to
run off; and not one of you has remembered that you must provide for the
raising of scaffoldings within, when the mosaics come to be made,
together with an infinite number of difficulties. But I, who see the
vaulting raised, know that there is no other method and no other way of
raising it than this that I am describing." And growing heated as he
spoke, the more he sought to expound his conception, to the end that
they might understand it and believe in it, the greater grew their
doubts about his proposal, so that they believed in him less and less,
and held him to be an ass and a babbler. Whereupon, having been
dismissed several times and finally refusing to go, he was carried away
bodily from the audience by their servants, being thought to be wholly
mad; and this affront was the reason that Filippo could afterwards say
that he did not dare to pass through any part of the city, for fear lest
someone might say: "There goes that madman."

The Consuls remained in the Audience Chamber all confused, both by the
difficult methods of the original masters and by this last method of
Filippo's, which they thought absurd, for it appeared to them that he
would ruin the work in two ways: first, by making the vaulting double,
which would have made it enormous and unwieldy in weight; and secondly,
by making it without a framework. On the other hand, Filippo, who had
spent so many years in study in order to obtain the commission, knew not
what to do and was often tempted to leave Florence. However, wishing to
prevail, he was forced to arm himself with patience, having insight
enough to know that the brains of the men of that city did not abide
very firmly by any one resolution. Filippo could have shown a little
model that he had in his possession, but he did not wish to show it,
having recognized the small intelligence of the Consuls, the envy of the
craftsmen, and the instability of the citizens, who favoured now one and
now another, according as it pleased each man best; and I do not marvel
at this, since every man in that city professes to know as much in these
matters as the experienced masters know, although those who truly
understand them are but few; and let this be said without offence to
those who have the knowledge. What Filippo, therefore, had not been able
to achieve before the tribunal, he began to effect with individuals,
talking now to a Consul, now to a Warden, and likewise to many citizens;
and showing them part of his design, he induced them to determine to
allot this work either to him or to one of the foreigners. Wherefore the
Consuls, the Wardens of Works, and those citizens, regaining courage,
assembled together, and the architects disputed concerning this matter,
but all were overcome and conquered by Filippo with many arguments; and
here, so it is said, there arose the dispute about the egg, in the
following manner. They would have liked Filippo to speak his mind in
detail, and to show his model, as they had shown theirs; but this he
refused to do, proposing instead to those masters, both the foreign and
the native, that whosoever could make an egg stand upright on a flat
piece of marble should build the cupola, since thus each man's intellect
would be discerned. Taking an egg, therefore, all those masters sought
to make it stand upright, but not one could find the way. Whereupon
Filippo, being told to make it stand, took it graciously, and, giving
one end of it a blow on the flat piece of marble, made it stand upright.
The craftsmen protested that they could have done the same; but Filippo
answered, laughing, that they could also have raised the cupola, if they
had seen the model or the design. And so it was resolved that he should
be commissioned to carry out this work, and he was told that he must
give fuller information about it to the Consuls and the Wardens of
Works.

Going to his house, therefore, he wrote down his mind on a sheet of
paper as clearly as he was able, to give to the tribunal, in the
following manner: "Having considered the difficulties of this structure,
Magnificent Lords Wardens, I find that it is in no way possible to raise
the cupola perfectly round, seeing that the surface above, where the
lantern is to go, would be so great that the laying of any weight
thereupon would soon destroy it. Now it appears to me that those
architects who have no regard for the durability of their structures,
have no love of lasting memorials, and do not even know why they are
made. Wherefore I have determined to turn the inner part of this vault
in pointed sections, following the outer sides, and to give to these
the proportion and the curve of the quarter-acute arch, for the reason
that this curve, when turned, ever pushes upwards, so that, when it is
loaded with the lantern, both will unite to make the vaulting durable.
At the base it must be three braccia and three quarters in thickness,
and it must rise pyramidically, narrowing from without, until it closes
at the point where the lantern is to be; and at this junction the
vaulting must be one braccio and a quarter in thickness. Then on the
outer side there must be another vault, which must be two braccia and a
half thick at the base, in order to protect the inner one from the rain.
This one must also diminish pyramidically in due proportion, so that it
may come together at the foot of the lantern, like the other, in such
wise that at the summit it may be two-thirds of a braccio in thickness.
At each angle there must be a buttress, making eight in all: and in the
middle of every side there must be two buttresses, making sixteen in
all: and between the said angles, on every side, both within and
without, there must be two buttresses, each four braccia thick at the
base. The two said vaults, built in the form of a pyramid, must rise
together in equal proportion up to the height of the round window closed
by the lantern. There must then be made twenty-four buttresses with the
said vaults built round them, and six arches of grey-stone blocks, stout
and long, and well braced with irons, which must be covered with tin;
and over the said blocks there must be iron ties, binding the said
vaulting to its buttresses. The first part of the masonry, up to the
height of five braccia and a quarter, must be solid, leaving no vacant
space, and then the buttresses must be continued and the two vaults
separated. The first and second courses at the base must be strengthened
throughout with long blocks of grey-stone laid horizontally across them,
in such wise that both vaults of the cupola may rest on the said blocks.
At the height of every nine braccia in the said vaults there must be
little arches between one buttress and another, with thick ties of oak,
to bind together the said buttresses, which support the inner vault; and
then the said ties of oak must be covered with plates of iron, for the
sake of the staircases. The buttresses must be all built of grey-stone
and hard-stone, and all the sides of the cupola must be likewise of
hard-stone and bound with the buttresses up to the height of
twenty-four braccia; and from there to the top the material must be
brick, or rather, spongestone, according to the decision of the
builder, who must make the work as light as he is able. A passage must
be made on the outside above the windows, forming a gallery below, with
an open parapet two braccia in height, proportionately to those of the
little tribunes below; or rather, two passages, one above the other,
resting on a richly adorned cornice, with the upper passage uncovered.
The rain water must flow from the cupola into a gutter of marble, a
third of a braccio wide, and must run off through outlets made of
hard-stone below the gutter. Eight ribs of marble must be made at the
angles in the outer surface of the cupola, of such thickness as may be
required, rising one braccio above the cupola, with a cornice above by
way of roof, two braccia wide, to serve as gable and eaves to the whole;
and these ribs must rise pyramidically from their base up to the summit.
The two vaults of the cupola must be built in the manner described
above, without framework, up to the height of thirty braccia, and from
that point upwards in the manner recommended by those masters who will
have the building of them, since practice teaches us what course to
pursue."

Filippo, having finished writing all that is above, went in the morning
to the tribunal and gave them that paper, which they studied from end to
end. And although they could not grasp it all, yet, seeing the readiness
of Filippo's mind, and perceiving that not one of the other architects
had better ground to stand on--for he showed a manifest confidence in
his speech, ever repeating the same thing in such wise that it appeared
certain that he had raised ten cupolas--the Consuls, drawing aside, were
minded to give him the work, saying only that they would have liked to
see something to show how this cupola could be raised without framework,
for they approved of everything else. To this desire fortune was
favourable, for Bartolommeo Barbadori having previously resolved to have
a chapel built in S. Felicita and having spoken of this to Filippo, the
latter had put his hand to the work and had caused that chapel to be
vaulted without framework, at the right hand of the entrance into the
church, where the holy-water basin is, also made by his hand. In those
days, likewise, he caused another to be vaulted beside the Chapel of the
High Altar in S. Jacopo sopra Arno, for Stiatta Ridolfi; and these works
were the means of bringing him more credit than his words. And so the
Consuls and the Wardens of Works, being assured by the writing and by
the work that they had seen, gave him the commission for the cupola,
making him principal superintendent by the vote with the beans. But they
did not contract with him for more than twelve braccia of the whole
height, saying to him that they wished to see how the work succeeded,
and that if it succeeded as well as he promised they would not fail to
commission him to do the rest. It appeared a strange thing to Filippo to
see so great obstinacy and distrust in the Consuls and Wardens, and, if
it had not been that he knew himself to be the only man capable of
executing the work, he would not have put his hand to it. However,
desiring to gain the glory of its construction, he undertook it, and
pledged himself to bring it to perfect completion. His written statement
was copied into a book wherein the provveditore kept the accounts of the
debtors and creditors for wood and marble, together with the aforesaid
pledge; and they undertook to make him the same allowance of money as
they had given up to then to the other superintendents.

The commission given to Filippo becoming known among the craftsmen and
the citizens, some thought well of it and others ill, as it has ever
been the case with the opinions of the populace, of the thoughtless, and
of the envious. The while that the preparations for beginning to build
were being made, a faction was formed among craftsmen and citizens, and
they appeared before the Consuls and the Wardens, saying that there had
been too much haste in the matter, and that such a work as this should
not be carried out by the counsel of one man alone; that they might be
pardoned for this if they had been suffering from a dearth of excellent
masters, whereas they had them in abundance; and that it was not likely
to do credit to the city, because, if some accident were to happen, as
is wont to come to pass sometimes in buildings, they might be blamed, as
persons who had laid too great a charge on one man, without considering
the loss and the shame that might result to the public interest;
wherefore it would be well to give Filippo a companion, in order to
restrain his rashness.

Now Lorenzo Ghiberti had come into great repute, by reason of having
formerly given proof of his genius in the doors of S. Giovanni; and that
he was beloved by certain men who were very powerful in the Government
was proved clearly enough, since, seeing the glory of Filippo waxing so
great, they wrought on the Consuls and the Wardens so strongly, under
the pretext of love and affection towards that building, that he was
united to Filippo as his colleague in the work. How great were the
despair and the bitterness of Filippo, on hearing what the Wardens had
done, may be seen from this, that he was minded to fly from Florence;
and if it had not been for Donato and Luca della Robbia, who comforted
him, he would have lost his reason. Truly impious and cruel is the rage
of those who, blinded by envy, put into peril the honours and the
beautiful works of others in their jealous emulation! It was no fault of
theirs, in truth, that Filippo did not break his models into pieces,
burn his designs, and throw away in less than half an hour all that
labour which had occupied him for so many years. The Wardens at first
made excuses to Filippo and exhorted him to proceed, saying that he
himself and no other was the inventor and the creator of so noble a
building; but at the same time they gave the same salary to Lorenzo as
to Filippo. The work was pursued with little willingness on the part of
Filippo, who saw that he must endure the labours that it entailed, and
must then divide the honour and the fame equally with Lorenzo. Making up
his mind, however, that he would find means to prevent Lorenzo from
continuing very long in the work, he went on pursuing it in company with
him, in the manner suggested by the writing given to the Wardens.
Meanwhile, there arose in the mind of Filippo the idea of making such a
model as had not yet been made; wherefore, having put his hand to this,
he had it wrought by one Bartolommeo, a carpenter, who lived near the
Studio. In this model, which had all the exact proportions measured to
scale, he made all the difficult parts, such as staircases both lighted
and dark, and every sort of window, door, tie, and buttress, together
with a part of the gallery. Lorenzo, hearing of this, wished to see it,
but Filippo refused to let him, whereupon he flew into a rage and
ordered another model to be made for himself, to the end that he might
not appear to be drawing his salary for nothing and to be of no account
in the work. With regard to these models, Filippo was paid fifty lire
and fifteen soldi for his, as we see from an order in the book of
Migliore di Tommaso, dated October 3, 1419, whereas three hundred lire
are entered as paid to Lorenzo Ghiberti for the labour and expense of
his model, more in consequence of the friendship and favour that he
enjoyed than of any profit or need that the building had of it.

This torment lasted before the eyes of Filippo until 1426, the friends
of Lorenzo calling him the inventor equally with Filippo; and this
annoyance disturbed the mind of Filippo so greatly that he was living in
the utmost restlessness. Now, having thought of various new devices, he
determined to rid himself entirely of Lorenzo, recognizing that he was
of little account in the work. Filippo had already raised the cupola
right round, what with the one vault and the other, to the height of
twelve braccia, and he had now to place upon them the ties both of stone
and of wood; and as this was a difficult matter, he wished to discuss it
with Lorenzo, in order to see if he had considered this difficulty. And
he found Lorenzo so far from having thought of such a matter, that he
replied that he referred it to Filippo as the inventor. Lorenzo's answer
pleased Filippo, since it appeared to him that this was the way to get
him removed from the work, and to prove that he did not possess that
intelligence which was claimed for him by his friends, and to expose the
favour that had placed him in that position. Now the masons engaged on
the work were at a standstill, waiting to be told to begin the part
above the twelve braccia, and to make the vaults and bind them with
ties. Having begun the drawing in of the cupola towards the top, it was
necessary for them to make the scaffoldings, to the end that the masons
and their labourers might be able to work without danger, seeing that
the height was such that merely looking down brought fear and terror
into the stoutest heart. The masons and the other master-builders were
standing waiting for directions as to the ties and the scaffoldings;
and since no decision was made either by Lorenzo or by Filippo, there
arose a murmuring among the masons and the other master-builders, who
saw no signs of the solicitude that had been shown before; and because,
being poor people, they lived by the work of their hands, and suspected
that neither one nor the other of the architects had enough courage to
carry the work any further, they went about the building occupying
themselves, to the best of their knowledge and power, with filling up
and finishing all that had as yet been built.

One morning Filippo did not appear at the work, but bound up his head
and went to bed, and caused plates and cloths to be heated with great
solicitude, groaning continually and pretending to be suffering from
colic. The master-builders, who were standing waiting for orders as to
what they were to do, on hearing this, asked Lorenzo what they were to
go on with: but he replied that it was for Filippo to give orders, and
that they must wait for him. There was one who said, "What, dost thou
not know his mind?" "Yes," answered Lorenzo, "but I would do nothing
without him"; and this he said to excuse himself, because, not having
seen the model of Filippo, and having never asked him what method he
intended to follow, he would never commit himself in talking of the
matter, in order not to appear ignorant, and would always make a
double-edged answer, the more so as he knew that he was employed in the
work against the will of Filippo. The illness of the latter having
already lasted for more than two days, the provveditore and many of the
master-masons went to see him and asked him repeatedly to tell them what
they were to do. And he replied, "You have Lorenzo, let him do
something"; nor could they get another word out of him. Whereupon, this
becoming known, there arose discussions and very adverse judgments with
regard to the work: some saying that Filippo had gone to bed in his
vexation at finding that he had not the courage to raise the cupola, and
that he was repenting of having meddled with the matter; while his
friends defended him, saying that his anger, if anger it was, came from
the outrage of having been given Lorenzo as colleague, but that his real
trouble was colic, caused by fatiguing himself overmuch at the work.
Now, while this noise was going on, the building was at a standstill,
and almost all the work of the masons and stone-cutters was suspended;
and they murmured against Lorenzo, saying, "He is good enough at drawing
the salary, but as for directing the work, not a bit of it! If we had
not Filippo, or if he were ill for long, what would the other do? Is it
Filippo's fault that he is ill?" The Wardens of Works, seeing themselves
disgraced by this state of things, determined to go and find Filippo;
and after arriving and sympathizing with him first about his illness,
they told him in how great confusion the building stood and what
troubles his illness had brought upon them. Whereupon Filippo, speaking
with great heat both under the cloak of illness and from love of the
work, replied, "Is not that Lorenzo there? Can he do nothing? And I
marvel at you as well." Then the Wardens answered, "He will do naught
without thee"; and Filippo retorted, "But I could do well without him."
This retort, so acute and double-edged, was enough for them, and they
went their way, convinced that Filippo was ill from nothing but the
desire to work alone. They sent his friends, therefore, to get him out
of bed, with the intention of removing Lorenzo from the work. Wherefore
Filippo returned to the building, but, seeing that Lorenzo was still
strongly favoured and that he would have his salary without any labour
whatsoever, he thought of another method whereby he might disgrace him
and demonstrate conclusively his little knowledge in that profession;
and he made the following discourse to the Wardens in the presence of
Lorenzo: "My Lords the Wardens of Works, if the time that is lent to us
to live were as surely ours as the certainty of dying, there is no doubt
whatsoever that many things which are begun would be completed instead
of remaining unfinished. The accident of this sickness from which I have
suffered might have cut short my life and put a stop to the work;
wherefore I have thought of a plan whereby, if I should ever fall sick
again, or Lorenzo, which God forbid, one or the other may be able to
pursue his part of the work. Even as your Lordships have divided the
salary between us, let the work also be divided, to the end that each of
us, being spurred to show his knowledge, may be confident of acquiring
honour and profit from our Republic. Now there are two most difficult
things which have to be put into execution at the present time: one
is the making of the scaffoldings to enable the masons to do their work,
which have to be used both within and without the building, where they
must support men, stones, and lime, and sustain the crane for lifting
weights, with other instruments of that kind; the other is the chain of
ties which has to be placed above the twelve braccia, surrounding and
binding together the eight sides of the cupola, and clamping the fabric
together, so that it may bind and secure all the weight that is laid
above, in such a manner that the weight may not force it out or stretch
it, and that the whole structure may rest firmly on its own basis. Let
Lorenzo, then, take one of these two works, whichever he may think
himself best able to execute; and I will undertake to accomplish the
other without difficulty, to the end that no more time may be lost."
Hearing this, Lorenzo was forced for the sake of his honour to accept
one of these tasks, and, although he did it very unwillingly, he
resolved to take the chain of ties, as being the easier, relying on the
advice of the masons and on the remembrance that in the vaulting of S.
Giovanni in Florence there was a chain of stone ties, wherefrom he might
take a part of the design, if not the whole. And so one put his hand to
the scaffoldings and the other to the ties, and each carried out his
work. The scaffoldings of Filippo were made with so great ingenuity and
industry, that the very opposite opinion was held in this matter to that
which many had previously conceived, for the builders stood on them,
working and drawing up weights, as securely as if they had been on the
surface of the ground; and the models of the said scaffoldings were
preserved in the Office of Works. Lorenzo had the chain of ties made on
one of the eight sides with the greatest difficulty; and when it was
finished, the Wardens caused Filippo to look at it. To them he said
nothing, but he discoursed thereon with some of his friends, saying that
it was necessary to have some form of fastening different from that one,
and to apply it in a better manner than had been done, and that it was
not strong enough to withstand the weight that was to be laid above, for
it did not bind the masonry together firmly enough; adding that the
supplies given to Lorenzo, as well as the chain that he had caused to be
made, had been simply thrown away. The opinion of Filippo became known,
and he was charged to show what was the best way of making such a
chain. Whereupon, having already made designs and models, he immediately
showed them, and when they had been seen by the Wardens and the other
masters, it was recognized into what great error they had fallen by
favouring Lorenzo; and wishing to atone for this error and to show that
they knew what was good, they made Filippo overseer and superintendent
of the whole fabric for life, saying that nothing should be done in that
work without his command. And as a proof of approbation they gave him
one hundred florins, decreed by the Consuls and Wardens under date of
August 13, 1423, by the hand of Lorenzo Paoli, notary to the Office of
Works, and under the name of Gherardo di Messer Filippo Corsini; and
they voted him an allowance of one hundred florins a year as a provision
for life. Wherefore, giving orders for the building to be pushed on, he
pursued it with such scrupulous care and so great attention, that not a
stone could be put into place without his having wished to see it.
Lorenzo, on the other hand, finding himself vanquished, and, as it were,
put to shame, was favoured and assisted by his friends so powerfully
that he went on drawing his salary, claiming that he could not be
dismissed until three years had passed.

[Illustration: THE DOME OF THE CATHEDRAL

(_After_ Filippo Brunelleschi. _Florence_)

_Alinari_]

Filippo was for ever making, on the slightest occasion, designs and
models of stages for the builders and of machines for lifting weights.
But this did not prevent certain malicious persons, friends of Lorenzo,
from putting Filippo into despair by spending their whole time in making
models in opposition to his, insomuch that some were made by one Maestro
Antonio da Verzelli and other favoured masters, and were brought into
notice now by one citizen and now by another, demonstrating their
inconstancy, their little knowledge, and their even smaller
understanding, since, having perfection in their grasp, they brought
forward the imperfect and the useless.

The ties were now finished right round the eight sides, and the masons,
being encouraged, were labouring valiantly; but being pressed more than
usual by Filippo, and resenting certain reprimands received with regard
to the building and other things that were happening every day, they had
conceived a grievance against him. Wherefore, moved by this and by
envy, the foremen leagued themselves together into a faction and
declared that the work was laborious and dangerous, and that they would
not build the cupola without great payment--although their pay had been
raised higher than usual--thinking in this way to take vengeance on
Filippo and to gain profit for themselves. This affair displeased the
Wardens and also Filippo, who, having pondered over it, made up his mind
one Saturday evening to dismiss them all. They, seeing themselves
dismissed and not knowing how the matter would end, were very evilly
disposed; but on the following Monday Filippo set ten Lombards to work,
and by standing ever over them and saying, "Do this here," and, "Do that
there," he taught them so much in one day that they worked there for
many weeks. The masons, on the other hand, seeing themselves dismissed,
deprived of their work, and thus disgraced, and having no work as
profitable as this, sent mediators to Filippo, saying that they would
willingly return, and recommending themselves to him as much as they
were able. Filippo kept them for many days in suspense as to his
willingness to take them back; then he reinstated them at lower wages
than they had before; and thus where they thought to gain they lost, and
in taking vengeance on Filippo they brought harm and disgrace on
themselves.

The murmurings were now silenced, and meanwhile, on seeing that building
being raised so readily, men had come to recognize the genius of
Filippo; and it was already held by those who were not prejudiced that
he had shown such courage as perchance no ancient or modern architect
had shown in his works. This came to pass because he brought out his
model, wherein all could see how much thought he had given to the
planning of the staircases and of the lights both within and without, in
order that no one might be injured in the darkness by reason of fear,
and how many diverse balusters of iron he had placed where the ascent
was steep, for the staircases, arranging them with much consideration.
Besides this, he had even thought of the irons for fixing scaffoldings
within, in case mosaics or paintings had ever to be wrought there; and
in like manner, by placing the different kinds of water-conduits, some
covered and some uncovered, in the least dangerous positions, and by
duly accompanying these with holes and diverse apertures, to the end
that the force of the winds might be broken and that neither exhalations
nor the tremblings of the earth might be able to do any harm, he showed
how great assistance he had received from his studies during the many
years that he stayed in Rome. And in addition, when men considered what
he had done in the way of dove-tailing, joining, fixing, and binding
together the stones, it made them marvel and tremble to think that one
single mind should have been capable of all that the mind of Filippo had
proved itself able to execute. So greatly did his powers continue to
increase that there was nothing, however difficult and formidable, that
he did not render easy and simple; and this he showed in the lifting of
weights by means of counterweights and wheels, so that one ox could
raise what six pairs could scarcely have raised before.

The building had now risen to such a height that it was a very great
inconvenience for anyone who had climbed to the top to descend to the
ground, and the builders lost much time in going to eat and drink, and
suffered great discomfort in the heat of the day. Filippo therefore made
arrangements for eating-houses with kitchens to be opened on the cupola,
and for wine to be sold there, so that no one had to leave his labour
until the evening, which was convenient for the men and very
advantageous for the work. Seeing the work making great progress and
succeeding so happily, Filippo had grown so greatly in courage that he
was continually labouring, going in person to the furnaces where the
bricks were being shaped and demanding to see the clay and to feel its
consistency, and insisting on selecting them with his own hand when
baked, with the greatest diligence. When the stonecutters were working
at the stones, he would look at them to see if they showed flaws and if
they were hard, and he would give the men models in wood or wax, or[19]
made simply out of turnips; and he would also make iron tools for the
smiths. He invented hinges with heads, and hinge-hooks, and he did much
to facilitate architecture, which was certainly brought by him to a
perfection such as it probably had never enjoyed among the Tuscans.

[Footnote 19: To make this passage intelligible, the word "or" has been
added in the later editions.]

In the year 1423 the greatest possible happiness and rejoicing were
prevailing in Florence, when Filippo was chosen as one of the Signori
for the quarter of San Giovanni, for May and June, Lapo Niccolini being
chosen as Gonfalonier of Justice for the quarter of Santa Croce. And if
he is found registered in the Priorista as "Filippo di Ser Brunellesco
Lippi," no one need marvel, seeing that he was called thus after his
grandfather Lippo, and not "de' Lapi," as he should have been; which
method is seen from the said Priorista to have been used in innumerable
other cases, as is well known to all who have seen it or who know the
custom of those times. Filippo exercised that office and also other
magisterial functions that he obtained in his city, wherein he ever bore
himself with most profound judgment.

Seeing that the two vaults were beginning to close in on the round
window where the lantern was to rise, it now remained to Filippo (who
had made many models of clay and of wood for both the one and the other
in Rome and in Florence, without showing them) to make up his mind
finally which of these he would put into execution. Wherefore, having
determined to finish the gallery, he made diverse designs, which
remained after his death in the Office of Works; but they have since
been lost by reason of the negligence of those officials. In our own
day, to the end that the whole might be completed, a part of it was made
on one of the eight sides, but by the advice of Michelagnolo Buonarroti
it was abandoned and not carried further, because it clashed with the
original plan. Filippo also made with his own hand a model for the
lantern; this was octagonal, with proportions in harmony with those of
the cupola, and it turned out very beautiful in invention, variety, and
adornment. He made therein the staircase for ascending to the ball,
which was something divine, but, since Filippo had stopped up the
entrance with a piece of wood let in below, no one save himself knew of
this staircase. And although he was praised and had now overcome the
envy and the arrogance of many, he could not prevent all the other
masters who were in Florence from setting themselves, at the sight of
this model, to make other in various fashions, and finally a lady of the
house of Gaddi had the courage to compete with the one made by Filippo.
But he, meanwhile, kept laughing at their presumption, and when many of
his friends told him that he should not show his model to any
craftsmen, lest they should learn from it, he would answer that there
was but one true model and that the others were of no account. Some of
the other masters had used some of the parts of Filippo's model for
their own, and Filippo, on seeing these, would say, "The next model that
this man makes will be my very own." Filippo's model was infinitely
praised by all; only, not seeing therein the staircase for ascending to
the ball, they complained that it was defective. The Wardens determined,
none the less, to give him the commission for the said work, but on the
condition that he should show them the staircase. Whereupon Filippo,
removing the small piece of wood that there was at the foot of the
model, showed in a pilaster the staircase that is seen at the present
day, in the form of a hollow blow-pipe, having on one side a groove with
rungs of bronze, whereby one ascends to the top, putting one foot after
another. And because he could not live long enough, by reason of his old
age, to see the lantern finished, he left orders in his testament that
it should be built as it stood in the model and as he had directed in
writing; protesting that otherwise the structure would collapse, since
it was turned with the quarter-acute arch, so that it was necessary to
burden it with this weight in order to make it stronger. He was not able
to see this edifice finished before his death, but he raised it to the
height of several braccia, and caused almost all the marbles that were
going into it to be well wrought and prepared; and the people, on seeing
them prepared, were amazed that it should be possible for him to propose
to lay so great a weight on that vaulting. It was the opinion of many
ingenious men that it would not bear the weight, and it appeared to them
great good-fortune that he had carried it so far, and a tempting of
Providence to burden it so heavily. Filippo, ever laughing to himself,
and having prepared all the machines and all the instruments that were
to be used in building it, spent all his time and thought in foreseeing,
anticipating, and providing for every detail, even to the point of
guarding against the chipping of the dressed marbles as they were drawn
up, insomuch that the arches of the tabernacles were built with wooden
protections; while for the rest, as it has been said, there were written
directions and models.

How beautiful is this building it demonstrates by itself. From the level
of the ground to the base of the lantern it is one hundred and
fifty-four braccia in height; the body of the lantern is thirty-six
braccia; the copper ball, four braccia; the cross, eight braccia; and
the whole is two hundred and two braccia. And it can be said with
confidence that the ancients never went so high with their buildings,
and never exposed themselves to so great a risk as to try to challenge
the heavens, even as this structure truly appears to challenge them,
seeing that it rises to such a height that the mountains round Florence
appear no higher. And it seems, in truth, that the heavens are envious
of it, since the lightning keeps on striking it every day. The while
that this work was in progress, Filippo made many other buildings, which
we will enumerate below in their order.

With his own hand he made the model of the Chapter-house of S. Croce in
Florence, a varied and very beautiful work, for the family of the Pazzi;
and the model of the house of the Busini, for the habitation of two
families; and also the model of the house and loggia of the Innocenti,
the vaulting of which was executed without framework, a method that is
still followed by all in our own day. It is said that Filippo was
summoned to Milan in order to make the model of a fortress for Duke
Filippo Maria, and that he left this building of the Innocenti in charge
of Francesco della Luna, who was very much his friend. This Francesco
made an architrave-ornament running downward from above, which is wrong
according to the rules of architecture. Wherefore Filippo, on returning,
reproved him for having done such a thing, and he answered that he
copied it from the Church of S. Giovanni, which is ancient. "There is
one sole error," said Filippo, "in that edifice, and thou hast followed
it." The model of this building, by the hand of Filippo, was for many
years in the hands of the Guild of Por Santa Maria, being held in great
account because a part of the fabric was still unfinished; but it is now
lost. He made the model of the Abbey of the Canons-Regular of Fiesole,
for Cosimo de' Medici, the architecture being ornate, commodious,
fanciful, and, in short, truly magnificent. The church is lofty, with
the vaulting barrel-shaped, and the sacristy, like all the rest of the
monastery, has its proper conveniences. But what is most important and
most worthy of consideration is that, having to place that edifice on
the downward slope of that mountain and yet on the level, he availed
himself of the part below with great judgment, making therein cellars,
wash-houses, bread-ovens, stables, kitchens, rooms for storing firewood,
and so many other conveniences, that it is not possible to see anything
better; and thus he laid the base of the edifice on the level. Wherefore
he was afterwards able to make the loggie, the refectory, the infirmary,
the noviciate, the dormitory, and the library, with the other principal
rooms proper to a monastery, on one plane. All this was carried out by
the Magnificent Cosimo de' Medici at his own expense, partly through the
piety that he showed in all matters in connection with the Christian
faith, and partly through the affection that he bore to Don Timoteo da
Verona, a most excellent preacher of that Order, whose conversation he
was so anxious to enjoy that he also built many rooms for himself in
that monastery and lived there at his own convenience. On this edifice
Cosimo spent one hundred thousand crowns, as may be seen in an
inscription. Filippo also designed the model for the fortress of Vico
Pisano; and he designed the old Citadel of Pisa, and fortified the Ponte
a Mare, and also gave the design for the new Citadel, closing the bridge
with the two towers. In like manner, he made the model for the fortress
of the port of Pesaro. Returning to Milan, he made many designs for the
Duke, and some for the masters of the Duomo of that city.

The Church of S. Lorenzo had been begun in Florence at this time by
order of the people of that quarter, who had made the Prior
superintendent of that building. This person made profession of much
knowledge in architecture, and was ever amusing himself therewith by way
of pastime. And they had already begun the building by making piers of
brick, when Giovanni di Bicci de' Medici, who had promised the people of
that quarter and the Prior to have the sacristy and a chapel made at his
own expense, invited Filippo one morning to dine with him, and after
much discourse asked him what he thought of the beginning of S. Lorenzo.
Filippo was constrained by the entreaties of Giovanni to say what he
thought, and being compelled to speak the truth, he criticized it in
many respects, as something designed by a person who had perchance more
learning than experience of buildings of that sort. Whereupon Giovanni
asked Filippo if something better and more beautiful could be made: to
which Filippo replied, "Without a doubt, and I marvel that you, being
the chief in the enterprise, do not devote a few thousand crowns to
building a body of a church with all its parts worthy of the place and
of so many noble owners of tombs, who, seeing it begun, will proceed
with their chapels to the best of their power; above all, because there
remains no memorial of us save walls, which bear testimony for hundreds
and thousands of years to those who built them." Giovanni, encouraged by
the words of Filippo, determined to build the sacristy and the principal
chapel, together with the whole body of the church, although only seven
families were willing to co-operate, since the others had not the means:
these seven were the Rondinelli, Ginori, Dalla Stufa, Neroni, Ciai,
Marignolli, Martelli, and Marco di Luca, and these chapels were to be
made in the cross. The sacristy was the first part to be undertaken, and
afterwards the church, little by little. The other chapels along the
length of the church came to be granted afterwards, one by one, to other
citizens of the quarter. The roofing of the sacristy was not finished
when Giovanni de' Medici passed to the other life, leaving behind him
his son Cosimo, who, having a greater spirit than his father and
delighting in memorials, caused this one to be carried on. It was the
first edifice that he erected, and he took so great delight therein that
from that time onwards up to his death he was for ever building. Cosimo
pressed this work forward with greater ardour, and while one part was
being begun, he would have another finished. Looking on the work as a
pastime, he was almost always there, and it was his solicitude that
caused Filippo to finish the sacristy, and Donato to make the
stucco-work, with the stone ornaments for those little doors and the
doors of bronze. In the middle of the sacristy, where the priests don
their vestments, he had a tomb made for his father Giovanni, under a
great slab of marble supported by four little columns; and in the same
place he made a tomb for his own family, separating that of the women
from that of the men. In one of the two little rooms that are on either
side of the altar in the said sacristy he made a well in one corner,
with a place for a lavatory. In short, everything in this fabric is
seen to have been built with much judgment. Giovanni and the others had
arranged to make the choir in the middle, below the tribune; but Cosimo
changed this at the wish of Filippo, who made the principal
chapel--which had been designed at first as a smaller recess--so much
greater, that he was able to make the choir therein, as it is at
present. This being finished, there remained to be made the central
tribune and the rest of the church; but this tribune, with the rest, was
not vaulted until after the death of Filippo. This church is one hundred
and forty-four braccia in length, and many errors are seen therein, one
being that the columns are placed on the level of the ground instead of
being raised on a dado, which should have been as high as the level of
the bases of the pilasters which stand on the steps, so that, as one
sees the pilasters shorter than the columns, the whole of that work
appears badly proportioned. All this was caused by the counsels of his
successors, who were jealous of his name and had made models in
opposition to his during his lifetime. For these they had been put to
shame with sonnets written by Filippo, and after his death they took
vengeance on him in this manner, not only in this work but in all those
that remained to be carried out by them. He left the model for the
presbytery of the priests of S. Lorenzo, and part of the building
finished, wherein he made the cloister one hundred and forty-four
braccia in length.

The while that this edifice was building, Cosimo de' Medici determined
to have a palace made for himself, and therefore revealed his intention
to Filippo, who, putting aside every other care, made him a great and
very beautiful model for the said palace, which he wished to place
opposite to S. Lorenzo, on the Piazza, entirely isolated on every side.
In this the art of Filippo had achieved so much that Cosimo, thinking it
too sumptuous and great a fabric, refrained from putting it into
execution, more to avoid envy than by reason of the cost. While the
model was making, Filippo used to say that he thanked his fortune for
such an opportunity, seeing that he had such a house to build as he had
desired for many years, and because he had come across a man who had the
wish and the means to have it built. But, on learning afterwards the
determination of Cosimo not to put this project into execution, in
disdain he broke the design into a thousand pieces. Deeply did Cosimo
repent, after he had made that other palace, that he had not adopted the
design of Filippo; and this Cosimo was wont to say that he had never
spoken to a man of greater intelligence and spirit than Filippo. He also
made the model of the most bizarre Temple of the Angeli, for the family
of the Scolari; but it remained unfinished and in the condition wherein
it is now to be seen, because the Florentines spent the money which lay
in the Monte for this purpose on certain requirements of their city, or,
as some say, in the war that they waged formerly against the people of
Lucca, wherein they also spent the money that had been left in like
manner by Niccolò da Uzzano for building the Sapienza, as it has been
related at length in another place. And in truth, if this Temple of the
Angeli had been finished according to the model of Brunellesco, it would
have been one of the rarest things in Italy, for the reason that what is
seen of it cannot be sufficiently extolled. The drawings by the hand of
Filippo for the ground-plan and for the completion of this octagonal
temple are in our book, with other designs by the same man.

[Illustration: THE OLD SACRISTY OF S. LORENZO

(_After_ Filippo Brunelleschi. _Florence_)

_Alinari_]

Filippo also designed a rich and magnificent palace for Messer Luca
Pitti at a place called Ruciano, without the Porta a San Niccolò in
Florence, but this failed by a great measure to equal the one that he
began in Florence for the same man, carrying it to the second range of
windows, with such grandeur and magnificence that nothing more rare or
more magnificent has yet been seen in the Tuscan manner. The doors of
this palace are double, with the opening sixteen braccia in length and
eight in breadth; the windows both of the first and second range are in
every way similar to these doors, and the vaultings double; and the
whole edifice is so masterly in design, that any more beautiful or more
magnificent architecture cannot be imagined. The builder of this palace
was Luca Fancelli, an architect of Florence, who erected many buildings
for Filippo, and one for Leon Batista Alberti, namely, the principal
chapel of the Nunziata in Florence, by order of Lodovico Gonzaga, who
took him to Mantua, where he made many works and married a wife and
lived and died, leaving heirs who are still called the Luchi from his
name. This palace was bought not many years ago by the most Illustrious
Lady Leonora di Toledo, Duchess of Florence, on the advice of the most
Illustrious Lord Duke Cosimo, her consort; and she increased the grounds
all round it so greatly that she made a very large garden, partly on the
plain, partly on the top of the hill, and partly on the slope, filling
it with all the sorts of trees both of the garden and of the forest,
most beautifully laid out, and making most delightful little groves with
innumerable sorts of evergreens, which flourish in every season; to say
nothing of the waters, the fountains, the conduits, the fishponds, the
fowling-places, the espaliers, and an infinity of other things worthy of
a magnanimous prince, about which I will be silent, because it is not
possible, without seeing them, ever to imagine their grandeur and their
beauty. And in truth Duke Cosimo could have chanced upon nothing more
worthy of the power and greatness of his mind than this palace, which
might truly appear to have been erected by Messer Luca Pitti, from the
design of Brunellesco, for his most Illustrious Excellency. Messer Luca
left it unfinished by reason of his cares in connection with the State,
and his heirs, having no means wherewith to complete it, and being
unwilling to let it go to ruin, were content to make it over to the
Duchess, who was ever spending money on it as long as she lived, but not
so much as to give hope that it would be soon finished. It is true,
indeed, according to what I once heard, that she was minded to spend
40,000 ducats in one year alone, if she lived, in order to see it, if
not finished, at least well on the way to completion. And because the
model of Filippo has not been found, his Excellency has caused
Bartolommeo Ammanati, an excellent sculptor and architect, to make
another, according to which the work is being carried on; and a great
part of the courtyard is already completed in rustic work, similar to
the exterior. And in truth, if one considers the grandeur of this work,
one marvels how the mind of Filippo could conceive so great an edifice,
which is truly magnificent not only in the external façade, but also in
the distribution of all the apartments. I say nothing of the view, which
is most beautiful, and of the kind of theatre formed by the most lovely
hills that rise round the palace in the direction of the walls, because,
as I have said, it would take too long to try to describe them in full,
nor could anyone, without seeing this palace, imagine how greatly
superior it is to any other royal edifice whatsoever.

It is also said that the machinery for the "Paradise" of S. Felice in
Piazza, in the said city, was invented by Filippo in order to hold the
Representation, or rather, the Festival of the Annunciation, in the
manner wherein the Florentines were wont to hold it in that place in
olden times. This was truly something marvellous, demonstrating the
genius and the industry of him who was its inventor, for the reason that
there was seen on high a Heaven full of living figures in motion, with
an infinity of lights appearing and disappearing almost in a flash. Now
I do not wish to grudge the labour of giving an exact description of the
machinery of that engine, seeing that it has all disappeared and that
the men who could speak of it from personal knowledge are dead, so that
there is no hope of its being reconstructed, that place being inhabited
no longer by the Monks of Camaldoli, but by the Nuns of S. Pier Martire;
and above all since the one in the Carmine has been destroyed, because
it was pulling down the rafters that support the roof.

For this purpose, then, Filippo had suspended, between two of the beams
that supported the roof of the church, the half of a globe in the shape
of an empty bowl, or rather, of a barber's basin, with the rim
downwards; this half-globe was made of thin and light planks fastened to
a star of iron which radiated round the curve of the said half-globe,
and these planks narrowed towards the point of equilibrium in the
centre, where there was a great ring of iron round which there radiated
the iron star that secured the planks of the half-globe. The whole mass
was upheld by a stout beam of pine-wood, well shod with iron, which lay
across the timbers of the roof; and to this beam was fastened the ring
that sustained and balanced the half-globe, which from the ground truly
appeared like a Heaven. At the foot of the inner edge it had certain
wooden brackets, large enough for one person to stand on and no more,
and at the height of one braccio there was also an iron fastening,
likewise on the inner edge; on each of these brackets there was placed a
boy about twelve years old, who was girt round with the iron fastening
one braccio and a half high, in such wise that he could not have fallen
down even if he had wanted to. These boys, who were twelve in all, were
placed on the brackets, as it has been said, and dressed like angels,
with gilded wings and hair made of gold thread; and when it was time
they took one another by the hand and waved their arms, so that they
appeared to be dancing, and the rather as the half-globe was ever moving
and turning round. Within it, above the heads of the angels, were three
circles or garlands of lights, contained in certain little lamps that
could not be overturned. From the ground these lights appeared like
stars, and the brackets, being covered with cotton-wool, appeared like
clouds. From the aforesaid ring there issued a very stout bar of iron,
which had at the end another ring, to which there was fastened a thin
rope reaching to the ground, as it will be told later. The said stout
bar of iron had eight arms, spreading out in an arc large enough to fill
the space within the hollow half-globe, and at the end of each arm there
was a stand about the size of a trencher; on each stand was a boy about
nine years old, well secured by an iron soldered on to the upper part of
the arm, but loosely enough to allow him to turn in every direction.
These eight angels, supported by the said iron, were lowered from the
space within the half-globe by means of a small windlass that was
unwound little by little, to a depth of eight braccia below the level of
the square beams that support the roof, in such a manner that they were
seen without concealing the view of the angels who were round the inner
edge of the half-globe. In the midst of this cluster of eight
angels--for so was it rightly called--was a mandorla of copper, hollow
within, wherein were many holes showing certain little lamps fixed on
iron bars in the form of tubes; which lamps, on the touching of a spring
which could be pressed down, were all hidden within the mandorla of
copper, whereas, when the spring was not pressed down, all the lamps
could be seen alight through some holes therein. When the cluster of
angels had reached its place, this mandorla, which was fastened to the
aforesaid little rope, was lowered very gradually by the unwinding of
the rope with another little windlass, and arrived at the platform where
the Representation took place; and on this platform, precisely on the
spot where the mandorla was to rest, there was a raised place in the
shape of a throne with four steps, in the centre of which there was a
hole wherein the iron point of the mandorla stood upright. Below the
said throne was a man who, when the mandorla had reached its place, made
it fast with a bolt without being seen, so that it stood firmly on its
base. Within the mandorla was a youth about fifteen years of age in the
guise of an angel, girt round the middle with an iron, and secured by a
bolt to the foot of the mandorla in a manner that he could not fall; and
to the end that he might be able to kneel, the said iron was divided
into three parts, whereof one part entered readily into another as he
knelt. Thus, when the cluster of angels had descended and the mandorla
was resting on the throne, the man who fixed the mandorla with the bolt
also unbolted the iron that supported the angel; whereupon he issued
forth and walked across the platform, and, having come to where the
Virgin was, saluted her and made the Annunciation. He then returned into
the mandorla, and the lights, which had gone out on his issuing forth,
being rekindled, the iron that supported him was once more bolted by the
man who was concealed below, the bolt that held the mandorla firm was
removed, and it was drawn up again; while the singing of the angels in
the cluster, and of those in the Heaven, who kept circling round, made
it appear truly a Paradise, and the rather because, in addition to the
said choir of angels and to the cluster, there was a God the Father on
the outer edge of the globe, surrounded by angels similar to those named
above and supported by irons, in such wise that the Heaven, the God the
Father, the cluster, and the mandorla, with innumerable lights and very
sweet music, truly represented Paradise. In addition to this, in order
to be able to open and close that Heaven, Filippo had made two great
doors, each five braccia both in length and breadth, which had rollers
of iron, or rather, of copper, in certain grooves running horizontally;
and these grooves were oiled in a manner that when a thin rope, which
was on either side, was pulled by means of a little windlass, any one
could open or close the Heaven at his pleasure, the two parts of the
door coming together or drawing apart horizontally along the grooves.
And these two doors, made thus, served for two purposes: when they were
moved, being heavy, they made a noise like thunder; and when they were
closed, they formed a platform for the apparelling of the angels and
for the making of the other preparations which it was necessary to carry
out within. These engines, made thus, together with many others, were
invented by Filippo, although others maintain that they had been
invented long before. However this may be, it was well to speak of them,
seeing that they have gone completely out of use.

But to return to Filippo himself; his renown and his name had grown so
great that he was sent for from far distant places by all who wished to
erect buildings, in their desire to have designs and models by the hand
of so great a man; and to this end the most powerful means and
friendships were employed. Wherefore the Marquis of Mantua, among
others, desiring to have him, wrote with great insistence to the
Signoria of Florence, by whom he was sent to that city, where he gave
designs for dykes on the Po and certain other works according to the
pleasure of that Prince, who treated him very lovingly, being wont to
say that Florence was as worthy to have Filippo as a citizen as he was
to have so noble and beautiful a city for his birthplace. In Pisa,
likewise, Count Francesco Sforza and Niccolò da Pisa, being surpassed by
him in the making of certain fortifications, commended him in his
presence, saying that if every State possessed a man like Filippo it
would be possible to live in security without arms. In Florence, also,
Filippo gave the design for the house of the Barbadori, near the tower
of the Rossi in the Borgo San Jacopo, but it was not put into execution;
and he also made the design for the house of the Giuntini on the Piazza
d'Ognissanti, on the Arno. Afterwards, the Captains of the Guelph party
in Florence, wishing to build an edifice containing a hall and an
audience-chamber for that body, gave the commission to Francesco della
Luna, who began the work, and he had already raised it to the height of
ten braccia above the ground, making many errors therein, when it was
put into the hands of Filippo, who brought the said palace to that
magnificent form which we see. In this work he had to compete with the
said Francesco, who was favoured by many. Even so did he spend his whole
life, competing now with one man and now with another; for many were
ever making war against him and harassing him, and very often seeking to
gain honour for themselves with his designs, so that he was reduced in
the end to showing nothing and trusting no one. The hall of this palace
is no longer used by the said Captains of the Guelphs, because the flood
of the year 1557 did so great damage to the papers of the Monte, that
the Lord Duke Cosimo, for the greater security of the said papers, which
are of the greatest importance, removed them to the said hall together
with the institution itself. And to the end that the old staircase of
this palace might serve for the said body of Captains--who gave up that
hall in favour of the Monte and retired to another part of that
palace--Giorgio Vasari was commissioned by his Excellency to make the
very commodious staircase that now ascends to the said hall of the
Monte. In like manner, from a design by the same man there was made a
coffer-work ceiling which was placed, after the plans of Filippo, on
certain fluted pillars of grey-stone.

One year the Lenten sermons in S. Spirito had been preached by Maestro
Francesco Zoppo, who was then very dear to the people of Florence, and
he had strongly recommended the claims of that convent, of the school
for youths, and particularly of the church, which had been burnt down
about that time. Whereupon the chief men of that quarter, Lorenzo
Ridolfi, Bartolommeo Corbinelli, Neri di Gino Capponi, and Goro di
Stagio Dati, with very many other citizens, obtained an order from the
Signoria for the rebuilding of the Church of S. Spirito, and made Stoldo
Frescobaldi provveditore. This man, by reason of the interest that he
had in the old church, the principal chapel and the high-altar of which
belonged to his house, took very great pains therewith; nay, at the
beginning, before the money had been collected from the taxes imposed on
the owners of burial-places and chapels, he spent many thousands of
crowns of his own, for which he was repaid.

Now, after the matter had been discussed, Filippo was sent for and asked
to make a model with all the features, both useful and honourable, that
might be possible and suitable to a Christian church. Whereupon he urged
strongly that the ground-plan of that edifice should be turned right
round, because he greatly desired that the square should extend to the
bank of the Arno, to the end that all those who passed that way from
Genoa, from the Riviera, from the Lunigiana, and from the districts of
Pisa and Lucca, might see the magnificence of that building. But since
certain citizens objected, refusing to have their houses pulled down,
the desire of Filippo did not take effect. He made the model of the
church, therefore, with that of the habitation of the monks, in the form
wherein it stands to-day. The length of the church was one hundred and
sixty-one braccia, and the width fifty-four braccia, and it was so well
planned, both in the ordering of the columns and in the rest of the
ornaments, that it would be impossible to make a work richer, more
lovely, or more graceful than that one. And in truth, but for the
malevolence of those who are ever spoiling the beautiful beginnings of
any work in order to appear to have more understanding than others, this
would now be the most perfect church in Christendom; and even as it
stands it is more lovely and better designed than any other, although it
has not been carried out according to the model, as may be seen from
certain parts begun on the outside, wherein the design observed within
has not been followed, as it appears from the model that the doors and
the borders round the windows were meant to do. There are some errors,
attributed to him, about which I will be silent, for it is believed that
if he had completed the building he would not have endured them, seeing
that he had brought all his work to perfection with so much judgment,
discrimination, intellect, and art; and this work likewise established
him as a genius truly divine.

Filippo was very humorous in his discourse and very acute in repartee,
as he showed when he wished to hit at Lorenzo Ghiberti, who had bought a
farm on Monte Morello, called Lepriano, on which he spent twice as much
as he gained by way of income, so that he grew weary of this and sold
it. Some one asked Filippo what was the best thing that Lorenzo had ever
done, thinking perchance, by reason of the enmity between them, that he
would criticize Lorenzo; and he replied, "The selling of Lepriano."
Finally, having now grown very old--he was sixty-nine years of age--he
passed to a better life on April 16, in the year 1446, after having
exhausted himself greatly in making the works that enabled him to win an
honoured name on earth and to obtain a place of repose in Heaven. His
death caused infinite grief to his country, which recognized and
esteemed him much more when dead than it had done when he was alive;
and he was buried with the most honourable obsequies and distinctions in
S. Maria del Fiore, although his burial-place was in S. Marco, under the
pulpit opposite to the door, where there is a coat of arms with two
fig-leaves and certain green waves on a field of gold, because his
family came from the district of Ferrara, that is, from Ficaruolo, a
township on the Po, as it is shown by the leaves, which denote the
place, and by the waves, which signify the river. He was mourned by
innumerable brother-craftsmen, and particularly by the poorer among
them, whom he was ever helping. Thus then, living the life of a
Christian, he left to the world the sweet savour of his goodness and of
his noble talents. It seems to me that it can be said for him that from
the time of the ancient Greeks and Romans to our own there has been no
rarer or more excellent master than Filippo; and he is all the more
worthy of praise because in his times the German manner was held in
veneration throughout all Italy and practised by the old craftsmen, as
it may be seen in innumerable edifices. He recovered the ancient
mouldings and restored the Tuscan, Corinthian, Doric and Ionic Orders to
their original forms. He had a disciple from Borgo a Buggiano, called Il
Buggiano, who made the lavatory of the Sacristy of S. Reparata, with
certain boys who pour out water; and he made a head of his master in
marble, taken from the life, which was placed after the death of Filippo
in S. Maria del Fiore, beside the door on the right hand as one enters
the church, where there is also the following epitaph, placed there by
public decree in order to honour him after his death, even as he had
honoured his country when alive:

                                 D.S.

   QUANTUM PHILIPPUS ARCHITECTUS ARTE DÆDALEA VALUERIT, CUM HUJUS
   CELEBERRIMI TEMPLI MIRA TESTUDO, TUM PLURES ALIÆ DIVINO INGENIO
   AB EO ADINVENTÆ MACHINÆ DOCUMENTO ESSE POSSUNT; QUAPROPTER
   OB EXIMIAS SUI ANIMI DOTES SINGULARESQUE VIRTUTES XV KAL. MAIAS
   ANNO MCCCCXLVI EJUS B.M. CORPUS HAC HUMO SUPPOSITA GRATA PATRIA
                            SEPELIRI JUSSIT.

To do him even greater honour, others have gone so far as to add these
two other inscriptions:

   PHILIPPO BRUNELLESCO ANTIQUÆ ARCHITECTURÆ INSTAURATORI S.P. Q.F.
                        CIVI SUO BENE MERENTI.

Giovan Battista Strozzi made the second:

   TAL SOPRA SASSO SASSO
   DI GIRO IN GIRO ETERNAMENTE IO STRUSSI;
   CHE COSÌ PASSO PASSO
   ALTO GIRANDO AL CIEL MI RICONDUSSI.

Other disciples of Filippo were Domenico dal Lago di Lugano; Geremia da
Cremona, who worked very well in bronze, together with a Sclavonian who
made many works in Venice; Simone, who died at Vicovaro while executing
a great work for the Count of Tagliacozzo, after having made the Madonna
in Orsanmichele for the Guild of the Apothecaries; Antonio and Niccolò,
both Florentines, who, working in metal at Ferrara, made a horse of
bronze for Duke Borso in the year 1461; and many others, of whom it
would take too long to make particular mention. Filippo was unfortunate
in certain respects, for, besides the fact that he ever had some one to
contend with, some of his buildings were not completed in his time and
are still unfinished. To mention only one, it was a great pity that the
Monks of the Angeli, as it has been said, could not finish the temple
begun by him, since, after they had spent on the portion that is now
seen more than three thousand crowns, drawn partly from the Guild of
Merchants and partly from the Monte, where their money was kept, the
capital was squandered and the building remained, as it still remains,
unfinished. Wherefore, as it was said in the life of Niccolò da Uzzano,
if a man desires to leave such memorials behind him, let him do it for
himself the while that he lives, and let him not put his trust in
anyone; and what has been said of this edifice could be said of
many others designed by Filippo Brunelleschi.


DONATO


LIFE OF DONATO

[_DONATELLO_]

SCULPTOR OF FLORENCE


Donato, who was called Donatello by his relatives and wrote his name
thus on some of his works, was born in Florence in the year 1403.
Devoting himself to the arts of design, he was not only a very rare
sculptor and a marvellous statuary, but also a practised worker in
stucco, an able master of perspective, and greatly esteemed as an
architect; and his works showed so great grace, design, and excellence,
that they were held to approach more nearly to the marvellous works of
the ancient Greeks and Romans than those of any other craftsman
whatsoever. Wherefore it is with good reason that he is ranked as the
first who made a good use of the invention of scenes in low-relief,
which he wrought so well that it is recognized from the thought, the
facility, and the mastery that he showed therein, that he had a true
understanding of them, making them with a beauty far beyond the
ordinary; for not only did no craftsman in this period ever surpass him,
but no one even in our own age has equalled him.

Donatello was brought up from his early childhood in the house of
Ruberto Martelli, where, by his good qualities and by his zealous
talent, he won the affection not only of Martelli himself but of all
that noble family. As a youth he wrought many things, which were not
held in great account, by reason of their number; but what made him
known for what he was and gave him a name was an Annunciation in
grey-stone, which was placed close to the altar of the Chapel of the
Cavalcanti, in the Church of S. Croce in Florence. For this he made an
ornament composed in the grotesque manner, with a base of varied
intertwined work and a decoration of quadrantal shape, adding six boys
bearing certain festoons, who appear to be holding one another securely
with their arms in their fear of the height. But the greatest genius
and art that he showed was in the figure of the Virgin, who, alarmed by
the unexpected apparition of the Angel, is making a most becoming
reverence with a sweet and timid movement of her person, turning with
most beautiful grace towards him who is saluting her, in a manner that
there are seen in her countenance that humility and gratitude which are
due to one who presents an unexpected gift, and the more when the gift
is a great one. Besides this, Donato showed a masterly flow of curves
and folds in the draperies of that Madonna and of the Angel,
demonstrating with the suggestion of the nude forms below how he was
seeking to recover the beauty of the ancients, which had lain hidden for
so many years; and he displayed so great facility and art in this work,
that nothing more could be desired, in fact, with regard to design,
judgment, and mastery in handling the chisel.

In the same church, below the tramezzo,[20] and beside the scene painted
by Taddeo Gaddi, he made a Crucifix of wood with extraordinary care; and
when he had finished this, thinking that he had made a very rare work,
he showed it to Filippo di Ser Brunellesco, who was very much his
friend, wishing to have his opinion. Filippo, whom the words of Donato
had led to expect something much better, smiled slightly on seeing it.
Donato, perceiving this, besought him by all the friendship between them
to tell him his opinion; whereupon Filippo, who was most obliging,
replied that it appeared to him that Donato had placed a ploughman on
the Cross, and not a body like that of Jesus Christ, which was most
delicate and in all its parts the most perfect human form that was ever
born. Donato, hearing himself censured, and that more sharply than he
expected, whereas he was hoping to be praised, replied, "If it were as
easy to make this figure as to judge it, my Christ would appear to thee
to be Christ and not a ploughman; take wood, therefore, and try to make
one thyself." Filippo, without another word, returned home and set to
work to make a Crucifix, without letting anyone know; and seeking to
surpass Donato in order not to confound his own judgment, after many
months he brought it to the height of perfection. This done, he
invited Donato one morning to dine with him, and Donato accepted the
invitation. Whereupon, as they were going together to the house of
Filippo, they came to the Mercato Vecchio, where Filippo bought some
things and gave them to Donato, saying, "Do thou go with these things to
the house and wait for me there, I am coming in a moment." Donato,
therefore, entering the house and going into the hall, saw the Crucifix
of Filippo, placed in a good light; and stopping short to study it, he
found it so perfectly finished, that, being overcome and full of
amazement, like one distraught, he spread out his hands, which were
holding up his apron; whereupon the eggs, the cheese, and all the other
things fell to the ground, and everything was broken to pieces. But he
was still marvelling and standing like one possessed, when Filippo came
up and said with a laugh, "What is thy intention, Donato, and what are
we to have for dinner, now that thou hast upset everything?" "For my
part," answered Donato, "I have had my share for this morning: if thou
must have thine, take it. But enough; it is thy work to make Christ and
mine to make ploughmen."

[Footnote 20: See note on p. 57, Vol. I.]

[Illustration: POGGIO BRACCIOLINI

(_After_ Donatello. _Florence: Duomo_)

_Alinari_]

In the Church of S. Giovanni in the same city Donato made a tomb for
Pope Giovanni Coscia, who had been deposed from the Pontificate by the
Council of Constance. This tomb he was commissioned to make by Cosimo
de' Medici, who was very much the friend of the said Coscia. He wrought
therein with his own hand the figure of the dead man in gilded bronze,
together with the marble statues of Hope and Charity that are there; and
his pupil Michelozzo made the figure of Faith. In the same church,
opposite to this work, there is a wooden figure by the hand of Donato of
S. Mary Magdalene in Penitence, very beautiful and excellently wrought,
showing her wasted away by her fastings and abstinence, insomuch that it
displays in all its parts an admirable perfection of anatomical
knowledge. On a column of granite in the Mercato Vecchio there is a
figure of Abundance in hard grey-stone by the hand of Donato, standing
quite by itself, so well wrought that it is consummately praised by
craftsmen and by all good judges of art. The column on which this statue
is placed was formerly in S. Giovanni, where there are the others of
granite supporting the gallery within; it was removed and its place was
taken by a fluted column, on which, in the middle of that temple, there
once stood the statue of Mars which was taken away when the Florentines
were converted to the faith of Jesus Christ. The same man, while still a
youth, made a figure of the Prophet Daniel in marble for the façade of
S. Maria del Fiore, and afterwards one of S. John the Evangelist seated,
four braccia high, and clothed in a simple garment: which figure is much
extolled. On one corner of the same place, on the side that faces
towards the Via del Cocomero, there is an old man between two columns,
more akin to the ancient manner than any other work that there is to be
seen by the hand of Donato, the head revealing the thoughts that length
of years brings to those who are exhausted by time and labour. Within
the said church, likewise, he made the ornament for the organ, which
stands over the door of the old sacristy, with those figures so boldly
sketched, as it has been said, that they appear to the eye to have
actual life and movement. Wherefore it may be said of this man that he
worked as much with his judgment as with his hands, seeing that many
things are wrought which appear beautiful in the rooms where they are
made, and afterwards, on being taken thence and set in another place, in
a different light or at a greater height, present a different
appearance, and turn out the contrary to what they appeared; whereas
Donato made his figures in such a manner, that in the room where he was
working they did not appear half as good as they turned out to be in the
positions where they were placed. For the new sacristy of the same
church he made the design for those boys who uphold the festoons that go
round the frieze, and likewise the design for the figures that were
wrought in the glass of the round window which is below the cupola,
namely, that one which contains the Coronation of Our Lady; which design
is greatly superior to those of the other round windows, as it is
clearly evident. For S. Michele in Orto in the said city he wrought the
marble statue of S. Peter which is to be seen there, a most masterly and
admirable figure, for the Guild of Butchers; and for the Guild of
Linen-manufacturers he wrought the figure of S. Mark the Evangelist,
which, after being commissioned to make it in company with Filippo
Brunelleschi, he finished by himself with the consent of Filippo.
This figure was wrought by Donato with so great judgment that its
excellence was not recognized, while it stood on the ground, by those
who had no judgment, and the Consuls of that Guild were inclined to
refuse to have it put into place; whereupon Donato besought them to let
him set it on high, saying that he wished to work on it and to show them
a different figure as the result. His request being granted, he covered
it up for a fortnight, and then uncovered it without having otherwise
touched it, filling everyone with wonder.

[Illustration: JUDITH

(_After the bronze by_ Donatello. _Florence: Loggia dei Lanzi_)

_Alinari_]

For the Guild of Armourers he made a most spirited figure of S. George
in armour, in the head of which there may be seen the beauty of youth,
courage and valour in arms, and a proud and terrible ardour; and there
is a marvellous suggestion of life bursting out of the stone. It is
certain that no modern figure in marble has yet shown such vivacity and
such spirit as nature and art produced in this one by means of the hand
of Donato. In the base that supports the shrine enclosing that figure he
wrought in marble the story of the Saint killing the Dragon, in
low-relief, wherein there is a horse that is much esteemed and greatly
extolled; and in the frontal he made a half-length figure of God the
Father in low-relief. Opposite to the church of the said oratory he
wrought the marble shrine for the Mercatanzia, following the ancient
Order known as Corinthian, and departing entirely from the German
manner; this shrine was meant to contain two statues, but he refused to
make them because he could not come to an agreement about the price.
After his death these figures were made in bronze by Andrea del
Verrocchio, as it will be told. For the main front of the Campanile of
S. Maria del Fiore he wrought four figures in marble, five braccia in
height, of which the two in the middle are portrayed from life, one
being Francesco Soderini as a youth, and the other Giovanni di Barduccio
Cherichini, now called Il Zuccone.[21] The latter was held to be a very
rare work and the most beautiful that Donato ever made, and when he
wished to take an oath that would command belief he was wont to say, "By
the faith that I place in my Zuccone"; and the while that he was working
on it, he would keep gazing at it and saying, "Speak, speak, plague
take thee, speak!" Over the door of the campanile, on the side facing
the Canon's house, he made Abraham about to sacrifice Isaac, with
another Prophet: and these figures were placed between two other
statues.

[Footnote 21: _I.e._, Bald-head.]

For the Signoria of that city he made a casting in metal which was
placed under an arch of their Loggia in the Piazza, representing Judith
cutting off the head of Holofernes; a work of great excellence and
mastery, which, if one considers the simplicity of the garments and
aspect of Judith on the surface, reveals very clearly below the surface
the great spirit of that woman and the assistance given to her by God,
even as one sees the effect of wine and sleep in the expression of
Holofernes, and death in his limbs, which have lost all life and are
shown cold and limp. This work was so well executed by Donato that the
casting came out delicate and very beautiful, and it was afterwards
finished so excellently that it is a very great marvel to behold. The
base, likewise, which is a baluster of granite, simple in design,
appears full of grace and presents an aspect pleasing to the eye. He was
so well satisfied with this work that he deigned to place his name on
it, which he had not done on the others; and it is seen in these words,
"Donatelli opus." In the courtyard of the Palace of the said Signori
there is a life-size David, nude and in bronze. Having cut off the head
of Goliath, he is raising one foot and placing it on him, holding a
sword in his right hand. This figure is so natural in its vivacity and
its softness, that it is almost impossible for craftsmen to believe that
it was not moulded on the living form. This statue once stood in the
courtyard of the house of the Medici, but it was transported to the said
place on the exile of Cosimo. In our own day Duke Cosimo, having made a
fountain on the spot occupied by this statue, had it removed, and it is
being kept for a very large courtyard that he intends to make at the
back of the palace, that is, where the lions formerly stood. In the hall
where there is the clock of Lorenzo della Volpaia, on the left, there is
a very beautiful David in marble; between his legs, under his feet, he
has the head of the dead Goliath, and in his hand he holds the sling
wherewith he slew him. In the first courtyard of the house of the Medici
there are eight medallions of marble, wherein there are copies of
ancient cameos and of the reverse sides of medals, with certain scenes,
all made by him and very beautiful, which are built into the frieze
between the windows and the architrave above the arches of the loggie.
In like manner he restored an ancient statue of Marsyas in white marble,
which was placed at the entrance of the garden; and a great number of
ancient heads, which were placed over the doors, were restored and
embellished by him with wings and diamonds (the emblem of Cosimo),
wrought very well in stucco. He made a very lovely vessel of granite,
which poured forth water, and he wrought a similar one, which also pours
forth water, for the garden of the Pazzi in Florence. In the said Palace
of the Medici there are Madonnas of marble and bronze made in
low-relief, besides some scenes in marble with most beautiful figures,
marvellous in their flat-relief. So great was the love that Cosimo bore
to the talent of Donato that he kept him continually at work, and
Donato, on the other hand, bore so great love to Cosimo that he could
divine his patron's every wish from the slightest sign, and obeyed him
in all things.

It is said that a Genoese merchant caused Donato to make a lifesize
head of bronze, which was very beautiful and also very light, because it
had to be carried to a great distance; and that the commission for this
work came to him through the recommendation of Cosimo. Now, when the
head was finished and the merchant came to pay for it, it appeared to
him that Donato was asking too much; wherefore the matter was referred
to Cosimo, who had the head carried to the upper court of the palace and
placed between the battlements that overlook the street, to the end that
it might be seen better. When Cosimo sought to settle the difference, he
found the offer of the merchant very far from the demand of Donato, and
he turned round and said that it was too little. Whereupon the merchant,
thinking it too much, said that Donato had wrought it in a month or
little more, and that this meant a gain of more than half a florin a
day. Donato, thinking this too much of an insult, turned round in anger
and said to the merchant that in the hundredth part of an hour he would
have been able to spoil the value of a year's labour; and giving the
head a push, he sent it flying straightway into the street below, where
it broke into a thousand pieces; saying to him that this showed that he
was more used to bargaining for beans than for statues. Wherefore the
merchant, regretting his meanness, offered to give him double the sum if
he would make another; but neither his promises nor the entreaties of
Cosimo could induce Donato to make it again. In the houses of the
Martelli there are many scenes in marble and in bronze; among others, a
David three braccia high, with many other works presented by him as a
free gift to that family in proof of the devotion and love that he bore
them; above all, a S. John of marble, made by him in the round and three
braccia high, a very rare work, which is to-day in the house of the
heirs of Ruberto Martelli. With regard to this work, a legal agreement
was made to the effect that it should be neither pledged, nor sold, nor
given away, without heavy penalties, as a testimony and token of the
affection shown by them to Donato, and by him to them out of gratitude
that he had learnt his art through the protection and the opportunities
that he received from them.

He also made a tomb of marble for an Archbishop, which was sent to
Naples and is in S. Angelo di Seggio di Nido; in this tomb there are
three figures in the round that support the sarcophagus with their
heads, and on the sarcophagus itself is a scene in low-relief, so
beautiful that it commands infinite praise. In the house of the Count of
Matalone, in the same city, there is the head of a horse by the hand of
Donato, so beautiful that many take it for an antique. In the township
of Prato he wrought the marble pulpit where the Girdle is shown, in
which, in several compartments, he carved a dance of children so
beautiful and so admirable, that he may be said to have demonstrated the
perfection of his art no less in this work than in his others. To
support this pulpit, moreover, he made two capitals of bronze, one of
which is still there, while the other was carried away by the Spaniards
who sacked that district.

[Illustration: GENERAL GATTAMELATA

(_After the bronze by_ Donatello. _Padua: Piazzo di S. Antonio_)

_Anderson_]

It came to pass about this time that the Signoria of Venice, hearing of
his fame, sent for him to the end that he might make the monument of
Gattamelata in the city of Padua; wherefore he went there right
willingly and made the bronze horse that is on the Piazza di S.
Antonio, wherein are perceived the panting and neighing of the horse,
with great spirit and pride, most vividly expressed by his art, in the
figure of the rider. And Donato proved himself such a master in the
proportions and excellence of so great a casting, that he can truly bear
comparison with any ancient craftsman in movement, design, art,
proportion, and diligence; wherefore it not only astonished all who saw
it then, but continues to astonish every person who sees it at the
present day. The Paduans, moved by this, did their utmost to make him
their fellow-citizen, and sought to detain him with every sort of
endearment. In order to keep him in their midst, they commissioned him
to make the stories of S. Anthony of Padua on the predella of the
high-altar in the Church of the Friars Minor, which are in low-relief,
wrought with so great judgment, that the most excellent masters of that
art stand marvelling and amazed before them, as they consider their
beautiful and varied compositions, with the great abundance of
extraordinary figures and diminishing perspectives. Very beautiful,
likewise, are the Maries that he made on the altar-dossal, lamenting the
Dead Christ. In the house of one of the Counts Capodilista he wrought
the skeleton of a horse in wood, which is still to be seen to-day
without the neck; wherein the various parts are joined together with so
much method, that, if one considers the manner of this work, one can
judge of the ingenuity of his brain and the greatness of his mind. In a
convent of nuns he made a S. Sebastian in wood at the request of a
chaplain, a Florentine, who was their friend and an intimate of his own.
This man brought him a figure of that Saint that they had, old and
clumsy, beseeching him to make the new one like it. Wherefore Donato
strove to imitate it in order to please the chaplain and the nuns, but,
although he imitated it, clumsy as it was, he could not help showing in
his own the usual excellence of his art. Together with this figure he
made many others in clay and in stucco, and on one end of an old piece
of marble that the said nuns had in their garden he carved a very
beautiful Madonna. Throughout that whole city, likewise, there are
innumerable works by his hand, by reason of which he was held by the
Paduans to be a marvel and was praised by every man of understanding;
but he determined to return to Florence, saying that if he remained any
longer in Padua he would forget everything that he knew, being so
greatly praised there by all, and that he was glad to return to his own
country, where he would gain nothing but censure, since such censure
would urge him to study and would enable him to attain to greater glory.
Having departed from Padua, therefore, he returned by way of Venice,
where, as a mark of his friendliness towards the Florentine people, he
made them a present of a S. John the Baptist, wrought by him in wood
with very great diligence and study, for their chapel in the Church of
the Friars Minor. In the city of Faenza he carved a S. John and a S.
Jerome in wood, which are no less esteemed than his other works.

Afterwards, having returned to Tuscany, he made a marble tomb, with a
very beautiful scene, in the Pieve of Montepulciano, and a lavatory of
marble, on which Andrea Verrocchio also worked, in the Sacristy of S.
Lorenzo in Florence; and in the house of Lorenzo della Stufa he wrought
some heads and figures that are very spirited and vivacious. Then,
departing from Florence, he betook himself to Rome, in order to try to
imitate the antiques to the best of his ability; and during this time,
while studying these, he made a tabernacle of the Sacrament in stone,
which is to be seen in S. Pietro at the present day. Passing through
Siena on his way back to Florence, he undertook to make a door of bronze
for the Baptistery of S. Giovanni; and he had already made the wooden
model, and the wax moulds were almost finished and successfully covered
with the outer mould, ready for the casting, when there arrived, on his
way back from Rome, one Bernardetto di Mona Papera, a Florentine
goldsmith and an intimate friend of Donato, who wrought upon him so
strongly both with words and in other ways, either for some business of
his own or for some other reason, that he brought him back to Florence;
wherefore that work remained unfinished, nay, not begun. There only
remained in the Office of Works of the Duomo in that city a S. John the
Baptist in bronze by his hand, with the right arm missing from the elbow
downwards; and this Donato is said to have done because he had not been
paid in full.

[Illustration: MADONNA AND CHILD

(_After the bronze by_ Donatello. _Padua: S. Antonio_)

_Anderson_]

Having returned to Florence, therefore, he wrought the Sacristy of S.
Lorenzo in stucco for Cosimo de' Medici, making four medallions on the
pendentives of the vault containing stories of the Evangelists, with
grounds in perspective, partly painted and partly in low-relief. And in
the said place he made two very beautiful little doors of bronze in
low-relief, with the Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors; and above these
he made some flat niches, one containing a S. Laurence and a S. Stephen,
and the other S. Cosimo and S. Damiano. In the transept of the church he
executed four saints in stucco, each five braccia high, which are
wrought in a masterly manner. He also designed the bronze pulpits that
contain the Passion of Christ, a work displaying design, force,
invention, and an abundance of figures and buildings; but these his old
age prevented him from executing, and his pupil Bertoldo finished them
and brought them to the utmost perfection. For S. Maria del Fiore he
made two colossal figures of brick and stucco, which are placed by way
of ornament without the church, at the corners of the chapels. Over the
door of S. Croce there is still to be seen a S. Louis wrought by him in
bronze, five braccia high; for this someone criticized him, saying that
it was stupid and perhaps the least excellent work that he had ever
made, and he answered that he had made it so of set purpose, seeing that
the Saint had been stupid to give up his throne and become a monk. The
same man made the head of the wife of the said Cosimo de' Medici in
bronze, and this head is preserved in the guardaroba of the Lord Duke
Cosimo, wherein there are many other works in bronze and marble by the
hand of Donato; among others, a Madonna with the Child in her arms, sunk
in the marble in flat-relief, which is the most beautiful work that it
is possible to see, and the rather as it is surrounded by a border of
scenes done in miniature by Fra Bartolommeo,[22] which are admirable, as
it will be told in the proper place. The said Lord Duke has a very
beautiful, nay, miraculous Crucifix in bronze, by the hand of Donato, in
his study, wherein there are innumerable rare antiquities and most
beautiful medals. In the same guardaroba there is a bronze panel
containing the Passion of Our Lord in low-relief, with a great number
of figures; and in another panel, also in metal, there is another
Crucifixion. In like manner, in the house of the heirs of Jacopo
Capponi, who was an excellent citizen and a true gentleman, there is a
marble panel with the Madonna in half-relief, which is held to be a very
rare work. Messer Antonio de' Nobili, who was Treasurer to his
Excellency, had in his house a marble panel by the hand of Donato, in
which there is a half-length Madonna in low-relief, so beautiful that
the said Messer Antonio valued it as much as all his possessions; nor is
it less valued by his son Giulio, a youth of singular goodness and
judgment, a friend to lovers of art and to all men of excellence. In the
house of Giovan Battista d'Agnol Doni, a gentleman of Florence, there is
a Mercury of metal in the round by the hand of Donato, one braccio and a
half in height and clothed in a certain bizarre manner; which work is
truly very beautiful, and no less rare than the others that adorn his
most beautiful house. Bartolommeo Gondi, of whom we have spoken in the
Life of Giotto, has a Madonna in half-relief by the hand of Donato,
wrought with so great love and diligence that it is not possible to see
anything better, or to imagine the fancifulness which he gave to her
headdress and the loveliness that he put into the garments which she is
wearing. In like manner, Messer Lelio Torelli, First Auditor and
Secretary to our Lord the Duke, and no less devoted a lover of all the
honourable sciences, arts, and professions, than he is excellent as a
jurist, has a marble panel of Our Lady by the hand of the same
Donatello.

[Footnote 22: Vasari says Fra Ber.... Fra Bernardo has been suggested,
but nothing is known of him. It is more reasonable to read Fra
Bartolommeo (della Porta).]

But if one were to give a complete account of his life and of the works
that he made, it would be a far longer story than it is our intention to
give in writing the Lives of our craftsmen, seeing that he put his hand
not only to great things, of which there has been enough said, but also
to the smallest things of art, making the arms of families on the
chimneypieces and on the fronts of the houses of citizens, a most
beautiful example of which may be seen in the house of the Sommai, which
is opposite to that of the baker Della Vacca. For the family of the
Martelli, moreover, he made a coffin in the form of a cradle wrought of
wicker-work, to serve for a tomb; but it is beneath the Church of S.
Lorenzo, because no tombs of any kind are to be seen above, save only
the epitaph of the tomb of Cosimo de' Medici, and even that one has
its entrance below, like the others.

[Illustration: THE ENTOMBMENT

(_After the relief by_ Donatello. _Padua: S. Antonio_)

_Alinari_]

It is said that Simone, the brother of Donato, having wrought the model
for the tomb of Pope Martin V, sent for Donato to the end that he might
see it before it was cast. Going to Rome, therefore, Donato found
himself in that city at the very moment when the Emperor Sigismund was
there to receive the crown from Pope Eugenius IV; wherefore he was
forced, in company with Simone, to occupy himself with making the
magnificent preparations for that festival, whereby he acquired very
great fame and honour.

In the guardaroba of Signor Guidobaldo, Duke of Urbino, there is a very
beautiful head of marble by the hand of the same man, and it is believed
that it was given to the ancestors of the said Duke by the Magnificent
Giuliano de' Medici, at the time when he was staying at that Court,
which was full of most cultured gentlemen. In short, the talent of
Donato was such, and he was so admirable in all his actions, that he may
be said to have been one of the first to give light, by his practice,
judgment, and knowledge, to the art of sculpture and of good design
among the moderns; and he deserves all the more commendation, because in
his day, apart from the columns, sarcophagi, and triumphal arches, there
were no antiquities revealed above the earth. And it was through him,
chiefly, that there arose in Cosimo de' Medici the desire to introduce
into Florence the antiquities that were and are in the house of the
Medici; all of which he restored with his own hand. He was most liberal,
gracious, and courteous, and more careful for his friends than for
himself; nor did he give thought to money, but kept his in a basket
suspended by a cord from the ceiling, wherefore all his workmen and
friends could take what they needed without saying a word to him. He
passed his old age most joyously, and, having become decrepit, he had to
be succoured by Cosimo and by others of his friends, being no longer
able to work. It is said that Cosimo, being at the point of death,
recommended him to the care of his son Piero, who, as a most diligent
executor of his father's wishes, gave him a farm at Cafaggiuolo, which
produced enough to enable him to live in comfort. At this Donato made
great rejoicing, thinking that he was thus more than secure from the
danger of dying of hunger; but he had not held it a year before he
returned to Piero and gave it back to him by public contract, declaring
that he refused to lose his peace of mind by having to think of
household cares and listen to the importunity of the peasant, who kept
pestering him every third day--now because the wind had unroofed his
dovecote, now because his cattle had been seized by the Commune for
taxes, and now because a storm had robbed him of his wine and his fruit.
He was so weary and disgusted with all this, that he would rather die of
hunger than have to think of so many things. Piero laughed at the
simplicity of Donato; and in order to deliver him from this torment, he
accepted the farm (for on this Donato insisted), and assigned him an
allowance of the same value or more from his own bank, to be paid in
cash, which was handed over to him every week in the due proportion
owing to him; whereby he was greatly contented. Thus, as a servant and
friend of the house of Medici, he lived happily and free from care for
the rest of his life. When he had reached the age of eighty-three,
however, he was so palsied that he could no longer work in any fashion,
and took to spending all his time in bed in a poor little house that he
had in the Via del Cocomero, near the Nunnery of S. Niccolò; where,
growing worse from day to day and wasting away little by little, he died
on December 13, 1466. He was buried in the Church of S. Lorenzo, near
the tomb of Cosimo, as he had himself directed, to the end that his dead
body might be near him, even as he had been ever near him in spirit when
alive.

His death caused great grief to his fellow-citizens, to the craftsmen,
and to all who knew him when living. Wherefore, in order to honour him
more after death than they had done in his life, they gave him most
honourable obsequies in the aforesaid church, and he was accompanied to
the grave by all the painters, architects, sculptors, and goldsmiths,
and by almost all the people of that city, which continued for a long
time to compose in his honour various kinds of verses in diverse
tongues, whereof it must suffice us to cite the few that are to be read
below.

But before I come to the epitaphs, it will not be amiss to relate the
following story of him as well. When he had fallen sick, and only a
little before his death, certain of his relatives went to visit him; and
after they had greeted him, as is customary, and condoled with him, they
said that it was his duty to leave them a farm that he had in the
district of Prato, although it was small and produced a very meagre
income; and they prayed him straitly to do it. Hearing this, Donato, who
showed something of the good in all that he did, said to them, "I cannot
satisfy you, my kinsmen, because I intend to leave it--as it appears to
me reasonable--to the peasant, who has always worked it and endured
great labour thereby, and not to you, who, without having bestowed upon
it anything more profitable than the thought of possessing it, expect me
to leave it to you because of this your visit! Go, and may God bless
you!" Of a truth such relatives, who have no love unconnected with
advantage or with the hope of it, should be ever treated in this
fashion. Sending therefore for a notary, he left the said farm to the
labourer who had always worked it, and who perchance had behaved better
to him in his need than those relatives had done. His art-possessions he
left to his pupils, namely, Bertoldo, a sculptor of Florence, who
imitated him closely enough, as may be seen from a very beautiful battle
between men on horseback, wrought in bronze, which is now in the
guardaroba of the Lord Duke Cosimo; Nanni d'Antonio di Banco, who died
before him; and Rossellino, Desiderio, and Vellano da Padova. In short,
it may be said that every man who has sought to do good work in relief
since the death of Donato, has been his disciple. He was resolute in
draughtsmanship, and he made his drawings with such mastery and boldness
that they have no equals, as may be seen in my book, wherein I have
figures drawn by his hand, both clothed and nude, animals that make all
who see them marvel, and other most beautiful things of that kind. His
portrait was made by Paolo Uccello, as it has been said in his Life. The
epitaphs are as follows:

   SCULTURA H.M. A FLORENTINIS FIERI VOLUIT DONATELLO, UTPOTE
   HOMINI, QUI EI, QUOD JAMDIU OPTIMIS ARTIFICIBUS MULTISQUE SÆCULIS
   TUM NOBILITATIS TUM NOMINIS ACQUISITUM FUERAT, INJURIAVE TEMPOR.
   PERDIDERAT IPSA, IPSE UNUS UNA VITA INFINITISQUE OPERIBUS CUMULATISS.
   RESTITUERIT: ET PATRIÆ BENEMERENTI HUJUS RESTITUTÆ
                 VIRTUTIS PALMAM REPORTARIT.

   EXCUDIT NEMO SPIRANTIA MOLLIUS ÆRA;
     VERA CANO; CERNES MARMORA VIVA LOQUI.
   GRÆCORUM SILEAT PRISCA ADMIRABILIS ÆTAS
     COMPEDIBUS STATUAS CONTINUISSE RHODON.
   NECTERE NAMQUE MAGIS FUERANT HÆC VINCULA DIGNA
         ISTIUS EGREGIAS ARTIFICIS STATUAS.

   QUANTO CON DOTTA MANO ALLA SCULTURA
     GIÀ FECER MOLTI, OR SOL DONATO HA FATTO;
     RENDUTO HA VITA A' MARMI, AFFETTO, ED ATTO;
   CHE PIÙ, SE NON PARLAR, PUÒ DAR NATURA?

The world remained so full of his works, that it may be affirmed right
truly that no craftsman ever worked more than he did. For, delighting in
every kind of work, he put his hand to anything, without considering
whether it was of little or of great value. Nevertheless it was
indispensable to sculpture, this vast activity of Donato in making
figures in every kind of relief, full, half, low, and the lowest;
because, whereas in the good times of the ancient Greeks and Romans it
was by means of many that it became perfect, he alone by the multitude
of his works brought it back to marvellous perfection in our own age.
Wherefore craftsmen should trace the greatness of this art rather to him
than to any man born in modern times, seeing that, besides rendering the
difficulties of the art easy, in the multitude of his works he combined
together invention, design, practice, judgment, and every other quality
that ever can or should be looked for in a divine genius. Donato was
very resolute and ready, executing all his works with consummate
facility, and he always accomplished much more than he had promised.

He left all his work to be completed by his pupil Bertoldo, and
particularly the bronze pulpits of S. Lorenzo, which were afterwards
finished in great part by him, and brought to the state in which they
are seen in the said church.

I will not forbear to say that the most learned and very reverend Don
Vincenzo Borghini, of whom mention has been made above with regard to
some other matter, has collected into a large book innumerable drawings
by excellent painters and sculptors, both ancient and modern; and on the
ornamental borders of two leaves opposite to each other, which contain
drawings by the hand of Donato and of Michelagnolo Buonarroti, he has
written, with much judgment, these two Greek epigrams; on Donato's,
"[Greek: ê Dônatos Bonarhrôtizei]," and on Michelagnolo's, "[Greek: ê
Bonarhrôtos Dônatizei]"; which mean in Latin, "Aut Donatus Bonarrotum
exprimit et refert; aut Bonarrotus Donatum," and in our own tongue,
"Either the spirit of Donato works in Buonarroto, or that of Buonarroto
began by working in Donato."


MICHELOZZO MICHELOZZI


LIFE OF MICHELOZZO MICHELOZZI

SCULPTOR AND ARCHITECT OF FLORENCE


If every man who lives in this world were to realize that he may have to
live when he is no longer able to work, there would not be so many
reduced to begging in their old age for that which they consumed without
any restraint in their youth, when their large and abundant gains,
blinding their true judgment, made them spend more than was necessary
and much more than was expedient. For, seeing how coldly a man is looked
upon who has fallen from wealth to poverty, every man should
strive--honestly, however, and maintaining the proper mean--to avoid
having to beg in his old age. And whosoever will act like
Michelozzo--who did not imitate his master Donato in this respect,
although he did in his virtues--will live honourably all the course of
his life, and will not be forced in his last years to go about miserably
hunting for the wherewithal to live.

Now Michelozzo applied himself in his youth to sculpture under
Donatello, and also to design; and although he realized their
difficulties, nevertheless he went on ever practising so diligently with
clay, with wax, and with marble, that he ever showed ability and great
talent in the works that he made afterwards. There was one art in which
he surpassed many and even his own self, for, after Brunellesco, he was
held to be the most methodical architect of his times, and the one who
was best able to arrange and contrive palaces, convents, and houses for
human habitation, and who designed them with the greatest judgment, as
will be told in the proper place. Of this man Donatello availed himself
for many years, because he was very well practised in working marble and
in the business of casting in bronze; of which we have proof in a tomb
in S. Giovanni at Florence (which was made by Donatello, as it has been
said, for Pope Giovanni Coscia), since the greater part was executed by
Michelozzo; and there we can see a very beautiful marble statue by his
hand, two braccia and a half in height, representing Faith (in company
with one of Hope and one of Charity made by Donatello, of the same
size), which does not suffer by comparison with the others. Moreover,
above the door of the sacristy and the Office of Works, opposite to S.
Giovanni, Michelozzo made a little S. John in full-relief, wrought with
diligence, which was much extolled.

Michelozzo was so intimate with Cosimo de' Medici that the latter,
recognizing his genius, caused him to make the model for the house and
palace at the corner of the Via Larga, beside S. Giovannino; for he
thought that the one made by Filippo di Ser Brunellesco, as it has been
said, was too sumptuous and magnificent, and more likely to stir up envy
among his fellow-citizens than to confer grandeur or adornment on the
city, or bring comfort to himself. Wherefore, being pleased with the
model that Michelozzo had made, he had the building brought to
completion under his direction in the manner that we see at the present
day, with all the beautiful and useful arrangements and graceful
adornments that are seen therein, which have majesty and grandeur in
their simplicity; and Michelozzo deserves all the greater praise in that
this was the first palace which was built in that city on modern lines,
and which was divided up into rooms both useful and most beautiful. The
cellars are excavated to more than half their depth underground, namely,
four braccia below, with three above for the sake of light; and there
are also wine-cellars and store-rooms. On the ground-floor there are two
courtyards with magnificent loggie, on which open saloons, chambers,
antechambers, studies, closets, stove-rooms, kitchens, wells, and
staircases both secret and public, all most convenient. On each floor
there are apartments with accommodation for a whole family, with all the
conveniences that are proper not only to a private citizen, such as
Cosimo then was, but even to the most splendid and most honourable of
Kings; wherefore in our own times Kings, Emperors, Popes, and all the
most illustrious Princes of Europe have been comfortably lodged there,
to the infinite credit both of the magnificence of Cosimo and of the
excellent ability of Michelozzo in architecture.

In the year 1433, when Cosimo was driven into exile, Michelozzo, who
loved him very greatly and was most faithful to him, accompanied him of
his own free will to Venice and insisted on remaining with him all the
time that he stayed there; and in that city, besides many designs and
models that he made for private dwellings and public buildings and
decorations for the friends of Cosimo and for many gentlemen, he built,
at the command and expense of Cosimo, the library of the Monastery of S.
Giorgio Maggiore, a seat of the Black Friars of S. Justina; and this was
not only finished with regard to walls, book-shelves, wood-work, and
other adornments, but was also filled with many books. Such was the
occupation and amusement of Cosimo during that exile, from which he was
recalled to his country in the year 1434; whereupon he returned almost
in triumph, and Michelozzo with him. Now, while Michelozzo was in
Florence, the Palazzo Pubblico della Signoria began to threaten to
collapse, for some columns in the courtyard were giving way, either
because there was too much weight pressing on them, or because their
foundations were weak and awry, or even perchance because they were made
of pieces badly joined and put together. Whatever may have been the
reason, the matter was put into the hands of Michelozzo, who accepted
the undertaking willingly, because he had provided against a similar
peril near S. Barnaba in Venice, in the following manner. A gentleman
had a house that was in danger of falling down, and he entrusted the
matter to Michelozzo; wherefore he--according to what Michelagnolo
Buonarroti once told me--caused a column to be made in secret, and
prepared a number of props; and hiding everything in a boat, into which
he entered together with some builders, in one night he propped up the
house and replaced the column. Michelozzo, therefore, emboldened by this
experience, averted the danger from the palace, doing honour both to
himself and to those by whose favour he had received such a charge; and
he refounded and rebuilt the columns in the manner wherein they stand
to-day. First he made a stout framework of props and thick beams
standing upright to support the centres of the arches, made of
nut-wood, and upholding the vaulting, so that this came to support
equally the weight that was previously borne by the columns; then,
little by little removing those that were made of pieces badly joined
together, he replaced them with others made of pieces and wrought with
diligence, in such a manner that the building did not suffer in any way
and has never moved a hair's breadth. And in order that his columns
might be known from the others, he made some of them at the corners with
eight sides, with capitals that have the foliage carved in the modern
fashion, and some round; and all are very easily distinguished from the
old columns that Arnolfo made formerly. Afterwards, by the advice of
Michelozzo, it was ordained by those who then governed the city that the
arches of those columns should be unburdened and relieved of the weight
of the walls that rested upon them; that the whole courtyard should be
rebuilt from the arches upwards, with a row of windows in modern
fashion, similar to those that he had made for Cosimo in the courtyard
of the Palace of the Medici; and that designs in rustic-work should be
carved on the walls, for the reception of those golden lilies that are
still seen there at the present day. All this Michelozzo did with great
promptitude; and on the second tier, directly above the windows of the
said courtyard, he made some round windows (so as to have them different
from the aforesaid windows), to give light to the rooms on that floor,
which are over those of the first floor, where there is now the Sala de'
Dugento. The third floor, where the Signori and the Gonfalonier lived,
he made more ornate, and on the side towards S. Piero Scheraggio he
arranged a series of apartments for the Signori, who had previously
slept all together in one and the same room. These apartments consisted
of eight for the Signori and a larger one for the Gonfalonier, and they
all opened on a corridor which had windows overlooking the courtyard.
Above this he made another series of commodious rooms for the household
of the Palace, in one of which, used to-day as the Treasury, there is a
portrait by the hand of Giotto of Charles, Duke of Calabria, son of King
Robert, kneeling before a Madonna. There, also, he made apartments for
the bailiffs, ushers, trumpeters, musicians, pipers, mace-bearers,
court-servants, and heralds, with all the other apartments that are
required in such a palace. On the upper part of the gallery, moreover,
he made a stone cornice that went right round the courtyard, and beside
it a water-cistern that was filled by the rains, to make some artificial
fountains play at certain times. Michelozzo also directed the
restoration of the chapel wherein Mass is heard, and beside it many
rooms, with very rich ceilings painted with golden lilies on a ground of
blue. He had other ceilings made both for the upper and the lower rooms
of the Palace, covering up all the old ceilings that had been made
before in the ancient manner. In short, he gave it all the perfection
that was demanded by so great a building; and he contrived to convey the
water from the wells right up to the highest floor, to which it could be
drawn up by means of a wheel more easily than was usual. One thing alone
the genius of Michelozzo could not remedy, namely, the public staircase,
because it was badly conceived from the beginning, badly situated,
awkwardly built, steep, and without lights, while from the first floor
upwards the steps were of wood. He laboured to such purpose, however,
that he made a flight of round steps at the entrance of the courtyard,
and a door with pilasters of hard-stone and most beautiful capitals
carved by his hand, besides a well-designed cornice with a double
architrave, in the frieze of which he placed all the arms of the
Commune. And what is more, he made the whole staircase of hard-stone up
to the floor where the Signori lived, fortifying it at the top and
half-way up with a portcullis at each point, in case of tumults; and at
the head of the staircase he made a door which was called the
"catena,"[23] beside which there was ever standing an usher, who opened
or closed it according as he was commanded by those in authority. He
strengthened the tower of the campanile, which had cracked by reason of
the weight of that part which stands out over space on corbels on the
side towards the Piazza, with very stout bands of iron. Finally, he
improved and restored that Palace so greatly, that he was therefore
commended by the whole city and made, besides other rewards, a member of
the College, which is one of the most honourable magistracies in
Florence. And if it should appear to anyone that I have perchance
spoken at greater length about this building than was needful, I deserve
to be excused, because--after having shown in the Life of Arnolfo, in
connection with its original erection, which was in the year 1298, that
it was built out of the square and wholly wanting in reasonable
proportion, with unequal columns in the courtyard, arches both large and
small, inconvenient stairs, and rooms awry and badly proportioned--it
was necessary for me to show also to what condition it was brought by
the intellect and judgment of Michelozzo; although even he did not
arrange it in such a manner that it could be inhabited comfortably,
without very great inconvenience and discomfort. Finally, when the Lord
Duke Cosimo came to occupy it in the year 1538, his Excellency began to
bring it into better form; but since those architects who served the
Duke for many years in that work were never able to grasp or to carry
out his conception, he determined to see whether he could effect the
restoration without spoiling the old part, in which there was no little
of the good; giving better order, convenience, and proportion, according
to the plan that he had in mind, to the awkward and inconvenient stairs
and apartments.

[Footnote 23: Chain.]

Sending to Rome, therefore, for Giorgio Vasari, painter and architect of
Arezzo, who was working for Pope Julius III, he commissioned him not
only to put in order the rooms that he had caused to be begun in the
upper part of the side opposite to the Corn Market, which were out of
the straight with regard to the ground-plan, but also to consider
whether the interior of the Palace could not, without spoiling the work
already done, be brought to such a form that it might be possible to go
all over it, from one part to another and from one apartment to another,
by means of staircases both secret and public, with an ascent as easy as
possible. Thereupon, while the said rooms, already begun, were being
adorned with gilded ceilings and scenes painted in oil, and with
pictures in fresco on the walls, and others were being wrought in
stucco, Giorgio took a tracing of the ground-plan right round the whole
of the Palace, both the new part and the old; and then, having arranged
with no small labour and study for the execution of all that he intended
to do, he began to bring it little by little into a good form, and to
unite, almost without spoiling any of the work already done, the
disconnected rooms, which previously varied in height even on the same
floor, some being high and others low. But in order that the Duke might
see the design of the whole, in the space of six months he had made a
well-proportioned wooden model of the whole of that pile, which has the
form and extent rather of a fortress than of a palace. According to this
model, which gained the approval of the Duke, the building was united
and many commodious rooms were made, as well as convenient staircases,
both public and secret, which give access to all the floors; and in this
manner a burden was removed from the halls, which were formerly like
public streets, for it had been impossible to ascend to the upper floors
without passing through them. The whole was magnificently adorned with
varied and diverse pictures, and finally the roof of the Great Hall was
raised twelve braccia above its former height; insomuch that if Arnolfo,
Michelozzo, and the others who laboured on the building from its first
foundation onwards, were to return to life, they would not recognize
it--nay, they would believe that it was not theirs but a new erection
and a different edifice.

[Illustration: PALAZZO RICCARDI

(_After_ Michelozzo Michelozzi. _Florence_)

_Alinari_]

But let us now return to Michelozzo; the Church of S. Giorgio had just
been given to the Friars of S. Domenico da Fiesole, but they only
remained there from about the middle of July to the end of January, for
Cosimo de' Medici and his brother Lorenzo obtained for them from Pope
Eugenius the Church and Convent of S. Marco, which was previously the
seat of Silvestrine Monks, to whom the said S. Giorgio was given in
exchange. And Cosimo and Lorenzo, being very devoted to religion and to
divine service and worship, ordained that the said Convent of S. Marco
should be rebuilt entirely anew after the design and model of
Michelozzo, and should be made very vast and magnificent, with all the
conveniences that the said friars could possibly desire. This work was
begun in the year 1437, and the first part to be built was that opening
out above the old refectory, opposite to the ducal stables, which Duke
Lorenzo de' Medici formerly caused to be built. In this place twenty
cells were built, the roof was put on, and the wooden furniture was made
for the refectory, the whole being finished in the manner wherein it
still stands to-day. But for some time the work was carried no further,
for they had to wait to see what would be the end of a law-suit that one
Maestro Stefano, General of the said Silvestrines, had brought against
the Friars of S. Marco with regard to that convent. This suit having
concluded in favour of the said Friars of S. Marco, the building was
once more continued. But since the principal chapel, which had been
built by Ser Pino Bonaccorsi, had afterwards come into the hands of a
lady of the Caponsacchi family, and from her to Mariotto Banchi, some
law-suit was fought out over this, and Mariotto, having upheld his
rights and having taken the said chapel from Agnolo della Casa, to whom
the said Silvestrines had given or sold it, presented it to Cosimo de'
Medici, who gave Mariotto 500 crowns in return for it. Later, after
Cosimo had likewise bought from the Company of the Spirito Santo the
site where the choir now stands, the chapel, the tribune, and the choir
were built under the direction of Michelozzo, and completely furnished
in the year 1439. Afterwards the library was made, eighty braccia in
length and eighteen in breadth, and vaulted both above and below, with
sixty-four shelves of cypress wood filled with most beautiful books.
After this the dormitory was finished, being brought to a square shape;
and finally the cloister was completed, together with all the truly
commodious apartments of that convent, which is believed to be the best
designed, the most beautiful, and the most commodious that there is in
Italy, thanks to the talent and industry of Michelozzo, who delivered it
completely finished in the year 1452. It is said that Cosimo spent
36,000 ducats on this fabric, and that while it was building he gave the
monks 366 ducats every year for their maintenance. Of the construction
and consecration of this holy place we read in an inscription on marble
over the door that leads into the sacristy, in the following words:

   CUM HOC TEMPLUM MARCO EVANGELISTÆ DICATUM MAGNIFICIS SUMPTIBUS
   CL. V. COSMI MEDICIS TANDEM ABSOLUTUM ESSET, EUGENIUS QUARTUS
   ROMANUS PONTIFEX MAXIMA CARDINALIUM, ARCHIEPISCOPORUM, EPISCOPORUM,
   ALIORUMQUE SACERDOTUM FREQUENTIA COMITATUS, ID CELEBERRIMO
   EPIPHANIÆ DIE, SOLEMNI MORE SERVATO, CONSECRAVIT. TUM
   ETIAM QUOTANNIS OMNIBUS, QUI EODEM DIE FESTO ANNUAS STATASQUE
   CONSECRATIONIS CEREMONIAS CASTE PIEQUE CELEBRARINT VISERINTVE,
   TEMPORIS LUENDIS PECCATIS SUIS DEBITI SEPTEM ANNOS TOTIDEMQUE
     QUADRAGESIMAS APOSTOLICA REMISIT AUCTORITATE, A. MCCCCXLII.

In like manner, Cosimo erected from the design of Michelozzo the
noviciate of S. Croce in Florence, with the chapel of the same, and the
entrance that leads from the church to the sacristy, to the said
noviciate, and to the staircase of the dormitory. These works are not
inferior in beauty, convenience, and adornment to any building
whatsoever of all those which the truly magnificent Cosimo de' Medici
caused to be erected, or which Michelozzo carried into execution; and
besides other parts, the door that leads from the church to the said
places, which he made of grey-stone, was much extolled in those times by
reason of its novelty and of its beautifully made frontal, for it was
then very little the custom to imitate the good manner of antique work,
as this door does. Cosimo de' Medici also built, with the advice and
design of Michelozzo, the Palace of Cafaggiuolo in Mugello, giving it
the form of a fortress with ditches round it; and he laid out farms,
roads, gardens, fountains with groves round them, fowling-places, and
other appurtenances of a villa, all very splendid; and at a distance of
two miles from the said palace, in a place called the Bosco a' Frati,
with the advice of Michelozzo, he carried out the building of a convent
for the Frati de' Zoccoli of the Order of S. Francis, which is something
very beautiful. At Trebbio, likewise, he made many other improvements
which are still to be seen; and at a distance of two miles from
Florence, also, he built the palatial Villa of Careggi, which was very
rich and magnificent; and thither Michelozzo brought the water for the
fountain that is seen there at the present day. For Giovanni, son of
Cosimo de' Medici, the same master built another magnificent and noble
palace at Fiesole, sinking the foundations for the lower part in the
brow of the hill, at great expense but not without great advantage, for
in that lower part he made vaults, cellars, stables, vat-stores, and
many other beautiful and commodious offices; and above, besides the
chambers, halls, and other ordinary rooms, he made some for books and
certain others for music. In short, Michelozzo showed in this building
how great was his skill in architecture, for, besides what has been
mentioned, it was constructed in such a manner that, although it stands
on that hill, it has never moved a hair's breadth. This palace finished,
he built above it, almost on the summit of the hill, the Church and
Convent of the Friars of S. Girolamo, at the expense of the same man.
The same Michelozzo made the design and model which Cosimo sent to
Jerusalem for the hospice that he caused to be erected there, for the
pilgrims who visit the Sepulchre of Christ. He also sent the design for
six windows in the façade of S. Pietro in Rome, which were made there
afterwards with the arms of Cosimo de' Medici; but three of them were
removed in our own day and replaced by Pope Paul III with others bearing
the arms of the house of Farnese. After this, hearing that there was a
lack of water at S. Maria degli Angeli in Assisi, to the very great
discomfort of the people who go there every year on August 1 to receive
Absolution, Cosimo sent thither Michelozzo, who brought the water of a
spring, which rose half-way up the brow of the hill, to the fountain,
which he covered with a very rich and lovely loggia resting on some
columns made of separate pieces and bearing the arms of Cosimo. Within
the convent, also at the commission of Cosimo, he made many useful
improvements for the friars; and these the magnificent Lorenzo de'
Medici afterwards renewed with more adornment and at greater expense,
besides presenting to that Madonna the image of her in wax which is
still to be seen there. Cosimo also caused the road that leads from the
said Madonna degli Angeli to the city to be paved with bricks; nor did
Michelozzo take his leave of those parts before he had made the design
for the old Citadel of Perugia. Having finally returned to Florence, he
built a house on the Canto de' Tornaquinci for Giovanni Tornabuoni,
similar in almost every way to the palace that he had made for Cosimo,
save that the façade is not in rustic-work and has no cornices above,
but is quite plain.

After the death of Cosimo, by whom Michelozzo had been loved as much as
a dear friend can be loved, his son Piero caused him to build the marble
Chapel of the Crucifix in S. Miniato sul Monte; and in the half-circle
of the arch at the back of the said chapel Michelozzo carved in
low-relief a Falcon with the Diamond (the emblem of Cosimo, father of
Piero), which was truly a very beautiful work. After these things, the
same Piero de' Medici, intending to build the Chapel of the Nunziata, in
the Church of the Servi, entirely of marble, besought Michelozzo, now an
old man, to give him his advice in the matter, both because he greatly
admired his talents and because he knew how faithful a friend and
servant he had been to his father Cosimo. This Michelozzo did, and the
charge of constructing it was given to Pagno di Lapo Partigiani, a
sculptor of Fiesole, who, as one who wished to include many things in a
small space, showed many ideas in this work. This chapel is supported by
four marble columns about nine braccia high, made with double flutings
in the Corinthian manner, with the bases and capitals variously carved
and with double members. On the columns rest the architrave, frieze, and
cornice, likewise with double members and carvings and wrought with
various things of fancy, and particularly with foliage and the emblems
and arms of the Medici. Between these and other cornices made for
another range of lights, there is a large inscription, very beautifully
carved in marble. Below, between the four columns, forming the ceiling
of the chapel, there is a coffer-work canopy of marble all carved, full
of enamels fired in a furnace and of various fanciful designs in mosaic
wrought with gold colour and precious stones. The surface of the
pavement is full of porphyry, serpentine, variegated marbles, and other
very rare stones, put together and distributed with beautiful design.
The said chapel is enclosed by a grille made of bronze ropes, with
candelabra above fixed into an ornament of marble, which makes a very
beautiful finish to the bronze and to the candelabra; and the door which
closes the chapel in front is likewise of bronze and very well
contrived. Piero left orders that the chapel should be lighted all round
by thirty silver lamps, and this was done. Now, as these were ruined
during the siege, the Lord Duke gave orders many years ago that new ones
should be made, and the greater part of them are already finished, while
the work still goes on; but in spite of this there has never been a
moment when there has not been that full number of lamps burning,
according to the instructions of Piero, although, from the time when
they were destroyed, they have not been of silver. To these adornments
Pagno added a very large lily of copper, issuing from a vase which rests
on the corner of the gilt and painted cornice of wood which holds the
lamps; but this cornice does not support so great a weight by itself,
for the whole is sustained by two branches of the lily, which are of
iron painted green, and are fixed with lead into the corner of the
marble cornice, holding those that are of copper suspended in the air.
This work was truly made with judgment and invention; wherefore it is
worthy of being much extolled as something beautiful and bizarre. Beside
this chapel, he made another on the side towards the cloister, which
serves as a choir for the friars, with windows which take their light
from the court and give it both to the said chapel and also (since they
stand opposite to two similar windows) to the room containing the little
organ, which is by the side of the marble chapel. On the front of this
choir there is a large press, in which the silver vessels of the
Nunziata are kept; and on all these ornaments and throughout the whole
are the arms and emblem of the Medici. Without the Chapel of the
Nunziata and opposite to it, the same man made a large chandelier of
bronze, five braccia in height, as well as the marble holy-water font at
the entrance of the church, and a S. John in the centre, which is a very
beautiful work. Above the counter where the friars sell the candles,
moreover, he made a half-length Madonna of marble with the Child in her
arms, in half-relief, of the size of life and very devout; and a similar
work in the Office of the Wardens of Works of S. Maria del Fiore.

Pagno also wrought some figures in S. Miniato al Tedesco in company with
his master Donato, while a youth; and he made a tomb of marble in the
Church of S. Martino in Lucca, opposite to the Chapel of the Sacrament,
for Messer Piero di Nocera, who is portrayed there from nature. Filarete
relates in the twenty-fifth book of his work that Francesco Sforza,
fourth Duke of Milan, presented a very beautiful palace in Milan to the
Magnificent Cosimo de' Medici, and that Cosimo, in order to show the
Duke how pleased he was with such a gift, not only adorned it richly
with marbles and with carved wood-work, but also enlarged it under the
direction of Michelozzo, making it eighty-seven braccia and a half,
whereas it had previously been only eighty-four braccia. Besides this,
he had many pictures painted there, particularly the stories of the life
of the Emperor Trajan in a loggia, wherein, among certain decorations,
he caused Francesco Sforza himself to be portrayed, with the Lady
Bianca, his consort, Duchess of Milan, and also their children, with
many other noblemen and great persons, and likewise the portraits of
eight Emperors; and to these portraits Michelozzo added that of Cosimo,
made by his own hand. Throughout all the apartments he placed the arms
of Cosimo in diverse fashions, with his emblem of the Falcon and
Diamond. The said pictures were all by the hand of Vincenzio di Zoppa, a
painter of no small repute at that time and in that country.

It is recorded that the money that Cosimo spent in the restoration of
this palace was paid by Pigello Portinari, a citizen of Florence, who
then directed the bank and the accounts of Cosimo in Milan and lived in
the said palace. There are some works in marble and bronze by the hand
of Michelozzo in Genoa, and many others in other places, which are all
known by the manner; but what we have already said about him must
suffice. He died at the age of sixty-eight, and he was buried in his own
tomb in S. Marco at Florence. His portrait, by the hand of Fra Giovanni,
is in the Sacristy of S. Trinita, in the figure of an old man with a cap
on his head, representing Nicodemus, who is taking Christ down from the
Cross.


INDEX


INDEX OF NAMES OF THE CRAFTSMEN MENTIONED IN VOLUME II


   Agnolo (of Siena), 81, 94, 95

   Agnolo Gaddi, 15, 25

   Agostino (of Siena), 81, 94, 95

   Agostino della Robbia, 123-125

   Alberti, Leon Batista, 227

   Albertinelli, Mariotto, 190

   Alessandro Filipepi (Sandro Botticelli, or Sandro di Botticello), 190

   Alesso Baldovinetti, 190

   Alonso Spagnuolo, 190

   Alvaro di Piero, 64

   Ammanati, Bartolommeo, 228

   Andrea dal Castagno (called Andrea degli Impiccati), 190

   Andrea del Sarto, 190

   Andrea della Robbia, 125-127, 175

   Andrea di Cione Orcagna, 91

   Andrea Mantegna, 138

   Andrea Pisano, 50, 81, 83, 91, 93, 120, 145, 147, 154, 160, 200

   Andrea Verrocchio, 190, 243, 248

   Angeli, Don Lorenzo degli (Don Lorenzo Monaco), _Life_, 55-58. 171

   Angelico, Fra (Fra Giovanni da Fiesole), 190, 271

   Antignano, Segna d', 26

   Antonio da Verzelli, 218

   Antonio Filarete, 159, 270

   Antonio Fiorentino, 236

   Antonio (or Vittore) Pisanello, 187

   Antonio Pollaiuolo, 159

   Antonio Rossellino, 253

   Antonio Viniziano, _Life_, 15-20. 37, 43, 83

   Antonio Vite, 45, 58

   Apelles, 80, 120, 191

   Arca, Niccolò dell' (Niccolò Bolognese), 97

   Aretino, Niccolò (Niccolò d'Arezzo, Niccolò di Piero Lamberti), _Life_,
     101-104. 145, 146, 159, 200

   Aretino, Spinello, _Life_, 29-39. 25, 26, 29-39, 67, 83, 179

   Arezzo, Niccolò d' (Niccolò Aretino, Niccolò di Piero Lamberti), _Life_,
     101-104. 145, 146, 159, 200

   Arnolfo di Lapo (Arnolfo Lapo, Arnolfo Lapi), 80, 202, 203, 262,
     264, 265

   Asciano, Giovanni da, 5


   Baccio Bandinelli, 127, 190

   Baccio della Porta (Fra Bartolommeo di San Marco), 190, 249

   Baldovinetti, Alesso, 190

   Banco, Nanni d'Antonio di, _Life_, 113-115. 253

   Bandinelli, Baccio, 127, 190

   Bartoli, Domenico, 63, 64

   Bartoli, Taddeo, _Life_, 61-64

   Bartolo di Maestro Fredi, 61

   Bartolommeo Ammanati, 228

   Bartolommeo di San Marco, Fra (called Baccio della Porta), 190, 249

   Bartoluccio Ghiberti, 144-146, 155, 161, 162

   Beccafumi, Domenico, 96

   Berna, _Life_, 3-5

   Bernardetto di Mona Papera, 248

   Bernardo Daddi, 25, 26

   Bertoldo, 249, 253, 254

   Bicci, Lorenzo di, _Life_, 67-73

   Bicci di Lorenzo, 72

   Bologna, Galante da, 51

   Bolognese, Niccolò (called Niccolò dell'Arca), 97

   Bonaccorso Ghiberti, 160

   Botticelli, Sandro (Sandro di Botticello, or Alessandro Filipepi), 190

   Bronzi, Simone de' (Simone da Colle), 145, 146, 200

   Brunelleschi, Filippo (Filippo di Ser Brunellesco), _Life_, 195-236.
     84-86, 93, 95, 124, 139, 143-147, 150, 159, 161, 183, 185, 188, 190,
     195-236, 240-243, 259, 260

   Buffalmacco, Buonamico, 68

   Buggiano, Il, 235

   Bugiardini, Giuliano, 138

   Buonaiuti, Corsino, 26

   Buonarroti, Michelagnolo, 159, 162, 187, 190, 191, 221, 255, 261

   Buschetto, 80

   Calamis, 80

   Campagnola, Girolamo, 138

   Canachus, 80

   Casentino, Jacopo di, _Life_, 23-26. 29, 33, 83

   Castagno, Andrea dal (called Andrea degli Impiccati), 190

   Castel della Pieve, Pietro da (Pietro Vannucci, or Pietro Perugino), 190

   Cenni, Pasquino, 26

   Cennini, Cennino di Drea, 109

   Cimabue, Giovanni, 25, 82, 161, 202

   Cini, Simone, 36

   Cinuzzi, Vanni, 26

   Colle, Simone da (called Simone de' Bronzi), 145, 146, 200

   Consiglio Gherardi, 26

   Corsino Buonaiuti, 26

   Cosmè, 104

   Credi, Lorenzo di, 190

   Cremona, Geremia da, 236

   Cristofano, 104


   Daddi, Bernardo, 25, 26

   Dalmasi, Lippo, 51

   Dello, _Life_, 107-110. 136

   Desiderio da Settignano, 253

   Domenico Bartoli, 63, 64

   Domenico Beccafumi, 96

   Domenico dal Lago di Lugano, 236

   Domenico Ghirlandajo, 190

   Domenico Pucci, 26

   Don Jacopo, 57

   Don Lorenzo Monaco (Don Lorenzo degli Angeli), _Life_, 55-58. 171

   Don Silvestro, 57

   Donato (Donatello), _Life_, 239-255. 72, 86, 93, 95, 101, 109,
    113-115, 120, 121, 123, 126, 132, 133, 138-140, 143-147, 151,
    161, 183, 185, 188, 197, 199-204, 213, 225, 239-255, 259, 260,
    270

   Duccio, _Life_, 9-11


   Erion, 80


   Fabriano, Gentile da, 187

   Fancelli, Luca, 227

   Fiesole, Fra Giovanni da (called Fra Angelico), 190, 271

   Filarete, Antonio, 159, 270

   Filipepi, Alessandro (Sandro Botticelli, or Sandro di Botticello), 190

   Filippo Brunelleschi (Filippo di Ser Brunellesco), _Life_, 195-236.
    84-86, 93, 95, 124, 139, 143-147, 150, 159, 161, 183, 185, 188, 190,
    195-236, 240-243, 259, 260

   Filippo Lippi, Fra, 187, 190

   Filippo Lippi (called Filippino), 189, 190

   Fiorentino, Antonio, 236

   Fiorentino, Francesco, 58

   Fiorentino, Niccolò, 236

   Fonte, Jacopo della (Jacopo della Quercia), _Life_, 91-97. 86, 87,
     91-97, 145, 146, 151, 200

   Forzore di Spinello, 39, 177

   Fra Angelico (Fra Giovanni da Fiesole), 190, 271

   Fra Bartolommeo di San Marco (called Baccio della Porta), 190, 249

   Fra Filippo Lippi, 187, 190

   Fra Giovanni da Fiesole (called Fra Angelico), 190, 271

   Francesco della Luna, 223, 232

   Francesco di Giorgio, 10, 85

   Francesco di Valdambrina, 145, 146, 200

   Francesco Fiorentino, 58

   Francesco Granacci (Il Granaccio), 190

   Franciabigio, 190

   Fredi, Bartolo di Maestro, 61


   Gabriello Saracini, 36

   Gaddi, Agnolo, 15, 25

   Gaddi, Taddeo, 23, 56, 83, 199, 240

   Galante da Bologna, 51

   Galasso Galassi, 104

   Gentile da Fabriano, 187

   Geremia da Cremona, 236

   Gherardi, Consiglio, 26

   Gherardo, Starnina, _Life_, 43-46. 20, 43-46, 58, 83, 165

   Ghiberti, Bartoluccio, 144-146, 155, 161, 162

   Ghiberti, Bonaccorso, 160

   Ghiberti, Lorenzo (Lorenzo di Cione Ghiberti, or Lorenzo di Bartoluccio
     Ghiberti), _Life_, 143-162. 4, 9, 86, 95, 143-162, 165, 171, 183, 200,
     201, 204, 213-218, 234

   Ghiberti, Vittorio, 160, 162

   Ghirlandajo, Domenico, 190

   Ghirlandajo, Ridolfo, 185, 190

   Giorgio, Francesco di, 10, 85

   Giorgio Vasari, see Vasari

   Giottino (Tommaso or Maso), 83

   Giotto, 23, 30, 35, 37, 73, 80-83, 86, 120, 131, 139, 147, 150, 161,
     162, 166, 171, 195, 202, 250, 262


   Jacopo (Jacopo Avanzi), 104

   Jacopo, Don, 57

   Jacopo da Pontormo, 190

   Jacopo della Quercia (or della Fonte), _Life_, 91-97. 86, 87, 91-97,
     145, 146, 151, 200

   Jacopo di Casentino, _Life_, 23-26. 29, 33, 83

   Jacopo Sansovino, 127


   Lamberti, Niccolò di Piero (Niccolò d'Arezzo, Niccolò Aretino), _Life_,
     101-104. 145, 146, 159, 200

   Lapo, Arnolfo di (Arnolfo Lapo, Arnolfo Lapi), 80, 202, 203, 262, 264,
     265

   Lapo Gucci, 26

   Laurati, Pietro (called Lorenzetti), 18

   Leon Batista Alberti, 227

   Leonardo da Vinci, 190

   Leonardo di Ser Giovanni, 119

   Lippi, Filippo (called Filippino), 189, 190

   Lippi, Fra Filippo, 187, 190

   Lippo, _Life_, 49-51. 83

   Lippo Dalmasi, 51

   Lorenzetti, Pietro (Pietro Laurati), 18

   Lorenzo, Bicci di, 72

   Lorenzo, Neri di, 72, 73

   Lorenzo di Bicci, _Life_, 67-73

   Lorenzo di Credi, 190

   Lorenzo Ghiberti (Lorenzo di Cione Ghiberti, or Lorenzo di Bartoluccio
     Ghiberti), _Life_, 143-162. 4, 9, 86, 95, 143-162, 165, 171, 183, 200,
     201, 204, 213-218, 234

   Lorenzo Monaco, Don (Don Lorenzo degli Angeli), _Life_, 55-58. 171

   Lorenzo Vecchietto, 151

   Luca della Robbia, _Life_, 119-128. 175, 213

   Luca della Robbia (the younger), 126, 127

   Luca di Tomè, 5

   Luca Fancelli, 227

   Lugano, Domenico dal Lago di, 236

   Luna, Francesco della, 223, 232


   Mantegna, Andrea, 138

   Marco da Montepulciano, 72, 179

   Mariotto Albertinelli, 190

   Martini, Simone (Memmi or Sanese), 16, 37, 83

   Masaccio, _Life_, 183-191. 86, 87, 133, 183-191, 198

   Maso (or Tommaso, called Giottino), 83

   Masolino da Panicale, _Life_, 165-167. 46, 159, 165-167, 171, 185,
     187-189

   Matteo (of Lucca), 96, 97

   Memmi, Simone (Martini or Sanese), 16, 37, 83

   Michelagnolo Buonarroti, 159, 162, 187, 190, 191, 221, 255, 261

   Michelozzo Michelozzi, _Life_, 259-271. 241

   Milano, Giovanni da, 23

   Moccio, 4, 10, 11, 101

   Mona Papera, Bernardetto di, 248

   Monaco, Don Lorenzo (Don Lorenzo degli Angeli), _Life_, 55-58. 171

   Montepulciano, Marco da, 72, 179

   Myron, 80


   Nanni d'Antonio di Banco, _Life_, 113-115. 253

   Neri di Lorenzo, 72, 73

   Niccola Pisano, 97

   Niccolò Aretino (Niccolò d'Arezzo, Niccolò di Piero Lamberti), _Life_,
     101-104. 145, 146, 159, 200

   Niccolò Bolognese (called Niccolò dell'Arca), 97

   Niccolò Fiorentino, 236

   Nicomachus, 80

   Nino Pisano, 81, 83

   Nunziata, Toto del, 190


   Orcagna, Andrea di Cione, 91

   Ottaviano della Robbia, 123-125


   Padova, Vellano da, 253

   Pagno di Lapo Partigiani, 269, 270

   Panicale, Masolino da, _Life_, 165-167. 46, 159, 165-167, 171,
     185, 187-189

   Paolo Schiavo, 166

   Paolo Uccello, _Life_, 131-140. 20, 110, 131-140, 159, 183, 184, 253

   Parri Spinelli, _Life_, 171-179. 36, 39, 83, 125, 159, 171-179

   Partigiani, Pagno di Lapo, 269, 270

   Pasquino Cenni, 26

   Perino (or Pierino) del Vaga, 190

   Perugino, Pietro (Pietro Vannucci, or Pietro da Castel della Pieve), 190

   Pheidias, 120

   Piero, Alvaro di, 64

   Pietro Laurati (called Lorenzetti), 18

   Pietro Perugino (Pietro Vannucci, or Pietro da Castel della Pieve), 190

   Pisanello (Vittore or Antonio), 187

   Pisano, Andrea, 50, 81, 83, 91, 93, 120, 145, 147, 154, 160, 200

   Pisano, Niccola, 97

   Pisano, Nino, 81, 83

   Polycletus, 80, 160

   Polygnotus, 80

   Pollaiuolo, Antonio, 159

   Pontormo, Jacopo da, 190

   Porta, Baccio della (Fra Bartolommeo di San Marco), 190, 249

   Protogenes, 80

   Pucci, Domenico, 26


   Quercia, Jacopo della (or della Fonte), _Life_, 91-97. 86, 87, 91-97,
     145, 146, 151, 200


   Raffaello Sanzio (Raffaello da Urbino), 126, 190

   Ridolfo Ghirlandajo, 185, 190

   Robbia, Agostino della, 123-125

   Robbia, Andrea della, 125-127, 175

   Robbia, Giovanni della, 126

   Robbia, Girolamo della, 126, 127

   Robbia, Luca della, _Life_, 119-128. 175, 213

   Robbia, Luca della (the younger), 126, 127

   Robbia, Ottaviano della, 123-125

   Rossellino, Antonio, 253

   Rosso, Il, 190


   San Marco, Fra Bartolommeo di (called Baccio della Porta), 190, 249

   Sandro Botticelli (Sandro di Botticello, or Alessandro Filipepi), 190

   Sanese, Simone (Martini or Memmi), 16, 37, 83

   Sanese, Ugolino (Ugolino da Siena,) 62

   Sansovino, Jacopo, 127

   Sanzio, Raffaello (Raffaello da Urbino), 126, 190

   Saracini, Gabriello, 36

   Sarto, Andrea del, 190

   Schiavo, Paolo, 166

   Segna d'Antignano, 26

   Ser Giovanni, Leonardo di, 119

   Settignano, Desiderio da, 253

   Siena, Ugolino da (Ugolino Sanese), 62

   Silvestro, Don, 57

   Simone, 104

   Simone (brother of Donatello), 251

   Simone (pupil of Filippo Brunelleschi), 236

   Simone Cini, 36

   Simone da Colle (called Simone de' Bronzi), 145, 146, 200

   Spagnuolo, Alonso, 190

   Spinelli, Parri, _Life_, 171-179. 36, 39, 83, 125, 159, 171-179

   Spinello, Forzore di, 39, 177

   Spinello Aretino, _Life_, 29-39. 25, 26, 29-39, 67, 83, 179

   Starnina, Gherardo, _Life_, 43-46. 20, 43-46, 58, 83, 165

   Stefano, 83


   Taddeo Bartoli, _Life_, 61-64

   Taddeo Gaddi, 23, 56, 83, 199, 240

   Timanthes, 80

   Tomè, Luca di, 5

   Tommaso (or Maso, called Giottino), 83

   Toto del Nunziata, 190


   Uccello, Paolo, _Life_, 131-140. 20, 110, 131-140, 159, 183, 184, 253

   Ugolino Sanese (Ugolino da Siena), 62

   Urbino, Raffaello da (Raffaello Sanzio), 126, 190


   Vaga, Perino (or Pierino) del, 190

   Valdambrina, Francesco di, 145, 146, 200

   Vanni Cinuzzi, 26

   Vannucci, Pietro (Pietro Perugino, or Pietro da Castel della Pieve), 190

   Vasari, Giorgio--
     as art-collector, 5, 20, 26, 39, 46, 51, 58, 64, 96, 104, 109, 110,
       128, 135, 139, 162, 178, 179, 227, 253
     as author, 3, 5, 10, 31, 55, 57, 71-73, 77-87, 94-96, 104, 113, 119,
       125-127, 136, 138, 139, 147, 160-162, 165, 166, 172, 178, 184, 187,
       188, 190, 202, 208, 228, 229, 234, 250, 252-254, 263, 264
     as painter, 32, 39
     as architect, 173, 233, 264, 265

   Vecchietto, Lorenzo, 151

   Vellano da Padova, 253

   Verrocchio, Andrea, 190, 243, 248

   Verzelli, Antonio da, 218

   Vincenzio di Zoppa, 271

   Vinci, Leonardo da, 190

   Viniziano, Antonio, _Life_, 15-20. 37, 43, 83

   Vite, Antonio, 45, 58

   Vittorio Ghiberti, 160, 162

   Vittore (or Antonio) Pisanello, 187


   Zeuxis, 80

   Zoppa, Vincenzio di, 271


END OF VOL. II.




PRINTED UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF CHAS. T. JACOBI OF THE CHISWICK PRESS,
LONDON. THE COLOURED REPRODUCTIONS ENGRAVED AND PRINTED BY HENRY STONE
AND SON, LTD., BANBURY