"Younger Sir," I said. "Pup and dog, I've known you twenty years;
heard most of your speeches in that time; honestly declare that for
lightness of touch, swiftness of attack, wariness of defence, not to
speak of eloquence, I've never heard you excel some of your speeches
this Session."

"Well, well, TOBY," said Mr. G., blushing in fashion never learned by
youth of to-day, "that's due to your too friendly way of looking at
things. What I was about to say is, that ever since I entered public
life I have always known a CAVENDISH to the fore. Ministries may rise
and fall; the CAVENDISHES remain. Curious thing is they have not--at
least in recent times--personally a passion for politics, as PITT had,
or such as, in some degree, influences me. They would, if they had
their own way, be out of it.

[Illustration: THE CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEE'S HOLIDAY DREAM.]

But the CAVENDISHES have had their place in English public life
throughout the Century, and, it being their duty to fill it, they fill
it. Young VICTOR'S speech on Friday night carried me back over space
of thirty-four years. I remember another CAVENDISH coming out. He
moved resolution which defeated DERBY'S Government in 1859. I remember
the difficulty we had in bringing him up to the scratch. It was BRIGHT
who finally succeeded. BRIGHT always had great opinion of HARTINGTON'S
ability, a view, as we have seen, amply justified. A great deal has
happened since 1859, and now here's another CAVENDISH moving another
Amendment, and, oddly enough"--here Mr. G.'s face wrinkled into smile
of delighted humour--"it's ME who would be turned out of office if the
Amendment were carried."

[Illustration: Victor, or Vig-Tory-ish, Cavendish.

In the Spring Unionist Time of his Youth.]

Being thus in melting mood, Mr. G. suddenly turned upon inoffensive
JESSE COLLINGS, who had been saying a few words, and almost literally
rent him into, fragments. Scarcely anything left of him but benevolent
though feeble smile.

_Business Done._--Very little in Committee on Home-Rule Bill.

_Tuesday Night._--AMBROSE, Q.C., roused at last. House known him for
eight years; only to-night learned that it has been cherishing upon
its bosom a sleeping volcano. Following fortunes of Conservative
leaders, AMBROSE has crossed and re-crossed floor, always taking
up seat about centre of Bench immediately behind PRINCE ARTHUR;
has occasionally risen thence and offered a few observations.
Characteristic of him that he was born in a Cathedral town; is a
Bencher of the Middle Temple.

  Persuasion tips his tongue whene'er he'll talk,
  And he has Chambers near the King's Bench Walk.

These things we knew; but not till to-night came discovery how
persuasive AMBROSE can be.

It was the Tenth Clause of the Home-Rule Bill that roused the
(attorney's) devil in him. Fact that Clause II. was under discussion,
and consequently out of order to debate Clause X., an incident of
no consequence, except that it indirectly supplied incentive to his
passionate eloquence, and led to disclosure of the true AMBROSE. When
he approached Clause X., cries of "Order! Order!" interrupted. The
Chairman recalled him to consideration of Clause II. He came back,
said a few words on amendment, then was off again at Clause X.,
pursued by howls. Had got a start, and kept it through some moments of
thunderous excitement. Waved his arms, thumped his papers; shouted
at top of voice; House still howling; Chairman on feet ineffectually
protesting. "Glad to see the SOLICITOR-GENTLEMAN in his place," he
observed, in one of the temporary pauses, (RIGBY usually alluded to as
the SOLICITOR-GENERAL, but AMBROSE, once started in new character, was
lavish in originality.) "Need I go further?" he asked, a few moments
later.