 It is
therefore wrongfully that that party is the object of the curses
lavished upon it." This is plain speaking, indeed,--the Brazilian
government being one of the strongest monarchies in the world, and
deriving its strength from the fact that it seeks the good of its
subjects. The blindest republican who ever dreamed it was in the power
of institutions to "cause or cure" the ills of humanity must admit,
that, if Bourbon rule in Mexico could have produced results similar to
those which have proceeded from Braganza rule in Brazil, it would have
been the best fortune that the former country could have known, had Don
Carlos or Don Francisco de Paula been allowed to wear the imperial crown
which was set up in 1822. With less ability than Iturbide, either of
those princes would have made a better monarch than that adventurer. It
is not so much intellect as influence that makes a sovereign useful, the
man being of far less consequence than the institution. Even the case of
Napoleon I. affords no exception to this rule; for his dynasty and his
empire fell with him, because they lacked the stability which comes from
prescription alone. Had Marlborough and Eugene penetrated to Paris, as
did Wellington and Blücher a century later, they never would have
thought of subverting the Bourbon line; but the Bonaparte line was cut
off as of course when its chief was defeated. The first king may have
been a fortunate soldier only, but it requires several generations of
royalty to give power to a reigning house, as in old times it required
several descents to give to a man the flavor of genuine nobility. If it
be objected to this, that it is an admission of the power which is
claimed for flunkeyism, we can only meet the charge by saying that there
is much of the flunkey in man, and that whoso shall endeavor to
construct a government without recognizing a truth which is universal,
though not great, will find that his structure can better be compared to
the Syrian flower than to the Syrian cedar. The age of Model Republics
has passed away even from dreams.

We have called the party in Mexico which represents a certain fixed
principle the clerical party; but we have done so more for the sake of
convenience, and from deference to ordinary usage, than because the
words accurately describe the Mexican reactionists. Conservative party
would, perhaps, be the better name; and the word _conservative_ would
not be any more out of place in such a connection, or more perverted
from its just meaning, than it is in England and the United States. The
clergy form, as it were, the core of this party, and give to it a shape
and consistency it could not have without their alliance. Yet, if we
can believe the Mexican already quoted, and who is apparently well
acquainted with the subject on which he has sought to enlighten the
English mind, the party that is opposed to the Liberals is quite as much
in favor of freedom as are the latter, and is utterly hostile to either
religious or political despotism. After objecting to the course of those
Mexicans who found a political pattern in the United States, and showing
the evils that have followed from their awkward imitation, he says,--"No
wonder, then, that some men, actuated by the love of their country,
convinced of the danger to Mexican nationality from such a state of
things, seeing clearly through all these American intrigues, and
determined to oppose them by all the means in their power, should have
formed long ago, and as soon as the first symptoms of anarchy and the
cause of them became apparent, the centre of a party, which, having
necessarily to combat the so-called 'Liberal party,' or, in other words,
the American army, is accused of being a retrograde, absolutist,
clerical party, bent on nothing but the reëstablishment of the
Inquisition and the 'worst of the worst times.' Nothing, however, is
less true. That party contains in its bosom the most enlightened and the
most respectable part of the community, men who have not as yet to learn
the advantages and benefits of civil and religious liberty, and who
would be happy indeed to see liberty established in their country; but
liberty under the law, rational and wise liberty, liberty compatible
with order and tranquillity, liberty, in a word, for good purposes,--not
that savage, licentious, and tyrannical liberty, the object of which is
anarchy, so well answering the private ends of its partisans, and, above
all, the iniquitous views of an ambitious neighbor.... For the present,
no doubt, their object is limited to obtain the triumph over their
enemies, who are the enemies of Mexico, and to put down anarchy, as the
first and most pressing want of the country, no matter under what form
of government or by what means. In pursuance of such an object, the
clergy naturally side with them; and hence, for those who are ignorant
of the bottom of things in Mexican affairs, the denomination given to
this party of 'Clerical party' supported by military despotism; whereas
the 'Anarchical party' is favored with the name of 'Liberal
Constitutional party.' It is, however, easy to see that those two
parties would be more exactly designated, the one as the _Mexican
Party_, the other as the _American Party_."

If this delineation of the Conservative party be a fair one,--as
probably it is, after making allowance for partisan coloring,--it is
easy to see, that, while the clergy are with it, they are not of it; and
also, that it would be involved in a quarrel with the priesthood in a
week after it should have succeeded in its contest with the Liberals.
Where, then, would be the restoration of order, of which this Mexican
writer has so much to say? The clergy of Mexico are too powerful to
become the tools of any political organization. They use politicians and
parties,--are not used by them. The Conservative party, therefore, is
not the coming party, either for the clergy or for Mexico. It answers
the clergy's purpose of making it a shield against the Liberals, whose
palms itch to be at the property of the Church; but it never could
become their sword; and it is a sword, and a sharp and pointed one,
firmly held, that the clergy desire, and must have, if their end is to
be achieved. The defensive is not and cannot be their policy. They must
rule or perish. Hence the victory of the Conservatives would be the
signal for the opening of a new warfare, and the clergy would seek to
found their power solidly on the bodies of the men whom they had used to
destroy the Liberals. They have pursued one course for thirty-eight
years, and will not be moved from it by any appeals that shall be made
to them in the name of order and of law, appeals to which they have been
utterly insensible when made by Liberals. Indeed, they will not be able
to see any difference between the two parties, but will hate the
Conservatives with most bitterness, because standing more immediately in
their way. A combat would be inevitable, with the chance that the
American Eagle would descend upon the combatants and swoop them away.

If anarchy were a reason for the formation of a league in Mexico,
composed of all the conservative men of the country, it ought to have
been formed long ago. Anarchy was organized there with the Republic, and
was made much more permanent than Carnot made victory. Unequivocal
evidences of its existence became visible before the Constitution was in
a condition to be violated; and when that instrument was accepted, it
appeared to have been set up in order that politicians and parties might
have something definite to disregard. The first President was Guadalupe
Victoria, an honest Republican, whose name has become somewhat dimmed by
time. With him was associated Nicolas Bravo, as Vice-President. It was
while Victoria was President that the masonic parties appeared, known as
the Scotch masons and the York masons, or _Escoceses_ and _Yorkinos_,
which were nothing but clubs of the Centralists and the Federalists. The
President was of the _Yorkinos_ or Federalists, and the Vice-President
was of the other lodge. Bravo and his party were for such changes as
should substitute a constitutional monarchy, with a Spanish prince at
its head, for the Constitution of 1824. Bravo "pronounced" openly
against Victoria,--a proceeding of which the reader can form some idea
by supposing Mr. Breckinridge heading a rabble force to expel Mr.
Buchanan from Washington, for the purpose of calling in some member of
the English royal family to sit on an American throne. Through the aid
of Guerrero, a man of ability and integrity, and very popular, the
Liberals triumphed in the field; but Congress elected his competitor,
Pedraza, President, though the people were mostly for Guerrero. This was
a most unfortunate circumstance, and to its occurrence much of the evil
that Mexico has known for thirty years may be directly traced. Instead
of submitting to the strictly legal choice of President, made by the
members of Congress, the Federalists set the open example of revolting
against the action of men who had performed their duties according to
the requirements of the Constitution. Guerrero was violently made
President. That the other party contemplated the destruction of the
Constitution is very probable; but the worst that they, its enemies,
could have done against it would have been a trifle in comparison with
the demoralizing consequences of the violation of that instrument by its
friends. Yet the Presidency of Guerrero will ever have honorable mention
in history, for one most excellent reason: Slavery was abolished by him
on the anniversary of Mexican independence, 1829, he deeming it proper
to signalize that anniversary "by an act of national justice and
beneficence." Will the time ever come when the Fourth of July shall have
the same double claim to the reverence of mankind?

Guerrero perished by the sword, as he had risen by it. The
Vice-President, Bustamente, revolted, and was aided by Santa Aña. His
popularity was too great to allow him to be spared, and when he was
captured, Guerrero was shot, in 1831. Of the many infamous acts of which
Santa Aña has been guilty, the murder of Guerrero is the worst. Possibly
it would have ruined him, but for his services against the Spaniards, at
about the same time. He was now the chief man in Mexico, and became
President in 1833. The next year he dissolved Congress, and established
a military government. The Constitution of 1824 was formally abolished
in 1835, and a Central Constitution was proclaimed the next year, by
which the States were converted into Departments. Santa Aña kept as much
aloof from these proceedings as he could, and sought to add to his
popularity by attacking Texas, where he reaped a plentiful crop of
cypress.

The triumph of the Centralists was the turning-point in the fortunes of
Mexico, as it furnished a plausible pretext for American interference in
her affairs, the end of which is rapidly approaching. The Texan revolt
had no other justification than that which it derived from the overthrow
of the Federal Constitution; but that was ample, and, had it not been
for the introduction of slavery into Texas, the judgment of the
civilized world would have been entirely in favor of the Texans. In
1844, when our Presidential election was made to turn upon the question
of the annexation of Texas to the United States, the grand argument of
the annexationists was drawn from the circumstance that the Mexicans had
abrogated the Federal Constitution, thereby releasing the Texans from
their obligations to Mexico. This was an argument to which Americans,
and especially democrats, those sworn foes of consolidation, were prone
to lend a favorable ear; and it is certain that it had much weight in
promoting the election of Mr. Polk. Had the Texan revolt been one of
ambition merely, and not justifiable on political grounds apart from the
Slavery question, the decision might have been different, if, indeed,
the question had ever been introduced into the politics of this country.
The sagacious men who managed the affairs of the Democratic party knew
their business too well to attempt the extension of slave-holding
territory in the gross and palpable form that is common in these
shameless days. But Texas, as an injured party that had valiantly
sustained its constitutional rights, was a very different thing from a
province that had revolted against Mexico because forbidden by Mexican
authority to allow the existence of slavery within its borders. There
was much deception in the business, but there was sufficient truth and
justice in the argument used to deceive honest men who do not trouble
themselves to look beyond the surface of things. For more than twenty
years our political controversies have all been colored by the triumph
of the Mexican Centralists in 1835-6; and but for that triumph, it is
altogether likely that our territory would not have been increased, and
that the Slavery question, instead of absorbing the American mind, would
have held but a subordinate place in our party debates. It may, perhaps,
be deemed worthy of especial mention, that the action of the Centralists
of Mexico, destined to affect us so sensibly, was initiated at the same
time that the modern phase of the Slavery question was opened in the
United States. The same year that saw the Federal Constitution of Mexico
abolished saw our government laboring to destroy freedom of the press
and the sanctity of the mails, by throwing its influence in favor of the
bill to prevent the circulation of "incendiary publications," that is,
publications drawn from the writings of Washington and Jefferson; and
the same year that witnessed the final effort of Santa Aña to "subdue"
Texas to Centralization beheld General Cushing declaring that slavery
should not be introduced into the North, thus "agitating" the country,
and winning for himself that Abolition support without which his
political career must have been cut short in the morning of its
existence. Such are the coincidences of history!

From the time of the victory of the Centralists until the commencement
of the war with the United States, Mexico was the scene of perpetual
disturbances. Mexia, a rash, but honest man, made an attempt to free his
country in 1838, but failed, being defeated and executed by Santa Aña,
who came from the retirement to which his Texan failure had consigned
him, as champion of the government. After some years of apparent
anarchy, Santa Aña became Dictator, and in 1843 a new Constitution, more
centralizing in its nature than its immediate predecessor, was framed
under his direction. At the beginning of 1845 he fell, and became an
exile. His successor was General Herrera, who was desirous to avoid war
with the United States, on which account he was violently opposed by
Paredes, with success, the latter usurping the Presidency. Aided by our
government, Santa Aña returned to Mexico, and infused new vigor into his
countrymen. On his return, he avowed himself a Federalist, and
recommended a recurrence to the Constitution of 1824, which was
proclaimed. Paredes had fallen before a "revolution," and was allowed to
proceed to Europe. He was a monarchist, and at that time the friends of
monarchy in Mexico had some hopes of success. It is believed that the
governments of England and France were desirous of establishing a
Mexican monarchy, and their intervention in the affairs of Mexico was
feared by our government. Two things, however, prevented their action,
if ever they seriously contemplated armed intervention. The first was
the rapid success of our armies, coupled as it was with the exhibition
of a military spirit and capacity for which European nations had not
been prepared by anything in our previous history; and the second was
the potato-rot, which brought Great Britain to the verge of famine, and
broke up the Tory party. The ill feeling, too, that was created between
the English and French governments by the Montpensier marriage, and the
discontent of the French people, which led to the Revolution of 1848,
were not without their effect on affairs. Had our government resolved to
seize all Mexico, it could have done so without encountering European
resistance in 1848, when there was not a stable Continental government
of the first class west of the Niemen, and when England was too much
occupied with home matters, and with the revolutions that were happening
all around her, to pay any regard to the course of events in the
Occident. But the Polk administration was not equal to the work that was
before it; and though members of the Democratic party did think of
acting, and men of property in Mexico were anxious for annexation,
nothing was done. The American forces left Mexico, and the old routine
of weakness and disorder was there resumed. Perhaps it would be better
to say it was continued; for the war had witnessed no intermission of
the senseless proceedings of the Mexican politicians. Their contests
were waged as bitterly as they had been while the country enjoyed
external peace.

Several persons held the Presidential chair after the resignation of
Herrera. Organic changes were made. The clergy exhibited the same
selfishness that had characterized their action for five-and-twenty
years. An Extraordinary Constituent Congress confirmed the readoption of
the Constitution of 1824, making such slight changes as were deemed
necessary. Santa Aña again became President. Some of the States formed
associations for defence, acting independently of the general
government. After the loss of the capital, Santa Aña resigned the
Presidency, and Peña y Peña succeeded him, followed by Anaya; but the
first soon returned to office. Peace was made, and Santa Aña again went
into exile. Herrera was chosen President, and for more than two years
devoted himself to the work of reformation, with considerable success,
though outbreaks and rebellions occurred in many quarters. President
Arista also showed himself to be a firm and patriotic chief. But in 1852
a reaction took place, under favor of which Santa Aña returned home and
became President for the fifth time, and Arista was banished. The
government of Santa Aña was absolute in its character, and much
resembled that which Napoleon III. has established in France,--with this
difference, that it wanted that strength which is the chief merit of the
French imperial system. It encountered opposition of the usual form,
from time to time, until it was broken down, in August, 1855, when the
President left both office and the country, and has since resided
abroad. The new revolution favored Federalism. Alvarez was chosen
President, but he was too liberal for the Church party, being so
unreasonable as to require that the property of the Church should be
taxed. Plots and conspiracies were formed against him, and it being
discovered that the climate of the capital did not agree with him, he
resigned, and was succeeded by General Comonfort. Half a dozen leaders
"pronounced" against Comonfort, one of them announcing his purpose to
establish an Empire. Government made head against these attacks, and
seized property belonging to the Church. Some eminent Church officers
were banished, for the part they had taken in exciting insurrections. At
the close of 1857, Comonfort made himself Dictator; but the very men who
urged him to the step became his enemies, and he was deprived of power.
Zuloaga, who was one of his advisers and subsequent enemies, succeeded
him, being chosen President by a Council of Notables. Comonfort's
measures for the confiscation of Church property were repealed. The
Constitution of 1857 placed the Presidential power in the hands of the
Chief Justice, on the resignation of the President, whence the
prominence of Juarez lately, he being Chief Justice when Comonfort
resigned. Assembling troops, he encountered Zuloaga, but was defeated.
The Juarez "government" then left the country, but shortly after
returned. Insurrections broke out in different places, and confusion
reigned on all sides. General Robles deposed Zuloaga, and made an honest
effort to unite the Liberals and Conservatives; but the Junta which he
assembled elected Miramon President, a new man, who had distinguished
himself as a leader of the Conservative forces. Miramon reinstated
Zuloaga, but accepted the Presidency on the latter's abdication, and has
since been the principal personage in Mexico, and, though he has
experienced occasional reverses, has far more power than Juarez. At the
close of the year 1859, the greater part of Mexico was either disposed
to submit to the Miramon government, or cared little for either Miramon
or Juarez.

It is impossible to believe that the Juarez government is possessed of
much strength; and the gentleman who lately represented the United
States in Mexico (Mr. Forsyth) is of opinion that it is powerless.
Nevertheless, our government acknowledges that of Juarez, and has made
itself a party to the contests in Mexico. In his last Annual Message,
President Buchanan devotes much space to Mexican affairs, drawing a
deplorable picture thereof, and recommending armed intervention by the
United States in behalf of the Liberal party. "I recommend to Congress,"
says the President, "to pass a law authorizing the President, under such
conditions as they may deem expedient, to employ a sufficient military
force to enter Mexico for the purpose of obtaining indemnity for the
past and security for the future." This force, should Congress respond
favorably to the Presidential recommendation, is to act in concert with
the Juarez government, and to "restore" it to power. In return for such
aid, that government is to indemnify the Americans, and to provide that
no more Americans shall be wronged by Mexican governments. Does the
President believe this theory of Mexican settlement will be accepted by
the world? If yes, then is he a man of marvellous faith, considering the
uncommonly excellent opportunities he has had to learn what the
political settlements of Mexico really mean. If no, then he has a
meaning beneath his words, and that meaning is the conquest of Mexico.
We do not charge duplicity upon President Buchanan, but it is vexatious
and humiliating to be compelled to choose between such charge and the
belief of a degree of simplicity in him that would be astonishing in a
yearling politician, and which is astounding in a man who has held high
office for well-nigh forty years. Let us suppose that Congress should
kindly listen to President Buchanan's recommendation,--that a strong
fleet and a great army should be sent to the aid of the Juarez
government, and should establish it in the capital of Mexico, and then
leave the country and the coasts of "our sister Republic,"--what would
follow? Why, exactly what we have seen follow the Peace of 1848. The
Juarez government could not be stronger or more honest than was that of
Herrera, or more anxious to effect the rehabilitation of Mexico; yet
Herrera's government had to encounter rebellions, and outrages were
common during its existence, and afterward, when men of similar views
held sway, or what passes for sway in "our sister Republic." So would it
be again, should we effect a "restoration" of the Liberals. In a week
after our last regiment should have returned home, there would be
rebellions for our allies to suppress. If they should succeed in
maintaining their power, it would be as the consequence of a violation
of their agreement with us; and where, then, would be the "indemnity"
for which we are to fight? If they should be overthrown, as probably
would be their fate, where would be the "security" for which we are to
pay so highly in blood and gold? It is useless to quote the treaty which
the Juarez government has just made with our government, as evidence of
its liberality and good faith. That treaty is of no more value than
would be one between the United States and the ex-king of Delhi. Nothing
is more notorious than the liberality of parties that are not in power.
There is no stipulation to which they will not assent, and violate, if
their interest should be supposed to lie in the direction of perjury.
Have we, in the hour of our success, been invariably true to the
promises made in the hour of our necessities? A study of the treaty we
made with France in 1778, by the light of after years, would be useful
to men who think that a treaty made is an accomplished fact. The people
of the United States have to choose between the conquest of Mexico and
non-intervention in Mexican affairs. There may be something to be said
in favor of conquest, though the President's arguments in that
direction--for such they are, disguised though they be--remind us
strongly of those which were put forth in justification of the partition
of Poland; but the policy of intervention does not bear criticism for
one moment. Either it is conquest veiled, or it is a blunder, the chance
to commit which is to be purchased at an enormous price; and blunders
are to be had for nothing, and without the expenditure of life and
money.

We had purposed speaking of the condition of Mexico, the character of
her population, and the probable effect of her absorption by the United
States; but the length to which our article has been drawn in the
statement of preliminary facts--a statement made necessary by the
general disregard of Mexican matters by most Americans--warns us to
forbear. We may return to the subject, should the action of Congress on
the President's recommendation lead to the placing of the Mexican
question on the list of those questions that must be decided by the
event of the national election of the current year.


REVIEWS AND LITERARY NOTICES.


_The Florence Stories._ By JACOB ABBOTT. _Florence and John._ New York:
Sheldon & Co. 16mo. pp. 252.

_Ernest Bracebridge, or Schoolboy Days._ By W. H. G. KINGSTON. Boston:
Ticknor & Fields. 16mo. pp. 344.

How should a book for children be written?

Three rules will suffice. It should be written clearly and simply; for
young minds will spend little time in difficult investigation. It should
have a good moral. It should be interesting; or it will generally be
left unread, and thus any other excellence that it may possess will be
useless. Some writers seem to have a fourth rule,--that it should be
instructive; but, really, it is no great matter, if a child should have
some books without wisdom. Moreover, this maxim is eminently perilous in
its practical application, and, indeed, is seldom followed but at the
expense of the other three.

To these three rules all writers of children's books profess to conform;
yet a good book for children is a rarity; for, simple as the rules are,
they are very little understood. While all admit that the style should
be simple and familiar, some appear to think that anything simple to
them will be equally simple to their child-readers, and write as nearly
as possible in the style of "The Rambler." Such a book is "The Percy
Family," whose author is guilty of an additional impropriety in putting
his ponderous sentences into the mouth of a child not ten years old.
Another and more numerous class, evidently piquing themselves not a
little upon avoiding this error, fall into another by fancying it
necessary to _write down_ to their young readers. They explain
everything with a tiresome minuteness of detail, although any observer
of children ought to know that a child's mind does not want everything
explained. They think that simplicity demands this lengthy discussion of
every trivial matter. There is such a thing as a conceited simplicity,
and there is a technical simplicity, that in its barrenness and
insipidity is worthy only of a simpleton. In Jacob Abbott's "Juveniles"
especially, by means of this minuteness, a very scanty stock of ideas is
made to go a great way. Does simplicity require such trash as this?

     "The place was known by the name of the Octagon. The reason why
     it was called by this name was, that the principal sitting-room
     in the house was built in the form of an octagon, that is,
     instead of having four sides, as a room usually has, this room
     had eight sides. An octagon is a figure of eight sides.

     "A figure of four sides is called a square. A figure of five
     sides is called a pentagon, of six sides a hexagon, of eight
     sides an octagon. There might be a figure of seven sides, but
     it would not be very easily made, and it would not be very
     pretty when it was made, and so it is seldom used or spoken of.
     But octagons and hexagons are very common, for they are easily
     made, and they are very regular and symmetrical in form."

The object of all this is, doubtless, to impart valuable information.
But while such slipshod writing is singularly uninteresting, it may also
be censured as inaccurate. Mr. Abbott seems to think all polygons
necessarily regular. Any child can make a heptagon at once,
notwithstanding Mr. Abbott calls it so difficult. A _regular_ heptagon,
indeed, is another matter. Then what does he mean by saying octagons and
hexagons are very regular? A regular octagon is regular, though an
octagon in general is no more regular than any other figure. But Mr.
Abbott continues:--

     "If you wish to see exactly what the form of an octagon is, you
     can make one in this way. First cut out a piece of paper in the
     form of a square. This square will, of course, have four sides
     and four corners. Now, if you cut off the four corners, you
     will have four new sides, for at every place where you cut off
     a corner you will have a new side. These four new sides,
     together with the parts of the old sides that are left, will
     make eight sides, and so you will have an octagon.

     "If you wish your octagon to be regular, you must be careful
     how much you cut off at each corner. If you cut off too little,
     the new sides which you make will not be so long as what
     remains of the old ones. If you cut off too much, they will be
     longer. You had better cut off a little at first from each
     corner, all around, and then compare the new sides with what
     is left of the old ones. You can then cut off a little more,
     and so on, until you make your octagon nearly regular.

     "There are other much more exact modes of making octagons than
     this, but I cannot stop to describe them here."

Must we have no more pennyworths of sense to such a monstrous quantity
of verbiage than Mr. Abbott gives us here? We would defy any man to
parody that. He could teach the penny-a-liners a trick of the trade
worth knowing. The great Chrononhotonthologos, crying,

    "Go call a coach, and let a coach be called,
    And let the man that calleth be the caller,
    And when he calleth, let him nothing call
    But 'Coach! coach! coach! Oh, for a coach, ye gods!'"

is comparatively a very Spartan for brevity. This may be a cheap way of
writing books; but the books are a dear bargain to the buyer.

A book is not necessarily ill adapted to a child because its ideas and
expressions are over his head. Some books, that were not written for
children and would shock all Mr. Abbott's most dearly cherished ideas,
are still excellent reading for them. Walter Scott's poems and novels
will please an intelligent child. Cooper's Leatherstocking tales will
not be read by the lad of fourteen more eagerly than by his little
sister who cannot understand half of them. A child fond of reading can
have no more delightful book than the "Faërie Queene," unless it be the
"Arabian Nights," which was not written as a "juvenile." There are pages
by the score in "Robinson Crusoe" that a child cannot understand,--and
it is all the better reading for him on that account. A child has a
comfort in unintelligible words that few men can understand. Homer's
"Iliad" is good reading, though only a small part may be comprehended.
(We are not, however, so much in favor of mystery as to recommend the
original Greek.) Do our children of the year 1860 ever read a book
called "The Pilgrim's Progress"? Hawthorne's "Wonder-Book" is good for
children, though better for adults.

Then look at our second rule. What, after all, constitutes a "good
moral"? We say that no book has a good moral which teaches a child that
goodness and effeminacy, laziness and virtue, are convertible terms; no
book is good that is "goody," no book is moral that moralizes. The
intention may be good, but the teaching is not. Have as much as you will
of poetical justice, but beware of making your books mere vehicles for
conveying maxims of propriety. You cannot so deceive a child. You may
talk _at_ him, while pretending to tell him a story, but he will soon be
shy of you. He has learned by bitter experience too much of the
falseness of this world, and has been too often beguiled by sugared
pills, to be slow in detecting the sugared pills of your
literature,--especially, O Jacob Abbott! when the pills have so little,
so very little, sugar.

Our notion of a good moral is a strong, breezy, open-air moral, one that
teaches courage, and therefore truth. These are the most important
things for a child to know, and a book which teaches these alone is
moral enough. And these can be taught without offending the mind of the
young reader, however keenly suspicious. But if you wish to teach
gentleness and kindness as well, let them be shown in your story by some
noisy boy who can climb trees, or some active, merry, hoydenish girl who
can run like Atalanta; and don't imply a falsehood by attributing them
always to the quiet children.

Mr. Abbott's books have spoiled our children's books, and have done
their best to spoil our children, too. There is no fresh, manly life in
his stories; anything of the kind is sourly frowned down. Rollo, while
strolling along, picturesquely, perhaps, but stupidly, sees A Noisy Boy,
and is warned by his insufferable father to keep out of that boy's way.
That Noisy Boy infallibly turns out vicious. Is that sound doctrine?
Will that teach a child to admire courage and activity? If he is ever
able to appreciate the swing and vigor of Macaulay's Lays, it will not
be because you trained him on such lyrics as

    "In the winter, when 'tis mild,
    We may run, but not be wild;
    But in summer, we must walk,
    And improve our time by talk" (!)

but because that Noisy Boy found him out,--and, quarrelling with him,
(your boy, marvellous to relate! having provoked the quarrel by some
mean trick, in spite of his seraphic training,) gave him a black
eye,--and afterwards, turning out to be the best-hearted Noisy Boy in
the world, taught him to climb trees and hunt for birds' nests,--and
stopped him when he was going to kill the little birds, (for your
pattern boy--poor child! how could he help it?--was as cruel as he was
timid,)--and imparted to him the sublime mysteries of base-ball and tag
and hockey,--and taught him to swim and row, and to fight bigger boys
and leave smaller boys in peace, instructions which he was at first
inclined to reverse,--and put him in the way to be an honest, fearless
man, when he was in danger of becoming a white-faced and white-livered
spooney. And that Noisy Boy himself, perversely declining to verify Mr.
Abbott's decorous prophecies, has not turned out badly, after all, but
has Reverend before his name and reverence in his heart, and has his
theology sound because his lungs are so. No doubt, Tom Jones often turns
out badly, but Master Blifil always does,--a fact which Mr. Abbott would
do well to note and perpend.

What! Because Rollo is virtuous, shall there be no more mud-cakes and
ale? Marry, but there shall! Don't keep a boy out of his share of free
movement and free air, and don't keep a girl out. Poor little child! she
will be dieted soon enough on "stewed prunes." Children need air and
water,--milk and water won't do. They are longing for our common mother
earth, in the dear, familiar form of dirt; and it is no matter how much
dirt they get on them, if they only have water enough to wash it off.
The more they are allowed to eat literal dirt now, the less metaphorical
dirt will they eat a few years hence. The great Free-Soil principle is
good for their hearts, if not for their clothes; and which is it more
important to have clean? Just make up your mind to let the clothes go;
and if you can't afford to have your children soil and tear their laced
pantalets and plumed hats and open-work stockings, why, take off all
those devices of the enemy, and substitute stout cloth and stout boots.
What have they to do with open-work stockings?

    "Doff them for shame,
    And hang a calf-skin on those recreant limbs."

Believe now, instead of learning by sad experience, that tin trumpets
and torn clothes do not necessarily signify depravity, and that quiet
children are not always free from deceit, cruelty, and meanness. The
quiet, ideal child, of whom Mr. Abbott thinks so highly, generally
proves, in real life, neither more nor less than a prig. He is more
likely to die than live; and if he lives, you may wish he had died.

These models not only check a child's spirit, but tend to make him
dishonest. Ask a child now what he thinks, and, ten to one, he mentally
refers to some eminent exemplar of all the virtues for instructions,
and, instead of telling you what he does think, quotes listlessly what
he ought to think. So that his mincing affectation is not merely
ungraceful, but is a sign of an inward taint, which may prove fatal to
the whole character. It is very easy to make a child disingenuous; if he
be at all timid, the work is already half done to one's hand. Of course,
all children are not bad who are brought up on such books,--one
circumstance or another may counteract their hurtful tendency,--but the
tendency is no less evident, nor is it a vindication of any system to
prove that some are good in its despite.

Again, the popularity of these tame, spiritless books is no conclusive
evidence of their merit. The poor children are given nothing else to
read, and, of course, they take what they can get as better than
nothing. An eager child, fond of reading, will read the shipping
intelligence in a newspaper, if there be nothing else at hand. Does that
show that he is properly supplied with reading matter? They will read
these books; but they would read better books with more pleasure and
more profit.

For our third rule, let our children's stories have no lack of incident
and adventure. That will redeem any number of faults. Thus, Marryatt's
stories, and Mayne Reid's, although in many respects open to censure and
ridicule, are very popular, and deserve to be. The books first put into
a child's hands are right enough, for they are vivid. Whether the letter
A be associated in our infant minds with the impressive moral of "In
Adam's fall We sinned all," or gave us a foretaste of the Apollo in "A
was an Archer, and shot at a Frog,"--in either case, the story is a
plainly told incident, (carefully observing the unities,) which the
child's fancy can embellish for itself, and the whole has an additional
charm from the gorgeous coloring of an accompanying picture. The
vividness is good, and is the only thing that is good. Why, then, should
this one merit be omitted, as our children grow a little older? A
lifeless moral will not school a child into propriety. If a twig be
unreasonably bent, it is very likely to struggle in quite a different
direction, especially if in so doing it struggle towards the light.
There is much truth in a blundering version of the old Scriptural maxim,
"Chain up a child, and away he will go." If you want to do any good by
your books, make them interesting.

And with reference to all three rules, remember that they are to be
interpreted by the light of common sense, and you will hardly need the
following remarks:--

It is alike uncomfortable and useless to a child to be perpetually
waylaid by a moral. A child reading "The Pilgrim's Progress" will omit
the occasional explanations of the allegory or resolutely ignore their
meaning. If you want to keep a poor child on such dry food, don't
mistake your own reason for doing so. It may be eminently proper, but it
is very uncomfortable to him. If you want children to enjoy themselves,
let them run about freely, and don't put them into a ring, in
picturesque attitudes, and then throw bouquets of flowers at them. But,
if you will do so, confess it is not for their gratification, but for
your own.

If you choose to try the dangerous experiment of writing "instructive"
stories, beware of defeating your own object. You write a story rather
than a treatise, because information is often more effective when
indirectly conveyed. Clearly, then, if you convey your information too
directly, you lose all this advantage.

Perfection is as intolerable in these as in any other stories. We all
want, especially children, some amiable weaknesses to sympathize with.
Thus, in "Ernest Bracebridge," an English story of school-life, the hero
is a dreadfully unpleasant boy who is always successful and always
right, and we are soon heartily weary of him. Besides, he is a horrible
boy for mastery of all the arts and sciences, and delivers brief and
epigrammatic discourses, being about twelve years old. However, the book
is full of adventure and out-door games, and so far is good.

After all, a child does not need many books. If, however, we are to have
them, we may as well have good ones. There is no reason why dulness
should be diverted from its legitimate channels into the writing of
children's books. Let us disabuse ourselves of the idea that these are
the easiest books to write. Let us remember that the alphabet is harder
to teach than the Greek Drama, and no longer think that the proper man
to write children's books is the man who is able to write nothing else.


_The Simplicity of Christ's Teachings, set forth in Sermons._ By CHARLES
T. BROOKS, Pastor of the Unitarian Church, Newport, R. I. Boston:
Crosby, Nichols, & Co. 1859. 16mo. pp. 342.

The name of the author of this volume has long been known as that of an
accomplished man of letters. Successive volumes of poetic versions,
chiefly from the German, had, by their various merit, gained for him a
high rank among our translators, when four years ago, in 1856, by a
translation of "Faust," he set himself at the head of living authors in
this department of literature. It is little to say of his work, that it
is the best of the numerous English renderings of Goethe's tragedy. It
is not extravagant to assert that a better translation is scarcely
possible. It is a work which combines extraordinary fidelity to the form
of the original with true appreciation of its spirit. It is at once
literal and free, and displays in its execution the qualities both of
exact scholarship and of poetic feeling and capacity.

This work, and the others of a similar kind which preceded it, were the
result of the intervals of leisure occurring in the course of their
author's professional life as a clergyman. While the wider world has
known him only through these volumes, a smaller circle has long known
and loved him as the faithful and able preacher and pastor,--as one to
whom the most beautiful description ever written of the character of a
good parson might be truly applied; for

    "A good man he was of religioun,
    That was a poure Persone of a toun:
    But riche he was of holy thought and werk;
    He was also a lerned man, a clerk,
    That Cristes gospel trewely wolde preche,
    His parishens devoutly wolde he teche.

           *       *       *       *       *

    And Cristes lore and his apostles' twelve
    He taught, but first he folwed it himselve."

And it is in this character that he now comes before us in the volume
which is well entitled "The Simplicity of Christ's Teachings."

It is a misfortune that the qualities which distinguish most published
sermons are not such as to recommend them on the score of literary
merit. The volumes of religious discourses which are worthy to hold a
place in literature, when judged by the usual critical standard, are
very few. A very large proportion of those which are continually
appearing from the press deserve no remembrance, and fortunately have no
permanence. They are addressed to a special class of readers,--a class
generally neither of highly cultivated taste, nor of acute critical
perception. Their writers are rarely men of sufficient talent to win for
themselves recognition out of their own narrow set. What in the slang of
the day are called "sensation" sermons are no exception to the common
rule. Their momentary effect, depending upon exaggeration and
extravagance, is no indication of worth. We should no more think of
criticizing them in a literary journal, than of criticizing the novels
of Mr. Cobb or Mr. Reynolds. Some of the causes of the poverty of
thought and of the negligence of style of average sermons are obvious.
The very interest and importance of the subjects with which the preacher
has to deal oftentimes serve to deaden rather than to excite the mind of
one who takes them up in the formal round of duty. The pretensions of
the clergy of many sects, pretensions as readily acknowledged as made,
save them from the necessity of intellectual exertion. The frequent
recurrence of the necessity of writing, whether they have anything to
say or not, leads them into substituting words for thoughts, platitudes
for truths. The natural weariness of long-continued solitary
professional labor brings mental lassitude and feebleness. The absence
of the fear of close and watchful criticism prevents them from bestowing
suitable pains upon their composition. These and other causes combine to
make the mass of the writing which is delivered from the pulpit poorer
than any other which passes current in the world,--perhaps, indeed, not
poorer in an absolute sense, but poorer when compared with the nature of
the subjects that it treats. It is by no means, however, to be inferred,
that, because a sermon is totally without merit as a work of literature,
it is incapable of producing some good in those who listen to it. On the
contrary, such is the frame of mind of many who regularly attend church,
that they are not unlikely to derive good from a performance which, if
weak, may yet be sincere, and which deals with the highest truths, even
if it deal with them in an imperfect and unsatisfactory manner. And,
indeed, as George Herbert says, good may be got from the worst
preaching; for,

                        "if all want sense,
    God takes the text, and preacheth patience."

Unquestionably, however, there is too much preaching in these days; too
many sermons are written, and the spirit of Christianity is less
effective than if the words concerning it were less numerous.

It is a rare satisfaction, therefore, to find such a volume of sermons
as that of Mr. Brooks, which, though not possessing the highest merit in
point of style, are the discourses of a thoughtful and cultivated man,
with a peculiar spiritual refinement, and with a devout intellect, made
clear by its combination with purity of heart and simplicity of faith.
The religious questions which are chiefly stirring the minds of men are
taken up in them and discussed with what may be called an earnest
moderation, with elevation of feeling and insight of spirit.


_Goethe's Correspondence with a Child._ Boston: Ticknor & Fields. 1859.

The immediate cause of the republication of these letters is the recent
death of Bettina, the child with whom Goethe corresponded. Though this
fact, and the beauty of the volume, may quicken the sale of the work,
and draw out fresh encomiums on its excellence, it has long since passed
the critical crisis and taken its place as one of the most remarkable
series of letters which the public have ever been invited to peruse.
Something of the marvellous vanishes from them, however, when we find
that the title, "Correspondence with a Child," is a misnomer; Bettina
having been, in truth, twenty-two years of age when she first visited
Goethe. Yet while this important circumstance abates much of the wonder
with which we once read her thoughts and confessions, they really become
all the more valuable as studies in human nature when we learn that they
are the exhalations of a heart in full flower, and one upon which the
dews of morning should not linger. The poet had reached the age of sixty
when this tide of tender sentiment, original ideas, and enthusiastic
admiration began to flow in upon him. Their first interview, as Bettina
describes it, with singular freedom, in one of the letters to Goethe's
mother, will be found a useful key, though perhaps not a complete one,
by which to interpret the glowing passion which gushed from her pen.
That the poet was pleased with the homage of this sweet, graceful, and
affectionate girl, and drew her on to the revealing of her whole nature,
is readily perceived. But when we inquire, To what end? we should
remember, that, like Parrhasius, Goethe was before all things an artist;
and furthermore, the correspondence of time will show that from this
crowning knowledge the "Elective Affinities" sprang. It may be that her
admiration was for his genius alone; if so, she chose love's language
for its wealth of expression. Were it so received, it could not but be
regarded as a peerless offering, for she was certainly a kindred spirit.
There are many rare thoughts and profound confessions in these letters,
which would have commanded the praise of Goethe, had they been written
by a rival; and coming, as they did, from a devotee who declared that
she drew her inspiration from him alone, they must have filled his soul
with incense, of which that burned by the priest in the temple of the
gods is only an emblem. To be brief and compendious on this book, it
appears to be a heart unveiled. German critics throw some doubts on the
literal veracity of the book; but it belongs at any rate to the better
class of the _ben trovati_, and among its leaves, the dreamer, the
lover, and the poet will find that ambrosial fruit on which fancy loves
to feed, but whose blossoms are so generally blasted by the common air
that only the few favored ones have had their longings for it appeased.
In imagination, at least, Bettina partook of this banquet, and had the
genius to wreak on words the emotions which swept through her heart.


_Sir Rohan's Ghost._ A Romance. Boston: J. E. Tilton & Company. 1860.
pp. 352.

It is very plain that we have got a new poet,--a tremendous
responsibility both for him who will have to learn how to carry the
brimming vase of Art from the Pierian spring without squandering a drop,
and for us critics who are to reconcile ourselves to what is new in him,
and to hold him strictly to that apprenticeship to the old which is the
condition of mastery at last.

Criticism in America has reached something like the state of the old
Continental currency. There is no honest relation between the promises
we make and the specie basis of meaning they profess to represent. "The
most extraordinary book of the age" is published every week; "genius"
springs up like mullein, wherever the soil is thin enough; the yearly
catch of "weird imagination," "thrilling pathos," "splendid
description," and "sublime imagery" does not fall short of an ordinary
mackerel-crop; and "profound originality" is so plenty that one not in
the secret would be apt to take it for commonplace. Now Tithonus, whom,
as the oldest inhabitant, we have engaged to oversee the criticism of
the "Atlantic," has a prodigiously long memory,--almost as long as one
of Dickens's descriptive passages,--he remembers perfectly well all the
promising young fellows from Orpheus down, and has made a notch on the
stalk of a devil's-apron for every one who ever came to anything that
was of more consequence to the world than to himself. His tally has not
yet mounted to a baker's dozen. Accordingly, when a young enthusiast
rushes to tell Tithonus that a surprising genius has turned up, that
venerable and cautious being either puts his hand behind his ear and
absconds into an extemporary deafness, or says dryly, "American kind, I
suppose?" This coolness of our wary senior is infectious, and we confess
ourselves so far disenchanted by it, that, when we go into a library,
the lettering on the backs of nine-tenths of the volumes contrives to
shape itself into a laconic _Hic jacet_.

It is of prime necessity to bring back the currency of criticism to the
old hard-money basis. We have been gradually losing all sense of the
true relation between words and things,--the surest symptom of
intellectual decline. And this looseness of criticism reacts in the most
damaging way upon literature by continually debasing the standard, and
by confounding all distinction between fame and notoriety. Ought it to
be gratifying to the author of "Popular Sovereignty, a Poem in Twelve
Cantos," to be called the most remarkable man of the age, when he knows
that he shares that preëminence with Mr. Tupper, nay, with half the
names in the Directory? Indiscriminate eulogy is the subtlest form of
depreciation, for it makes all praise suspicious.

We look upon artistic genius as the rarest and most wayward apparition
among mankind. It cannot be predicated upon any of Mr. Buckle's
averages. Given the census, you may, perhaps, say so many murders, so
many suicides, so many misdirected letters (and men of letters), but not
so many geniuses. In this one thing old Mother Nature will be whimsical
and womanish. This is a gift that John Bull, or Johnny Crapaud, or
Brother Jonathan does not find in his stocking every Christmas. Crude
imagination is common enough,--every hypochondriac has a more than
Shakspearian allowance of it; fancy is cheap, or nobody would dream;
eloquence sits ten deep on every platform. But genius in Art is that
supreme organizing and idealizing faculty which, by combining,
arranging, modulating, by suppressing the abnormal and perpetuating the
essential, apes creation,--which from the shapeless terror or tipsy
fancy of the benighted ploughman can conjure the sisters of Fores heath
and the court of Titania,--which can make language thunder or coo at
will,--which, in short, is the ruler of those qualities any one of which
in excess is sure to overmaster the ordinary mind, and which can
crystallize helpless vagary into the clearly outlined and imperishable
forms of Art.

It is not, therefore, from any grudging incapacity to appreciate new
authors, but from a strong feeling that we are to guard the graves of
the dead from encroachment, and their fames from vulgarization, that the
"Atlantic" has been and will be sparing in its use of the word _genius_.
One may safely predicate power, nicety of thought and language, a clear
eye for scenery and character, and grace of poetic conception of a book,
without being willing to say that it gives proof of genius. For genius
is the _shaping_ faculty, the power of using material in the best way,
and may not work itself clear of the besetting temptation of personal
gifts and of circumstances in a first or even second work. It is
something capable of education and accomplishment, and the patience with
which it submits itself to this needful schooling and self-abnegation is
one of the surest tests of its actual possession. Could even
Shakspeare's poems and earlier plays come before us for judgment, we
could only say of them, as of Keats's "Endymion," that they showed
affluence, but made no sure prophecy of that artistic self-possession
without which plenty is but confusion and incumbrance.

So much by way of preface, lest we might seem cold to the very
remarkable merits of "Sir Rohan's Ghost," if we treated it as a book
worth finding fault with, instead of condemning it to the indifferent
limbo of general eulogy. It is our deliberate judgment that no first
volume by any author has ever been published in America showing more
undoubtful symptoms of genuine poetic power than this. There are
passages in it where imagination and language combine in the most
artistic completeness, and the first quatrain of the song which Sir
Rohan fancies he hears,--

    ----"In a summer twilight,
      While yet the dew was hoar,
    I went plucking purple pansies
      Till my love should come to shore,"--

seems to us absolutely perfect in its simplicity and suggestiveness. It
has that wayward and seemingly accidental just-right-ness that is so
delightful in old ballads. The hesitating cadence of the third line is
impregnated with the very mood of the singer, and lingers like the
action it pictures. All those passages in the book, too, where the
symptoms of Sir Rohan's possession by his diseased memory are handled,
where we see all outward nature but as wax to the plastic will of
imagination, are to the utmost well-conceived and carried out. It was
part of the necessity of the case that the book should be conjectural
and metaphysical, for it is plain that the author is young and has
little experience of the actual. Accordingly, with a true instinct, she
(for the newspapers ascribe the authorship of the book to Miss Prescott)
calls her story a Romance, thus absolving it from any cumbersome
allegiance to fact, and lays the scene of it in England, where she can
have old castles, old traditions, old families, old servants, and all
the other olds so essential to the young writer, ready to her hand.

We like the book better for being in the main _subjective_ (to use the
convenient word Mr. Ruskin is so angry with); for a young writer can
only follow the German plan of conjuring things up "from the depths of
his inward consciousness." The moment our author quits this sure ground,
her touch becomes uncertain and her colors inharmonious.
Character-painting is unessential to a romance, belonging as it does
properly to the novel of actual life, in which the romantic element is
equally out of place. Fielding, accordingly, the greatest artist in
character since Shakspeare, hardly admits sentiment, and never romance,
into his master-pieces. Hawthorne, again, another great master, feeling
instinctively the poverty and want of sharp contrast in the externals of
our New England life, always shades off the edges of the actual, till,
at some indefinable line, they meet and mingle with the supersensual and
imaginative.

The author of "Sir Rohan" attempts character in Redruth the butler, and
in the villain and heroine of her story. We are inclined to think the
villain the best hit of the three, because he is downright scoundrel
without a redeeming point, as the Nemesis of the story required him to
be, and because he is so far a purely ideal character. But there is no
such thing possible as an ideal butler, at least in the sense our author
assumes in the cellar-scene. The better poet, the worse butler; and so
we are made impatient by his more than Redi-isms about wine, full of
fancy as they are in themselves, because they are an impertinence. For
the same reason, we forgive the heroine her rhapsodies about the figures
of the Arthur-romances, but cannot pardon her descents into real life
and her incursions on what should be the sanctuary of the
breakfast-table. The author attributes to her a dash of gypsy blood; and
if her style of humorous conversation be a fair type of that of the race
in general, we no longer wonder that they are homeless exiles from human
society. When will men learn the true nature of a pun,--that it is a
play upon ideas, and not upon sounds,--and that a perfect one is as rare
as a perfect poem?

In the prose "Edda," the dwarfs tell a monstrous fib, when they pretend
that Kvasir, the inventor of poetry, has been suffocated by his own
wisdom. Nevertheless, the little fellows showed thereby that they were
not short of intelligence; for it is almost always in their own overflow
that young poets are drowned. This superabundance seems to us the chief
defect in "Sir Rohan's Ghost." The superabundance is all very fine, of
the costliest kind; but was Clarence any the better for being done to
death in Malmsey instead of water?

This fault we look on as a fault of promise. There is always a chance
that luxuriance may be pruned, but none short of a miracle that a
broomstick may be made to blossom. There is, however, one absolute, and
not relative fault in the book, which we find it harder to forgive,
since it is one of instinct rather than of Art. The author seems to us
prone to confound the _terrible_, (the only true subject of Art) with
the _horrible_. The one rouses moral terror or aversion, the other only
physical disgust. This is one of the worst effects of the modern French
school upon literature, the inevitable result of its degrading the
sensuous into the sensual.

We have found all the fault we could with this volume, because we
sincerely think that the author of it is destined for great things, and
that she owes it to the rare gift she has been endowed with to do
nothing inconsiderately, and by honest self-culture to raise natural
qualities to conscious and beneficent powers.


RECENT AMERICAN PUBLICATIONS

RECEIVED BY THE EDITORS OF THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY.


Essays of Elia. By Charles Lamb. A New Edition. Boston. William Veazie.
8vo. pp. 466. $1.25.

Archaia; or, Studies of the Cosmogony and Natural History of the Hebrew
Scriptures. By J. W. Dawson, LL. D., F. G. S., Principal of McGill
College, Author of "Acadian Geology," etc. Montreal. B. Dawson & Son.
12mo. pp. 406.

Manual of Public Libraries, Institutions, and Societies in the United
States and British Provinces of North America. By William J. Rhees,
Chief Clerk of the Smithsonian Institution. Philadelphia. J. B.
Lippincott & Co. 8vo. pp. xxviii., 687. $3.00.

The Oakland Stories. By George R. Taylor, of Virginia. Volume I. Kenny.
New York. Sheldon & Co. 16mo. pp. 176. 50 cts.

The Florence Stories. By Jacob Abbott. Florence and John. New York.
Sheldon & Co. 16mo. pp. 252. 60 cents.

Poems read at the Opening of the Fraternity Lectures, 1858-9. By F. B.
Sanborn and Rufus Leighton, Jr. Boston. Printed for the Fraternity.
16mo. pp. 59. 25 cts.

The Law of the Territories. Philadelphia. Printed by C. Sherman and Son.
16mo. pp. 127. 50 cts.

The Wife's Trials and Triumphs. By the Author of "Grace Hamilton's
School-Days," etc. New York. Sheldon & Co. 16mo. pp. 347. $1.00.

The Old Battle-Ground. By J. T. Trowbridge, Author of "Father
Brighthopes," etc. New York. Sheldon & Co. 24mo. pp. 276. 50 cts.

Abridgment of the Debates of Congress, from 1789 to 1856. From Gales and
Seaton's Annals of Congress; from their Register of Debates; and from
the Official Reported Debates, by John C. Rives. By the Author of the
"Thirty Years' View." Volume XII. New York. Appleton & Co. 8vo. pp. 807.
$2.50.

"Woman's Right to Labor"; or, Low Wages and Hard Work: in Three
Lectures, delivered in Boston, November, 1859. By Caroline H. Dall.
Boston. Walker, Wise, & Co. 16mo. pp. xvi., 184. 50 cts.

The Diary of a Samaritan. By a Member of the Howard Association of New
Orleans. New York. Harper & Brothers. 12mo. pp. 324. $1.00.

A Popular History of the United States of America: from the Discovery of
the American Continent to the Present Time. By Mary Howitt. Illustrated
with Numerous Engravings. In Two Volumes. New York. Harper & Brothers.
12mo. pp. xii., 406; xii., 388. $2.00.

Poems. By Henry Timrod. Boston. Ticknor & Fields. 16mo. pp. iv., 130. 50
cts.

New Miscellanies. By Charles Kingsley. Boston. Ticknor & Fields. 12mo.
pp. vi., 375. $1.00.

The Two Christmas Celebrations, A. D. 1 and 1855. A Christmas Story for
1856. By Theodore Parker, Minister of the 28th Congregational Society of
Boston. Boston. Rufus Leighton, Jr. Small 8vo. pp. 46. 50 cts.

Frank Wildman's Adventures on Land and Water. By Frederick Gerstaecker.
Translated and revised by Lascelles Wraxall. With Eight Illustrations,
printed in Oil Colors. Boston. Crosby, Nichols, & Co. 16mo. pp. viii.,
312. $1.00.

The Boy Tar; or, A Voyage in the Dark. By Captain Mayne Reid. With
Twelve Illustrations, by Charles Keene. Boston. Ticknor & Fields. 16mo.
pp. iv., 356. 75 cts.

The Crusades and the Crusaders. By John G. Edgar, Author of "Boyhood of
Great Men," etc. With Eight Illustrations, by Julian Portch. Boston.
Ticknor & Fields. 16mo. pp. x., 380. 75 cts.

The White Hills: their Legends, Landscape, and Poetry. By Thomas Starr
King. With Sixty Illustrations, engraved by Andrew, from Drawings by
Wheelock. Boston. Crosby, Nichols, & Co. 8vo. pp. xviii., 403. $5.00.

A Look at Home; or, Life in the Poor-House of New England. By S. H.
Elliot, Author of "Rolling Ridge." New York. H. Dexter & Co. 12mo. pp.
490. $1.00.

How Could He Help It? or, The Heart Triumphant. By A. S. Roe, Author of
"I've been Thinking," etc. New York. Derby & Jackson. 12mo. pp. 443.
$1.25.

Evenings at the Microscope; or, Researches among the Minuter Organs and
Forms of Animal Life. By Philip Henry Gosse, F. R. S. With
Illustrations. New York. Appleton & Co. 12mo. pp. xii., 480. $1.50.

Hester, the Bride of the Islands. A Poem. By Silvester B. Beckett.
Portland. Bailey & Noyes. 12mo. pp. 336. $1.00.

Great Facts: A Popular History and Description of the most Remarkable
Inventions during the Present Century. By Frederick C. Bakewell, Author
of "Philosophical Conversations," etc. Illustrated with Numerous
Engravings. New York, Appleton & Co. 12mo. pp. xii., 307. $1.00.

Prince Charlie, the Young Chevalier. By Merideth Johnes, Author of "The
Boy's Book of Modern Travel," etc. With Eight Illustrations, by N. S.
Morgan. New York. Appleton & Co. 16mo. pp. 331. 75 cts.

Edith Vaughan's Victory; or, How to Conquer. By Helen Wall Pierson,
Author of "Sophie Krantz." New York. Appleton & Co. 16mo. pp. 289. 63
cts.

A History of the Cemetery of Mount Auburn. By Jacob Bigelow, President
of the Corporation. Boston. Munroe & Co. 16mo. pp. xvi., 263. $1.00.

Here and There; or, Heaven and Earth Contrasted. New York. Appleton &
Co. 18mo. pp. 41. 25 cts.

A Report of the Celebration at Norwich, Ct., on the 200th Anniversary of
the Settlement of the Town, Sept. 7th and 8th, 1859. With an Appendix,
containing Historical Documents of Local Interest. Norwich. John W.
Stedman. 8vo. pp. 304. $1.50.

Re-Statements of Christian Doctrine, in Twenty-Five Sermons. By Henry W.
Bellows, Minister of All-Souls' Church, New York. New York. Appleton &
Co. 12mo. pp. viii., 434. $1.25.

The Great Harmonia: being a Progressive Revelation of the Eternal
Principles which inspire Mind and govern Matter. By Andrew Jackson
Davis. Vol. V. In Three Parts. New York. A. J. Davis & Co. 12mo. pp.
438. $1.00.

History of the Republic of the United States of America, as traced in
the Writings of Alexander Hamilton and his Contemporaries. By John C.
Hamilton. Vol. V. New York. Appleton & Co. 8vo. pp. xii., 603. $2.50.

Life of Lafayette. Written for Children. By E. Cecil. With Six
Illustrations. Boston. Crosby, Nichols, & Co. 16mo. pp. vi., 218. 75
cts.

Self-Help; with Illustrations of Character and Conduct. By Samuel
Smiles, Author of "The Life of George Stephenson." Boston. Ticknor &
Fields. 16mo. pp. xiv., 408. 75 cts.

Bible Stories in Bible Language. New York. Appleton & Co. Square 16mo.
pp. 197. $1.25.

Martha's Hooks and Eyes. New York. Appleton & Co. 18mo. pp. 129. 37 cts.

Christian Believing and Living. Sermons. By F. D. Huntington, D.D.,
Preacher to the University, and Plummer Professor of Christian Morals in
Harvard College. Boston. Crosby, Nichols, & Co. 12mo. pp. viii., 528.
$1.25.

Ernest Bracebridge; or, Schoolboy Days. By W. H. G. Kingston. Boston.
Ticknor & Fields. 16mo. pp. iv., 344. 75 cts.

Baby Nightcaps. By the Author of "Nightcaps." New York. Appleton & Co.
18mo. pp. 140. 50 cts.

The New Nightcaps told to Charley. New York. Appleton & Co. 18mo. pp.
207. 50 cts.

Rainbow's Journey. By Jacob Abbott. New York. Harper & Brothers. 16mo.
pp. 201. 50 cts.

Harry's Summer in Ashcroft. With Illustrations. New York. Harper &
Brothers. 18mo. pp. 204. 50 cts.

Seven Years. By Julia Kavanagh, Author of "Adele," "Nathalie," etc.
Boston. Ticknor & Fields. 8vo. pp. 180. 30 cts.

The Sea-Lions; or, The Lost Sealers. By J. Fenimore Cooper. Illustrated
from Drawings by F. O. C. Darley. New York. W. A. Townsend & Co. 12mo.
pp. 490. $1.50.

The Professor at the Breakfast-Table; with the Story of Iris. By Oliver
Wendell Holmes. Boston. Ticknor & Fields. 12mo. pp. 410. $1.00.

Misrepresentation. A Novel. By Anna H. Drury, Author of "Friends and
Fortune," etc. New York. Harper & Brothers. 8vo. paper. pp. 210. 50 cts.

History of Peter the Great, Emperor of Russia. By Jacob Abbott. With
Engravings. New York. Harper & Brothers. 16mo. pp. 368. 60 cts.