(4) _Dipodomys s. spectabilis_ is nocturnal; it is gentle, and does not
offer to bite when taken in the hand; is silent for the most part;
active; somewhat sociable with its fellows, but fights in defense of its
food stores; progresses chiefly by leaping; signals by a drumming or
tapping on the ground with its hind feet.

(5) The breeding season of _spectabilis_ begins in January and continues
into August. Whether more than one litter is raised in a single season
is unknown. The number of young in each litter varies from 1 to 3,
averaging 2.

(6) _Dipodomys s. spectabilis_ does not hibernate, but provides food
stores, mostly seeds, for use during seasons when food would be
otherwise unavailable. Storage in each den varies in quantity from 5
grams (about 1/6 ounce) to 5,750 grams (12.67 pounds). Materials stored
include several important forage plants; for example, various species of
_Bouteloua_ and _Aristida_, with _B. rothrockii_ (crowfoot grama) the
most important. Accessibility and abundance of different plants have
much to do with the kinds of storage found.

(7) The dens of _spectabilis_ are the most notable of all kangaroo rat
dwelling places. They range from 6 inches to 4 feet in vertical height,
and from 5 to 15 feet in diameter. Here the kangaroo rat has its home,
shelter, and food-storage chambers. Within the den is found a tortuous
network of burrows, with many storage and some nest chambers, the whole
arranged so as to be two to four stories high.

(8) _Dipodomys s. spectabilis_ is not of great economic significance,
except locally, in ordinary seasons. During periods of extreme drought
it may be of critical importance on grazing areas from the standpoint of
the carrying capacity of the range.

(9) Kangaroo rats are easy to poison by following the same formula as
that used by the Biological Survey for destroying prairie dogs.

(10) In many places unsuited to extensive grazing or agriculture
_spectabilis_ does no appreciable damage. It is one of the most
interesting of all the rodents peculiar to our Southwestern deserts, and
should not be molested except where it is destructive.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


ALLEN, J. A.

1895. On a collection of mammals from Arizona and Mexico, made by Mr.
W. W. Price, with field notes by the collector. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat.
Hist., vol. 7, art. 6, pp. 193-258. 17 figs. in text.

BABCOCK, S. M.

1912. Metabolic water: Its production and rôle in vital phenomena.
Research Bull. No. 22, Univ. Wisconsin Agr. Exp. Station, pp. 159 and
170, March.

BAILEY, V.

1905. Biological survey of Texas. North Amer. Fauna No. 25, Biol. Surv.,
U. S. Dept. Agr., pp. 222, 16 pls., 24 figs. in text.

CLEMENTS, F. E.

1905. Research methods in ecology. Lincoln, Univ. Pub. Co., pp. xvii,
334, 85 figs. in text.

GRIFFITHS, D.

1910. A protected stock range in Arizona. Bull. No. 177, Bur. Plant
Ind., U. S. Dept. Agr., pp. 28, 6 pls., 1 fig. in text.

GRINNELL, JOSEPH.

1921. Revised list of the species in the genus _Dipodomys_. Journal of
Mammalogy, vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 94-97, May 2.

MCATEE, W. L.

1921. Farm help from the birds. In Yearbook of the U. S. Dept. Agr. for
1920, pp. 253-270; unnumbered figs. in text.

MERRIAM, C. H.

1890. Description of three new kangaroo rats, with remarks on the
identity of _Dipodomys ordii_ of Woodhouse. In North Amer. Fauna No. 4,
Div. Ornith. and Mamm. (Biol. Surv.), U. S. Dept. Agr., 41-49.

NELSON, E. W.

1918. Smaller mammals of North America. Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. 33, No. 5,
pp. 371-493; numerous unnumbered figs. and colored pls. in text.


ADDITIONAL COPIES
OF THIS PUBLICATION MAY BE PROCURED FROM
THE SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON, D. C.
AT
15 CENTS PER COPY