Mairan, who wrote in 1731, was of opinion that the zodiacal light
consisted of particles thrown off from the sun by its rapid rotation,
or a species of atmosphere peculiar to the central orb. Others have
supposed the luminosity to be composed of 'revolving planetary
particles,' shining by a direct or reflected light. But, according to
Professor Olmsted, of Yale College, Massachusetts, it is something
which has a motion of its own around the sun, notwithstanding that the
general steadiness of its movements had warranted the notion that it
was in some way attached to the body of the sun itself. Olmsted's
conclusions are drawn from a diligent observation of the light during
a period of six years, and are on this account, as well as from his
scientific reputation, entitled to respect. He states the light to be,
in constitution, colour, and density, similar to that of the tail of a
comet, the portion nearest the sun being brightest, and both admitting
of stars being seen through them. We may, therefore, infer it to be a
nebulous ring surrounding the sun, in the same way that the
magnificent rings of Saturn surround that planet. Of such nebulæ as
this there are from 2000 to 3000 visible in the regions of space,
compared with which the dimension of ours is insignificant: at the
same distance, and sought for with the same instruments, it would be
invisible.

In one point, Professor Olmsted's views are particularly interesting,
as, out of one mysterious phenomenon, he endeavours to explain
another, and inquires: 'Whether or not the zodiacal light is the
origin of the meteoric showers of November and August, and especially
those of November?' Many readers know that for some years past great
numbers of falling-stars, or showers of meteors, have been observed
periodically in November: the fall seen in the United States in
1834--when, as is estimated, more than 240,000 stars fell as thick as
snow-flakes, in the space of nine hours--being the most remarkable
hitherto known. The explanation is, that the zodiacal light is a
nebulous body revolving round the sun, and arrives at its aphelion on
the 13th November in that part of the earth's orbit which the earth
then reaches, and, coming into contact with our atmosphere, portions
of the nebulous matter are detached, and, taking fire as they pass
through, appear to us as shooting-stars. This explanation of the
phenomenon in question is one not hastily conceived; the reasoning on
which it is founded is altogether satisfactory, as well with regard to
the movement of the nebulous matter, as to that of the earth.

Professor Olmsted, in a communication addressed to the 'American
Association for the Advancement of Science,' sums up his views as
follows:

'1. The zodiacal light, as we have found, in our inquiry into its
nature and constitution, is a _nebulous body_.

'2. It has a revolution round the sun.

'3. It reaches beyond and _lies over the earth's orbit_ at the time of
the November meteors, and makes but a small angle with the ecliptic.

'4. Like the nebulous body, its periodic time is commensurable with
that of the earth, so as to perform a certain whole number of
revolutions while the earth performs one, and thus to complete the
cycle in one year, at the end of which the zodiacal light and the
earth return to the same relative position in space. This necessarily
follows from the fact, that at the same season of the year it occupies
the same position one year with another, and the same now as when
Cassini made his observations nearly 170 years ago.

'5. In the meteoric showers of November, _the meteors are actually
seen to come from the extreme portions of the zodiacal light_, or
rather a little beyond the visible portions.'

There is much that is suggestive in this summary, and, as we said at
the commencement, the subject is one of a nature to stimulate inquiry
and research, and to lead to further explanations of cosmical
phenomena. M. Mathieson's observations, published in the _Comptes
Rendus_ of the Académie des Sciences for 1843, shew, that when tested
with the thermo-multiplier, the zodiacal light was found to radiate
heat as well as light--a fact which, if further verified, will support
the evidence in favour of an independent luminous ring.


WHO WROTE SHAKSPEARE?


Thus asks Mrs Kitty in _High Life Below Stairs_, to which his Grace my
Lord Duke gravely replies: 'Ben Jonson.' 'O no,' quoth my Lady Bab:
'Shakspeare was written by one Mr Finis, for I saw his name at the end
of the book!' and this passes off as an excellent joke, and never
fails to elicit the applause of the audience; but still the question
remains unanswered: Who wrote Shakspeare? a question, we humbly think,
which might be made the theme for as much critical sagacity,
pertinacity, and pugnacity, as the almost equally interesting
question, who wrote Homer? In the former case, the question is
certainly in one respect more simple, for the recognised plays and
poems that go by Shakspeare's name are--at least by far the larger
portion--unquestionably from one and the same pen; while Homer, poor,
dear, awful, august, much-abused shade! has been torn by a pack of
German wolves into fragments, which it puzzles the lore and research
of Grote and Muir to patch together again. Even Mr Grote seems
disposed to admit, that while the _Odyssey_ may pass muster as one
continuous poem, whatever was the name of the author, the greater
_Iliad_ must be broken up at least into an _Iliad_ and an _Achilleid_,
by different rhapsodists; and though Colonel Muir stands stoutly on
the other side, the restoration of the unity of Homer may, even with
us sober-minded thinkers, take ten times the years it took to capture
Troy; while with the German Mystics and Mythists, the controversy may
last till they have to open their bewildered and bewildering eyes upon
the realities of another world.

So far, therefore, the question is limited, for we are entitled to
assume, what no one at this time of day dreams of disputing, that
_Hamlet_ and his fellows are not only the productions of one mind, but
are beyond comparison the greatest productions which man's intellect,
not divinely inspired, has yet achieved. The question therefore
is--who wrote them? With the exception of Homer, who lived before the
time of written history, and Junius, who purposely and successfully
shrouded himself in obscurity, there has, perhaps, been no great
writer who has not in his life, his letters, or his sayings, more or
less identified himself with the productions of his pen. Take Walter
Scott, for instance; or Byron, or Addison, or Dryden; or, to go still
earlier, take Ben Jonson, or Kit Marlowe, or Geoffrey Chaucer, and
each and all of them have external marks by which we could assign the
authorship, even if the production had been published anonymously. Try
Shakspeare's plays by the same test, and suppose _Hamlet_, _Macbeth_,
&c., had been successively published after the fashion of Junius, and
what critic of any age would ever have ascribed them to William
Shakspeare?

