
When viewed by moonlight, the solemnity and grandeur of the effect is
charming. An enthusiastic friend of mine, on paying the abbey a visit a
year or two ago, had it lighted up with tapers. I subjoin a few passages
from a letter I received at the time from him;--"Yesterday, being
Valentine's day, in the evening I went to vespers, and had six tapers
burning at the high altar in the abbey; also several in each of the
(eight) confessionals, holy water, fonts, shrines, and altars.--The
church-yard, the abbey, were silent as the grave; you might have heard a
pin drop; there was not a breath of air stirring, so the tapers burnt,
beautifully." This must have strongly reminded the spectator of the
introduction to the _Monastery_, and the visit of the worthy
benedictine, accompanied by Captain Clutterbuck, for the purpose of
taking up his patron's heart. My friend adds, "not a taper has been
burnt in St. Mary's of Melrose since the days of Knox.--On Monday I went
to the tower of Glendearg; at the fountain, where Sir Piercie Shafton
and Halbert Glendinning fought, I got, with the help of my guide, some
curious stones, said to be the work of the _White Lady_." The
scenery is picturesque in the highest degree. "Yesterday I went to Old
Melrose. The windings of the Tweed there are beautiful; but the tolling
the abbey bell recalls me from my wanderings."

The impression made on Sir Walter Scott by the ruins may be inferred
from the following lines:--

  "If thou would'st view fair Melrose aright,
  Go visit it by the pale moonlight;
  For the gay beams of lightsome day
  Gild but to flout the ruins grey.
  When the broken arches are black in night,
  And each shafted oriel glimmers white;
  When the cold light's uncertain shower
  Streams on the ruin'd central tower,
  When buttress and buttress, alternately,
  Seem framed of ebon and ivory;
  When silver edges the imagery,
  And the scrolls that teach thee to live and die;
  When distant Tweed is heard to rave,
  And the owlet to hoot o'er the dead man's grave;
  Then go--but go alone the while--
  Then view St. David's ruin'd pile;
  And home returning, soothly swear,
  Was never scene so sad and fair!"


One of your correspondents (with whom I had once a disputation on the
_weighty_ subject of ghosts) sent you a version of the subjoined
epitaph, with a trifling alteration in the spelling, (which is copied
from a very ancient tomb-stone in Melrose Abbey,) with these remarks,
(see MIRROR, vol. 4, p. 392):--"The following beautiful lines were
written by a cow-boy [!] in Sussex on a wall, with a piece of red chalk,
[mark the precision.] They have only been inserted in a Sussex paper,
and may be quite unknown to many London readers," &c. &c. &c. This is a
regular hoax.


EPITAPH.

  The earth goeth on the earth,
  Glist'ring like Gold;
  The earth goes to the earth sooner than it wold.
  The earth builds on the earth castles and towers;
  The earth says to the earth, all shall be ours.


Here the contemplative wanderer may pass many an hour, with profit and
pleasure,

  "Mid epitaphs and tombs,
  Wrapt in the dreams of other days."


HISTORY OF THE ABBEY.

I have arranged a few particulars of the history, &c. of this relic of
monkish times, which will form an appropriate conclusion to these
desultory remarks.

  "Hail! ye bold turrets, and thou rev'rend pile,
  That seem in age's hoary rest to smile!
  All trail! for here creative fancy reads
  Of ages past the long-forgotten deeds.
  With trembling footsteps I approach thy gates,
  The massy door upon the hinges grates!
  Hark! as it opens what a hollow groan
  'Cross the dark hall and down the aisles is thrown!"

SIR EGERTON BAYDGES.


It is handed down by tradition that an abbey was founded at Melrose
about the end of the sixth century. The famous St. Cuthbert was one of
the abbots in 643; he, however, left, and went to Holy Island, in
Northumberland. Many wonderful stories are related of St. Cuthbert; that
eleven years after his death in Holy Island, (in 687,) his body, on
being taken up, exhibited no marks of corruption, seeming as if asleep,
&c. &c. Ethelwold succeeded St. Cuthbert, and sometime after the
monastery was ruined by the Danes. The place where this abbey is
supposed to have stood is called Old Melrose, and is a mile and a half
from the present abbey.

Melrose Abbey was founded by king David of Scotland in 1136. It is
supposed to have been built in ten years. The church of the convent was
dedicated to St. Mary on the 28th of July, 1146. It was the mother
church of the Cistertian order in Scotland. The monks were brought from
Rievaulx Abbey, in Yorkshire. Their habit was white; and they soon
superseded the order of the Benedictines.

The abbey is built in the form of St. John's cross, of the Gothic style
of architecture, and is 258 feet in length; the breadth 137-1/2 feet;
and 943 feet in circumference. A considerable part of the principal
tower is now in ruins; its present height is 84 feet. There are many
very superb windows; the principal one at the east end (which is the top
nave of the cross,) appears to have been more recently built than the
others, and is 57 feet in extreme height, and 28 feet wide. It has been
ornamented with statues, &c. The beauty of the carved work, with which
the abbey is profusely decorated, is seldom equalled, and deservedly
celebrated:

  "Spreading herbs and flow'rets bright,
  Glisten'd with the dew of night;
  Nor herb nor flow'ret glisten'd there,
  But was carved in the cloister'd arches as fair."


There are in the external view of the building 50 windows, 4 doors, 54
niches, and above 50 buttresses. The abbey was much injured by the
English in 1322 and 1384. Richard II. made it a grant in 1389, as some
compensation for the injuries it had sustained in the retreat of his
army. It was also greatly defaced during the reformation. A stronger
proof of their infatuated and (partly) misplaced zeal cannot be adduced,
than the destruction of religious edifices by the reformers. There were
one hundred monks, without including the abbot and dignitaries. The last
abbot was James Stuart, natural son of James V., who died in 1559. The
privileges and possessions of the abbey were very extensive,.and it was
endowed by its founder, David, with the lands of Melrose, Eildon, &c.,
&c., right of fishery on the Tweed, &c.; and succeeding monarchs
increased its property. Sixty of the monks, it is said, renounced popery
at the reformation. In 1542, the revenue of the abbey was, "1758_l_.
in money, 14 chalders nine bolls of wheat, 56 chal. 5 bolls of barley,
78 chal. 13 bolls of meal, 44 chal. 10 bolls of oats, 84 capons, 620
poultry, 105 stone of butter, 8 chal. of salt, 340 loads of peats, and
500 carriages;" besides 60 bolls of corn, 300 barrels of ale, and 18
hogsheads of wine, for the service of the mass: a large quantity for the
entertainment of strangers; 4,000_l_. for the care of the sick; and
400_l_. to the barber. These were given up at the commencement of the
reformation in 1561. The lands were either seized by the crown, or
divided amongst the nobles. A large portion fell into the hands of the
Buccleugh family.

A stone coffin, supposed to be that of the famous Michael Scott, the
wizard, was found in the small aisle on the south of the chancel in
1812. It was authenticated that his remains had been laid here. There
was an altar erected to say mass for his soul. The length of the
skeleton was six feet. A stone head at the foot of the coffin bears a
very rude wizard-like appearance. Alexander II. and many of the Scottish
kings and nobles are buried here. The best view is obtained of the
building from the south east, which, indeed, commands the whole of the
ruin. The village contains 500 or 600 inhabitants, and is 35 miles
distant from Edinburgh. The remains of several Roman camps are to be
seen in its neighbourhood, and one of the hills bears the marks of
having been a volcano. Sir Walter Scott's residence at Abbotsford is
within a few miles.

VYVYAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON WAITS.

(_To the Editor of the Mirror_.)


MR. EDITOR,--It may not be unacceptable to many of your readers to
receive some elucidation of a custom which is still prevalent at the
present season. I allude to the waits, who visit us in the month of
December, with instrumental music, going from house to house.

_Waites_, or _waits_, formerly _wayghtes_ is derived from
the latter noun, and originally signified _hautbois_, (or hautbois,
as we have it in English,) of which it is not unworthy remark, there is
no singular number. From the instrument its signification was, after a
time, transferred to the performers themselves; concerning whom, it is
well known,.the appellation is now applied to all who follow the
practice above adverted to, especially those who, at the approach of.
Christmas, salute us with their nightly concerts.

The _wayghtes_ of ancient times were, as some historians say, so
called, because they attended or _waited_ on potentates, judges,
magistrates, and bodies corporate, pomp and processions, &c.; they were
also sometimes appointed to keep a sort of Watch at night, and were then
generally decorated with superb dresses, splendid cloaks, &c. In Rymers'
_Fardera_ there is an account of such an establishment, of the
minstrels and _waites_ who were in the service of the court of
Edward IV., wherein is mentioned "a _waite_ that nighteleye, from
Michaelmas to Shrove Thorsday, pipeth the watch within this court;" "i.
fewer times, in the somere nightes iij. times." Todd derives the term
waits from _wahts_, (Goth.) nocturnal itinerant musicians,
(Beaumont and Fletcher;) Bayley, on account of their waiting on
magistrates, &c.; or of _guet_, a watch; or from the French
_guetter_, to watch, because anciently they kept a sort of watch a
night. From what I have narrated, then, it appears that the persons
formerly called waites, or waits, were _musical_ watchmen, the word
implying _obees_. They were, in fact, minstrels, at first annexed
to the king's court, who sounded the watch every night; and in towns
paraded the streets during winter, to prevent theft, &c. At Exeter they
were set up, with a regular salary, in 1400; and although suppressed by
the Puritans, were reinstated in 1660. M.A. Boyer, in his _French and
English Dictionary_, Rivington. 1747, under the word _waits_, s.
has the following: "in the French, _sorte de hautbois_, (ho-boy,)
corresponding with the signification of the term waits, as itinerant or
wandering (music or) musicians. These nocturnal perambulators, it seems,
were anciently called, as they now are, waits; and persons, bearing the
same name, still go about our streets during the month of December,
(previous to the 25th.) Whatsoever may be the reasons or the motives of
those (maunderers) who _now_ call _themselves waits_, I must
leave for the consideration of such as are favoured with their visits. I
am of opinion it can have neither allusion nor similitude to the
Christmas carol as some have suggested, which was an imitation, however
humble, of 'The glory to God on high,' &c., as sung by the angels who
hovered over the fields of Bethlehem on the morning of our Saviour's
nativity." It is true, indeed, that our modern angels, _the waits_
of 1897, have _hovered about_, and _they may_ (without a pun)
be styled angels (of darkness), not only on account of the watch they
keep _a nights_, but on account of those _spirit-uous propensities_,
for the attainment of which, principally, some have supposed, _we_ are
_indebted_ to _them_ for _their waits_, and also for their _wait-ing_
upon us on the day ycleped boxing-day.

But to return to our subject; independent of the origin of the waits, or
of the persons so called, as relates to the institution in England,
which is, comparatively, of modern date, _it appears there were
peculiar to the Romans_ a description of individuals, who, in their
offices and character, answered to our waits, and from whom there is no
doubt the latter were derived; these, among the Romans, were called
_spondaulae_, from which I conceive the _waightes_, or _waites_,
of our ancient kings were borrowed. The _Roman waites_, or _spondaulae_,
were a description of vocal and instrumental musicians, who performed a
hymn, whose measure consisted of spondees, (a poetic foot, formed of two
long syllables,) which was sung, accompanied by the flute, or other wind
instrument, while the priest offered the sacrifice, and the incense was
burning, to procure the favour of the gods; the waits, or spondaulae,
continuing their music, to prevent the priest from hearing sounds of ill
omen, which might disturb the ceremony, or divert his attention. It has
been suggested, in this view of the origin of the waits, which many
writers consider to be the real source of the custom, that they are
altogether anti-christian, and of heathen and idolatrous foundation, and
of consequence have neither allusion to, nor connexion with, our
festivities at Christmas _at any period_.

City Road.

L. DESORMEAUX.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGIN OF LOVE.

FROM THE MADRIGALS OF GUARINI.

(_For the Mirror_.)


  Cupid one day, in luckless hour,
  Observed a bee from flow'r to flow'r,
    Hurrying on busy wing;
  Thinking to gain the honied prize,
  He strove the insect to surprise,
    But quickly felt its sting.

  Fired with revenge, he flew away
  To where asleep my Julia lay,
    On mossy bank reclin'd;
  And while he sought relief to sip,
  By kisses from her balmy lip,
    He left the sting behind.

  Thus if I now, in hours of bliss,
  From her sweet mouth should steal a kiss,
    I after feel the smart;
  For when her rosy lips I've press'd,
  And think myself supremely blest,
    I bear the sting at heart!

E.L.J.


       *       *       *       *       *

TOTTENHAM HIGH CROSS.

(_For the Mirror_.)


On entering Tottenham, on the right from London, is to be seen the
following inscription over eight alms-houses:--

  1600.
  Not vnto vs,
  O Lord--
  Not vnto vs--But
  vnto thy name
  give ye glorie.

_Ps. 115, v. i._


"Balthaza Zanchez, born in Spain, in the citie of Shere, in Estramadvra,
is the fownder of these eyght Alma-Houses for the relieefe of eyght
poore men and women of the Town of Tattenham High Crasse."

The founder of these alms-houses, Balthazar Zanches, was confectioner to
Philip II. of Spain, with whom he came over to England, and was the
first who exercised that art in this country. He became a Protestant,
and died in 1602. It is said that he lived in the house, now the George
and Vulture Inn; at the entrance of which he had fixed the arms of
England, in a garter, supported by a lion and griffin, and with the
initials E.R.: over another door, 1587.

Among the ancient possessors of the manor of Tottenham, was Robert
Bruce, king of Scotland, from whom the Manor-House obtained the name of
Bruce Castle, which it still retains.--At the end of Page Green stands a
remarkable circular clump of elms, called the Seven Sisters; and on the
west side of the great road is St. Loy's well, which is said to be
always full, and never to run over; and opposite the vicarage house
rises a spring, called Bishop's Well, of which the common people report
many strange cures.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARCANA OF SCIENCE.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Outline of the History of Gas Lighting._


"What a striking contrast between the appearance of the brilliantly
illuminated streets at this time, compared with the days of Henry V. It
is recorded, that in 1417, Sir Henry Barton, mayor of London, ordained
'lanterns with lights to bee hanged out on the winter evenings between
Hallowtide and Candlemasse.' Paris was first lighted by an order issued
in 1524; and in the beginning of the sixteenth century, the streets
being infested with robbers, the inhabitants were ordered to keep lights
burning in the windows of all such houses as fronted the streets. In
1668, when some regulations were made for improving the streets of
London, the inhabitants were reminded to hang out their lanterns at the
usual time; and in 1690 an order was issued to hang out a light, or
lamp, every night as soon as it was dark, from Michaelmas to Christmas.
By an act of the common council in 1716, all housekeepers, whose houses
fronted any street, lane, or passage, were required to hang out, every
dark night, one or more lights, to burn from six to eleven o'clock,
under the penalty of one shilling. In 1736, the lord mayor and common
council applied to parliament for an act to enable them to erect lamps;
and in 1744 they obtained farther powers for lighting the city.
Birmingham was first lighted by lamps in 1733, so that in this
improvement it preceded the metropolis."--_Beckman's History of
Inventions_.

It may not be disagreeable to our readers to trace the brilliant lights
by which the streets are illuminated, from the obscure recesses of
nature, and to show by what steps that which was once thought simply an
object of curiosity, has been applied to a practical purpose of the most
useful and agreeable kind.

The inflammable gases were known originally for their direful effects
rather than their useful qualities. Miners were acquainted with two of
them, called the _choke damp_ and the _fire damp_, long before
the establishment of the Royal Society; but the earliest printed account
of either occurs in its Transactions, in the year 1667. The paper in
which it is contained, is entitled, "A Description of a Well and Earth
in Lancashire taking Fire, by a Candle approaching to it. Imparted by
Thomas Shirley, Esq an eye-witness."

Dr. Stephen Hales was the first person who procured an elastic fluid
from the actual distillation of coal. His experiments with this object
are related in the first volume of his Vegetable Statics, published in
1726. From the distillation of "one hundred and fifty-eight grains of
Newcastle coal, he states that he obtained one hundred and eighty cubic
inches of air, which weighed fifty-one grains, being nearly one third of
the whole." The inflammability of the fluid he thus produced was no part
of his inquiry; and though it is now deemed its most useful and
important property, appears to have excited no attention till several
years after.

In the "Philosophical Transactions" for 1733, some properties of
coal-gas are detailed in a paper called, "An Account of the Damp Air in
a Coal-pit of Sir James Lowther, sunk within Twenty Yards of the Sea."
This paper, as it contains some striking facts relating to the
inflammability and other properties of coal-gas, is deserving of
particular attention.

The principal properties of coal-gas are here related with remarkable
minuteness and precision; and as the writer exhibited them to different
members of the Royal Society, and showed that after keeping the gas
sometime, it still retained its elasticity and inflammability, it is
remarkable, that the philosophers of the time undertook no experiments
with the view of applying it to useful purposes.

Dr. John Clayton, in an extract from a letter in the "Philosophical
Transactions" for 1735, calls gas the "spirit" of coal; and came to a
knowledge of its inflammability by an accident. This "spirit" chanced to
catch fire, by coming in contact with a candle, as it was escaping from
a fracture in one of his distillatory vessels. By preserving the gas in
bladders, he frequently diverted his friends, by exhibiting its
inflammability. This is the nearest approach to the idea of practically
applying this property.

The subject attracted the attention of Dr. Richard Watson, who published
the results of his researches in the second volume of his "Chemical
Essays." He dwells upon the elasticity and inflammability of coal-gas;
and remarked, that it retains these properties _after passing through
a great quantity of water_.

The man who first applied the inflammability of gas to the purposes of
illumination, was Mr. Murdoch. This gentleman, residing at Soho, near
Birmingham, that hot-bed of ingenuity and mechanical science, on
occasion of the celebration of the peace of 1802, covered the works of
Soho with a light and splendour that astonished and delighted all the
population of the surrounding country. Mr. Murdoch had not attained to
this perfection without having had many difficulties to encounter. In
the year 1792, he used coal gas for lighting his house and offices, at
Redruth, in Cornwall; and in 1797 he again made a similar use of it at
Old Cunnock, in Ayrshire. At Soho, he constructed an apparatus which
enabled him to exhibit his plan on a larger scale than any he had
heretofore attempted. His experiments were then seduously continued,
with the able assistance of Mr. Southern and Mr. Henry Creighton, with
a view to ascertain not only the best modes of making, but also of
purifying and burning gas, so as to prevent either the smell or the
smoke from being offensive.

Previous to the public display made of the illuminating properties of
gas, at Soho, it had been applied to similar purposes, by a M. Le Bon,
of Paris. A friend of the gentlemen at Soho, wrote from Paris a letter,
dated November 8, 1801, to that establishment, informing them, that a
person had lighted up his house and gardens with the gas obtained from
wood and coal, and had it in contemplation to light up the city of
Paris. This is an important fact in the detail of the history of
gas-lighting; and we should be glad of further information respecting
the steps which led M. Le Bon to the results which he appears to have
obtained, and also respecting the fortunes which subsequently attended
the invention in France. However, M. Le Bon's exhibitions have a
remarkable connexion with the progress of the invention in England: they
seem, indeed, almost to have diverted it from its natural course, which
certainly would have led from the illumination at Soho to its public
adoption.

In 1804, Dr. Henry delivered a course of lectures on chemistry, at
Manchester, in which he showed the mode of producing gas from coal, and
the facility and advantage of its use. Dr, Henry analyzed the
composition and investigated the properties of carburetted hydrogen gas.
His experiments were numerous and accurate, and made upon a variety of
substances; and having obtained the gas from wood, peat, different kinds
of coal, oil, wax, &c. he endeavoured to estimate the relative quantity
of light yielded by each.

In 1805, Mr. Samuel Clegg, to whom the world is much indebted for the
improvements he subsequently introduced into the manufacture of gas,
having left Soho, directed his attention to the construction of gas
apparatus. The first he erected was in the cotton mill of Mr. H Lodge,
near Halifax, in Yorkshire. Mr. Josiah Pemberton, one of those ingenious
men happily not rare in the centre of our manufactures, whose minds are
perpetually employed on the improvement of mechanical contrivances, and
who, as soon as they have accomplished one discovery, leave others to
reap the benefit, and themselves pursue the chase alter new inventions,
had for some time been experimenting on the nature of gas. A resident of
Birmingham, his attention was probably roused by the exhibition at Soho;
and such was the fertility of his invention, and his practical skill as
a mechanic, that it has been observed by those who know him, that he
never undertook to make an article without inventing an improvement in
its construction. About 1806, he exhibited gas-lights in a variety of
forms, and with great brilliance, at the front of his manufactory in
Birmingham.

In 1808 he constructed an apparatus, applicable to several uses, for Mr.
Benjamin Cooke, a manufacturer of brass tubes, gilt toys, and other
articles. In 1808, Mr. Murdoch communicated to the Royal Society a very
interesting account of his successful application of coal gas to
lighting the extensive establishment of Messrs. Phillips and Lea. For
this communication, Count Rumford's gold medal was presented to him. Mr.
Murdoch's statements threw great light on the comparative advantage of
gas and candles, and contained much useful information on the expenses
of production and management.

Early in 1809, Mr. Samuel Clegg communicated to the Society of Arts his
plan of an apparatus for lighting manufactories with gas, for which he
received a silver medal. In this year also, Mr. Clegg erected a gas
apparatus in Mr. Harris's manufactory at Coventry.

It was natural to suppose that all these circumstances should eventually
produce an impression on the country; consequently about this time much
attention was excited towards gas-lighting, and much utility anticipated
from a general application of it to public purposes. In this year 1809,
accordingly, the first application was made to parliament for an act to
incorporate a company, with the view of carrying on its processes more
effectually and beneficially. The movers in this project were some of
the more intelligent and persevering subscribers to a New Light and Heat
Company, projected by Mr. Winsor. They were opposed by some on the
ground of their designs being visionary and fraught with danger; and by
Mr. Murdoch on the plea of priority of invention, which entitled him to
exclusive privileges if he chose to avail himself of them. This gave
rise to a long and minute investigation of the subject before a committee
of the House of Commons. The application terminated unsuccessfully; and
the testimony of Mr. Aceum, exposed him to the animadversions of Mr.
Brougham. In 1810, however, the application was renewed by the same
parties, and though some opposition was encountered, and considerable
expense incurred, the bill passed, but not without great alterations;
and the present London and Westminster Chartered Gas-Light and Coke
Company was established. The proceedings of this company after the act
was obtained comprise a most important period in the history of this
invention. During the first few years of their operations large sums of
money were expended in experiments, and very few beneficial results were
obtained. The undertaking was complicated and difficult, and not only
required the guidance of experience, but the assistance of a scientific
education and a fertile invention. These requisites were found in the
person of Mr. Samuel Clegg, under whose able direction and
superintendence the principal works of the company, at their different
stations, were erected. From this period various improvements were
gradually introduced into almost every part of the apparatus. In 1816,
Mr. Clegg obtained the patent for his horizontal rotative retort; his
apparatus for purifying coal gas with cream of lime; for his rotative
gas meter; and self-acting governor; and altogether by his exertions the
London and Westminster Company's affairs assumed a new and flattering
aspect.

For reasons which are not assigned, in 1817, Mr. Clegg retired from the
service of this establishment.

In this year, 1817, at the three stations belonging to the Chartered Gas
Company, twenty-five chaldron of coal were daily carbonized, producing
300,000 cubic feet of gas, which was equal to the supply of 75,000
Argand lamps, each yielding the light of six candles. At the City Gas
Works, in Dorset-street, Black-friars, the quantity of coal daily
carbonized amounted to, three chaldron, which afforded a quantity of gas
adequate to the supply of 1,500 Argand lamps; so that twenty-eight
chaldron of coal were daily carbonized at that time, and 76,500 lights
supplied by those two companies only.

At this period the principal object of attention in the manufacture of
gas was its purification. Mr. D. Wilson, of Dublin, took out a patent
for purifying coal gas by means of the chemical action of ammoniacal
gas. Another plan was devised by Mr. Reuben Phillips, of Exeter, who
obtained a patent for the purification of coal gas by the use of dry
lime. Mr. G. Holworthy, in 1818, took out a patent for a method of
purifying it by causing the gas, in a highly-condensed state, to pass
through iron retorts heated to a dark red. For this object and several
others, having in view improvements upon the ordinary method, many other
patents were procured.

OIL gas now appeared in the field as a rival of COAL gas. In 1815, Mr.
John Taylor had obtained a patent for an apparatus for the decomposition
of _oil_ and other animal substances; but the circumstance which
more particularly attracted the public attention to be directed to
_oil_ gas was the erection of the patent apparatus at Apothecary's
Hall, by Messrs. Taylors and Martineau; and the way was prepared for an
application to parliament for the establishment of an Oil Gas Company by
sundry papers in journals, and by the recommendations of Sir William
Congreve, who had been employed by the Secretary of State to inspect the
state of the gas manufactories in the metropolis. This application, made
in the year 1825, proved unfortunate.

In Sir William's Reports is the following account, beginning with the
London Gas-Light and Coke Company:--

At the Peter-street station the whole number of the retorts which they
had fixed was 300; the greatest number working at any time daring the
last year, 22l; the least 87. Fifteen gasometers, varying in dimensions,
the contents computed on an average at 20,626 cubic feet each, amounting
to 309,385 cubic feet altogether; but never quite filled; the working
contents estimated at 18,626 cubic feet each--in the whole at 279,390
cubic feet. The extent of mains belonging to this station is about
fifty-seven miles, there being two separate mains in some of the
streets; the produce of gas from 10,000 to 12,000 cubic feet from a
chaldron of coals. The weekly consumption of coal is reckoned at 42
bushels for each retort, amounting to about 602 chaldrons; and taking
the average number of retorts worked at this station at about 153, would
give an annual consumption of coals of upwards of 9,282 chaldrons,
producing 111,384,000 cubic feet of gas.

The average number of lights during the year 1822 was 10,660 private,
2,248 street lamps, theatres, 3,894.

At the Brick-lane works, the number of retorts which were fixed was 371,
the greatest number worked 217, and the least 60. The number of
gasometers 12, each averaging 18,427 cubic feet, amounting in the whole
to 221,131 cubic feet; and their average working contents 197,124 cubic
feet. The average number of retorts worked was 133; the coals consumed
8,060 chaldrons; the quantity of gas produced 96,720.000 cubic feet; the
number of lamps 1,978 public, 7,366 private, through 40 miles of mains.

At the Curtain-road establishment the whole number of retorts was 240;
the greatest number worked in the last year 80; the lowest 21. The
number of gasometers 6, average contents of each 15,077 cubic feet; the
contents of the whole 90,467; another gasometer containing 16,655 cubic
feet; the average number of retorts worked 55; the coals consumed 3,336
chaldrons; quantity of gas produced 40,040,000 cubic feet; the number of
lamps supplied 3,860 private, and 629 public, through 25 miles of mains.

The whole annual consumption of coals by the three different stations
was 20,678; the quantity of gas produced 248,000,000 cubic feet: the
whole number of lamps lighted by this company 30,735, through 122 miles
of mains.

The City of London Gas-Light Company, Dorset-street:--The number of
retorts fixed 230; the number of gasometers 6; the largest 39,270 cubic
feet, the smallest 5,428 cubic feet; two large additional gasometers
nearly completed, contents of each 27,030 cubic feet, making in the
whole 181,282 cubic feet. The number of lamps lighted 5,423 private, and
2,413 public, through 50 miles of mains. The greatest number of retorts
worked at a time (in 1811) 130, the least 110, average 170. The quantity
of coals carbonized amounted to 8,840 chaldrons; produced 106,080,000
cubic feet of gas.

The South London Gas-Light and Coke Company, at Bankside:--The number of
retorts was 140; gasometers 3; the contents of the whole 41,110 cubic
feet; and their mains from 30 to 40 miles in length. At their other
station in Wellington-street, they had then no retorts in action; but
three large gasometers were erected, containing together 73,565 cubic
feet, which were supplied from Bankside till the retorts were ready to
work.

The Imperial Gas-Light and Coke Company were erecting at their Hackney
station two gasometers of 10,000 cubic feet each, and about to erect
four more of the same size. At their Pancras station they had marked out
ground for six gasometers of 10,000 cubic feet each.

In the year 1814, there was only _one_ gasometer in Peter-street,
of 14,000 cubic feet, belonging to the Chartered Gas-Light Company, then
the only company established in London. At present there are four great
companies, having altogether 47 gasometers at work, capable of
containing in the whole 917,940 cubic feet of gas, supplied by 1,315
retorts, and these consuming 33,000 chaldron of coals in the year, and
producing 41,000 chaldron of coke. The whole quantity of gas generated
annually being upwards of 397,000,000 cubic feet, by which 61,203
private, and 7,268 public or street lamps are lighted in the metropolis.
In addition to these great companies, there are several private
companies, whose operations are not included in the foregoing
statements.--_Abridged from Matthews's History of Gas-Lighting, and
the London Magazine, Dec. 1827_.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF THE
PUBLIC JOURNALS.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON LYRICS.

MAGOG'S PROPHECY.

  Pastor cum traheret per freta navibus.

HOR. _lib._ i. _od._ 15.


  As late, of civic glory vain,
  The Lord Mayor drove down Mincing-lane,
  The progress of the baimer'd train
    To lengthen, not to shorten:

  Gigantic Magog, vex'd with heat,
  Thus to be made the rabble's treat,
  Check'd the long march in Tower-street,
    To tell his Lordship's fortune.

  "Go, man thy barge for Whitehall Stair;
  Salute th' Exchequer Barons there,
  Then summon round thy civic chair
    To dinner Whigs and Tories--
  Bid Dukes and Earls thy hustings climb;
  But mark my work, Matthias Prime,
  Ere the tenth hour the scythe of Time
    Shall amputate, thy glories.

  "Alas! what loads of food I see,
  What Turbots from the Zuyder Zee,
  What Calipash, what Calipee,
    What Salad and what Mustard:
  Heads of the Church and limbs of Law,
  Vendors of Calico and Straw,
  Extend one sympathetic jaw
    To swallow Cake and Custard.

