I sometimes hear my friends complain finely that I do not appreciate
their fineness. I shall not tell them whether I do or not. As if they
expected a vote of thanks for every fine thing which they uttered or
did! Who knows but it was finely appreciated? It may be that your
silence was the finer thing of the two....  In human intercourse the
tragedy begins, not when there is misunderstanding about words, but when
silence is not understood. Then there can never be an explanation.

--_Thoreau_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a friendly heart that has plenty of friends.

--_Thackeray_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not becoming to turn from friends in adversity, but then it is for
those who have basked in the sunshine of their prosperity to adhere to
them. No one was ever so foolish as to select the unfortunate for their
friends.

--_Lucanus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is essential to friendship that there be no labor to pass for more
than we are, no effort, no anxiety to hide! If anything be concealed,
the constant intercourse of friends will discover it, and one discovery
will produce others. The idea that the heart has one secret fold
extinguishes affection.

--_Channing_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Impatient and uncertain lovers think that they must say or do something
kind whenever they meet; they must never be cold. But they who are
friends do not do what they think they must, but what they must. Even
their friendship is, in one sense, a sublime phenomenon to them.

--_Thoreau_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a good and safe rule to sojourn in many places, as if you meant to
spend your life there, never omitting an opportunity of doing a kindness
or speaking a true word or making a friend.

--_Ruskin_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has seemed to me lately more possible than I knew, to carry a
friendship greatly, on one side, without due correspondence on the
other. Why should I cumber myself with the poor fact that the receiver
is not capacious? It never troubles the sun that some of his rays fall
wide and vain into ungrateful space, and only a small part on the
reflecting planet....  It is thought a disgrace to love unrequited. But
the great will see that true love cannot be unrequited.

--_Emerson_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the cause of friendship brave all dangers.

--_Dickens_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindness given and received aright and knitting two hearts into one is a
thing of heaven, as rare in this world as a perfect love; both are the
overflow of only very rare and beautiful souls.

--_Balzac_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kindred passions and pursuits are the natural groundwork of friendship.
Real friendship is of slow growth, and never thrives, unless ingrafted
upon a stock of known and reciprocal merit.

--_Chesterfield_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let this, therefore, be established as a primary law concerning
friendship, that we expect from our friends only what is honorable, and
for our friends' sake do what is honorable; that we should not wait till
we are asked; that zeal be ever ready, and reluctance far from us.

--_Cicero_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Let Friendship's accents cheer our doubtful way,
    And Love's pure planet lend its guiding ray,--
  Our tardy Art shall wear an angel's wings,
    And life shall lengthen with the joy it brings!

--_Holmes_.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am not of that feather, to shake off my friend when most he needs me.

--_Shakespeare_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let the honor of thy friend be as dear unto thee as thy own.

--_The Talmud_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life to be rich and fertile must be reinforced with friendship. It is
the sap that preserves from blight and withering; it is the sunshine
that beckons on the blossoming and fruitage; it is the starlight dew
that perfumes life with sweetness and besprinkles it with splendor; it
is the music-tide that sweeps the soul, scattering treasures; it is the
victorious and blessed leader of integrity's forlorn hope; it is the
potent alchemy that transmutes failure into success; it is the hidden
manna that nourishes when all other sustenance fails; it is the voice
that speaks to hopes all dead, "Because I live, ye shall live also." For
the loftiest friendships have no commercial element in them: they are
founded on disinterestedness and sacrifices. They neither expect nor
desire a return for gift or service. Amid the tireless breaking of the
billows on the shores of experience, there is no surer anchorage than a
friendship that "beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all
things."

--_Cooper_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is one of the wretchednesses of the great that they have no approved
friends.  Kings are the most solitary beings on earth.

--_Channing_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many kinds of fruit grow upon the tree of life, but none so sweet as
friendship.

--_Larcom_.

       *       *       *       *       *

My treasures are my friends.

--_Constantius_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life should be fortified by many friendships.

--_Smith_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Love begins with love; and there is no passing from firm friendship to
even feeble love.

--_La Bruyere_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Live not without a friend; the Alpine rock must own
  Its mossy grace or else be nothing but a stone.

--_Story_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let the soul be assured that somewhere in the universe it should rejoin
its friend, and it would be content and cheerful alone for a thousand
years.

--_Emerson_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Make new friends, but keep the old;
  Those are silver, these are gold,
  Brow may wrinkle, hair grows grey:
  True friendship never knows decay.

--_Anon_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Oh, the comfort--the inexpressible comfort of feeling safe with a
person--having neither to weigh thought nor measure words, but pouring
them all right out, just as they are, chaff and grain together; certain
that a faithful hand will take and sift them, keep what is worth
keeping, and with the breath of kindness blow the rest away.

--_Muloch_.

       *       *       *       *       *

O matchless wisdom; those seem to take the sun out of the world who
remove friendship from the pleasures of life: than which we have
received nothing better or more pleasant from the gods.

--_Cicero_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Not on the store of sprightly wine,
    Nor plenty of delicious meats,
  Though generous Nature did design
    To court us with perpetual treats;
  'Tis not on these we for content depend,
    So much as on the shadow of a friend.

--_Menander_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since human affairs are frail and fleeting, some persons must ever be
sought for whom we may love, and by whom we may be loved; for when
affection and kind feeling are done away with, all cheerfulness likewise
is banished from existence.

--_Cicero_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lying on lower levels is but a trivial offence compared with civility
and compliments on the level of friendship.

--_Thoreau_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  My friend, with you to live alone,
  Were how much better than to own
  A crown, a sceptre and a throne!

--_Tennyson_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pure friendship is something which men of an inferior intellect can
never taste.

--_La Bruyere_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sweet words will multiply a man's friends; and a fair-speaking tongue
will multiply courtesies. Let those that are at peace with thee be many;
but thy counsellors one of a thousand. If thou wouldest get thee a
friend, get him by proving, and be not in haste to trust him. For there
is a friend that is so for his own occasion, and he will not continue in
the day of thy affliction. And there is a friend that turneth to enmity;
and he will discover strife to thy reproach. And there is a friend that
is a companion at the table, and he will not continue in the day of thy
affliction; and in thy prosperity he will be as thyself, and will be
bold over thy servants; if thou shalt be brought low, he will be against
thee, and he will hide himself from thy face.

--_Bible_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first thing you should procure, after faith, is a good friend.

--_Arabic_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such a friendship, that through it we love places and seasons; for as
bright bodies emit rays at a distance, and flowers drop their sweet
leaves on the ground around them, so friends impart favor even to the
places where they dwell. With friends even poverty is pleasant. Words
cannot express the joy which a friend imparts; they only can know who
have experienced.  A friend is dearer than the light of heaven, for it
would be better for us that the sun were extinguished than that we
should be without friends.

--_S. Chrysostom_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange as it may sound, we are sometimes rather disposed to choose our
friends from the unworthy than the worthy; for though it is difficult to
love those whom we do not esteem, it is a greater difficulty to love
those whom we esteem much more than ourselves. A perfect friendship
requires equality, even in virtue.

--_Smith_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sincerity, truth, faithfulness, come into the very essence of
friendship.

--_Channing_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Somehow or other, friendship entwines itself with the life of all men,
nor does it suffer any mode of spending our life to be independent of
itself.

--_Cicero_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Small service is true service while it lasts,
    Of humblest friends, bright creature, scorn not one;
  The daisy by the shadow that it casts
    Protects the lingering dewdrop from the sun.

--_Wordsworth_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some friendships are made by nature, some by contract, some by interest,
and some by souls.

--_Taylor_.

       *       *       *       *       *

They who dare to ask anything of a friend, by their very request seem to
imply that they would do anything for the sake of a friend.

--_Cicero_.

       *       *       *       *       *

To act the part of a true friend requires more conscientious feeling
than to fill with credit and complacency any other station or capacity
in social life.

--_Ellis_.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is as much difference between the counsel that a friend giveth and
that a man giveth himself, as there is between the counsel of a friend
and of a flatterer.  For there is no such flatterer as is a man's self;
and there is no such remedy against flattery of a man's self as the
liberty of a friend.

--_Bacon_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The laws of friendship are austere and eternal, of one web with the laws
of nature and of morals.

--_Emerson_.

       *       *       *       *       *

To he only an admirer is not to be a friend of a human being. Human
nature wants something more, and our perceptions are diseased when we
dress up a human being in the attributes of divinity.  He is our friend
who loves more than admires us, and would aid us in our great work.

--_Channing_.

       *       *       *       *       *

True, active, productive friendship consists in keeping equal pace in
life, in the approval of my aims by my friend, while I approve his, and
thus moving forward together steadily, however much our way of thought
and life may vary.

--_Goethe_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  The man, that comforts a desponding friend
  With words alone, does nothing. He's a friend
  Indeed, who proves himself a friend in need.

--_Plautus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The making of friends, who are real friends, is the best token we have
of a man's success in life.

--_Hale_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Truthfulness, frankness, disinterestedness, and faithfulness are the
qualities absolutely essential to friendship, and these must be crowned
by a sympathy that enters into all the joys, the sorrows and the
interests of the friend; that delights in all his upward progress, and
when he stumbles or falls, stretches out the helping hand, and is tender
and patient even when it condemns.

--_Ware_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The expensiveness of friendship does not lie in what one does for one's
friends, but in what, out of regard for them, one leaves undone.

--_Ibsen_.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are three friendships which are advantageous, and three which are
injurious.  Friendship with the upright; friendship with the sincere;
and friendship with the man of observation: these are advantageous.
Friendship with the man of specious airs; friendship with the
insinuatingly soft; and friendship with the glib-tongued: these are
injurious.

--_Confucius_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  The tree withereth
  Which stands in the courtyard
  Without shelter of bark or of leaf.
  So is a man
  Destitute of friends.
  Why should he live on?

--_The Hava-mal_.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is nothing that is meritorious but virtue and friendship, and
indeed, friendship itself is but a part of virtue.

--_Pope_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mind never unbends itself so agreeably as in the conversation of a
well-chosen friend. There is indeed no blessing of life that is any way
comparable to the enjoyment of a discreet and virtuous friend. It eases
and unloads the mind, clears and improves the understanding, engenders
thoughts and knowledge, animates virtue and good resolutions, soothes
and allays the passions, and finds employment for most of the vacant
hours of life.

--_Addison_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The best way to represent to life the manifold use of friendship is to
cast and see how many things there are which a man cannot do himself;
and then it will appear that it was a sparing speech of the ancients to
say "that a friend is another himself."

--_Bacon_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The conversation of a friend brightens the eyes.

--_Persian Proverb_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who want friends to open themselves unto, are cannibals of their
own hearts. But one thing is most admirable, which is, that this
communicating of a man's self to his friend works two contrary effects;
for it redoubleth joys, and cutteth grief in halfs. For there is no man
that imparteth his joys to his friends, but he joyeth the more; and no
man that imparteth his griefs to his friend, but he grieveth the less.

--_Bacon_.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no better medicine for grief than the advice of a good and
honored friend. He who, in his sufferings, excites and tries to soothe
his mind by wine, though he may have pleasure for a moment, has a double
portion of pain afterwards.

--_Euripides_.

       *       *       *       *       *

