Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Pat A Benoy
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                              |
| Transcriber's Note: Italicized words, phrases, etc. are      |
| surrounded by _underline characters_. Greek transliterations |
| are surrounded by ~tildes~. Diacritical marks over           |
| characters are bracketed: [=x] indicates a macron over the   |
| letter, [(x] indicates a breve. Archaic spellings and        |
| hypenation inconsistancies have been retained.               |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+


{373}
NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 181.]
SATURDAY, APRIL 16. 1853.
[Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition, 5d.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

NOTES:--                                                       Page
  "The Shepherd of Banbury's Weather-Rules," by
    W. B. Rye                                                   373
  Notes on several misunderstood Words, by the Rev. W.
    R. Arrowsmith                                               375
  Lord Coke                                                     376
  Shakspeare Correspondence, by C. Mansfield Ingleby,
    &c.                                                         377

  MINOR NOTES:--Alleged Cure for Hydrophobia--Epitaph
    at Mickleton--Charade attributed to Sheridan--
    Suggested Reprint of Hearne--Suggestions of Books
    worthy of being reprinted--Epigram all the Way from
    Belgium--Derivation of "Canada"--Railway Signals
    --A Centenarian Trading Vessel                              379
QUERIES:--
  Bishop Ken                                                    380
  MINOR QUERIES:--Canute's Reproof to his Courtiers
    --The Sign of the Cross in the Greek Church--Rev.
    Richard Midgley, Vicar of Rochdale, temp. Eliz.--
    Huet's Navigations of Solomon--Sheriff of Worcestershire
    in 1781--Tree of the Thousand Images--De
    Burgh Family--Witchcraft Sermons at Huntingdon--
    Consort--Creole--Shearman Family--Traitors' Ford
    --"Your most obedient humble Servant"--Version
    of a Proverb--Ellis Walker--"The Northerne Castle"
    --Prayer-Book in French--"Navita Erythræum," &c.
    --Edmund Burke--Plan of London--Minchin                     380

  MINOR QUERIES WITH ANSWERS:--Leapor's "Unhappy
    Father"--Meaning of "the Litten" or "Litton"
    --St. James' Market House                                   382

REPLIES:--
  Grub Street Journal, by James Crossley                        383
  Stone Pillar Worship                                          383
  Autographs in Books                                           384
  Grindle                                                       384
  Roger Outlawe, by Dr. J. H. Todd, &c.                         385
  Prospectus to Cibber's "Lives of the Poets," by James
    Crossley                                                    386
  Pic-nic, by John Anthony, M.D., and Henry H. Breen            387
  Peter Sterry and Jeremiah White, by James Crossley            388

  PHOTOGRAPHIC NOTES AND QUERIES:--Colouring Collodion
    Portraits--On some Points in the Collodion
    Process--Economical Iodizing Process                        388

  REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES:--Bishop Juxon's Account
    of Vendible Books in England--Dutensiana--Vicars-Apostolic
    --Tombstone in Churchyard--"Her face is
    like," &c.--Annuellarius--Ship's Painter--True Blue
    --"Quod fuit esse"--Subterranean Bells--Spontaneous
    Combustion--Muffs worn by Gentlemen--
    Crescent--The Author of "The Family Journal"--
    Parochial Libraries--Sidney as a Christian Name--
    "Rather"--Lady High Sheriff--Nugget--Epigrams
    --Editions of the Prayer-Book--Portrait of Pope--
    Passage in Coleridge--Lowbell--Burn at Croydon               390

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, &c.                                            394
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                   394
  Notices to Correspondents                                      394
  Advertisements                                                 395

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.


"THE SHEPHERD OF BANBURY'S WEATHER-RULES."

_The Shepherd of Banbury's Rules to judge of the Changes of the
Weather_, first printed in 1670, was long a favourite book with the
country gentleman, the farmer, and the peasant. They were accustomed to
regard it with the consideration and confidence which were due to the
authority of so experienced a master of the art of prognostication, and
dismissing every sceptical thought, received his maxims with the same
implicit faith as led them to believe that if their cat chanced to wash
her face, rainy weather would be the certain and inevitable result.
Moreover, this valuable little manual instructed them how to keep their
horses, sheep, and oxen sound, and prescribed cures for them when
distempered. No wonder, then, if it has passed through many editions.
Yet it has been invariably stated that _The Banbury Shepherd_ in fact
had no existence; was purely an imaginary creation; and that the work
which passes under his name, "John Claridge," was written by Dr. John
Campbell, the Scottish historian, who died in 1775. The statements made
in connexion with this book are curious enough; and it is with a view of
placing the matter in a clear and correct light that I now trouble you
with a Note, which will, I hope, tend to restore to this poor
weather-wise old shepherd his long-lost rank and station among the rural
authors of England.

I believe that the source of the error is to be traced to the second
edition of the _Biographia Britannica_, in a memoir of Dr. Campbell by
Kippis, in which, when enumerating the works of the learned Doctor,
Kippis says, "He was also the author of _The Shepherd of Banbury's
Rules_,--a favourite pamphlet with the common people." We next find the
book down to Campbell as the "author" in Watt's _Bibliotheca
Britannica_, which is copied both by Chalmers and Lowndes. And so the
error has been perpetuated, even up to the time of the publication of a
meritorious _History of Banbury_, by the late Mr. Alfred Beesley, in
1841. This writer thus speaks of the work:

    "The far-famed shepherd of Banbury is only an apocryphal
    personage. In 1744 there was published {374} _The Shepherd of
    Banbury's Rules to judge of the Changes of the Weather, grounded
    on forty Years' Experience. To which is added, a rational
    Account of the Causes of such Alterations, the Nature of Wind,
    Rain, Snow, &c., on the Principles of the Newtonian Philosophy.
    By John Claridge. London: printed for W. Bickerton, in the
    Temple Exchange, Fleet Street. Price 1s._ The work attracted a
    large share of public attention, and deserved it. A second
    edition appeared in 1748.... It is stated in Kippis's
    _Biographia Britannica_ that, the real author was Dr. John
    Campbell, a Scotchman."

In 1770 there appeared _An Essay on the Weather, with Remarks on "The
Shepherd of Banbury's Rules, &c."_: by John Mills, Esq., F.R.S. Mr.
Mills observes:

    "Who the shepherd of Banbury was, we know not; nor indeed have
    we any proof that the rules called his were penned by a real
    shepherd. Both these points are, however, immaterial; their
    truth is their best voucher.... Mr. Claridge published them in
    the year 1744, since which time they are become very scarce,
    having long been out of print."

Now all these blundering attempts at annihilating the poor shepherd may,
I think, be accounted for by neither of the above-mentioned writers
having a knowledge of the original edition, published in 1670, of the
real shepherd's book (the title of which I will presently give), which
any one may see in the British Museum library. It has on the title-page
a slight disfigurement of name, viz. John _Clearidge_; but it is
_Claridge_ in the Preface. The truth is, that Dr. John Campbell
_re-published_ the book in 1744, but without affixing his own name, or
giving any information of its author or of previous editions. The part,
however, which he bore in this edition is explained by the latter
portion of the title already given; and still more clearly in the
Preface. We find authorities added, to give weight to the shepherd's
remarks; and likewise additional rules in relation to the weather,
derived from the common sayings and proverbs of the country people, and
from old English books of husbandry. It may, in short, be called a
clever scientific commentary on the shepherd's observations. After what
has been stated, your readers will not be surprised to learn that one
edition of the work appears in Watt's very inaccurate book under
CLARIDGE, another under CLEARIDGE, and a third under CAMPBELL. I will
now speak of the original work: it is a small octavo volume of
thirty-two pages, rudely printed, with an amusing Preface "To the
Reader," in which the shepherd dwells with much satisfaction on his
peculiar vaticinating talents. As this Preface has been omitted in all
subsequent editions, and as the book itself is extremely scarce, I
conceive that a reprint of it in your pages may be acceptable to your
Folk-lore readers. The "Rules" are interlarded with scraps of poetry,
somewhat after the manner of old Tusser, and bear the unmistakeable
impress of a "plain, unlettered Muse." The author concludes his work
with a poetical address "to the antiquity and honour of shepheards." The
title is rather a droll one, and is as follows:

    "The Shepheard's Legacy: or John Clearidge his forty Years'
    Experience of the Weather: being an excellent Treatise, wherein
    is shewed the Knowledge of the Weather. First, by the Rising and
    Setting of the Sun. 2. How the Weather is known by the Moon. 3.
    By the Stars. 4. By the Clouds. 5. By the Mists. 6. By the
    Rainbow. 7. And especially by the Winds. Whereby the Weather may
    be exactly known from Time to Time: which Observation was never
    heretofore published by any Author. 8. Also, how to keep your
    Sheep sound when they be sound. 9. And how to cure them if they
    be rotten. 10. Is shewed the Antiquity and Honour of Shepheards.
    With some certain and assured Cures for thy Horse, Cow, and
    Sheep.

        An Almanack is out at twelve months day,
        My Legacy it doth endure for aye.
        But take you notice, though 'tis but a hint,
        It far excels some books of greater print.

    London: printed and are to be sold by John Hancock, Junior, at
    the Three Bibles in Popes-head Ally, next Cornhill, 1670."

In the Preface he tells us that--

    "Having been importun'd by sundry friends (some of them being
    worthy persons) to make publique for their further benefit what
    they have found by experience to be useful for themselves and
    others, I could not deny their requests; but was willing to
    satisfie them, as also my own self, to do others good as well as
    myself; lest I should hide my talent in a napkin, and my skill
    be rak'd up with me in the dust. Therefore I have left it to
    posterity, that they may have the fruit when the old tree is
    dead and rotten. And because I would not be tedious, I shall
    descend to some few particular instances of my skill and
    foreknowledge of the weather, and I shall have done.

    "First, in the year 1665, at the 1st of January, I told several
    credible persons that the then frost would hold till March, that
    men could not plow, and so it came to pass directly.

    "2. I also told them that present March, that it would be a very
    dry summer, which likewise came to pass.

    "3. The same year, in November, I told them it would be a very
    open winter, which also came to pass, although at that time it
    was a great snow: but it lasted not a week.

    "4. In the year 1666, I told them that year in March, that it
    would be a very dry spring; which also came to pass.

    "5. In the year 1667, certaine shepheards ask'd my councel
    whether they might venture their sheep any more in the
    Low-fields? I told them they might safely venture them till
    August next; and they sped very well, without any loss.

    "6. I told them, in the beginning of September the same year,
    that it would be a south-west wind for two or {375} three months
    together, and also great store of rain, so that wheat sowing
    would be very difficult in the Low-fields, by reason of wet;
    which we have found by sad experience. And further, I told them
    that they should have not above three or four perfect fair days
    together till the shortest day.

    "7. In the year 1668, in March, although it was a very dry
    season then, I told my neighbours that it would be an
    extraordinary fruitful summer for hay and grass, and I knew it
    by reason there was so much rain in the latter end of February
    and beginning of March: for by that I ever judge of the summers,
    and I look that the winter will be dry and frosty for the most
    part, by reason that this November was mild: for by that I do
    ever judge of the winters.

    "Now, I refer you unto the book itself, which will sufficiently
    inform you of sundry other of my observations. For in the
    ensuing discourse I have set you down the same rules which I go
    by myself. And if any one shall question the truth of what is
    here set down, let them come to me, and I will give them further
    satisfaction.

    JOHN CLARIDGE, SEN.

    "Hanwell, near Banbury."

It appears, from inquiries made in the neighbourhood, that the name of
Claridge is still common at Hanwell, a small village near Banbury--that
"land o'cakes,"--and that last century there was a John Claridge, a
small farmer, resident there, who died in 1758, and who might have been
a grandson of the "far-famed," but unjustly defamed, "shepherd of
Banbury."

_Apropos_ of the "cakes" for which this flourishing town has long been
celebrated, I beg to inform your correspondent ERICA (Vol. vii., p.
106.) and J. R. M., M.A. (p. 310.) that there is a receipt "how to make
a very good Banbury cake," printed as early as 1615, in Gervase
Markham's _English Hus-wife_.

W. B. RYE.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES ON SEVERAL MISUNDERSTOOD WORDS.

(_Continued from_ p. 353.)

_To miss_, to dispense with. This usage of the verb being of such
ordinary occurrence, I should have deemed it superfluous to illustrate,
were it not that the editors of Shakspeare, according to custom, are at
a loss for examples:


    "We cannot _miss_ him."

    _The Tempest_, Act I. Sc. 2. (where see Mr. Collier's note, and
    also Mr. Halliwell's, Tallis's edition).

    "All which things being much admirable, yet this is most, that
    they are so profitable; bringing vnto man both honey and wax,
    each so wholesome that we all desire it, both so necessary that
    we cannot _misse_ them."--_Euphues and his England._

    "I will have honest valiant souls about me;
    I cannot _miss_ thee."

    Beaumont and Fletcher, _The Mad Lover_, Act II. Sc. 1.

    "The blackness of this season cannot _miss_ me."

    The second _Maiden's Tragedy_, Act V. Sc. 1.

    "All three are to be had, we cannot _miss_ any of them."--Bishop
    Andrewes, "A Sermon prepared to be preached on Whit Sunday, A.D.
    1622," _Library of Ang.-Cath. Theology_, vol. iii. p. 383.

    "For these, for every day's dangers we cannot _miss_ the
    hand."--"A Sermon preached before the King's Majesty at
    Burleigh, near Oldham, A.D. 1614," _Id._, vol. iv. p. 86.

    "We cannot _miss_ one of them; they be necessary all."--_Id._,
    vol. i. p. 73.

It is hardly necessary to occupy further room with more instances of so
familiar a phrase, though perhaps it may not be out of the way to
remark, that _miss_ is used by Andrewes as a substantive in the same
sense as the verb, namely, in vol. v. p. 176.: the more usual form being
_misture_, or, earlier, _mister_. Mr. Halliwell, in his _Dictionary_,
most unaccountably treats these two forms as distinct words; and yet,
more unaccountably, collecting the import of _misture_ for the context,
gives it the signification of misfortune!! He quotes Nash's _Pierce
Pennilesse_; the reader will find the passage at p. 47. of the
Shakspeare Society's reprint. I subjoin another instance from vol. viii.
p. 288. of Cattley's edition of Foxe's _Acts and Monuments_:

    "Therefore all men evidently declared at that time, both how
    sore they took his death to heart; and also how hardly they
    could away with the _misture_ of such a man."

In Latin, _desidero_ and _desiderium_ best convey the import of this
word.

_To buckle_, bend or bow. Here again, to their great discredit be it
spoken, the editors of Shakspeare (Second Part of _Hen. IV._, Act I. Sc.
1.) are at fault for an example. Mr. Halliwell gives one in his
_Dictionary_ of the passive participle, which see. In Shakspeare it
occurs as a neuter verb:

                    "... And teach this body,
    To bend, and these my aged knees to _buckle_,
    In adoration and just worship to you."
        Ben Jonson, _Staple of News_, Act II. Sc. 1.

    "For, certainly, like as great stature in a natural body is some
    advantage in youth, but is but burden in age: so it is with
    great territory, which, when a state beginneth to decline, doth
    make it stoop and _buckle_ so much the faster."--Lord Bacon, "Of
    the True Greatness of Great Britain," vol. i. p. 504. (Bohn's
    edition of the _Works_).

And again, as a transitive verb:

    "Sear trees, standing or felled, belong to the lessee, and you
    have a special replication in the book of 44 E. III., that the
    wind did but rend them and _buckle_ them."--_Case of Impeachment
    of Waste_, vol. i. p. 620.

_On the hip_, at advantage. A term of wrestling. So said Dr. Johnson at
first; but, on second {376} thoughts, referred it to _venery_, with
which Mr. Dyce consents: both erroneously. Several instances are adduced
by the latter, in his _Critique of Knight and Collier's Shakspeare_; any
one of which, besides the passage in _The Merchant of Venice_, should
have confuted that origin of the phrase. The hip of a chase is no term
of woodman's craft: the haunch is. Moreover, what a marvellous
expression, to say, A hound has a chase _on_ the hip, instead of _by_.
Still more prodigious to say, that a hound _gets_ a chase _on_ the hip.
One would be loth to impute to the only judicious dramatic commentator
of the day, a love of contradiction as the motive for quarrelling with
Mr. Collier's note on this idiom. To the examples alleged by Mr. Dyce,
the three following may be added; whereof the last, after the opinion of
Sir John Harington, rightly refers the origin of the metaphor to
wrestling:

    "The Divell hath them _on the hip_, he may easily bring them to
    anything."--_Michael and the Dragon_, by D. Dike, p. 328.
    (_Workes_, London, 1635).

    "If he have us at the advantage, _on the hip_ as we say, it is
    no great matter then to get service at our hands."--Andrewes, "A
    Sermon preached before the King's Majesty at Whitehall, 1617,"
    _Library of Ang.-Cath. Theology_, vol. iv. p. 365.

    "Full oft the valiant knight his hold doth shift,
     And with much prettie sleight, the same doth slippe;
     In fine he doth applie one speciall drift,
     Which was to get the Pagan on the _hippe_:
     And hauing caught him right, he doth him lift,
     By nimble sleight, and in such wise doth trippe:
     That downe he threw him, and his fall was such,
     His head-piece was the first that ground did tuch."
       Sir John Harington's Translation of _Orlando
          Furioso_, Booke xlvi. Stanza 117.

In some editions, the fourth line is printed "_namely_ to get," &c.,
with other variations in the spelling of the rest of the stanza.

W. R. ARROWSMITH.

(_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *


LORD COKE.

Turning over some old books recently, my attention was strongly drawn to
the following:

    "The Lord Coke, his Speech and Charge, with a Discouerie of the
    Abuses and Corruptions of Officers. 8vo. Lond. N. Butter, 1607."

This curious piece appears to have been published by one R. P.[1], who
describes himself, in his dedication to the Earl of Exeter, as a "poore,
dispised, pouertie-stricken, hated, scorned, and vnrespected souldier,"
of which there were, doubtless, many in the reign of James the Pacific.
Lord Coke, in his address to the jury at the Norwich Assizes, gives an
account of the various plottings of the Papists, from the Reformation to
the Gunpowder Treason, to bring the land again under subjection to Rome,
and characterises the schemes and the actors therein as he goes along in
the good round terms of an out-and-out Protestant. He has also a fling
at the Puritans, and all such as would disturb the church and hierarchy
as by law established. But the most remarkable part of the book is that
which comes under the head of "A Discouerie of the Abuses and Corruption
of Officers;" and believing an abstract might interest your readers, and
furnish the antiquary with a reference, I herewith present you with a
list of the officials and others whom my Lord Coke recommends the
_Jurie_ to present, assuring them, at the same time, that "by God's
grace they, the offenders, shall not goe unpunished for their abuses;
for we have," says he, "a COYFE, which signifies a _scull_, whereby, in
the execution of justice, wee are defended against all oppositions, bee
they never so violent."

1. The first gentleman introduced by Lord Coke to the Norwich jury is
the _Escheator_, who had power to demand upon what tenure a poor yeoman
held his lands, and is an officer in great disfavour with the judge. He
gives some curious instances of his imposition, and concludes by
remarking that, for his rogueries, he were better described by striking
away the first syllable of his name, the rest truly representing him a
_cheator_.

2. _The Clarke of the Market_ comes in for his share of Lord Coke's
denouncements. "It was once," he says, "my hap to take a clarke of the
market in his trickes; but I aduanst him higher than his father's sonne,
by so much as from the ground to the toppe of the pillorie" for his
bribery.

3. "A certaine ruffling officer" called a _Purveyor_, who is
occasionally found _purveying money_ out of your purses, and is
therefore, says Lord Coke, "on the highway to the gallowes."

4. As the next officer is unknown in the present day, I give his
character _in extenso_:

    "There is also a Salt-peter-man, whose commission is not to
    break vp any man's house or ground without leaue. And not to
    deale with any house, but such as is vnused for any necessarie
    imployment by the owner. And not to digge in any place without
    leauing it smooth and leuell: in such case as he found it. This
    Salt-peter-man vnder shew of his authoritie, though being no
    more than is specified, will make plaine and simple people
    beleeue, that hee will without their leaue breake vp the floore
    of their dwelling house, vnlesse they will compound with him to
    the contrary. Any such fellow, if you can meete with all, let
    his misdemenor be presented, that he may be taught better to
    vnderstand his office: For by their abuse the country is
    oftentimes troubled."

5. There is another troublesome fellow called a _Concealor_, who could
easily be proved no better {377} than a _cosioner_, and whose
pretensions are to be resisted.

6. A _Promoter_, generally both a beggar and a knave. This is the modern
informer, "a necessarie office," says Lord Coke, "but rarely filled by
an honest man."

7. The _Monopolitane_ or _Monopolist_; with these the country was
overrun in James' reign. "To annoy and hinder the public weale, these
for their own benefit have sold their lands, and then come to beggarie
by a _starch_, _vinegar_, or _aqua vitæ_ monopoly, and justly too," adds
his lordship.

8. Lord Coke has no objection to those _golden fooles_, the _Alcumists_,
so long as they keep to their _metaphisicall_ and _Paracelsian_ studies;
but _science is felony committed by any comixture to multiply either
gold or silver_; the alchymist is therefore a suspected character, and
to be looked after by the jury.

9. Vagrants to be resolutely put down, the Statute against whom had
worked well.

10. The stage-players find no favour with this stern judge, who tells
the jury that as they, the players, cannot perform without leave, it is
easy to be rid of them, remarking, _that the country is much troubled by
them_.

11. Taverns, Inns, Ale-houses, Bowling Allies, and such like thriftless
places of resort for tradesmen and artificers, to be under strict
surveillance.

12. Gallants, or riotous young gents, to be sharply looked after, and
their proceedings controlled.

13. Gentlemen with greyhounds and birding-pieces, who would elude the
_statutes against gunnes_, to be called to account "for the
shallow-brain'd idlenesse of their ridiculous foolery."

14. The statute against _ryotous expence in apparel_ to be put in force
against _unthriftie infractors_.

There is room here for a few Queries, but I content myself with asking
for a further reference to No. 4., "The Salt-peter-man."

J. O.

   [Footnote 1: No doubt the author of an ultra-Protestant poem,
   entitled _Times Anatomie, made by Robert Prickett, a Souldier_.
   Imprinted, 1606.]

       *       *       *       *       *


SHAKSPEARE CORRESPONDENCE.

_Dogberry's Losses or Leases._--_Much Ado about Nothing_, Act IV. Sc.
4.:

    "_Dogberry._ A rich fellow enough, go to: and a fellow that hath
    had losses; and one that hath two gowns, and everything handsome
    about him."

I can quite sympathise with the indignation of some of my cotemporaries
at the alteration by MR. PAYNE COLLIER'S mysterious corrector, of
"losses" into "leases." I am sorry to see a reading which we had
cherished without any misgiving as a bit of Shaksperian quaintness, and
consecrated by the humour of Gray and Charles Lamb, turned into a clumsy
misprint. But we must look at real probabilities, not at fancies and
predilections. I am afraid "leases" is the likelier word. It has also a
special fitness, which has not been hitherto remarked. Many of the
wealthy people of Elizabeth's reign, particularly in the middle class,
were "fellows that had had leases." It will be recollected that
extravagant leases or fines were among the methods by which the
possessions of the church were so grievously dilapidated in the age of
the Reformation. Those who had a little money to invest, could not do so
on more advantageous terms than by obtaining such leases as the
necessity or avarice of clerical and other corporations induced them to
grant; and the coincident fall in the value of money increased the gain
of the lessees, and loss of the corporations, to an extraordinary
amount. Throughout Elizabeth's reign parliament was at work in
restraining this abuse, by the well-known "disabling acts," restricting
the power of bishops and corporations to lease their property. The last
was passed, I think, only in 1601. And therefore a "rich fellow" of
Dogberry's class was described, to the thorough comprehension and
enjoyment of an audience of that day, as one who "had _had_ leases."

SCRUTATOR.

May I be allowed a little space in the pages of "N. & Q." to draw MR.
COLLIER'S attention to some passages in which the old corrector appears
to me to have corrupted, rather than improved, the text? Possibly on
second thoughts MR. COLLIER may be induced to withdraw these readings
from the text of his forthcoming edition of our great poet. I give the
pages of MR. COLLIER'S recent volume, and quote according to the old
corrector.

_Two Gentlemen of Verona_, Act II. Sc. 2., p. 21.:

    "That I, unworthy body, as I _can_,
     Should censure thus a _loving_ gentleman."

_Can_ for _am_ spoils the sense; it was introduced unnecessarily to make
a perfect rhyme, but such rhymes as _am_ and _man_ were common in
Shakspeare's time. _Loving_ for _lovely_ is another modernism; _lovely_
is equivalent to the French _aimable_. "Saul and Jonathan were _lovely_
and pleasant in their lives," &c. The whole passage, which is indeed
faulty in the old copies, should, I think, be read thus:

                       "'Tis a passing shame
          That I, unworthy body that I am,
          Should censure _on a_ lovely _gentleman_.

    _Jul._ Why not on Proteus as _on_ all the rest?

    _Luc._ Then thus,--of many good I think him best."

_Thus_ crept in after _censure_ from the next line but one. In Julia's
speech, grammar requires _on_ for _of_.

_Measure for Measure_, Act IV. Sc. 5., p. 52.:

    "For my authority bears _such_ a credent bulk," &c.

Fols. "_of_ a credent bulk," read "_so_ credent bulk."

{378}
_Much Ado about Nothing_, Act IV. Sc. 1., p 72.:

    "Myself would on the _hazard_ of reproaches
     Strike at thy life."

When fathers kill their children, they run the risk not merely of being
reproached, but of being hanged; but this reading is a mere
sophistication by some one who did not understand the true reading,
_rearward_. Leonato threatens to take his daughter's life _after having_
reproached her.

_Taming of the Shrew_, p. 145.:

    "O, yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
     Such as the daughter of _Agenor's race_," &c.

"The daughter of Agenor's race" for "the daughter of Agenor" is awkward,
but there is a far more decisive objection to this alteration. To
compare the beauty of Bianca with the beauty of Europa is a legitimate
comparison; but to compare the beauty of Bianca with Europa herself, is
of course inadmissible. Here is another corruption introduced in order
to produce rhyming couplet; restore the old reading, "the daughter of
Agenor _had_."

_The Winter's Tale_, Act IV. Sc. 2., p. 191.:

    "If, &c., let me be _enrolled_, and any name put in the book of
          virtue."

We have here an abortive attempt to correct the nonsensical reading of
the old copies, _unrolled_; but if _enrolled_ itself makes sense, it
does so only by introducing tautology. Besides, it leads us away from
what I believe to be the true reading, _unrogued_.

_King John_, Act V. Sc. 7., p. 212.:

    "Death, having prey'd upon the outward parts,
     Leaves them _unvisited_; and his siege is now
     Against the mind."

