Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net and the booksmiths at
http://www.eBookForge.net


POSTHUMOUS WORKS

OF

MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT GODWIN.

VOL. I.


POSTHUMOUS WORKS

OF THE

AUTHOR

OF A

VINDICATION OF THE RIGHTS OF WOMAN.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

_LONDON:_

PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, NO. 72, ST. PAUL'S
  CHURCH-YARD; AND G. G. AND J. ROBINSON,
              PATERNOSTER-ROW.
                   1798.


THE

WRONGS OF WOMAN:

OR,

MARIA.

A FRAGMENT.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.


PREFACE.


THE public are here presented with the last literary attempt of an
author, whose fame has been uncommonly extensive, and whose talents have
probably been most admired, by the persons by whom talents are estimated
with the greatest accuracy and discrimination. There are few, to whom her
writings could in any case have given pleasure, that would have wished
that this fragment should have been suppressed, because it is a fragment.
There is a sentiment, very dear to minds of taste and imagination, that
finds a melancholy delight in contemplating these unfinished productions
of genius, these sketches of what, if they had been filled up in a manner
adequate to the writer's conception, would perhaps have given a new
impulse to the manners of a world.

The purpose and structure of the following work, had long formed a
favourite subject of meditation with its author, and she judged them
capable of producing an important effect. The composition had been in
progress for a period of twelve months. She was anxious to do justice to
her conception, and recommenced and revised the manuscript several
different times. So much of it as is here given to the public, she was
far from considering as finished, and, in a letter to a friend directly
written on this subject, she says, "I am perfectly aware that some of the
incidents ought to be transposed, and heightened by more harmonious
shading; and I wished in some degree to avail myself of criticism, before
I began to adjust my events into a story, the outline of which I had
sketched in my mind[x-A]." The only friends to whom the author
communicated her manuscript, were Mr. Dyson, the translator of the
Sorcerer, and the present editor; and it was impossible for the most
inexperienced author to display a stronger desire of profiting by the
censures and sentiments that might be suggested[x-B].

In revising these sheets for the press, it was necessary for the editor,
in some places, to connect the more finished parts with the pages of an
older copy, and a line or two in addition sometimes appeared requisite
for that purpose. Wherever such a liberty has been taken, the additional
phrases will be found inclosed in brackets; it being the editor's most
earnest desire, to intrude nothing of himself into the work, but to give
to the public the words, as well as ideas, of the real author.

What follows in the ensuing pages, is not a preface regularly drawn out
by the author, but merely hints for a preface, which, though never filled
up in the manner the writer intended, appeared to be worth preserving.

W. GODWIN.


AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


THE Wrongs of Woman, like the wrongs of the oppressed part of mankind,
may be deemed necessary by their oppressors: but surely there are a few,
who will dare to advance before the improvement of the age, and grant
that my sketches are not the abortion of a distempered fancy, or the
strong delineations of a wounded heart.

In writing this novel, I have rather endeavoured to pourtray passions
than manners.

In many instances I could have made the incidents more dramatic, would I
have sacrificed my main object, the desire of exhibiting the misery and
oppression, peculiar to women, that arise out of the partial laws and
customs of society.

In the invention of the story, this view restrained my fancy; and the
history ought rather to be considered, as of woman, than of an
individual.

The sentiments I have embodied.

In many works of this species, the hero is allowed to be mortal, and to
become wise and virtuous as well as happy, by a train of events and
circumstances. The heroines, on the contrary, are to be born immaculate;
and to act like goddesses of wisdom, just come forth highly finished
Minervas from the head of Jove.

       *       *       *       *       *

[The following is an extract of a letter from the author to a friend, to
whom she communicated her manuscript.]

       *       *       *       *       *

For my part, I cannot suppose any situation more distressing, than for a
woman of sensibility, with an improving mind, to be bound to such a man
as I have described for life; obliged to renounce all the humanizing
affections, and to avoid cultivating her taste, lest her perception of
grace and refinement of sentiment, should sharpen to agony the pangs of
disappointment. Love, in which the imagination mingles its bewitching
colouring, must be fostered by delicacy. I should despise, or rather call
her an ordinary woman, who could endure such a husband as I have
sketched.

These appear to me (matrimonial despotism of heart and conduct) to be the
peculiar Wrongs of Woman, because they degrade the mind. What are termed
great misfortunes, may more forcibly impress the mind of common readers;
they have more of what may justly be termed _stage-effect_; but it is the
delineation of finer sensations, which, in my opinion, constitutes the
merit of our best novels. This is what I have in view; and to show the
wrongs of different classes of women, equally oppressive, though, from
the difference of education, necessarily various.

FOOTNOTES:

[x-A] A more copious extract of this letter is subjoined to the author's
preface.

[x-B] The part communicated consisted of the first fourteen chapters.


ERRATA.

Page 3, line 2, _dele_ half.

P. 81 and 118, _for_ brackets [--], _read_ inverted commas " thus "


CONTENTS.

VOL. I. AND II.

The Wrongs of Woman, or Maria; a Fragment:
to which is added, the First Book
of a Series of Lessons for Children.

VOL. III. AND IV.

Letters and Miscellaneous Pieces.


_WRONGS_

OF

WOMAN.


CHAP. I.


ABODES of horror have frequently been described, and castles, filled with
spectres and chimeras, conjured up by the magic spell of genius to harrow
the soul, and absorb the wondering mind. But, formed of such stuff as
dreams are made of, what were they to the mansion of despair, in one
corner of which Maria sat, endeavouring to recal her scattered thoughts!

Surprise, astonishment, that bordered on distraction, seemed to have
suspended her faculties, till, waking by degrees to a keen sense of
anguish, a whirlwind of rage and indignation roused her torpid pulse. One
recollection with frightful velocity following another, threatened to
fire her brain, and make her a fit companion for the terrific
inhabitants, whose groans and shrieks were no unsubstantial sounds of
whistling winds, or startled birds, modulated by a romantic fancy, which
amuse while they affright; but such tones of misery as carry a dreadful
certainty directly to the heart. What effect must they then have produced
on one, true to the touch of sympathy, and tortured by maternal
apprehension!

Her infant's image was continually floating on Maria's sight, and the
first smile of intelligence remembered, as none but a mother, an unhappy
mother, can conceive. She heard her half speaking cooing, and felt the
little twinkling fingers on her burning bosom--a bosom bursting with the
nutriment for which this cherished child might now be pining in vain.
From a stranger she could indeed receive the maternal aliment, Maria was
grieved at the thought--but who would watch her with a mother's
tenderness, a mother's self-denial?

The retreating shadows of former sorrows rushed back in a gloomy train,
and seemed to be pictured on the walls of her prison, magnified by the
state of mind in which they were viewed--Still she mourned for her child,
lamented she was a daughter, and anticipated the aggravated ills of life
that her sex rendered almost inevitable, even while dreading she was no
more. To think that she was blotted out of existence was agony, when the
imagination had been long employed to expand her faculties; yet to
suppose her turned adrift on an unknown sea, was scarcely less
afflicting.

After being two days the prey of impetuous, varying emotions, Maria began
to reflect more calmly on her present situation, for she had actually
been rendered incapable of sober reflection, by the discovery of the act
of atrocity of which she was the victim. She could not have imagined,
that, in all the fermentation of civilized depravity, a similar plot
could have entered a human mind. She had been stunned by an unexpected
blow; yet life, however joyless, was not to be indolently resigned, or
misery endured without exertion, and proudly termed patience. She had
hitherto meditated only to point the dart of anguish, and suppressed the
heart heavings of indignant nature merely by the force of contempt. Now
she endeavoured to brace her mind to fortitude, and to ask herself what
was to be her employment in her dreary cell? Was it not to effect her
escape, to fly to the succour of her child, and to baffle the selfish
schemes of her tyrant--her husband?

These thoughts roused her sleeping spirit, and the self-possession
returned, that seemed to have abandoned her in the infernal solitude into
which she had been precipitated. The first emotions of overwhelming
impatience began to subside, and resentment gave place to tenderness, and
more tranquil meditation; though anger once more stopt the calm current
of reflection, when she attempted to move her manacled arms. But this
was an outrage that could only excite momentary feelings of scorn, which
evaporated in a faint smile; for Maria was far from thinking a personal
insult the most difficult to endure with magnanimous indifference.

She approached the small grated window of her chamber, and for a
considerable time only regarded the blue expanse; though it commanded a
view of a desolate garden, and of part of a huge pile of buildings, that,
after having been suffered, for half a century, to fall to decay, had
undergone some clumsy repairs, merely to render it habitable. The ivy had
been torn off the turrets, and the stones not wanted to patch up the
breaches of time, and exclude the warring elements, left in heaps in the
disordered court. Maria contemplated this scene she knew not how long; or
rather gazed on the walls, and pondered on her situation. To the master
of this most horrid of prisons, she had, soon after her entrance, raved
of injustice, in accents that would have justified his treatment, had not
a malignant smile, when she appealed to his judgment, with a dreadful
conviction stifled her remonstrating complaints. By force, or openly,
what could be done? But surely some expedient might occur to an active
mind, without any other employment, and possessed of sufficient
resolution to put the risk of life into the balance with the chance of
freedom.

A woman entered in the midst of these reflections, with a firm,
deliberate step, strongly marked features, and large black eyes, which
she fixed steadily on Maria's, as if she designed to intimidate her,
saying at the same time--"You had better sit down and eat your dinner,
than look at the clouds."

"I have no appetite," replied Maria, who had previously determined to
speak mildly, "why then should I eat?"

"But, in spite of that, you must and shall eat something. I have had many
ladies under my care, who have resolved to starve themselves; but, soon
or late, they gave up their intent, as they recovered their senses."

"Do you really think me mad?" asked Maria, meeting the searching glance
of her eye.

"Not just now. But what does that prove?--only that you must be the more
carefully watched, for appearing at times so reasonable. You have not
touched a morsel since you entered the house."--Maria sighed
intelligibly.--"Could any thing but madness produce such a disgust for
food?"

"Yes, grief; you would not ask the question if you knew what it was." The
attendant shook her head; and a ghastly smile of desperate fortitude
served as a forcible reply, and made Maria pause, before she added--"Yet
I will take some refreshment: I mean not to die.--No; I will preserve my
senses; and convince even you, sooner than you are aware of, that my
intellects have never been disturbed, though the exertion of them may
have been suspended by some infernal drug."

Doubt gathered still thicker on the brow of her guard, as she attempted
to convict her of mistake.

"Have patience!" exclaimed Maria, with a solemnity that inspired awe. "My
God! how have I been schooled into the practice!" A suffocation of voice
betrayed the agonizing emotions she was labouring to keep down; and
conquering a qualm of disgust, she calmly endeavoured to eat enough to
prove her docility, perpetually turning to the suspicious female, whose
observation she courted, while she was making the bed and adjusting the
room.

"Come to me often," said Maria, with a tone of persuasion, in consequence
of a vague plan that she had hastily adopted, when, after surveying this
woman's form and features, she felt convinced that she had an
understanding above the common standard; "and believe me mad, till you
are obliged to acknowledge the contrary." The woman was no fool, that is,
she was superior to her class; nor had misery quite petrified the
life's-blood of humanity, to which reflections on our own misfortunes
only give a more orderly course. The manner, rather than the
expostulations, of Maria made a slight suspicion dart into her mind with
corresponding sympathy, which various other avocations, and the habit of
banishing compunction, prevented her, for the present, from examining
more minutely.

But when she was told that no person, excepting the physician appointed
by her family, was to be permitted to see the lady at the end of the
gallery, she opened her keen eyes still wider, and uttered a--"hem!"
before she enquired--"Why?" She was briefly told, in reply, that the
malady was hereditary, and the fits not occurring but at very long and
irregular intervals, she must be carefully watched; for the length of
these lucid periods only rendered her more mischievous, when any vexation
or caprice brought on the paroxysm of phrensy.

Had her master trusted her, it is probable that neither pity nor
curiosity would have made her swerve from the straight line of her
interest; for she had suffered too much in her intercourse with mankind,
not to determine to look for support, rather to humouring their passions,
than courting their approbation by the integrity of her conduct. A deadly
blight had met her at the very threshold of existence; and the
wretchedness of her mother seemed a heavy weight fastened on her innocent
neck, to drag her down to perdition. She could not heroically determine
to succour an unfortunate; but, offended at the bare supposition that she
could be deceived with the same ease as a common servant, she no longer
curbed her curiosity; and, though she never seriously fathomed her own
intentions, she would sit, every moment she could steal from observation,
listening to the tale, which Maria was eager to relate with all the
persuasive eloquence of grief.

It is so cheering to see a human face, even if little of the divinity of
virtue beam in it, that Maria anxiously expected the return of the
attendant, as of a gleam of light to break the gloom of idleness.
Indulged sorrow; she perceived, must blunt or sharpen the faculties to
the two opposite extremes; producing stupidity, the moping melancholy of
indolence; or the restless activity of a disturbed imagination. She sunk
into one state, after being fatigued by the other: till the want of
occupation became even more painful than the actual pressure or
apprehension of sorrow; and the confinement that froze her into a nook of
existence, with an unvaried prospect before her, the most insupportable
of evils. The lamp of life seemed to be spending itself to chase the
vapours of a dungeon which no art could dissipate.--And to what purpose
did she rally all her energy?--Was not the world a vast prison, and women
born slaves?

Though she failed immediately to rouse a lively sense of injustice in the
mind of her guard, because it had been sophisticated into misanthropy,
she touched her heart. Jemima (she had only a claim to a Christian name,
which had not procured her any Christian privileges) could patiently hear
of Maria's confinement on false pretences; she had felt the crushing hand
of power, hardened by the exercise of injustice, and ceased to wonder at
the perversions of the understanding, which systematize oppression; but,
when told that her child, only four months old, had been torn from her,
even while she was discharging the tenderest maternal office, the woman
awoke in a bosom long estranged from feminine emotions, and Jemima
determined to alleviate all in her power, without hazarding the loss of
her place, the sufferings of a wretched mother, apparently injured, and
certainly unhappy. A sense of right seems to result from the simplest act
of reason, and to preside over the faculties of the mind, like the
master-sense of feeling, to rectify the rest; but (for the comparison may
be carried still farther) how often is the exquisite sensibility of both
weakened or destroyed by the vulgar occupations, and ignoble pleasures of
life?

The preserving her situation was, indeed, an important object to Jemima,
who had been hunted from hole to hole, as if she had been a beast of
prey, or infected with a moral plague. The wages she received, the
greater part of which she hoarded, as her only chance for independence,
were much more considerable than she could reckon on obtaining any where
else, were it possible that she, an outcast from society, could be
permitted to earn a subsistence in a reputable family. Hearing Maria
perpetually complain of listlessness, and the not being able to beguile
grief by resuming her customary pursuits, she was easily prevailed on, by
compassion, and that involuntary respect for abilities, which those who
possess them can never eradicate, to bring her some books and implements
for writing. Maria's conversation had amused and interested her, and the
natural consequence was a desire, scarcely observed by herself, of
obtaining the esteem of a person she admired. The remembrance of better
days was rendered more lively; and the sentiments then acquired appearing
less romantic than they had for a long period, a spark of hope roused
her mind to new activity.

How grateful was her attention to Maria! Oppressed by a dead weight of
existence, or preyed on by the gnawing worm of discontent, with what
eagerness did she endeavour to shorten the long days, which left no
traces behind! She seemed to be sailing on the vast ocean of life,
without seeing any land-mark to indicate the progress of time; to find
employment was then to find variety, the animating principle of nature.


CHAP. II.

