The first quarter of the century witnessed the advent of new agencies,
as well as a multiplication of forces. The American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions was organized in 1810, the English
Wesleyan Missionary Society in 1814, the American Baptist in 1814, the
American Methodist in 1819, the American Protestant Episcopal in 1820,
and the Berlin and Paris Missionary Societies in 1824. Thus, in the
comparatively short space of thirty-two years, thirteen societies had
been organized by the various denominations here and in Europe, each
of which was destined to grow to proportions little contemplated by
their founders. Since that time the great China Inland Mission and
other undenominational societies have been founded and are sending out
men and women in large numbers to the heathen world. Besides these,
there have been societies of special workers which have done valuable
service in aiding the missionary societies, such as the medical
missionaries, the Zenana Missionaries and the university and students'
volunteer movements. Statistics recently compiled show that the number
of central stations in heathen lands occupied by Protestant
missionaries in 1896 was 5055, with out-stations to the number of
17,813. There are now thirty-seven missionary societies in this
country alone which have sent out 3512 missionaries. A library of
volumes would be needed to give even a sketch of the results of the
labors of these devoted men and women. The Church holds their names in
holy reverence. Many of them have attained the crown of martyrdom, and
a still greater number have fallen victims to the severities of
uncongenial climates. Every heathen land has now associated with it
the name of valiant soldiers of the Cross, who have given their lives
to add it to their Master's, kingdom. In India among many others,
there have been Carey, Duff, Martyn, Marshman and Ward. In China,
Morrison, Milne, Taylor, John Talmage and Griffith John. In Africa,
Moffat, Livingstone, Hannington and Vanderkemp. In the South Seas,
Williams, Logan and Paton, while Judson of Burmah and a host of noble
men and women in every clime, have toiled and suffered, not counting
their lives dear unto them, that they might preach to the heathen the
unsearchable riches of Christ.


PREACHING TO HEATHEN AT HOME.

The zeal for the propagation of the Gospel among the heathen, has been
paralleled by the efforts put forth for the evangelization of the
people in nominally Christian lands. In this enterprise the front rank
on both sides of the Atlantic has been occupied by the Methodist
Church. Its system of itinerary, relieving its ministers in part from
exhausting study, and so giving them time and opportunity for pastoral
work and aggressive evangelistic effort, its welcome of lay assistance
in pulpit service and its system of drill and inspection in the
class-meeting, have all combined to develop its working resources and
increase its aggressive power. The fact that there are now in the
world over thirty million Methodists of various kinds, makes it
difficult to realize that when the century began, John Wesley had been
dead only nine years. This century consequently has witnessed the
growth and development of that mighty organization from the seed sown
by that one consecrated man and his helpers. It is doubtful whether in
politics or society there is any fact of the century so remarkable as
this. The Church Wesley founded has split into sections in this land
and in England, but the divisions are one at heart, and the name of
Methodist is the common precious possession of them all. A great
writer has contended with much force that the world at this day knows
no such unifier of nationalities and societies as the Methodist
Church. When the young man leaves the parental roof of a Methodist
family for some distant city, or some foreign land, the pangs of
anxiety are alleviated by the knowledge that wherever he may be, there
will be some Methodist Church where he will find friends, and some
Methodist class-leader who will look after his most important
interests. The magnificent Methodist organization, unequalled outside
the Roman Catholic Church, has developed within the century, and its
aggressive forces have been felt throughout Christendom. All the
denominations have received an impetus from its abundant energy and
each in its measure has caught the contagion of its activities. In
country districts, in the great cities and in foreign lands, its
representatives, loyal to their Church and the principles of its
founder, are pressing forward in self-denial and apostolic fervor
foremost everywhere in the van of the Christian army.

