 The latter was, probably, the
case: for in the same breath in which he declares "his life, even his
early life, to have been pure," he sues for pardon at the hands of his
Maker, and acknowledges a Redeemer, as the instrument through which he
is to obtain it.

That quickness of feeling and disposition to abandon himself to
its guidance, which made Parr an inconsistent man, made him also a
benevolent one. Benevolence he loved as a subject for his contemplation,
and the practical extension of it as a rule for his conduct. He could
scarcely bear to regard the Deity under any other aspect. He would have
children taught, in the first instance, to regard him under that aspect
alone; simply as a being who displayed infinite goodness in the
creation, in the government, and in the redemption of the world.
Language itself indicates, that the whole system of moral rectitude is
comprised in it--_[Greek: energetein], benefacere_, beneficencethe
generic term being, in common parlance, emphatically restricted to works
of charity. Nor was this mere theory in Parr. Most men who have been
economical from necessity in their youth, continue to be so, from habit,
in their age--but Parr's hand was ever open as day. Poverty had vexed,
but had never contracted his spirit; money he despised, except as it
gave him power--power to ride in his state coach, to throw wide his
doors to hospitality, to load his table with plate, and his shelves with
learning; power to adorn his church with chandeliers and painted
windows; to make glad the cottages of his poor; to grant a loan, to a
tottering farmer; to rescue from want a forlorn patriot, or a thriftless
scholar. Whether misfortune, or mismanagement, or folly, or vice, had
brought its victim low, his want was a passport to Parr's pity, and the
dew of his bounty fell alike upon the evil and the good, upon the just
and the unjust. It is told of Boerhaave, that, whenever he saw a
criminal led out to execution, he would say, "May not this man be better
than I? If otherwise, the praise is due, not to me, but to the grace of
God." Parr quotes the saying with applause. Such, we doubt not, would
have been his own feelings on such an occasion.--_Quarterly Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GATHERER

    A snapper up of unconsidered trifles.
SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


SONG FROM THE ITALIAN OF P. ROLLI.


  Babbling current, would you know
    Why I turn to thee again,
  'Tis to find relief from woe,
    Respite short from ceaseless pain.

  I and Sylvio on a day
    Were upon thy bank reclin'd,
  When dear Sylvio swore to me,
    And thus spoke in accents kind:

  First this flowing tide shall turn
    Backward to its fountain head,
  Dearest nymph, ere thou shall mourn,
    Thy too easy faith betray'd.

  Babbling current, backward turn,
    Hide thee in thy fountain head;
  For alas, I'm left to mourn
    My too easy faith betray'd.

  Love and life pursu'd the swain,
    Both must have the self-same date,
  But mine only he could mean,
    Since his love is turn'd to hate.

  Sure some fairer nymph than I,
    From me lures the lovely youth,
  Haply she receives like me,
    Vows of everlasting truth.

  Babbling current should the fair
    Stop to listen on thy shore,
  Bid her, Sylvio, to beware,
    Love and truth he oft had sworn.

T.H.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SPRING AND THE MORNING,

_A Ballad._


  _Written by Sir Lumley Skeffington, Bart._
  _Inscribed to Miss Foote_.

  When the frosts of the Winter, in mildness were ending,
    To April I gave half the welcome of May;
  While the Spring, fresh in youth, came delightfully blending
    The buds that are sweet, and the songs that are gay.
  As the eyes fixed the heart on a vision so fair,
  Not doubting, but trusting what magic was there;
  Aloud I exclaim'd, with augmented desire,
  I thought 'twas the Spring, when In truth, 'tis Maria.

  When the fading of stars, in the regions of splendour,
    Announc'd that the morning was young in the East,
  On the upland I rov'd, admiration to render,
    Where freshness, and beauty, and lustre increas'd.
  Whilst the beams of the morning new pleasures bestow'd,
  While fondly I gaz'd, while with rapture I glow'd;
  In sweetness commanding, in elegance bright,
  Maria arose! a more beautiful light!

_Gentleman's Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *


UNEXPECTED REPROOF.


The celebrated scholar, Muretus, was taken ill upon the road as he was
travelling from Paris to Lyons, and as his appearance was not much in
his favour, he was carried to an hospital. Two physicians attended him,
and his disease not being a very common one, they thought it right to
try something new, and out of the usual road of practice, upon him.
One of them, not knowing that their patient knew Latin, said in that
language to the other, "We may surely venture to try an experiment upon
the body of so mean a man as our patient is." "Mean, sir!" replied
Muretus, in Latin, to their astonishment, "can you pretend to call any
man so, sir, for whom the Saviour of the world did not think it beneath
him to die?"

IRELAND.

The following is the territorial surface of Ireland:--

                                                             Acres.

  Arable land, gardens, meadows, pastures, and marshes   12,125,280

  Uncultivated lands, and bogs capable of improvement ... 4,900,000

  Surface incapable of any kind of improvement[3]........ 2,416,664
                                                         __________
  Total of acres                                         19,441,944


   [3] Parliamentary Report.

       *       *       *       *       *


ROUGE ET NOIR.


  When jovial Barras was the Monarch of France,
  And its women all lived in the light of his glance,
  One eve, when tall Tallien and plump Josephine
  Were trying the question, of which should be Queen,
  Dame Josephine hung on one side of his chair,
  With her West Indian bosom as brown as 'twas bare;
  Dame Tallien as fondly on t'other side hung,
  With a blush that might burn up the spot where she clung.
  Old Sieyes stalked in; saw my lord at his wine,
  Now toasting the copper-skin, now the carmine;
  Then starting away, cried, "Barras, _le bon soir_;
  'Twas for business _I_ came; I leave _you Rouge et Noir_."

       *       *       *       *       *


LIMBIRD'S EDITIONS.

CHEAP and POPULAR WORKS published at the MIRROR OFFICE in the Strand,
near Somerset House.

The ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS, Embellished with nearly 150
Engravings. Price 6s. 6d. boards

The TALES of the GENII. Price 2s.

The MICROCOSM. By the Right Hon. G. CANNING. &c. Price 2s.

PLUTARCH'S LIVES, with Fifty Portraits, 2 vols. price 13s. boards.

COWPER'S POEMS, with 12 Engravings, price 3s. 6d. boards.

COOK'S VOYAGES, 2 vols. price 8s. boards.

The CABINET of CURIOSITIES: or WONDERS of the WORLD DISPLAYED Price 5s.
boards.

BEAUTIES of SCOTT. 2 vols. price 7s. boards.

The ARCANA of SCIENCE for 1828. Price 4s. 6d.

Any of the above Works can be purchased in Parts.

GOLDSMITH'S ESSAYS. Price 8d. DR. FRANKLIN'S ESSAYS. Price 1s. 2d.
BACON'S ESSAYS Price 8d. SALMAGUNDI. Price 1s. 8d.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed and Published by J. LIMBIRD, 143, Strand, (near Somerset
House,) London; sold by ERNEST FLEISCHER, 626, New Market, Leipsic; and
by all Newsmen and Booksellers_.