
Behind the most sample-roomey, fire-insuranceish, and express-wagonized
part of Broadway, New York, yawns a venerable street called Nassau;
wherein architecture is a monster of such hideous mien that to be hated
needs but to be rented, and more full-grown men stare into shoe-stores
and shirt-emporiums without buying anything than in any other part of
the world. Near the lower end of this quaint avenue rises the
Post-Office, sending aloft a wooden steeple which is the coffin of a
dead clock, and looking, altogether, like some good, old-fashioned
country church, which, having come to town many years ago to see its
city cousins, and been discouraged by their brown-stone airs, retired,
much demoralized, into a shady by-way, and there fell from grace into a
kind of dissipated cross between Poor-House and railroad depot. To reach
this amazing edifice, with too much haste for more than a momentary
glimpse of its harrowing exterior, and to get away from it, with a speed
as little complimentary to the charms of its shadow, are, apparently,
the two great and exclusive objects of the thousands swarming down and
up the narrow street all through a day. Some twenty odd boot-shops, all
next-door-but-one to each other, startlingly alike in their despondent
outer appearances, and uniformly conducted by embittered elderly men of
savage aspect--seem to sue in vain from year to year for at least one
customer; and as many other melancholy dens for the sale of exactly the
things no one but a madman would want to buy while on his way to a
Post-Office, or from it, appear to wait as hopelessly for the first
purchaser. There are, too, no end of open-air dealers in such curious
postal incidentals as ghastly apples, insulting neck-ties, and
impracticable pocket-combs; to whom, possibly, an unwholesome errand boy
may be seen applying for a bargain about once in the lifetime of an
ordinary _habitué_ of the street, but whose general wares were never
seen selling to the extent of four shillings by any living observer.
Still, with an affront to human credulity of which only newspapers are
capable, it has been declared, in print, that there are bootmakers and
apple-women of Nassau who continually buy choice up-town corner-lots
with their profits; and, if it may be therefrom inferred that the other
trades of the street do as incredibly well, it were wise, perhaps, to be
further convinced that people have a well-established habit of
stealthily laying in their new raiment, fruit, and toilet articles while
going for their business-mails, and at once relinquish all earthly
confidence in the senses obstinately refuting the theory.

About half-way between end and end of Nassau street stands a row of what
were modest dwelling-houses in the remote days when the city was under
the rule of the Americans, but are now only so many floors of law
offices. Who owns them is not known; for proprietors of real-estate in
this extraordinary highway of antiquity are never mentioned in public
like owners in any other street; but they are shabby, dreary,
hopeless-looking old piles, suggestive of having, perhaps, been hurried
and tumbled through musty law-suits scores of times, and occupied at
last by the robber Law itself for costs. On a certain dark, foggy
afternoon in December, one of the seediest of the fallen brick
brotherhood presented a particularly dingy appearance, as the gas-lights
necessitated by the premature gloom of the hour gleamed dimly through a
blearing window-pane here and there. The house still retained the narrow
street-door, hall-way, and abrupt immediate stairway of its earlier
days; and had, too, the old-style goodly single brown stone for a
"stoop," along the front fall of which, in faded white block letters, as
though originally done with a stencil-plate, appeared the strange
device:

  S--T--1860--X.

Whether this curious legend referred to the sweets or bitters of the
tenement's various experiences; whether it meant Subjected To 1860
'Xecutions, or Sacrificed to 1860 'Xecutors, or Sentenced to Wait e'en
Sixty 'Xigencies, did not bother the head of Mr. DIBBLE, who came in
from Gowanus every morning to occupy his law-office up-stairs, and was
sitting thoughtfully therein, before a grate fire, on the dull, wintry
afternoon in question.

Severely unostentatious was that office, with its two ink-stained desks,
shelves of lettered deed-boxes, glass case of law-books in sheep, and
vellum-covered reading-table in the centre of the room. Its prompt
lesson for the visitor was: You are now in the Office of an old-school
Constitutional Lawyer, Sir; and if you want an Absolute Divorce,
Obtained for No Cause, in Any State; No Publicity; No Charges; you must
step around to a certain newspaper sanctum for your witnesses, and apply
to some other legal practitioner. In this establishment, sir, after you
have left your measure in the shape of a retaining fee, we fit you with
a suit warranted to last as long as you do. We cut your pockets to suit
ourselves, but furnish you as much choler as you can stand. If you are a
pursey man the suit will have no lack of sighs for you; if you are thin,
it will make your waste the greater.

Mr. DIBBLE'S usual companion in this office was his clerk, BLADAMS, who
generally wrote at the second desk, and, consequently, was a person of
another deskscription. A politician in former days--when he was known as
Mr. WILLIAM ADAMS--this clerk had aspired to office in New York, and
freely spent his means to attain the same. His name, however, was too
much for his fortune. Public credulity revolted from the pretence that a
WILLIAM ADAMS had come from Ireland some years before, on purpose to
found the family of which the later candidate of the same name claimed
to be a descendant; and, after an election in which he had spent the
last of his money, he was "counted out" in favor of a rather hod
character named O'GLOORAL. Thus practically taught to understand the
political genius of a Republic, which, as gloriously contrasted with any
effete monarchy ruled by a Peerage, looks for its own governing class to
the Steerage, Mr. WILLIAM ADAMS subsided impecuniously into plain BILL
ADAMS and a book-keepership in dry goods; and was ultimately blurred
into BLADAMS and employment as a copyist by Mr. DIBBLE, to whom his
experience of spending every cent he had in the world, and getting
nothing in the world for it but wrinkles, seemed felicitously legal and
almost supernaturally qualifying for law-writing. BLADAMS was about
forty years old, though appearing much older: with a slight cast in his
left eye, a pimply pink countenance, and a circular piece of unimproved
property on top of his head.

"Any news?" inquired Mr. DIBBLE, as this member of the once powerful
American race entered the office and still grasped the edge of the door.

"I saw Mr. DROOD across the street just now," was the answer.

"And what did he say, BLADAMS?"

"That, in turn he'd see _me_ across the street; and here he is,"
returned the clerk, advancing into the room.

"Ah, my dear Mr. EDWIN, glad to see you!" exclaimed Mr. DIBBLE, rising
to his feet and turning about to greet the new comer. "Sit down by the
fire; and don't mind the presence of Mr. BLADAMS, who was once a
gentleman."

"Thank you, old man, I don't know but I _will_ take a glow with you,"
said EDWIN, accepting a chair and throwing aside hat and overcoat.

"You're just in time to dine with me," continued the lawyer. "I'll send
across to a restaurant for three stews and as many mugs of ale. We must
ask Mr. BLADAMS to join us, you see; for he was once a decent man, and
might not like to be sent out for oysters unless asked to take some."

"If they're the small black ones you generally treat on, I'd rather be
excused," grumbled Mr. BLADAMS, involuntarily placing a hand upon his
stomach, as though already paying the penalty of such bivalvular
hospitality.

"Order saddle-rocks this time," was the reckless response of his
employer. "Mr. EDWIN is so rarely our guest that we must do the
princely. You'll tell them, BLADAMS, to send plenty of crackers, and
request the waiters to keep their fingers out of the stews while
bringing the latter over. I've known waiters to have their finger-nails
boiled off in time, by a habit of carrying soups and stews with the ends
of their digits in them."

The clerk departing to order the feast, Mr. DIBBLE renewed his attention
to Mr. E. DROOD, who had already taken his ball from his pocket and was
practicing against the mantel.

"I suppose you are on your way to Bumsteadville, again, Mr. EDWIN, and
have called to see if I have any message for my pretty ward over there."

"That's the ticket," assented EDWIN, making a neat fly-catch.

"You're impatient to be there, of course?" assented Mr. DIBBLE, with
what might have passed for an attempt at archness if he had not been so
wholly devoted to squareness.

"I believe the Flowerpot is expecting me," yawned the young man.

"Do you keep plants there, Mr. EDWIN?"

"The whole thing is a regular plant, Mr. DIBBLE."

"But you spoke about a flowerpot."

EDWIN stretched his feet further toward the fire, and explained that he
meant Miss POTTS. "Did she say anything to you about the PENDRAGONS,
when you saw her?" he inquired.

"What _are_ pendragons?" asked the lawyer, wonderingly.

"One of them is a schoolmate of hers. A girl with some style about her."

"No," said Mr. DIBBLE, "she did not.--But here comes BLADAMS."

(_To be Continued_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR AGRICULTURAL COLUMN.

MEMORABILIA OF "WHAT I KNOW ABOUT FARMING."

To avoid the charge of plagiarism I have concluded to adopt the above,
as the title of the following statistics.

Many persons have trifled with the subject of agriculture; notably among
these may be mentioned the "self-made" man and the innocent who has been
abroad. I propose to attack the subject seriously, and to lay before the
readers of PUNCHINELLO information which will make their hair (if it be
of a carroty hue,) stand on end, and will certainly appease their
curiosity.

There are several ways in which agriculture may be attacked. 1st,
Scientifically, (but then you are likely to get to Lie-big.) 2nd,
Theologically, (and a vast deal of theology may be picked up on a
well-located farm, for do we not find "sermons in stones"?) 3d,
Humorously, (which is the way in which the aforesaid "self-made" man
advances to it,) and 4th, Practically, (in which way, I think, that
innocent gets at it.) Now, when, during the war, I was building forts at
the Dry Tortugas, my overseer informed me that a fort was most easily
taken when attacked on all sides, so I have concluded to pitch into
agriculture from every quarter. Therefore my remarks may be considered
as made in a Scientific-theological-humorous-practical sense.

Postponing a description of soils to a future time, I proceed to
elucidate, first,

CORN.

Of this vegetable there are five varieties, viz.: hard corn, soft corn,
chicken corn, pop corn, and Indian corn. It is a very useful production,
as it affords occupation to a large number of itinerant persons, who
have peculiar ways of sub-soiling it, some by a knife, some by washes,
and some by plasters. This vegetable is generally planted early,
(shoemakers having a monopoly of the cultivation,) and, curiously
enough, the larger the crop the less the owner likes it. Rainy weather
is good for this vegetable, as a damp day swells it very rapidly. It
requires a deep soil, for you cannot have any corn without at least one
foot, though two feet will probably produce a much larger crop.

The best treatment for hard corn is to subsoil it with a hatchet, though
a little judicious paring is good; soft corn sometimes does the pairing
itself, though not judiciously. Soft corn is sometimes called sweet
corn, on the principle, "sweet are the uses of adversity." The variety
of this vegetable cultivated by roosters is called chicken corn, though
no farmer can give a reason therefor, as no chicken ever had anything to
do with a shoe, unless, perhaps, "shoo-fly." Corn cultivated by an old
maid is irreverently called pop-corn. Why Indian corn should differ from
white corn, I have never yet been able to discover. It flourishes under
the same circumstances, and requires the same kind of care, and, except
in color, cannot be distinguished from the white. Probably RED CLOUD
could have told us the difference, if he had been properly interviewed.

Scientifically, corn is _tumorus in footibus_; theologically, it is a
"condemned" nuisance; humorously, you can't plant your foot without
planting corn; practically, everybody treads on it.

LOT.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MANAGERS OF RAILROADS.

PUNCHINELLO invites the attention of managers of railroads, generally,
but especially that of the President and Directors of the Morris and
Essex Railroad Company, to his new Patent, Portable, Folding, Tripodular
Derrick, with self-elongating extensions. The purposes to which this
machine may be applied are too numerous to mention, but it will be found
particularly useful for lifting up, and expelling from the cars, the
heavy commuters of the railroad just referred to, who decline to pay
double fare for stopping at Newark, and who sometimes even object to
being ejected for non-payment of said perfectly fair fare.

In practical operation this machine is at once simple and complete. It
is also refined, elevating, symmetrical, and chaste. By properly
adjusting it, a railroad conductor can easily lift a recalcitrant
passenger, and project him through one of the windows of the car,
(provided said window is large enough to admit of such exit,) into any
selected pool, or pond, or quagmire, or any other sort of mire, of the
miasmatic salt meadows, with the produce of which Morris and Essex stock
is so satisfactorily salted down.

Recent experiments upon pinguid and repudiating commuters, in the old
way of bullying, coaxing, and "soft-sawdering," have proved to be utter
failures. The united forces of a conductor and two brakesmen of the
Morris and Essex R.R. proved, in a late instance of a member of the Fat
Men's Club, quite inadequate to the ejection of that person from the car
of which he occupied a conspicuous fraction. The obese fellow declined
to have his ticket punched, and defied the officers of the road to come
on and punch his head. It is for the expulsion of such blisters upon the
social cuticle that PUNCHINELLO'S invention has been specially devised.

As it is intended solely for the use and benefit of railroad managers,
no further particulars respecting it will be supplied to recalcitrant
commuters unless their applications are accompanied with Four Dollars,
respectively--the regulated price of one year's subscription to
PUNCHINELLO'S witty, plastic, unrivalled, intermittent, hebdomadal
publication. Should no purchase of the patent in question be made by the
directory of the Morris and Essex Railroad, however, PUNCHINELLO will
then meet contingencies by condensing the machine, reducing it so much
in size that a commuter may easily carry one in his waistcoat pocket, to
be ready, when necessary, for extracting an insolent conductor out of
his boots; or, should the occasion arise, for the immediate evulsion
from office of the autocratic President of the concern, himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOCAL.

The enterprising reporter who discovered an earthquake in the eastern
districts of the city, a few days since, has been obliged to employ a
snake-charmer to extract from his left boot an immense anaconda that had
effected a lodgement there.

[Illustration: FOLLOWING SUIT.-A Possible Sort of Reta(i)liation.

"GOOD GRACIOUS, ARABELLA! DO BE CAREFUL--YOU'VE GOT YOUR FOOT ON THE
GENTLEMAN'S TRAIN!"

"WELL, HOW CAN ONE HELP IT, WHEN THOSE ABSURD TRAINS ARE ALWAYS GETTING
UNDER ONE'S FEET?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FEMALE GENTLEMAN.

A MOURNFUL BALLAD OF THE PERIOD.

  A certain fair young maid,
    With mind on progress bent,
  Could not endure the way
    Reformers mostly went.

  Those rights she wished to gain,
    Which SUSAN A. expects,
  But still she would not lose
    The softness of her sex.

  If at a station she
    For cars did wait in vain,
  She would not stride about,
    And "damn" the hapless train.

  "With men I'll equal be,"
    She said, "if women can;
  But still I must become
    A female gentleman.

  Hereafter I shall try
    Polite and kind to be;
  And treat all gentlemen
    As gentlemen treat me."

  One morning, in a stage,
    She rode to STEWART'S store--
  A young man soon got in,
    And sat down near the door.

  Then, leaning towards the man,
    While passengers did stare,
  She smiling said, "Good sir,
    Shall I pass up your fare?"

  The young man started back
    As if he had been shot.
  Said he, "This dollar bill?
    I think I'd rather not!"

  The poor girl sat abashed,
    While every one began
  To have suspicions of
    This female gentleman.

  One morning, hast'ning home,
    It rained--to her regret,
  And just before her walked
    A young man getting wet.

  She stepped up to him quick,
    And said, with courtesy rare,
  "It's raining, sir; will you
    My large umbrella share?"

  The young man sprang aside,
    Beneath a leaky spout;
  The water from his clothes
    Ran like a stream for trout.

  His hand upon his watch
    He clapped, and cried, "Don't stop!
  Just travel on, I say,
    Or I shall call a 'cop!'"

  This sort of thing she tried
    In many such a case;
  But every time she met
    Deplorable disgrace.

  At last she said, "Oh, ho!
  My plan it is no use;
  When I politeness show
    I always get abuse.

  The day is yet to come
    When female courtesy
  Is wanted by the men;
    No more of it for me!"

  She straight sought SUSAN A.,
    And joined her haughty clan
  And tried no more to be
    A female gentleman.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR PORTFOLIO.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO: Having been appointed by the Committee of the
"American Universal Protection Society," of which you are chairman, to
call upon our honored Secretary of State, with the view of obtaining
protection for the interests of our merchants who are now endeavoring to
create a trade in ant-eaters with the inhabitants of the Chickadiddle
Islands in the South Sea, I have the honor to submit the following
synopsis of what took place at the interview:

I found Mr. FISH in a state of partial exhaustion, owing to the unusual
heat of the weather, and the perusal of a fresh batch of compliments
forwarded to him by his particular friend in New York, the Hon. C.
ANDERSON DANA.

Three negresses stood about him with palm-leaf fans, endeavoring to
accelerate the movement of the atmosphere in the very close room to
which the privacy of his feelings sometimes drives him. He was reclining
upon a sofa when I entered, but immediately arose and motioned me to
take a seat. I had scarcely occupied a comfortable looking stuffed
back-piece of furniture, when a pricking sensation in the region of my
coat-tails caused me to resume the perpendicular with amazing rapidity,
and, upon looking down, I observed the point of a pin protruding through
the cushion of the chair. The Secretary did not lose his gravity, but
very heartily apologized for what he called the "little _contretemps_."
The smarting sensation made me a little lax in speech, so that I did not
choose my words with that regard for the majesty of a Premier which I
came there at first disposed to do. He listened to my recital of the
application with perfect equanimity, until I mentioned the name of
PUNCHINELLO. At this point he colored slightly, bit his nether lip, and
exclaimed, with evident vexation:

"What! the editor of a sheet that has dared to speak of me as a "scaly"
fellow, and hold my policy up to the laughter of the nation?"

"Pardon me, Mr. Secretary," I interposed, with all the courtesy of
manner I could muster, "but I think you mistake the motive of Mr.
PUNCHINELLO in applying that description to a person so august."

"Fire and fiddlesticks, sir! do you take me for a fool?"

I pressed my hand in the vicinity of the fifth rib on my left side, and
solemnly asseverated that I did not.

"It makes no difference," added the great man, in an excited tone. "I
can entertain no application coming from such a quarter."

"But will you permit me to explain what Mr. PUNCHINELLO intended by the
epithet 'scaly'? It was only his peculiar way of saying that an officer
appointed to administer the responsible duties of your august office
could not impartially do so without the 'Scales'--of Justice."

"Nonsense!" shouted the petulant old mackerel; and now I began to feel
"sassy."

"But you must admit, Mr. Secretary, that there is a great deal of sense
in Mr. PUNCHINELLO'S nonsense. He shoots folly as it flies, and yet it's
a great pity that he can't shoot all the fools."

"I am impressed with the truth of that remark, from the fact of his
sending you here," was the reply, delivered with an air and tone
intended to be witheringly sarcastic. That was enough for me, so I
dropped my gloves (metaphorically speaking) and went for him.

"Old man!" says I, "you were lifted out of the quiet of a happy home and
placed here, not so much by the act of our illustrious President as by
the dispensation of a mysterious Providence. 'Way down in Skewdunk they
held prayer-meetings when they heard that news, and a good many of them
haven't stopped praying yet. But only last week, let me tell you, Deacon
DRYASDUST wrote to General GRANT'S father, saying: 'JESSE, old boy,
there's no use praying for that venerable porgy any longer; he's worser
nor ever, and bound to drag LYSSES down to the bottom with him.' The
kind old man wrote back to the Deacon 'That's so, GILL, as sure as
pickled souse ain't pickled salmon.' And now, Mr. Secretary, I come to
the point. What old GILL DRYASDUST and JESSE GRANT think of you is what
the people think; and when PUNCHINELLO shoots at you an arrow now and
then, dipped in fun, and winged with satire, he does it in no spirit of
surly bitterness or spleen, but with a heart full of hope and charity,
and as much as says to the people of the United States, in your hearing:
'My good friends, keep on praying for brother FISH, and don't give him
up because some think him a "scaly" fellow.'"

Thus finishing this mingled admonition and explanation, I dropped a
single tear upon the figure worked in the carpet, and gloomily quitted
the apartment.

The next morning I found a letter upon the table, at my lodgings,
bearing the imprint of the Department of State, and couched in these
terms:

    Dear Sir: Instructions have been sent from this Department to
    Admiral POOR, commanding U. S. Squadron in Cuban waters to
    extend to American merchants engaged in establishing a trade in
    ant-eaters with the inhabitants of the South Sea Chickadiddle
    Islands, every protection consistent with his remaining where he
    now is.

    Very Respect'y,

    HAMILTON FISH.

All of which is respectfully submitted.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMIC ZOOLOGY.

ORDER, REPTILIA.--WORMS.

Worms are invertebral animals; in other words, they are backboneless,
but nevertheless some of them--for example the prickly caterpillars--are
full of spines. In Texas they call a chicken-snake seven feet long a
worm; but it would be just as reasonable to call the Rosse Telescope an
opera-glass.

The common earthworm is the most unfortunate variety of the species.
Beaks are always after him, and he is often taken up early in the
morning while lying perdue in the moist meadow grass. Earthworms are a
good bait for trout, but the highflyers of the gentle craft consider it
infra dig to dig them. Impaled on a hook, they are as lively as if on a
bender, and if thrown, in this condition, into a stream or pool, the
fish are apt to mistake them for their natural Grub. When quickly drawn
from the liquid element by the angler, they sometimes come up with a
single drop of water hanging to them, and sometimes--though more
rarely--with two Gills. The question whether the hook hurts them, or
only tickles till they squirm, is one of those knotty problems that
physiologists have failed to solve. COWPER, the poet, had a tenderness
for the earthworm. So also had IZAAK WALTON, who recommends that he be
skewered "tenderly, as if you loved him."

From the cradle to the grave, and even after we are deposited in the
latter, our bodies are liable to be infested with worms. There is the
trichina spiralis, which really exists, although the German
pork-butchers denounce the story as a "pig lie;" the ordinary intestinal
worm, which disports itself, eel-like, in the Alimentary Canal; and the
tape worm, of two varieties, one of which performs its circumlocutory
antics in the human stomach, and the other in the government Bureaux at
Washington. The worm that feeds on the cold meat of humanity, although
the most insignificant of reptiles, has one attribute of Diety. It is no
respecter of persons, and would as lief pick a bone in a royal vault as
in POTTER'S Field. All flesh is the same to it--unless saturated with
carbolic acid. It is said that all living things are propagated--that
the process of creation ceased ages ago; yet it is quite certain that
the worms known as maggots may be created by a blow. The most detestable
of all the vermicular tribe is the Worm of the Still, which is a sort of
caterer for the worm which never dieth--a reptile of another sphere,
that has never been described in Natural History. The only worm
recognized as edible by civilized man is produced in Italy and vulgarly
known as wormy-chilly. The subject is susceptible of further expansion,
but having run it into the ground, we here break it off.

       *       *       *       *       *

DUBIOUS ENGLISH.

The Paris correspondence of one of the city dailies has the following
terse, but somewhat equivocal statement:

  "Another murder of a brutal character is reported."

At the first glance one is inclined to wonder who the "brutal character"
was, whose violent death is thus referred to. On consideration, however,
it is possible to arrive at the conclusion that no particular character
is pointed at, but only a murder designated as brutal.

It is a way with newspaper correspondents to characterize some murders
as brutal, with the view, probably, of distinguishing them from
benignant murders, which, everybody knows, are of such frequent
occurrence.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A RURAL VIEW OF THE CENSUS.

_Farmer's Wife. (Who mistakes our Artist for a Census-taker.)_ "LOOK A'
HERE, MISTER, IF YOU'VE COME ALONG TO TAKE THE _senses_ OUT OF ME AND MY
OLD MAN, I'LL SET THE BULL-DORG ON TER YER!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

WESTERN NOMENCLATURE.

