The Battalion was in the trenches during the abortive gas attack on
December 19th, but was not affected by the gas, which passed just
behind it. _To face page 28._

[Illustration: POPERINGHE, 1915.]

Christmas Day was spent in Poperinghe.

[Sidenote: =1916.=

=Jan. 4th.=]

On leaving the trenches on this date the Battalion was kept in Brigade
reserve. Apart from heavy night-working parties, the week was not too
uncomfortable, though baths were impossible.

[Sidenote: =Jan. 18th.=]

The London Rifle Brigade returned to rest under canvas instead of to
billets.

[Sidenote: =Feb. 1st--8th.=]

Owing to the relief of the 3rd Division this period was one of variety.
The Battalion marched from trenches to rest, and back into reserve. It
was attached to three different Brigades, and for a time was Divisional
Troops. Eventually, on the 8th, orders were received to entrain the next
day. The various outlying details were collected before midnight.

[Sidenote: =Feb. 9th.=]

The Battalion entrained for the South.

[Sidenote: =Gommecourt.=

=July 1st.=]

This fighting is too recent for any details, however bare, to be given.

Previous to this date the Battalion, now part of as fine a Territorial
Division as France had ever seen, took its ordinary tour of training and
trenches. It was, of course, known that the Division was going "over the
top" at the beginning of the offensive, and all training was carried out
with this great end in view.

_To face page 29._

[Illustration: VOORMEZEELE CHURCH.]

The following extract from the account published in the Press is given
here, not because the writer of these notes does not feel able to
give his own account, but because he might unwittingly say more than the
Censor would feel able to pass:--

          "I am about to give, on first-hand information, an
          account of the part which has been played by
          certain of our famous London Regiments. These
          regiments, which included the London Rifle
          Brigade, the Queen Victoria's Rifles, the Rangers,
          the Queen's Westminsters, and London Scottish, had
          assigned to them certain objectives near
          Gommecourt, towards the northern end of our
          original line of advance, where, as is well known,
          owing to the extraordinary preparations which the
          enemy had made in that direction, we did not fare
          so well as we have done, and continue to do,
          further south. The London Regiments, which fought
          with magnificent gallantry and tenacity, did, in
          fact, accomplish their primary objects, but, owing
          to circumstances beyond their control, they
          subsequently had to retire to a line which nearly
          corresponds to that they occupied before the
          battle began. . . ."

For its work on this day the Corps, of which the Division formed a part,
received a special verbal message of thanks, delivered by one of Sir
Douglas Haig's A.D.C.'s. This was subsequently confirmed in writing by
the Chief of the General Staff.

_To face page 30._

[Illustration: TRENCH BATTALION HEADQUARTERS.

_November, 1915--February, 1916._]

Lieut.-Colonel Bates, D.S.O., was given sick leave in August, and Major
R. H. Husey, M.C., took command. Under his leadership the Battalion
added to its laurels in the fighting during September.


SECOND BATTALION.

At the beginning of September, 1914, permission was obtained to form a
second Battalion. Recruiting was commenced at Headquarters in Bunhill
Row on the 3rd, and the Battalion was filled in one day. So great was
the rush of recruits that, had it been possible to obtain leave to do
so, another Battalion could easily have been formed. Great care was
taken, under these advantageous circumstances, in the selection of
recruits. Those taken, combined with the draft from the 1st Battalion of
men who were unable at that time to undertake the foreign service
obligation, made up a fine Battalion.

Of the officers on formation, the following had formerly served in the
Regiment, or were serving, and transferred from the 1st Battalion under
the home service condition:--

          Lieut.-Colonel G. R. Tod, formerly Adjutant for
          five years, 1898-1903.

          Major G. Harvest.

          Quartermaster and Hon. Major J. Guppy.

_To face page 31._

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO CAMP, REST BILLETS, MAY, 1916, WHERE THE LORD
MAYOR SAW THE BATTALION ON PARADE.]

          Captain C. G. H. Macgill, M.V.O., who acted as
          Adjutant until the formation of the Home Service
          Provisional Battalion.

          Captain S. Bowers.

          Captain C. R. Bland.

          Captain H. B. Prior.

          Captain C. E. Johnstone.

          Captain C. Furze.

          Lieutenant B. E. Bland.


THIRD BATTALION.

The 3rd Battalion was raised on November 30th, 1914. The first
Commanding Officer was Colonel H. C. Cholmondeley, C.B. (see pages 3 and
4). The Battalion was fortunate in having the help of several old
members of the Regiment in the commissioned and non-commissioned ranks.
They were invaluable in carrying on to the new men the traditions and
ésprit de corps of the London Rifle Brigade.

After some five months in London, the Battalion proceeded at the end of
April by train to Wimbledon, and on, by route march, to Tadworth, where
it went under canvas. Soon after its arrival Colonel Cholmondeley was
given command of a 4th Line Brigade, and the command of the Battalion
was taken over by Major Norman C. King, T.D., who went out to the front
with the 1st Battalion, and had been invalided home. Lieut.-Colonel
King, being the officer with the senior permanent rank on the cadre of
the Regiment, now commands it.

The system of training adopted was that of a public school; that is to
say, the company represented the house, and the Captain the house
master, who administered the company, but was not responsible for its
training. The instructors in each subject--e.g., drill, musketry,
bombing, etc.--each had their own staff of assistants, and every platoon
was taken up in turn for its lesson. This represented the forms of a
school. The system proved very successful, and received commendation
from high authority. It was subsequently recommended for adoption over
the whole of the Southern Command, but was too much of a departure from
tradition to be taken over as it stood, though it was recommended in a
modified form.

As the summer of 1915 passed on, officers from the 1st Battalion, who
had been wounded in the second battle of Ypres in April-May, were posted
to the 3rd Battalion on recovery. Thus began the circulation between the
1st and 3rd Battalions which has proved so invaluable in keeping close
touch and sympathy between those at the front and those at home.

On November 12th the Battalion moved to billets in Sutton, and received
the greatest kindness and consideration there. Everything possible was
done for the comfort of the Battalion, and not the least of the
kindnesses received were the services at Christchurch, under the Rev.
Courtney Gale. Nothing could have exceeded the warmth and vigour of the
church parades, which were much appreciated by all ranks.

On January 10th, 1916, the Battalion moved to its present camp.


ADMINISTRATIVE CENTRE.

The Headquarters and Depôt or Administrative Centre are situated at 130,
Bunhill Row, E.C., and are in charge of Captain H. Ferguson, to whom the
Regiment owes a considerable debt of gratitude for the whole-hearted way
he has thrown himself into the work since he joined. Having been private
secretary to the late Lord Roberts, he has brought a ripe knowledge and
warm appreciation of the Territorial Force to bear on the thousand and
one details which have to be arranged from Headquarters. Here it is that
recruits receive their equipment and their first insight into drill.

The finances of the Regiment since war broke out have been ably looked
after by Major C. W. Cornish, V.D., who took up the reins again after
having laid them down in 1908.

The London Rifle Brigade Mutual Aid Society centres in Bunhill Row, and
a copy of its scheme is given in Appendix F.

The Prisoners' Aid Fund, for sending food and warm clothing to
non-commissioned officers and riflemen of the Regiment who are
prisoners, is also controlled from Headquarters. Weekly parcels are sent
by ladies of the Regiment to any whose relatives are not in a position
to send them all they require.


APPENDIX A.


HONOURS AND REWARDS.


  _Victoria Cross._

  9539 Lance-Sergeant Douglas Walter Belcher (now Sec.-Lieutenant, Queen
      Victoria's Rifles).


  _K.C.V.O._

  The Bishop of London.


  _C.M.G._

  Lieut.-Colonel W. D. The Earl Cairns.


  _D.S.O._

  Major A. S. Bates.

  Captain A. C. Oppenheim, King's Royal Rifle Corps.


  _Military Cross_ (10).

  Captain R. H. Husey.

  Captain J. R. Somers-Smith.

  Captain H. L. Johnston.

  Captain C. W. Trevelyan.

  Captain F. H. Wallis.

  Captain R. Russell.

  Captain F. H. Crews.

  Lieutenant E. R. Williamson (with a Trench Mortar
        Battery).

  Sec.-Lieutenant A. K. Dodds (attached 181st Company, Royal Engineers).

  Sec.-Lieutenant R. E. Petley.


  _D.C.M._ (12).

   9338 Sergeant (now Captain, Hampshire R., T.F.) W. F. Pothecary.

   6968 Signalling Sergeant E. A. Adams.

   8541 Sergeant R. V. Todd.

   9435 Transport Sergeant A. Gordon (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Rifle
       Brigade).

    515 Sergeant W. M. Lilley.

   9996 Sergeant W. A. Roulston (killed).

   9497 Corporal (now Lieutenant, London Rifle Brigade) G. G. Boston.

     75 Lance-Corporal T. H. Stransom (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Rifle
       Brigade).

  11003 Lance-Corporal C. Taylor.

   1006 Rifleman J. S. Lindsay (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Rifle
       Brigade).

   8896 Rifleman R. S. Clark.

  10839 Rifleman E. L. Kench.


  _Military Medal_ (28).

   1867 Regimental Sergeant-Major J. Adams.

    660 Sergeant (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Rifle Brigade) P. T. Dyer.

  10835 Sergeant F. C. Keele.

   9412 Sergeant (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Rifle Brigade) E. H. Slade.

   1131 Sergeant W. G. T. Mason.

    776 Corporal R. F. Ebbetts.

   9535 Corporal (now Sec.-Lieutenant, Lincolnshire Regiment) P.
       Godsmark.

   9921 Lce.-Cpl. (now Sergeant) L. W. Billington.

   9289 Lance-Corporal (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Rifle Brigade)
       H. J. F. Crisp.

   1621 Lance-Corporal J. H. Foaden.

   1220 Lance-Corporal (now at Officers' Cadet School) V. L. A. Fowle.

   9899 Lance-Corporal J. O. Haylock (now Sergeant-Dispenser,
       Northumbrian Field Ambulance).

   9471 Lance-Corporal (now Sec.-Lieutenant, Cheshire Regiment) H. J. C.
      Rowe.

   9137 Lance-Corporal (now Sec.-Lieutenant, King's Own Royal Lancaster
      Regiment) R. H. Stonnill.

   9453 Lance-Corporal (now Corporal) H. Turner.

    762 Lance-Corporal R. E. Parslow.

    787 Sergeant C. W. Bradford (killed).

   1124 Rifleman H. G. Buck.

   1289 Rifleman F. A. Crocker.

     92 Rifleman (now Sec.-Lieutenant, Royal Field Artillery) W. E.
      Dunnett.

   2516 Rifleman H. W. Dunk.

   2822 Rifleman A. F. H. Edington.

   9457 Rifleman (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Regiment) G. Gordon.

  10535 Rifleman W. Hawthorn.

    161 Rifleman (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Regiment)
        E. W. G. Hodgkinson.

   9609 Rifleman (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Regiment) E. B. Latham.

   9597 Rifleman (now Sec.-Lieutenant, London Regiment) W. E. Lockhart.

    147 Rifleman (Sec.-Lieutenant, Oxford and Bucks Light Infantry) A. C.
      Thomas (killed).


  _Meritorious Service Medal_ (2).

    129 Acting-Sergt. D. Mackay.

   9587 Rfn. G. W. Hunter.


  _The Montenegrin Decoration of Danilo._

  Lieut.-Col. R. H. Husey, M.C.


  _Croix de Guerre_ (with palm leaves).

  515 Sergeant W. M. Lilley.

All above Orders, Decorations, and Medals were won by officers,
non-commissioned officers, and riflemen while serving with, or wearing
the uniform of, the Regiment.

The following officers, who served with or in the ranks of the 1st
Battalion, London Rifle Brigade, have gained the award shown after their
names since being transferred, or commissioned, to other Regiments[A]:--

  Sec.-Lieutenant H. H. Linzell, The Border Regiment, Military Cross.

  Sec.-Lieutenant D. Blofeld, The London Regiment, Military Cross
      (killed).

  Sec.-Lieutenant S. R. Hogg, Royal Fusiliers, Military Cross.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] This list does not claim to be complete. Any additions should be
sent to the Officer in Charge Depôt, where a record will be kept.


[Illustration: Map]


APPENDIX B.


The following officers and other ranks have been mentioned in
despatches:--

  Lieut.-Colonel W. D. Earl Cairns.

  The Bishop of London.

  Lieut.-Colonel A. S. Bates (3).

  Major A. D. Ducat, M.B., T.D., R.A.M.C. (T.F.).

  Captain A. C. Oppenheim, King's Royal Rifle Corps (2).

  Captain R. H. Husey.

  Captain J. R. Somers-Smith.

  Captain C. W. Trevelyan.

  Lieutenant R. Russell.

  Sec.-Lieutenant W. L. Willett.

  Sec.-Lieutenant A. K. Dodds.

  709 Company Sergeant-Major A. J. R. Macveagh.

  8488 Company Sergeant-Major (now Sec.-Lieutenant, Royal Field
      Artillery) B. K. Manbey.

  8929 Corporal (now Sec.-Lieutenant, King's Royal Rifle Corps) T. H.
      Jenkin.

  9391 Rifleman R. E. Peck.


The following officer who served in the ranks of the 1st Battalion,
London Rifle Brigade, has also been mentioned in despatches since being
commissioned to another regiment[B]:--

  Temporary Sec.-Lieutenant L. E. Schultz, Wiltshire Regiment (killed).

FOOTNOTE:

[B] This list does not claim to be complete. Any additions should be
sent to the Officer in Charge Depôt, where a record will be kept.


APPENDIX C.


Alphabetical list, by ranks--the latter as on 15/8/16--of London Rifle
Brigade officers with service in France up to that date, ~excluding
those now serving whose names have not been passed by the Censor for
publication~:--

  _Lieutenant-Colonels._

                        Joined B.E.F as
  NAME.                   an Officer.        Left B.E.F.

  Bates, A. S.               5/11/14            15/8/16

  Cairns, W. D., Earl        5/11/14             9/4/15

  King, N. C.                5/11/14             6/1/15

  Matthey, C. G. R.          5/11/14            12/1/15


  _Majors._

  Burnell, C. D.             5/11/14             7/5/15  Wounded

  MacGeagh, H. D. F.         5/11/14            13/1/15
                             31/8/15            3/12/15

  Soames, M. H.              5/11/14            17/7/15


  _Captains._

  Alcock, J. E.             20/12/14            21/2/15  Wounded

  Bland, B. E.              23/12/14             9/3/15

  Charles, F. D.              8/5/15            16/9/16  Wounded

  Charles, R. D. S.          19/2/15             7/5/15  Wounded

  Cholmeley, G. H.           5/11/14            21/2/15
                             18/7/15             -/7/16  Wounded

  de Cologan, A. T. B.       18/7/15             1/7/16  Prisoner

  Harvey, B. S.             20/12/14             3/5/15  Wounded
                              5/8/15             1/7/16  Killed

  Johnston, H. L.            5/11/14            23/6/16  Wounded

  Kirby, A. G.               5/11/14           20/12/14  Wounded

  Kitching, G. C.            5/11/14            17/2/15

  Large, E. L.               5/11/14            21/5/15  Died of wounds

  Lintott, A. L.             5/11/14            20/1/15
                             21/5/15           19/11/15

  Morrison, G. H.            5/11/14            31/3/15  Killed

  Nobbs, H. G.                8/8/16             9/9/16  Wounded &
                                                           Prisoner
                                                         Now exchanged

  Robinson, J. G.            5/11/14            25/1/16

  Russell, R.                11/2/15            21/4/16

  Somers-Smith, J. R.        5/11/14             3/6/15
                            24/10/15             1/7/16  Killed

  White, A. B.               19/2/15             7/5/15  Wounded
                             18/7/15           20/11/15

  Wills, E. C.                8/5/15           13/10/16  Wounded


  _Lieutenants._

  Bantoft, E. S.              5/7/16            11/9/16  Died of wounds

  Beard, H. C.               18/3/15             3/5/15  Wounded

  Boston, G. G.               8/5/15            27/7/16  Wounded

  Bromiley, B.              24/12/15             5/7/16

  Cartwright, G. H. G. M.    5/11/14            11/5/15  Wounded

  Clode-Baker, G. E.        24/12/15             1/7/16  Killed

  Dodds, A. K.               28/2/15           11/10/15  Gassed

  Flindt, R. E. H.           11/2/15             7/5/15  Wounded

  Fursdon, G. E. S.          5/11/14             2/5/15  Wounded
                             18/7/15             4/9/15

  Long, C. W.                27/5/16            27/7/16

  Maynard, M. J.              8/5/15            -/10/16  Missing

  Oldfield, P. B. B.          1/5/15            27/7/16  Wounded

  Petersen, J. R. S.         5/11/14             5/5/16

  Pocock, B. L. E.          24/12/15             2/7/16  Wounded

  Price, H. B.               5/11/14             3/5/15  Killed

  Sedgwick, A. E.            26/2/15             6/5/15  Wounded
                             12/8/16            10/9/16  Killed

  Slessor, P.                5/11/14           22/12/14

  Titley, P.                 19/1/16            26/6/16

  Vincent, H. G.             5/11/14             3/5/15

  Williamson, E. R.         24/12/15            10/9/16  Wounded &
                                                           missing,
                                                           believed
                                                           killed

  Wimble, A. S.              29/4/15             7/5/15  Wounded


  _Second-Lieutenants._

  Appleton, E. R.            18/7/15           20/12/15

  Aste, P. J.                18/7/15             4/2/16

  Baldwin, N. E.              3/8/16            -/10/16  Wounded &
                                                           missing

  Balkwill, C. V.            27/5/16             1/7/16  Killed

  Balls, F. A.               27/5/16            11/7/16

  Barker, H. C.              29/4/15            22/1/16
                             28/3/16            24/4/16

  Benns, A. L.                5/3/16             1/7/16  Killed

  Betts, A. W. T.             2/5/15            17/5/15  Wounded

  Brodie, C. G.              18/7/15            15/9/15

  Camden, H. M.              11/1/16             9/2/16

  Carrier, J. R.              8/5/16            8/10/16  Killed

  Collis, L. W.               2/8/16            20/9/16

  Cotter, G. H.              11/2/15            12/4/15  Killed

  Crisp, H. J. F.            27/5/16            14/9/16  Wounded

  Doust, C. B.               14/3/16             1/7/16  Killed

  Dyer, P. T.                19/7/16            29/9/16  Wounded

  Feast, A. C.                8/5/15            17/5/15

  Forbes, K.                 5/11/14            10/2/15  Killed

  Gardiner, W. E. M.          8/5/16            19/7/16  Killed

  Gooding, H. R. W.          19/4/15            13/5/15  Killed

  Hill, R. L.                13/8/15             6/6/16

