Of these MARY HARDWICK married (his first wife) Richard Wingfield, of
Wantisden, seventh son of Sir Anthony Wingfield, of Letheringham, co.
Suffolk, K.G. His will was proved in London 14th August, 1591. Their
eldest son _Henry_ was of Crowfield, co. Suffolk. His great-grandson,
_Harbottle Wingfield_, of Crowfield, was living 1644, and his
descendants, if any, may quarter Hardwick. Their second son, _Anthony
Wingfield_, was the well-known Greek reader to Queen Elizabeth; and
their third son, _Sir John Wingfield_, married Susan Bertie, Countess
Dowager of Kent, and left _Peregrin Wingfield_, of whom nothing is
recorded.

JANE HARDWICK, next daughter, married Godfrey Bosvile of Gunthwaite and
Beighton, co. Ebor. His will is dated 22nd July, 1580. Their eldest
child, _Francis Bosvile_, left only daughter, Grace Bosvile, who died
young. His three sisters became coheirs, but the estate of Gunthwaite
went to an uncle, ancestor of the present Godfrey Bosvile, Lord
Macdonald. Of these sisters, _Frances Bosvile_ married John Savile;
_Dorothy Bosvile_, John Lacy; and _Elizabeth Bosvile_, John Copley:
either they had no children, or these died young. _Mary Bosvile_, the
second daughter and coheir, married Richard Burdett, of Derby, living
1612. Their son, _George Burdett_, had by his first wife a son, whose
issue failed; and by his second wife two daughters, eventually coheirs.

Of these. _Mary Burdett_ married, first, Richard Pilkington, and second,
Sir T. Beaumont, of Whitby: and _another sister_ married--Ramsden. No
issue of either are recorded. The third sister, _Elizabeth Burdett_,
married, at Hoyland, 6th Feb., 1636, the Rev. Daniel Clark, A.M., and
died 27th Aug., 1679, at Fenney-Compton. Their great-grandson and sole
male representative was the late _Joseph Clark_ of Northampton, whose
descendants also quarter Hardwick.

ELIZABETH HARDWICK, the next daughter, was the celebrated Countess of
Shrewsbury. Her _representatives_ are all noble, and their pedigrees may
be found in the Peerages. They are--

1. _The Duke of Devonshire_, representing Wm. Cavendish, first earl.

Certain descendants of Sir Charles Cavendish, of Welbeck Abbey, or
rather of his grandson, Henry, second Duke of Newcastle, namely,

2. The _Duke of Portland_, representing Margaret Pelham, the Duke's
eldest coheir;

3. The _Marquis of Salisbury_ from Catherine, and second coheir;

4. The _Earl De la Warr_; and

5. The _Earl of Aboyne_, are the coheirs of Sir Charles Cope, Baronet,
of Orton; who represented Arabella, Countess of Sunderland, third
coheir. These five all quarter Hardwick.

ALICE HARDWICK, next daughter, married Francis Hercy, according to some
pedigrees. No issue recorded.

There are therefore descendants certainly known of only two of the
children of John Hardwick. Possibly some of your correspondents can
supply those of Wingfield and Hercy.

The crest and arms of the Hardwicks may be found in Edmondson. They only
quartered Pynchbeke. I am not aware of any motto. {284}

Miss Costello, and other biographers of the Countess of Shrewsbury, have
quite overlooked all the descendants of her sisters. Possibly, should
these lines meet the eye of the Duke of Devonshire, who possesses the
estates and papers of the Hardwicks, it may lead to more particulars
concerning the family being made public.

ERMINE.

Torquay.


_Quotations in Bishop Andrewes_ (Vol. ii., p. 245.).--

  "Minutuli et patellares Dei."

is from Plautus:

  "Di me omnes magni minutique et patellarii."
  _Cistell._ II. 1. 46.

and

  "Sed quæ de septem totum circumspicit orbem
  Collibus, imperii Roma Deumque locus."

is from Ovid (_Trist_. I. 5. 69.).

J.E.B MAYOR.

Marlborough College.


_The Sun Feminine in English_ (Vol. ii., p. 21).--MR. COX may perhaps be
pleased to learn _why_ the northern nations made the sun feminine. The
ancient Germans and Saxons--

    "When they discovered how the sun by his heat and influence
    excited venereal love in creatures subserviant to his dominion,
    they then varied his sex, and painted him like a woman, because
    in them that passion is most impotent, and yet impetuous; on her
    head they placed a myrtle crown or garland to denote her
    dominion, and that love should be alwaies verdant as the myrtle;
    in one hand she supported the world, and in the other three
    golden apples, to represent that the world and its wealth are
    both sustained by love. The three golden apples signified the
    threefold beauty of the sun, exemplified in the morning,
    meridian, and evening; on her breast was lodged a burning torch,
    to insinuate to us the violence of the flame of love which
    scorches humane hearts."--_Philipot's Brief and Historical
    Discourse of the Original and Growth of Heraldry_, pp. 12, 13.
    London, 1672.

T.H. KERSLEY

King William's College, Isle of Man.

_Carpatio_ (Vol. ii., p. 247.).--Your Querist must be little versed in
early Italian art, not to know that Vittore Carpaccio (such is the
correct spelling) was one of the morning stars of the Venetian school;
and his search must have been somewhat careless, as Carpaccio and his
works are fully described in Kugler's _Handbook_, p. 149., and in Lanzi.
Some exquisite figures of his, of which Mrs. Jameson has given a St.
Stephen in her _Legendary Art_, exist in the Brera at Milan. He is a
painter not sufficiently known in England, but one whom it may be hoped
the Arundel Society will introduce by their engravings. I cannot assist
J.G.N. in explaining the subject of his engraving. May _Cornubioe_ be by
error for _Cordubioe_?

CLERICUS.


_The Character_ "&".--This character your correspondent will at once see
is only the Latin word "et", written in a flourishing form; as we find
it repeated in the abbreviation "&c.," for "et cetera". Its adoption as
a contraction for the English word "and", arose, no doubt, from the
facility of its formation; and the name it acquired was "and-per
se-and", "and by itself and," which is easily susceptible of the
corruptions noticed by MR. LOWER.

[Greek: PHI].


_Walrond Family_ (Vol. ii., p. 206.).--Burke, in his _History of the
Commoners_, only gives the name of George, _one_ of the sons of Colonel
Humphry Walrond. He also states that the colonel married _Elizabeth_,
daughter of Nathaniel Napier, Esq., of More Critchel. Now Colonel
Walrond appears from his petition (Royalist Comp. Papers, State Paper
Office) dated 12th February, 1648, addressed to the Commissioners for
Compounding with Delinquents, to have had _nine_ other children then
living. He states: "Thus his eldest sonne George Walrond did absente
himselfe for a short time from his father's house, and went into the
king's army, where he unfortunately lost his right arme. That he having
no estate at present, and but little in expectancy after his father's
death, _he having ten_ children, and all _nine_ to be provided for out
of y'e petitioner's small estate." In a similar petition, dated about
two years later, from "_Grace_, the wife of Humphry Walrond, of Sea, in
the county of Somerset, Esquire," she states "herself to be weake woman,
and _having_ TEN children (whereof many are infants) to maintain." That
he was married to this _Grace_, and _not to Elizabeth_ (as stated by
Burke), as early as 1634, is clear from a licence to alienate certain
lands at Ilminster, 10 Ch. I. (_Pat. Rolls_.)

That they were both living in 1668 is proved by a petition in the State
Paper Office (Read in Council, Ap. 8, 1688. Trade Papers, Verginia, No.
I. A.):--"To the King's most excellent Ma'tie and the rt. hon'ble the
Lords of his Maj. most hon'ble Privy Councel," from "Grace, the wife of
Humphry Walrond, Esq." In this petition she states that her husband had
been very severely prosecuted by Lord Willoughby, whose sub-governor he
had been in Barbadoes. "He had contracted many debts by reason of his
loyalty and suffering in the late troubles, to the loss of at least
thirty thousand pounds." "That his loyalty and sufferings are
notoriously known, both in this kingdom and the Barbadoes, where he was
banished for proclaiming your Ma'tie after the murder of your royal
father." Colonel Walrond is mentioned by Clarendon, Rushworth,
Whitelock, &c.; but of the date of his death, the maiden name of his
wife, and the Christian names of all his ten children, I can find no
account.

The arms S.S.S. inquires about on the monument {285} of Humphry Walrond,
Esq., in Ilminster Church, are those of the family of Brokehampton.
Humphry Walrond (who died 1580) married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir
of John Brokehampton., of Sea, and so obtained that estate.

W. DOWNING BRUCE.

Middle Temple.


_Blackguard_ (Vol. ii., p. 134.).--An early instance of the use of this
word occurs in a letter from Richard Topcliffe (Aug. 30, 1578), printed
in Lodge's _Illustrations_, vol. ii. p. 188. I quote from Mr. Jardine's
_Criminal Trials_, vol. ii. p. 13.: "His house, Euston, far unmeet for
her Highness, but fitter for the _Black Guard_."

It also occurs in Fuller's _Church History_ (Book ix. cent. xvi. sect.
vii. § 35. vol. v. p. 160. ed. Brewer):--"For who can otherwise conceive
but such a prince-principal of darkness must be proportionably attended
with a _black guard_ of monstrous opinions?"

J.E.B. MAYOR.


_Scala Coeli_ (Vol. i., pp. 366. 402. 455.).--Maundrell mentions, "at
the coming out of Pilate's house, a descent, where was anciently the
_Scala Sancta_." (_Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem_, p. 107.) This holy
or heavenly stair was that by which the Redeemer was led down, by order
of Pilate, according to the legend, and afterwards was, among other
relics, carried to Rome. It is now in the Church of St. John Lateran,
whither it is said to have been brought by St. Helena from Jerusalem.
Pope Alexander Vl., and his successor Julius, granted to the Chapel of
St. Mary built by King Henry VII., in Westminster Abbey--

    "Easdem indulgencias et peccatorum remissiones ... quas
    Celebrantes pro Defunctis in Capellâ _Scala Coeli_ nuncupatâ in
    Ecclesiâ Trium Fontium extra muros Urbis Cisterciensis Ordinis
    ... consequuntur."

This indulgence of Pope Julius was dated in the year 1504; and its
intention of drawing thither pilgrims and offerings was fully realised,
we may believe: for in the year 1519 we find the brotherhood of St. Mary
of Rouncevall by Charing Cross paying:--

    "To the keper of Scala Celi in the Abby ... vjd."

(See Rymer's _Foedera_, tom. v. pt. iv.; and Dugdale's _Monasticon_,
vol. i. p. 320.)

MACKENZIE WALCOTT, M.A. Oxon.


_Sitting during the Lessons_ (Vol. ii., p. 46.).--With respect to L.'s
Query respecting sitting during the Lessons, I can venture no remarks;
but the custom of standing during the reading of the Gospel is very
ancient. In the mass of St. Chrysostom the priest exclaims, "Stand up,
let us hear the holy Gospel." (Goar, _Rituale Græcorum_, p. 69.) The
same custom appears in the Latin Liturgy of St. Basil:--"Cumque
interpres Evangelii dicit 'State cum timore Dei' convertitur Sacerdos ad
occidentem," etc. (_Renaudot_, vol. i. p. 7. Vide also "Liturgy of St.
Mark," _Ren_. vol. i. p. 126.) The edition of Renaudot's _Liturgies_ is
the reprint in 1847.

N.E.R. (a subscriber).


_Sitting during the Lessons._--There is no doubt, I believe, that in
former times the people stood when the minister read the Lessons, to
show their reverence. It is recorded in Nehemiah, viii. 5.:

    "And Ezra opened the Book in the sight of all the people (for he
    was above all the people), and when he opened it all the people
    _stood_ up."

Why this practice should have been altered, or why our Rubric should be
silent on this head, does not appear quite clear, though I find in
Wheatley (_On the Book of Common Prayer_, chap. vi. sec. vi.) that which
seems to me to be a very sufficient reason, if not for the sitting
during the Lessons, certainly for the standing during the reading of the
Gospel, and sitting during the Epistle:--

    "In St. Augustine's time the people always stood when the
    lessons were read, to show their reverence to God's holy word:
    but afterwards, when this was thought too great a burden, they
    were allowed to sit down at the lessons, and were only obliged
    to _stand_ at the reading of the Gospel; which always contains
    something that Our Lord did speak, or suffered in His own
    person. By which gesture they showed they had a greater respect
    to the Son of God himself than they had to any other inspired
    person, though speaking the word of God, and by God's
    authority."

WALTER MONTAGUE


_Aërostation, Works on_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.).--To the numerous list of
works on Aërostation which will no doubt be communicated to you in
answer to the inquiry of C.B.M., I beg to add the following small
contribution:--

"Saggio Aereonautico di Giuseppe Donini Tifernate," 8vo. pp. 92. With
four large folding Plates. Firenze 1819.

Signor Donini also published in 1823 (in Citta di Castello per il
Donati) the following pamphlet:--

"Circolare Areonautico (sic) Guiseppe Dolini d Città di Castello a tutti
i dotti, e ricchi nazionali, stranieri. 8vo." pp. 16. Oxford.

J.M.


_Aërostation._--Your correspondent C.B.M. (Vol. ii., p. 199.) will find
some curious matter of _aërostation_ in poor Colonel Maceroni's
_Autobiography_, 2 vols. 8vo.

W.C.


_Pole Money_ (Vol. ii., p. 231.).--The "pole money" alluded to in the
extracts given by T.N.I., was doubtless the poll tax, which was revived
in the reign of Charles II. Every one {286} knows that at an earlier
period of our history it gave rise to Wat Tyler's insurrection. The tax
was reimposed several times during the reign of William III. and it
appears from a statement of the Lords in a conference which took place
with the Commons on the subject in the first of William's reign, that
the tax, previously to that time, was last imposed in the 29th of
Charles II.

C. ROSS.


_Wormwood Wine_ (Vol. ii., p. 242.).--If, as MR. SINGER supposes,
"Eisell was absynthites, or wormwood wine, a nauseously bitter
medicament then much in use," Pepys' friends must have had a very
singular taste, for he records, on the 24th November, 1660,--

    "Creed and Shepley, and I, to the Rhonish wine house, and there
    I did give them two quarts of wormwood wine."

Perhaps the beverage was doctored for the English market, and rendered
more palatable than it had been in the days of Stuckius.

BRAYBROOKE.


_Darvon Gatherall_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.).--Dervel Gadarn (vulgarly
miscalled Darvel Gatheren) was son or grandson of Hywel or Hoel, son to
Emyr of Britany. He was the founder of Llan-dervel Church, in Merioneth,
and lived early in the sixth century. The destruction of his image is
mentioned in the _Letters on the Suppression of Monasteries_, Nos. 95.
and 101. Some account of it also exists in Lord Herbert's _Henry VIII._,
which I cannot refer to. I was not aware his name had ever undergone
such gross and barbarous corruption as _Darvon Gatherall_.

A.N.


_Darvon Gatherall_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.), or _Darvel Gatheren_, is spoken
of in Sir H. Ellis's _Original Letters_, Series III., Letter 330. Hall's
_Chronicle_, p. 826. ed. 1809.

J.E.B. MAYOR.


_Darvon Gatherall._--I send you an extract from Southey's _Common-place
Book_, which refers to Darvon Gatherall. Southey had copied it from
Wordworth's _Ecclesiastical Biography_, where it is given as quotation
from Michael Wodde, who wrote in 1554. He says:--

    "Who could, twenty years agone, say the Lord's Prayer in
    English?... If we were sick of the pestilence, we ran to St.
    Rooke: if of the ague, to St. Pernel, or Master John Shorne. If
    men were in prison, they prayed to St. Leonard. If the Welshman
    would have a purse, he prayed to _Darvel Gathorne_. If a wife
    were weary of a husband, she offered oats at Poules; at London,
    to St. Uncumber."

Can any of your readers inform me who St. Uncumber was?

PWCCA.


    [Poules is St. Paul's. The passage from Michael Wodde is quoted
    in Ellis' _Brand_, vol. i. p. 202. edit. 1841.]


_Angels' Visits_ (Vol. i., p. 102.).--WICCAMECUS will find in Norris's
_Miscellanies_, in a poem "To the Memory of my dear Neece, M.C." (Stanza
X. p. 10. ed. 1692), the following lines:--

  "No wonder such a noble mind
  Her way to heaven so soon could find:
  Angels, as 'tis but seldom they appear,
  So neither do they make long stay;
  They do but visit, and away."

Mr. Montgomery (_Christian Poet_) long ago compared this passage with
those cited by WICCAMECUS.

J.E.B. MAYOR.


_Antiquity of Smoking_ (Vol. ii., pp. 41. 216.).--On that interesting
subject, "The Antiquity of Smoking," I beg to contribute the following
"Note," which I made some years ego, but unfortunately without a
reference to the author:--

    "Some fern was evidently in use among the ancients: for
    Athenæus, in his first book, quotes from the Greek poet,
    Crobylus, these words:--

      [Greek:
      'Kai ton larung haedista purio temachiois
      Kaminos, ouk anthropos.']

      'And I will sweetly burn my throat with cuttings:
      A chimney, not a man!'

    "Now as, in a preceding line, the smoker boasts of his 'Idæan
    fingers,' it is plain that every man rolled up his sharoot for
    himself."

H.G.


_Antiquity of Smoking_ (Vol. ii., p. 216.).--_Herod_. lib. i. sec. 36.
is referred to for some illustration, I suppose, of smoking through
tubes. _Herodotus_ supplies nothing: perhaps _Herodian_ may be meant,
though not very likely. Herb smoking was probably in use in Europe long
before tobacco. But direct authority seems sadly wanting.

SANDVICENSIS.


"_Noli me tangere_" (Vol. ii., pp. 153. 219. 250.).--In a New Testament
published by the Portusian Bible Society is a small ill-executed print,
called "Christ appearing to Mary," copied from a picture by C. Ciguani.

WEDSECNARF.


_Partrige Family_ (Vol. ii., p. 230.).--Mr. Partrige's reference to
Strype's _Ecclesiastical Memorials_ is quite unintelligible to those who
have not access to the Oxford _reprint_ of that work. The reprint (I
wish that in all other reprints a similar course was adopted) gives the
paging of the original folio edition. I submit, therefore, that Mr.
Partrige should have stated that the note he has made is from Strype's
_Ecclesiastical Memorials_, vol. ii. p. 310.

The grant to which Mr. Partrige refers is, I dare say, on the Patent
Roll, 7 Edw. VI., which may be inspected at the Public Record Office,
Rolls Chapel, on payment of a fee of 1s., with liberty to take a copy or
extract in pencil gratuitously or a plain copy may be obtained at the
rate of 6d. a folio.

The act of 1 Mary, for the restitution in blood of the heirs of Sir
Miles Partrige, if not given in the {287} large edition of the Statutes,
printed by the Record Commissioners, may no doubt be seen at the
Parliament Office, near the House of Lords, on payment of the fee of 5s.

I believe I am correct in saying that no debates of that session are
extant; but the proceedings on the various bills may probably be traced
in the journals of the two Houses of Parliament, which are printed and
deposited in most of our great public libraries.

C.H. Cooper.

Cambridge, Sept. 7, 1850


_City Offices._--The best account of the different public offices of the
city of London, with their duties, etc., that I know of, your
correspondent A CITIZEN (Vol. ii., p. 216.) will find in the _Reports of
the Municipal Corporation Commissioners_.

W.C.


_Harvey and the Circulation of the Blood_ (Vol. ii., p. 266.).--The
claim set up on behalf of Father Paul to the honour of Harvey's
discovery, which is noticed by your correspondent W.W.B., is
satisfactorily disposed of in the life of Harvey in the _Biographia
Britannica_, iv. 2548., note C. Harvey gave a copy of his treatise _De
Motu Cordis_ to the Venetian ambassador in England. On his return home
the ambassador lent the book to Father Paul, who made some extracts from
it. After Father Paul's death, he was thought to be the author of these
extracts and hence the story which your correspondent quotes. It might
occasionally be convenient if your correspondents could make _a little_
inquiry before they send off their letters to you.

Beruchino.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

All who love the shady side of Pall Mall, and agree with Dr. Johnson
that the tide of human enjoyment flows higher at Charing Cross than in
any other part of the globe, will gladly welcome Mr. Jesse's recently
published volumes entitled _London and its Celebrities_. They are
pleasant, gossiping and suggestive, and as the reader turns over page
after page of the historical recollections and personal anecdotes which
are associated with the various localities described by Mr. Jesse, he
will doubtless be well content to trust the accuracy of a guide whom he
finds so fluent and so intelligent, and approve rather than lament the
absence of those references to original authorities which are looked for
in graver histories. The work is written after the style of Saint Foix'
_Rues de Paris_, which Walpole once intended to imitate; and is executed
with a tact which will no doubt render it very acceptable to those for
whom it has been written, namely those persons whose avocations of
business or pleasure lead them to traverse the thoroughfares of the
great metropolis; and to whom it points out in a manner which we have
correctly designated gossiping, pleasant, and suggestive, "such sites
and edifices as have been rendered classical by the romantic or literary
associations of past times."

Messrs. Williams and Norgate have forwarded to us a Catalog of an
extensive Collection of Books, the property of a distinguished
physician, which are to be sold by auction in Berlin on the 21st of
October. The library, which was forty years in forming, is remarkable
for containing, besides numerous rare works in Spanish, Italian, French,
and English Literature, a curious series of works connected with the
American aborigines; and a most extensive collection of works on the
subjects of Prison Discipline, Poor Laws, and those other great social
questions which are now exciting such universal attention.

We have received the following Catalogues: J. Miller's (43. Chandos
Street, Trafalgar Square) Catalogue No. 11, for 1850 of Books Old and
New, including a large Number of scarce and curious Works on Ireland,
its Antiquities, Topography, and History; W. Heath's (29-1/2. Lincoln's
Inn Fields) Catalogue No. 5. for 1850 of Valuable Second-hand Books in
all Departments of Literature.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE

TRANSLATION OF THE FRENCH LETTERS IN THE APPENDIX TO FOX'S HISTORY OF
JAMES II. 4to. 1808 HUTTON'S (W.) ROMAN WALL, 8vo. 1801

---- BARBERS, a Poem. 8vo. 1793 (Genuine edition, not the facsimile
copy.)

---- EDGAR AND ELPRIDA, 8vo. 1794

Odd Volumes.

BEYAN'S DICTIONARY OF PAINTERS AND ENGRAVERS, 4to. London, 1816. Vol. I.

SULLY'S MEMOIRS, Eight Volumes in French. London, 1763. Vol. II LES
AVENTURES DE GIL BLAS. London, 1749. Vols. I and II.

Letters, stating particulars and lowest prices, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. Dell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186 Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Volume the First of Notes and Queries, with Title-page and very copius
Index, is now ready, price 9s. 6d., bound in cloth, and may be had, by
order, of all Booksellers and newsmen._

_The Monthly Part for September, being the Fourth of Vol. II, is also
now ready, price 1s._

_Notes and Queries may be procured by the Trade at noon on Friday: so
that our country Subscribers ought to experience no difficulty in
receiving it regularly. Many of the country Booksellers are probably not
yet aware of this arrangement, which enables them to receive Copies in
their Saturday parcels._

_S.G. (C.C. Coll., Camb.), who writes respecting the History of Edward
II., is refered to our First Volume, pp. 59. 91. 220._

A Student of History. _The Oxford Chronological Tables published by
Talboys, and now to be had of Bohn, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, at
the reduced price of One Guinea, is, we believe, the best work of the
kind referred to by our correspondent._

S.S. _The Query respecting Pope's lines_,--"Welcome the coming, speed
the parting guest," _has been answered. See_ No. 42. p. 188.

       *       *       *       *       * {288}

ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.

26. Suffolk Street, Pall Mall, Sept. 23, 1850.

At an ordinary meeting of the Central Committee of the Archæological
Institute, the President in the chair, it was unanimously
"Resolved--That the Committee, having taken into consideration the
Resolution of the British Archæological Association, passed at their
congress at Manchester, and also that of their Council of the 4th of
September, and communicated by the President of the Association to the
President of the Institute, are of opinion that the position and
prospects of the Institute are such as to render inexpedient any
essential modifications of it's existing rules and managements.

"The Committee disclaim all unfriendly feeling towards the Association:
they are of opinion that the field of Archæology is sufficiently wide
for the operations of several societies without discord; but if the
members of the Archæological Association should be disposed to unite
with the Institute, the Central Committee will cordially receive them on
the terms announced in their advertisement of September 9th, which was
intended to be conciliatory, feeling assured that such a course cannot
fail to meet with the entire approbation of the members of the
Institute."

By order of the Central Committee,

H. BOWYER LANE, _Secretary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE QUARTERLY REVIEW,

No. CLXXIV., will be published on Wednesday, October 2nd.

CONTENTS:

I.    TICKNOR'S HISTORY OF SPANISH LITERATURE.
II.   CHURCH AND EDUCATION IN WALES.
III.  FORMS OF SALUTATION.
IV.   SILURIA AND CALIFORNIA.
V.    MORE ON THE LITERATURE OF GREECE.
VI.   METROPOLITAN WATER SUPPLY.
VII.  ANECDOTES OF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT.
VIII. COCHRANE'S YOUNG ITALY.
IX.   LAST DAYS OF LOUIS PHILIPPE.

JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Will be published on the 1st of November, 1850, with the other
Almanacks,

THE LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC REGISTER AND ALMANACK for 1850. Price 3s.
6d.

Dedicated by especial permission to H.R.H. Prince Albert, by J.W.G.
GUTCH, M.R.C.S L., F.L.S.;

Containing a condensed mass of scientific and useful information alike
valuable to the student and man of science.

Tenth Yearly issue.

Published by D. Bogue, Fleet Street, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE for OCTOBER will contain the following
articles:--

The Antiquities of Richborough, Reculver, and Lymne (with
Engravings)--Original Letters of Miss Jane Porter and Count
Suwarrow--Facts for a new Biographia Britannica--Origin of Newspapers in
Germany--Memoir of Vauvanargues--Coronation Stone at
Kingston-upon-Thames (with an Engraving)--The Burkes not concerned in
Junius--Works of the Van Liugs in Painted Glass--Dr. Chalmers at
Glasgow--Great Literary Piracy in the Prayer-book of the Ecclesiastical
History Society--The new One-Hundred-and-fifty-three-Volume Catalogue of
the British Museum. With Notes of the Month, Literary and Antiquarian
Intelligence, Historical Chronicle, and Obituary, including Memoirs of
Louis Philippe, Viscount Newark, Rt. Hon. C. Arbuthnot, Dr. Prout Dr.
Bromet, John Roby, Esq., John Brumell, Esq., &c., &c. Price 2s. 6d.

NICHOLS AND SON, 25. Parliament-street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now Ready, 8vo., 3s.,

AN EXAMINATION OF THE CENTURY QUESTION: to which is added, A Letter to
the Author of "Outlines of Astronomy," respecting a certain peculiarity
of the Gregorian System of Bissextile compensation.

  "Judicio perpende: et si tibi vera videntur,
   DEDE MANUS."                       Lucret.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lately Published, 8vo., price 12s.

SYNOPSIS Of the DOCTRINE of BAPTISM, REGENERATION, CONVERSION, &c. From
the Fathers and other Writers, to the End of the Fourth Century by J.A.
WICKHAM, Esq. With a PREFACE, by the Rev. H.D. WICKHAM, M.A., late of
Exeter College, Oxford.

"Without saying that such an elaborate Collection is necessary, we may
remark on its great utility, and express our hope that Mr. Wickham's
labours will be appreciated by the public. It is curious that he should
have begun, sixteen years ago, a compilation whose publication is so
very appropriate to the present moment."--_Guardian_.

"As an editor Mr. Wickham has shown much good taste, patience, and
discernment. Further, he has written a very sensible introductory
chapter on the use and authority of the Fathers".--_Church and State
Gazette_.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 1st of October, No. I., price 2s. 6d.

DETAILS Of GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE,

measured and drawn from existing Examples, by J.K. COLLING, Architect.
The work is intended to illustrate those features which have not been
given in Messrs. Brandon's "Analysis:" it will be uniform with that
work, and also the "Gothic Ornaments". Each Number will contain five
4to. Plates, and be continued monthly.

D. BOGUE, Fleet Street: sold also by G. BELL, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Preparing for Publication, in 2 vols. small 8vo.

THE FOLK-LORE Of ENGLAND. By WILLIAM J. THOMS, F.S.A., Secretary of the
Camden Society, Editor of "Early Prose Romances", "Lays and Legends of
all Nations," &c. One object of the present work is to furnish new
contributions to the History of our National Folk-Lore, and especially
some of the more striking Illustrations of the subject to be found in
the Writings of Jacob Grimm and other Continental Antiquaries.

Communications of inedited Legends, Notices of remarkable Customs and
Popular Observances, Rhyming Charms, &c. are earnestly solicited, and
will be thankfully acknowledged by the Editor. They may be addressed to
the care of Mr. BELL, Office of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Edited by W.F. HOOK, D.D.--Now ready, Third and Cheaper Edition, price
3s. cloth, 6s. 6d. morocco,

VERSES FOR HOLY SEASONS. BY C.F.H., Author of "The Baron's Little
Daughters," "Moral Songs and Hymns for Little Children."

"An unpretending and highly useful book, suggestive of right thoughts at
the right season."--_English Journal of Education_.

R. SLOCOMBE, Leeds; GEORGE BELL, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, 3s. each plain; 4s. tinted. Parts 15. and 16. of

