Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


_THE OLDEN-TIME SERIES._

16mo. Per vol., 50 cents.

       *        *       *       *       *

There appears to be, from year to year, a growing popular taste for quaint
and curious reminiscences of "Ye Olden Time," and to meet this, Mr. Henry
M. Brooks has prepared a series of interesting handbooks. The materials
have been gleaned chiefly from old newspapers of Boston and Salem, sources
not easily accessible, and while not professing to be history, the volumes
contain much material for history, so combined and presented as to be both
amusing and instructive. The titles of some of the volumes indicate their
scope and their promise of entertainment:--

    CURIOSITIES OF THE OLD LOTTERY.
    DAYS OF THE SPINNING-WHEEL.
    SOME STRANGE AND CURIOUS PUNISHMENTS.
    QUAINT AND CURIOUS ADVERTISEMENTS.
    LITERARY CURIOSITIES.
    NEW-ENGLAND SUNDAY, ETC.

       *        *       *       *       *

"It has been the good fortune of the writer to be allowed a peep at the
manuscript for this series, and he can assure the lovers of the historical
and the quaint in literature that something both valuable and pleasant is
in store for them. In the specialties treated of in these books Mr. Brooks
has been for many years a careful collector and student, and it is
gratifying to learn that the material is to be committed to book
form."--_Salem Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

_For sale by all Booksellers. Sent, post-paid, upon receipt of price.
Catalogues of our books mailed free._

TICKNOR & CO., BOSTON.


THE OLDEN TIME SERIES

       *        *       *       *       *

QUAINT AND CURIOUS ADVERTISEMENTS


_ADVERTISEMENTS._

_Advertisements are sometimes very amusing. They give insights into the
manners of the times no less interesting than authentic. Suppose the
ancients had possessed a press, and that a volume of a Roman_ Post _or_
Chronicle _had been dug up at Herculaneum, with what curiosity should we
not contemplate the millinery of the Roman ladies, or, "Wanted, a
Gladiator to fight the last new lion;" or, "Next Ides of November will be
published the new poem of Quintus Horatius Flaccus"!_--LEIGH HUNT.


THE OLDEN TIME SERIES.

GLEANINGS CHIEFLY FROM OLD NEWSPAPERS OF BOSTON AND SALEM, MASSACHUSETTS


SELECTED AND ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF COMMENTS

BY

HENRY M. BROOKS

       *        *       *       *       *

Quaint and Curious Advertisements

    "Old and new make the warp and woof of every moment. There is
    no thread that is not a twist of these two strands. By necessity, by
    proclivity, and by delight, we all quote."--EMERSON

[Illustration: Crest]

BOSTON

TICKNOR AND COMPANY

1886

_Copyright, 1886,_

BY TICKNOR AND COMPANY.

_All rights reserved._

University Press:

JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.


    INDEX OF NAMES.

                                         PAGE

    ABRAHAM, NATHANIEL                     30
    Adams, John                            73
    Allen, Jolley                          40
    Allen, Thomas                          27
    Amberson, William                     105
    Amory, John & Thomas, & Co.           126
    Amory, Jonathan & John                 29
    Andrews, William, jr.                 140
    Appleton, John                         46
    Aspinwalle, G. & T.                    91

    BAILS, JAMES                          137
    Baker, John                            21
    Baker, Mr.                              8
    Ball, John                             12
    Barclay, Andrew                        38
    Barnard, Thomas, D.D.              45, 48
    Barnum, P.T.                          120
    Bartlett, Keziah                 136, 137
    Bartlett, W.P.                         59
    Bathrick, Samuel                      141
    Bell, Robert                           54
    Belcher & Armstrong                    91
    Belknap, Jeremy, D.D.                  44
    Bernard, Governor Francis          14, 15
    Billings, Mary                     18, 19
    Blake, Increase                        11
    Blanchard & Hancock                    35
    Bois, John                             17
    Bolles, E.C., D.D.                    117
    Boutineau, Deacon                       3
    Bowen, Mr.                     55, 68, 92
    Bowes, Nicholas                        24
    Bowles, William Augustus              104
    Boyer, Daniel                          31
    Bray, George                       11, 12
    Brazer, Samuel                     98, 99
    Brewer, Jonathan                      106
    Brewer, Thomas                         67
    Briggs, Enos               70, 72, 73, 75
    Brooks, Sarah                          61
    Brown, Charles                        127
    Brown, Mr.                            120
    Brown, William                         82
    Buffum, James R.                      145
    Bulfinch, Jeremiah                    136
    Burnham, Nathan                       140

    CABOT, FRANCIS                         48
    Cabot, Joseph                       9, 10
    Caines, Thomas                        137
    Callender, Joseph                      35
    Campbell, Elizabeth                     3
    Carleton, Osgood                   54, 55
    Cato                                  100
    Chapman, Moses                        119
    Chase & Speakman                       40
    Chase, T.                              40
    Chase, Thomas                          17
    Choate, Thomas                        140
    Chesterfield, Lord                     23
    Clark, Dr.                             20
    Clark, W. Gaylord                       7
    Coffin, Ebenezer                       34
    Copley, John S.                        69
    Courtney, Elizabeth                     8
    Courtney, Mr.                           9
    Craigie, Andrew                        25
    Crandel, Mr.                          121
    Crombie, Mr.                          145
    Crosby, John                           42
    Curwen, George R.                     117
    Curwen, Samuel                         45
    Cushing & Appleton                78, 124

    DABNEY, NATHANIEL                      48
    Daland, Benjamin                      112
    Dalgleish, Andrew                      48
    Dana, Rev. Samuel                  50, 51
    Daniell, Jesse                        137
    Davis, Caleb                           17
    Davis, Israel                         127
    Derby, E.H.                            74
    Derby, Richard, jr.                    49
    Dodd, Rev. Dr. William             23, 24
    Dodge, John T., jr.                   142
    Don Vincent, Folch, St. Col.          104
    Dorr, Harbottle                        44
    Dow, Enoch                             89
    Draper, Mr.                            97
    Duncan, Robert                         32
    Dupee, Isaac                           25

    EDES & GILL                13, 17, 19, 33
    Elliot, Robert                        105
    Ellson, Mr.                            17
    Emerson, Bulkeley                      17
    Erving, Mr.                            63

    FAIRFIELD, WILLIAM                    106
    Felt, George W.                        88
    Flagg, Josiah, jr.                     58
    Franklin, Benjamin                    115
    Franklin, Mr.                         121
    Franklin, Samuel                       38
    Franklin, William Temple              116
    Freeman, Philip                        28
    Forrest, Edwin                        149
    Foster, Hopestill                      97
    Foster, Susannah                       27
    Fowle, Daniel                          17
    Fowle, J.                              50

    GARDNER, SAMUEL                     9, 10
    Gay, Martin                            44
    Gray & Carter                         139
    Gray, Hon. William                74, 138
    Gibson, Deacon                         11
    Gilbert, Mr.                           67
    Gillespie, Andrew                      17
    Glover, Jonathan                       50
    Goldthwaite, Ezekiel                    6
    Goodale, Nathan                        48
    Goodhue, William                       54
    Green & Russell                        19
    Greenleaf, J.                    124, 125
    Greenough, David S.                    52
    Greenwood, Isaac                 107, 108
    Greenwood, Isaac, jr.                  53
    Gridley, Richard                       70
    Griswold, Ezra                         83

    HACKET, COLONEL                        73
    Hamilton, Alexander                    65
    Hardy, Charles                         82
    Hawthorne, Nathaniel                  112
    Hendry, Widow                          12
    Hepburn, Thomas                        57
    Hewes, Daniel                         109
    Hewes, Shubael                         20
    Hodgdon, Colonel                       91
    Holden, Nathaniel J.                  117
    Holker, John                          143
    Holman, Samuel                         46
    Holyoke, Dr. E.A.                  45, 48
    Hook, E. & G., & Hastings             148
    Hook, Elias                           148
    Hopkins, Daniel, D.D.                  45
    Hunt, Thomas F.                       117
    Hunt, William                     30, 100
    Hutchinson, Governor Thomas    46, 48, 49
    Hudson & Goodwin                       80

    IRWIN, JOHN                           105
    Ives, John M.                    125, 149

    JACKSON, MARY & SON                    42
    Jenks, John                            72
    Johnston & Co., Nicholas              104
    Jones, Daniel                          36
    Jones, Thomas                         102
    Jordis, Frederick                  61, 62

    KEITH, JOHN H.                     75, 76
    King, Major                      131, 132
    Kingsbury, Ezekiel, jr.                97
    Kneeland, S.                           44
    Knox, Henry                            24

    LANG, Mr.                              88
    Lang, William                          46
    Leech, Asa                             86
    Leverett, Thomas                       24
    Lewis, Thomas                         143
    Lindal, Timothy                        29
    Loring, John                           27
    Lowell, Rev. Charles                  143
    Lynde, Chief Justice Benjamin          45
    Lynde, Madam                           45

    MCALPINE, W.                            2
    McDaniel, B.F.                        117
    Mansfield, J. 3d.                      64
    Marshall, Captain                      31
    Mason, James                           36
    Mason, Jonathan                        37
    Matthews, John L.                     103
    Matthis, Edmond                  106, 107
    Mein & Flemming                        42
    Metcalf, Joseph                        85
    Moore, Rosanna                         39
    Morgan, Theodore                      119
    Morris, Robert                        102
    Morris, York                          102
    Morse, Edward S.                      118
    Mylod, Samuel                          83

    NAZRO, Mr.                            149
    Newell, Joseph                        136
    Newhall, J. & I.                       99
    Northey, William                       46
    Nutting, John                          48

    OLIVER, ANDREW                         15
    Oliver, Daniel                         77
    Osgood, Nathaniel                     101
    Otis, Samuel Allyne                    45

    PACKARD, ALPHEUS S.                   118
    Paddock, Adino                         34
    Paddock, Captain                       40
    Paff, Mr.                              92
    Paget, Henry                           19
    Palfrey, William                   31, 32
    Palmer, Joseph & Co.                   35
    Parker, Daniel                         26
    Payson, Jonathan                   12, 13
    Peale, Charles W.                     116
    Peck, Thomas Handasyd                  28
    Peck, William Augustus                 10
    Peters, Hugh                           81
    Peters, John                           81
    Phillips, Deacon                       34
    Phillips, Margaret                    137
    Pickman, Benjamin                      45
    Pickman, C. Gayton                     48
    Pickman, William                       48
    Pinchbeck, Mr.                         86
    Pollard, A.                           123
    Pousland, T.D.                        142
    Preble, Captain                        75
    Prentice, John                     49, 50
    Prince, Samuel                        130
    Procter, Martha                        83
    Purcell, Mary                        3, 4
    Putnam, Ebenezer                       48
    Putnam, Frederick W.                  118
    Pynchon, William                       48

    RANDALL, JOSEPH                        23
    Randall, Susannah                      23
    Remond, C. Lenox                      151
    Remond, John      129, 150, 151, 152, 153
    Rengill, Emanuel                      104
    Revere, Paul                       20, 77
    Rice, Lemuel                           76
    Richards, Giles & Co.                  43
    Richardson, F.P.                      117
    Robinson, J.                           79
    Robinson, John                   117, 118
    Rogers, James                         106
    Ropes, Judge Nathaniel                 46
    Rose, Samuel                           21
    Russell, Benjamin                  34, 35
    Rust, John                             89

    SALISBURY, AMBROSE                    150
    Sancho                                 90
    Sargent, Ignatius                      91
    Sargent, Winthrop                  90, 91
    Scott, Captain                         35
    Silhouette, M.                        119
    Skillings, Captain                     32
    Smith, Samuel                      15, 16
    Sparhawk, N.                           48
    Stetson, Prince                       138
    Stevenson, John & Thomas               29
    Stewart, Mr.                          121
    Stickney, M.A.                        117
    Stone, John                           101
    Street & Grose                        133
    Sylvester, Richard                     41
    Symmes, John                           32

    TALLEYRAND                             71
    Tannebill, A.                         105
    Thaxter, Samuel                        43
    Thomas, Isaiah, jr.                84, 85
    Tisdall, Thomas                    80, 81
    Todd, Sarah                          3, 4
    Townley, John                          33
    Trask, Jonathan                        97
    Tromelle & Girard                     144
    Tucker & Thayer                        65
    Tucker, Mr.                           145
    Turner, John                           48
    Turner, Mr.                            18
    Tyler, Joseph                          98
    Tyler, Thomas                          25

    URQUHART, DAVID                        91

    WALLACE, GEORGE                       105
    Waters, H.F.                          117
    Watt, Captain                          38
    Wheatland, Henry                      118
    Whipple, Henry                        103
    Whitaker, Nathaniel, D.D.              45
    Whitwell, William                      26
    Wilkins, J. jr.                       105
    Williams, Jonathan                     36
    Williams, Mr.                          17
    Williams, Thomas                       73
    Woodbury, Josiah                       22

[Illustration]


QUAINT

AND

CURIOUS ADVERTISEMENTS.

AMONG the mass of advertisements that have appeared from time to time in
newspapers are to be found some which are very quaint and curious. Such
are not, in all cases, intended by the writers to be so; but they sound
so, especially to those persons who have an ear for strange or humorous
things. Sometimes, indeed, it is the intention of the writers to attract
particular notice by the wording of the advertisement. Oftentimes the
matter may have been dictated by illiterate persons. Frequently the nature
of the subject is itself sufficient to excite our humorous feelings. But
whatever may be the object of the advertiser, these productions are often
amusing and interesting enough to be reproduced for the benefit of those
who cannot conveniently read the originals.

In 1767 "the Prince of the Power of the Air reigned with almost
uncontrouled Restraint," according to a book published.

                     THIS DAY _PUBLISHED_,
                        An ADDRESS to
                      PERSONS of FASHION,
                  Concerning frequenting of
         PLAYS, BALLS, ASSEMBLIES, CARD-TABLES, &c.
          In which is introduced the Character of
                          _LUCINDA_.
     Printed & Sold by _W. McAlpine_, in Marlboro'-street.

    *** A Pamphlet worthy the serious Attention of every
    Christian, especially at a Time when Vice and Immorality seems
    to have an Ascendency over Religion, and the Prince of the
    Power of the Air reigns with almost an uncontrouled Restraint.

                                   _Boston Gazette_, May 21, 1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

In the year 1759 competition in trade had not reached the proportions that
it has since assumed, for the "ill-natured opposition" which two women
met with according to the "Boston Gazette" of August 13, that year, was
probably nothing more or less than the treatment of some competitor in the
same line,--perhaps a man mean enough to undersell. Such things have
frequently occurred in our day,--some mammoth establishment cutting prices
purposely, to drive some poor woman out of business whose sole dependence
is in a small shop selling cotton, pins, needles, etc., barely making a
living at it. "Rule or ruin" is the motto of too many in these days; and
such men are called "smart," and if they get rich are fairly worshipped
for their enterprise.

                  _Sarah Todd_ and _Mary Purcell_

    Hereby inform the Publick that (notwithstanding the ill-natur'd
    Opposition they have met with, though not from the Landlord,
    who has fulfill'd his Engagement to them) they have remov'd
    their Shop from opposite the Old-Brick Meeting-House in
    Cornhill to the House lately occupied by Mrs. _Elizabeth
    Campbell_, next Door to Deacon _Boutineau's_ in Cornhill,
    _Boston_, where they hope their Friends and others will favour
    them with their Custom, and whom they engage to supply with
    the following Articles at the lowest Rate that any fair Trader
    can afford them for Cash. _VIZ._

    _India Taffities, Grograms, Persians, black and colour'd
    Sattins, Silk, Callamancoe, Tammie, and Horse Hair quilted
    Petticoats, a Variety of the newest fashion'd Prussian Cloaks
    and Hatts, with figur'd Silk and Trimming for ditto, 6-4 and
    yard-wide Muslin, Long Lawn, Cambrick, clear and flower'd
    Lawns, Cyprus, Gauze, Tandem Holland, Damask Table Cloths,
    India Ginghams, white Callico, Cap Lace, black Bone Lace, and
    Trolly ditto, white and colour'd Blond Lace, Stone sett in
    Silver Shoe Buckles, Sleeve Buttons, Stock Tape, Sattin
    Jockeys with Feathers for Boys, brocaded silk, black Sattin
    and Russel Shoes, black Sattin Bonnetts and Hatts, Pastboard
    Stomachers, Cotton, Thread and Worsted Mens and Womens Hose, a
    great Variety of Ribbons, Necklaces and Earings, black and
    white Silk Mitts, Kid and Lamb Gloves and Mitts, French ditto,
    Cotton, Cambrick and Scotch Threads, with a great Variety of
    Millenary Goods, too many to enumerate. --> The said_ Todd
    _and_ Purcell _having spare Room in said House, can
    accommodate young Ladies with Board and Lodging at a
    reasonable Rate._

       *        *       *       *       *

In 1760 the town clerk of Boston issued a notice to the public in
reference to persons forestalling the market by falsely representing to
farmers and others that the small-pox was prevalent in the town, which had
so frightened the market-men that they were glad to sell outside the town
and at lower prices than they otherwise would have done.

                                        Boston, February 13, 1760.

    WHEREAS sundry evil minded Persons in some of the neighbouring
    Towns, to discourage the Market-People coming into this Town
    with their Provisions, and that they may have an Opportunity
    to purchase at low Rates, and sell them here at an exorbitant
    Price, have industriously reported that the Small-Pox for some
    Time past has been in this Town, and now prevails here:

    THESE are to Inform the Public, that for near two Years past,
    there has been only one Person taken down in this Town with
    the Small-Pox, which is upwards of a Month past, who upon
    discovery of it was immediately removed to the Hospital, and
    there died, and no other Person has had it, or any Symptoms of
    it since.--That Yesterday there was a general Visitation of
    the Town by the Justices of the Peace, Selectmen and Overseers
    of the Poor, and upon their Report last Evening of the State
    and Circumstances of the Inhabitants, I hereby Certify that
    there is not an Infectious Distemper of any Sort, known to be
    in Town.--AND as the above false Reports have been Propagated
    to the great Prejudice of this Town by those who employ
    themselves in Engrossing Provisions and Forestalling the
    Market, (many of whom are known to the Selectmen:) They are
    hereby particularly Notified, That unless they desist from
    such wicked and abusive Practices, they will be prosecuted on
    the Act of the Province, for making and publishing such Lyes
    and false Reports.----By Order of the Selectmen,

                                 Ezekiel Goldthwait, Town Clerk.

    Many Country-People have imagined by seeing Silks hanging on
    Poles, that the Small-Pox is in such Houses; but their
    Surmises are entirely groundless, they being hung out at the
    Silk Dyers for drying.

                                               _Boston Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

In 1760 the Committee of Tradesmen advise voters to "put on Sabbath Day
Clothes" and "wash their Hands and Faces" before going to town meeting the
next day. They also speak of the "New and Grand Corcas," meaning probably
caucus. This is from the "Boston Gazette," May 12.

    THE Committee of Tradesmen hereby advise their Constituents
    and others to set apart a decent Portion of Time (at least one
    Hour) previous to the Opening of the Town-Meeting To-Morrow to
    shift themselves and put on their Sabbath Day Clothes, also
    to wash their Hands and Faces, that they may appear neat and
    cleanly; Inasmuch as it hath been reported to said Committee
    of Tradesmen that Votes are to be GIVEN AWAY by the delicate
    Hands of the _New and Grand Corcas_; and they would have no
    Offence given to Turk or Jew, much less to Gentlemen who
    attend upon so _charitable_ a design.--Nothing of the _least
    Significancy_ was transacted at a late Meeting of the said new
    and grand Corcas to require any further Attention of said
    Committee.

                                   _Boston Gazette_, May 12, 1760.

       *        *       *       *       *

Some one is "desired to refresh his memory" in 1767. Such mistakes remind
us of Willis Gaylord Clark's account of an announcement he once heard at a
revival meeting somewhere in New York State. The minister said: "I would
_ad_nounce to this _codin_gregation [through his nose] that, _pre_bably by
mistake, there was left at this house of prayer this morning a small
_cotting_ umbrella, very much worn and of an exceeding_lie_ pale blue
color; in the place whereof was taken one that was new and of great
beauty. I say, brethren and sisters, that it was _pre_bably by mistake
that of these two articles the one was taken and the other left; but it
was a very improper mistake, and should be discountenanced if possible.
Blunders of this sort are getting to be a _lee_tle too common."

    Taken (as is supposed by Mistake) last Wednesday from the
    Representatives Chamber in _Boston_, a long Camblet Cloak,
    lin'd with red Baize: Whoever has taken the same is desired to
    refresh his Memory, and return it to Mr. _Baker_, Keeper of
    the Court-House.                              _Sept. 5, 1767._

       *        *       *       *       *

By an advertisement in the "Boston Gazette," Oct. 19, 1767, we learn that
the young ladies of Boston had an opportunity to learn to paint on "gauze
and catgut," which we suppose at that time was considered "high art."

                    To the Young Ladies of _Boston_.

    _ELIZABETH COURTNEY_, as several Ladies has signified of
    having a desire to learn that most ingenious art of Painting
    on Gauze & Catgut, proposes to open a School, and that her
    business may be a public good, designs to teach the making all
    sorts of French Trimmings, Flowers, and Feather Muffs and
    Tippets. And as those arts above mentioned (the Flowers
    excepted) are entirely unknown on the Continent, she flatters
    herself to meet with all due encouragement; and more so, as
    every Lady may have a power of serving herself of what she is
    now obliged to send to England for, as the whole process is
    attended with little or no expence. The Conditions are _Five
    Dollars_ at entrance, to be confin'd to no particular hours or
    time: And if they apply constant, may be compleat in six
    weeks. And when she has fifty subscribers, school will be
    open'd, as not being designed to open a school under that
    number, her proposals being to each person so easy, but to
    return to those who have subscrib'd their money again, and
    keep the business to herself.

    _N.B._ Feather Muffs and Tippets to be had; and Gauze wash'd
    to look as well as new.

    Please to inquire at Mr. _Courtney's_, Taylor, four Doors
    below the Mill-Bridge, North-End.

       *        *       *       *       *

Sept 14, 1761, Samuel Gardner and Joseph Cabot of Salem offer a "snow"
(two-masted vessel) for sale, that "goeth well."


    TO BE SOLD, by _Samuel Gardner_, _Francis_ and _Joseph Cabot_
    of _Salem_, on reasonable Terms; a SNOW burthened about One
    hundred and seventy Tons, well built and fitted, goeth well;
    She has 10 Carriage and 6 Swivel Guns, belonging to her.


       *        *       *       *       *

In June, 1762, "gentleman seamen" were offered a chance to ship.
"Post-Boy."

    [Illustration]

    Now bound on a CRUIZE of Six Months, Against his Majesty's
    Enemies, The Brigantine _Tartar_, A prime Sailer, mounting
    Fourteen Six Pounders, Twenty Co-horns, and will carry One
    Hundred and Twenty Men, Commanded by _William Augustus Peck_.

    ALL Gentlemen SEAMEN and able bodied LANDMEN, who have a Mind
    to make their Fortunes, and are inclined to take a Cruize in
    said Vessel, by applying to the _KING's-HEAD_ Tavern at the
    North-End may view the Articles, which are more advantageous
    to the Ship's Company than ever were before offered in this
    Place.

                                     _Boston_, _June 28, 1762._

In 1762 the front part of a house is to be let near the "Orange-Tree" in
Boston. The "Orange-Tree" was a tavern.

    _TO be LETT, The front Part of the House that Deacon_ Gibson
    _formerly liv'd in, a little below the Orange-Tree; for
    further Information, inquire of Mr._ Increase Blake, _living
    in the back Part of said House and know further._

       *        *       *       *       *

In September, 1767, those persons who were indebted to Mr. George Bray and
who did not wish to be waited upon by a "monitor"--otherwise a
constable--were reminded of their duty in the following quaint notice from
the "Boston Gazette:"--

    IF those who are indebted to Mr. _George Bray_ will pay what
    they owe him to me his Attorney on or before the 26th Day of
    next Month, they will save me the Trouble of sending, and
    themselves of paying a MONITOR, who will at least remind them
    that in ancient Times People were desired to "OWE NO MAN ANY
    THING, BUT TO LOVE ONE ANOTHER": Which I believe is as
    obligatory, I am sure as necessary, to be observed now as it
    was then; especially considering Mr. _Bray's_ repeated Losses
    by Fire, his having a large Family to maintain, and also being
    a long Time out of Business.

    _Boston_, _Sept. 26, 1767._                         JOHN BALL.

    _N.B._ Beware of suing, for no further Warning
                 will be given.                               J.B.


       *        *       *       *       *

In 1767 Widow Hendry had "a very chargeable family," and had suffered by a
recent fire in "Paddy's Alley."

    THIS is to give notice that the Widow _Hendry_, having had her
    Workshop destroyed in the late Fire in Paddy's Alley, carries
    on the Farrier's Business on Scarlet's Wharf, at the North
    End, where she hopes her Customers will continue their Favors
    to her, in her deplorable Circumstances, having a very
    chargeable Family, and met with very heavy Losses by the said
    Fire.

       *        *       *       *       *

After the same fire Jonathan Payson missed a pair of "Brass Doggs"
(andirons), etc.

    Sundry Things missing after the late Fire, _viz._ One Pair of
    Brass Doggs, cast solid, very heavy and large; 22 yards of
    Hamburgh Sheeting; one Bell metal Skillet, and one Silver
    Spoon--The Persons that took them in not knowing who they may
    belong to, I take this Method to inform them that they belong
    to the Subscriber.

                                                JONATHAN PAYSON.

       *        *       *       *       *

Lead sashes in use in 1767.

                            TO BE SOLD,

    A Number of Windows, set in Lead. Inquire of the Printers.

          _BOSTON_, Printed by _Edes_ and _Gill_, 1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

In July, 1761, among the rough element, there seems to have been a "boom"
in breaking windows and throwing stones. This state of things reached such
a pitch that the Governor was forced to issue a Proclamation offering a
reward for the detection of the offenders.

                         BY HIS EXCELLENCY

                       FRANCIS BERNARD, Esq;

    Captain-General and Governor in Chief, in and over His
    Majesty's Province of the _Massachusetts Bay_, in
    _New-England_, and Vice-Admiral of the same.

                         A PROCLAMATION.

    _WHEREAS certain Persons, who remain hitherto undiscovered,
    have of late committed great Disorders in the Night-Time,
    within several Towns in this Province, and particularly have
    broke the Windows of some Meeting Houses, and of the
    Dwelling-Houses of several Persons, by flinging thereinto
    great Stones and Bricks, thereby indangering the Lives of the
    Inhabitants, as well as injuring their Houses, against the
    Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and in Contempt of his
    Laws:_

    I HAVE therefore thought fit, with the Advice of His Majesty's
    Council, to issue this Proclamation, requiring all Justices of
    the Peace, Sheriffs, Constables, and all other Officers whom
    it may concern, and also recommending it to all other His
    Majesty's good Subjects within this Province, to use their
    utmost Endeavours for discovering and bringing to Justice all
    Persons concerned in such disorderly and riotous Practices.

    AND I do hereby promise, that whosoever shall discover and
    detect all or any of the Persons concerned therein, so that
    they or any of them may be lawfully convicted of any such
    Offences, shall receive out of the Public Treasury of this
    Province the Sum of _TEN POUNDS_ Lawful Money, as a Reward to
    be paid upon the Conviction of such Offender or Offenders.

    _GIVEN at the Council-Chamber in_ Boston, _the Seventh Day of_
    July, 1761, _in the First Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
    Lord GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of_ Great-Britain,
    France, _and_ Ireland, KING, _Defender of the Faith, &c._

                                                  Fr. Bernard.

    By His Excellency's Command,
        A. OLIVER, Secr.
            GOD Save the KING.

       *        *       *       *       *

In the "Boston Gazette," this same year, August 10, Samuel Smith objected
to people reporting that he "was run away."

    _WHEREAS it has been falsely reported by some ill minded
    litigious Persons that I, the Subscriber, was run away, THIS
    is to inform the Public, and especially those that it doth
    concern, That I have been no further than_ Philadelphia, _a
    Trading, with a Design to return Home in about two Months, but
    return'd Home one Week sooner; and be it KNOWN notwithstanding
    all the false Reports about me, I am to be spoke with at my
    Dwelling-House at the North End, or upon 'Change, every Day in
    the Week._

                                                     Samuel Smith.

    N.B. _Said_ Smith _has a House at the North End of the Town to
    Lett; also two Rooms in another House in said Part of the
    Town; he has likewise another House in said Part of the Town,
    which he would be willing to exchange for one further
    Southward_.

       *        *       *       *       *

Quaint advertisement of a paper-maker in the "Boston Gazette," Nov. 23,
1767.

                            ADVERTISEMENTS.

    The Manufacturers of PAPER at Milton beg the Favor of the
    Public to furnish them with what Linnen Rags they can spare,
    for which the greatest possible Allowance will be given.--All
    Persons dispos'd in this Way to encourage so useful a
    Manufacture, are hereby acquainted that Linnen Rags and old
    Paper (to be kept separate from each other) will be receiv'd
    at the following Places, viz.

    In Boston, at Mr. Caleb Davis's Shop near the Fortification,
    Mr. Thomas Chase near Liberty-Tree, Mr. Andrew Gillespie,
    Tobacconist, in Fore-Street, Mr. John Bois's House in
    Long-Lane, and at Edes & Gill's Printing-Office in
    Queen-Street.----At Mr. Ellson's Master of the Workhouse in
    Salem; at Mr. Williams's Master of the Workhouse in
    Marblehead, to each of whom we have been already much
    oblig'd.----At Mr. Bulkeley Emerson Stationer in Newbury-Port,
    and at Mr. Daniel Fowle's, Printer in Portsmouth.----If any
    Person will favor us in this Way, who live near Winnisimet-Ferry,
    or in Black Horse Lane in Boston, or in the Center of the Town
    of Charlestown, they are desir'd to send their Names to Edes
    and Gill's Printing-Office.----As large Quantities of Paper
    fortunately arriv'd from Europe before the Duties could be
    demanded, it is hoped before that can be consum'd, there will
    be sufficient of this Country Manufacture for future Use.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _THE_ PRINTERS _of this Paper beg Leave to Advertise their
    Customers, that they have lately purchas'd a new Set of_
    TYPES, _at a very great_ Expence, _which will be improved for
    the Entertainment and Instruction of the Public. They only
    desire that those Gentlemen who are in Arrears_ for more than
    a Twelvemonth, _wou'd be kind enough for their Encouragement
    to pay off their respective Balances, as soon as may be, in
    Cash, or good clean Linnen Rags, the latter of which they
    prefer._

    *** Choice WRITING PAPER, manufactured at Milton, to be Sold
    by the Printers hereof.

       *        *       *       *       *

As Mr. Turner, the dancing-master, had "suffered much by booking," we
infer that some people had "danced without paying the fiddler."

                          _DANCING ACADEMY,_

                            CONCERT-HALL.

    MR. TURNER informs the Ladies and Gentlemen in town and
    country, that he has reduced his price for teaching, from _Six
    Dollars_ entrance to _One Guinea_, and from _Four Dollars_ per
    month to _Three_. Those Ladies and Gentlemen who propose
    sending their children to be taught, will notice, that no
    books will be kept, as Mr. T. has suffered much by booking.
    The pupils must pay monthly, if they are desirous the School
    should continue.

    _Boston, March 29, 1788._

       *        *       *       *       *

Mary Billings, opposite the Governor's, sold lottery tickets in 1761.
(December 7.)

                A FEW TICKETS IN _SUDBURY_--LOTTERY,

    Which will certainly commence Drawing on the 22d of this
    Month, may be had of the Managers in _Sudbury_ or of _Edes_
    and _Gill_ and _Green_ and _Russell_, Printers in Queen-Street
    _Boston_.

                      SCHEME
     1 of 500 Dollars.  |  180 of 10 Dollars.
    15 of 100           |   80 of  8
    20 of  50           |   51 of  6
    20 of  40           | 1315 of  4
    10 of  20           |

    To be Sold by _Mary Billings_, opposite the
    GOVERNOR'S--Cardinal Silks and Trimmings, with many other
    Articles, cheap for Cash.

       *        *       *       *       *

From "Boston Gazette," Sept. 8, 1760:

    TO be Sold by _Henry Paget_, of _Providence_, a Tract of Land,
    partly improved, lying in _Weyer_ River Parish, being the
    North Part of said Parish, and joins to _Greenwich_ and
    _Hardwick_, containing about 2400 Acres--laid out in 100 Acre
    Lotts; to be Sold together, or in Lots. Said Land will be Sold
    reasonable for prompt Pay; or if the Purchaser can't pay the
    whole, good Security will be taken.

    _N.B._ There's a settled Minister in said Parish much approved
    of.

       *        *       *       *       *

Sporting in Boston, in 1790. From the "Massachusetts Centinel," May 1.

    WHEREAS great danger daily arises to the Inhabitants, from the
    frequency of persons gunning or shooting birds, at various
    parts of the town, in direct violation of the law; the
    Selectmen would now acquaint the inhabitants, that they have
    appointed Mr. SHUBAEL HEWES to take notice of all such
    persons, who may be found shooting within the limits of the
    town in future, and prosecute them, without exception, to the
    utmost extent of the law.

       *        *       *       *       *

                       PAUL REVERE AS A DENTIST.

In the "Boston Gazette," Dec. 19, 1768, appears the following curious
advertisement:

    WHEREAS many Persons are so unfortunate as to lose their
    Fore-Teeth by Accident, and otherways, to their great
    Detriment, not only in Looks, but speaking both in Public and
    Private:--This is to inform all such, that they may have them
    re-placed with artificial Ones, that looks as well as the
    Natural, & answers the End of Speaking to all Intents, by
    _PAUL REVERE_, Goldsmith, near the Head of Dr. _Clarke's_
    Wharf, _Boston_.

    *** All Persons who have had false Teeth fixt by Mr. _John
    Baker_, Surgeon-Dentist, and they have got loose (as they will
    in Time) may have them fastened by the above, who learnt the
    Method of fixing them from Mr. _Baker_.

       *        *       *       *       *

Escape of a negro man slave who "can play on a Fiddle, and loves strong
Drink."

                                              FIVE DOLLARS Reward.

    RAN-away from his Master the 25th Day of November last, at
    North-Kingston, in the Colony of Rhode-Island, a well-set
    Negro Man Slave, named Isaac, about 5 Feet 6 or 7 Inches high,
    with a Scar on his Forehead, between 30 and 40 Years old,
    thick Beard, can play on a Fiddle, and loves strong Drink; had
    on and carried with him a lightish-colour'd Thick-set Coat, a
    blue Ratteen Jacket with Cuffs to the Sleeves, a blue Broad
    Cloth Jacket without Sleeves, Flannel Shirt, stript Flannel
    Trowsers, grey yarn Stockings, and single Channel Pumps.
    Whoever will secure said Slave in any of his Majesty's Goals,
    or deliver him to the Subscriber, his Master, shall have FIVE
    DOLLARS Reward, and necessary Charges paid.

                                                  Per SAMUEL ROSE.

    Masters of Vessels, and others, are hereby forbid carrying off
    or securing said Slave, as they would avoid the Penalty of the
    Law.                                         December 5, 1768.

                                                 _Boston Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

The town of Beverly has always been noted for beans, and it will be seen
that as early as 1771 Josiah Woodbury offered two bushels as a reward to
any person who would keep his "House Plague," who had run away from him.
The question naturally arises, Was "Old Moll" Mr. Woodbury's wife?

                                         Beverly, Sept. 16, 1771.

    RAN-AWAY from Josiah Woodbury, Cooper, his House Plague for 7
    long Years, Masury Old Moll, alias Trial of Vengeance. He that
    lost will never seek her; he that shall keep her, I will give
    two Bushel of Beans. I forewarn all Persons in Town or Country
    from trusting said Trial of Vengeance. I have hove all the old
    Shoes I can find for Joy; and all my Neighbours rejoice with
    me. A good Riddance of bad Ware. Amen.

                                                  Josiah Woodbury.

                                  _Essex Gazette_, Sept. 17, 1771.

       *        *       *       *       *

A woman advertises and describes a run-away husband.

                        Curious ADVERTISEMENT.

                  Copied from a late Hartford Paper.

    RAN away from the subscriber, on the 13th of May, one Joseph
    Randall, a tall, trim-built fellow: Had on, when he went away,
    a blue coat, velvet waistcoat and breeches, mixt coloured
    stockings, and wore away two felt hats; he rode away a black
    horse, and led a sorrel horse; he is supposed to be lurking in
    the south part of Scantick after a strumpet that he has spent
    the most of his time with for three years past. Whoever will
    take up said Randall, and return him to me, shall have 3
    coppers reward; but whoever will take the trouble to keep him
    away shall have ten dollars reward, and all necessary charges
    paid by me.

                                                 SUSANNAH RANDALL.

    N.B. All persons are forbid harbouring him, for I am
    determined to maintain him no longer.

                                    _Salem Mercury_, July 1, 1785.

       *        *       *       *       *

In the "Massachusetts Gazette," Feb. 3, 1774, is advertised a book by the
notorious Dr. Dodd, who was executed for the forgery of Lord
Chesterfield's name. This book is said to be "extremely proper to be
given at Funerals."

    A Book which upon perusal recommends itself, and which it is
    only necessary to read to approve; extremely proper to be
    given at Funerals or any other solemn Occasion: being written
    expressly with that intention.

                       _THIS DAY WAS PUBLISHED,_

          (Price 2_s._ Lawful Money single and 1/8. the doz.)
                 By THOMAS LEVERETT, NICHOLAS BOWES
                     and HENRY KNOX in Cornhill,

                            REFLECTIONS
                                ON
                               DEATH.

                       By WILLIAM DODD, LL. D.

            Prebendary of Brecon and Chaplain in Ordinary
                         to His MAJESTY.

              IT IS APPOINTED ONCE FOR MEN TO DIE, BUT
               AFTER THIS THE JUDGMENT, Heb. ix. 27.

                          THE FIFTH EDITION.

    A desire of extending the very laudable Practice of giving
    Books at Funerals, and the great propriety of the present Work
    for that Purpose, have induced the Editors to put this
    valuable Performance one Third cheaper than the London
    Edition, although it is by no Means Inferior in point of
    Elegance.

       *        *       *       *       *

Some of the business localities of Boston in the last century were known
by names which now strike us as very queer or quaint. We select a number
of advertisements from the "Gazette," "Post-Boy," and "Chronicle."

                             Dec. 10, 1759.

              Imported in the last Ships from _LONDON_.

                           _By_ Andrew Craigie,

    And to be Sold at his Shop, right against the Old South
    Meeting-House: by Wholesale & Retail, English Goods, suitable
    for the Season, too many to be enumerated, At the lowest Rate,
    for Cash, or short Credit.

       *        *       *       *       *

                             Feb. 23, 1761.

                          Isaac Dupee, _Carver_,

    ADVERTISES his Customers and others that since the late Fire
    (on Dock Square) he has opened a Shop the North Side of the
    Swing-Bridge, opposite to _Thomas Tyler's_, Esq.; where
    Business will be carried on as usual with Fidelity and
    Dispatch.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _Imported in the Neptune_, _Capt._ Binney, _and to be Sold by_

                    Daniel Parker, _Goldsmith_,

              _At his Shop near the Golden-Ball_, Boston.

    _AN Assortment of Articles in the Goldsmith's and Jeweller's
    Way_, viz. _brilliant and cypher'd Button and Earing Stones of
    all Sorts, Locket Stones, cypher'd Ring Stones, Brilliant Ring
    Sparks, Buckle Stones, Garnetts, Emethysts, Topaz and Saphire
    Ring Stones, neat Stone Rings sett in Gold, some with Diamond
    Sparks, Stone Buttons in Silver, by the Card, black ditto in
    Silver, best Sword Blades, Shoe and Knee Chapes of all Sizes,
    Files of all Sorts, freezing Punches, Turkey Oyl Stones, red
    and white Foyl, moulding Sand, Borax, Saltpetre, Crucibles and
    Black Led Potts, Money Scales, large ditto to weigh Silver,
    Piles of Ounce Weights, Penny Weights & Grains, Coral Beeds,
    Stick ditto for Whistles, Forgeing Anvils, Spoon Teats, plain
    ditto, small raizing Anvils for Cream Potts, fine Lancashire
    Watch Plyers, Shears and Nippers, Birmingham ditto, with
    sundry other Articles, cheap for Cash._

       *        *       *       *       *

    _CHOICE Muscovado best Powder and brown Sugars, by the
    Hogshead or Barrel, to be Sold by_ WILLIAM WHITWELL, _at the
    Seven Stars near the Draw-Bridge, Boston. Also choice new
    Raisins by the Cask, Philadelphia Flour and Bar Iron per
    Quantity, Coffee by the Barrel or Hundred, Bohea Tea, &c.,
    cheap for Cash or short Credit._

       *        *       *       *       *

                            Sept. 8, 1760.

                            _John Loring,_

                   At his Shop near The Great Trees.

    A Fresh and General Assortment of Medecines both Chemical and
    Galenical--Spices of all Sorts--Likewise Redwood, Logwood,
    Allum, Copperas, Brimstone, &c.----_N.B._ True _Lockyer's_
    Pills, _Bateman's_ Drops, _Stoughton's_ and _Duffy's_ Elixer,
    _&c. &c._

       *        *       *       *       *

                              Susannah Foster

    HEREBY informs her Customers, That she has removed from Queen
    Street to Fore-Street, next Door to the Sign of the Cross,
    where they may be supplied as usual with all Kinds of
    Groceries at the cheapest Rates.

       *        *       *       *       *

                               Feb. 23, 1761.

            Imported in the last Ship from _London_, and to be Sold

                            _By_ Thomas Allen.

                       Near _Bromfield's_ Lane, BOSTON.

    Cardinal Silks and Trimmings, Prussian Cloaks, Muffs and
    Tippets, Callimanco and Tammy quilted Coats, _Irish_ Linens,
    Mens & Womens cotton, thread and worsted Hose; a neat
    Assortment of Millenary Goods, &c. cheap for Cash.--

    _ALSO_ a great Variety of Paper Hangings.

       *        *       *       *       *

       Imported in Captains _Hulme_ and _Binney_ from _London_,

                      By _Thomas Handasyd Peck_,

          And Sold by him at the Hatt & Beaver, Merchant's Row.

    A _Fresh Assortment of Linnen Linings, suitable for Beaver,
    Beaverett, Castor and Felt Hatts, Tabby ditto, Mohair Lupings,
    Silk Braid ditto, flatt and round Silk Lace and Frogs for
    Button Lupes, plain and sash Bands, workt & plain Buttons,
    black Thread, Gold and Silver Chain, yellow and white Buttons,
    hard and light Brushes, Velures, Cards, large and small
    Bowstrings, Looping Needles, Verdigrees and Coperas, a good
    Assortment of Mens and Boys Felt Hatts, Castor ditto.----He
    likewise sells Logwood._

    Missing since the late Fire, when the Market-House was burnt,
    a large Folio of Mr. _Clarkson's_ Works, and twenty yards of
    Gold and Silver Chain. If any Person has the Book or Chain,
    they are desir'd to inform said _Peck_.

       *        *       *       *       *

                            May 11, 1761.

    A few Firkins of Choice Butter, to be Sold by _PHILIP
    FREEMAN_, at the Blue Glove, facing the Sign of the
    Cornfields.

       *        *       *       *       *

                              May 11, 1761.

                          Jonathan & John Amory

    In _King-Street_, just below the Town-House in _Boston_, and
    at _Salem_, in the House where the Honourable _Timothy
    Lindal_, Esq; deceas'd, lately dwelt, near the Friends Meeting
    House, Have lately open'd a very large Assortment of English
    Goods, of almost every Kind, for Men's and Women's wear,
    consisting of too many Articles to be compriz'd in an
    Advertisement, which they will sell at either Place, by
    Wholesale or Retail, at very low Prices for Cash or
    Treasurer's Notes, and allow the Interest thereon.

       *        *       *       *       *

                            May 11, 1761.

                             Imported by

    John and Thomas Stevenson, And to be Sold at their Shop, at
    the Sign of the Stays, opposite the South Side of the
    Town-House, _Boston_, at the very lowest Prices, _Viz._

    Lawns of all Sorts, strip'd and flower'd kenting Handkerchiefs;
    cotton and linnen ditto; silk and gause ditto; Cambricks,
    Calicoes and printed Linnens--white and colour'd Threads;--silk,
    worsted, cotton and thread Stockings--Women's silk and worsted
    Mitts--Broad-Cloths; German Serges--Thicksets; Fustians; Jeans;
    Pillows and Dimities--Broglios; Dorsateens; Venetian Poplins;
    flower'd and plain Damasks; Prussianets; Serpentines; Tammies;
    strip'd Stuffs; Camblets; Callimancoes; Shalloons and
    Buckrams,--worsted Caps; Garters; Needles and Pins--white, brown
    and striped Hollands--white and check'd Linnen; Diaper;
    Bed-Ticks; Tartans; Plaids; Breeches and Jacket Stocking
    Patterns; cotton & silk and cotton Gowns--Stock Tapes--Leather
    Breeches; Men's and Women's Leather Shoes, _&c. &c._

    _N. B. Kippen's_ and _Tilloch's_ Snuff; Scotch Barley and
    Carpeting and Porter by the Dozen; With a great Number of
    other Articles.

       *        *       *       *       *

                           Jan. 9, 1764.

    A Few Hogsheads of choice _Barbadoes_ RUM to be sold: Inquire
    _Nathaniel Abraham_, at the Golden Key.

       *        *       *       *       *

                           TO BE LETT,

    _And enter'd upon the 25th of_ March, _in good tenable
    Repair._

    The Five Grist-Mills at the North Part of the Town of
    _Boston_, with Stabling for Horses, Stores for Grain, &c. Any
    Person inclining to Hire, may apply to _William Hunt_, in
    Hanover-Street, whom the Proprietors hath empowered to Let the
    same. Feb. 23, 1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

                         May 4, 1767.

    Just Imported from _London_, and to be Sold by
                Daniel Boyer, _Jeweller_,
    At his Shop opposite the Governor's in _Boston_,

    Best Brilliant and         *  Binding Wire
    Cypher Earing & Button     *  Brass and Iron ditto
    Stones                     *  Brass stamps
    Brilliant & cypher ring    *  Buckle & ring brushes
    stones                     *  Money scales & weights
    Garnets, amethysts, and    *  Small sheers & plyers
    topaz                      *  Screw dividers
    Ring and buckle sparks     *  Blow pipes
    Locket stones & cyphers    *  Draw plates
    Ruby and white foyle       *  Moulding sand
    Coral beeds                *  Crucibles & black pots
    Coral for whistles         *  Borax & Salt-Petre
    Shoe and knee chapes       *  Pommice and Rottenstone,
    Rough and smooth files     *  &c.

    Where also may be had, most sorts of Jewellers
    and Goldsmith Work, cheap for Cash.


       *        *       *       *       *

                          William Palfrey

    HEREBY informs his Customers and others, That he has just
    opened a fresh Assortment of Goods suitable for the Season,
    which were imported in the Ship _Boston-Packet_, Capt.
    _Marshall_.

    _ALSO_, A Variety of Stone, China and Glass Ware, which will
    be sold very low at his Shop next Door North of the Heart and
    Crown in Cornhill, _Boston_.

       *        *       *       *       *

    Imported in Captain _Skillings_ from _London_, and to be Sold

                   _By_ John Symmes, _Goldsmith_,

                Near the Golden Ball, _Boston, viz._

    BEST Shoe and Knee Buckles Fluke and Tongs, ruff and smooth
    Files, Bone Buckle Brushes, Freezing Punches, Binding Wire,
    Steel Top Thimbles, Cypher and Brilliant Button Stones, Cypher
    and Brilliant Ring Stones, Ring Sparks, Motto Ring Stones,
    Amethysts, Garnetts, Brilliant and Cypher Earing Stones,
    Amethysts Foyle, red & white do. Stone Bosom Buckles,
    Crusables, and Black Lead Melting Pots, &c. all cheap for
    Cash.

       *        *       *       *       *

                             November, 1767.

                              Robert Duncan

    Begs Leave to inform his Customers and Others, That he has
    removed from the Store on the Town Dock to the Shop lately
    improved by Mr. _William Palfrey_, next Door Northward of the
    Sign of the HEART and CROWN in Cornhill.

       *        *       *       *       *

    A House to Lett in _Hawkins's_-Street, near the Sign of the
    Parrot. Inquire of Edes and Gill.

       *        *       *       *       *

    No. 1. A House at the North-End of the Town, the Corner of
    Winnisimett Ferry.

       *        *       *       *       *

    No. 4. One large double House at New-Boston, near the Sign of
    the Ship. Boston, 21st Nov. 1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

                            Aug. 13, 1759.

    Imported in the last Ships from London, and to be Sold

                          By John Townley,

    At the Sign of the _Wheat Sheaff_, the Corner of _Wing's
    Lane_, very cheap for Cash;

    BROAD cloths, _Yorkshire_ plains, cotton velvets and
    cut-velvet shapes, thicksetts, fustians, white jeans, figured
    and corded dimothys, silk and cotton gowns, stript linnens,
    _Manchester_ checks, ruffells, calimancoes, tammys, durants,
    yard wide & prussian poplins, cross-bar'd stuffs, rich
    brunets, broglios, stript & plain camblets & cambleteens,
    lastings of all colours, bombazine, a fine assortment of
    _Irish_ linnens, _English_ oznabrigs.

       *        *       *       *       *

              _Imported in the last Ships from_ LONDON, _by_

                        =Ebenezer Coffin=,

    _And to be Sold at the_ Crown _and_ Bee-Hive, _opposite
    Deacon_ Phillips's _in_ Cornhill, Boston, _very cheap for
    ready Cash, or on short Credit_,

    A Large assortment of best london, hard-metal and common
    pewter dishes, plates, basons, porringers, quart-pots,
    tankards, soup-kettles, communion flaggons and cups,
    christening basons, tea-pots and spoons, bed and close stool
    pans, measures, &c.

       *        *       *       *       *

                          Aug. 27, 1759.

    _Adino Paddock_ Chaise-Maker, near the Granary, has six
    second-hand Chaises to sell; and as they take up much Storage,
    he will sell them under their Value.

       *        *       *       *       *

                              Aug. 22, 1763.

                            =Benjamin Russell=

    INFORMS his Customers and others, that he Undertakes PAPERING
    ROOMS and Stair-Cases in the best Manner, at a reasonable
    Rate.--Any Gentleman that has a mind to Employ him in the
    neighbouring Towns, may be serv'd by him (paying his
    Travelling Charges) at the same Rate as those in
    _Boston_.--Said _Russell_ has a number of Window SASHES 10 by
    8, 24 Lights in a Window, to Sell reasonably for Cash,--they
    are made of the best of PINE.

    --> Said _Russell_ lives the North-side of Bacon-Hill in
    _Boston_, opposite to Mr. _Joseph Callender's_, Baker.

       *        *       *       *       *

                           Jan. 12, 1767.

                           TO BE SOLD BY

                        Joseph Palmer & Co.,

                   At their Store on _Minot's_ T,

    Spermaceti Candles, _warranted_ _Pure_--Spermaceti in
    Cakes--Strain'd Spermaceti Oyl, by the Quantity or
    Cask--_Philadelphia_ Flour--English Duck, Cordage, &c.

       *        *       *       *       *

    A few Firkins of choice good Irish BUTTER, to be Sold by
    _BLANCHARD_ & _HANCOCK_, opposite the Conduit.----Likewise a
    large and good assortment of Ironmongery, Cutlery and Pewter
    Wares, just imported in the _Lydia_, Captain _Scott_, from
    _London_--Also, Philadelphia and Russia Barr Iron, &c. all at
    the very lowest Rates for Cash.

       *        *       *       *       *

                            June 14, 1762.

    GOOD CYDER to be Sold by the Barrel, or otherwise, at the
    _Black Boy & But_, by JONATHAN WILLIAMS.

       *        *       *       *       *

                            Daniel Jones,

    _At the_ HAT _and_ HELMIT, _South-End_, BOSTON, MAKES Beaver
    and Beaveret HATS; has also English Beaveret & Castor, English
    and French Felt Hats, Hat Trimmings; an Assortment of English
    GOODS suitable for all Seasons of the Year; a few Boxes of
    Looking-Glasses; which he will sell by Wholesale or Retail at
    a moderate Rate for Cash, Treasurer's Notes, or short Credit.

    _N.B._ Said _Jones_ desires those Persons who have far
    exceeded their Contracts either on Book or Notes of Hand, to
    be very speedy in settling the same, or they will oblige him
    to the disagreeable Necessity of putting them to Trouble.

       *        *       *       *       *

    ALL Persons that are indebted to the Estate of _James Mason_,
    late of _Boston_, Merchant, Deceas'd, are desired to Pay the
    same without Delay to _Jonathan Mason_, Executor to his
    Will;--and those who have any Demands on said Estate, are
    desired to bring in their Accompts to said Executor, who has
    to Sell at his House next Door to the Sign of the Three Kings
    in Cornhill, the following GOODS belonging to the Estate of
    the Deceased, which will be Sold at the first Cost and
    Charges, Viz.

    Broad Cloths, German Serges, Bearskins, Beaver Coating,
    Half-Thick, red Shagg, Bayes, 8 qr. and 9 qr. Blankets,
    Shalloons, Tammies, Durants, Calimancoes, worsted Damasks,
    strip'd and plain Camblets, strip'd Swanskins, Flannell,
    Manchester Velvet, Womens ditto, Bombazeen, Allopeen, colour'd
    Ruffells, Hungarians, Dimothy, Crimson and green China, 7-8th,
    yard wide and 6 qr. cotton Check, worsted and Hair Plush,
    Men's and Women's Hose, worsted Caps, mill'd ditto, black
    Tiffany, Women's and Children's Stays, cotton Romalls, printed
    Linnen Handkerchiefs, black Gauze ditto, Bandanoes, Silk
    Lungee Romalls, Cambricks, Lawns, Muslins, Callicoes, Chints,
    Buckrams, Gulick Irish and Tandem Holland, Mens and Womens Kid
    and Lamb Gloves, black and white Bone Lace, Capuchin Silk, and
    Fringe, Gartering, Silk and Cotton Laces, stript Gingham,
    yellow Canvas, Diaper, Damask Table Cloths and Napkins,
    Bedtick, 7-8th Garlix, Soletare Necklaces and Earings, Tapes,
    Womens Russel Shoes, sewing Silk, Nutmegs, Pepper, Looking
    Glasses, Ticklinburg, English and Russia Duck, Allum, Copperas
    and Brimstone, German Steel, Bar Lead, English and India
    Taffety, Grograms, English and India Damasks, Padusoys,
    Lutestrings, black and white Sattin, rich Brocade, Gauze Caps,
    and Ruffles, Shades and handsome Silk Cloaks, &.c. &c. &c.

       *        *       *       *       *

                                Aug. 22, 1763.

                              _Andrew Barclay_,

    AT his House opposite the Golden Cock in Marlborough-Street,
    _Boston_, Binds Books of all kinds, Gilt and Plain, in the
    neatest and best Manner. Gentlemen in Town or Country may
    depend upon having their Work done with Fidelity and Dispatch.

       *        *       *       *       *

                  1768.             Nov. 21.----Nov. 28.

          _Just imported in the Ship_ Thames, _Captain_ Watt,
                        _from_  London, _by_

                           Samuel Franklin,

    _At the Sign of the_ Crown and Razor, _South-End_, Boston:

    BEST Razors, Pen-knives, scissars, shears, shoe-knives, shoe
    tacks and stampt awl blades, teeth instruments, lancets, white
    and yellow swords, and sword belts; case-knives and forks;
    ink powder and sealing-wax, files and rasps; horse sleams;
    hones and curling tongs; brass ink-pots, horn and ivory combs;
    white, yellow and steel shoe and knee buckles; gilt, lackered
    and plated coat and breast buttons, snuff boxes, and a few
    second hand hats, &c. all very cheap.

    N.B. Razors, penknives and scissars ground, scabbards made for
    swords and bayonets, caseknife and fork blades made at said
    Shop.

                                               _Boston Chronicle._

       *        *       *       *       *

                    1769.        June 1.----June 5.

                                 WINE
                            TO BE SOLD _by_
                             ROSANNA MOORE,
              By wholesale and retail, at her WINE CELLAR
                  near LIBERTY TREE, Boston, viz.

    OLD Sterling MADEIRA, LISBON, Teneriff, Claret, Port, Canary,
    Malaga, Tent, sweet and other WINES, all in their original
    purity, and as cheap as any in town.

                                _Boston Chronicle_, June 1, 1769.

       *        *       *       *       *

                 _Just imported from_ LONDON, _by_

                          _Jolley Allen,_

    At his Shop about Midway between the Governor's and the
    Town-House, and almost Opposite the _Heart_ and _Crown_ in
    Cornhill,

                             _BOSTON._

    A very large Assortment of English and India GOODS, fit for
    all Seasons, too many to be enumerated separately in an
    Advertisement.----

                               _Boston Gazette_, Feb. 20, 1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

    WHEREAS the CO-PARTNERSHIP of Chase & Speakman is mutually
    dissolved, this is to desire all persons who are indebted to
    them to make speedy payment, and likewise all those who have
    any demands on said company, to call and receive their
    respective dues of T. Chase, at the venerable LIBERTY-ELM.

                                _Boston Chronicle_, May 22, 1769

       *        *       *       *       *

                              BOSTON.

    This morning arrived here Captain Paddock, in a schooner from
    London, after a long passage.

    ***_The_ BOSTONIAN _came too late for this day's Paper._

       *        *       *       *       *

                              STOLEN,

    FROM the side of the house, belonging to _Richard Silvester_,
    now the Sign of the

                            BROKEN POST,

    _Newbury street_, Boston, about half an hour past one o'clock
    in the morning of the 24th ult.

    A Black and White Horse, with a Bridle, without a Saddle.----The
    Persons concerned in this Frolick, who were seen and known,
    are desired to replace the said Horse, in the manner and form
    they found him. And it is hoped, as he is a young creature,
    they will not corrupt his morals, by teaching him any of their
    bad tricks, but return him soon, as the owner will not allow
    any thing for his keeping.

    N.B. If he should bite or kick any that have him in
    possession; his former master now declares, he will not be
    answerable for the damages.----He was not imported from
    England, but manufactured in this land of liberty.

    _Query._ Whether the persons who knocked at said SILVESTER'S
    door, past three o'clock the same morning, in their return
    home, and cried THIEVES, were not accomplices in this
    _glorious_ exploit.

                               _Boston Chronicle_, March 1, 1770.

       *        *       *       *       *

                                _TO BE SOLD
                         By_ Mary Jackson & Son,
                     _At the Brazen-Head in Cornhill,
                     A few Firkins of good Butter, at
    4s. 6d. per Pound; also choice_ Connecticut _Pork, Hogs Fat,
    and Cheese._

    N.B. _All Kind of Braziers, Cutlers, Pewterers and Ironmongery
    Goods, Wholesale and Retail._

                                                    July 13, 1761.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _WANTED_ for a _HOUSE-KEEPER,_ A Discreet elderly WOMAN that
    can be well recommended, who understands dressing victuals,
    and the oeconomy of a large family where there are no
    children.--Such a person will meet with _good_ encouragement,
    by applying to MEIN and FLEEMING.

                               _Boston Chronicle_, Dec. 19, 1768.

       *        *       *       *       *

                              To be SOLD by
                               JOHN CROSBY,
    LEMMON-TRADER, at the Sign of the _Basket of LEMMONS_, at the
    South-End, Choice good and fresh LISBON LEMMONS, equal to any
    in Town for goodness, and as large in general as Lemmons
    commonly are, at _Four Pounds_ O.T. _per_ Hundred, and _Ten
    Shillings per_ single Dozen.

                                                   Dec. 19, 1768.

       *        *       *       *       *

                               TO BE LET,
    A Handsome square SHOP, in _Marshall's-Lane_, near
    Boston-stone, suitable either for a Grocery, West-India or
    Dry-Goods Shop--it will also accommodate any person in the
    Mechanical Line. Inquire of the Printer, or of GILES RICHARDS
    and Co. near the _Mill-Bridge_.

                                                  March 12, 1791.

       *        *       *       *       *

Picture of a Boston mariner in 1799.


                           _TO BE SOLD_,

    [Illustration]

    _By_ Samuel Thaxter, MATHEMATICAL _Instrument Maker_, No. 49
    STATE-STREET, 1 best brass Sextant, latest improvement;
    Hadley's Quadrants, Davis' do. Brass Azimuth Amplitude and
    Steering Compas; Brass Surveying Compas, Wood, do. Spy
    Glasses; Sea Books, and Charts; Scales and Dividers; Surveying
    Chains, &c.

    N.B. Quadrants and Compasses carefully repaired;--where
    Gentlemen may depend on reasonableness and punctuality.

                                                         March 30.

       *        *       *       *       *

                              FOR SALE,

    A Small HOUSE-LOT, in Sisters-lane, very near the Rev. Dr.
    Belknap's Meeting-house. Inquire of the Printer. March 30.
    1799.

       *        *       *       *       *

                     Just Imported, and to be Sold by
                          Harbottle Dorr,
    At his Shop (adjoining to the House of Mr. _Martin Gay_)
    almost opposite to the Cornfields in Union-Street, Boston,

    A Fine Assortment of Braziery, Ironmongery, and Cutlery Ware,
    by Wholesale or Retail, cheap for Cash.

                                 _Boston Gazette_, July 13, 1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

A sermon suitable to distribute among tenants and servants:--

                         THIS DAY PUBLISHED,
           (_And Sold by_ S. Kneeland, _in Queen-Street_;)
    THE CARE of the SOUL, urged as the ONE THING NEEDFUL. A SERMON
    first preached at the Funeral of a young Person, and
    afterwards before some worthy and excellent Persons, who
    desired some printed Copies of it, to disperse among their
    Tenants and Servants.

                                   _Boston Gazette_, Nov. 2, 1761.

       *        *       *       *       *

Goods exchanged for New England rum.


    Barbados Rum,                 |         Russia Duck
    and Sugars by the             |         Pitch, Tar,
    Hogshead or Barrel,           |                and
    Bohea Tea,                    |         Cordage.
    Cotton Wool by the Bag,       |         Long & short Pipes.
    New Flour,                    |         Sole Leather.
    Indigo.                       |         English Steel.
    --> Dumb FISH.                |                  With,

    A General Assortment of English Goods and Hard Ware.

    Many of the above Articles will be Exchang'd for New England
    Rum,

                 _By_ Samuel Allyne Otis,

                    At Store No. 5, South-Side of the Town-Dock.

                               _Boston Gazette_, Sept. 22, 1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

Wigs advertised in Salem, suitable to "grace and become Judges, Divines,
Lawyers, or Physicians," and "Rolls to raise the Heads" of ladies "to any
Pitch they desire." This shop was probably patronized by Judge and Madam
Lynde, Colonel Pickman, Dr. Holyoke, Dr. Barnard, Dr. Hopkins, Dr.
Whitaker, Samuel Curwen, Judge Ropes, John Appleton, Deacon Holman,
Friend Northey, and others.

                            =William Lang,=

                   _Wig-Maker and Hair-Dresser,_

    HEREBY informs the Public, that he has hired a Person from
    EUROPE, by whose Assistance he is now enabled, in the several
    Branches of his Business, to serve his good Customers, and all
    others, in the most genteel and polite Tastes that are at
    present in Fashion in England and America.----In particular,
    WIGS made in any Mode whatever, such as may grace and become
    the most important Heads, whether those of Judges, Divines,
    Lawyers or Physicians; together with all those of an inferior
    Kind, so as exactly to suit their respective Occupations and
    Inclinations.----HAIR-DRESSING, for Ladies and Gentlemen,
    performed in the most elegant and newest Taste.----Ladies, in
    a particular Manner, shall be attended to, in the nice, easy,
    genteel and polite Construction of ROLLS, such as may tend to
    raise their Heads to any Pitch they desire,----also French
    Curls, made in the neatest Manner. He gives Cash for Hair.

                                   _Essex Gazette_, Feb. 9, 1773.

       *        *       *       *       *

On the departure of Governor Hutchinson from the Province of Massachusetts
in 1774, a hundred and twenty-three citizens of Boston, together with
sundry citizens of Salem, Marblehead, and other places, signed a
complimentary address to him, "lamenting the loss of so good a Governor,"
and praising him for his character and conduct. Most of these persons
belonged to the better classes; but their action was judged to be, to say
the least, hasty. Shortly after this, these "addressors" were "hauled over
the coals" by the patriots and forced to retract. The following cards from
some of these gentlemen we take from the "Essex Gazette," a newspaper
circulating in Salem and Cambridge. From the known character and standing
of many of these persons, it is believed that they were glad of an
opportunity of thus expressing their patriotism. The first blood of the
Revolution had not been shed when they signed this address to the
Governor, who they had hoped would be able to influence the British
ministry so that war could be averted. But after the battles of Lexington
and Concord there was no longer any hope of a reconciliation, and the
"Committee of Safety," naturally wishing to be sure as to who were
friends and who were enemies, took this method of ascertaining the fact
and thereby satisfying the community.

                                                  Salem, May 30, 1775.

    Whereas we the Subscribers did some time since sign an Address
    to Governor Hutchinson, which, though prompted to by the best
    Intentions, has nevertheless given great Offence to our
    Country; We do now declare that we were so far from designing
    by that Action to show our Acquiescence in those Acts of
    Parliament so universally and justly odious to all America,
    that on the contrary we hoped we might in that Way contribute
    to their Repeal, though now to our sorrow we find ourselves
    mistaken.--And we do now further declare that we never
    intended the Offense which this Address has occasioned, that
    if we had foreseen such an Event, we should never have signed
    it; as it always has been and now is our Wish to live in
    Harmony with our Neighbors, and our serious Determination to
    promote to the utmost of our Power, the Liberty, the Welfare
    and Happiness of our Country, which is inseparably connected
    with our own.

                 JOHN NUTTING,      ANDREW DALGLEISH,
                 N. GOODALE,        THOMAS BARNARD,
                 E.A. HOLYOKE,      NATH. DABNEY,
                 WM. PYNCHON,       WILLIAM PICKMAN,
                 EBEN'R PUTNAM,     C. GAYTON PICKMAN,
                 FRANCIS CABOT,     JOHN TURNER,
                           N. SPARHAWK.

    In Committee of Safety, Salem, 30th May, 1775.

    The Declaration of which the above is a copy, being presented
    and read, it was voted unanimously that the same was
    satisfactory, and that the said Gentlemen ought to be received
    and treated as real Friends to this Country.

                     By order of the Committee,
                                  RICHARD DERBY, _jun., Chairman_.

       *        *       *       *       *

    Whereas I the Subscriber was so unfortunate (some Time since)
    as to sign an Address to the late Governor Hutchinson, so
    universally, and so justly, deemed an Enemy to American
    Liberty and Freedom, I hereby in this public Manner declare
    that at the Time I signed the said Address, I intended the
    Good of my Country, and that only; but finding in my Sorrow it
    had not that but quite a contrary Effect, I hereby renounce
    the same Address in every Part, and hope my injured and
    afflicted Fellow-Countrymen will overlook my past Misconduct,
    as I am ready to assist them in their Struggles for Liberty
    and Freedom in whatever Way I shall be called upon by them.

    Londonderry, June 6, 1775.                   JOHN PRENTICE.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _To the Publick_:

    Whereas I the Subscriber signed an Address to the late
    Governor Hutchinson, upon his leaving this Province: I now
    declare my doing so was without any View of injuring the
    Liberties of my Country, which I ever held sacred; nor had I
    the least Design of giving Offence to any Individual within
    the Circle of my Acquaintance, and had I conceived such an
    Address would have been so generally disapproved of, I should
    by no Means have signed it; and hope the Publick will freely
    forgive this Error in their humble Servant.   JONATHAN GLOVER.

       *        *       *       *       *

    Whereas I, the Subscriber, signed an Address to the late
    Governor Hutchinson,--_I wish the Devil had had said Address
    before I had seen it._

    Marblehead, October 24, 1774.                      J. FOWLE.

John Prentice, of Marblehead, signed a similar card the same day.

       *        *       *       *       *

We have room but for one more of these political cards. The Rev. Samuel
Dana, of Groton, appears to have been suspected of "Toryism," and prints
the following in the "Essex Gazette":--

    "I, the Subscriber, being deeply affected with the Miseries
    bro't on this Country by a horrid Thirst for ill-got Wealth
    and unconstitutional Power,--and lamenting my Unhappiness in
    being left to adopt Principles in Politics different from the
    Generality of my Countrymen; and thence to conduct in a
    Manner that has but too justly excited the Jealousy and
    Resentment of the true Sons of Liberty against me, earnestly
    desirous, at the same Time, to give them all the Satisfaction
    in my Power; do hereby Sincerely ask Forgiveness of all such
    for whatever I have said or done, that had the least Tendency
    to the Injury of my Country, assuring them that it is my full
    Purpose, in my proper Sphere, to unite with them in all those
    laudable and fit Measures that have been recommended by the
    Continental and Provincial Congresses for the Salvation of
    this Country, hoping my future Conversation and Conduct will
    fully prove the up-rightness of my present Professions.

    Groton, May 22, 1775.                            SAMUEL DANA.

The town of Groton voted that the above was satisfactory to the
inhabitants, and that Mr. Dana "ought to enjoy the Privileges of Society,"
etc.

       *        *       *       *       *

East Boston, to be let, in the year 1800.

                           _Noddle's Island._

    TO BE LET, (for the term of one or more years, and entered
    upon, the 25th March next,)

    THAT valuable Estate in the Harbour of Boston, known by the
    name of NODDLE'S Island. The advantages of its situation,
    soil, &c. &c. are so well known, as to render a detail
    thereof unnecessary.--For particulars, inquire of the Printer,
    or of DAVID S. GREENOUGH, at Roxbury.

                                                          Feb. 15.

                                             _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

                       GENTLEMEN and LADIES.

    [Illustration]

    ISAAC GREENWOOD, jun., takes this opportunity to inform you,
    that at his Shop opposite the Town-House, in Salem, Gentlemen
    may be supplyed with neat walking Sticks; and Ladies with
    Umbrellas, neater and cheaper than those imported: He makes
    and mends Umbrella Sticks in the best Manner.

    He earnestly wishes, for his Profit and their Good, that they
    would apply to him for Teeth-Brushes, and Teeth-Powder, which
    when used will recommend itself.

    Said Greenwood performs all kinds of turned Work, in Silver,
    such as Tankards, Cans, &c. also in Brass, Iron, Ivory,
    Turtle-Shell, Bone, Horn, and Wood of any sort or bigness.
    Repairs Violins; makes Flutes, Fifes, Hoboys, Clarinets,
    Chaise-Whips, Tea-Boards, Bottle-Stands, Tamboy Frames,
    Back-Gammon Boxes Men and Dies, Chess men, Billiard-Balls,
    Maces, Lemon Squeezers, Serenges, Hydrometers, Shaving Boxes
    and Brushes, Buckle-Brushes, Ink-Stands, Paper-Folders,
    Sand-Boxes, Bannisters for Stair-Cases, &c. &c. &c.

                                   _Salem Gazette_, July 3, 1781.

       *        *       *       *       *

An appeal to "the Sentimentalists of the Town of Salem," from the
"Gazette" of June 19, 1781. "Sentimentalists" would in these days be
called book-buyers.

                           By AUTHORITY.

                _JEWELS and DIAMONDS for_ SENTIMENTALISTS.

    THE Sentimentalists of the Town of Salem, and all Voluntiers,
    who are pleased to encourage the extensive Propagation of
    polite Literature, by the Business of Book Auctioniering,
    which in all free States hath always been highly favoured with
    peculiar Privileges, because it is the sublimest Auxiliary
    which Science, Commerce, and Arts either has, or perhaps ever
    will possess, are requested to observe, that _On Thursday
    Evening June 21st, 1781, and for_ two more Evenings
    successively, The following curious Collection of valuable and
    scarce BOOKS, containing History, Biography, Voyages, Travels,
    Philosophy, Mathematics, Periodical Papers, Letters, Essays,
    Arts, Sciences, Novels and Adventures, with Poetic and
    Dramatic Entertainment, by the most celebrated ancient and
    modern Authors, who have explored, investigated, and attempted
    to illuminate the human Understanding with the god-like
    Attribute of knowledge,

    _Will be exhibited by AUCTION, at Mr._ GOODHUE'S Tavern in the
    Town of _SALEM_,

    _By_ ROBERT BELL, _Bookseller, Provedore_ to the
    Sentimentalists, and Professor of Book-Auctioniering, who is
    just arrived from _Philadelphia_, and will return thither in a
    few days.

    Hours of Exhibition by Auction from Six to Ten each Evening;
    when the Jewels and Diamonds will, instantaneously, either be
    sold or sacrificed, according to the Taste of the Company.

    Printed CATALOGUES of the Books to be had at the Time and
    Place.

    N.B. On Tuesday, or Wednesday next Week, the Book-Auctionier
    intends also to exhibit a Collection of Books by Auction in
    the town of Newbury-Port; and sometime in the Week after, he
    intends to exhibit another Collection of Books by Auction in
    the Town of Portsmouth, the Capital of the State of
    New-Hampshire.

       *        *       *       *       *

In the "Herald of Freedom," published in Boston, is the following singular
notice from Osgood Carleton:--

                           =Osgood Carleton,=

    HAVING been frequently applied to for a decision of disputes,
    and sometimes wagers,[A] respecting the place of his nativity,
    and finding they sometimes operate to his disadvantage: Begs
    leave to give this public information--that he was born in
    Nottingham-west, in the State of New-Hampshire--in which state
    he resided until sixteen years old; after which time, he
    traveled by sea and land to various parts, and being (while
    young) mostly conversant with the English, he lost some of the
    country dialect, which gives rise to the above disputes.

    [A] _Several Englishmen have disputed his being born in America._

                                          BOSTON, AUGUST 20, 1790.

       *        *       *       *       *

The singular taste for wax-work exhibitions which used formerly to prevail
is shown in the following announcement from the "Salem Gazette," Oct. 18,
1791:--

                                  WAX-WORK.

                                 _Mr. BOWEN_

    RESPECTFULLY acquaints the Ladies and Gentlemen of Salem and
    its vicinity, that he has removed his Exhibition from Boston,
    where it met with universal applause.

    To-Morrow Evening at 7 o'clock the door will be opened, and
    commence one of the most pleasing & innocent amusements,

                   At the Assembly Room, _Salem_.

    The numerous attractions of this admired Collection having
    lately been increased by adding several excellent new Figures,
    it is recommended to be worthy of the patronage and attention
    of a liberal public. Mr. BOWEN, wishing immediately to gratify
    the inhabitants of this town and vicinity, begs leave to
    inform them that his residence here will be but a few days.

    It would be unnecessary to give a particular description of
    all the Figures in this large Exhibition; but among the most
    admired, we may enumerate, an excellent likeness of the
    PRESIDENT of the United States and his amiable Lady, with a
    representation of the President supporting the Union of
    Liberty, Justice, Peace, and Plenty. His Excellency Gov.
    HANCOCK, who was one of the first of the patriotic members
    that signed the Declaration of American Independence--a
    sincere Friend to his Country. The celebrated _Hamilton_,
    Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. Three
    beautiful female Figures, representing a _Boston, Rhodeisland,
    and Philadelphia_ Beauty. The unfortunate _Baron_ TRENCK in
    real chains. Doctor FRANKLIN, dressed in a suit of his own
    clothes, with about _Twenty_ other Figures in full stature.

    The Exhibition will be open every day (except Saturday
    evenings and Sundays) from 10 o'clock in the morning until 9
    in the evening.

    --> Tickets of admission, at _one shilling and six pence_ for
    Ladies and Gentlemen, and _nine-pence_ for Children under 10
    years of age, may be had at the door.

               _No reduction of the price will take place._

       *        *       *       *       *

Wine advertised in a Baltimore paper in 1788.

                "--> _In good Wine there is truth._"

    "THE ROSY GOD, ever attentive to the wants and wishes of his
    votaries here below, has for their use deposited in the hands
    of the subscriber (one of his _oldest Tapsters_) some of his
    CHOICEST GIFTS, the best Produce of various Vintages. Such
    exhilarating Beverage as, of old, cheered the Hearts of GODS
    and Men.--A strict Observance of the _Seventh Commandment_ is
    enjoined in the Distribution. The Fiat shall be obeyed, by the
    Publick's most obliged and devoted Servant,

                                                  "THOMAS HEPBURN.
    _"Baltimore, April 11, 1788."_

       *        *       *       *       *

In the "Boston Columbian Centinel" Josiah Flagg, jun., advertises for
"live teeth."


    [Illustration]

                 _JOSIAH FLAGG_, jun.
                   SURGEON DENTIST:
             AT THE STONE-HOUSE, BEACON-STREET,
                       _BOSTON--_

    CONTINUES his practise with useful improvements.
    Assistance to the poor gratis.

        --> CASH given for live Teeth, and
      Gold Cobbs, or Dust.    May 26, 1792.

       *        *       *       *       *

It is curious to see how in "old times" things "got mixed up." The
incongruity of putting together whalebone, Bibles, and chip hats is only
exceeded by a later advertisement we have seen of Scott's Bible sold at a
lottery-office. This is from the "Salem Mercury" of 1788:--

                          _NEXT FRIDAY,_
                                AT
                       W.P. Bartlett's Office,
                  Will be Sold at Publick Auction,
                    A variety of Shop Goods and
                         other articles:

                       _Among which are,_

    A Few pieces best India BANDANNOES----BROADCLOTHS in
    patterns--twill'd & plain CORDUROY--few doz. purple & white
    SHAWLS--Hair Ribbons--coloured Threads--N^o 4 Pins--Irish
    LINENS--yellow SERGE--black LASTINGS--WHALEBONE--large and
    small BIBLES--Chip Hats--Watch Chains--Bottled
    Mustard--Playing Cards--Green Chairs--few pounds of
    NUTMEGS--Men's Worsted STOCKINGS, &c.--_Sale to begin at 11
    o'clock_, A.M.

       *        *       *       *       *

The following notice of the Bradford Academy from the "Salem Gazette"
reminds us of the days of small prices,--"Tuition $3," or "$3.50 to those
who paint and embroider"!

                           _Bradford Academy._

    THE Female Apartment in Bradford Academy, half a mile from
    Haverhill Bridge, will be opened the first Wednesday in May,
    under the direction of approved instructors. The Male
    Apartment will be continued as usual. Young Masters and Misses
    will be instructed by such as are assigned to their respective
    Apartments, in all the branches hitherto taught in that or in
    any other Academy. The preceptor will spend less time than
    usual in the female apartment, and the preceptress will have
    an assistant. The price of tuition, except those who paint and
    embroider, will be three dollars a quarter. To those who paint
    and embroider, three dollars and fifty cents. Very particular
    attention will be paid to inculcate virtuous sentiments and
    preserve the moral character of the scholars.

    Bradford, April 9, 1805.

       *        *       *       *       *

Husbands often advertise wives, but it is seldom that a wife publicly
refuses to pay her husband's debts, as according to the following
announcement from the "Salem Gazette," Mistress Sarah Brooks did. This
was before the days of "women's rights," too.

    THE Subscriber being apprehensive that her Husband, JOHN
    BROOKS, will contract debts on her account--this is to forbid
    any person trusting him on her account, as she will not
    satisfy any debt so contracted after this date--altho my
    compassion for him is such, that he shall not want for any
    thing I can help him to--knowing him to be a poor, forlorn
    young man. I cannot but pity his condition, and sincerely hope
    he will alter his way of life for the better--tear jealousy
    from his heart--bury in oblivion his unhappy temper--and take
    up a firm resolution, that he will turn from the error of his
    ways, to a better course of life, become a good citizen, a
    friend to his wife and children, and not hearken any more to
    his supposed friends (tho greatest enemies)--this is the
    sincere wish of the Subscriber.

                                                       SARAH BROOKS.

    _Marblehead, March 27, 1793._

       *        *       *       *       *

In the "Salem Gazette," Oct. 8, 1793, Frederick Jordis complains of "a
certain greedy worshipper of Plutus."

    WHEREAS a certain greedy worshipper of Plutus has attempted
    (canker worm like) to blast the tender bloom of my reputation,
    by misrepresenting an occurrence that took place between us
    on the third inst.--I take this method, as the most salutary
    remedy, to put a stop to its dangerous ravages. I will confess
    candidly every particular. Sometime since, this man came to me
    with an account I had in vain demanded of him 4 months ago for
    horse-hire; having compared it with my own memorandum, I found
    three charges over and above what I owed him, and the
    remainder a third higher than usual; finding him unwilling to
    diminish his unjust claim, I repaired to his house last
    Thursday to settle with him, and paid him in full the amount
    of his bill, subtraction made of his three charges: Perceiving
    his intention was to make me pay them again, I pocketed the
    bill; his pugilistick arguments to get it back again made me
    obstinately refuse it; and thanks to a gentleman then present,
    I escaped his dirty hands. Unwilling to enter the field of
    Themis with such an antagonist, I will place his receipted
    account into any impartial man's hands, and submit cheerfully
    to his decision.

                                                FREDERICK JORDIS.

       *        *       *       *       *

To show how factories were supplied with operatives in the early days of
manufacturing in New England, we copy an advertisement from the "Columbian
Centinel," March 4, 1795. This is addressed especially to those parents
"who can ill afford to maintain their children." How much better off our
manufacturing towns would be if such a system were practicable now!

    _An exceeding good opportunity for parents_ (in these very
    expensive times for every necessary of life) _to provide their
    children with good and comfortable maintenance, cloathing,
    schooling, and a trade, but little known and understood in
    this country._

    MR. ERVING proposes to receive as Apprentices to the Cotton &
    Woolen Manufactory (now going on at New-Haven) any number of
    Boys or Girls, from the age of ten to fourteen. They will be
    instructed in all the various branches of the factory, well
    cloathed and fed, and taught to read, write and cypher; and
    parents may be assured that the most particular attention will
    be paid to the morals, as well as to the education, of their
    children.

    Those who can but ill afford to maintain their children, have
    now an opportunity of binding them to a trade which must, in a
    few years, be peculiarly beneficial to them and advantageous
    to their country.

    MR. ERVING will thank those that have an inclination to put
    their children out, to call on him, at his house, No. 42
    Marlborough-street, Boston, where they can be more
    particularly informed of the nature of the factory, and the
    advantages which must eventually accrue to their children from
    a general knowledge of this useful branch of business.

                                                    March 4, 1795.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _THE following lines were written in the Shop of the
    Subscriber, by a son of St. Crispin, viewing with contempt the
    tyrannical and oppressive disposition of a Man who has
    threat'ned vengeance on his neighbour's business, because the
    article he deals in is_ SHOES.

    Salem, 9th Mo. 6th, 1801.

    Oh Shame! that Man a Dog should imitate,
    And only live, his fellow Man to hate.
      An envious Dog, once in a manger lay,
      And starv'd himself, to keep an Ox from hay,
      Altho' thereof he could not eat--
      Yet if the Ox was starv'd, to him 'twas sweet.
      His neighbor's comfort thus for to annoy,
      Altho' thereby he did his own destroy.
      Oh! Man, such actions from the page erase,
      And from thy breast malicious envy CHACE.

    -->_Twenty per Cent was struck off at one clip, from those
    kind of Shoes, which are mostly worn. It is fifteen months
    since the Shoe War commenced._

                                               J. MANSFIELD, 3d.

    A general Assortment of Shoes for Sale as usual, at a living
    profit.

                                               _Salem Register._

       *        *       *       *       *

                       _Appropriate Mourning._

    IN consequence of the late afflicting event of the death of
    the much lamented General _Hamilton_, TUCKER & THAYER will
    sell their black ITALIAN CRAPE at the reduced price of one
    dollar per yard 4-4 wide:--

        "_GOD takes the_ Good, _too good on earth to stay_,
        "_And leaves the_ Bad, _too bad to take away!_"

                           _Columbian Centinel_, July 25, 1804.

       *        *       *       *       *

Bad effects of the abolition of slavery in Providence, R.I.

                 _From the Providence Gazette._

    Messrs. Printers,

    You will oblige a number of your customers, by publishing the
    following advertisement in the next Gazette.

                  _Five Hundred Dollars Reward._

    Was mislaid, or taken away by mistake (soon after the
    formation of the Abolition Society) from the Servant Girls of
    this town, all inclination to do any kind of work;--and left
    in lieu thereof, an impudent appearance, a strong and
    continued thirst for high wages, a gossiping disposition for
    all sorts of amusement, a leering and hankering after persons
    of the other sex, a desire of finery and fashion, a never
    ceasing trot after new places more advantageous for
    stealing--with number of contingent accomplishments that do
    not suit the wearers. Now if any person or persons will
    restore to the owners that degree of Honesty and Industry,
    which has been for some time missing, he or they shall receive
    the reward of Five Hundred Dollars, beside the warmest
    blessings of many abused and insulted

                                                     HOUSEHOLDERS.
    _Providence, Oct. 14, 1796._

       *        *       *       *       *

Parents in Boston cautioned against thorn-apples in "Columbian Centinel,"
Oct. 26, 1793.

                              _CAUTION!_

    THE Inspector of Police, respectfully makes known to Parents
    and others, that of late, several children have very much
    injured themselves, by eating the seeds of Stramonium, or
    Thorn-Apple, commonly called Devil's Apple; who must
    inevitably have died, had they not been speedily relieved by
    Emetics, &c. As those bushes are in several parts of the town,
    it would be well, if they were destroyed.

       *        *       *       *       *

Rabbits a curiosity in 1798.

                  _Curious Living Animals._

    MR. GILBERT informs the Public that he has purchased, at
    considerable expense, a Collection of Living Animals, harmless
    and playful.

    A large Baboon, which is allowed to be the most curious Animal
    of its kind, ever seen in America.

    A Porcupine, Bear, Rackoon and Rabbit, which are also very
    great curiosities.

    --> The Collection may be seen every day (except Sundays) from
    4 o'clock in the afternoon until sunset, at the _Granary_,
    head of the _Mall, Boston_. _Admittance_ Nine Pence _for
    Ladies and Gentlemen, and half price for Children._

                                                          May 12.
                                            _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

Mourning badge for Washington.

    A very ingenious and elegant mourning Vignette, stamped on
    sattin ribbon, for the purpose of being worn by the Ladies on
    public occasions, is for sale at Mr. _Thomas Brewer's_ shop in
    Cornhill. The device contains a profile bust of the deceased
    WASHINGTON in an obelisk, with the trophies of war, and the
    arms of the U.S.; round the monument are nymphs in the posture
    of mourning; and on the base are inscribed in legible
    characters the initials of his name, and the date of his birth
    and death.

                            _E. Russell's Gazette, Jan. 16, 1800._

       *        *       *       *       *

Temple of Fame in Boston, with a real eagle, in 1800.

                         _Temple of Fame._

    MR. Bowen respectfully informs the public that the MUSEUM is
    again opened, with additions and improvements. An excellent
    figure of GEN. WASHINGTON will appear in a Temple of Fame,
    expressive of the late melancholy event.--The Young Ladies
    which represent the _Sister States_ (with a real Eagle
    hovering over) will be seen with suitable alterations:--with a
    variety of rural decorations of _Groves_ and _Forests_.

                                                          _Jan. 2._
                                                  _Boston Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

Families used to live in State Street, Boston, in 1796.

    --> _A_ Family in State-street, that does not make a business
    of keeping boarders, will accommodate a couple of gentlemen,
    who are disposed to make themselves agreeable in a private
    family. Apply at the office of the Daily Advertiser.

                      _Daily Advertiser and Polar Star_, Dec. 22.

       *        *       *       *       *

Copley's paintings at auction in 1790.

                THIS DAY, (_At TEN in the Morning_,)
                  Will be sold by PUBLIC VENDUE at
                   Russell & Clap's Auction-Room,
                          _COURT STREET_,

    A Variety of elegant paintings, &c.--principally by the
    ingenious MR. COPLEY.--ALSO, an Electrical Machine, a glass
    Case for a shop, &c.

                                 _Columbian Centinel_, Aug. 31.

       *        *       *       *       *

The way they compromised with creditors in 1806.

                        _To the Public._

    WHEREAS by misfortunes, together with expenses of law suits,
    with honest pride I acknowledge I am not worth one cent in the
    world, and of course cannot pay my debts. But through the
    assistance of friends, I am now accommodated with a Shop, and
    necessary Tools to carry on my business, in _Cambridge-Port_;
    where I shall be happy to execute any kind of work for those I
    am indebted to, at the lowest cash price, on this
    condition--that I am paid one half of what the work comes to,
    in cash, when delivered. But if my creditors will allow me
    time, and my health is spared, I have no doubt I shall soon be
    able to pay twenty shillings on the pound to them, in cash.

    To those gentlemen I am not indebted to, I solicit of them a
    share of their work, assuring them, that whatever engagements
    I make, shall be executed punctually, and in a workmanlike
    manner, by their humble servant,

                                                 RICHARD GRIDLEY.
    _Cambridge-Port_, sept. 10, 1806.

    --> The Printers of Newspapers in Boston are requested to
    publish the above, provided they will receive their pay in
    Smith's work.

                                            _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

On the 11th of January, 1799, Mr. Briggs advertises in the "Salem Gazette"
and thanks "the good people of the County of _Essex_ for their spirited
exertions in bringing down the trees of the forest for building the
frigate. In the short space of four weeks, the full complement of timber
has been furnished." He ends by saying:--

    "Next September is the time
      When we'll launch her from the strand,
    And our cannon load and prime
      With tribute due to Talleyrand."

       *        *       *       *       *

The following advertisement appeared in the papers in 1798, in reference
to the building of the frigate "Essex":--

                           The _Salem Frigate_.

                            [Illustration]

                             TAKE NOTICE!

    YE Sons of Freedom! all true lovers of the Liberty of your
    Country! step forth, and give your assistance in building the
    Frigate, to oppose French insolence and piracy. Let every man
    in possession of a _White Oak Tree_, be ambitious to be
    foremost in hurrying down the timber to Salem, and fill the
    complement wanting, where the noble structure is to be
    fabricated, to maintain your rights upon the Seas, and make
    the name of America respected among the nations of the world.
    Your largest and longest trees are wanted, and the arms of
    them for Knees and Rising Timber. Four trees are wanted for
    the Keel, which all together will measure 146 feet in length,
    and hew 16 inches square. Please to call on the Subscriber,
    who wants to make contracts for large or small quantities, as
    may suit best, and will pay the READY CASH.

                                                  _ENOS BRIGGS._
    SALEM, Nov. 23, 1798.

       *        *       *       *       *

                              CASH GIVEN FOR

    ONE ton COPPER, in pigs, or old COPPER--10 tons best old Sable
    or Swedes IRON. Apply to the Subscriber.

                              ALSO--_WANTED_,

    A _Blacksmith_, to contract for doing all the IRON WORK of the

                              _SALEM FRIGATE_.

    *** Proposals therefor, will be received from any Smith,
    sealed and directed to

                                                        JOHN JENKS.
    _Salem, Nov. 21._

       *        *       *       *       *

In the "Gazette" of Oct. 1, 1799, appears the following brief account of
the launching of the "Essex;" also a communication in reference to the
frigate.

                                 Salem,

                      TUESDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1799.

    Yesterday the FRIGATE ESSEX, of 32 guns, was launched from the
    stocks, in this town. She went into the water with the most
    easy and graceful motion, amidst the acclamations of thousands
    of spectators, and a federal salute from her guns on the hill,
    returned by an armed ship in the harbour, commanded by Capt.
    Thomas Williams. The Committee acting for the subscribers,
    Col. Hacket, the superintendant, and Mr. Briggs, the master
    builder, have thus the satisfaction of producing to their
    country as fine a ship, of her size, as graces the American
    Navy. It is not yet known who will command her; but it is on
    all hands agreed that she is well calculated to do essential
    service to her country.

       *        *       *       *       *

                           _COMMUNICATION._

              _And_ ADAMS _said_, "LET THERE BE A NAVY!"
                      _and there was a Navy._

    To build a Navy was the advice of our venerable sage. How far
    it has been adhered to, is demonstrated by almost every town
    in the United States, that is capable of floating a _galley_
    or a _gun boat_.

    Salem has not been backward in this laudable design. Impressed
    with a due sense of the importance of a Navy, the patriotic
    citizens of this town put out a subscription, and thereby
    obtained an equivalent for building a vessel of force. Among
    the foremost in this _good work_ were Messrs. DERBY and GRAY,
    who set the example by subscribing TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS each.
    But alas! the former is no more--we trust his _good deeds
    follow him_.

    Such was the patriotic zeal with which our citizens were
    impressed, that in the short space of SIX MONTHS they
    contracted for the materials and equipment of a Frigate of 32
    guns, and had her completed yesterday for launching. The chief
    part of the timber was standing but six months ago--and in a
    _moment_, as it were, "_every Grove descended_," to put in
    force the patriotic intentions of those at whose expense she
    was built.

    Yesterday the Stars and Stripes were unfurled on board the
    Frigate ESSEX, and at 12 o'clock she made a majestic movement
    into her destined element, there to join her sister craft in
    repelling foreign aggressions, and maintaining the _Rights_
    and _Liberties_ of a "GREAT, FREE, POWERFUL & INDEPENDENT
    NATION."

    The concourse of spectators was immense; and the averted face
    of jacobinism was not seen depicted on the countenance of a
    single one;--but on the contrary, the heart-felt satisfaction
    of the beholders of this magnificent spectacle, was evinced by
    the concording shouts and huzzas of thousands, which
    reiterated from every quarter.

    The unremitting zeal of Mr. BRIGGS, the Architect of this
    beautiful ship, cannot be too highly applauded. His assiduity,
    in bringing her into a state of such perfection, in so short a
    time, entitles him to the grateful thanks of his country; and
    we fondly hope that his labours have not been spent in vain,
    for we may truly say that he has not _given rest to the sole
    of his foot_, since her keel was first laid.

       *        *       *       *       *

The "Massachusetts Mercury," Dec. 27, 1799, says:--

    The frigate _Essex_, of 32 guns, capt. PREBBLE, sailed from
    _Salem_ on Sunday morning last for _Newport_. She saluted
    _Fort Pickering_, which returned the salute. She sails
    remarkably well.

       *        *       *       *       *

At "No. 1, Honesty Side," Salem, dry goods were to be had in 1807.

                        _John H. Keith_

    Informs the inhabitants of Salem and its environs, that on the
    15th day of April next ensuing, he intends opening a Shop for
    the purpose of vending

                           Dry Goods,

                                             _No 1, Honesty Side_.

    Constantly for Sale, American, French, English, Italian, Dutch
    and India manufactures, from the coarse _Tow Cloth_ to the
    fine _Cobweb Muslin_.--Said Keith will attend personally from
    the _sun's oriental ascension_ to its _occidental
    declination_.--To prevent a superfluity of _words_, he
    observes that there will be only one price for his goods at
    _retail_, and another for _wholesale_, and that _cash_ will be
    the staple commodity receivable at his bank. Bills of any of
    the States will be received, provided the stockholders are
    known to be good and _responsible men_. March 24.

                                         _Salem Gazette_, April 3.

       *        *       *       *       *

The "Worcester Spy" in 1797 had the following quaint advertisement:--

                     _Honesty is the best Policy._

    THE Gentleman Night Walker, alias Night Villain, who of late
    has frequented the SLAUGHTER HOUSE of LEMUEL RICE, and taken
    therefrom a considerable quantity of FRESH BEEF, is informed,
    that if he comes forward, in a gentleman like manner, and
    settles for the same, his name shall not be exposed; but, if
    he neglects this friendly hint, he must shortly expect to be
    complimented by a WARRANT, which will give him that _reward
    his_ LABORS justly _merit_.

    _Worcester, April 5th, 1797._

       *        *       *       *       *

The "Grand Lodge." Paul Revere, master, has the following notice in the
"Massachusetts Centinel:"--

                            _Grand Lodge._

    [Illustration]

    THE OFFICERS and MEMBERS of the GRAND LODGE, and the
    Representatives of Lodges, are hereby requested to attend a
    Quarterly Communication at Concert-Hall in Boston, on the
    evening of Monday, the 9th March, at 7 o'clock.

    By order of the Most Worshipful

    PAUL REVERE, G. Master.

    DANIEL OLIVER, G. Secretary.

    Boston, Feb. 28, 5795.

       *        *       *       *       *

A remarkable dog is on exhibition in Salem, March 24, 1807.

                     THE SAPIENT DOG.
                   _AT WASHINGTON-HALL_,
                    TO-MORROW EVENING.

    The extraordinary sagacity of this Animal, supercedes the
    necessity of puffing advertisements or exaggerated
    bills--that the Sapient Dog is a great curiosity, the
    Proprietor feels no hesitation in affirming, that his feats of
    activity are more various and pleasing than any preceding
    exhibition of a similar nature, all of which will be made
    manifest to every spectator, by his dexterity and precision in
    exhibiting the following performances--viz.

    _He illuminates the Exhibition Room, himself, by Lighting
                          his own Lamps._
    By means of Typographical Cards, (in the same manner
                      as a Printer composes,)
             _He Spells, and Reads Print or Writing._
              By any person's watch in the company,
                  _Tells the time of the Day,_
        Both the hour and minutes--the date of the year,
     day of the month, and week, and distinguishes colours.

    As an Arithmetician,
          _He Adds, Subtracts, Divides and Multiplies,_
           Tells how many persons there are present,
       _Discharges a loaded Cannon, and jumps through a Hoop._

    To conclude--the proprietor will suffer any Lady
    or Gentleman in the company, to make choice of a
    card, and the Dog, notwithstanding the face of both
    packs are concealed from him, will discover the card
    so drawn.

    --> Tickets at 25 cents, to be sold at Cushing &
    Appleton's Book-Store, children half price.--No
    money received at the door.

                                           _Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

The "Shaksperian Society" of Boston has "new revised" articles in 1795,
according to the following notice to members:--

                           Shaksperian Society.

    TAKE NOTICE--All persons who have regularly been balloted for,
    as Members of the above Society, who have not yet signed the
    Articles, since their being new revised, must attend this
    Evening, and execute the same, or they will not be admitted as
    Members thereof. Members of the above society are requested to
    attend early on particular business.            By Order,
    March 7, 1795.                             J. ROBINSON, Sec'y.

       *        *       *       *       *

Connecticut "Election Goods."

    THE Subscriber refers the generous Public to his late
    advertisements to be informed of the articles he still
    continues to sell by wholesale and retail; and also
    respectfully informs them, that he has just come to hand, a
    fresh assortment of Chintzes and Callicoes, Gentlemen's fancy
    Waistcoating, silk Romal, buff and other Shawls, printed
    Jeans, cotton and linen Handkerchiefs, a variety of Ribbons,
    all of a late importation; Nankeens of a superior quality, and
    cheaper by nine pence in the single piece than can be
    purchased in New-York by the quantity. Among his fancy
    patterns for ladies are, the Covent Garden Cross-bar, the
    Renelagh full moon, the Prussian stormont, Harlequin's motto,
    and an olive check inclosing four lions rampant and three
    flours de Luce; and for gentlemen's waistcoating, the
    Sportsman's fancy, the Prince of Wales's New-Market jockey,
    and the modest pale blue. He doubts not in the least, but that
    among the great variety of figures he has, every fancy may be
    suited; and as for the prices, he makes not the least
    hesitation to assert, they will be approved.--He also has
    taken the greatest pains to procure for young masters and
    misses such cloths and figures as will be durable, pleasing,
    and well suited to the approaching general election.

                                                 THOMAS TISDALL.

    N.B. A few pair of gentlemen's doe skin hunting Gloves, and
    choice old Spirits by the gallon; a _little_ of which may be
    used as a cordial.                                         9

    _Hartford, next door south of Mess. Hudson_ }
    _and Goodwin's Printing-Office, 1788._      }

                        _The crooked Staff of Life._

    PURE, mild and unadulterated St. CROIX RUM, to be sold by the
    hogshead, barrel or lesser quantity, on pleasing terms, for
    one of the great essentials, _Solid Coin_, by the public's
    very humble servant, next door to Hudson and Goodwin's
    Printing-Office.

                                                  THOMAS TISDALE.
                             _Connecticut Courant_, May 19, 1788.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _Republican BEEF._

    THE subscriber respectfully informs the citizens of Hartford,
    that he has purchased the fattest OX and COW perhaps in
    Connecticut, which will be killed and ready for sale for the
    ensuing Election, at a low price for the times. Those who wish
    to purchase _real good Beef_, will please to apply to

                                                    WILLIAM BROWN.
    April 28, 1794.
                                            _Connecticut Courant._

       *        *       *       *       *

Nantucket wit and humor on the 4th of July, in the year 1829.

    A GRAND TOUCH. The last Nantucket Inquirer contains the
    following advertisement:--

         At the sign of the Eastern Pine,
         Where the red and the white combine.

    JOHN PETERS, a descendant of the famous English Divine, Hugh
    Peters, informs all the tidy citizens of Nantucket, that
    Apollo and the Graces came over in the last packet, and have
    taken up their abode at the corner of Pearl and Water streets.
    He officiates as high Priest in their temple, where it is his
    delightful task to adorn the outward man, to _shave_ off
    excrescences, and trim into proportion the shrubbery which
    nature has reared around the headpieces of mankind.--By a
    judicious application of the _scissors_ of discrimination, the
    _soap_ of good nature, the _brush_ of reform, and the _razor_
    of decision, he expects to bring about results which, like
    powers of the Steam Engine are, as yet, only dreamed of. The
    grace of the Athenian beau and the dignity of the Roman
    senator shall be so intermingled in the _grand contour_ of all
    who submit to his touch, that the _toute ensemble_ cannot fail
    to kindle love and command respect.

       *        *       *       *       *

                          CHARLES HARDY,

                                                 _STREET SWEEPER_,

    TAKES this method publicly to return his grateful thanks to
    his friends of Marlborough street, Cornhill, &c. for their
    kindness to him during the past season; not only in
    patronizing him while able to perform his usual labors, but in
    assisting him while under the influence of a distressing and
    debilitating disease. He has grown old in the service of the
    inhabitants of Boston, and they do not forget him--they do not
    cast him off, or suffer him to become an inmate of the
    Alms-house; and although _he is an African_, he will not be
    guilty of the _blackest_ of sins--that of ingratitude. He
    humbly solicits a continuance of their favors, to enable him
    to buffet the inclemency of the approaching season, (when his
    regular employment fails) and flatters himself he shall still
    be able to sustain that character of fidelity which the
    partiality of his friends has bestowed upon him.

                                      BOSTON, _Nov. 28, 1815._

                                             _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

    THE subscriber wishes to notify his old honourable customers,
    who practise stealing and destroying his fruit every year,
    that his Water Mellons are now almost ripe; and if they do not
    as usual destroy the fruit and vines immediately, they will
    get entirely ripe; and then some body or other will be the
    better for them, which will be a grievous mortification to
    those manly gentlemen.

                                                    EZRA GRISWOLD.
    Simsbury, August 4, 1794.
                                            _Connecticut Courant._

       *        *       *       *       *

                                Removal.

    SAMUEL MYLOD informs his friends and the public that he has
    removed from Danvers to the building belonging to Mrs. _Martha
    Procter_, near Buffum's corner, Salem, where he colours all
    kinds of wearing apparel. Silks cleansed from spots or injury
    from sea. N.B. Pickles that will keep the longest voyage, for
    Sale.                                                Oct. 11.

                                           _Salem Gazette, 1805._

       *        *       *       *       *

In "old times" even publishers were sometimes short of money, and ready to
barter with their subscribers. So celebrated a character as Isaiah Thomas,
of the "Worcester Spy," was occasionally obliged to give "hints" to his
"Delinquent Customers and Postriders." The latter were distributers of
papers to country customers.

                       _To Delinquent Customers._

    -->_Serious Times--or the_ PRINTER _without_ Money--_or a
    Final Hint to_ Delinquent Customers _and_ Postriders!<--

    THE Subscriber has frequently given _Hints_ to his _Delinquent
    Customers_ and _Postriders_, that he was in want of Cash and
    has repeatedly invited all indebted to him to come forward and
    make an immediate settlement, without being put to any _extra
    cost_--he now, for the last time, informs all that are
    indebted to him for _Newspapers_, _Advertisements_, _&c. &c._
    that an immediate settlement must be made, and all who
    disregard this notice, may depend upon having their Notes and
    Accounts put into the hands of an Attorney.

    To accommodate those who cannot pay money, the following
    articles will be received until the FIRST of JANUARY, 1803,
    viz. _Corn_, _Rye_, _Wheat_, _Oats_, and _Wood_--Those who
    have not the above articles, and who cannot make it convenient
    to pay the money at present, their NOTES will be received,
    payable in _Three Months_, provided they are given previous to
    the _Second Wednesday_ in _March_ next.

                                                ISAIAH THOMAS, Jun.

    _Worcester_, November 17, 1802.


       *        *       *       *       *

                             _To be SOLD_,

                      _And entered upon next April,_

    THE House and Land now occupied by the subscriber, pleasently
    situated at a very public corner, in the main street, at the
    West part of the town.----After serving the public faithfully,
    for several years, as a private soldier in the army, and
    suffering most intolerable hardships, I am now, on account of
    my country's unfaithfulness, in not paying what they owe me,
    obliged to sell the house which belonged to my ancestors, in
    order to pay my debts, and to retire to an obscure hut at some
    distance from the town.

                                                   JOSEPH METCALF.

                                            _Salem Gazette_, 1784.


       *        *       *       *       *

An advertisement like the following is not only "quaint or curious," but
it is also rare:--

    ONE evening last week, a piece of Gold was passed, through
    mistake, at Beverly Ferry, to Asa Leech's Ferryman, with
    coppers, for a copper.----The owner may have it again,
    applying to said Leech, telling the marks, and paying the
    charges.

                             _Beverly, Sept. 20, 1784._

                                              _Salem Gazette._


       *        *       *       *       *

In 1798 a "Learned Pig" was in Salem, and we notice that about the same
time a learned dog was exhibited.


                           _For ten days only._

                              Mr. PINCHBECK

    RESPECTFULLY informs the Inhabitants of SALEM, that he has
    just arrived in this town with that great natural curiosity,
    the

                            Pig of Knowledge,
       And flatters himself, after exhibiting before the President
             of the United States with unbounded applause,
                  and in every principal City in the
               Union, to have the honour of gratifying
                      such Ladies and Gentlemen
                        in this place, as may
                        favour him with their
                               Company.

    _This extraordinary Animal will actually perform the following
    surprising particulars, viz._

    He reads print or writing, spells, tells the time of day, both
    the hours and minutes, by any person's watch in the company,
    the date of the year, the day of the month, distinguishes
    colours, how many persons there are present, ladies or
    gentlemen, and to the astonishment of every spectator, will
    answer any question in the four first rules of Arithmetick. To
    conclude, any Lady or Gentleman may draw a card from a pack,
    and keep it concealed, and the PIG without hesitation will
    discover the card when drawn.

    Those who doubt the truth of the above are informed in case it
    don't answer every expectation the advertisement can excite,
    and prove a real living Animal, shall have the Money returned,
    or be at liberty to pay after they have convinced themselves
    by seeing him perform.

    To be seen in a convenient room under the western side of
    Concert-Hall, Market-Street.

    _Admittance, for grown persons, one Quarter of a
    Dollar.----Children half price._

    N.B. Strict attention paid to keep the place fit for the
    reception of Ladies.

    MAY 4, 1798.

                                             _Salem Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

This is a quiet way of asking a favor; taken from a paper of 1811:--

    --> Mr. LANG would thank the person that took a _Camblet
    Cloak_ from his entry the last summer to return it, as he
    expects to want it the approaching cold weather.

       *        *       *       *       *

Mr. George W. Felt seems not to have been accustomed to show much
gallantry, judging from his notice in the "Salem Gazette," Sept. 4, 1804.

    _WHEREAS two GIRLS were seen taking_ APPLES _from the
    Subscriber's Field, on Sunday last, in North Fields, so
    called, if they will call and settle for the same, THIS DAY,
    they will avoid further trouble!_

                                                 GEORGE W. FELT.

    _Salem, Sept. 4, 1804._

       *        *       *       *       *

Females seem to have been often in difficulty in "old times," as appears
from some of the advertisements, of which we give a few specimens. But
perhaps this was due in part, at least, to "kleptomania,"--a disease then
but little understood.

    --> _The_ FEMALE, _who a few days since took_ 4 _Pair of_
    SLIPPERS _from a shop in old Paved Street, is_ requested _to
    return them, and no questions will be asked; if she does not
    return them in 6 days she will hear from the owner another
    way._

                                                   Jan. 5, 1792.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _The Female who offered a Counterfeit Seven Dollar Bill at Mr.
    Dow's Shop, on Wednesday afternoon, and afterwards passed it
    upon a small Lad at another shop, is desired to call and
    exchange the same, if she wishes to avoid trouble, as her name
    is known._

                                                   _Nov. 1, 1805._

       *        *       *       *       *

    The Female that took from the Shop of the subscriber on
    Monday, 19th of June, four pair COTTON HOSE, is requested to
    return them to prevent further exposure.

    June 20, 1815.                                    JOHN RUST.

       *        *       *       *       *

An indiscreet and ungrateful servant advertised as missing. We take the
following from the "Columbian Centinel," Sept. 30, 1807:--

    [Illustration]

            A GOOD _LIKENESS_ OF _SANCHO_, A NEGRO MAN,
    thirty years of age, about 5 feet high, very black complexion,
    good teeth, not corpulent, but well formed, and of erect
    position of body & a _fast walker_, WHO absented himself
    (supposed to have been inveigled away by some artful villains
    for their own use and benefit) upon the Evening of the 17th
    inst. from his Master, WINTHROP SARGENT, late Governor of the
    Missisippi Territory. He had learned the trade of a Barber,
    and is in every respect a most accomplished servant for a
    gentleman or a family; was born and educated in his Master's
    house; endeared to _him_, his _mistress_, and his own _wife_
    and _children_, as well as the numerous blacks of his Master's
    Plantations, by long, affectionate, and faithful services, and
    ere this _solitary_ instance of malconduct, there was not a
    single doubt entertained that the attachments were mutual and
    inviolable. If he voluntarily returns to the service of his
    Master, he shall be received with wonted kindness and
    affection, but no expense will be spared to punish to the
    utmost limits of the law, all persons who may be accessory in
    harboring or concealing him, and the sum of FIFTY DOLLARS
    shall be paid to any person who will apprehend and deliver him
    to his Master, or in his absence to Mr. IGNATIUS SARGENT, in
    _Boston_; to Messrs. G. & T. ASPINWALLE, in _New-York_; or
    Col. HODGDON, in _Philadelphia_;--or the sum of ONE HUNDRED
    DOLLARS for delivering him to Mr. DAVID URQUHART, Merchant,
    _New-Orleans_.

                                               WINTHROP SARGENT.

       *        *       *       *       *

                               _UNGUIOLOGY._

    JUST Received, and for Sale at the Printing-Office of BELCHER
    & ARMSTRONG, No. 79, _State-street_, and at the several
    Bookstores--a few copies of that rare and valuable work, "A
    Translation of Doctor _Gasper Gall La'Veytur's_ UNGUIOLOGY, or
    the doctrine of _Toe-Nails_." The various editions, languages,
    and countries, through which this publication has passed
    almost in rapid succession, exceed calculation. Gentlemen of
    literature are invited to apply in season, as the work is
    under restriction and cannot be reprinted in this country.
    Foreign reviews speaking of it say, "The ingenuity of Doctor
    _Gasper Gall La'Veytur's_ Unguiological system exceeds the
    capacity of our praise. It is impossible for any one of
    judgment and penetration to read this work without being
    convinced that the seat of the soul is in the toe-nails; the
    superior advantages which this index has over physiognomy and
    craniology are made most incontrovertibly evident to the most
    common comprehension." _Price_ 32-1/2 _cents_. august 27.

                                                 _Centinel_, 1806.

       *        *       *       *       *

The really curious collection of the Columbian Museum is advertised in the
"Boston Chronicle," Dec. 19, 1797.

                           LATE ADDITIONS TO THE

                             COLUMBIAN MUSEUM,

                    _At the Head of the MALL_, BOSTON.

    Mr. BOWEN informs the Public, that he has purchased Mr. PAFF's
    much admired Exhibition of

                              _CONCERT CLOCKS_,

    _Which are placed at the head of the_ Museum Hall, _as a
    valuable and pleasing addition to that very extensive
    repository of CURIOSITIES._

    1. A CANARY BIRD, which sings a variety of beautiful songs,
    minuets, marches, &c. natural as life. 2. A company of
    _Automatum Figures_, which dance to the Music of an
    Harpsichord. 3. Three Figures, which play the Organ and
    Clarinet in concert. 4. Three Figures, which play the
    Harpsichord and Hautboys, in concert. 5. King Herod beheading
    John the Baptist, and his Daughter holding a charger to
    receive the head. 6. A Chimney Sweep and his boy on the top of
    a chimney. 7. Three Figures which strike the hours and
    quarters. 8. A Butcher killing an Ox.

    _The above CONCERT CLOCKS have been exhibited in New-York,
    with universal applause, and are well worthy the attention of
    the Citizens of Boston and the Public in general._

    The Musuem also contains the most extensive Collection of

                      _ELEGANT PAINTINGS_,

    That ever was exhibited in the United States, some of which
    are 10 by 12 feet, elegantly framed, and valued from 500 to
    1000 dols.

                   ALSO--_A Collection of upwards of_

    50 elegant Figures of WAXWORK, Large as Life, among which are
    the following (the most interesting) viz.

    The late King of France, taking an affectionate leave of his
    family just before he suffered under the guillotine: The Queen
    appears in a rage of distraction--the King's Sister deeply
    affected--the young Princess is fainting--and the Dauphin is
    embracing his unhappy Father--the Queen's Maid of Honor also
    appears in great distress. A guard of Soldiers are waiting to
    conduct him to the place of execution. This is an affecting
    scene which appears as natural as the life, and is the most
    interesting group of WAX FIGURES that ever was exhibited to
    the United States.

    GEORGE WASHINGTON, late President of the United States, is
    elegantly situated in the centre of the Museum Hall,
    surrounded by four beautiful _Wax Figures_, representing
    LIBERTY, with the staff and cap--JUSTICE, with the sword and
    balance--PEACE, with the olive branch extended and PLENTY,
    with a cornucopia, or horn of plenty, loaded with fruit.

    Dr. FRANKLIN, sitting at a table, with the late Dr. STILES,
    President of Yale College, Connecticut. The _New-York Beauty_.
    The _Sleeping Nymph_. A Tea Party of Young Ladies, with a
    Servant Negro Girl. The _Salem Beauty_. _Maternal Affection_,
    or a Lady with two beautiful Children. The _Boston Beauty_.
    _Sir Charles Grandison_ and _Miss Harriet Byron_. _Charlotte_
    weeping at the Tomb of _Werter_.--_Humphreys_ and _Mendoza_,
    the celebrated English Boxers. The domestic Cottager, at the
    spinning wheel. The venerable _John S. Hutton_, who lately
    died in Philadelphia, aged 108 years and 4 months, drest with
    the same cloathes which he wore when living, with his own
    cane, pipe, tobacco-box, &c. The assassination of MARAT, by
    the beautiful Miss CHARLOTTE CORDE, in France. Two Greenwich
    Pensioners. The late unfortunate Baron TRENCK, loaded with
    large iron chains in a real Prison. An Indian Warrior, with
    his tomahawk, belts of wampum, &c. Two Chinese Mandarines,
    drest in the modern stile of that country. Also, two
    Mandarines, deposited in the Museum, For Sale.

                      _With a great variety of_

                 Natural and Artificial Curiosities;

    Among which are a great variety of _Birds_, _live Owls_,
    _Beasts_, _Reptiles_, _Serpents_, (one of which is a
    RATTLE-SNAKE, 9 years of age, and 4 feet in length,)
    _Insects_, _Diamond Beetle_, _Glass Frigates_, two feet in
    length, compleatly rigged and mounted with Glass Guns, &c.

    The _MUSEUM_ has lately received the principal Additions for
    this season--It is Opened Every Day, (except Sundays) and
    ILLUMINATED every

          _Tuesday_, _Thursday_, and _Friday_ Evenings.

       *        *       *       *       *

Notice to the economical, from the "Salem Mercury," July 8, 1788.

    --> Save your Rags!

    AND send them to the Printing Office; you will there receive
    for what you think of no service, money _enough_, which, in
    effect, is the same as having money for nothing, and is
    certainly better than to be at the trouble of sweeping Rags
    away. If this _beloved_ argument is thought insufficient to
    procure them, then only think of the virtue of serving your
    country!

       *        *       *       *       *

"Beauties" to be seen.

                            New Additions.

    The BOSTON MUSEUM, North side the _Market_, has lately
    received many very valuable additions, among which are

    The _Philadelphia_, _New-York_, and _Salem_ Beauties, and a
    number of other Figures.--_Also_, a variety of natural
    curiosities, among which are the skin of the _Sea-Elephant_,
    in natural preservation, which measures 8 feet in length, and
    6 feet round the body, &c. The skin of the African _Lion_, a
    _Calf_ with 8 legs, 2 bodies, and one head, in natural
    preservation, &c. &c.

    Museum opened every day and evening, Saturdays and Sundays
    excepted.

    --> _Admittance to the Museum, 25 Cents._

    The Invisible Lady, and Acoustic Temple, continues to be
    exhibited among the other curiosities, at 25 Cents admittance.

                                                          June 29.

                                       _Columbian Centinel_, 1805.

       *        *       *       *       *

A case of short weight of a load of hay is gravely advertised in the
"Columbian Centinel" by the town-weigher

        Mr. RUSSELL,

    THIS day came EZEKIEL KINGSBURY, jun., of Dedham, with a Load
    of Hay to be weighed, which was accordingly done. After it was
    weighed, he drove it off round Mr. _Greenleaf's_ corner, where
    he stopped. Mr. _Jonathan Trask_, truckman, wanted to purchase
    a load of hay--went and tried to bargain with him for it, and
    as he was going towards the hay, he perceived a man raise his
    head on the top of the load, by the name of _Draper_, of said
    town. He accordingly came to me and told me of it. I went in
    pursuit of _Kingsbury_, and overtook him just before he got to
    the Granary, and ordered him back to the scales to have his
    load weighed again, which weighed one hundred and an half less
    that it did before.--The several printers are requested to
    insert the above, to prevent further impositions on the
    publick.

                                   HOPESTILL FOSTER, Hay-weigher.

    _Boston, Dec. 15, 1789._


       *        *       *       *       *

It seems to have been the fashion in "old times" with people who had
articles stolen from them to advertise in the papers, requesting the thief
or thieves to make restitution. Probably this was the surest method of
recovery, in the absence of the detective system. Joseph Tyler in the
"Boston Gazette," Nov. 21, 1761, is inclined to be sarcastic, and Samuel
Brazer, of Worcester, in 1802, is witty, but modest. As to stealing
psalm-books, no one would dream of doing such a thing in these days. Our
modern thieves are not interested in devotional books; they prefer
"yellow-covered literature."

    Joseph Tyler _desires the Person that borrowed his Surtout to
    return it, if it is not worn out_.                      1767.

       *        *       *       *       *

    Taken out of the Pew, No. 59, in the Rev'd Mr. Barnard, senior's
    Meeting-House, about a Month since, a PSALM-BOOK. The Person is
    desired to return it, otherwise may depend upon being exposed.

                                 _Essex Gazette_, Sept. 28, 1773.

       *        *       *       *       *

                        _A MODEST REQUEST!_

    THE two obliging _Ladies_, who on the night of Monday, the
    29th ultimo, between six and seven o'clock in the evening,
    took from the Store of the Subscriber (_not by mistake_) FIVE
    BARCELONA HANDKERCHIEFS, are desired to return them
    immediately, _with satisfactory remuneration_, or the next
    notice they receive will come "_GREETING_."

                                                   SAMUEL BRAZER.

    _Worcester_, December 8, 1802.

       *        *       *       *       *

    THE person who took six pair of SHOES, one day last week,
    under a false name, from a shop in Essex Street, would do
    well, if they wish to avoid difficulties, to return them
    immediately.

                                              Salem, July 22.
                                       _Salem Gazette_, 1800.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _The Person who yesterday, at dusk, took a piece of black_
    VELVET _from the shop board of the Subscribers, is well known.
    He has now an opportunity of returning it, and if not
    immediately done, shall suffer the penalty of the Law._

                                                  J. & I. NEWHALL.

    Salem, Nov. 5, 1805.

       *        *       *       *       *

Pictures like the following could be seen in the "Essex Gazette" in 1771
(May 14).

    [Illustration]

    Ran away from the Subscriber, on the 4th of May, a Negro Man
    named _Cato_, of a middling Stature, has lost the Sight of his
    left Eye, had on a kersey Jacket and leather Breeches. Whoever
    shall take up said Negro, and bring him to his Master in
    Salem, shall have Two Dollars Reward, and all Charges paid, by

                                                   _William Hunt._

       *        *       *       *       *

Vessels were accommodated at "Rotting Row," in Salem, in 1812, and we
presume there is room for some now.

    SEVERAL BIRTHS for VESSELS are vacant at Rotting Row, the
    tides are favorable and the Dockage so extremely low, good and
    safe, as to make it an object for any one to haul his vessel
    there to winter.                                Salem, Nov. 20.

       *        *       *       *       *

It used to be common in the early part of this century to see such goods
as "Mamoodies," "Chittabully Baftas," etc., advertised in the Salem and
Boston papers.

    JOHN STONE,

    _Has for sale,_        _Front street,_
    ONE bale MUGGA MAMOODIES;
    1 do. MADRAS PAT HANDKERCHIEFS;
    1 do. ALEABAD MOWSANNAS;
    1 do. do. MAMODIES;
    1 do. CHITTABULLY BAFTAS;
    1 do. JOLLOPOUR SANNAS;
    1 do. BANDANNAS;

    Imported in the ship Union, Capt. Osgood, from Calcutta, and
    of the first chop.                          _Sept. 24, 1811._

In another advertisement we notice "Guzzenahs, Allebad Emerty, Taundah
Khassah, Mahge Gunge." These are all India cottons.

       *        *       *       *       *

It seems strange to us now, when we see so many boot-blacks everywhere, to
learn that in 1815 the "craft" advertised in the papers, as did
"wood-sawyers," too, about the same time. As coal had not then been
introduced into Salem, everybody burned wood, so that wood-sawing was an
occupation of considerable importance. During the war of 1813 wood became
rather scarce, and some people used dried turf, or peat, as it was called,
for fuel.


                       Boots and Shoes Cleaned.

    YORK MORRIS respectfully informs the Gentlemen of Salem, that
    he has taken the Shop one door west of the Sun Tavern, where
    he will be happy to clean their Boots and Shoes in the best
    manner, and at the shortest notice.----He will keep constantly
    for sale _LIQUID BLACKING_ of a very superior quality, in jugs
    and bottles. Also, a Composition, with which he cleans
    _Ladies'_ Walking Shoes.                             April 18.

This York Morris was father of the Boston colored lawyer, Robert Morris.

       *        *       *       *       *

                      _Boots and Shoes Cleaned._

    THOMAS JONES respectfully informs the Gentlemen of Salem, that
    he has taken the Shop (recently occupied by York Morris) two
    doors west of the Sun Tavern, where he will be happy to clean
    their BOOTS and SHOES in the best manner, and at the shortest
    notice.

    Salem, June 13.

       *        *       *       *       *

                             Wood-Sawing.

    THE Subscriber, being under the interdict of a Non-Intercourse
    law, his horses and waggons hauled into dry dock, will no
    longer carry freight between Salem and Boston; but,
    "abandoning the ocean altogether," he respectfully offers his
    services to his federal friends, with his saw and wooden
    horse, and shall be obliged to them to call upon him when they
    have any wood to cut. Orders will be received at his dwelling,
    near the Court-house.

                                                 JOHN L. MATTHEWS.

    --> Wanted to hire--two smart men.             June 11 [1811].

       *        *       *       *       *

Specific for a "religious hydrophobia" in 1819.

                       _Cochranism Delineated,_

    Or a description of, and specific for, a religious Hydrophobia,
    which has spread & is still spreading in a number of towns in
    the counties of York and Cumberland, District of Maine--price
    12 1·2 cents--for sale at the Bookstore of

    June 12.                                         HENRY WHIPPLE.

       *        *       *       *       *

The following is printed in the "Massachusetts Mercury:"--

                     From the GEORGIA GAZETTE.

    _Vice Consulship of Spain for the States of North Carolina,
                   South Carolina, and Georgia._

    Messrs. Nicholas Johnston and Co.

        _Gentlemen,_

    His Excellency Lieut. Colonel Don Vincent Folch, Governor of
    the Province of West Florida, in a letter, dated Panzacola,
    1st August, has been pleased to communicate to me the
    following:

    "I have issued a proclamation, offering FOUR THOUSAND FIVE
    HUNDRED DOLLARS to any person who will deliver here, or in
    _Apalache_, the body of WILLIAM AUGUSTUS BOWLES, or else
    produce sufficient proof of having killed him; which
    information I will thank you to make public, in order that
    some clever fellow, at the cheap rate of one gun shot, will
    place in his pocket the said sum, which shall be paid, with
    the greatest acknowledgment of gratitude, in good Spanish
    dollars, without the least delay."

    Therefore I request you to give this a conspicuous place in
    your paper. It is, doubtless, a very interesting subject to
    _Spain_, _America_ and the Indians, that they be rid of this
    noted vagabond.

                     I remain, with respect,
                              Your obedient servant,
                                               EMANUEL RENGILL.

    _Savannah, 25th August, 1800._

       *        *       *       *       *

                 _Progress of Refinement in America._

                       =INDIANS' SCALPS.=

                                       _Pittsburg, May 17, 1791._

    WE the subscribers, encouraged by a large subscription, do
    promise to pay One Hundred Dollars for every hostile Indian's
    scalp, with both ears to it,[B] taken between this date and
    the 15th day of June next, by any inhabitant of Alleghany
    county.

         _George Wallace,_       _Robert Elliot,_
         _Wm. Amberson,_         _A. Tannehill,_
         _J. Wilkins, jun._      _John Irwin._

    [B] The shape of the ears, we suppose, is to determine the
    enmity of the Indian.

                                                   _Salem Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

A negro "pretends to be very religious." From the "Boston Gazette."

    RAN away from me the Subscriber at _Londonderry_, in the
    Province of _New-Hampshire_, on the 28th of _September_, a
    Negro Man Servant named _Prince_, about Forty Years of Age,
    about five Feet five Inches high, speaks good _English_, had
    on when he went away a green Coat, blue plush Breeches, diaper
    Jacket, several pair of thread Stockings with him; he looks
    very serious and grave, and pretends to be very religious: He
    is the property of Major _Rogers_, and has been several Years
    in the Service to the Westward, and pretends to be free.

    Whoever will take up said Slave and bring him to me, or to
    Capt. _Jonathan Brewer_ at _Framingham_, shall have FIVE
    DOLLARS Reward and all necessary Charges paid by me,

                                                 _James Rogers._

    _Dated at Londonderry, October 8, 1762._

       *        *       *       *       *

In the "Boston Gazette," Oct. 8, 1759, some servants are advertised who
among other accomplishments speak high & low Dutch. At this time two
dollars and a half was the value of a pound in New York currency, while
the New England currency was three dollars and thirty-three cents to a
pound. To this day a shilling is 12-1/2 cents in New York, and in New
England 16-2/3 cents.

    _RUN away from Major_ Edmond Matthis _of_ Albany, _in the
    Province of_ New-York, _the following People, viz. A Servant
    Man named_ William Fairfield, _of a dark Complection, down
    look, black Hair, and of a middling Stature. Also a Negro Man
    and Woman, and a white Girl with them, about_ 14 _Years of
    Age, who talks good English, high and low Dutch; the Negro
    Man is much pitted with the Small Pox, and speaks good
    English; tis suppos'd they are all together: They took with
    them a great many Cloaths, and its probable they will often
    alter their Dress. Whoever takes up said Run-aways, and safely
    conveys them to their abovesaid Master, shall have_ Ten Pounds
    (25 Dollars) New-York _Currency Reward, and all necessary
    Charges paid._

    Albany, Octob. 1, 1759.                        EDMOND MATTHIS.

       *        *       *       *       *

Dr. Greenwood, of Boston, in 1788 offered his services to "give a youthful
air to the countenance," and was ready to "electerise" any persons who
stood "in need of that almost universal remedy."

                         _ISAAC GREENWOOD,_

                              DENTIST,

    ACQUAINTS the publick, that he has REMOVED from N^o. 49 to
    N^o. 19, Marlborough Street, opposite Messrs. AMORYS' Store,
    where he continues to perform the necessary branches of that
    art, carefully and faithfully. Removing every substance
    tending to destroy the Teeth and Gums. Cures the Scurvy in the
    Gums, makes the Teeth white, &c. Sells BRUSHES that are
    suitable for the Teeth, with a POWDER that never fails to
    recommend itself, at 1/4 per box. Fixes NATURAL TEETH on
    plates of gold or silver, with gold springs, if wanted.
    _Also_, substitutes ARTIFICIAL TEETH, of different substances,
    from 2_s._ to 6_s._ each--that give a youthful air to the
    countenance, and render pronunciation more agreeable and
    distinct--In a word, both natural and artificial are of such
    real service, as are worthy the attention of every one. He
    with pleasure attends on those who may incline to employ him,
    provided they cannot conveniently attend on him, at his HOUSE,
    where he has every accommodation necessary for their
    reception.

    _At the same place may be had_,

    [Illustration]

    Oil, Silk, and Ladies' UMBRELLAS, cheap. Old Umbrellas
    repaired, oiled, newly covered, &c. Oil Silk CAPS for bathing,
    German Flutes, Fifes, Violins, and Strings for ditto, Reeds
    for hautboys, Men, Boxes and Dice for back-gammon, Chess men,
    Billiard Balls, Ivory Combs, a variety of Canes, by wholesale
    and retail. Cane Strings, Whips, electrical Machines with
    apparatus for experiments and medical use--artificial Magnets,
    &c. &c. &c.

    N.B. Said GREENWOOD offers his service to electerise those who
    stand in need of that almost universal remedy, at 1/6 each
    time, at his House.

    --> _Advise with your physicians._                MAY 3, 1788.

       *        *       *       *       *

                                _REMOVAL._

                      _Boston Umbrella Manufactury._

                           DANIEL HEWES,

    [Illustration]

    UMBRELLA Manufacturer; takes this early opportunity to inform
    his friends and the Public in general, that he has Removed
    from the North-Square, to

    _No. 55, Marlborough-Street,_

    at the sign of the UMBRELLA----where may be had any quantity,
    quality, or sized UMBRELLAS, at the shortest notice, made of
    better materials, cheaper, and more durable than can be
    imported.

                             _Also,_

    Turned Work in Ivory, hard Woods, and Metals, executed in the
    best stile of workmanship.

    --> _Cash given for_ Ivory, Sea-horse, _and_ Sea-cows TEETH.
    (8w)                                        March 14 [1798].

       *        *       *       *       *

The following--supposed to be--attempt at wit appeared in the
"Massachusetts Centinel" in 1789.

                     _ADVERTISEMENTS EXTRA._

    IMPORTED in the last vessels from Europe, A treatise on
    ogling, simpering, flirting, gigling, painting, patching,
    perfuming, &c. very useful to every _Lady_--and much in
    demand. Also, The Art of burning dimples in ladies' cheeks and
    chins--of repairing female tongues that wear with using--of
    setting eyes _fashionably_ in their sockets--of giving the
    face a _beautiful pale_, deathlike aspect--and of acquiring
    the elegant hysterick and other fits.

    _TO BE SOLD_--Many elegant and beautiful copies of a most
    scarce and valuable work, called "_The Virtue of the Times_."
    Inquire any where.

    _LOST_--Through carelessness, _thirty good years of life_--of
    a gentleman--ALSO, _forty-two years of a lady_--the latter,
    from a desire to appear _beautifully_ slim. Whoever can inform
    the losers how they can be redeemed, shall be handsomely
    rewarded.

                        _EXTRA--BUT SERIOUS._

    WANTED--much _wanted_--several _small sums of money_--say,
    from 4/6. to Ten Dollars--for which _obligations_, which have
    frequently been _offered_, will be _given_. Inquire of the
    _Printer_.

       *        *       *       *       *

A Boston paper of 1789 prints the following unique production, copied from
a late London paper. It was probably designed as a "take-off" to some of
the humbugs of the day.

                       THOMAS TOUCHWOOD, GENT.,

    Proposes, on the last day of the present month, to shoot
    himself by subscription. His life being of no farther use to
    himself or his friends, he takes this method of endeavouring
    to turn his death to some account; and the novelty of the
    performance, he hopes, will merit the attention and patronage
    of the publick.

    He will perform with two pistols, the first shot to be
    directed through his _abdomen_, to which will be added another
    through his brain, the whole to conclude with staggering
    convulsions, grinning, &c., in a manner never before publickly
    attempted.

    The doors to be opened at eight, and the exhibition to begin
    precisely at nine. Particular places, for that night only,
    reserved for the ladies. No money to be returned, nor half
    price taken. _Vivant Rex et Regina._

    _N.B._ Beware of counterfeits and impostors.--The person who
    advertises to hang himself the same night, in opposition to
    Mr. Touchwood, is a taylor, who intends only to give the
    representation of death by dancing in a collar, an attempt
    infinitely inferior to Mr. T.'s original and authentic
    performance.

       *        *       *       *       *

Probably camels were not seen in America before 1789. Increased interest
attaches to the following advertisement from the fact that the exhibition
was held near the very pump which Hawthorne commemorates in "Twice-Told
Tales." This notice is taken from the "Salem Mercury," Aug. 4, 1789.

                            TO THE CURIOUS.

        _To be seen at Mr. BENJAMIN DALAND'S, near the town-pump,
                                Salem._

                              TWO CAMELS,

               _Male and Female, imported from Arabia._

    THESE stupenduous Animals are most deserving the attention of
    the curious, being the greatest natural curiosity ever
    exhibited to the publick on this continent. They are 19 hands
    high--have necks near 4 feet long--have a large bunch on their
    backs, & another under their breasts, in the form of a
    pedestal, on which they support themselves when lying
    down--they have 4 joints in their hind legs, and will travel
    12 or 14 days without drinking, and carry a burthen of 1500
    wt.--they are remarkably harmless and docile, and will lie
    down and rise at command.

       *        *       *       *       *

    _Abraham was old and well stricken in age: And the Lord had
    blessed Abraham in all things. And Abraham said unto his
    eldest Servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had,
    Thou shalt go unto my Country, and to my Kindred, and take a
    Wife unto my Son Isaac. And the Servant took ten Camels, of
    the Camels of his Master, and departed; and went to
    Mesopotamia, unto the city Nahor. And he made his Camels to
    kneel down without the city, by a well of water, at the time
    of the evening, even the time that Women go out to draw water.
    Pure wisdom directed the Servant, and succeeded him in
    obtaining the consent of the Parents, Brethren and Kindred of
    Rebeccah, that she should go to the Land of Canaan, and become
    the Wife of Isaac. And they sent away Rebeccah, their Sister,
    with her Damsels and her Nurse, & Abraham's Servant, & his
    men, and they rode upon the Camels._--Gen. XXIV.

    N.B.--The CAMELS will go from this town this evening.

       *        *       *       *       *

In 1796 a mermaid was exhibited in Salem, and in 1800 a cassowary bird.
The admission fee to the latter curiosity was for "grown persons" 12-1/2
cents, and for children 6-1/4 cents. The exact change could then be easily
made, as the Spanish silver ninepences (12-1/2 cents) and fourpence
halfpence (6-1/4 cents) were more common than any other silver pieces. The
American dimes and half-dimes had not at that time got much into
circulation in New England.


                              NATURAL CURIOSITY.

    [Illustration]

              _To be seen at Washington Hall, for this day only,_

                                THE CASSOWARY,

                       _A Bird, from the East Indies._

    ITS height is 5 feet, weighs near 100 pounds; it will eat half
    a peck of apples at a meal, swallow whole eggs, also stones
    and apples as large as eggs, and jump to a great
    height.--Goldsmith says, in his history of Animated Nature, it
    has the head of a Warrior, the eye of a Lion, the defence of a
    Porcupine, and the swiftness of a Courser.

    It is fond of all kinds of vegetables and fruits. It will pick
    a pea out of a Child's hand without injury. Many that have
    seen it, say it is the greatest curiosity of the kind ever
    exhibited here. Children of seven years old can ride
    it.--Admittance for grown persons 9 pence--Children half
    price.

                          *       *       *

    --> _The remarkable bird, called the_ CASSOWARY, _now
    exhibiting in this town, is described by Goldsmith in his 3d
    volume of Animated Nature, page 39, American edition.--After
    describing him, the Doctor observes, that "the southern parts
    of the most eastern Indies seem to be its natural climate. His
    domain, if we may so call it, begins where that of the ostrich
    terminates. The latter has never been found beyond the Ganges;
    while the Cassowary is never seen nearer than the islands of
    Banda, Sumatra, Java, the Molucca islands, and the
    corresponding parts of the continent. Yet even here this
    animal seems not to have multiplied in any considerable
    degree, as we find one of the kings of Java making a present
    of one of these birds to the captain of a Dutch ship,
    considering it as a very great rarity."_

                                       _Gazette_, August 8, 1800.

       *        *       *       *       *

The following notice, taken from the "Salem Gazette," July 13, 1790, has
an interest to us from what it says of the likenesses "produced from a
Spark of Electricity." It is difficult to conjecture what this means;
though additional interest is derived from the fact of these likenesses
having been presented by Dr. Franklin's grandson.

                           AMERICAN MUSEUM.

    MR. PEALE, of Philadelphia, has lately received a number of
    donations for his Cabinet of Curiosities. Among them were

    Likenesses of the King and Queen of France, executed on white
    satin, and each produced by a single spark of
    electricity.--Presented by WM. TEMPLE FRANKLIN, Esq.----And

    The Finger of Mr. Broliman (a provincial officer in the
    British service, in the war before the last) who was executed
    at Philadelphia for the murder of a Mr. Scull. This
    unfortunate gentleman, soured by some disgust, became weary of
    life. In this temper of mind, he one morning rose earlier than
    usual, and walked out upon the common of the city, with his
    fusee in hand, determined to shoot the first person he should
    meet. The first person he saw was a very pretty young girl,
    whose beauty disarmed him. The next presented was the late Dr.
    Cadwallader--The Doctor, bowing politely to Mr. Broliman (who,
    though unknown to him, had the garb and appearance of a
    gentleman) accosted him with "Good morning, Sir! What sport?"
    The Officer answered the Doctor very civilly; and was so
    struck with his gentlemanly manner and pleasing address, that
    he forebore to execute his desperate resolution: Impelled,
    however, by the same gloominess of disposition which actuated
    him when he first set out, he repaired to the Centre house,
    where some gentlemen were engaged at billiards--The tack of
    one of the players happening to strike his hat, the wretched
    man, eager for an opportunity of accomplishing his desire to
    leave the world, instantly shot Mr. Scull, one of the company,
    who died of the wound.

    This little story affords a striking proof, that amiableness
    and politeness of manners are not only pleasing, but useful,
    in our commerce with the world.

Salem always was famous for its collections of natural and historical
curiosities, and many of its houses are now well stocked with such things.
Among these collections we may mention Mr. Geo. R. Curwen's antique family
portraits, china, clothing, and furniture; Mr. M.A. Stickney's rare coins,
old paper money, and books, autographs, etc.; Mr. H.F. Waters's rare
ancient furniture (Mr. Waters is now in London, engaged in historical
research in reference to American families); Mr. John Robinson's
remarkable collection of Chinese coins, and scarce views of old houses of
Salem; Mr. T.F. Hunt's valuable collection of Chinese books and pictures;
Rev. Dr. Bolles's fine collection of works on London; Rev. B.F. McDaniel's
collection of engravings, etc.; Mr. N.J. Holden's and Mr. F.P.
Richardson's collections of illustrated books, autographs, etc.; besides
numerous minor collections. It is not too much to say that Professor E.S.
Morse's collection of Japanese pottery is certainly not surpassed in the
world; the South Kensington collection in London, which is the best in
Europe, does not approach it in size or importance. One of the best
museums of our country was started in Salem in the latter part of the last
century, and that collection is now, as is well known, in charge of the
Peabody Academy of Science. Its objects of natural history have in recent
years been carefully classified and arranged under the direction of Dr.
Henry Wheatland, Professors Morse, Putnam, Packard, and Robinson; and its
cabinets, together with those of the Essex Institute, now contain probably
more unique and valuable specimens than are to be found elsewhere in this
country.

       *        *       *       *       *

The "silhouette," or cheap portrait cut in black paper, was much in vogue
in New England some seventy or eighty years ago. The process was named
from M. Silhouette, an honest French minister who about 1759 was noted for
his advocacy of economy in everything relating to the public welfare. He
received a great deal of ridicule, and hence all inexpensive things were
said to be _à la Silhouette_. At the rooms of the Essex Institute, and in
many houses in Salem, there are numerous silhouettes of former citizens of
the place. Those who remember the originals consider the likenesses often
very striking.

                        _CORRECT PROFILE LIKENESSES._

                               MOSES CHAPMAN

    [Illustration]

    Informs the Ladies and Gentlemen of Salem that he has taken a
    shop next to Mr. Morgan's, in North street, _Salem_, where he
    will take PROFILES in the newest and most elegant style: two
    of one person for 25 cents, or if desired, will paint and
    shade them for 75 cents.

    --> FRAMES, of different kinds and prices, for the Profiles
    may be had at the above place.

    Salem, January 23, 1808.

                                               _Salem Register._

       *        *       *       *       *

    [Illustration]

                              MR. BROWN

    RESPECTFULLY informs the Public that having met with so
    extensive encouragement, he is induced to continue to cut and
    frame Profiles at Morse's Inn, opposite Boylston Market. Price
    for cutting 12-1/2 cents.

    N.B. His customers are requested to apply in the morning, noon
    or evening, on account of his absence at other times.  Oct. 15.

                                           _N. E. Palladium_, 1819.

       *        *       *       *       *

In September, 1808, we have a notice of a circus, in which the
horsemanship, according to the representations, must have equalled that of
Barnum's people. It is not common to find much editorial comment in the
papers of the time on such exhibitions, from which we judge that they were
not considered first-class entertainments, and were not as much patronized
by the clergy as at the present day.

                                   AT THE
                                   CIRCUS
                          IN BROAD-STREET, SALEM,
                           _WILL BE EXHIBITED,_
                              This Evening,
        (_If the weather permit; if not, the first fair evening_)

    A GRAND SCENE OF

                               Horsemanship,

    Consisting of a number of HORNPIPES, danced by the Company on
    different Horses, while in full speed.

    Mr. CRANDEL Dances the Hornpipe and Jumps the Whip.

    Mr. FRANKLIN Dances the Hornpipe; Rides with his Toe in his
    Mouth; he also Leaps from the Ground to his Horse in various
    ways.

    Mr. STEWART Dances the Hornpipe; Jumps a great height from his
    Horse, and with surprising agility throws himself into
    different attitudes while his horse is in full speed.

    PETER dances the Hornpipe and Jumps the Whip; also, standing
    erect on his toes, rides in full speed once round the Circus.

    Mr. STEWART performs the picking up of four Handkerchiefs from
    the ground; he also stands erect on his horse, while his horse
    leaps a board 3 feet from the ground.

    PETER, the young African, riding backwards, dances a hornpipe;
    changes his position in a number of extraordinary leaps; jumps
    out of one hoop into another; and also, with one leap, jumps
    twice through a hoop; in once round the Circus leaps 4
    quarters; and rides two Horses, one forward of the other.

    The Horse _Phoenix_ lies down, sits up, and eats from the
    table with his master.

    The Grand Still Vaulting, by the Company.

    Many other Extraordinary Feats performed during the
    Exhibition.

    The performance to conclude with the Brother Miller.

    _The Doors opened at 5 o'clock in the Evening. The Performance
    begins at 6._

    _Price, Boxes 1 Dollar, Pit 50 Cents.----Tickets to be had at
    the Circus and at the Salem Hotel._

    Those who please to favor the performers with their presence,
    are requested to take Tickets before the exhibition
    commences.--No pains will be spared to render the
    Entertainment as agreeable as possible.

                                                  Sept. 27, 1808.

       *        *       *       *       *

    Monstrous Sight!

    TO be seen at A. POLLARD's Tavern, Elm Street--A white
    Greenland Sea BEAR, which was taken at sea, weighing 1000 wt.
    This animal lives either in the sea or on the land. They have
    been seen several leagues at sea, and sometimes floating on
    cakes of ice.--This animal displays a great natural
    curiosity.--Admittance 12 1-2 cts. ... children half price.
    april 28.

                             [Boston] _Columbian Centinel_, 1810.

       *        *       *       *       *

Just before the declaration of the last war against Great Britain
"Non-Intercourse Quills" were for sale. This reminds us that most young
people know but little about quills of any kind, and probably not one in a
hundred knows, in these days, how to make a quill pen. Quills were in
pretty general use for writing until about 1835 or 1836, when steel pens
took their place to some extent, although quill pens were used by many
down to a comparatively recent period, and occasionally a person may now
be seen using one. Steel and silver pens were made by Shakers as early as
1824, and Cushing & Appleton had steel pens as early as 1811, according to
an advertisement in the "Salem Gazette."

                              =STEEL PENS=

    JUST received for sale by

                                           _CUSHING & APPLETON,_
                                                   Oct. 6th, 1811.

    NON-INTERCOURSE QUILLS.

    CUSHING & APPLETON have still on hand a few thousand _English_
    QUILLS, which for a short time will be sold at the present low
    rate, for specie, or bills of any of the banks in Essex or
    Boston.---- --> Persons in want of Quills will please to
    recollect, that in about _two or three weeks_ the
    NON-INTERCOURSE with _Great Britain_ takes place, which in all
    probability will continue during the short time that Nation
    may exist, at least. Such another opportunity for purchasing
    can therefore never occur.                      Jan. 14, 1811.

       *        *       *       *       *

J. Greenleaf sold steel pens in Boston in 1812.

                             Steel Pens,

    [Illustration]

    A FURTHER supply of the celebrated STEEL PENS is received by
    J. GREENLEAF, No. 49, Cornhill.

                                                march 11 [1812].

                        SUPERIOR DESK KNIVES,

    MANUFACTURED in Paris of Damascus Steel and warranted.

    _Also_--an assortment of Steel & Silver Pens, from the Shaker
    Village.                                          For sale by

                                                    JOHN M. IVES,

    Dec. 11 [1824].                               _Essex street._

       *        *       *       *       *

Many young people do not know that in old times blotting-paper of the kind
now in use had not been introduced. Black sand was used altogether for
drying the ink on freshly written letters or ordinary writing, except in
books, when the writers either waited for the ink to dry, or made China
paper, taken from the inside of tea-chests, a blotter. Black sand was in
general use until within thirty years or thereabouts. We have seen the
sand adhering to writing which had been done more than a century. No
writing-desk was complete without a sand-box.

                           BLACK SAND,

    WHICH is so useful to all who have any thing to do with
    penmanship--for sale, at No. 34, opposite the
    Treasurer's-Office, in _Marlborough-Street_.

    --> BOOKS and STATIONARY, as usual. _Boston, May 29, 1790._

                                          _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

                           _Country Traders_,

    Who are in search of penny-worths, are invited to the STORE of

                        John & Tho's Amory & Co.

                      No. 41, _Marlborough-Street_.

                                       _Columbian Centinel_, 1790.

       *        *       *       *       *

    --> _IF the Small Pox should be allowed to spread in this
    town_ [Boston], _the Editor assures his country customers that
    every precaution in his power shall be taken, that no part of
    his papers shall convey the infection into the country.--But
    it is his belief that it will not be permitted to spread--and
    his wishes accord with his belief, having never had the
    infection. Should he be necessitated to innoculate, he shall
    withdraw himself from his office and leave the business in the
    care of a person who will use every caution necessary for the
    purpose._

                              _Columbian Centinel_, Aug. 29, 1792.

       *        *       *       *       *

    WHEREAS a Person who called himself by the Name of _Charles
    Brown_, did on the 29th of _June_ last, hire a Chaise of
    _Israel Davis_, of _Danvers_, to go to _Boston;_ since which
    the said Chaise has not been returned: This is to give Notice
    to any one who will discover the said _Brown_ or Chaise, and
    leave Word with the Printers hereof, a Reward of Ten Dollars
    for each, will be given by

                                                   _Israel Davis._

    The said _Brown_ is of a middling Stature, thin, looked sickly
    and very poor, as if he had had the yellow Fever: He is about
    30 Years of Age; wears short black Hair, tied with a black
    Ribbon; has a blue German Serge Surtout Coat, faced with blue
    Calamancoe, yellow Buttons; a whitish Coat and Breeches; blue
    Sattin Jacket, with a narrow scollop'd Silver Lace: He has
    also a yellowish Thicksett Coat, blue Plush Waistcoat, yellow
    Leather Breeches, a laced Hat, and ruffled Shirts; appears and
    pretends to be a Gentleman, and has a Person with him as a
    Waiter, who calls himself Capt _Stutson_.

    The Chaise has standing Posts with a Canvass Top, the Lining
    is cloth coloured Broad-Cloth; the back is warped by the Sun
    and cracked; the Leather at the Bottom of the Floor old; large
    Brass Nails on the Foot Board; the Door of the Box is pricked
    with Awl-Holes; one of the Staples thro' which the Reins go on
    the Saddle is loose; The off-wheel has two Gripes thereon.

    _Danvers, July 10, 1762._

                                                 _Boston Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

                       THIS DAY PUBLISHED,

    And to be Sold at the New Printing Office in Cornhill (Price
    four Coppers),

    THE TWO MOTHERS; or The History of _Antigone_ and _Phronissa_;
    Shewing how _Antigone_ laughed at her good old Grandmother,
    and married her Daughters, before Sixteen, to a laced Coat and
    a fashionable Wig,----and how the wiser _Phronissa_ instructed
    her Daughters in Reading, Dressing, Singing, Dancing,
    Visiting, &c. in order to make them happy and useful in the
    rising Age.

                                  _Boston Gazette_, Oct. 8, 1759.

       *        *       *       *       *

                           _New Establishment._

    THE Subscriber, desirous of doing all in his power whereby he
    can serve the public, and at the same time benefit himself, is
    induced to give this public notice, that he has removed to the
    New Assembly House, Chestnut Street, where he proposes opening
    a
                                 RESTORATOR,
    for the accommodation of all who may honor him with their
    calls. Ample arrangements have been made and he flatters
    himself that superior cooking and good attendance will secure
    the patronage of a liberal public.

    --> SOUP will be served up at 11 A.M. on Mondays, Tuesdays,
    Thursdays and Fridays during the winter.

    All kinds of Cakes, Wafers, French Rolls, &c. furnished at the
    shortest notice.

                                                      JOHN REMOND.

       *        *       *       *       *

                            _TURTLE SOUP._

    Two GREEN TURTLES will be served up, as above, _This Day_, at
    11 and 1 o'clock. Families supplied by immediate application.

    Salem, Oct. 24 [1815].

                                                 _Salem Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

                        _Speaking Figure._

    THE Proprietor respectfully informs the publick that his
    exhibition will remain in _Boston_ until sold or removed to
    _New-York_. More fully to gratify the curiosity of the
    publick, the Speaking Figure is moved to a part of the room
    which intirely removes the suspicion of any one being
    concealed in the chimney.--Those who wish to see this most
    pleasing phenomenon of art will please to call soon, as this
    will positively be the last day.

    Those who have viewed the exhibition in its former situation
    will be charged half price for re-admission--those who have
    not, are admitted at 1_s_6. each, from 3 o'clock in the
    afternoon until 9 in the evening, by the Publick's most
    obedient,

                                                  SAMUEL PRINCE.

    _Boston, Oct. 16, 1790._

                                            _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

We frequently find in old Boston papers advertisements of rare beasts to
be exhibited,--in December, 1800, a "Beautiful Moose," and in August,
1801, a "Beautiful Lion."

    [Illustration]

                          _TO THE CURIOUS._

                       A beautiful African LION,

    To be seen every day in the week (Sundays excepted) in
    _Brattle-street_, next to Major KING'S, near the _Market_,
    where a very convenient situation is provided for those Ladies
    and Gentlemen who may please to favor the proprietor with
    their presence.

    THIS noble Animal is between three and four feet high,
    measures eight feet from nostrils to tail, and a beautiful dun
    colour; 11 years old, and weighs near 500 wt.--His legs and
    tail are as thick as those of a common size ox. He was caught
    in the woods of Goree, in Africa, when a whelp; and brought
    from thence to New-York. Great attention has been paid in
    providing a strong substantial Cage, and to have the Lion
    under very good command. The person who has the care of him
    can comb his mane, make him lie down and get up at any time;
    and it is said by those who have seen Lions in the Tower of
    London, and many parts, that he is really worth the
    contemplation of the curious.

    --> _Admittance 25 Cents.--Children half price._

    Aug. 13 [1801].

                                              _Boston Gazette._

    [Illustration]

                           _A Beautiful MOOSE._

    THE curious in Natural History are invited to Major KING'S
    Tavern, where is to be seen a fine young MOOSE of sixteen
    hands in height, and well proportioned. The properties of this
    fleet and tractable Animal are such as will give pleasure and
    satisfaction to every beholder.

    _Price of admittance, Nine Pence._             _Dec. 9, 1800._

                                          _Massachusetts Mercury._

       *        *       *       *       *

We have before noticed the tastes of the people formerly for wax-work. In
1805 there was another curious collection in Salem.

                                WAX-WORK.

    STREET and GROSE respectfully acquaint the Ladies and
    Gentlemen of Salem that there is now exhibiting at Washington
    Hall a new and elegant collection of well executed WAX
    FIGURES, (large as life,) consisting of the following
    characters, viz.

    A striking representation of the late unfortunate
    DUEL between

                        General Hamilton, and
                            Colonel Burr.

    In this interesting scene the General is represented
       as supported by his Second, after receiving the
        fatal wound, while the Second of Colonel Burr
            urges him to retire from the field.
              An excellent likeness of the
                 Marquis De La Fayette.

                   The Austere Father

        Frowning upon his DAUGHTER, finding her
                    with her Gallant.

                The handsome Coquette.

    PROSPERO and CALABAN, a scene from the Tempest.

    OTHELLO and DESDEMONA: this scene is taken from Shakespeare's
    celebrated play of the Moor of Venice. Othello is represented
    as meditating on the murder of his amiable and beautiful wife.
    The curtains that surround the bed of Desdemona are superb,
    and formerly encircled that of the Queen of France. The scene
    of Othello is an object of admiration.

    The SALEM BEAUTY.

    The FEMALE ECONOMIST, a Lady giving instructions to her
    Daughter.

    TIANA, Prince of Atooi.

    CALICUM, a Chief of Nookta Sound.

    WYNEE, a native of Owyhee.

    LIBERTY and JUSTICE supporting a portrait of Gen. WASHINGTON.

    A BUST of General BONAPARTE, in Plaster of Paris, said to be a
    correct likeness.

    A GLASS SHIP.

                             A Likeness of
                                A Child

    Now living in Newhaven, which at its birth weighed only two
                      pounds and fourteen ounces.

                         The Grecian Daughter,

                  Nourishing her Father in prison.

                      A striking likeness of

                         Jason Fairbanks,

         Who was executed at Dedham, and of the beautiful

                           Eliza Fales:

    He is dressed in the same Clothes that he wore at the time of
                             his trial.

                Also--Sundry other interesting Figures.

                        Music on the Organ.

    The Exhibition will be open from nine o'clock in the morning
    until nine in the evening, (Saturday evening and Sunday
    excepted,) and will be removed from this town shortly.

         _Admittance 25 Cents--Children half price._

    --> No person will be allowed to touch any of the figures
    above mentioned.

    Salem, June 14.

       *        *       *       *       *

Our grandfathers and grandmothers sometimes had dealings with large sums
of money.

                               To the CURIOUS

    [Illustration]

    TO be seen at _Jeremiah Bulfinch's_, near the Mill-Bridge, a
    live

                                 HOG,

    That is thought to be the biggest ever raised in this Country,
    weighing upwards of 1000 weight. The price for viewing of said
    quadruped is 4 pence.                        _March 2 [1791]._

                                              _Herald of Freedom._

       *        *       *       *       *

                    To Widow _Keziah Bartlett_.

    YOUR Tax for 1810, committed to J. NEWELL

    for Collection, is           _d.c._

    State Tax                    0  3

    County and Town              0 14
                                 ----
                                $0 17

                        JOSEPH NEWELL.

    Feb. 24, 1813.                         _Collector of Needham._

                                                 _Boston Patriot._

                      To Widow _Keziah Bartlett_.

    YOUR Tax for 1811, committed to JESSE DANIELL for Collection,
    is

                      _d.c._
    State Tax--       0  3
    County and Town-- 0 13
                      ----
                     $0.16

             JESSE DANIELL,

    Feb. 24, 1813.                          _Collector of Needham._

                                                  _Boston Patriot._

       *        *       *       *       *

                              _NOTICE._

    THE Annual Meeting of the _Boston Cent Society_ will be holden
    at the House of Mrs. MARGARET PHILLIPS, Walnut street, on
    Tuesday, April 8th, at 11 o'clock A.M. The subscribers are
    requested to attend.

    Per Order                                           April 5.

                                     _Columbian Centinel_, 1817.

       *        *       *       *       *

                         _ONE MILL REWARD._

    RAN away from the subscriber, an indented Apprentice, of the
    name of JAMES BAILS. All persons are hereby forbidden to trust
    or harbor him on my account.        (_Signed_)

                                                    THOMAS CAINES.

    _South-Boston, August 8, 1817._

                                             _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

The "Jews-Harp Club" indicates the state of music in Salem in 1815.

                        _Jews-Harp Club._

    THE first meeting of this Society will be holden at the Essex
    Coffee House, _This Evening_ at 8 o'clock, for the purpose of
    electing Officers and organizing the Society.
                                                _April 25, 1815._

       *        *       *       *       *

In 1814 the Essex Coffee House in Salem, formerly the residence of the
Hon. William Gray (Lieutenant-Governor of Massachusetts), was opened by
Prince Stetson, as the following advertisements show.

                      _ESSEX COFFEE-HOUSE._

    PRINCE STETSON informs the public that he has closed the doors
    of the SALEM HOTEL and taken that spacious and elegant brick
    house, (the late mansion of the Hon. _Wm. Gray_,) in
    ESSEX-STREET, a few rods west of the Sun Tavern, now known by
    the name of the ESSEX COFFEE-HOUSE; where he will be happy to
    accommodate Travellers, Parties, Fire Clubs, and all other
    guests who may honor him with their company.

    He rests his claims for patronage on a Larder well supplied
    with the choicest viands which the markets afford--a cellar
    stocked with the best Wines and other Liquors which can be
    procured--and the assiduous attention of civil and capable
    Servants, together with his own personal exertions to give
    every satisfaction to his guests. [6w] _Salem, July 4, 1814._

       *        *       *       *       *

                        THE CLOSED DOOR--OPEN.

    THAT Mr. _Stetson_, on leaving the SALEM HOTEL, shut the door
    after him, is probable enough: it is what is expected of every
    well-bred man on leaving any house; but

                            _GRAY & CARTER_

    beg leave to inform the public that the _door_ is now _opened_
    again, and though the Hotel is not so spacious as the
    _Prince_-ly Mansion of their neighbour, yet being an old and
    well accustomed Stand, they flatter themselves that those
    gentlemen who have long frequented it, will not discontinue
    their custom, as no pains will be spared to accommodate
    Parties--Fire Clubs--steady Boarders, and all who may honor
    the house with their company. --> Particular attention will be
    paid to Gentlemen's Horses and Carriages.

                                                   July 13 [1814].

       *        *       *       *       *

We seldom hear nowadays of so scandalous an act as is here set forth;
although there was a time in England when it was proved that murders were
committed solely for the purpose of selling the bodies of the victims to
surgeons for dissection.

                             500 Dollars Reward.

                   _Most daring and sacrilegious Robbery._

    STOLEN, from the grave yard in Chebacco Parish in Ipswich, the
    bodies of eight persons, seven of whom were interred since the
    13th of October last; the other, a coloured man, about six
    years ago. As without doubt they have all, ere this time,
    passed under the dissecting knife of the anatomist, either of
    the rude novice in the art or of the skilful professor, little
    hope is entertained of recovering any relict of them for the
    consolation of the deeply afflicted friends. But whoever will
    give any information of this atrocious villainy, so as to
    detect and bring to justice, either the traders in this
    abominable traffic, or their inhuman employers, shall receive
    the above reward; and the thanks of an afflicted and
    distressed people.

                                         WILLIAM ANDREWS jun.
                                         THOMAS CHOATE
                                         NATHAN BURNHAM

    _Ipswich, Chebacco Parish,_      }   _Committee._
    _April 25th, 1818._              }

       *        *       *       *       *

Business in "Knocker's Hole" must have been brisker in 1811 than it has
been of late years. Old Salem people will remember "Roast Meat Hill."

                  _Distress in the Baking Business!_

    CASH spoiling for want of good labor, as my brethren have
    distressed me so by giving all the workmen in this town steady
    employ, so that I have not bread to oblige my good customers
    in season. To relieve myself, I offer to six Journeymen Bakers
    of other towns, who can recommend themselves by good and quick
    dispatch in that line of business, $15 per month for this
    season.----_Wanted_, two LABORERS about the yard, two months
    or more; 8 in all more than my present number may have good
    employ by calling on

                          SAMUEL BATHRICK,

    _Baker, Mill-street, Salem, Massachusetts, easily found by
    inquiry._                                  July 12 [1811].

       *        *       *       *       *

Sport in 1821.

                             _TO SPORTSMEN._

    THE Subscriber, intending to give a grand treat to _Sportsmen_
    and _Sharp Shooters_, purposes to set up a number of fine
    TURKEYS to be fired at on _FRIDAY, the 7th day of December
    next_, and invites all who are disposed for this purpose to
    attend.

    Good accommodations will be found at his house.

                                                JOHN T. DODGE, jr.
    Wenham, Nov. 23, 1821.

       *        *       *       *       *

                           _Sharp Shooting._

    THOMAS D. POUSLAND informs his friends and the friends of
    _Sport_ that he will, on FRIDAY, the 7th day of December next,
    set up for SHOOTING a number of

                           Fine Fat TURKEYS,

    and invites all the _gunners_ and others, who would wish to
    recreate themselves, to call on _the day after Thanksgiving at
    the Old Baker's Tavern, Upper Parish, Beverly_, where every
    accommodation can be afforded.

                                                         Nov. 23.
                                                   _Salem Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

What was expected of a governess in 1817.

                             _WANTED._

    WANTED, an intelligent and well informed LADY, above or about
    forty years of age, as a governess, capable of instructing
    four young Children of her own sex in all the early branches,
    to reside in the family of their father, a gentleman of high
    respectability in every sense of the word, and of considerable
    fortune and estate, upon which he dwells, in the vicinity of
    Winchester, Frederick County, Virginia. It will be expected
    that she understands and will undertake at same time the
    management and direction of the household and family concerns.
    For further information, application may be made to the
    subscriber, now residing for a short time at the house of Mr.
    Thomas Lewis, Cambridge-street, Boston, near Mr. Lowell's
    Meeting-house.

    august 13.                   ep3t                JOHN HOLKER.
                                            _Columbian Centinel._

       *        *       *       *       *

                    BULL-FIGHT IN NEW ENGLAND!

Many persons have supposed that bull-fights were never to be seen except
in Spain; but it appears that in June, 1809, according to an advertisement
in the "Essex Register," there was to be a bull-fight on the Salem
turnpike, near the "Half-way House" (to Boston). As there were no
reporters in those days, we are unable to give an account of the
exhibition.


                        _Sportsmen, Attend!_

    THE gentlemen SPORTSMEN of this town and its vicinity are
    informed that a Grand Combat will take place between the URUS,
    ZEBU, and Spanish BULL, on the 4th of July, if fair weather,
    if not, the next fair day, at the HALF-WAY HOUSE on the _Salem
    Turnpike_. There will also be exposed at the Circus, other
    ANIMALS, which, for courage, strength and sagacity are
    inferior to none. No danger need be apprehended during the
    performance, as the Circus is very convenient.

    Doors opened at 3, performance to begin at 4. Tickets 50
    cents.

    After the performance there will be a grand FOX CHASE on the
    Marshes near the Circus, to start precisely at 6 o'clock.

       *        *       *       *       *

                   General Fencing Exhibition.

    MESSRS. TROMELLE & GIRARD, Fencing-Masters of the Military
    School of Col. de la Croix, respectfully inform the Gentlemen
    of Salem and its vicinity that they propose a

                       FENCING EXHIBITION,

    at which several amateurs will be present, and during which
    they will play the Small-Sword, Cut-and-Thrust, Broad-Sword,
    and Cudgel or Cane Fighting; to close with a Duel between
    Messrs. T. & G., who will at first fight with Sabres, and
    afterwards with Small-Swords, until one of the parties falls
    weltering in blood.

    The Exhibition will be on FRIDAY, the 30th inst., at 7
    o'clock P.M., at the Military School, Washington Hall, Court
    street.

    _Terms of admission, One Dollar._

    Tickets to be had at Mr. Crombie's Salem Hotel, and at Mr.
    Tucker's Sun-Tavern.                              June 23.

                                             _Essex Register._

       *        *       *       *       *

Something like the stylographic pen was advertised in 1825 in Salem.

                          _The self-supplying_

                       Pocket Writing Instrument,

                                  OR

                      Scheffer's Patent Penograph.

    [Illustration]

    THE merit of this Instrument is that it contains Ink, and
    supplies itself as required, by which means the writer is
    enabled to use it for 10 or 12 hours with the same ease as
    with a pencil, without the aid of an Inkstand; and is
    manufactured in Gold or Silver, either with or without a
    pencil case, and so constructed that either a Metallic or
    Quill Nib may be applied. For sale by

    June 24 [1825].                             J.R. BUFFUM.

       *        *       *       *       *

A "caravan" of 1824.

    [Illustration]

                              A CARAVAN OF

                             LIVING ANIMALS

    Is now exhibiting at the Essex Coffee House, in this town.

    AMONG the Animals are the following:--

    The African Lion.

    The beautiful spotted Lama, from the Coast of Peru.

    The Mammoth Ox, 6 years old, 18 hands high, 16 feet in
    length, and raised in Chenango county, State of New York. He
    is well worthy the attention of the public.

    The Dwarf Cow, 7 years old, 2 feet 4 inches in height, and is
    handsomely proportioned. This most extraordinary and wonderful
    production of nature has been visited by a large number of
    persons, in different cities, and is pronounced a complete
    model in miniature of her kind; she is so short that she can
    pass under the belly of the large Ox.

    The Heifer, 3 years old, having 6 legs, and is very active.

    Two large Bears, very tractable and docile.

    Dandy Jack.

    Saucy Jack.

    The Great Ribbed Nose Baboon.

    The beautiful Deer, 2 years old.

    The Ichneumon, an animal famous for destroying reptiles' eggs,
    and is worshipped by the Egyptians.

    Also, a variety of other Animals, Birds, &c.

    --> Admittance 12 1-2 cents; Children under 12 years of age,
    half price. Open from 9 A.M. till 9 P.M., Saturday evenings
    excepted. The room is conveniently fitted, so that Ladies and
    Gentlemen can view the animals with perfect safety.

    This Exhibition is attended with good Music on different
    instruments. Also, Music on the Leaf. The sounds produced by
    the Leaf are admired by the lovers of Music. Jan. 30.

                                                 _Salem Gazette._

       *        *       *       *       *

It may be interesting to some of our readers to see what piano music was
popular in 1827-1829.

Elias Hook, the celebrated organ-builder, of the firm of E. & G.G. Hook &
Hastings, was a native of Salem and kept a music-store there, moving to
Boston about 1830.

                                =NEW=

                         Piano Forte Music.

    JUST published, and for sale by
                                                     ELIAS HOOK,
    The Maltese Boat Song; Polly Hopkins and Tommy Tompkins; The
    Soldier's last Sigh; 'Tis sweet to take the bonnie Lake; When
    I left thy shores, O Naxos; The merry Flageolet; When young
    men come a sighing; Comin' thro' the Rye; Love was once a
    little Boy; I've been Roaming; My Heart and Lute; Draw the
    Sword, Scotland; Adventures of Paul Pry; I have Fruit and I
    have Flowers; The Washing Day; The Light Guitar, and Answer;
    Long Summers have smiled--&c. &c.                    [1827].

       *        *       *       *       *

                           New Piano Music.

    YON ROSE TREE. The Rock of our Salvation. Thou art my only
    Love. The days of good Queen Bess. Gipsey Rondo. Oh, 'tis
    Love. As the evening Appearing. The cup of Love. The Bells of
    St. Andrew's Tower. By murmuring brook. The Banner of Battle.
    A fragrant Rose there grew. My country no more. To live and
    Love. My own native Isle. Mild is thine eye of blue, sweet
    maid. Mary of the Ferry. Look you now. Love thee, yes, too
    fondly, truly. Lovely Mary. Love in the Barn. Bolivar's
    Peruvian Battle Song. There is a Love. The Glasses sparkle on
    the Board. St. Patrick was a Gentleman. The winter it is past.
    With Instructions--for the Piano &c. just received by

    March 29 [1829].                                    J.M. IVES.

       *        *       *       *       *

In February, 1829, Mr. Nazro, of the Roundhill School (Northampton?), made
the following singular challenge to Edwin Forrest, the tragedian. We do
not know whether or not it was accepted.

    The Boston Evening Bulletin of Wednesday last contains the
    following:--

    "A CARD. If Mr. Edwin Forrest, the Tragedian, thinks that more
    effect can be produced by reading Tragedy than can be by
    reading from Scripture, Mr. Nazro, Instructor of Elocution,
    from Roundhill School, would deny it fully, and offers to meet
    him, Mr. Forrest, in any town in the United States, and read
    from Scripture, and Mr. Forrest shall read from Tragedy.

    _Boston_, 25th Feb., 1829."

       *        *       *       *       *

The "draisena" was the forerunner of the velocipede and bicycle.

    [Illustration]

                          THE DRAISENA.

    AMBROSE SALISBURY, Wheelwright and Chaise-Maker, first
    introduced into this town [Boston] Machines similar to the one
    described below, and of which the plate will convey some idea;
    he has manufactured two, which may be examined at his Shop in
    Water-street, where the manner of using them will be
    explained. It is called Draisena, from the name of the
    Inventor.                                               May 7.

                                          _N. E. Palladium_, 1819.

       *        *       *       *       *

Advertisements of John Remond, for many years well known in Salem as a
caterer. He used to advertise very freely. He was the father of Charles
Lenox Remond, the famous colored lecturer.

                                 =Salem=,

                     SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1820.

                               TURTLE SOUP

    The subscriber will issue from his house in Chesnut-street, on
    Tuesday & Wednesday next, at from 12 to 1 o'clock, SOUP made
    from a superior fat Turtle, weighing over 200 wt.

    His old customers and the public will be supplied as usual at
    50 cts per quart.

                                                     _J. REMOND._

       *        *       *       *       *

                               NOTICE.

    THE subscriber informs his customers that notwithstanding he
    has publicly discontinued the sale of OYSTERS, in consequence
    of their being in an unhealthy state during the months of July
    and August, still he is ready to supply them as usual, if
    called upon; he would observe, however, that he cannot hold
    himself responsible for the injurious effects they may produce
    on the system when eaten at this season of the year.
                                                      JOHN REMOND.

    July 16 [1831].

       *        *       *       *       *

                           HAMILTON HALL,

                          CHESTNUT STREET.

    THIS Establishment having been purchased by a New Company, and
    undergone repairs, the interior of the same is so far
    completed that the subscriber is ready for the reception of
    GENTEEL PARTIES. The repairs and improvements already made;
    the furnace which heats the entire Dancing portion of the
    building,--entries, Supper Hall, etc.; the improved
    Chandelier, new Sofas, Ladies' drawing-room new carpeted and
    furnished in a comfortable manner; a reduction of former price
    of Hall; strict adherence to a uniform price of Help, and
    every care taken to select and furnish the most careful and
    obliging attendants, with the enchanting music of the SALEM
    QUADRILLE BAND, cannot fail to secure the patronage of a
    generous public. Did I say above, "enchanting music"? Yes.
    Without the fear of contradiction, during thirty years and
    upwards that it has been my privilege to conduct the affairs
    of Hamilton Hall, I have never heard from five instruments
    richer music sent forth than I did on the evening of the 27th
    November, ultimo.--There is one fact that should be known, and
    which is acknowledged by all who have performed there, that
    five pieces of music are better in Hamilton Hall than seven in
    any other Hall in the city.

    As respects the subscriber, who is still to conduct the
    affairs of the establishment, suffice it to say that those
    who have had the pleasure, for a long series of years, to
    participate in such matters, are the best judges of the style,
    comfort, etc.

                                                           REMOND.

    N.B. With the extensive cooking apparatus and other advantages
    of the premises, Families who do not wish to disarrange their
    houses, or single gentlemen who are not at House-keeping,
    wishing to entertain their friends, can be accommodated at
    reasonable prices, and everything conducted in true family
    style.                                                    J.R.

    Salem, Dec. 16 [1844].

[Illustration]

    Transcriber's note:
    Text version
    *** Represents Inverted Asterism
    --> Represents Right Index
    <-- Represents Left Index