He appealed on behalf of her Arts, her Cathedrals, and libraries ruined,
her towns plundered. He told a story, very quietly, of an old
grandfather and grandmother murdered and their daughter ravished before
the eyes of her tiny children. Here he himself began to shed tears. He
tried to brush them back. He paused and wiped his eyes.... Finally,
breaking down altogether, he turned away and hid his face....

I do not suppose that there were more than a dozen persons in that hall
who understood anything of the language in which he spoke. Certainly it
was the merest gibberish to that whole army of listening men.
Nevertheless, with every word that he uttered the emotion grew tenser.
Cries--little sharp cries like the bark of a puppy--broke out here and
there. "_Verrno! Verrno! Verrno_! (True! True! True!)" Movements, like
the swift finger of the wind on the sea, hovered, wavered, and
vanished....

He turned back to them, his voice broken with sobs, and he could only
cry the one word "Belgia... Belgia... Belgia"... To that they
responded. They began to shout, to cry aloud. The screams of "_Verrno...
Verrno_" rose until it seemed that the roof would rise with them.
The air was filled with shouts, "Bravo for the Allies." "_Soyousniki!
Soyousniki_!" Men raised their caps and waved them, smiled upon one
another as though they had suddenly heard wonderful news, shouted and
shouted and shouted... and in the midst of it all the little rotund
Belgian Consul stood bowing and wiping his eyes.

How pleased we all were! I whispered to Vera: "You see! They do care!
Their hearts are touched. We can do anything with them now!"

Even Uncle Ivan was moved, and murmured to himself "Poor Belgium! Poor
Belgium!"

How delighted, too, were the gentlemen on the platform. Smiling, they
whispered to one another, and I saw several shake hands. A great moment.
The little Consul bowed finally and sat down.

Never shall I forget the applause that followed. Like one man the
thousands shouted, tears raining down their cheeks, shaking hands, even
embracing! A vast movement, as though the wind had caught them and
driven them forward, rose, lifted them, so that they swayed like bending
corn towards the platform, for an instant we were all caught up
together. There was one great cry: "Belgium!"

The sound rose, fell, sunk into a muttering whisper, died to give way to
the breathless attention that awaited the next speaker.

I whispered to Vera: "I shall never forget that. I'm going to leave on
that. It's good enough for me."

"Yes," she said, "we'll go."

"What a pity," whispered Uncle Ivan, "that they didn't understand what
they were shouting about."

We slipped out behind the platform; turned down the dark long passage,
hearing the new speaker's voice like a bell ringing beyond thick walls,
and found our way into the open.

The evening was wonderfully fresh and clear. The Neva lay before us like
a blue scarf, and the air faded into colourless beauty above the dark
purple of the towers and domes. Vera caught my arm: "Look!" she
whispered. "There's Boris!" I knew that she had on several occasions
tried to force her way into his flat, that she had written every day to
Nina (letters as it afterwards appeared, that Boris kept from her). I
was afraid that she would do something violent.

"Wait!" I whispered, "perhaps Nina is here somewhere."

Grogoff was standing with another man on a small improvised platform
just outside the gates of the Bourse.

As the soldiers came out (many of them were leaving now on the full tide
of their recent emotions) Grogoff and his friend caught them, held them,
and proceeded to instruct their minds.

I caught some of Grogoff's sentences: "_Tovaristchi_!" I heard him cry,
"Comrades! Listen to me. Don't allow your feelings to carry you away!
You have serious responsibilities now, and the thing for you to do is
not to permit sentiment to make you foolish. Who brought you into this
war? Your leaders? No, your old masters. They bled you and robbed you
and slaughtered you to fill their own pockets. Who is ruling the world
now? The people to whom the world truly belongs? No, the Capitalists,
the money-grubbers, the old thieves like Nicholas who is now under lock
and key... Capitalists... England, France... Thieves, Robbers....

"Belgium? What is Belgium to you? Did you swear to protect her people?
Does England, who pretends such loving care for Belgium, does she look
after Ireland? What about her persecution of South Africa? Belgium? Have
you heard what she did in the Congo?..."

As the men came, talking, smiling, wiping their eyes, they were caught
by Grogoff's voice. They stood there and listened. Soon they began to
nod their heads. I heard them muttering that good old word "_Verrno!
Verrno_!" again. The crowd grew. The men began to shout their approval.
"Aye! it's true," I heard a solder near me mutter. "The English are
thieves"; and another "Belgium?... After all I could not understand a
word of what that little fat man said."

I heard no more, but I did not wonder now at the floods that were rising
and rising, soon to engulf the whole of this great country. The end of
this stage of our story was approaching for all of us.

We three had stood back, a little in the shadow, gazing about to see
whether we could hail a cab.

As we waited I took my last look at Grogoff, his stout figure against
the purple sky, the masts of the ships, the pale tumbling river, the
black line of the farther shore. He stood, his arms waving, his mouth
open, the personification of the disease from which Russia was
suffering.

A cab arrived. I turned, said as it were, my farewell to Grogoff and
everything for which he stood, and went.

We drove home almost in silence. Vera, staring in front of her, her face
proud and reserved, building up a wall of her own thoughts.

"Come in for a moment, won't you?" she asked me, rather reluctantly I
thought. But I accepted, climbed the stairs and followed Uncle Ivan's
stubby and self-satisfied progress into the flat.

I heard Vera cry. I hurried after her and found, standing close
together, in the middle of the room Henry Bohun and Nina!

With a little sob of joy and shame too, Nina was locked in Vera's arms.


XV

This is obviously the place for the story, based, of course, on the very
modest and slender account given me by the hero of it, of young Bohun's
knightly adventure. In its inception the whole affair is still
mysterious to me. Looking back from this distance of time I see that he
was engaged on one knightly adventure after another--first Vera, then
Markovitch, lastly Nina. The first I caught at the very beginning, the
second I may be said to have inspired, but to the third I was completely
blind. I was blind, I suppose, because, in the first place, Nina had,
from the beginning, laughed at Bohun, and in the second, she had been
entirely occupied with Lawrence.

Bohun's knight-errantry came upon her with, I am sure, as great a shock
of surprise as it did upon me. And yet, when you come to think of it, it
was the most natural thing. They were the only two of our party who had
any claim to real youth, and they were still so young that they could
believe in one ideal after another as quick as you can catch goldfish in
a bowl of water. Bohun would, of course, have indignantly denied that he
was out to help anybody, but that, nevertheless, was the direction in
which his character led him; and once Russia had stripped from him that
thin coat of self-satisfaction, he had nothing to do but mount his white
charger and enter the tournament.

I've no idea when he first thought of Nina. He did not, of course, like
her at the beginning, and I doubt whether she caused him any real
concern, too, until her flight to Grogoff. That shocked him terribly. He
confessed as much to me. She had always been so happy and easy about
life. Nothing was serious to her. I remember once telling her she ought
to take the war more deeply. I was a bit of a prig about it, I suppose.
At any rate she thought me one.... And then to go off to a fellow like
Grogoff!

He thought of it the more seriously when he saw the agony Vera was in.
She did not ask him to help her, and so he did nothing; but he watched
her efforts, the letters that she wrote, the eagerness with which she
ravished the post, her fruitless visits to Grogoff's flat, her dejected
misery over her failure. He began himself to form plans, not, I am
convinced, from any especial affection for Nina, but simply because he
had the soul of a knight, although, thank God, he didn't know it. I
expect, too, that he was pretty dissatisfied with his knight-errantries.
His impassioned devotion to Vera had led to nothing at all, his
enthusiasm for Russia had led to a most unsatisfactory Revolution, and
his fatherly protection of Markovitch had inspired apparently nothing
more fruitful than distrust. I would like to emphasise that it was in no
way from any desire to interfere in other people's affairs that young
Bohun undertook these Quests. He had none of my own meddlesome quality.
He had, I think, very little curiosity and no psychological
self-satisfaction, but he had a kind heart, an adventurous spirit, and a
hatred for the wrong and injustice which seemed just now to be creeping
about the world; but all this, again thank God, was entirely
subconscious. He knew nothing whatever about himself.

The thought of Nina worried him more and more. After he went to bed at
night, he would hear her laugh and see her mocking smile and listen to
her shrill imitations of his own absurdities. She had been the one happy
person amongst them all, and now--! Well, he had seen enough of Boris
Grogoff to know what sort of fellow he was. He came at last to the
conclusion that, after a week or two she would be "sick to death of it,"
and longing to get away, but then "her pride would keep her at it. She'd
got a devil of a lot of pride." He waited, then, for a while, and hoped,
I suppose, that some of Vera's appeals would succeed. They did not; and
then it struck him that Vera was the very last person to whom Nina would
yield--just because she wanted to yield to her most, which was pretty
subtle of him and very near the truth.

No one else seemed to be making any very active efforts, and at last he
decided that he must do something himself. He discovered Grogoff's
address, went to the Gagarinskaya and looked up at the flat, hung about
a bit in the hope of seeing Nina. Then he did see her at Rozanov's
party, and this, although he said nothing to me about it at the time,
had a tremendous effect on him. He thought she looked "awful." All the
joy had gone from her; she was years older, miserable, and defiant. He
didn't speak to her, but from that night he made up his mind. Rozanov's
party may be said to have been really the turning-point of his life. It
was the night that he came out of his shell, grew up, faced the
world--and it was the night that he discovered that he cared about Nina.

The vision of her poor little tired face, her "rather dirty white
dress," her "grown-up" hair, her timidity and her loneliness, never left
him for a moment. All the time that I thought he was occupied only with
the problem of Markovitch and Semyonov, he was much more deeply occupied
with Nina. So unnaturally secretive can young men be!

At last he decided on a plan. He chose the Monday, the day of the Bourse
meeting, because he fancied that Grogoff would be present at that and he
might therefore catch Nina alone, and because he and his
fellow-propagandists would be expected also at the meeting and he would
therefore be free of his office earlier on that afternoon. He had no
idea at all how he would get into the flat, but he thought that fortune
would be certain to favour him. He always thought that.

Well, fortune did. He left the office and arrived in the Gagarinskaya
about half-past five in the evening. He walked about a little, and then
saw a bearded tall fellow drive up in an Isvostchick. He recognised this
man as Lenin, the soul of the anti-Government party, and a man who was
afterwards to figure very prominently in Russia's politics. This fellow
argued very hotly with the Isvostchick about his fare, then vanished
through the double doors. Bohun followed him. Outside Grogoff's flat
Lenin waited and rang the bell. Bohun waited on the floor below; then,
when he heard the door open, he noiselessly slipped up the stairs, and,
as Lenin entered, followed behind him whilst the old servant's back was
turned helping Lenin with his coat. He found, as he had hoped, a crowd
of cloaks and a Shuba hanging beside the door in the dark corner of the
wall. He crept behind these. He heard Lenin say to the servant that,
after all, he would not take off his coat, as he was leaving again
immediately. Then directly afterwards Grogoff came into the hall.

That was the moment of crisis. Did Grogoff go to the rack for his coat
and all was over; a very unpleasant scene must follow--a ludicrous
expulsion, a fling or two at the amiable habits of thieving and deceit
on the part of the British nation, and any hope of seeing Nina ruined
perhaps for ever. Worst of all, the ignominy of it! No young man likes
to be discovered hidden behind a coat-rack, however honest his original
intentions!

His heart beat to suffocation as he peeped between the coats.... Grogoff
was already wearing his own overcoat. It was, thank God, too warm an
evening for a Shuba. The men shook hands, and Grogoff saying something
rather deferentially about the meeting, Lenin, in short, brusque tones,
put him immediately in his place. Then they went out together, the door
closed behind them, and the flat was as silent as an aquarium. He waited
for a while, and then, hearing nothing, crept into the hall. Perhaps
Nina was out. If the old servant saw him she would think him a burglar
and would certainly scream. He pushed back the door in front of him,
stepped forward, and almost stepped upon Nina!

She gave a little cry, not seeing whom it was. She was looking very
untidy, her hair loose down her back, and a rough apron over her dress.
She looked ill, and there were heavy black lines under her eyes as
though she had not slept for weeks.

Then she saw who it was and, in spite of herself, smiled.

"Genry!" she exclaimed.

"Yes," he said in a whisper, closing the door very softly behind him.
"Look here, don't scream or do anything foolish. I don't want that old
woman to catch me."

He has no very clear memory of the conversation that followed. She stood
with her back to the wall, storing at him, and every now and again
taking up a corner of her pinafore and biting it. He remembered that
action of hers especially as being absurdly childish. But the
overwhelming impression that he had of her was of her terror--terror of
everything and of everybody, of everybody apparently except himself.
(She told him afterwards that he was the only person in the world who
could have rescued her just then because she simply couldn't be
frightened of some one at whom she'd laughed so often.) She was
terrified, of course, of Grogoff--she couldn't mention his name without
trembling--but she was terrified also of the old servant, of the flat,
of the room, of the clock, of every sound or hint of a sound that there
was in the world. She to be so frightened! She of whom he would have
said that she was equal to any one or anything! What she must have been
through during those weeks to have brought her to this!... But she told
him very little. He urged her at once that she must come away with him,
there and then, just as she was. She simply shook her head at that.
"No... No... No..." she kept repeating. "You don't understand."

"I do understand," he answered, always whispering, and with one ear on
the door lest the old woman should hear and come in. "We've got very
little time," he said. "Grogoff will never let you go if he's here. I
know why you don't come back--you think we'll all look down on you for
having gone. But that's nonsense. We are all simply miserable without
you."

But she simply continued to repeat "No... No..." Then, as he urged her
still further, she begged him to go away. She said that he simply didn't
know what Grogoff would do if he returned and found him, and although
he'd gone to a meeting he might return at any moment. Then, as though
to urge upon him Grogoff's ferocity, in little hoarse whispers she let
him see some of the things that during these weeks she'd endured. He'd
beaten her, thrown things at her, kept her awake hour after hour at
night making her sing to him... and, of course, worst things, things
far, far worse that she would never tell to anybody, not even to Vera!
Poor Nina, she had indeed been punished for her innocent impetuosities.
She was broken in body and soul; she had faced reality at last and been
beaten by it. She suddenly turned away from him, buried her head in her
arm, as a tiny child does, and cried....

It was then that he discovered he loved her. He went to her, put his arm
round her, kissed her, stroked her hair, whispering little consoling
things to her. She suddenly collapsed, burying her head in his breast
and watering his waistcoat with her tears....

After that he seemed to be able to do anything with her that he pleased.
He whispered to her to go and get her hat, then her coat, then to hurry
up and come along.... As he gave these last commands he heard the door
open, turned and saw Masha, Grogoff's old witch of a servant, facing
him.

The scene that followed must have had its ludicrous side. The old woman
didn't scream or make any kind of noise, she simply asked him what he
was doing there; he answered that he was going out for a walk with the
mistress of the house. She said that he should do nothing of the kind.
He told her to stand away from the door. She refused to move. He then
rushed at her, caught her round the waist, and a most impossible
struggle ensued up and down the middle of the room. He called to Nina to
run, and had the satisfaction of seeing her dart through the door like a
frightened hare. The old woman bit and scratched and kicked, making
sounds all the time like a kettle just on the boil. Suddenly, when he
thought that Nina had had time to get well away, he gave the old woman a
very unceremonious push which sent her back against Grogoff's chief
cabinet, and he had the comfort to hear the whole of this crash to the
ground as he closed the door behind him. Out in the street he found
Nina, and soon afterwards an Isvostchick. She crouched up close against
him, staring in front of her, saying nothing, shivering and
shivering.... As he felt her hot hand shake inside his, he vowed that he
would never leave her again. I don't believe that he ever will.

So he took her home, and his Knight Errantry was justified at last.


XVI

These events had for a moment distracted my mind, but as soon as I was
alone I felt the ever-increasing burden of my duty towards Markovitch.

The sensation was absolutely dream-like in its insistence on the one
hand that I should take some kind of action, and its preventing me, on
the other, from taking any action at all. I felt the strange inertia of
the spectator in the nightmare, who sees the house tumbling about his
head and cannot move. Besides, what action could I take? I couldn't
stand over Markovitch, forbid him to stir from the flat, or imprison
Semyonov in his room, or warn the police... besides, there were now no
police. Moreover, Vera and Bohun and the others were surely capable of
watching Markovitch. Nevertheless something in my heart insisted that it
was I who was to figure in this.... Through the dusk of the streets, in
the pale ghostly shadows that prelude the coming of the white nights, I
seemed to see three pursuing figures, Semyonov, Markovitch, and myself.
I was pursuing, and yet held.

I went back to my flat, but all that night I could not sleep. Already
the first music of the May Day processions could be heard, distant
trumpets and drums, before I sank into uneasy, bewildered slumber.

I dreamt then dreams so fantastic and irresolute that I cannot now
disentangle them. I remember that I was standing beside the banks of the
Neva. The river was rising, flinging on its course in the great
tempestuous way that it always has during the first days of its release
from the ice. The sky grew darker--the water rose. I sought refuge in
the top gallery of a church with light green domes, and from here I
watched the flood, first as it covered the quays, tumbling in cascades
of glittering water over the high parapet, trickling in little lines and
pools, then rising into sheeted levels, then billowing in waves against
the walls of the house, flooding the doors and the windows, until so far
as the eye could reach there were only high towers remaining above its
grasp. I do not know what happened to my security, and saw at length the
waters stretch from sky to sky, one dark, tossing ocean.

The sun rose, a dead yellow; slowly the waters sank again, islands
appeared, stretches of mud and waste. Heaving their huge bodies out of
the ocean, vast monsters crawled through the mud, scaled and horned,
lying like logs beneath the dead sun. The waters sank--forests rose. The
sun sank and there was black night, then a faint dawn, and in the early
light of a lovely morning a man appeared standing on the beach, shading
his eyes, gazing out to sea. I fancied that in that strong bearded
figure I recognised my peasant, who had seemed to haunt my steps so
often. Gravely he looked round him, then turned back into the forest....

Was my dream thus? Frankly I do not know--too neat an allegory to be
true, perhaps--and yet there was something of this in it. I know that I
saw Boris, and the Rat, and Vera, and Semyonov, and Markovitch,
appearing, vanishing, reappearing, and that I was strongly conscious
that the submerged and ruined world did not _touch_ them, and was only a
background to their own individual activities.... I know that Markovitch
seemed to come to me again and cry, "Be patient... be patient.... Have
faith... be faithful!"

I know that I woke struggling to keep him with me, crying out that he
was not to leave me, that that way was danger.... I woke to find my room
flooded with sunshine, and my old woman looking at me with disapproval.

"Wake up, Barin," she was saying, "it's three o'clock."

"Three o'clock?" I muttered, trying to pull myself together.

"Three in the afternoon... I have some tea for you."

When I realised the time I had the sensation of the wildest panic. I
jumped from my bed, pushing the old woman out of the room. I had
betrayed my trust! I had betrayed my trust! I felt assured 'that some
awful catastrophe had occurred, something that I might have prevented.
When I was dressed, disregarding my housekeeper's cries, I rushed out
into the street. At my end of the Ekaterinsgofsky Canal I was stopped by
great throngs of men and women returning homewards from the procession.
They were marching, most of them, in ordered lines across the street,
arm in arm, singing the "Marseillaise."

Very different from the procession a few weeks before. That had been
dumb, cowed, bewildered. This was the movement of a people conscious of
their freedom, sure of themselves, disdaining the world. Everywhere
bands were playing, banners were glittering, and from the very heart of
the soil, as it seemed, the "Marseillaise" was rising.

Although the sun only shone at brief intervals, there was a sense of
spring warmth in the air. For some time I could not cross the street,
then I broke through and almost ran down the deserted stretch of the
Canal. I arrived almost breathless at the door in the English Prospect.
There I found Sacha watching the people and listening to the distant
bands.

"Sacha!" I cried, "is Alexei Petrovitch at home?"

"No, Barin," she answered, looking at me in some surprise. "He went out
about a quarter of an hour ago."

"And Nicholas Markovitch?"

"He went out just now."

"Did he tell you where he was going?"

"No, Barin, but I heard Alexei Petrovitch tell him, an hour back, that
he was going to Katerinhof."

I did not listen to more. I turned and went. Katerinhof was a park, ten
minutes distant from my island; it was so called because there was there
the wooden palace of Katherine the Great. She had once made it her place
of summer residence, but it was now given over to the people and was,
during the spring and summer, used by them as a kind of fair and
pleasure-garden. The place had always been to me romantic and
melancholy, with the old faded wooden palace, the deserted ponds, and
the desolate trees. I had never been there in the summer. I don't know
with what idea I hurried there. I can only say that I had no choice but
to go, and that I went as though I were still continuing my dream of the
morning.

Great numbers of people were hurrying there also. The road was thronged,
and many of them sang as they went.

Looking back now it has entirely a dream-like colour. I stepped from the
road under the trees, and was at once in a world of incredible fantasy.
So far as the eye could see there were peasants; the air was filled with
an indescribable din. As I stepped deeper into the shelter of the
leafless trees the colour seemed, like fluttering banners, to mingle and
spread and sway before my eyes. Near to me were the tub-thumpers now so
common to us all in Petrograd--men of the Grogoff kind stamping and
shouting on their platforms, surrounded by open-mouthed soldiers and
peasants.

Here, too, were the quacks such as you might see at any fair in
Europe--quack dentists, quack medicine-men, men with ointments for
healing sores, men with pills, and little bottles of bright liquid, and
tricks for ruptures and broken legs and arms. A little way beyond them
were the pedlars. Here were the wildest men in the world. Tartars and
Letts and Indians, Asiatics with long yellow faces, and strange fellows
from Northern Russia. They had everything to sell, bright beads and
looking-glasses and little lacquered trays, coloured boxes, red and
green and yellow, lace and silk and cloths of every colour, purple and
crimson and gold. From all these men there rose a deafening gabble.

I pressed farther, although the crowd now around me was immense, and so
I reached the heart of the fair. Here were enormous merry-go-rounds, and
I had never seen such glittering things. They were from China, Japan,
where you will. They were hung in shining, gleaming colours, covered
with tinsel and silver, and, as they went tossing round, emitting from
their hearts a wild barbaric wail that may have been, in some far
Eastern city, the great song of all the lovers of the world for all I
know, the colours flashed and wheeled and dazzled, and the light
glittered from stem to stem of the brown silent trees. Here was the very
soul of the East. Near me a Chinaman, squatting on his haunches, was
showing before a gaping crowd the exploits of his trained mice, who
walked up and down little crimson ladders, poked their trembling noses
through holes of purple silk, and ran shivering down precipices of
golden embroidery. Near to him two Japanese were catching swords in
their mouths, and beyond them again a great number of Chinese were
tumbling and wrestling, and near to them again some Japanese children
did little tricks, catching coloured balls in wooden cups and turning
somersaults.

Around all these a vast mass of peasants pushed and struggled. Like
children they watched and smiled and laughed, and always, like the flood
of the dream, their numbers seemed to increase and increase....

The noise was deafening, but always above the merry-go-rounds and the
cheap-jacks and the shrill screams of the Japanese and the cries of the
pedlars I heard the chant of the "Marseillaise" carried on high through
the brown leafless park. I was bewildered and dazzled by the noise and
the light. I turned desperately, pushing with my hands as one does in a
dream.

Then I saw Markovitch and Semyonov.

I had no doubt at all that the moment had at last arrived. It was as
though I had seen it all somewhere before. Semyonov was standing a
little apart leaning against a tree, watching with his sarcastic smile
the movements of the crowd. Markovitch was a little way off. I could see
his eyes fixed absolutely on Semyonov. He did not move nor notice the
people who jostled him. Semyonov made a movement with his hand as though
he had suddenly come to some decision. He walked slowly away in the
direction of the palace. Markovitch, keeping a considerable distance
from him, followed. For a moment I was held by the crowd around me, and
when at last I got free Semyonov had disappeared, and I could just see
Markovitch turning the corner of the palace.

I ran across the grass, trying to call out, but I could not hear my own
voice. I turned the corner, and instantly I was in a strange place of
peace. The old building with its wooden lattices and pillars stood
melancholy guard over the dead pond on whose surface some fragments of
ice still lay. There was no sun, only a heavy, oppressive air. All the
noise was muffled as though a heavy door had swung to.

They were standing quite close to me. Semyonov had turned and faced us
both. I saw him smile, and his lips moved. A moment later I saw
Markovitch fling his hand forward, and in the air the light on the
revolver twinkled. I heard no sound, but I saw Semyonov raise his arm,
as though in self-defence. His face, lifted strangely to the bare
branches, was triumphant, and I heard quite clearly the words, like a
cry of joy and welcome:

"At last!... At last!"

He tumbled forward on his face.

I saw Markovitch turn the revolver on himself, and then heard a report,
sharp and deafening, as though we had been in a small room. I saw
Markovitch put his hand to his side, and his mouth, open as though in
astonishment, was suddenly filled with blood. I ran to him, caught him
in my arms; he turned on me a face full of puzzled wonder, I caught the
word "Vera," and he crumpled up against my heart.

Even as I held him, I heard coming closer and closer the rough
triumphant notes of the "Marseillaise."



THE END