Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                JUNE 3, 1897                No. 30.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

     =TO ANY SUBSCRIBER SECURING
      ... FOR US 1 SUBSCRIPTION=


[Illustration: On Honour's Roll
Tales of Heroes in the
Nineteenth Century]

    =WE WILL SEND POST-PAID ANY ONE OF THE FOLLOWING BOOKS=

THE STORY OF THE INDIAN MUTINY.= By Ascott R. Hope. 4 illustrations.
12mo.

=THE ORCHID SEEKERS.= A Story of Adventure in Borneo. By Ashmore Russan
and Frederick Boyle. Illustrated. 8vo.

=UNDER MANY FLAGS.= Stories of Scottish Adventurers. By Davenport Adams.
Illustrated. 12 mo.

=THE FUR TRADERS OF THE WEST= or, =The Doones of Fowey=. By E.R.
Suppling. 21 full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=LOST IN AFRICA.= A Book of Adventure. By Frederick Whishaw. With
full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=THE DAYS OF BRUCE.= A Story from Scottish History. By Grace Aguilar.
Illustrated. 8vo.

=THE DESERT SHIP.= A Story of Adventure by Sea and Land. By John
Bloundelle-Burton. Illustrated. 8vo.

=NUTTALL'S STANDARD DICTIONARY.= Compiled by the Rev. James Wood.
Illustrated. 8vo. 832 pages.

[Illustration:  The Orchid
Seekers]

=GIRL'S HOME COMPANION.= Edited by Mrs. L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.
Contains full description of indoor and outdoor games and valuable
information concerning embroidery, sewing, and all other occupations and
accomplishments for girls.

=LEGENDS OF KING ARTHUR AND HIS KNIGHTS.= By J.T. Knowells. 8vo.

=ON HONOUR'S ROLL.= Tales of Heroism in the Nineteenth Century. By L.
Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=HARRY RAYMOND.= By Commander Cameron. Illustrated. 8vo.

=WE THREE BOYS.= By L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=SEA FIGHTS AND LAND BATTLES.= By Mrs. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=PUZZLES OLD AND NEW.= By Professor Hoffman. 8vo. With over 500 diagrams
and illustrations.

=MASTERMAN READY.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=SETTLERS IN CANADA.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=POOR JACK.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The above are all cloth-bound, well-made books, and are carefully
     selected for their interest and character....

       *       *       *       *       *

              =The Great Round World=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.           NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:
     WOODEN PUTTER
     BRASSIE SPOON
     BRASSIE NIBLICK
     DRIVER
     CLEEK
     IRON
     LOFTING IRON
     MASHIE
     NIBLICK
     IRON PUTTER]

     =To any one sending us 2 new subscribers=

     we will send, express paid, any one of the golf sticks shown in
     cut...

=These are the most approved shapes and styles and are made in the best
possible manner=

       *       *       *       *       *

     =2= special golf balls may be had for
                   ... =1= new subscription

       *       *       *       *       *

     =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

Do you Cover your Books?

    THE "ONE PIECE"
    ADJUSTABLE BOOK COVERS

are made of the strongest and best book-cover paper obtainable. This paper
is made in large quantities especially for these book covers and will
protect books perfectly. The book covers themselves are a marvel of
ingenuity, and, although they are in one piece and can be adjusted to fit
perfectly any sized book without cutting the paper, they are also so
simple that any boy or girl can use them; as they are already gummed they
are always ready for use.

A sample dozen will be mailed to any address for 20 cents (or ten two-cent
stamps) if you write

           WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US


   =8= _NEW...._
       _SUBSCRIBERS_

     WE WILL SEND A

                               =JUNIOR RIFLE=

     22 calibre, highly finished, with rebounding lock, case-hardened
     frame, detachable barrel, automatic shell ejector. Weight 4-1/2
     pounds.

[Illustration: Rifle]

                                      OR


                               =A "Shattuck New=
                               =Model" Shot=Gun=


     Side-snap action, rebounding lock, walnut pistol-grip stock, patent
     fore end, rubber butt, and pistol-grip cap, nickel frame,
     choke-bored, twist-steel barrel. 12 or 16 gauge.

           =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.          NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

...PREMIUMS...

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 4 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: A Pocket Kodak

     Measures 2-1/4 x 2-7/8 x 3-7/8 inches, makes a picture 1-1/2 x 2
     inches, and weighs only 5 ounces. Delivered ready for 12 exposures
     without reloading.]

The Lens is of the fixed focus type, and of sufficient length of focus
(2-1/2 inches) to avoid distortion.

Has improved rotary shutter and set of three stops for lens. The slides
for changing stops and for time exposures are alongside of the exposure
lever and always show by their position what stop is before the lens and
whether the shutter is set for time or instantaneous exposures, thus
acting as a warning.

In the _quality_ of the work they will do, Pocket Kodaks equal the best
cameras on the market. They make negatives of such perfect quality that
enlargements of any size can be made from them.

The Pocket Kodaks are covered with fine leather, and the trimmings are
handsomely finished and lacquered. They are elegant, artistic, and
durable.

=For one more subscription we will send with this camera a bicycle
carrying-case=

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 9 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: An Improved
    =No. 4=
   Bulls-Eye

     For pictures 4x5 inches; delivered ready for 12 exposures without
     reloading. Size of camera, 4-7/8 x 5-7/8 x 9-1/4 inches; weight 2
     pounds 2 ounces; length of focus of lens, 6-1/4 inches.]

Fitted with an achromatic lens of superior quality, having a set of
three stops; has two finders, one for vertical and one for horizontal
exposures; and is also provided with two sockets for tripod screws, one
for vertical and one for horizontal exposures. Fitted with improved
rotary shutter, for snap-shots or time exposures. Can be loaded in
daylight. Handsomely finished and covered with leather.

=Both of the above cameras are manufactured by the Eastman Kodak Co.,
Rochester, N.Y., and this is a guarantee of their worth=

                 =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.         NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   JULY 22, 1897.   NO. 37


The peace negotiations have not made very much progress during the past
week.

Turkey has announced to the Powers that she holds that Thessaly belongs
to her by right of conquest, and she is not willing to give it up.

But the Powers are determined to allow only a sum of money as a war
indemnity, and a rearrangement of the frontier whereby Turkey will gain
certain strategic points.

The Sultan has again asked the Emperor of Germany to help him to secure
Thessaly, but William has declined to interfere in the matter, and has
advised the Sultan to obey the wishes of the Powers.

The Czar of Russia has also written to the Sultan, urging him to accept
the conditions offered, and not delay the negotiations by making demands
on Greece which it will be impossible for her to accept.

The delay in the peace negotiations is causing considerable alarm in
Europe.

It seems that the Sultan's main object in writing to Germany and Russia
has been to gain time.

It is thought that he hopes the Powers will disagree and leave him free
to do as he pleases.

If, however, they still remain as firm as they are at present, he thinks
the delay may give time for the Mohammedans to calm down.

These people are now so excited over the success that has attended the
Turkish arms, that it is feared they will revolt against the Sultan if
he agrees to give up Thessaly.

We told you about the visit of the Sheik ul Islam to the Sultan.

These Sheiks are very powerful persons. It is perhaps a little difficult
to make you understand just how powerful they are, living as you do in a
country where such conditions do not exist.

The Sheiks are leaders of numerous tribes of people to whom their word
is absolute law, and whom they command as entirely as a father commands
his children, and for the reason that the tribesmen are in a measure the
children of the Sheik.

In the olden times family life was much stronger and closer than it is
to-day. The father of a family would continue to govern the affairs of
his sons after they had grown up and married and had families of their
own. Until his death, the father would be the ruler of his own group of
relatives, and when he was gone, his eldest son would become the head of
the family in his place.

As the grandchildren grew up and raised sons and daughters of their own,
the family would grow larger; but, while all obeyed their own fathers,
they also obeyed the rulings of the head or chief of the family.

It was the plan of leadership that we read of in the Bible--the
patriarchal system, as it was called.

The clans of the Highlands of Scotland are formed in a similar manner. A
member of a clan is simply a relative, a person of the same blood and
family as the head of the clan, and according to their custom he obeys
the commands of his chieftain.

In ancient times, when a Highland chieftain went to war, he had the
right to call on every man in the clan to join him. None who were able
to answer the call ever thought of refusing.

In the East to-day the patriarchal system prevails as strongly as ever.
The Sheiks or Chiefs are the rulers of the people, and can control and
command them as they please.

The people of the Eastern tribes are nearly all Mohammedans. As we have
told you before, they think it right to kill those who do not believe in
the Prophet Mohammed.

They would be very glad to gain possession of Thessaly and spread
Mohammedanism throughout the province. They are therefore most unwilling
that the Sultan should allow it to fall again into the hands of the
Greeks.

Should the Sultan consent to the demands of the Powers and restore
Thessaly, the Sheiks might call out their tribes and carry on the war
themselves.

The Sultan has therefore to be very careful not to anger them, and it is
for this reason that he delays, hoping that in time one party or the
other may give in.

The Powers are, however, quite tired of the delay, and the latest
despatch says that they have sent the Sultan a collective note, which
means a letter expressing the sentiments of all the diplomats concerned.

This note states that they cannot allow any further delay, and demands
that the Porte arrive at a decision immediately.

It is also stated on good authority that the Greek Government has
arranged a loan to pay the money that Turkey demands as a war indemnity,
so that just as soon as the peace negotiations are concluded Greece may
be ready to pay the required sum.

       *       *       *       *       *

The report about the wounding of General Gomez has been contradicted.

It seems that the Spaniards and Cubans had an engagement near the Jucaro
Moron trocha.

A body of insurgents under General Vega were trying to join the forces
of General Gomez, when they encountered the Spanish troops.

The insurgents gave battle, and were getting the best of the fight, when
a second Spanish column appeared in sight.

The insurgents, finding themselves outnumbered, retreated.

In the engagement General Vega was wounded, his horse being shot under
him, and he himself falling unconscious to the ground. His staff
surrounded him, and carried him away to a place of safety, but not
before the Spaniards had seen what had occurred.

Knowing Gomez to be in the neighborhood, they supposed it was he who had
been in command, and so the mistake arose.

It is a happy thing for the Cubans that Gomez is still spared to them.
The terrible disasters of the Greek campaign have shown us how necessary
good leaders are.

General Weyler has announced his intention of doing no more fighting
until the close of the rainy season.

He is on his way back to Havana. He has not pacified Santiago de Cuba as
he promised to do, but now declares that it is impossible to attempt any
military operations during the rainy season.

The Cubans do not agree with him. The rain has, so far, not dampened
their ardor.

Every day reports come to us that raids and skirmishes are taking place
all over the island.

On the outskirts of Havana the insurgents are keeping up a constant
fight. They are burning houses, and making the best of every opportunity
to harass the enemy.

A bold attempt was made to capture Fondeviela the other day; some fierce
fighting took place, but the Colonel eventually succeeded in driving off
the Cubans.

The case of Gen. Rius Rivera is likely to be settled without the
interference of the Spanish Government.

The unfortunate soldier is seriously ill, and not expected to live many
days. It is said that he is not dying of his wounds, but of a disease
that has developed since he has been in prison.

A late report says that the discontent among the Spanish soldiers in
regard to their pay has induced their officers to give them permission
to plunder where they can. The few unfortunates who have any property
left are now at the mercy of the soldiers.

This state of distress in the island is in great contrast to the
charming picture of peace and prosperity which it presented a few short
years ago.

A writer in _The Sun_ describes the island as it was before the breaking
out of the first war.

He says that in those days its commerce with this country amounted to a
hundred million dollars a year. It maintained an army of twenty thousand
Spanish soldiers, and its harbors were always filled with Spanish
vessels.

Havana was then one of the gayest capitals in the world. Its streets
were thronged with fine carriages, in which the beauties of the island
took their daily drives. At night all the fashion of the city would
congregate on the Plaza in front of the Governor's mansion, and listen
to the music of the military bands.

The people of the island were loyal and obedient to the wishes of the
mother country. They gave up the treasures of the island in return for a
kindly government.

In those days Spain called Cuba the ever-faithful island, because she
was the only American possession of Spain that still remained contented
under the rule of the mother country.

To travellers she seemed an earthly Paradise, and many were the stories
of the beauties of this favored isle.

No one could say enough pleasant things about its light-hearted, kindly
people, its marvellous vegetation, its lovely flowers, its delicious
fruits, and its generous soil in which anything that was planted would
grow.

When we think of Cuba to-day, laid waste by fire and sword, with barren
fields and starving people, we cannot help feeling that the causes must
have been great which led to such a terrible sacrifice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The only news relating to Hawaiian matters this week is that Japan is
seriously angry with us over the treatment her Minister at Washington
has received at the hands of the Secretary of State.

It would seem that the Japanese are extremely precise and particular
about the way their diplomatic affairs are conducted.

Their idea of what is necessary on such occasions is very different from
ours, and unfortunately the Japanese Ministers both at Honolulu and
Washington have not received the treatment that, according to their
views, is due them.

Minister Hoshi, in Washington, is so indignant that he was not informed
of the negotiations in regard to the treaty, that it is said he has
asked to be recalled to Japan.

His displeasure has been increased by Secretary Sherman's failure to
reply to his letter asking for an explanation.

       *       *       *       *       *

We told you that England had been making arrangements with Portugal to
secure Delagoa Bay, in South Africa, and that this contract, if
concluded, would give Great Britain the control of the only port
available for the people of the Transvaal.

President Krüger is, however, too clever a man to allow this to be done
without making some effort to secure the port for himself.

We told you that Dr. Leyds had been sent to England by the Boer
Government to arrange the trouble over the Transvaal Raid.

Dr. Leyds had a further commission, which he did not mention while he
was in London.

This was to try and secure possession of Delagoa Bay for his own
country.

He went to Paris, and organized a company to buy from Portugal certain
lands in Africa which should include Delagoa Bay, its ports and customs.

To prevent England getting any knowledge of what was going on, the
matter was arranged in Paris, and appeared on the surface to be a French
speculation.

But it has come to light that the large sums of money which will have to
be paid to conclude the matter are being subscribed in part by German
financiers, and the rest by the National Bank of the Transvaal.

It seems that it is an arrangement between Germany and the Transvaal.

As we have told you before, Germany is quite friendly with the South
African Republic, so much so that, at the time of the raid, the Emperor
of Germany very much displeased the English people by sending President
Krüger a telegram congratulating him on his victory over the raiders.

It is said that neither the English nor the Boer-German offer for
Delagoa Bay has as yet been accepted by Portugal.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news from India is of a very serious character.

We told you some months ago how the trees in Bengal province had been
marked, and how the European residents in India feared that it might be
the signal for another mutiny.

It would almost seem that their fears were well grounded.

On the clay of the Jubilee celebration in India the natives killed
Government officers in various parts of the country, and assumed a
hostile and impudent attitude toward Europeans generally.

Last week a riot broke out in one of the suburbs of the city of
Calcutta, and for more than forty-eight hours the mob held the town.

The trouble arose over a mosque or Mohammedan temple.

It is contrary to the rules of their religion to allow mosques to be
built on ground that belongs to unbelievers, but of late the Moslems
have been seizing on buildings owned by Europeans and Hindoos,
converting them into mosques, and then refusing to pay rent for them.

This practice has annoyed the land-owners very much, and at last one
owner, a Hindoo, determined to put an end to the nuisance.

The Mohammedans had seized a mud hut which he owned, and as usual they
refused to pay rent for it. The Hindoo appealed to the British
Government, and under its protection sent workmen over and had the hut
demolished.

This enraged the Mohammedans.

The hut had been converted into a mosque, and they regarded its
destruction as a wicked act.

They rose against the Europeans under whose authority this had been
done, attacked them, and the soldiers had to be called out to quell the
disturbance.

The riots lasted for two days. At the end of that time it was reported
that to pacify the mob the authorities had given them possession of the
land on which the mosque had stood.

The European residents were very angry when this news reached them. They
feared that it would make the people still more unruly, as they would be
sure to think the authorities were afraid of them if they gave in to
their demands.

This prediction appears to have been correct, for even after the rioters
had been subdued, it was unsafe for Europeans to venture into some parts
of Calcutta without protection.

It is stated that the authorities did not really give up the land, but
only allowed the rumor to be circulated for the sake of pacifying the
mob. The police have possession of the disputed property, and will not
allow any one to approach it.

It has developed that notwithstanding the fact that the owner of the
land was a Hindoo, there is no really bad feeling between the Hindoos
and the Mohammedans, but that both have combined against the Europeans.

It is distinctly an anti-European feeling. British authority is openly
defied by the natives, and the situation is regarded as very grave.

In Simla, which is the summer home of the Viceroy of India, there has
been more rioting.

A mob tried to seize upon a mosque, but the police and soldiers opened
fire on them, and a serious fight ensued.

The mob was finally repulsed, and the leader arrested.

Simla, which is one of the most fashionable of the Indian summer
resorts, is built high up among the Himalayan Mountains.

The seat of the government of India is really in Calcutta, but the heat
there is so intense during the summer months that the Europeans cannot
endure it.

For fully half the year the Viceroy, who is the representative of the
Queen, moves up to Simla, with his council and household, and the
government is carried on there.

That riots should have occurred at the seat of government makes the
Europeans still more uneasy.

Nor are these the only disturbances we have to record.

In a recent number we told you about the attack on one of the government
officials in the Fochi Valley.

There has been a fresh outbreak in the same place. A number of coolies
or porters, who were carrying provisions, were attacked and robbed.

This time the attacking party did not meet with such success. The
military commanders have been on the alert since the last outrage, and
no sooner was the news of the attack telegraphed, than a body of cavalry
started in pursuit of the offenders.

They were overtaken before they had time to reach their hill dwellings,
and fifty of them were captured and brought back as prisoners.

It is little to be wondered at that these various disturbances, coming
so closely one upon the other, should be causing the Europeans in India
a great deal of uneasiness.

It may be that the memories of the mutiny make them a little
over-anxious, but the situation is certainly very serious.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a report that the Siamese have invaded the French possessions
in Indo-China.

The French colonies in Asia consist of Cochin China, Tonquin, Anam, and
Cambodia, and since the year 1896 a large portion of Siam has been added
to them.

All these provinces lie to the east of Burmah and Siam, at the extreme
southeast of Asia.

The telegrams state that Cambodia has been invaded by the Siamese, who
have pillaged and burned many villages and carried off a number of
prisoners.

In Bangkok, which is the capital of Siam, and also in the provinces
ceded to France, French authority is no longer acknowledged.

The Siamese demand taxes of the people, and when they insist that they
are under French protection and must pay their taxes to France, their
claims are not listened to. All their papers which relate to the subject
are destroyed, and they are forced to pay the taxes demanded.

When the French in their turn ask for the taxes, the people naturally
refuse to pay them twice; then there are lawsuits, and the people who
will not pay are brought before the judges.

This, however, does little good to the French, for the courts refuse to
hear French complaints.

Some of the Cambodian chiefs who are under French protection have been
arrested by the Siamese, thrown into prison, and kept there many months
without being brought to trial.

It is thought that the King of Siam needs a lesson to teach him to be
more respectful to his European neighbors.

You remember that in the case of United States Vice-Consul Mr. Kellet at
Bangkok, that the trouble arose from the Siamese trying to seize the
property of an American citizen named Cheek, and that Siam did not want
to make amends for the wrong.

It seems that the French difficulty arises from much the same cause. The
Siamese Government does not like to see the taxes going out of its
hands, and so, despite its treaties, seizes them for itself.

The spread of civilization into Asia has taught these Eastern monarchs
many things, and they are no longer simple, docile people, who can be
overawed by the knowledge and power of the Europeans.

The Japanese have recently come to the front as a nation, and it would
not be surprising if the Siamese followed their example.

The King of Siam, who has just been visiting Europe to attend the
Jubilee celebrations, appears to be a clever and progressive monarch.

He has been visiting Rome, and has of course been taken to see the
wonderful art treasures that this very ancient city contains. His guides
were much impressed by the correct taste the King displayed in matters
of art. They declare that no artist could have made better comments on
the various pictures and statues shown him than this King of Siam, to
whom examples of Greek art were new.

The history of Italy and the deeds of its great men were also familiar
to this far-away King. In passing through one of the galleries he saw
the statues of King Victor Emmanuel of Italy and of Garibaldi, the two
men who had worked so bravely for the liberty of Italy.

The King of Siam stopped before these statues, uncovered his head, and
paid silent homage to the noble deeds of these two great heroes. His
suite followed his example, all the gentlemen in his train bowing with
uncovered heads and passing silently on.

The King also appears to have a keen sense of humor.

He was invited by one of the scientific societies of Rome to attend a
lecture on some very deep subject, in which he was not at all
interested.

He did not want to attend, but confided to King Humbert that he feared
the professors would call him a barbarian if he stayed away. So to the
lecture he went.

On his return King Humbert asked him how he had enjoyed it.

"To be frank with you," he replied, "it is even stronger at putting you
to sleep than our opium."

When the news of the trouble in Siam was telegraphed, the King declared
that he knew nothing of the affair. If he is as clever as they say, he
probably keeps himself thoroughly acquainted with everything that is
happening in his kingdom.

The chances are that he knows all about the matter, but does not want it
mentioned until his pleasure trip is over.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sad story of a wrecked steamer has just reached us.

The vessel, the _Aden_, was one of the steamers which carry passengers
from Europe to India, passing through the Suez Canal.

Heavy winds and storms have been raging in the Indian Ocean for some
weeks past; in fact, the storms and the earthquake about which we told
you came at the same time.

The unfortunate steamer was caught in one of these tempests, and driven
on a reef off Socotra Island.

Socotra is at the mouth of the Gulf of Aden. It is into this gulf that
the Red Sea flows.

As soon as the accident occurred the life-boats were launched, and some
of the passengers and crew were put aboard them.

Unhappily the sea was running so high that the boats could not live in
it. They were soon overturned and their occupants drowned.

Two other boats were smashed to pieces in the effort to launch them, and
finally seven persons found themselves forced to stay by the wreck.

The accident happened in the dead of night, and until the daylight came
they were clinging together, expecting that the vessel would go down at
any moment.

When morning came they found that the ship was so tightly wedged on the
rocks that she was not likely to sink, but they were out of sight of
land, and had no chance of rescue unless some passing vessel happened to
see them.

To add to their misery, great waves were constantly washing over the
wreck. They had taken refuge in one of the deck cabins, and here they
were forced to stay for three or four days until the waters became
calmer.

They were at first afraid that they would be starved, but a few biscuits
were found in the cabin, and on these they subsisted until it was safe
to cross the deck to the cook's galley without danger of being washed
overboard. Here they found provisions.

Two women were of the party, and they appear to have behaved very well,
doing their share toward making their comrades comfortable, and
preparing the best meals they could under the circumstances.

When the storm was so far abated that they dared to go on deck, they set
signals, in the hopes of attracting some passing vessel.

Two vessels, however, passed without noticing them, but at last, after
fourteen days of anxiety and fear, help came to them.

They were taken off the vessel and brought safely to land.

The owners of the _Aden_ made full inquiry into the cause of the
disaster, and attributed it to the storm, and not to any carelessness on
the part of captain or crew.

       *       *       *       *       *

There will have to be a new trial of the case against the Tobacco Trust,
the jury having been discharged by the court.

We told you, in reference to the _Laurada_ trial, that it was necessary
for all the twelve jurymen to agree before a verdict could be secured.

When a trial is finished and the case is given to the jury, the jurymen
in the charge of the sheriff are locked up in the jury-room and kept
there until they arrive at a decision or the judge dismisses them.

When the jurors arrive in their own room, a ballot is taken, and if the
vote is not unanimous they begin a regular discussion of the case. A
foreman of the jury is chosen at the beginning of the trial, and serves
as chairman of the jury while the case is in their hands.

After he thinks the matter has been well weighed, the foreman asks the
jurymen if they are ready to vote. Another ballot is then taken, each
man registering his opinion.

The foreman counts the votes.

If the jury is not all of the same way of thinking, the matter is again
discussed and a new ballot taken.

In the Tobacco Trust trial the jury was "out," as it is called,
twenty-one hours. During that time forty ballots were taken, ten of the
jury voting "guilty" and two "not guilty."

At the end of that time one of the jurors was taken ill. The foreman
sent a request for a doctor, and asked the judge to dismiss the jury, as
it was impossible for them to come to a decision.

The judge has the right to keep the jury locked up until he is satisfied
that they cannot arrive at a verdict.

In this instance he kept them three hours longer, and then, finding them
still divided ten to two, he discharged them.

In English and American law there are only two verdicts, "Guilty" or
"Not guilty," and a person who has once been adjudged not guilty can
never be tried again for the same crime. In Scotland they have a third
verdict--"Not proven." Under this verdict a person regains his liberty,
but he can be tried again at any time that fresh evidence against him is
secured.

The jurors would probably have agreed on the verdict of "Not proven" had
it been in use in our courts, but, as it is, there will have to be
another trial of the Tobacco Trust as soon as the District Attorney is
ready to prosecute.

       *       *       *       *       *

People living in New York have long complained of the lack of
accommodation on the surface and elevated roads.

During the crowded hours of the day it does not seem possible to put on
enough cars to seat the passengers.

Men and women have to stand in these crowded cars, packed as closely as
herrings in a barrel.

After enduring this nuisance for many years with surprising patience,
the people have at last sought the aid of the Board of Health.

They have complained to the Board that standing in the cars is injurious
to the health of women and persons in delicate health.

When the summer came on and the crowding nuisance was not abated, but
the discomforts were considerably increased by the neglect of the
companies to provide straps in the open cars for the people to hold on
to, the complaints increased to such an extent that the Board of Health
decided to take immediate action.

A careful investigation was commenced, and it was found that in rounding
the curve at Fourteenth Street and Broadway, and the sharp curves at
Fifty-third Street, every person who was not provided with a seat was in
danger of losing life or limb.

The standing passengers were jostled, jolted, and flung this way and
that, without sufficient protection against being thrown off the cars.

Inspectors from the Health Board were stationed at the different points
to ascertain just how many persons were forced to travel in this
dangerous manner.

The inspector detailed to watch the Lexington Avenue branch of the cable
road reported that during two hours, 1,750 had been standing up in the
135 cars that had passed him.

From the various reports it was seen that most of this crowding could be
stopped if the companies made rules to regulate the number of passengers
allowed in each car, and provided enough cars to accommodate their
patrons.

When the reports were all in, the Health Board met to discuss the
matter.

One of its members is the President of the Board of Police. His
department has had a great deal of trouble with the Broadway Cable
Company.

It has been necessary to station extra policemen along the route to help
people to cross the tracks in safety. Several policemen have been
injured at the curves, and the Police Board has no love for the
railroad.

At the meeting he introduced a resolution which he wished to make a part
of the Sanitary Code.

