
We see therefore between the visualized image and the thought content,
which is, as it were, represented by it, a number of relations. The whole
image resolves itself insofar as it has characteristic features, almost
entirely into such elements as are most closely related to the thought
content. Apart from these connections of the material category, the image
represents also my momentary psychic condition (transition to sleep).
Whoever is going to sleep is, as it were, in the mental state of sinking
into a dark sea. (The sinking into water or darkness, entrance into a
forest, etc., are frequently-occurring threshold symbols.) The clearness
of ideas vanishes there and everything melts together just as did the
water and the atmosphere in the image.

This example is but to illustrate; it is in itself much too slight and
simple to make any striking revelation of the remarkable interlacing of
the two kinds of symbolism. I refer to my studies on symbolism and on
dreams in the bibliography. Exhaustive treatment at this point would lead
us too far afield. Let us rest satisfied then with the facts that the
psychoanalysts simultaneously deal with two fundamentally different lines
of interpretation in a product of the phantasy (dream, etc.), quite apart
from the multiple determinants which they can find within the material as
well as in the functional categories; both lines of interpretation are
supplied by the same fabric of images, indeed often by the same elements
of this image fabric. This context therefore must have been sought out
artfully enough by the creative unconscious to answer the double
requirement.

The coexistence of the material meaning with the functional is not
entirely puzzling to the student of psychoanalysis. Two facts must be kept
in mind throughout.

In the first place, we are acquainted with the principle of multiple
determination or condensation. The multiplicity of the dimly moving latent
dream thoughts condenses into a few clear dream forms or symbols, so that
one symbol continually, as it were, appears as the representative of
several ideas, and is therefore interpretable in several ways. That it
should be susceptible of more than one interpretation can cause no
surprise because the fundamental significance (the latent thoughts) were
the very ones that, by association, caused the selection of the symbols
from an infinite series of possibilities. In the shaping of the dream, and
therefore in the unconscious dream work, only such pictorial elements
could penetrate into consciousness as satisfied the requirements of the
multiple determination. The principle of multiple determination is valid
not only within the material and the functional categories, but makes the
fusion of both in the symbol in question to some extent intelligible.
Elements of both categories take an active part in the choice of the
symbol. On the one hand, a number of affects press on towards the symbolic
representation of objects to which they direct themselves (objects of
love, hate, etc.). On the other hand, the psyche takes cognizance of its
own impulses, play of affects, etc., and this perception will gain
representation. Both impulses take part in the choice of those symbols
which thrust themselves into the nascent consciousness of phantasy, and so
the dream, like the poem, etc., besides the symbolism of the wish
tendencies (material categories) that animate them, bears the stamp of the
psychic authorship (functional category) of the dreamer or the author.
[Ferenczi defends the view for the myth also that the material symbolism
must coincide with the functional (Imago I, p. 283).]

Secondly, it has been shown in recent times in psychoanalytic studies that
symbols which were originally material pass over to functional use. If we
thoroughly analyze for a sufficient time the dreams of a person we shall
find that certain symbols which at first probably appeared only
incidentally to signify some idea content, wish content, etc., return and
become a persistent or typical form. And the more such a typical form is
established and is impressed, the farther it is removed from its first
ephemeral meaning, and the more it becomes a symbolic representative of a
whole group of similar experiences, a spiritual capital, so to speak, till
finally we can regard it simply as the representative of a spiritual
current (love, hate, tendency to frivolity, to cruelty, to anxiety, etc.).
What has been accomplished there is a transition from the material to the
functional on the path of a determination inward or intro-determination
(verinnerlichung) as I shall call it. Later I shall have more to say about
intro-determination. For the present this may suffice for the
understanding, that the material and the functional symbolism, in spite of
their at first apparently fundamental difference, are essentially related
in some way, which is illuminated by the process of intro-determination.

The analogue of the problem of multiple interpretation unfolded in the
preceding section is shown to be a question that can be easily answered.
And we would bring our problem to a generally satisfactory position if we
succeeded in showing that the anagogic interpretation, whose alignment
with the psychoanalytic seemed so impracticable, is a form of functional
interpretation, or at least related to it. In this case it would be at
once comprehensible how a product of the imagination harmonizes with
several expositions (problem of multiple interpretation); because this
variety of sense had already operated in the selection of the symbol and
indeed, in those cases as well where we did not at first sight suspect the
coöperation of the anagogic thoughts; secondly, the anagogic and the
psychoanalytic interpretations are somehow reconciled to each other,
whereby possibly also the position of the natural science interpretation
can be made somewhat clearer.

The possibility that the anagogic has some part in the creation of the
functional, will be brought nearer by the fact that our previously offered
anagogic expositions (fairy tales, parabola) markedly resemble functional
interpretations. In the tale of the six swans Hitchcock explains the
reception of the maiden into the castle as the reception of sin into the
heart; the seven children are the seven virtues (consequently spiritual
tendencies). The small maiden is conscience, the tissues are processes of
thought. In the story of the three feathers, again, one son is conscience;
the secret door is the entrance to the inner life, to spiritual
absorption, the three feathers are spiritual tendencies, etc. In the dream
of the "flying post" conscience appears as the conductor. The "Mills of
God," which psychologically also represents conscience, the more
strikingly because the burden of sin, guilty feeling, drives them, also
appear in the parable. The lion or the dragon which must be overcome on
the mystic path is again a spiritual force. The approximation to the
functional category is not to be denied. Processes that show an interplay
of spiritual powers are symbolically represented there. But we are at once
struck with a difference. The true functional phenomenon, as I have so far
described it, pictures the actual psychic state or process; the anagogic
image appears on the contrary to point to a state or process that is to be
experienced in the future. We shall pass over for a time the last topic,
which will not, however, be forgotten, and turn to the question as to the
point on which the anagogic and the functional interpretations can best be
brought together. This point appears to me to be introversion, first
because it is related to the previously mentioned intro-determination, and
second, because it is familiar to psychoanalysis and is of great
importance in anagogic method.

The term "introversion" comes from C. G. Jung. It means sinking into one's
own soul; the withdrawal of interest from the outer world; the seeking for
joys that can be afforded by the inner world. The psychology of the
neuroses has led to the concept of introversion, a province, therefore,
which principally treats of morbid forms and functions of introversion.
The sinking of oneself into one's own soul also appears exactly as a
morbid losing of oneself in it. We can speak of introversion neuroses.
Jung regards dementia precox as an introversion neurosis. Freud, who has
adopted the concept of introversion [with some restrictions] regards the
introversion of the libido as a regular and necessary precondition of
every psychoneurosis. Jung (Jb. ps. F., III, p. 159) speaks of "certain
mental disturbances [he means dementia precox] which are induced by the
fact that the patients retire more and more from reality, sink into their
phantasy, whereby in proportion as reality loses its force, the inner
world takes on a reality and determining power." We may also define
introversion as a resignation of the joys of the outer world (probably
unattainable or become troubled) and a seeking for the libido sources in
one's own ego. So we see how generally self-chastisement, introversion and
autoerotism are connected.

The turning away from the outer world and turning in to the inner, is
required by all those methods which lead to intensive exercise of religion
and a mystic life. The experts in mysteries provide for opportunities that
should encourage introversion. Cloisters and churches are institutions of
introversion. The symbolism of religious doctrine and rite is full of
images of introversion, which is, in short, one of the most important
presuppositions of mysticism.

Religious and mythical symbolism has countless images for introversion;
e.g., dying, going down, subterranean crypts, vaults, dark temples, into
the underworld, hell, the sea, etc.; being swallowed by a monster or a
fish (as Jonah), stay in the wilderness, etc. The symbols for introversion
correspond in large part with those that I have described for going to
sleep and waking (threshold symbolism), a fact that can be readily
appreciated from their actual similarity. The descent of Faust to the
mothers is an introversion symbol. Introversion fulfills here clearly the
aim of bringing to reality, i.e., to psychological reality, something that
is attainable only by phantasy (world of the past, Helen).

In Jacob Boehme (De Vita Mentali) the disciple says to the master, "How
may I attain suprasensuous life, so that I may see God and hear him
speak?" The master says, "When you can lift yourself for one moment into
that realm where no creature dwelleth, you will hear what God speaks." The
disciple says, "Is that near or far?" The master says, "It is in
yourself."

The hermetics often urge retirement, prayer and meditation, as
prerequisites for the work; it is treated of still more in the
hieroglyphic pictures themselves. The picture of death is already familiar
to us from the hermetic writings, but in the technical language there are
still other expressions for introversion, e.g., the shutting up in the
receptacle, the solution in the mercury of the sages, the return of the
substance to its radical condition (by means of the "radical" or root
dampness).

Similar features in our parable are the wandering in the dense forest, the
stay in the lion's den, the going through the dark passage into the
garden, the being shut up in the prison or, in the language of alchemy,
the receptacle.

Introversion is continually connected with regression. Regression, as may
be recalled from the 2d section of Part I, is a harking back to more
primitive psychic activities, from thinking to gazing, from doing to
hallucinating; a striving back towards childhood and the pleasures of
childhood. Introversion accordingly is accompanied by a desire for
symbolic form of expression (the mystical education is carried on in
symbols), and causes the infantile imagos to revive--chiefly the mother
image. It was pre-eminently father and mother who appeared as objects of
childish love, as well as of defiance. They are unique and imperishable,
and in the life of adults there is no difficulty in reawakening and making
active those memories and those imagos. We easily comprehend the fact that
the symbolic aim of the previously mentioned katabasis always has a
maternal character; earth, hole, sea, belly of fish, etc., that all are
symbols for mother and womb. Regression revives the OEdipus complex with
its thoughts of incest, etc. Regression leads back to all these relics now
done away with in life and repressed. It actually leads into a sort of
underworld, into the world of titanic wishes, as I have called them. How
far this was the case in the alchemistic parable, I have fully shown in
the psychoanalytic treatment of it. Here I need merely to refer to the
maternal nature of the symbols cited: receptacle, mercury of the sages
("mother of metals") and radical moisture, also called "milk" and the
like.

Fairy tales have frequently a very pretty functional symbolism for the way
in which introversion leads to the mother imago. Thus the simpleton in the
fairy tale of the feathers comes through the gate of introversion exactly
into the family circle, to the mother that cares for him. There his love
finds its satisfaction. There he even gets a daughter, replica of the
mother imago, for a wife.

In the parable the wandering in the forest (introversion) is followed by
the battle (suggestive of incest) with the lion (father or mother in their
awe inspiring form); the inclusion in the receptacle (introversion) by the
accomplishment of the incest.

If it is now clear also that in introversion, as a result of the
regression that is connected with it, visions of "titanic" emotions
(incest, separating of parents, etc.) are encountered, yet it has not
become in the slightest degree comprehensible how these visions are
related to the treatment of anagogic ideas. And that is indeed the
question.

We can really understand these striking facts better if we recall what I
have said above about the type formation and the intro-determination of
the symbols, namely, that symbols can depart from their original narrower
meaning and become types for an entire class of experiences whereby an
advance is made from the material to the functional meaning. Some examples
will elucidate this.

I have observed particularly fine cases of intro-determination in a series
of experiments in basin divination (lecanomancy) which I have carried on
for several years. Lecanomancy resembles crystal gazing, except that the
gazer looks into a basin of water. In the visions of my subject, Lea,
typical forms were pictured, which always recurred. Regarded as symbols
they were, as subsequent analysis showed, almost all subjected to inward
accentuation or intro-determination. Thus, for instance, a black cat
appeared. At first it appeared as representative of Lea's grandmother, who
was cat-like, malicious and fawning. Later the cat stood for the
corresponding traits that she perceived in herself. Above all the cat is
the symbol of her grandmother, so the grandmother (or cat) is a mental
current of Lea. Frequently there appears in the image a Dyas, sometimes in
the shape of a two-headed snake, of two hands, of two feet, or of a woman
with two faces, etc. Above all, every antithesis appears to have some
external meaning, two men who love each other, etc. So it becomes clear
that the common element which finds its most pregnant expression in the
double faced woman is the Dyas in itself and that it means bisexuality,
psychic hermaphroditism. More than that it is definitely certain that the
deepest sense of the symbol means a complete dissociation of Lea's
character into two different personalities, one of which may be called the
savage and the other the mild. (Lea herself uses the expressions cynical
and ideal personality.) In one of the later experiments Lea saw her cynic
double vividly personified and spoke in this character, which is closely
related to the "black cat." The Dyas in the symbols has the value first of
a representation of externals (two lovers, etc.), then as symbols of
bisexuality. The sexual Dyas can again be conceived as a symbol or
characteristic of a still more general and comprehensive dissociation of
the ego. A further symbol and one still more tending towards
intro-determination was death. Starting from connections with definite
external experiences and ideas of actual death, the meaning of the symbol
became more and more spiritual, till it reached the meaning of the fading
away of psychic impulses. What died symbolically or had to die was
represented by an old man who sacrificed himself after suffering all kinds
of fortune. The dying of this old man signified, as analysis showed, the
same thing that we call the "putting off the old Adam" (turning over a new
leaf). The figure of the old man, originally Lea's grandfather, then her
father, came to have this meaning only after a long process of
intro-determination.

A few more examples for typical figures.

In many dreams of a woman analyzed by me (Pauline, in my treatise Zur
Symbolbildung), a cow appears as a typical image. The alternation of this
cow with more or less definite mother symbols leads to identification of
the cow with the mother. Two circumstantial dreams that were fully
analyzed showed, however, that the cow and other forms with which she
alternated cannot be translated so correctly by the concept of mother as
by that of the maternal authority and finally still more correctly by
self-criticism or conscience, of which maternal authority is but a type.
Children figure in Pauline's case as a result of various experiences, as
typical of obstacles.

In the case of another dreamer the father stands in similar relation as
the determinant that paralyzes his resolutions.

The climbing of an ascent, usually a symbol of coitus (hurrying upward
which makes us out of breath), turns out often in a deeper relation as the
effort to get from the disagreeable things of life to a place of retreat
(lonely attics, etc.), inaccessible to other persons (= thoughts); and now
we see that this deeper meaning appears without prejudice to the first,
for even coitus, like all transport, is only a special case of flight from
the outer life, one of the forms of spiritual oblivion. Hence in part the
mythologically and psychopathologically important comparison of
intoxication, intoxicating drink and sperm, soma and semen. Ascent =
coitus is in this case a type for a quite comprehensive class of
experience.

Marcinowski found in his analyses that the father in dream life often was
a "symbol of an outlived, obsolete attitude." (Z. Bl. f. Ps., II, 9.)

Other examples of types are the phallus, the sun and other religiously
revered objects, if we regard them as does Jung (Wandl. u. Sym., Jb. ps.
F., III-IV) as a symbol of the libido. [The concept of which is extended
by Jung almost to Schopenhauer's Will.] The typical character of divine
personalities is moreover quite clearly emphasized by Jung himself.

The snake, about whose significance as a "negative phallus," etc.
[developed in detail by Jung], we shall have more to say, can also be
regarded as a typical image. Bull, cow and other animal forms are in
mythology as in dreams typical transmutations, with unlimited possibility
of intro-determination. Dogs are often in dreams the representations of
animal propensities. The beast is often "la bête humaine" in the dreamer's
own inner life. We have become acquainted with the terrible lions, the
bears, etc., as father types; here we get a new perspective which makes
clear the one-sidedness of our first conception.

Since psychoanalysis has found acceptation, many of its followers believe
they are able to solve, with their work of analysis alone, all the
psychological, esthetic and mythological problems that come up. We
understand only half of the psychic impulses, as indeed we do all
spiritual development, if we look merely at the root. We have to regard
not merely whence we come but also whither we go. Then only can the course
of the psyche be comprehended, ontogenetically as well as
phylogenetically, according to a dynamic scheme as it were.

If we apply this fundamental principle to symbolism there develops
therefrom the obligation to keep both visible poles in view, between which
the advance of significance, the process of intro-determination is
completed. (An externalization is also possible, yet the internalization
or intro-determination must be regarded as the normal process.) [It
corresponds namely to the process of education and progress of culture.
This will soon be cleared up.] To the most general type belong then,
without doubt, those symbols or frequently disguised images, concerning
which we wondered before, that besides representing "titanic" tendencies,
they are fitted to represent the anagogic. The solution of the riddle is
found the instant we regard these images as types with a certain degree of
intro-determination, as types for a few fundamental forces of the soul,
with which we are all endowed, and whose typical symbols are for that
reason of general applicability. [I will therefore call these types the
human elementary types.] For example, if by psychoanalysis we deduce
father and mother, etc., from some of the symbols appearing in dreams, we
have in these representations of the psychic images, as the psychoanalyst
calls them, in reality derived mere types whose meaning will change
according to the ways of viewing them, somewhat as the color of many
minerals changes according to the angle at which we hold them to the
light. The actual father or mother, the experiences that surrounded them,
were the material used in the formation of the types; they were external
things even if important, while later the father, etc., emerging as
symbol, may have significance as a type of the spiritual power of the very
person in question; a spiritual power to be sure, which the person in
question feels to be like a father for otherwise the father figure would
not be suited for the symbol. And we can go so far as to call this
spiritual power a father image. That should not however, mislead us into
taking that real person, who in the individual case generally (though not
always) has furnished the type, for the real or the most essential. The
innermost lies in ourselves and is only fashioned and exercised upon
persons of the external world.

So then we get for the typical symbol a double perspective. The types are
given, we can look through them forward and backward. In both cases there
will be distortions of the image; we shall frequently see projected upon
each other, things that do not belong together, we shall perceive
convergences at vanishing points which are to be ascribed only to
perspective. I might for brevity's sake call the errors so resulting
errors of superposition. The significance of this concept will, I hope,
come to have still greater validity in psychoanalysis. [This error of
superposition C. G. Jung attempts to unmask, when he writes: "As libido
has a forward tendency, so in a way, incest is that which tends backward
into childhood. It is not incest for the child, and only for the adult,
who possesses a well constituted sexuality, does this regressive tendency
become incest in that he is no longer a child, but has a sexuality that
really no longer can suffer a regressive application." (Jung, Psychology
of the Unconscious.) It may moreover be remarked that Freud also is
careful not to take the incest disclosed by psychoanalysis in too physical
a sense.] This error of superposition is found not only in the view
backward but in the forward view. So what I, as interpreter of mystical
symbolism, may say about the possible development of the soul will be
affected by this error of superposition. It is not in my power to correct
it. In spite of everything, the treatment of symbolism from the two points
of view must be superior to the onesided treatment; in order to
approximate a fundamental comprehension, which to be sure remains an
ideal, the different aspects must be combined and in order to make this
clear I have added a synthetic treatment to the analytic part of my work.

Looking back through the elementary types, we see the infantile images
together with those non-moral origins that psychoanalysis discovers in us;
looking forward we notice thoughts directed to certain goals that will be
mentioned later. The elementary types themselves thanks to
intro-determination represent however a collection of our spiritual
powers, which we have first formed and exercised at the time that the
images arose, and which are in their nature closely related to these
images, indeed completely united with them as a result of the errors of
superposition--this collection of powers, I say, accompanies us through our
entire life and is that from which are taken the powers that will be
required for future development. The objects or applications change, the
powers remain almost the same. The symbolism of the material categories
which depends on external things changes with them; but the symbolism of
the functional categories, which reflects these powers remains constant.
The types with their intro-determination belong to the functional
categories; and so they picture the constant characters.

That experience to which the suggestions of symbolism (brought to verbal
expression by means of introversion) point as to a possible spiritual
development, corresponds to a religious ideal; when intensively lived out
this development is called mysticism. [We can define mysticism as that
religious state which struggles by the shortest way towards the
accomplishment of the end of religion, the union with the divinity; or as
an intensive cultivation of oneself in order to experience this union.] It
presents itself if instead of looking backward we gaze forward from our
elementary types to the beyond. But let us not forget that we can regard
mysticism only as the most extreme, and therefore psychically the most
internal, unfolding of the religious life, as the ideal which is hardly to
be attained, although I consider that much is possible in this direction.
If my later examination carries us right into the heart of mysticism,
without making the standpoint clear every time, we now know what
restrictions we must be prepared for.

If I take the view that those powers, whose images (generally veiled in
symbolism) are the elementary types, do not change, I do not intend to
imply that it is not possible to sublimate them. With the increasing
education of man they support a sublimation of the human race which yet
shows in recognizable form the fundamental nature of the powers. One of
the most important types, in which this transformation process is
consummated and which refines the impulse and yet allows some of its
character to remain, is the type mother, i.e., incest. Among religious
symbols we find countless incest images but that the narrow concept of
incest is no longer suited to their psychological basis (revealed through
analysis) has been, among psychoanalysts, quite clearly recognized by
Jung. Therefore in the case of every symbolism tending to ethical
development, the anagogic point of view must be considered, and most of
all in religious symbolism. The impulse corresponding to the religious
incest symbols is preeminently to be conceived in the trend toward
introversion and rebirth which will be treated of later. [Vid. note C, at
the end of the volume.]

I have just used the expression "sublimation." This Freudian term and
concept is found in an exactly similar significance in the hermetic
writers. In the receptacle where the mystical work of education is
performed, i.e., in man, substances are sublimated; in psychological terms
this means that impulses are to be refined and brought from their baseness
to a higher level. Freud makes it clear that the libido, particularly the
unsocial sexual libido, is in favorable circumstances sublimated, i.e.,
changed into a socially available impelling power. This happens in the
evolution of the human race and is recapitulated in the education of the
individual.

I take it for granted that the fundamental character of the elementary
psychic powers in which the sublimation is consummated is the more
recognizable the less the process of sublimation is extended in time. In
mysticism, e.g., the fundamental character penetrates the primal motive
because the latter wishes to lead the relatively slightly sublimated
impulses by a shortened process to the farthest goal of sublimation.
Mysticism undertakes to accomplish in individuals a work that otherwise
would take many generations. What I said therefore about the
unchangeability of the fundamental powers or their primal motive, is
wholly true of its fate in mystical development.

The Mohammedan mystic Arabi (1165-1240) writes, "Love as such, in its
individual life, is the same for sensuous and spiritual, therefore equally
for every Arab (of an allegory) and for me, but the objects of love are
different. They loved sensible phenomena while I, the mystic, love the
most intimate existence." (Horten, Myst. Texte, p. 12.)

The religious-mystical applications of the fundamental powers represented
by the types, in the sense of a sublimation, does not manifest therefore
in contrast to their retrospective form (titanic, purposeless form) an
essentially foreign nature; the important novelty in them is that they no
longer are used egotistically but have acquired a content that is
ethically valuable, to which the intro-determination was an aid. This
determination, whose external aspects we have noticed in the types or
symbols, is only the visible expression of a far more important actual
intro-determination whose accomplishment lies in an amplification of
personality, and will later be considered in detail.

In the psychoanalytic consideration of the alchemistic parable it would
appear that only the titanic impulses were realized there, e.g., to have
the mother as a lover and to kill the father. Now it corresponds to a
really significant intro-determination when we hear that in the
alchemistic work the father is the same as the son, and when we understand
that the father is a state, or psychic potentiality, of the "son," whom
the latter in himself, has to conquer, exactly in the same manner as Lea
in the lecomantic study strove to put off the old man.

The alchemist Rulandus (Lex., p. 24) quotes the "Turba": "Take the white
tree, build him a round, dark, dew-encircled house, and set in it a
hundred year-old man and close it so that no wind or dust can get to him
(introversion); then leave him there eight days. I tell you that that man
will not cease to eat of the fruit of that tree till he becomes a youth. O
what a wonderful nature, for here is the father become son and born
again." Ibid: "The stone [that is in the anagogic sense, man] is at first
the senex, afterwards young, so it is said filius interficit patrem; the
father must die, the son be born, die with each other and be renewed with
each other."

We must proceed similarly if we wish to interpret the parable
anagogically.

What I have already taken from the anagogic fairy tale interpretation as a
symbol of introversion shows, of course, also the character of
intro-determination.

As for the nature of the relatively unchangeable spiritual tendencies
represented by the elementary types [That can also be called in
mythological study primal motives] a simple examination of the essentials
without any psychological hair splitting, brings us at once to an
elementary scheme that will help us to understand the changes
(intro-determination) that take place in accordance with the elementary
types. We need here only to examine the simplest reactions of the
individual, necessarily produced by rubbing up again the external world;
reactions which become persistent forms of experience that are
approximately as self-evident as the libido itself. The degree of egoism
which is active in the elementary tendencies must, according to the
experience of psychoanalysis, be considered very great. For this purpose I
have selected in what follows an excessively egotistical expression for
the "titanic" aspect, the retrospective form, of the tendencies; and this
same excessive expression which would seem to be rather objectionable when
applied to the basis of a religious development, enables us, thanks to the
principle of intro-determination, to understand this development.

Starting from the libido in the most general sense we arrive first of all
at the two phenomena, the agreeableness and the disagreeableness, from
which results at once, acceptance and aversion. Obstacles may aggravate
both activities, so that acceptance becomes robbery and aversion becomes
annihilation. These possibilities can to be sure only become acts in so
far as they prove practically feasible. In all cases they are present in
the psyche, and in this crude primal form play no small part in the soul
of the child. It is indeed only a blind sentimentality that can raise the
child to an angelic status, from which it is as far removed as from its
opposite. We should be careful not to regard the crude form of the impulse
as crude in the sense of an educated humanity, which must see in the
crudeness something morally inferior. In robbery and annihilation there
exists on the primitive or childish level hardly the slightest germ of
badness. There is much to be said about the psychology and morality of the
child. I cannot, however, enter very deeply into this broad topic,
interesting though it is.

The primal tendencies, when directed toward the persons in the
environment, produce certain typical phenomena. I can unfortunately
describe them only with expressions which, if the cultured man uses them,
evoke the idea of crime. An ethically colorless language should be made
available for these things. [The dream and the myth have found for them
the language of symbolism.] The opposition of a fellow man against the
working out of an impulse arouses a tendency to overcome this man, to get
him out of the way, to kill him. The type of the obstructing man is always
the instructor (father, eventually mother). That he is at the same time a
doer of good is less appreciated because the psychical apparatus takes the
satisfaction of desires as the natural thing, which does not excite its
energy nearly as much as does a hindrance to its satisfaction.
[Recognition of a good deed, thankfulness, etc., regularly presuppose
sublimation; they do not belong to the titanic aspect. A form of
appreciation of this kindness however comes to mind. Towards the mother
there occurs on the part of the child, though it has been completely
overlooked for a long time, very early and gradually increasing, a
sexually-toned feeling, although the manifestations of this feeling are
very dim and at times may completely disappear. In this "love" is
contained a germ of desire, of erotic appropriation-to-self. Any woman in
the environment and especially the mother must needs supply the ideal of
the desired woman. In so far as the father is perceived as an obstacle to
the love towards the mother he must, in the elementary tendency, be killed
to remove the obstacle, and there arises the murder impulse belonging to
the OEdipus Complex. [The child has no clear idea of death. It is only a
matter of wishing to have some one out of the way. If this primal motive
appears to us subsequently as a "killing," it is again only because of the
error of superposition, just as in the later mentioned "rape."] In so far
as the mother herself does not meet the desired tenderness or in refusing,
acts as a corrective agent, while carrying on the education, she, too,
becomes an obstacle, a personality contrasting with the "dear" mother, a
contrast which plunges the psyche in anxiety and bitterness. Anxiety comes
principally from the conflict of psychical tendencies, which result from
the same person being both loved and hated. The correlative to the denying
action of the mother is to commit rape on her. Another cause of the
attraction towards the mother besides the erotically toned one, is the
desire for her care, called forth by the hardships encountered elsewhere
in the world. It is an indolence opposed to the duties of life. The
propensity towards ease is psychologically a very important factor. The
home is in general the place of protection; the characteristic embodiment
of this is preëminently the mother. We speak of maternal solicitude but
less of paternal solicitude. I have noted the solicitous mother type in
the story of the three feathers, where the mother toad bestows the gifts
from the big box. In so far as the solicitous person refuses the requests
made of her and for reasons of necessity thrusts the child out into the
world, or in so far as any other obstacles (demands of life) stand in the
way of the gratification of the lazy, "feed me" state of mind, like the
angel with the flaming sword before the entrance to paradise, so far the
obstructing power appears as the type of the "terrible" mother, a picture
whose terribleness is yet intensified by the working of the incest
conflict. In this aspect therefore the otherwise beloved mother is a
hostile personality.

To the process of education on the part of the parents, felt as pedantry
by the child, or to otherwise misunderstood action, he opposes a well
known defiance, and there results, as also from the attempt to change in
general the rough path of life, the hopeful attempt to get a creative
"improvement," which I have already discussed. The wish to die sometimes
occurs. Further the obstacles that stand in the way of the full erotic
life in the external world, in so far as they are insuperable or are not
overcome on account of laziness, lead to autoerotism. (That this is found
even in early childhood is for the mechanism of the impulses, a
side-issue. The scheme just given is not to be regarded as a historical or
chronological development, but the tendencies are quite as intimately
connected with each other as with the acquisition of the psychical
restraints that are not generally brought to view; in separating them we
commit something like an error.)

We have considered the following main forces: 1. Removal of obstacles. 2.
Desire for the solicitude of the parents. 3. Desire for the pleasurable
[especially of the woman]. 4. Auto-erotism. 5-6. Improvement and
re-creation. 7. Death wish. The following scheme shows the retrograde
(titanic) as well as the anagogic aspect of these powers, which later
corresponds to an intro-determination of the types, and a species of
sublimation of impulses.

RETROGRADE ASPECT.               ANAGOGIC ASPECT.
1. Killing of the father.        Killing of the old Adam.
2. Desire for the mother         Introversion.
(laziness).
3. Incest.                       Love towards an Ideal.
4. Auto-erotism.                 Siddhi.(4)
5. Copulation with the mother.   Spiritual regeneration.
6. Improvement.                  Re-creation.(5)
7. Death wish.                   Attainment of the ideal.

We need not scent anything extraordinary behind these
intro-determinations, as the scheme is here indeed only roughly sketched;
they take place in each and every one of us, otherwise we should be mere
beasts. Only they do not in every one of us rise to the intensity of the
mystical life.

A more careful inquiry into the mechanism of the psychic powers in the
development of mysticism, would show in greater detail how everything that
happens is utilized toward intro-determination in the process of
education. It would be interesting as an example to discover the
application of the special senses to introversion and ascertain the fate
of the sense qualities. It is quite remarkable what a prominent rôle
tastes and smells often play in descriptions given by persons who have
followed the path of mysticism. I mention the odor of sanctity and its
opposite in the devilish, evil odor. The experimenter in magic
Staudenmaier, who will be mentioned later, has established in his own case
the coördination of his partial souls (personifications, autonomous
complexes) to definite bodily functions and to definite organs. Certain
evil, partial souls, which appear to him in hallucinations as diabolical
goat faces, were connected with the function of certain parts of the lower
intestine.

Mysticism stimulates a much more powerful sublimation of impulses than the
conventional education of men. So it is not strange if intro-determination
does not accomplish its desires quickly but remains fragmentary. In such
unfortunate or fragmentary cases, the inward-determined powers show more
than mere traces of their less refined past. The heroes of such miscarried
mysticism appear as rather extraordinary saints. So, for instance, Count
von Zinzendorf's warm love of the Savior has so much of the sensual
flavor, with furthermore such decided perversities, that the outpourings
of his rapture are positively laughable. Thus the pious man indulges his
phantasy with a marked predilection for voluptuousness in the
"Seitenhölchen" (Wound in the Side) in Jesus' body and with an
unmistakable identification of this "cleft" with the vulva.

Examples of the poetical creations of Zinzendorf and his faithful
followers are given:


    So ever-sideways-squinting
    So side-homesickness-feeling;
    So lambs-hearts-grave-through crawling,
    So lambs-sweat-trace-smelling.

    So Jesus sweat-drop-yielding,
    With love's fever trembling
    Like the child full of spirit.
    So corpse-air-imbibing,
    So wound-wet-emitting,
    So grave-fume-sniffing.

    So martyr-lamb's heart-like,
    So Jesus-boy-like,
    So Mary Magdalene-like being,
    Childlike, virgin-like, conjugal
    Will the lamb keep us
    Close to the kiss of his clefts.

    With us Cross people
    The closet of the side often is worth
    The whole little lamb.
    Ye poor sinners.
    But deep, but deep within,
    Yes deep, right deep within,
    And whoever will be blessed
    He wishes himself within
    Into the dear rendezvous
    Of all the darlings.
    Ravishing little lamb.
    I, poor little thing, I kiss the ring
    On thy little ringer,
    Thou wound of the spear
    Hold thy little mouth near,
    It must be kissed.
    Lamb, say nothing to me in there
    For this precious minute
    Thou art mine only.


On this curiosity compare the psychological explanations of Pfister.
(Frommigkeit G. Ludw. v. Zinzendorf.)

Returning to the previously mentioned "spiritual powers" I should mention
that alchemy also attempts to include in a short schema the inventory of
powers available for the Great Work. It uses different symbols for this
purpose; one of the most frequent is the seven metals or planets. Whether
I say with the astrologers that the soul (not the celestial spirit, which
is derived from God) flowing in from the seven planets upon man, is
therefore composed of their seven influences, or if with the alchemists I
speak of the seven metals, which come together in the microcosm, it is of
course quite the same, but expressed in another closely related symbol.
The metals are, as we know, incomplete and have to be "improved" or "made
complete." That means we must sublimate our impulses.

"From the highest to the lowest everything rises by intermediate steps on
the infinite ladder, in such manner that those pictures and images, as
outgrowths of the divine mind, through subordinate divinities and demigods
impart their gifts and emanations to men. The highest of these are: Spirit
of inquiry, power of ruling and mastering self, a brave heart, clearness
of perception, ardent affection, acuteness in the art of exposition, and
fruitful creative power. The efficient forces of all these God has above
all and originally in himself. From him they have received the seven
spirits and divinities, which move and rule the seven planets, and are
called angels, so that each has received his own, distinct from the rest.
They share them again among the seven orders of demons subordinated to
them, one under each. And these finally transmit them to men." (Adamah
Booz. Sieb. Grunds., p. 9 ff.)

In this enumeration the fundamental powers, whose partition varies
exceedingly, already show a certain measure of intro-determination. If we
wish to contrast their titanic with their anagogic aspect, we get
approximately the following scheme, to which I add the familiar
astrological characters of the seven planets.

Destroying (castration).      [Symbol: Saturn] Introversion.
Mastery.                      [Symbol: Jupiter] Mastery of
                              oneself.
Love of combat.               [Symbol: Mars] Warring against
                              oneself.
Libido.                       [Symbol: Sol] Sublimated
                              libido.
Sexual life, incest.          [Symbol: Venus] Regeneration.
Hypercriticism, fussing.      [Symbol: Mercury] Knowledge.
Joy in change; Improvement.   [Symbol: Luna] Changing
                              oneself.

[Freud is of the opinion that the original inquisitiveness about the
sexual secret is abnormally transformed into morbid over subtlety; and yet
can still furnish an impulsive power for legitimate thirst for knowledge.]

Beside the partition of the fundamental powers according to the favorite
number seven, there are to be sure in alchemy still other schemata with
other symbols. We must furthermore continually keep in mind that the
symbols in alchemy are used in many senses.

In so far as the Constellations, as is often to be understood in the
hermetic art, are fundamental psychic powers, it sounds just like
psychoanalysis when Paracelsus expresses the view that in sleep the
"sidereal" body is in unobstructed operation, soars up to its fathers and
has converse with the stars.

With regard to intro-determination I must refer to my observations in the
following sections on the extension of personality. It is an important
fact that those external obstructions which oppose the unrestrained
unfolding of the titanic impulses are gradually taken up as constraints
into the psyche, which adopts those external laws, that would make life
practicable. In so far as deep conflicts do not hinder it, there arises by
the operation of these laws a corresponding influence upon the
propensities. Habit, however, can learn to carry a heavy yoke with love,
even to make it the condition of life. I have just made the restriction:
if conflicts do not hinder it; now usually these exist, even for the
mystics; and the "Work" is above all directed toward their overcoming. For
the annihilation of the opposition, the weapons aimed outward in the
"titanic" phase must be turned inward; there and not outside of us is the
conflict. [Here we see the actual intro-determination briefly mentioned
above.]


B. Effects Of Introversion.


Introversion is no child's play. It leads to abysses, by which we may be
swallowed up past recall. Whoever submits to introversion arrives at a
point where two ways part; and there he must come to a decision, than
which a more difficult one cannot be conceived. The symbol of the abyss,
of the parting of the ways, both were clearly contained in our parable.
The occurrence of the similar motive in myths and fairy tales is familiar.
The danger is obvious in that the hero generally makes an apparently quite
trivial mistake and then must make extraordinary efforts to save himself
from the effects of these few trivial errors. One more wrong step and all
would have been lost.

Introversion accordingly presents two possibilities, either to gain what
the mystic work seeks, or to lose oneself.

In introversion the libido sinks into "its own depths" (a figure that
Nietzsche likes to use), and finds there below in the shadows of the
unconscious, the equivalent for the world above which it has left, namely
the world of phantasy and memories, of which the strongest and most
influential are the early infantile memory images. It is the child's
world, the paradise of early childhood, from which a rigorous law has
separated us. In this subterranean realm slumber sweet domestic feelings
and the infinite hopes of all "becoming." Yet as Mephistopheles says, "The
peril is great." This depth is seducing: it is the "mother" and--death. If
the libido remains suspended in the wonder realm of the inner world the
man has become but a shadow for the world above. He is as good as dead or
mortally ill; if the libido succeeds however in tearing itself loose again
and of pressing on to the world above, then a miracle is revealed; this
subterranean journey has become a fountain of youth for it, and from its
apparent death there arises a new productiveness. This train of thought is
very beautifully contained in an Indian myth: Once on a time Vishnu
absorbed in rapture (introversion) bore in this sleep Brahma, who
enthroned on a lotus flower, arose from Vishnu's navel and was carrying
the Vedas, eagerly reading them. (Birth of creative thought from
introversion.) Because of Vishnu's rapture, however, a monstrous flood
overcame the world (swallowing up through introversion, symbolizing the
danger of entering into the mother of death). A demon profiting by the
danger, stole the vedas from Brahma and hid them in the deep. (Swallowing
of the libido.) Brahma wakes Vishnu and he, changing into a fish, dived
into the flood, battled with the demon (dragon fight), conquered him and
brought the vedas up again. (Prize attained with difficulty.) (Cf. Jung,
Psychology of the Unconscious.)

The marvel of the invigoration that can be attained in the successful
issue of introversion is comparable to the effect that Antæus felt on
touching his mother, the earth. The mother of men, to whom introversion
carries us, is the spirit of the race, and from it flows gigantic
strength. "This occasional retiring into oneself, which means a return to
an infantile relation to the parent images, appears within certain limits
to have a favorable effect upon the condition of the individual." Of this
mine of power Stekel (Nerv. Angst., p. 375) writes: "When mankind desires
to create something big, it must reach down deep into the reservoir of its
past."

I wish now to quote a mystic philosopher. J. B. von Helmont (1577-1644)
writes: "That magic power of man which is operative outside of him lies,
as it were, hidden in the inner life of mankind. It sleeps and rules
absolutely without being wakened, yet daily as if in a drunken stupor
within us.... Therefore we should pray to God, who can be honored only in
the spirit, that is, in the inmost soul of man. Hence I say the art of the
Cabala requires of the soul that magic yet natural power shall, as it
were, after sleep has been driven away, be placed in the keeping of the
soul. This magic power has gone, to sleep in us through sin and has to be
awakened again. This happens either through the illumination of the Holy
Ghost or a man himself can by the art of the Cabala produce this power of
awakening himself at will. Such are called makers of gold [nota bene!]
whose leader (rector) is, however, the spirit of God.... When God created
the soul of man he imparted to it fundamental and primal knowledge. The
soul is the mirror of the universe and is related to all Being. It is
illumined by an inner light, but the storm of the passions, the
multiplicity of sensuous impressions, and other distractions darken this
light, whose beams are spread abroad only, if it burns alone and if all in
us is in harmony and peace. If we know how to separate ourselves from all
external influences and are willing to be led by this inner light, we
shall find pure and true knowledge in us. In this state of concentration
the soul distinguishes all objects to which it directs its attention. It
can unite with them, penetrate their nature, and can itself reach God and
in him know the most important truths." (Ennemoser, Gesch. d. Mag., pp.
906, 914.)

Staudenmaier, who has experimented on himself magically to a great extent
and has set down his experiences recently in the interesting book, "Die
Magie als experimentelle Naturwissenschaft," thinks he has observed that
through the exercise that he carries on, and which produces an intense
introversion, psychophysical energies are set free that make him capable
of greater efficiency. Specifically, an actual drawing upon the nerve
centers unused in the conscious function of the normal man of to-day would
be available for intellectual work, etc. So, as it were, a treasure can be
gained (by practices having a significant introversion character), a
treasure which permits an increased thinking and feeling activity. If
Staudenmaier, even in the critical examination of his anomalous functions,
can be influenced by them, it would be a great mistake to put them aside
simply as "pathological."

Ennemoser says of the danger of introversion (l. c., p. 175): "Now where
in men of impure heart, through the destructive natural powers and evil
spiritual relations, the deepest transcendental powers are aroused, dark
powers may very easily seize the roots of feeling and reveal moral
abysses, which the man fixed in the limits of time hardly suspects and
from which human nature recoils. Such an illicit ecstasy and evil
inspiration is at least recognized in the religious teachings of the Jews
and Christians, and the seers of God describe it as an agreement with hell
(Isaiah XXVIII, 15)."

Whence comes the danger? It comes from the powerful attraction for us of
that world which is opened to us through introversion. We descend there to
whet our arms for fresh battles, but we lay them down; for we feel
ourselves embraced by soft caressing arms that invite us to linger, to
dream enchanting dreams. This fact coincides in large part with the
previously mentioned tendency toward comfort, which is unwilling to forego
childhood and a mother's careful hands. Introversion is an excellent road
to lazy phantasying in the regressive direction.

Among psychopathologists Jung especially has of late strongly insisted
upon the dangerous rôle of indolence. According to him the libido
possesses a monstrous laziness which is unwilling to let go of any object
of the past, but would prefer to retain it forever. Laziness is actually a
passion, as La Rochefoucauld brilliantly remarks: "Of all the passions the
least understood by us is laziness; it is the most indefatigable and the
most malign of them all, although its outrages are imperceptible." "It is
the perilous passion affecting the primitive man more than all others,
which appears behind the suspicious mask of the incest symbols, from which
the fear of incest has driven us away, and which above all is to be
vanquished under the guise of the 'dreaded mother.' [Vide, Note D. To
avoid a wrong conception of this quotation it must be noted that laziness
is, of course, not to be regarded as the only foundation of incest
symbolism.] She is the mother of infinite evils, not the least of them
being the neurotic maladies. For especially from the vapor of remaining
libido residues, those damaging evils of phantasy develop, which so
enshroud reality that adaptation becomes well nigh impossible." (Jung,
Psychology of the Unconscious.)

That the indolent shrinking back from the difficulties of life is
indicated so frequently in psychology and in mythology by the symbol of
the mother is not surprising, but I should yet like to offer for a
forceful illustration an episode from the war of Cyrus against Astyages
which I find recorded in Dulaure-Krauss-Reiskel (Zeugg., p. 85.) After
Astyages had aroused his troops, he hurled himself with fiery zeal at the
army of the Persians, which was taken unawares and retreated. Their
mothers and their wives came to them and begged them to attack again. On
seeing them irresolute the women unclothed themselves before them, pointed
to their bosoms and asked them whether they would flee to the bosoms of
their mothers or their wives. This reproachful sight decided them to turn
about and they remained victorious.

On the origin of the mythological and psychological symbol of the dreaded
mother: "Still there appears to reside in man a deep resentment, because a
brutal law once separated him from an impulsive indulgence and from the
great beauty of the animal nature so harmonious with itself. This
separation is clearly shown in the prohibition of incest and its
corollaries (marriage laws). Hence pain and indignation are directed
toward the mother as if she were to blame for the domestication of the
sons of men. In order not to be conscious of his desire for incest (his
regressive impulse toward animal nature) the son lays the entire blame on
the mother, whence results the image of the 'dreaded mother.' 'Mother'
becomes a specter of anxiety to him, a nightmare." (Jung, Psychology of
the Unconscious.)

The snake is to be regarded as a mythological symbol (frequent also in
dream life) for the libido that introverts itself and enters the perilous
interdicted precinct of the incest wish (or even only the life shirking
tendency); and especially (though not always valid) is this conception in
place, if the snake appears as a terrifying animal (representative of the
dreaded mother). So also the dragon is equivalent to the snake, and it
can, of course, be replaced by other monsters. The phallic significance of
the snake is, of course, familiar enough; the snake as a poisonous
terrible animal indicates, however, a special phallus, a libido burdened
with anxiety. Jung, who has copious material with which to treat this
symbolism, calls the snake really a "negative phallus," the phallus
forbidden with respect to the mother, etc. I would recall that alchemy,
too, has the symbol of the snake or the dragon, and used in a way that
reënforces the preceding conception. It is there connected with the
symbols of introversion and appears as "poisonous." The anxiety serpent is
the "guardian of the threshold" of the occultists; it is the treasure
guarding dragon of the myth. In mystic work the serpent must be overcome;
we must settle with the conflict which is the serpent's soul.

Also the mystic yoga manuals of the Hindus know the symbol of the serpent,
which the introverting individual has to waken and to overcome, whereupon
he comes into possession of valuable powers. These serpents [kundalini]
are considered by the Yogi mystics as an obstacle existing in the human
body that obstructs certain veins or nerves (the anatomy of the Hindu
philosophers is rather loose here), and by this means, if they are freed,
the breath of life (prana) sends wondrous powers through the body. The
main path in the body which must be freed for the increased life-energies
is generally described as the susumna (as far as I know, it is not yet
cleared up whether the aorta abdominalis or the spine has furnished the
anatomical basis for the idea of the central canal), and is the middle way
between two other opposed canals of the breath, which are called pingala,
the right, and ida, the left. (Here, too, note by the way, appears the
comparison of opposites.) I quote now several passages on the kundalini
and its significance at the beginning of the mystical work.

"As Ananta, the Lord of Serpents, supports this whole universe with its
mountains and its forests, so kundalini is the main support of all the
yoga practices. When kundalini is sleeping it is aroused by the favor of
the guru [spiritual teacher], then all of the lotuses [lotus here stands
for nerve center] and granthis [swallowings, nerve plexus?] are pierced.
Then prana goes through the royal road, susumna. Then the mind remains
suspended and the yogi cheats death.... So the yogi should carefully
practice the various mudras [exercises] to rouse the great goddess
[kundalini] who sleeps closing the mouth of susumna." (Hatha Yoga Prad.,
Ill, 1-5.) "As one forces open a door [door symbolism] with a key [the
'Diederich' of the wanderer in the parable] so the yogi should force open
the door of moksa [deliverance] by the kundalini. The Paramesoari [great
goddess] sleeps, closing with her mouth the hole through which one should
go to the brahmarandhra [the opening or place in the head through which
the divine spirit, the Brahma or the Atman, gets into the body; the
anatomical basis for this naïve idea may have been furnished by one of the
sutures of the skull, possibly the sutura frontalis; the brahmarandhra is
probably the goal of the breath that passes through the susumna that is
becoming free.] where there is no pain or misery. The kundalini sleeps
above the kanda. [The kanda, for which we can hardly find a corresponding
organ, is to be found between the penis and the navel.] It gives mukti to
the yogis and bondage to the fools. [See later the results of
introspection.] He who knows her, knows yoga. The kundalini is described
as being coiled like a serpent. He who causes that sakti [probably, power]
to move ... is freed without doubt. Between the Ganges and the Yamuna [two
rivers of India, which are frequently used symbolically, probably for the
right and the left stream of the breath of life, ingala and ida, cf. what
follows] there sits the young widow [an interesting characterization of
the kundalini] inspiring pity. He should despoil her forcibly, for it
leads one to the supreme seat of Vishnu. Ida is the sacred Ganges and
pingala the Yamuna. Between ida and pingala sits the young widow
kundalini. You should awake the sleeping serpent [kundalini] by taking
hold of its tail. That sakti, leaving off sleep, goes up forcibly."
(Hatha-Yoga, Prad., III, 105-111.) Ram Prasad ("Nature's Finer Forces," p.
189) writes about the kundalini: "This power sleeps in the developed
organism. It is that power which draws in gross matter from the mother
organism through the umbilical cord and distributes it to the different
places, where the seminal prana gives it form. When the child separates
from the mother the power goes to sleep." Here the kundalini sakti appears
clearly in connection with the mother. Siva is the god [father image] most
peculiar to the yogis. The wife of Siva, however, is called Kundalini.

Mythologically expressed, introversion proceeds well if the hero defeats
the dragon. If this does not happen, an unsuccessful issue is the result;
the man loses himself. In my opinion this losing of self is possible in
two ways, one active, the other passive. In all there would then be three
terminations of introversion. The good conclusion is the entrance into the
true mystical work, briefly, mysticism. The bad conclusions are the active
way of magic and the passive one of schizophrenia (introversion
psychosis). In the first case there is consummated an inner reunion, in
the other two cases a losing of self; in magic one loses oneself in
passions, for which one wishes to create satisfaction magically, absolving
oneself from the laws of nature; in the case of mental malady the sinking
develops into laziness, a spiritual death. The three paths followed by the
introverting individual correspond roughly to these three other
possibilities of life, work (morality), crime, suicide. These three
possibilities are, of course, recognized by the hermetic art; it
recognizes three fundamental powers, which can give no other result
psychically. Two of these principles are mutually opposed (in the
unpurified condition of the material). We know them quite well as [Symbol:
Fire] and [Symbol: Water], etc. The third principle lies evenly between
the other two, like the staff of Hermes between the two serpents. So the
symbol [Symbol: Mercurius], as Hermes' staff with the serpents, precisely
unites all three. In this aspect the three qualities or constituents of
matter (prakrti) may at once be substituted for the three fundamental
powers of alchemy according to the Hindu samkhya doctrine. Sattva, Rajas,
Tamas, are translated (by Schroeder) by "purity, passion, darkness."

In the Bhagavad-Gita it is said of the happiness that these three grant:


    "Where one rests after earnest work and arrives at the end of
                toil,
    Fortune, which appears poison at first, finally is like nectar.
    Such a fate is truly good, procured through cheerfulness of
                spirit. [Sattva.]
    Fortune that first shows like nectar, and finally appears as
                poison,
    Chaining the senses to the world, belongs to the realm of passion.
                [Rajas.]
    Fortune that immediately and thereafter strikes the soul with
                delusion,
    In sleep, indolence, laziness, such Fortune belongs to darkness."
                [Tamas.]


"Passion" and "darkness," Rajas and Tamas, (in alchemy indicated by
[Symbol: Fire] and [Symbol: Water], also often by [Symbol: Mars] and
[Symbol: Venus]) indicate the wrong way, the peril in introversion. They
lead to what Gorres (Christl. Myst.) describes as the "demoniac" mysticism
as opposed to the divine mysticism. All mystic manuals warn us of the
wrong way and emphasize often that we can easily lose the way even where
there is good intention. The evil one knows how, by illusions, to make the
false way deceptively like the right one, so that the righteous man, who
is not on his guard, may get unsuspectingly into the worst entanglements.
Careful examination of himself, exact observation of the effect of the
spiritual exercises, is to be laid to heart by every one. Yet powers come
into play that have their roots in the deepest darkness of the soul (in
the unconscious) and which are withdrawn from superficial view. [After
this had been written I read a short paper of Dr. Karl Furtmüller,
entitled "Psychoanalyse und Ethik," and find there, p. 5, a passage which
I reproduce here on account of its agreement with my position. I must
state at the outset that according to Furtmüller, psychoanalysis is
peculiarly qualified to arouse suspicion against the banal conscience,
which leads self-examination into the realm of the conscious only, with
neglect of the unconscious impulses, which are quite as important for the
performance of actions. The passage of interest to us here reads: "There
is no lack of intimation that these fundamental facts which place the
whole of life in a new perspective, were recognized or suspected even in
earlier times. If early Christianity believed that demons could overpower
the heart of man in the sense that they assumed the voice of God, and the
man believed that, while really doing the devil's work he was doing the
work of God, then that sounds like a symbolic representation of the play
of the forces that are described above." The play of these forces was
indeed known to cultivated religious peoples of all times. As for
Christianity, what the author asserts of its beginnings can be accepted as
true for a much earlier time. We already know that one of the first works
of mysticism consists in the education of the conscience, in a most subtle
purification of this judicial inner eye. The claims of the psychoanalyst
are there fulfilled to the uttermost.] Instead of many examples I gladly
quote a single one, but an instructive exposition by Walter Hitton, a
great master of the contemplative life, from his "Scala Perfectionis" as
Beaumont (Tract. v. Gust. pub. 1721, pp. 188 ff.) renders it. Thus he
writes: "From what I said we can to some extent perceive that visions and
revelations, or any kind of spirit in bodily appearance, or in the
imagination in sleep or waking, or any other sensation in the bodily
senses that are, as it were, spiritually performed, either through a sound
in the ears or taste in the mouth or smell in the nose, or any other
perceptible heat of fiery quality that warms the breast or any other part
of the body, or any other thing that can be felt by a bodily sense, even
if it is not so refreshing and agreeable, all this is not contemplation or
observation; but in respect of the spiritual virtues, and those of
celestial perception and love towards God, which accompany true
contemplation, only evil secondary matters, even if they appear to be
laudable and good. All such kinds of sensation may be good if produced by
a good angel, but may, however, proceed in a deceptive manner, from the
impositions of a bad angel, if he disguises himself as an angel of light.
For the devil can imitate in bodily sensations exactly the same things
that a good angel can accomplish. Indeed, just as the good angels come
with light, so can the devil do also. And just as he can fabricate this in
things that appear to the eyes, so he can bring it to pass in the other
senses. The man who has perceived both can best say which is good and
which is evil. But whoever knows neither or only one, can very easily be
deceived."

Externally, in the sense quality, they are all similar, but internally
they are very different. And therefore we should not too strongly desire
them, nor lightly maintain that the soul can distinguish between the good
and evil by the spirit of difference, so that it may not be deceived. As
St. John says: "Believe not every spirit, but prove it first whether it be
of God or not." And to know whether the perception of the bodily sense is
good or evil, Hitton gives the following rule:

"If ye see an unusual light or brilliance with your bodily eye, or in
imagination, or if ye hear any wonderful supernatural sound with your
ears, or if ye perceive a sudden sweet taste in your mouths or feel any
warmth in your breasts, like fire, or any form of pleasure in any part of
your body, or if ye see a spirit in a bodily form, as if he were an angel
to fortify or instruct you, or if any such feeling that you know comes not
from you or from a physical creature, then observe yourselves with great
care at such a time and consider the emotions of your heart prudently. For
if ye become aware by occasion of pleasure or satisfaction derived from
such perception, that your hearts are drawn away from the contemplation of
Jesus Christ and from spiritual exercises: as from prayer, and knowledge
of yourselves and your failings, and from the turning in towards virtue
and spiritual knowledge and perception of God, with result that your heart
and your inclinations, your desire and your repose depend chiefly on the
above mentioned feeling or sight, in that ye therefore retain them, as if
that were a part of the celestial joy or angelic bliss, and therefore your
thoughts become such that ye neither pray nor can think of anything else,
but must entirely give way to that, in order to keep it and satisfy
yourself with it, then this sensation is very much to be suspected of
coming from the Enemy; and therefore were it ever so wonderful and
striking, still renounce it and do not consent to accept it. For this is a
snare of the Enemy, to lead the soul astray by such bodily sensation or
agreeableness of the senses, and to trap it in order to hurl it into
spiritual arrogance and false security, which happens if it flatters
itself as if it enjoyed celestial bliss and on account of the pleasure it
feels were already half in paradise, while it is still in fact at the gate
of hell, and therefore through pride and presumptuousness may have fallen
into error, heresy, fanaticism and other bodily or spiritual disaster.

"In case, however, that these things do not result in leading away your
heart from spiritual exercises, but cause ye to become ever more devout
and more ardent in prayer and more wise to cultivate spiritual thoughts;
if ye are at first astonished but nevertheless your heart turns back and
is awakened to greater longing for virtue and your love toward God and
your neighbor increases more and more, and makes you ever meeker in your
own eyes; then you may infer from this sign that it is of God and comes
from the presence and action of a good angel, and comes from the goodness
of God, either for comfort to simple pious souls to increase their trust
in and longing for God, and because of such a strengthening to seek more
thoroughly for the knowledge and love of God. Or if they are perfect that
perceive such a pleasure, it appears to them somewhat like a foretaste and
shadow of the transfiguration of the body which it may expect in the
celestial bliss." However, I do not know whether such a man can be found
on earth.

"He continues: Of this method of distinguishing between the works of the
spirits, Saint John (I John IV, 3) speaks in his epistle: 'Every spirit
that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God'
(or as it is translated by Luther: 'Who does not recognize that Jesus
Christ is come into the flesh'). This union and connection of Jesus with
the human soul is caused by a good will and a zealous striving toward him,
which alone desires to possess him and to view him spiritually in his
blessedness. The greater this longing the more closely is Jesus united
with the soul, and the less the longing, the more loosely is he bound to
him. So every spirit or every sensation that diminishes this longing, and
draws it away from the steadfast contemplation of Jesus Christ and from
sighing and longing like a child for him, this spirit will release Jesus
from the soul, and therefore it is not from God but the activity of the
Enemy. But if a spirit or a sensation increases this desire, fastens the
bonds of love and devotion closer to Jesus, raises the eyes of the soul to
spiritual knowledge more and more, and makes the heart ever meeker, this
spirit is from God."

In many of the modern theosophic introversion methods, borrowed from the
Hindu yoga doctrines, we find the exhortation to attach no importance to
the marvels appearing beside the real prize, indeed to regard them as a
pernicious by-product. The Hindu doctrine calls them Siddhi. Walter Hitton
speaks of them as "inferior subordinate matters." From the description of
them it appears that they are phantastic appearances, which partly flatter
the wish for power, partly other wishes. [See Note E at the end of this
volume.] The Siddhi are qualified to captivate weak minds with their
jugglery. Erotic experiences are connected very easily with them because,
going over into the regressive phase, they show their "titanic"
countenances. I have with some daring, but not without right, just cited
the Siddhi as the anagogic equivalent of autoerotism. The regressive
phase, however, appears as soon as one indulges in the gratification of
the Siddhi. It is not the Siddhi themselves that are the evil (I regard
them indeed as anagogic), but the losing of oneself in them. They can be
both divine and diabolic. That depends on one's attitude towards them.

In the result of introversion, the diabolic mysticism is opposed, as we
saw, to the divine. The true mysticism is characterized by the extension
of personality and the false by the shrinking of personality. We can also
say, by an extension or shrinking of the sphere of interest that
determines the socially valuable attitude. I say advisedly "sphere of
interest," for mysticism in the end will not merely fulfill the social law
without love, but it labors for the bringing out of this very love. It is
not satisfied with superficially tincturing the substance into gold (i.e.,
among other meanings, to get man to do good externally); but it would
change the substance completely, make it gold through and through (i.e.,
to orient the entire impulse power of man for good, so that he desires
this good with the warmth of love and therefore finds his good fortune in
virtue). Only the good and not the good fortune is chosen as the leading
star, as I must note in order to avoid a misconception about the hermetic
procedure. Happiness arises only at a certain point, and seems to me like
a fruit ripened in the meantime. The most subtle representatives of this
doctrine among the alchemists are not so far, after all, from the Kantian
ethics.

Alchemistic ethics presupposes that there is an education, an ennobling of
the will. The person that wills can learn to encompass infinitely much in
his ego. [Cf. Furtmüller (Psychoanalyse und Ethik, p. 15): "The individual
can ... make the commands of others his own." He quotes Goethe (Die
Geheimnisse):


    From the law which binds all being
    The man is freed who masters himself.


The poles of shrinking and extension are the following: The magician and
the pathological introversionist contract the sphere of their interest
upon the narrowest egoism. The mystic expands it immensely, in that he
comprises the whole world in himself. The person egotistically entering
into introversion can preserve his happiness only by a firm self-enclosure
before the ever threatening destruction; the mystic is free. The mystic's
fortune consists in the union of his will with the world will or as
another formula expresses it, in the union with God. [On the freeing
effect of the merging of one's own will into a stronger cf. my essays Jb.
ps. F., III, pp. 637 ff., and IV, p. 629.] This fortune is therefore also
imperishable (gold). The reader must always bear in mind that the mystic
never works on anything but on the problem of mankind in general; only he
does so in a form of intensive life, and it may indeed be the case that
the powers which introversion furnish him, actually make possible a more
dynamic activity and a greater result. For my part I am strongly inclined
to believe it.

On the extension of personality, some passages from the Discourses on
Divinity in the Bhagavad-Gita:


    "Who sees himself in all being and all being in himself,
    Whoever exercises himself in devotion and looks at all
                impartially,
    Whoever sees me everywhere, and also sees everything in me,
    From him I can never vanish nor he from me." VI, 29f.
    "Whoever discovers in all the modes of life the very exalted lord,
    Who does not fail when they fail--he who recognizes that, has
                learned well,
    For whosoever recognizes the same lord as the one who dwells in
                all,
    Wounds not the self through the self, and travels so the highest
                road." XIII 27f.


These passages elucidate the progressive function of the idea of God in
the "work." Incidentally, I believe that the devotional doctrines (Yoga)
which are theoretically based on the Samkhya philosophy that originated
without a God, has for good practical reasons taken the idea of isvara
(God) into its system. Concentration requires an elevated impalpable
object as an aim. And this object must have the property of being above
every reach of the power to grasp and yet apparently to seem attainable.
God has furthermore the functions of the bearer of conflicts and hopes. At
the beginning of the work indeed the obstructing conflicts still exist. A
certain unburdening is accomplished by leaving the conflict to the
divinity, and frees the powers that were at first crippled under the
pressure of the conflicts. [Cf. Jung's Psychology of the Unconscious,
Freud Kl. Schr., II, p. 131.]


    "Then throw on me all thy doings, thinking only on the highest
                spirit,
    Hoping and desiring nothing, so fight, free from all pain." Bh. G.
                III 30.
    "Whose acts without any bias and dedicates all his activity to God
    Will not be stained with evil [is therefore free from conflicts]
                as the lotus leaf is not stained by the water." V 10.


The idea of the education of the will has, of course, been familiar for a
long time to ethical writers, even if it has at times been lost sight of.

Aristotle is convinced that morality arises from custom and convention.
"As we learn swimming only in water, and music by practice on an
instrument, so we become righteous by righteous action and moderate and
courageous by appropriate acts. From uniform actions enduring habits are
formed, and without a rational activity no one becomes good ... being good
is an act. Good is never by nature; we become good by a behavior
corresponding to a norm. We possess morality not by nature but against
nature. We have the disposition to attain it ... we must completely win it
by habit. As Plato says, in agreement with this, the proper education
consists in being so led from youth upward, as to be glad and sorry about
the things over which we should be glad and sorry. But if by a course of
action in accordance with custom, a definite direction of the will has
been secured, then pleasure and pain are added to the actions that result
from the will and, as it were, as signs, that here a new nature is
established in man." (Jodl. Gesch. d. Eth., I, pp. 44 ff.) "The energy and
the proud confidence in human power with which Aristotle offers to man his
will and character formation as his own work, the emphasis with which he
has opposed to the quietistic 'velle non discitur' (we cannot educate
volition nor learn to will, as later pessimistic opinions have expressed
it axiomatically) with the real indispensability and at the same time the
possibility of the formation of the will; this contention is admirable and
quite characteristic of the methods of thought of ancient philosophy at
its height." (Jodl., l. c., p. 49.) [Velle non discitur has been
popularized by Schopenhauer.]

In Philo and the related philosophers there appears quite clearly the
thought that gained such wide acceptance later among the Christian
ascetics, that the highest development of moral strength was attainable
only through a long continued and gradually increasing exercise, an
ethical gymnastics. Philo, moreover, uses the word Askesis to describe
what elsewhere had been described as bodily exercise. The occidental
spiritual exercise corresponds to the Hindu yoga.

In the domestication of man through countless generations, social
instincts must have been established, which appear as moral dispositions.
I recall the moral feeling in Shaftesbury. The social life of man, for
instance, plays with Adam Smith a significant rôle, and yet even with him
the moral law is not something ready from the very beginning, not an
innate imperative, but the peculiar product of each individual. The
development of conscience receives an interesting treatment by Smith.
There takes place in us a natural transposition of feelings, mediated
through sympathy, which arouse in each of us the qualities of the other,
and we can say "that morality in Smith's sense, just as Feuerbach taught
later, is only reflected self-interest, although Smith himself was quite
unwilling to look at sympathy as an egotistic principle. By means of a
process that we can almost call a kind of self-deception of the
imagination, we must look at ourselves with the eyes of others, a very
sensible precaution of nature, which thus has created a balance for
impulses that otherwise must have operated detrimentally. [Bear in mind
what I have said above about intro-determination.] This transposition
which sympathy effects we cannot escape; it itself appears when we know
that we are protected from the criticism of another by the complete
privacy of our own doings. It alone can keep us upright when all about us
misunderstand us and judge us falsely. For the actual judgments of another
about us form, so to speak, a first court whose findings are continually
being corrected by that completely unpartisan and well informed witness
who grows up with us and reacts on all our doings." (Jodl., l. c., I, pp.
372 ff.)

The derivation of the moral from selfish impulses by transposition does
not resolve ethics into egoism, as Helvetius would have us believe. It is
"a caricature of the true state of things to speak of self-interest, when
we have in mind magnanimity and beneficence, and to maintain that
beneficence is nothing but disguised selfishness, because it produces joy
or brings honor to the person that practices it." (L. c., p. 444.)

The ethical evolution which takes place as an extension of personality
demands, the more actively it is practiced, the removal of resistances
which operate against the expansion of the ego. It cannot be denied that
hostile tendencies, which are linked with pusillanimous views, are always
on hand and create conflicts. If they were not, the moral task would be an
easy one. Now as man cannot serve two masters, so in the personal
psychical household, the points of view which have been dethroned, as far
as they will not unite with the newly acquired ones, must be killed, and
ousted from their power. Most of all must this process be made effective
if the development is taken up intensively in the shape of introversion.
It must appear also in the symbolism.

Already in the lecanomantic experiments we are struck by the dying of the
figure (old man) that represents the old form of conscience that has been
overcome. It is that part of Lea's psyche that resists the new, after the
manner of old people (father type). In order that the new may be
suppressed, it must be immolated; at every step in his evolution man must
give up something; not without sacrifice, not without renunciation, is the
better attained. The sacrifice must come, of course, before the new
reformed life begins. The hermetic representations do not indeed always
follow chronological order, yet the sacrifice is usually placed at the
beginning, as introversion. In the parable the wanderer kills the lion,
well at the beginning. He sacrifices something in so doing. He kills
himself, i.e., a part of himself, in order to be able to rise renewed
(regenerated). This process is the first mystical death, also called by
the alchemists, putrefaction or the blacks. This death is often fused with
the symbol of introversion, because both can appear under the symbol of
the entrance into the mother or earth. Only by closer examination can it
sometimes be seen which process is chiefly intended.

"And that shalt thou know my son, whoso does not know how to kill, and to
bring about a rebirth, to make the spirits revive, to purify, to make
bright and clear ... he as yet knows nothing and will accomplish nothing."
(Siebengestirn, p. 21.)

"These are the two serpents sent by Juno (which is the metallic nature)
which the strong Hercules (i.e., the wise man in his cradle) has to
strangle, i.e., to overpower and kill, in order in the beginning of his
work to have them rot, be destroyed and to bear." (Flamel, p. 54.)

Again and again the masters declare that one cannot attain to true
progress except by means of the blacks, death and putrefaction.

In the "Clavis philosophiae et alchymiae Fluddanae," of the year 1633, we
read: "Know then that it is the duty of spiritual alchemy to mortify and
to refine all obscuring prejudice as corruptible and vain, and so break
down the tents of darkness and ignorance, so that that imperishable but
still beclouded spirit may be free and grow and multiply in us through the
help of the fiery spirit, full of grace, which God so kindly moistened, so
as to increase it from a grain to a mountain. That is the true alchemy of
which I am speaking, that which can multiply in me that rectangular stone,
which is the cornerstone of my life and my soul, so that the dead in me
shall be awakened anew, and arise from the old nature that had become
corrupted in Adam, as a new man who is new and living in Christ, and
therefore in that rectangular stone...."

To the "sacrifice" of the person introverting, Jung devotes an entire
chapter in his Psychology of the Unconscious, Chapt. IV. A brief résumé of
it would show that by the sacrifice is meant the giving up of the mother,
i.e., the disclaiming of all bonds and limitations that the soul has
carried over from childhood into adulthood. The victory over the dragon is
equivalent to the sacrificing of the regressive (incestuous) tendency.
After we have sought the mother through introversion we must escape from
her, enriched by the treasure which we have gotten.

The sacrifice of a part of ourself (killing of the dragon, the father,
etc.) is, as Jung points out, represented also in mythology by the
shooting with sharp arrows at the symbol of the libido. The symbol of the
libido is generally a sun symbol. Now it is particularly noteworthy that
the VIII key of the alchemist Basilius Valentinus (see figure 3, p. 199)
shows arrows being shot, which are aimed at the [Symbol: sun] (this libido
symbol par excellence) that is aptly used as a "target." Death is clearly
enough accentuated and correlated with the sinking of the corns of wheat
into the earth. [John XII, 24, 25, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except
a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it
die, it bringeth forth much fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it;
and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life
eternal.] As this rises, so also will the dying mystic rise. The grave
crosses have the form [Symbol: Fire] ([Symbol: Sulphur]); they show that
the interred one is a certain sulphur, the impure sulphur, willfulness.
The birds, from which we are to protect the grain, may in the end be the
Siddhi; they are, in the introversion form of the religious work, what
would otherwise be merely "diversions" or "dissipations."

The mystical death is the death of egoism (in Hindu terminology ahamkara).
Jacob Boehme writes in his book of the true atonement, I, 19: "...
Although I am not worthy, [Jesus] take me yet in thy death and let me only
in thy death die my death; still strike thou me in my acknowledged
selfishness to the ground and kill my selfishness by thy death...." In the
Mysterium Magnum, XXXVI, 74, 75: "... We exalt not the outspoken word of
the wisdom of God, but only the animal will to selfishness and egoism
which is departed from God, which honors itself as a false God of its own
and may not believe or trust God (as the Antichrist who has placed himself
in God's stead); and we teach on the contrary that the man of the
Antichrist's image shall wholly die so that he may be born in Christ of a
new life and will, which new will has power in the perfect word of nature
with divine eyes to see all the miracles of God, both in nature and
creature, in the perfect wisdom. For as dies the Antichrist in the soul,
so rises Christ from the dead."

In the hermetic book, "Gloria Mundi," it is related of Adam that he would
have been able, if he had not acted contrary to God, to live 2000 years in
paradise and would then have been taken up into heaven; but he had drawn
on himself death, sickness and calamity. Only through the grace of God was
he given a partial knowledge of the powers of things, of herbs and
remedies against manifold infirmities. "When, however, he could no longer
maintain himself by the medicinal art [in paradise] he sent his son Seth
forth to paradise for the tree of life, which he received, not physically,
but spiritually. Finally he desired the oil of compassion, whereupon by
the angels, at God's command to give the oil, the promise was given and
thereupon the seed of the oil tree sent, which seed Seth planted on his
return, after his father's death and on his father's grave, from which
grew the wood of the holy cross, on which our Lord Jesus Christ, through
his passion and death, freed us from death and all sins; which Lord Christ
in his holiest humanity has become the tree and the wood of life and has
brought to us the fruit of the oil of compassion...." Adam is the
undomesticated man; this ideal must die to the moral aspirant.

The painful duty of killing a part of self is beautifully expressed in the
Bhagavad-Gita, where the hero, Aryuna, hesitates to fight against his
"kindred," to shoot at them--the bow falls from his hand.

Dying relates to the old realms. The old laws expire to make room for the
new. The new life cancels the old deeds. (Cf. Paul, Rom. VII-VII.)

Vedanta doctrine: But as to the duty of the scripture canon and
perception, both last as long as Samsara, i.e., until the awakening. If
this is attained, perception is annulled, and if you derive thence the
objection that thereby the veda is annulled, it must be noted that
according to our own doctrine father is not father and the Veda is not the
veda. (Deussen, Syst. d. Ved., p. 449.)


    Bhagavad-Gita, IV, 37:

    "Like fire when it flames and turns all the firewood to ashes."
    So the fire of knowledge burns for you all deeds to ashes.


For several reasons the father image is peculiarly suited to represent
what has to be resolved. By the father, the old Adam (totality of
inherited instincts) and the strongest imperatives are implanted in the
child. The father is also the type of tenacious adherence to the
ancestors. Again we meet the antithesis, old generation, new generation,
in ourselves after the intro-determination.

The mystical death (sacrifice) is not to be accomplished by mere
asceticism, as it were, mechanically; the alchemists warn us carefully
against severe remedies. The work is to take a natural course; the work is
also, although indeed a consummation of nature, yet not above nature.


    "Nature rejoices in nature
    Nature overcomes nature
    Nature rules nature."


Thus the magician Osthanes is said to have taught. And the Bhagavad-Gita
(VI, 5-7) says:


    "Let one raise himself by means of self, and not abase self,
    Self is his own friend, is also his own enemy.
    To him is his self his own friend, who through self conquers self,
    Yet if it battle with the external world, then self becomes enemy
                to self."


In the "Clavis Philosophiae et Alchymiae Fluddanae" (p. 57) we read: "So
it is impossible to rise to the supramundane life, in so far as it does
not happen by means of nature. From the steps of nature Jacob's ladder is
reached and the chain to Jupiter's throne begins on earth."

The idea of self-sacrifice (with dismemberment) appears very prettily in
an allegorical vision of the old hermetic philosopher Zosimos, who seems
to have copied it, as Reitzenstein notes, from an Egyptian Nekyia. I quote
from Hoefer (Hist. Chim., I, pp. 256-259):

"I slept and saw a priest standing before an altar shaped like a cup and
with several steps by which to climb to it. [First 15, later 7 steps are
mentioned.] And I heard a voice crying aloud, 'I have finished climbing
and descending these 15 steps, resplendent with light.' After listening to
the priest officiating at the altar I asked him what this resounding voice
was whose sound had struck my ear. The priest answered me, saying: 'I am
he who is ({~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH VARIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH DASIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA WITH PSILI AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}), the priest of the sanctuary, and I am under the
weight of the power that overwhelms me. For at the break of day came a
deputy who seized me, killed me with a sword, cut me in pieces; and after
flaying the skin from my head, he mixed the bones with the flesh and
burned me in the fire to teach me that the spirit is born with the body.
That is the power that overwhelms me.' While the priest was saying that,
his eyes became as blood, and he vomited all his flesh. I saw him mutilate
himself, rend himself with his teeth and fall on the ground. Seized with
terror I awoke, and I began to ponder and ask myself if this indeed was
the nature and the composition of the water. And I congratulated myself
upon having reasoned well [namely in a train of thought preceding the
vision]. Soon I slept again and perceived the same altar, and on this
altar I saw water boiling with a noise and many men in it. Not finding any
one in the neighborhood to explain this phenomenon, I advanced to enjoy
the spectacle at the altar. Then I noticed a man with gray hair and thin,
who said to me, 'What are you looking at?' 'I am looking,' I answered with
surprise, 'at the boiling of the water and the men who are boiling there
still alive.' 'The sight you see,' replied he, 'is the beginning, the end
and the transmutation ({~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH OXIA~}).' I asked him what the transmutation was.
'It is,' he said, 'the place of the operation which is called purification
[in the original, topos askeseos], for the people who wish to become
virtuous come there and become spirits shunning the body.' And I asked
him, 'Are you also a spirit [pneuma]?' 'I am,' said he, 'a spirit and the
guardian of spirits.' During this conversation and amid the noise of the
boiling water and the cries of the people, I perceived a man of brass,
holding in his hand a book of lead, and I heard him tell me in a loud
voice: 'See, I command all those who are subjected to punishments to learn
from this book. I command every one to take the book of lead and to write
in it with his hand until his pharynx is developed, the mouth is opened,
and the eyes have taken their place again.' The act followed the word, and
the master of the house, present at this ceremony, said to me, 'Stretch
your neck and see what is done.' 'I see,' said I. 'The brazen man that you
see,' said he, 'and who has left his own flesh, is the priest before the
altar. It is he who has been given the privilege of disposing of this
water.' In going over all this in my imagination I awoke and said to
myself, 'What is the cause of this occurrence? What indeed is it? Is it
not the water white, yellow, boiling, divine?' I found that I had reasoned
well.... Finally, to be brief, build, my friend a temple of a single stone
[monolith] ... a temple that has neither beginning nor end, and in the
interior of which there is found a spring of purest water, and bright as
the sun. It is with the sword in hand that one must search and penetrate
into it, for the entrance is narrow. It is guarded by a dragon, which has
to be killed and flayed. By putting the flesh and the bones together you
make a pedestal up which you will climb to reach the temple, where you
will find what you are looking for. For the priest, who is the brazen man
whom you saw sitting near the spring, changes his nature and is
transformed into a man of silver, who can, if you wish, change himself
into a man of gold.... Do not reveal anything of this to any one else and
keep these things for yourself, for silence teaches virtue. It is very
fine to understand the transmutation of the four metals, lead, copper,
tin, silver, and to know how they change into perfect gold...."

Psychoanalysis, like comparative mythology, makes it probable that the
killing or dismemberment of the father figure is equivalent to castration.
That has, according to intro-determination, an anagogic, a wider sense, if
we compare the organ of generation to the creative power, and a narrower,
if we compare it to sexuality. The wider conception does not require
immediate interpretation. With regard to the narrower, I observe that the
mystical manuals show that the most active power for spiritual education
is the sexual libido, which for that reason is partially or entirely
withdrawn from its original use. (Rules of chastity.) "Vigor is obtained
on the confirmation of continence." (Patanjali, Yoga-Sutra, II, 38.) These
instruction books have recognized the great transmutability of the sexual
libido. (Cf. ability of sublimation in the alchemistic, as well as in the
Freudian terminology.) Naturally the reduction of sexuality had to occur
at the beginning of the work in order to furnish that power; hence the
castration at the commencement of the process. The killing of the phallic
snake amounts, of course, to the same thing. The snake with its tail in
its mouth is the cycle of the libido, the always rolling wheel of life, of
procreation, which always procreates itself, and of the creation of the
world. The same cycle is represented by a god who holds his phallus in his
mouth, and so (in accordance with infantile and primitive theory)
constantly impregnates himself. The serpent is good and also evil. Whoever
breaks through the ring frees himself from the wheel of compulsion, raises
himself above good and evil, in order to put in its place later a mystical
union [Hieros Gamos].

Regarded from the point of view of knowledge, the formation of types
reveals itself as a symbolic presentiment of an anagogic idea, not at
first clearly conceivable. For the spirit, what cannot yet be clearly seen
(mythological level of knowledge) or can no longer be seen (going to
sleep, etc.) is pictured in symbolic form. [More details will be found in
my essays, "Phantasie und Mythos," "Ueber die Symbolbildung," and "Zur
Symbolbildung" (Jb. ps. F., II, III, IV).] This symbol form is the form of
knowledge adapted to the spirit's capacity as it then existed. Not that
any mysterious presentiment or prophetic gift of vision must be assumed.
The circumstance that man can get ever deeper meaning from his symbols
gives them the appearance of being celestial harbingers sent forth by the
latest ideas that they express. In a certain sense, however, the last
meaning is implicated in the first appearance of the typical symbol. It
has already been explained by intro-determination how that was possible.
The psyche, whose inventory of powers is copied symbolically in the
elementary types, knows, even if only darkly at first, the possible
unfolding of the powers. These unfoldings are originally not actual but
potential. [See Note F.]

The more then that the psyche is so developed, that what was originally
only a possible presentiment of actuality and that hence tends to come
nearer the merely potential, begins to become actual, the more symbolism
has the value of a "program." According to Jung, Riklin, etc., the
phantasy (dream, myth-making) can be conceived not only as with Freud, "as
a wish fulfillment, wherein older and infantile material expresses the
wish for something unsettled, unattained or suppressed, but also as a
mythological first step in the direction of conscious and adapted thinking
and acting, as a program.... Maeder has discussed the teleological
functions of the dream and the unconscious. In the course of an analytic
treatment we discover the continuous transformations of the libido symbol
in the dream current, till a form is reached which serves as an attempt to
adapt oneself to actuality. There are epochs in the history of
civilization which are particularly characterized by a storing of the
libido in the sense that from the reservoir of mythological and religious
thought forms, new adaptations to the real processes and data are made. A
significant example is the Renaissance, which a study of renaissance
literature and a visit to the renaissance cities, e.g., Florence, make
evident in a high degree. The analysis of romanticism ... confirms these
processes of development." (Zentralblatt f. Psa., III, p. 114.)

We have here the thought that the "program" is expressed in art, which
therefore has prescience in a certain degree of the coming event. Jung
(Jb. ps. F., III, pp. 171 ff.) writes: "It is a daily experience in my
professional work (an experience whose certainty I must express with all
the caution that is required by the complexity of the material) that in
certain cases of chronic neuroses, a dream occurs at the time of the onset
of the malady or a long time before, frequently of visionary significance,
which is indelibly imprinted on the memory and holds a meaning, concealed
from the patient, which anticipates the succeeding experiences, i.e., the
psychological significance. Dreams appear to stay spontaneously in memory
so long as they suitably outline the psychological situation of the
individual."

The more the program is worked out the more the value of the symbolism
(whose types can always remain the same in spite of changes in their
appearance) changes into that of the functional symbolism in the narrower
sense; for the functional symbolism in the restricted sense is that which
copies the actual play of forces in the psyche.

To the functional symbolism of actual forces belong, e.g., in large part
the faces in my lecanomantic experiments, although they also contain
program material; further, in purest form, the previously related
autosymbolic vision of the mountains. The progress of a psychoanalytic
treatment is, apart from the program connections, generally copied in the
dream in correspondence to the momentary psychic status, and therefore
actually and functionally. It is quite probable that the progress of the
mystical work is represented to the mystic in his phantasying (dreams,
visions, etc.) in a symbolic manner. But when one happens upon written
phantasy products of the mystics, of course only he who has mystical
experiences of his own can venture to say whether a program symbolism or
an actually functional symbolism is exhibited. For example, I make no
judgment on the degree of actuality in the anagogic symbolism of the
parable.


C. Regeneration.


In the favorable issue of introversion, i.e., when we conquer the dragon,
we liberate a valuable treasure, namely, an enormous psychic energy, or,
according to the psychoanalytic view, libido, which is applicable to the
much desired new creation (as the titanic aspect of which we recognize the
"reforming"). The symbolic type, either openly or hiddenly expressed, of
the setting free of an active libido, is birth. A libido symbol with the
characteristic of active life comes out of a mother symbol. (The former is
either explicitly a child or even a food, or it is phallic or animal. Zbl.
Psa., III, p. 115.) As the mystic is author of this, his birth, he has
become his own father.

Introversion (seeking for the uterus or the grave) is a necessary
presupposition of regeneration or resurrection, and this is a necessary
presupposition of the mystical creation of the new man. (John III, 1-6):
"There was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
The same came to Jesus by night [introversion] and said unto him, 'Rabbi,
we know that thou art a teacher come from God; for no man can do these
miracles that thou doest except God be with him.' Jesus answered and said
unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be
born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb
and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man
be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, that which is born of the
Spirit is spirit."

Water is one of the most general religious mother symbols (baptism). With
the earliest alchemists the brazen man becomes silver, the silver man,
gold, by being dipped in the holy fountain.

A mythological representation of introversion with its danger and with
regeneration was given previously [see Vishnu's adventure]. Detailed
examples follow; first the Celtic myth of the birth of Taliesin.

In olden times there was a man of noble parentage in Peelyn named Tegid
Voel. His ancestral country was in the center of the lake of Tegid. His
wife was called Ceridwen. Of her he had a son, Morvram ap Tegid, and a
daughter, Creirwy, the fairest maiden in the world. These two had another
brother, the ugliest of all beings, named Avagddu. Ceridwen, the mother of
this ill favored son, well knew that he would have little success in
society, although he was endowed with many fine qualities. She determined
to prepare a kettle [introversion] for her son, so that on account of his
skill in looking into the future [Siddhi] he should find entrance into
society. The kettle of water began to boil [cooking of the child in the
uterus vessel] and the cooking had to be continued without interruption
till one could get three blessed drops from the gifts of the Spirit
[treasure]. She set Gwyon, the son of Gwreang of Llanveir, to watch the
preparation of the kettle, and appointed a blind man [mutilation or
castration] named Morda to keep alight the fire under the kettle, with the
command that he should not permit the interruption of the boiling for a
year and a day. [Cf. the activity of the wanderer in the parable, Sec. 14
ff.] Meanwhile Ceridwen occupied herself with the stars, watched daily the
movement of the planets, and gathered herbs of all varieties that
possessed peculiar powers [Siddhis]. Towards the end of the year, while
she was still looking for herbs, it happened that three drops of the
powerful water flew out of the kettle and fell on Gwyon's finger. They
scalded him and he stuck his finger in his mouth. As the precious drops
touched his lips all the events of the future were opened to his eyes, and
he saw that he must be on his guard against Ceridwen [dreaded mother]. He
rushed home. The kettle split into two parts [motive of the tearing apart
of the uterus], for all the water in it except the three powerful drops
were poisonous [danger of introversion], so that it poisoned the chargers
of Gwyddno Garantur, which were drinking out of the gutter into which the
kettle had emptied itself [the flood]. Now Ceridwen came in and saw that
her whole year's work was lost. She took a pestle and struck the blind man
so hard on the head that one of his eyes fell out on his cheeks. "You have
unjustly deformed me," cried Morda; "you see that I am guiltless. Your
loss is not caused by my blunder." "Verily," said Ceridwen, "Gwyon the
Small it was that robbed me." Immediately she pursued him, but Gwyon saw
her from a distance and turned into a hare and redoubled his speed, but
she at once became a hound, forced him to turn around and chased him
towards a river. He jumped in and became a fish, but his enemy pursued him
quickly in the shape of an otter, so that he had to assume the form of a
bird and fly up into the air. But the element gave him no place of refuge,
for the woman became a falcon, came after him and would have caught him
[forms of anxiety]. Trembling for fear of death, he saw a heap of smooth
wheat on a threshing floor, fell into the middle of it and turned into a
grain of wheat. But Ceridwen took the shape of a black hen, flew to the
wheat, scratched it asunder, recognized the grain and swallowed it
[impregnation, incest]. She became pregnant from it and after being
confined for nine months [regeneration] she found so lovely a child
[improvement] that she could no longer think of its death [immortality].
She put it in a boat, covered it with a skin [skin = lanugo of the foetus,
belongs to the birth motive], and at the instigation of her husband cast
the skiff into the sea on the 29th of April. At this time the fish weir of
Gwyddno stood between Dyvi and Aberystwyth, near his own stronghold. It
was usual in this weir every year on the 1st of May to catch fish worth
100 pounds. Gwyddno had an only son, Elphin. He was very unfortunate in
his undertakings, and so his father thought him born in an evil hour. His
counselors persuaded the father, however, to let his son draw the weir
basket this time, to try whether good luck would ever be his, and so that
he might yet gain something with which to go forth into the world. On the
next day, the 1st of May, Elphin examined the weir basket and found
nothing, yet as he went away, he saw the boat covered with the skin rest
on the post of the weir. One of the fishermen said to him, "You have never
been so unlucky as you were to-night, but now you have destroyed the
virtue of the weir basket," in which they always found a hundred pounds'
worth on the first of May. "How so?" asked Elphin. "The boat may easily
contain the worth of the hundred." The skin was lifted and he that opened
it saw the forehead of a child and said to Elphin, "See the beaming
forehead." "Beaming forehead, Taliesin, be his name," replied the prince,
who took the child in his arms and because of his own misfortune, pitied
it. He put it behind him on his charger. Immediately the child composed a
song for the consolation and praise of Elphin, and at the same time
prophesied to him his future fame. Elphin took the child into the
stronghold and showed him to his father, who asked the child whether he
was a human being or a spirit. Whereupon he answered in the following
song: "I am Elphin's first bard; my native country is the land of the
cherubim. The heavenly John called me Merddin [Merlin] and finally, every
one, King: Taliesin. I was nine months in the womb of my mother Ceridwen,
before which I was the little Gwyon, now I am Taliesin. With my Lord I was
in the world above, and fell as Lucifer into the depths of hell. I carried
the banner before Alexander. I know the names of the stars from north to
south. I was in the circle of Gwdion [Gwydi on] in the Tetragrammaton. I
accompanied the Hean into the valley of Hebron. I was in Canaan when
Abraham was killed. I was in the court of Dve before Gwdion was born, a
companion of Eli and Enoch. I was at the judgment that condemned the Son
of God to the cross. I was an overseer at Nimrod's tower building. I was
in the ark with Noah. I saw the destruction of Sodom. I was in Africa
before Rome was built. I came hither to the remains of Troy (i.e., to
Britain, for the mystical progenitor of the Britons boasted a Trojan
parentage). I was with my Lord in the asses' manger. I comforted Moses in
the Jordan. I was in the firmament with Mary Magdalene. I was endowed with
spirit by the kettle of Ceridwen. I was a harper at Lleon in Lochlyn. I
suffered hunger for the son of the maiden. I was in the white mountains in
the court of Cynvelyn in chains and bondage, a year and a day. I dwelt in
the kingdom of the Trinity [Tri-unity]. It is not known whether my body is
flesh or fish. I was a teacher of the whole world and remain till the day
of judgment on the face of the earth. [Briefly, Taliesin has the ubiquity
of [Symbol: Mercury].] I sat on the shaken chair at Caer Seden [Caer Seden
is probably the unceasingly recurrent cycle of animal life in the center
of the universe.], which continually rotates between the three elements.
Is it not a marvel that it does reflect a single beam?" Gwyddnaw,
astonished at the evolution of the boy, requested another song and
received the answer: "Water has the property of bringing grace; it is
profitable to devote one's thoughts aright to God; it is good warmly to
pray to God, because the grace which goes out from him cannot be thwarted.
Thrice have I been born; I know how one has to meditate. It is sad that
men do not come to seek all the knowledge of the world, which is collected
in my breast, for I know everything that has been and everything that will
be." (Nork. Myth. d. Volkss., pp. 662 ff.)

The story of Taliesin closely harmonizes with that of Hermes in the
Smaragdine tablet. Nork makes some interesting observations, which besides
the nature myth interpretation, contains also an allusion to the idea of
spiritual regeneration.

I have already mentioned that the uterus symbol is frequently the body
cavity of a monster. Just as in the previous myth the hero by introversion
gets three marvelous drops, so in the Finnish epic Kalevala, Wäinämöinen
learns three magic words in the belly of a monster, his dead ancestor
Antero Wipunen. The gigantic size of the body of the being that here and
in other myths represents the mother, has an infantile root. The
introverting person, as we know, becomes a child. To the child the adults,
and of course, the mother, are very large. For the adult, who becomes a
child and revives the corresponding images, the mother image may easily
become a giant.

Stekel tells (Spr. d. Tr., p. 429) of a patient whose dreams show uterus
and regeneration phantasies in concealed form, that he, advised of it by
Stekel, mused upon it some minutes and then said, "I must openly confess
to you these conscious phantasies. I was 13 years old when I wished to
become acquainted with an enormously large giantess, in whose body I might
take a walk, and where I could inspect everything. I would then make
myself quite comfortable and easy in the red cavern. I also phantasied a
swing that was hung 10 m. high in the body of this giantess. There I
wanted to swing up and down joyfully." This patient had carried over the
original proportion of foetus and mother to his present size. Now that he
was grown up, the body in which he could move had to be the body of a
giantess.

We shall now not be surprised at the flesh mountain Krun of the mandæan
Hibil-Ziwâ saga or similar giant personalities. Hibil-Ziwâ descended into
the world of darkness in order to get the answer to a question (i.e., once
more the treasure in the form of a marvelous word). He applied in vain to
different persons, but always had to go deeper and finally came to Krûn,
from whom he forced the magic word.

The treasure or wonder working name comes from the depths according to the
hermetic cabbalistic conception also. David is supposed to have found at
the digging of the foundation of the temple, the Eben stijjah, Stone of
the Deeps, that unlocked the fountain of the great deep (I Mos., VII, 11,
and VIII, 12) and on which the Sêm ha-mephorás, the outspoken name (of
God) was inscribed. This stone he brought into the holy of holies, and on
it the ark of the covenant was set. Fearless disciples of wisdom entered
at times into the sanctuary and had learned from the stone the name with
its combinations of letters in order to work wonders therewith.

In cases where the uterus is represented by the body cavity of a monster
the rebirth occurs most frequently by a spitting forth. Also the breaking
forth by means of tearing apart the uterus occurs, and in every case it
has the significance of a "powerfully tearing of oneself away," the
burning of bridges behind one, the final victory over the mother. To the
descent into the underworld (introversion) corresponds, as characteristic
of the subsequent rebirth, the rising to the light with the released
treasure (magic word as above, water of life, as in Ishtar's hell journey,
etc.).

A frequently used symbol for the released libido is the light, the sun.
Reborn sun figures, in connection with a daily and yearly up and down, are
also quite general. That the released libido appears thus may have several
reasons. External ones, like the life-imparting properties of the sun,
invite comparison. Then the parallel light = consciousness. [Also that
higher or other consciousness that is mediated by the mystic religious
work; for which expressions like illuminate, etc., are sufficiently
significant. On this topic see my essay, Phant. u. Myth. (Jb., II, p.
597).] and also inner reasons, i.e., such as rest upon the actual light
and warmth sensations, which occur, as literature and observations show,
in persons who are devoted to spiritual training. Here the occasion may be
offered to the mystic to utilize for conscious life and action, functions
that hitherto had been unconscious. Of the appearance of light in the
state of introversion, the histories of saints and ecstatics, and the
autobiographies of this kind of men are full. An enormous number of
instances might be given. I shall rest content with recalling that
Mechthildis von Magdeburg has entitled her revelations: "A flowing Light
of my Godhead" ("Ein vliessend Lieht miner Gotheit"), and with adding Jane
Leade's words: "If any one asks what is the magic power [sought by the
reborn] I answer, 'It is to be compared to a wonderfully powerful
inspiration to the soul, to a blood, coloring and penetrating and
transmuting the inner life, a concentrating and essentially creative light
and fire flame.' "

The Omphalopsychites or Hesychiasts, those monks who dwelt in the Middle
Ages on Mount Athos, were given the following instructions by their Abbot
Simeon: "Sitting alone in private, note and do what I say. Close thy doors
and raise thy spirit from vain and temporal things. Then rest thy beard on
the breast and direct the gaze with all thy soul on the middle of the body
at the navel. [See Note G.] Contract the air passages so as not to breathe
too easily. Endeavor inwardly to find the location of the heart, where all
psychic powers reside. At first thou wilt find darkness and inflexible
density. When, however, thou perseverest day and night, thou wilt,
wonderful to relate, enjoy inexpressible rapture. For then the spirit sees
what it never has recognized; it sees the air between the heart and itself
radiantly beaming." This light, the hermits declare, is the light of God
that was visible to the young men on Tabor.

Yoga-Sutra (Patanyali, I, 36) says: "Or that sorrowless condition of mind,
full of light (would conduce to samadhi)." And the commentator Manilal
Nabubhai Dvivedi remarks upon this: "The light here referred to is the
light of pure sattva. When the mind is deeply absorbed in that quality,
then, indeed, does this condition of light which is free from all pain
follow. Vachaspatimisra remarks that in the heart there is a lotus-like
form having eight petals and with its face turned downward. One should
raise this up by rechaka (exhalation of the breath) and then meditate upon
it, locating therein the four parts of the pranava, viz., a, u, m, and the
point in their several meanings. When the mind thus meditating falls in
the way of the susumna, it sees a perfect calm light like that of the moor
of the sun, resembling the calm ocean of milk. This is the jyotis, light,
which is the sure sign of complete sattva. Some such practice is here
meant...." The similarity to the instruction of the Abbot Simeon is
evident.

The light and sun symbolism in alchemistic writings is everywhere used;
yet gold also = sun, indeed the same sign [Symbol: Gold] serves for both.
I should like to call attention incidentally to a beautiful use of the sun
symbol in "Amor Proximi," which differs slightly from the more restricted
gold symbolism. On p. 32 ff. we read: "See Christ is not outside of us,
but he is intimately within us all, but locked up, and in order that he
may unlock that which is locked up in us, did he once become outwardly
visible, as a man such as we are, the hard sin enclosure excepted, and of
this the [Symbol: Gold] in this world is the true copy, which quickly
convinced the heathens from the beginning of the world that God must
become man even as the light of nature has become a body in the [Symbol:
Gold]. Now the [Symbol: Gold] is not alone in the firmament outside of all
other creatures, but it is much more in the center of all creatures but
shut up, but the external [Symbol: Gold] is as a figure of Christ, in that
it unlocks in us the enclosed [Symbol: Gold], as its image and substance,
just as Christ does, through his becoming man, also unlock in us the image
of God. For were this not so, then the sphere of the earth would approach
in vain to the [Symbol: Gold] in order to derive its power from it, and
nothing at all would grow from the accursed [Symbol: earth]. [The symbol
[Symbol: earth] means earth.] So the [Symbol: earth] shows us that
inasmuch as it approaches near to the [Symbol: Gold] it is unlocked, so
we, too, approaching Christ, shall attain again the image of God; then at
the end of time this [Symbol: earth] will be translated into the point of
the sun [in Solis punctum] [Cf. what has been said about the point in the
[Symbol: Gold].];" and still farther on: "Ye see that the [Symbol: earth]
turns to the sun, but the reason ye know not; if the earth had not in the
creation gone out of the Solis punctum, it could not have turned and
yearned according to its magnetic manner, so this turning around shows us
that the world was once renewed, and in its beginning, as [Symbol: Gold]
is punctum; it desires to return, and its rest will be alone in that;
therefore the soul of man is also similarly gone out of the eternally
divine sun, towards which it also yearns...."

Our parable, to which I should like now to revert, appears in a new light.
It would be a waste of time to lead the reader once more through all the
adventures of the wanderer. He again, without difficulty, will find all
the aforesaid elements in the parable, and will readily recognize the
introversion and rebirth. I therefore pick out for further consideration
only a few particular motives of the parable or alchemy which seem to me
to require special elucidation.

We should not forget the singular fact that after the introversion, at the
beginning of the work of rebirth, a deluge occurs. This flood takes place
not merely in the alchemistic process (when the bodies undergo
putrefaction in the vessel and become black), but we see the mythic
deluges coming with unmistakable regularity at the same time, i.e., after
the killing of the original being (separation of the primal parents,
etc.), and before the new creation of the world by the son of God. Stucken
(SAM., p. 123): "We see corroborated ... what I have already emphasized,
that on the appearance of the flood catastrophe the creation of the world
is not yet finished. Even before the catastrophe there was indeed an earth
and life on it, but only after the flood, begins the forming of the
present Cosmos. Thus it is in the germanic Ymir-saga, and in the
Babylonian Tiamat-saga, in the Egyptian and likewise in the Iranian." What
may the flood be in the psychological sense. Dreams and poetry tell us, in
that they figure the passions in the image of a storm-tossed sea. After
the introversion, whose perils have already been mentioned, there is
always an outbreak of the passions. Not without consequences is the Stone
of the Deeps elevated, which locks the prison of the subterranean powers.
(Cf. Book of Enoch, X, 5, and passim.) The point is to seize the wildly
rushing spirits and to get possession of their powers without injury. The
entire inundation must, in the philosophical vessel, be absorbed by the
bodies that have turned black, and then it works on them for the purpose
of new creation, fructifying them like the floods of water upon the earth.
It does no damage to the materia only then, when it is actually black
(stage of victory). If this happens, it (the materia) is in contrast to
the waters raging over it, like an ocean which suffers no alteration by
the influx of waters. "Like an ocean that continually fills itself and yet
does not overflow its boundaries, even with the inflowing waters, so the
man acquires calm, into whom all desires flow in similar wise, and not he
who wantonly indulges his desire." (Bhag. Gita, II, 70. Latin: translated
by Schlegel: German [Schroeder].)


    "Wer wie das Meer in das die Wasser strömen
    Das sich anfüllet und doch ruhig dasteht
    Wer so in sich die Wünsche lässt verschwinden,
    Der findet Ruhe--nicht wer ihnen nachgibt."


Above I have compared the lion of the parable to the Sphinx of OEdipus, and
on the other hand, it appears from later deliberation that it (the lion)
must be the retrogressive element in men, which is to be sacrificed in the
work of purification. Now I find several remarks of Jung (Psychology of
the Unconscious) that mediate very well between both ideas. Even if I do
not care to go so far as to see in the animal only the sexual impelling
powers, but prefer to regard it rather as the titanic part of our
impulses, I find the conception of the author very fortunate. The Sphinx,
that double being, symbolizes the double natured man, to whom his
bestiality still clings. Indeed it is to be taken exactly as a functional
representation of the development of reason out of the impulses (human
head and shoulders growing out of an animal body).

The homunculus motive would likewise have to be regarded in a new light. I
have said that the mystic was his own father; he creates a new man
(himself) out of himself with a merely symbolic mother, therefore with
peculiar self-mastery, without the coöperation of any parents. That means
the same thing as the artificial creation of a man. We recognize therefore
the anagogic significance of the homunculus, the idea of which we found
closely interwoven with alchemy in general. This connection also has not
escaped Jung, though he takes it one-sidedly and draws a too far-reaching
conclusion. He points to the vision of Zosimos, where, in the hollow of
the altar he finds boiling water and men in it, and remarks that this
vision reveals the original sense of alchemy, an original impregnation
magic, i.e., a way in which children could be made without a mother. I
must observe that the hermetic attempt to get back to Adam's condition has
some of the homunculus phantasy in it. Adam was regarded as androgyne, a
being at once man and woman, but sufficient in himself alone for
impregnation and procreation. Welling says in his Opus mago-cabbalisticum,
"This man Adam was created, as the scripture says, i.e., of the male and
female sex, not two different bodies but one in its essence and two in its
potentiality, for he was the earth Adamah, the red and white [Symbol:
Sulfur] the spiritual [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver], the male and
female seed, the dust of the Adamah from Schamajim, and therefore had the
power to multiply himself magically (just as he was celestial) which could
not indeed have been otherwise, unless the essential masculinity and
femininity were dissociated." I am reminded in this connection that
Mercury is also bisexual; the "materia" must be brought into the
androgynic state "rebis." The idea of hermaphroditism plays a well known,
important part in mythology also.

                                * * * * *

We have explained why phantasy creations carry two meanings, the
psychoanalytic and the anagogic, apparently fundamentally different, even
contradictory, and yet, on account of their completeness, undeniable. We
have found that the two meanings correspond to two aspects or two
evolutionary phases of a psychic inventory of powers, which are attached
as a unity to symbolic types, because an intro-determination can take
place in connection with the sublimation of the impulses. When we
formulated the problem of the multiple interpretation, we were struck with
the fact that besides the two meanings that were nominally antipodal in
ethical relations, there was a third ethically indifferent, namely, the
natural scientific. Apart from the fact that I have not yet exhausted the
anagogic contents of our material and so must add a number of things in
the following sections, I am confronted with the task of elucidating the
position of the nature myth portion. That will necessarily be done
briefly.

In the case of alchemy the natural scientific content is chemistry (in
some degree connected with physics and cosmology), a fact hardly requiring
proof. The alchemistic chemistry was not, to be sure, scientific in the
strict modern sense. In comparison with our modern attitudes it had so
much mythical blood in it that I could call it a mythologically
apperceiving science, wherein I go a little beyond the very clearly
developed conception of Wilhelm Wundt (Volkerps. Myth. u. Rel.) regarding
mythological apperception, from a desire for a more rigid formulation, but
without losing the peculiar concept of the mythical or giving it the
extension it has acquired with G. F. Lipps. Alchemy's myth-like point of
view and manner of thinking is paralleled by the fact that it was
dominated by symbolic representation and the peculiarities that go with
it. [The concept of the symbol is here to be taken, of course, in the
wider sense, as in my papers on Symbolbildung (Jb. ps. F., II-IV).]

The choice of a symbol is strongly influenced by what strongly impresses
the mind, what moves the soul, whether joyful or painful, what is of vital
interest, in short, whatever touches us nearly, whether consciously or
unconsciously. This influence is shown even in the commonplace instances,
where the professional or the amateur is betrayed by the manner of
apperceiving one and the same object. Thus the landscape painter sees in a
lake a fine subject, the angler an opportunity to fish, the business man a
chance to establish a sanitarium or a steamboat line, the yachtsman a
place for his pleasure trips, the heat tormented person a chance for a
bath, and the suicide, death. In the symbolic conception of an object,
moreover (which is much more dependent on the unconscious or uncontrolled
stimulation of the phantasy that shapes the symbol), the choice from among
the many possibilities can surely not fall upon such images as are
unsympathetic or uninteresting to the mind. Even if we consciously make
comparisons we think of an example mostly from a favorite and familiar
sphere; when something "occurs" to us there is already evidenced some part
of an unconscious complex. This will become elaborated in the degree that
the phantasy is given free play.

The raw product then, of the symbol-choosing phantasy of the individual
("raw," i.e., not covered for publicity with a premeditated varnish) bears
traces of the things that closely concern the person in question. ("Out of
the fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh"--even without premeditation.)
If we now start from a spiritual product which is expressed in symbols
(mythologically apperceived), and whose author we must take to be not an
individual man but many generations or simply mankind, then this product
will, in the peculiarities of the selection of the symbol, conceivably
signify not individual propensities but rather those things that affect
identically the generality of mankind. In alchemy, which as a
mythologically apperceiving science is completely penetrated by symbols,
we regard as remarkable in the selection of symbols, the juxtaposition of
such images as reflect what we have, through psychoanalysis, become
acquainted with, as the "titanic" impulses (OEdipus complex). No wonder!
These very impulses are the ones that we know from psychoanalytic
investigations as those which stand above all individual idiosyncracies.
And if we had not known it, the very circumstances of alchemy would have
taught us.

The familiar scheme of impulses with its "titanic" substratum, which is
necessarily existent in all men (although it may have been in any
particular case extraordinarily sublimated) comes clearly to view in
individual creations of fancy. It must be found quite typically developed,
however, where a multitude of men (fable making mankind) were interested
in the founding, forming, polishing and elaborating of the symbolic
structure. Such creations have transcended the merely personal. An example
of this kind is the "mythological" science of alchemy. That we are
repelled by the retrograde perspective of the types residing in its
symbols (and which often appear quite nakedly) comes from the fact that in
the critic these primal impulse forms have experienced a strong
repression, and that their re-emergence meets a strong resistance
(morality, taste, etc.).

The much discussed elementary types have therefore insinuated themselves
into the body of the alchemistic hieroglyphics, as mankind, confronted
with the riddles of physico-chemical facts, struggled to express a mastery
of them by means of thought. The typical inventory of powers, as an
apperception mass, so to speak, helped to determine the selection of
symbols. A procedure of determination has taken place here similar to that
we might have noticed in the coincidence of material and functional
symbolism in dreams. Here again appears the heuristic value which the
introduction of the concept of the functional categories had for our
problem.

The possibility of deriving the "titanic" and the "anagogic" from the
alchemistic (often by their authors merely chemically intended) allegories
is now easily explained. We can work it out, because it was already put in
there, even if neither in the extreme form of the "titanic" (i.e., the
retrograde aspect), nor in that of the "anagogic" (the progressive
aspect), but in an indeterminate middle stage of the intro-determination.
What gave opportunity for this play of symbolism was an effort of
intelligence directed toward chemistry. The chemical content in alchemy
is, so to speak, what has been purposely striven for, while the rest came
by accident, yet none the less inevitably. So then natural philosophy
appears to be the carrier, or the stalk on which the titanic and the
anagogic symbolism blossoms. Thus it becomes intelligible how the
alchemistic hieroglyphic aiming chiefly at chemistry, adapted itself
through and through to the hermetic anagogic educational goal, so that at
times and by whole groups, alchemy was used merely as a mystical guide
without any reference to chemistry.

What we have found in alchemy we shall now apply to mythology where
analogous relations have been indicated. [The apperception theory here
used should not be confused with the intellectual theory (of Steinthal)
which Wundt (V. Ps., IV2, pp. 50 ff.) criticised as the illusion theory. I
should be more inclined to follow closely the Wundtian conception of the
"mythological apperception" (ibid., pp. 64 ff.) with particular emphasis
on the affective elements that are to work there. With Wundt, the affects
are really the "actual impulse mainsprings" and the most powerful stimuli
of the phantasy (ib., p. 60). "The affects of fear and hope, wish and
desire, love and hate, are the widely disseminated sources of the myth.
They are, of course, continually linked with images. But they are the ones
that first breathe life into these images." I differ from Wundt in that I
have more definite ideas of the origin of these affects, by which they are
brought into close connection with the frequently mentioned elementary
motives.] Modern investigation of myths has, in my opinion, sufficiently
shown that we are here concerned with a nucleus of natural philosophy
(comprehension of astral and even of meteorological processes, etc.)
around which legendary and historical material can grow. As has been shown
by two fairy tales and as I could have abundantly shown from countless
others, the psychoanalytic and the anagogic interpretations are possible
alongside of the scientific. [We can criticise Hitchcock for having in his
explanations of fairy tales considered them only in their most developed
form, and not bothered about their origin and archaic forms. And as a
matter of fact the more developed forms permit a very much richer anagogic
interpretation than the archaic. But that is no proof against the
interpretation, but only establishes their orientation in the development
of the human spirit. The anagogic interpretation is indeed a prospective
explanation in the sense of an ethical advance. Now the evolution even of
fairy tales shows quite clearly a progression towards the ethical; and
inasmuch as the ethical content of the tale grows by virtue of this
evolution, the anagogic explanation is in the nature of things able to
place itself in higher developed tales in correspondingly closer
connection with mythical material.] I adduce here only one example, namely
the schema that Frobenius has derived from the comparison of numerous sun
myths. The hero is swallowed by a water monster in the west [the sun sets
in the sea]. The animal journeys with him to the east (night path of the
sun apparently under the sea). He lights a fire in the belly of the animal
and cuts off a piece of the pendant heart when he feels hungry. Soon after
he notices that the fish is running aground. (The reillumined sun comes up
to the horizon from below.) He begins immediately to cut his way out of
the animal, and then slips out (sunrise). In the belly of the fish it has
become so hot that all his hair has fallen out. (Hair probably signifies
rays.) Quite as clear as the nature myth purport, is the fact that we have
a representation of regeneration, which is quite as conceivable in
psychoanalytic as in anagogic explanation.

Now I cannot approve of the attempt of many psychoanalysts to treat as a
negligible quantity or to ignore altogether the scientific content (nature
nucleus) of the myths which has been so well substantiated by the newer
research, even though it is not so well established in the details. [I
have uttered a similar warning in Jb. ps. F., IV (Princip. Anreg.) and
previously, in Jb. ps. F., II (Phant. u. Myth), have advocated the
equality of the natural philosophical and the psychological content. Now I
observe with pleasure that very recently an author of the psychoanalytic
school is engaged on the very subject that I have recommended as so
desirable. Dr. Emil F. Lorenz, in the February number of _Imago_, 1913,
treats the "Titan Motiv in der allgemeinen Mythologie" in a manner that
approaches my conception of it. In the consideration of human primal
motives as apperception mass, there is particularly revealed a common
thought in the primitive interpretation of natural phenomenon.
Unfortunately the article appeared after this book was finished. So even
if I am not in a position to enter into this question, I will none the
less refer to it and at the same time express the hope that Lorenz will
further elaborate the interesting preliminary contribution, communicated
in the form of aphorisms, as he terms it.] The inadmissibility of these
omissions arises from the vital importance and gripping effect of the
objects thus (i.e., mythologically) regarded by humanity (e.g., of the
course of the sun, so infinitely important for them in their dependence
upon the moods of nature). If then, on the one hand, it will not be
possible for the psychoanalyst to force the nature mythologist out of his
position and somehow to prove that any symbol means not the sun but the
father, so on the other hand the nature mythologist who may understand his
own interpretations so admirably, must not attack the specifically
psychological question: why in the apperception of an object, this and not
that symbolic image offers itself to consciousness. So, for instance, why
the sunset and sunrise is so readily conceived as a swallowing and
eructation, or as a process of regeneration. Yet Frobenius (Zeitalt. d.
Sonneng., I, p. 30) finds the symbolism "negligible."

It is also conceivable that the obtrusive occurrence of incest, castration
of the father, etc., should make the mythologists ponder. It was bias on
the part of many of them to be unwilling to see the psychological value of
these things. I must therefore acknowledge the justice of Rank's view when
he (Inz-Mot., p. 278) says in reference to the OEdipus myth (rightly, in
all probability, interpreted by Goldziher as a sun myth): "Yet it is
indubitable that these ideas of incest with the mother and the murder of
the father are derived from human life, and that the myth in this human
disguise could never be brought down from heaven without a corresponding
psychic idea, which may really have been an unconscious one even at the
time of the formation of the myth, just as it is with the mythologists of
today."

And in another passage (pp. 318 ff.): "While these investigators (astral
and moon mythologists) would consider incest and castration operative in
an equal or even greater degree than we do, as the chief motives in the
formation of myths in the celestial examples only, we are forced by
psychoanalytical considerations to find in them universal primitive human
purposes which later, as a result of the need of psychological
justification, have been projected into the heavens from which our myth
interpreters wish in turn to derive them. [Whether such a need of
justification has had a share in the formation of myths appears to me
doubtful or at any rate not demonstrable. At all events in so strongly
emphasizing these unnecessary assumptions and conceiving the projection
upon heaven of the mundane psychological primal motives as an act of
release, we hide the more important cause for concerning ourselves with
heaven, namely the already mentioned vital importance of the things that
are accomplished there. Now the fact that the primal motives cooperate in
the symbolical realization of these things, implies no defense directed
against them. A better defense would be to repress them in symbolism than,
as really happens, to utilize them in it.] These interpreters, for
example, have believed that they recognized in the motive of dismemberment
(castration) a symbolic suggestion of the gradual waning of the moon,
while the reverse is for us undoubted, namely, that the offensive
castration has found a later symbolization in the moon phases. Yet it
argues either against all logic and psychology, or for our conception of
the sexualization of the universe, that man should have symbolized so
harmless a phenomenon as the changes of the moon, by so offensive a one as
the dismemberment or castration of the nearest relative. So the nature
mythologists also, and Siecke in particular, have thought that primitive
man has 'immediately regarded' the (to him) incomprehensible waning of the
moon as a dismemberment, while this is psychologically quite unthinkable
unless this image, which is taken from earthly life, should have likewise
originated in human life and thought (phantasy)."

It is indeed never conceivable that men would have chosen for the natural
phenomenon exactly these titanic symbols, if these had not had for them a
special psychic value, and therefore touched them closely. If any one
should object that they would not have "chosen" them (because they did not
purposely invent allegories, as was formerly thought), I should raise the
contrary question: Who has chosen them? I will stick to the word "choose"
for a choice has taken place. But the powers that arranged this choice
lived and still live in the soul of man.

The conception advocated by me gives their due to the nature mythologists
just as much as to the psychologists that oppose them. It reinstates,
moreover, a third apparently out-worn tendency [the so-called degeneration
theory] that sees in the myth the veiling of ancient priestly wisdom. This
obsolete view had the distinction that it placed some value, which the
modern interpreters did not, on the anagogic content of the myths (even if
in a wrong perspective). The necessity of reckoning with an anagogic
content of myths results from the fact that religions with their ethical
valuations, have developed from mythical beginnings. And account must be
taken of these relations. In the way in which the older interpretations of
myths regarded the connection, they pursued a phantom, but their point of
view becomes serviceable as soon as it reverses the order of evolution. It
is not true that the religious content in myths was the priestly wisdom of
antiquity, but rather that it became such at the end of the development.
My conception shows further that the utmost significance for the
recognition and comparison of the motives (corresponding to the
psychological types) attaches to the material so brilliantly reconstructed
by Stucken and other modern investigators, but not the convincing evidence
which some think they find there for the migration theory, as against the
theory of elementary thoughts.

With regard to the possibly repellent impression derived from the notion
of an unconscious thought activity of the myth forming phantasy, I should
like to close with these words of Karl Otfried Müller: "It is possible
that the concept of unconsciousness in the formation of myths will appear
obscure to many, even mysterious ... but is history not to acknowledge the
strange also, when unprejudiced investigation leads to it?"


                               Section II.


The Goal Of The Work.


In the preceding section the symbolism and the psychology of the progress
of the mystic work has been developed more or less, but certainly not to
the end. Regeneration is evidently the beginning of a new development, the
nature of which we have not yet closely examined. Nothing has yet been
said definitely about the later phases of the work and about its goal. I
am afraid that this section, although it is devoted chiefly to the goal of
the work, cannot elucidate it with anything like the clearness that would
be desirable. To be sure the final outcome of the work can be summed up in
the three words: Union with God. Yet we cannot possibly rest satisfied
with a statement that is for our psychological needs so vague; we must
endeavor to comprehend the intimate nature of the spiritual experiences
that we have on the journey into the unsearchable; although I must at the
outset point out that at every step by which the symbolism of the mystics
leads us towards regeneration, we run the risk of wandering away from
psychology, and that in the following we shall all too soon experience
these deviations. We shall have to transplant ourselves uncritically at
times, into the perceptual world of the hermetics, which is, of course, a
mere fiction, for in order to do it rightly we should have to have a
mystical development behind us [whatever this may be]; one would have to
be himself a "twice born." One thing can be accepted as true, that a
series of symbols that occur with striking agreement among all mystics of
all times and nations is related to a variety of experiences which
evidently are common to all mystics in different degrees of their
development, but are foreign to the non-mystics (or more exactly to all
men, even mystics, who have not attained the given level).

With this premise I will take up the question of the goal of alchemy
(mysticism). In this I follow in general the train of thought of
Hitchcock, without adhering closely to his exposition. (I cite H. A. =
Hitchcock, Remarks upon Alchemy.)

The alchemistic process is, as the hermetics themselves say, a cyclical
work, and the end resides to a certain degree in the beginning. Here lies
one of the greatest mysteries of the whole of alchemy, although the
meaning of the language is to be understood more or less as follows. If,
for example, it is said that whoever wishes to make gold must have gold,
we must suppose that the seeker of truth must _be_ true (H. A., p. 67);
that whoever desires to live in harmony with the conscience must be in
harmony with it, and that whoever will go the way to God, must already
have God in himself. Now when the conscience, wherein the sense of right
and justice has existence, becomes active under the idea of God, it is
endowed with supernatural force and is then, as I understand it, the
alchemists' philosophical mercury and his valued salt of mercury. It is no
less his sovereign treacle, etc. (H. A., p. 53). The progress of the work
points to some kind of unity as the goal which, however, very few men
attain except in words (H. A., p. 157). The hermetic writers set up the
claim to a complete agreement in their teachings, but this agreement is
restricted to some principles of vital significance in their doctrine,
which have reference almost exclusively to a definite practice; probably
to a complete setting to work of the consciousness of duty, which is what
Kant claims to do with his categorical imperative: "An unreasoning, though
not unreasonable, obedience to an experienced, imperious sense of duty,
leaving the result to God; and this I am disposed to call the Way."


        Do thy duty!
    Ask not after the result of thy doing!
    Without dependence thereon carry out that which is thy duty!
    Whoever acts without attachment to the world, that man attains the
                loftiest goal.


And the like in many places in the Bhagavad-Gita.

Now the end is perhaps the fruit of this obedience. It may be that the
steady preservation of the inward unity, which regards with composure all
external vicissitudes, leads man finally to some special experience, by
which a seal of confirmation is set upon what was first a mere trust in
the ultimate blessing of rectitude (H. A., p. 128). The hermetic
philosophers would have the conscience known as the Way or as the base of
the work, but with regard to the peculiar wonder work of alchemy
(transmutation) they place the chief value on love; it effects the
transformation of the _subject_ into the _object_ loved (H. A., p. 132).

Arabi: "It is a fundamental principle of love that thou becomest the real
essence of the beloved (God) in that thou givest up thy individuality and
disappearest in him. Blessedness is the abiding place of the divine and
holy joy." (Horten, Myst., I, p. 9.)

Similarly we find in the yoga primers that the spirit, by sinking into an
object of perception, becomes identical with the object. The object need
not be the very highest, but a gradation is possible. Arabi, too,
recognizes a gradation of objects, as they correspond, as correlates of
sinking or surrender, to the different mystical states. [Colors, etc., of
alchemy.] Two passages of Arabi may be quoted: "My heart is eligible for
every form [of the religious cult]; for it is said that the heart (root:
kalaba = overturn, to alter oneself) is so called from its continual
changing." It changes in accordance with the various (divine) influences
that it feels, according to the various states of the mystical
illumination. This variation of experiences is a result of the variation
of the divine appearances, which occur in its inmost spirit. The law of
religion (theology) speaks of this phenomenon as the changing and
metamorphizing in the forms (of living and being). Gazelles are the
objects of the mystic's love. In one of his poems he says: "And surrender
yourselves to play in the manner of lovely maidens with buxom breasts and
enjoy the luxuriant willows in the manner of the female gazelles." In his
commentary on this passage he says: " 'Play' denotes the various states of
the mystic, to which he is advanced when he passes from one divine name to
another." (Horten, Myst., I, pp. 11, 13, ff.)

It is the ethical ideal of the mystic, more and more to put off the
limited ego, and to take on in its place the qualities of God, in order to
become God.

When with Arabi the theme of an ode is "Through asceticism, fervent
yearning after God and patience in suffering, man becomes God or acquires
divine nature" (Horten, Myst., I, p. 16), then this goal is identical with
that of the alchemistic transmutation; the base metal acquires (after
purification, refining, etc.) by virtue of the tincturing with the
Philosopher's Stone the nature of gold, i.e., the divine nature.

But patient effort is requisite. Precipitancy is as great an evil as
inactivity. It is, to use the language of the alchemists, just as bad to
scorch the tender blossoms by a forced and hasty fire (that in spite of
its intensity may be merely a straw fire), as to let go out the fire which
should be continuously kept alight, and to let grow cold the materia. The
process of distillation is to be accomplished slowly, so that the spirits
may not escape. That which rises as steam through the "heating" in the
"receptacle" (i.e., in man) is the soul rising into the higher regions.
Distilling like rain drops [destillare = drop down], it brings each time
to the thirsting materia a divine gain. But this process is not to be
overdone, for the thirsting earth must be gently instilled with the
heavenly moisture of the water of life: the process of "imbibition."

The metallic subject must be gently dissolved in its own natural water
(conscience), not with powerful media, not with corroding acids, which the
foolish employ in order to reach the goal in a hurry, for by such means he
either spoils the materia or produces a merely superficial action.
Senseless asceticism and the like are just as objectionable as the
impetuous enthusiasm (which we called straw fire here). The ethical work
of alchemy as of common life is a sublimation; it is important that the
materia takes up at any time only as much as it can sublimate. We may also
conceive it in this way. The materia is to be moistened only with the
water that it can utilize after the solution has taken place (i.e., keep
in enduring form, absorb into their nature). Compare in this connection
the words of Count Bernhard von Trevis: "I tell you assuredly that no
water dissolves any metallic spices by a natural solution, save that which
abides with them in matter and form, and which the metals themselves,
being dissolved, can recongeal." (H. A., pp. 189 ff.)

The passage "slowly and quite judiciously" of the Smaragdine tablet will
now be fully appreciated.

The desired completion or oneness should be a state of the soul, a
condition of being, not of knowing. The means that lead to it presuppose
in the neophyte something analogous to religious faith, and because the
conditions of the mastery appear to the neophyte to contradict nature or
each other, the mystical experiences that are derived from it are called
"supernatural." The "supernatural" is, however, only an appearance, which
results when we conceive nature too narrowly, as when we see in her merely
the totality of bodies. If we mean by nature the possibility of life and
activity, then that which appears supernatural must be counted as nature.
The expressions natural and supernatural are but means of the thinking
judgment, they are preliminaries which have a certain justification but
only so long as they are an expression for a stage of knowledge. The
initially supernatural resolves itself in nature, or better, Nature is
raised to divinity. If the natural and the supernatural are symbolized,
the one being described as sulphur and the other as mercury, then the
disciples of philosophy, under the obligation to think things and not
merely names, are finally brought, during the process of search, to a
recognition of the inseparableness of both in a third something which may
be called sun; but as all three are recognized as inseparably one, the
termini can change places until finally an inner illumination takes place.
"Those that have never had this experience are apt to decry it as
imaginary, but those who enter into it know that they have entered into a
higher life, or feel themselves enabled to look upon things from a higher
point of view. To use what may seem to be a misapplication of language: it
is a supernatural birth, naturally entered upon." (H. A., p. 229.) When
the alchemists speak of philosophical mercury and philosophical gold, they
mean something in man and something in God that finally turns out to be
the One. "By this symbolism the alchemists escape the difficulty of
treating the subject in ordinary language. The learner must always return
to nature and her possibilities for the sense of the derived symbols, and
to it the hermetic masters also continually direct him." (H. A., pp. 232
ff.) If the true light has risen in the hearts of the seekers, kindled
from within (although apparently by a miracle from without) "the sulphur
and mercury become one, or are seen to be the same, differing only in a
certain relation; somewhat as the known and the unknown (and the conscious
and the unconscious) are but one, the unknown decreasing as the known
increases, and vice versa." (H. A., p. 235.)

One alchemist teaches: "Consider well what it is you desire to produce,
and according to that regulate your intention. Take the last thing in your
intention as the first thing in your principles.... Attempt nothing out of
its own nature [then follow parables that grapes are not gathered from
thistles, etc.]. If you know how to apply this doctrine in your operation
as you ought, you will find great benefit, and a door will hereby be
opened to the discovery of greater mysteries." Actually there is a greater
difference between one who seeks what he seeks as an end, and one who
seeks it as a means to an end. To seek knowledge for riches is a very
different thing from seeking riches (or independence) as an instrument of
knowledge. In the study in question the means and the end must coincide,
i.e., the truth must be sought for itself only. (H. A., p. 238.) In the
book, "De Manna Benedicto," we read: "Whoever thou art that readest this
tractate, let me exhort thee that thou directest thy understanding and
soul more toward God for the keeping of his commandments, than toward love
of this art [sc. its external portions], for although it be the only,
indeed the whole wisdom of the world, it is yet powerless in comparison
with the divine wisdom of the soul, which is the love towards God, in the
keeping of his commandments.... Hast thou been covetous, profane one? Be
thou meek and pious and serve in all lowliness the glorious creator; if
thou art not determined to do that, thou art employed in trying to wash an
Ethiop white."

Desire is, as some ancient philosophers think, the root of all affects,
which manifest themselves in pairs. Joy corresponds to desire fulfilled,
sorrow to the obstructed or imperiled fulfillment; hope is the expectation
of fulfillment, fear the opposite, etc. All the pairs of opposites are in
some degree superficial, something that comes and goes with time, while
the essential remains, itself invisible and without relation to time--a
perpetual activity, an ever enduring conation as it was formerly called.
(It is the libido of the psychoanalysis. In its manifestations it is
subjected to bipolarity, as Stekel has named the inevitable pairs of
opposites.)

The pairs of opposites have been noticed in the Hindu doctrine of
salvation exactly as in alchemy. Alchemistic hieroglyphics we know are
rich in [ambiguous] expressions for a hostile Dyas (couple), with whose
removal a better condition first commences, although at the outset it is
actually requisite for the achievement of the work. In the Bhagavad-Gita
the pairs of opposites play a great part. The world is full of agony on
account of the pairs of opposites, which are to be found everywhere. Heat,
cold; high, low; good, evil; joy, sorrow; poor, rich; young, old; etc. The
basis of the opposites is formed by the primal opposition Rajas-Tamas. To
escape from it in recognizing the true ego as superior to it and not
participating in it, is the foremost purpose of the effort toward
salvation. So whoever has raised himself above the qualities of substances
is described as having escaped from opposites.


    "Contact of atoms is only cold and warm, brings pleasure and pain,
    They come and go without permanency--tolerate them O Bharata.
    The wise man, whom these do not affect, O mighty hero,
    Who bears pain and pleasure with equanimity he is ripening for
                immortality." (II, 14 ff.)


The spirit, the true ego, is raised above the agitation of the qualities
of nature:


    "Swords cut him not, fire burns him not,
    Water wets him not nor does the wind wither him.
    Not to be cut, not to burn, not to get wet, not to be withered,
    He is constant, above everything, continuous, eternal immovable."
                [II 23 ff.]


This characterization sounds almost like the description of the mercury of
the philosophers, which is indestructible, a water that does not wet, a
fire that does not consume.

Hermes on the human soul: "The accidents residing in the material
substances have never sympathized with each other, but on the contrary
have always been in opposition and in mutual conflict. Guard thyself O
soul from them and turn away from them.... Thou O soul art of one nature,
but they are manifold; thou art but one with thyself; they are, however,
in conflict with each other. [Psychoanalytically regarded, to the soul is
here assigned the property which is desired but is not present, while that
which is undesired but actually present in the soul (inclination and
disinclination) is projected into the external world.] ... How long O soul
wilt thou yet be needy, and flee from every sensation to its opposite, now
from warmth to cold, now from cold to warmth, now from hunger to satiety,
now from satiety to hunger?" (Fleischer Herm. a. d. Seele, pp. 14 ff.) "Be
thou O soul regardful of the behavior in this world, yet not as a child
without understanding who when one gives him to eat and acts leniently
towards him is satisfied and cheerful, but when one treats him severely
cries and is bad, indeed begins to weep while laughing and when he is
satisfied begins again to be bad. This is not worthy of approbation but
rather a mongrel and blameworthy behavior. The world O soul, is so
organized as to unify exactly these opposites; good and evil, weal and
woe, distress and comfort, and contains types of ideas that have the
effect of waking the soul and making it aware of itself, so that as a
result it gains reason that illumines and consummates knowledge, i.e.,
wisdom and knowledge of the true nature of things. For this purpose alone
has the soul come into the world, to learn and experience; but it is like
a man that comes to a place to become acquainted with it and know its
conditions, but then gives up the learning, inquiring and collecting of
information, and diverts his spirit by reaching after luxury and the
enjoyment of other things, and in so doing forgets to acquire that which
he was to strive for." (L. c., pp. 8 ff.)

I return to the psychological point of view of our friend Hitchcock:
"Desire and love are almost synonymous terms, for we love and seek what we
desire, and so also we desire and seek what we love; yet neither love nor
desire is by any necessary connection directed to one thing rather than
another, but either under conditions suitable to it may be directed to
anything. From which it follows that it is possible to make God as the
Eternal, its object, or call it truth and we may see that its enjoyment
must partake of its own nature. Now we read that it is not common for man
to love and pursue the good and the true because it is the good and true;
but we call that good which we desire and there lies the great mistake of
life. From all which we may see that vast consequences follow from the
choice of an object of desire, which as we have said, may as easily be an
eternal as a transient one. We should be on guard against a too mechanical
conception of these things. By so doing we should depart too greatly from
the point of view of the true alchemists. One author tells of the
significant advance that he made from the time when he discovered that
nature works 'magically.' " (H. A., Hitchcock's Remarks upon Alchemy, pp.
294 ff.)

Aversion and hate, the opposites of desire and love, are not independent
affections but depend upon the latter. There is only the one impulsion of
demand that strives for what satisfies it and repulses what conflicts with
it. "If then desire is turned to one only eternal thing, then, since the
nature of man takes its character from his leading or chief desire, the
whole man is gradually converted to, or, as some think, transmuted into
that one thing." (H. A., pp. 295 ff.)

The doctrine naturally presupposes the possibility, already mentioned, of
a schooling of the will, yet it will still be necessary to fix it upon a
definite object. The love of the transitory finds itself deceived because
the objects vanish, while the desire itself, the conation (or in
psychoanalytic language the libido), continues forever. For this
everlasting desire only an everlasting object is suitable. An object of
that kind is not to be found in the external world. We can only withdraw
the outer object and offer ideals in exchange. The moment that this
withdrawal of external objects takes place the libido begins, as it were,
to eject itself as an object; in the ideal we give it a nucleus for this
process, in order that it may form the new object around it and water it
with its own life. So in a "magic" way a new world is formed whose laws
are those of the ideal. The formation of the new world (new earth and new
heaven, new Jerusalem, etc.) occurs frequently in the symbolic language of
mysticism.

The laws of the ideal and consequently of the new world are determined by
the nature of the ideal. Not every one is proved everlastingly suitable.


    "Those that dedicate themselves to the gods and fathers, pass over
                to the gods and fathers,
    Spirit worshipers to the spirits, whoever honors me, comes to me."


says the Highest Being to Arjuna in the Bhagavad-Gita (IX, 25). The mystic
is in the position from the moment of regeneration, to create in himself a
new world with laws that he may, to a certain extent, himself select.
Fortunate is he who makes a good selection. Every one is the architect of
his own fortune. This is most true when after introversion the power of
self determining one's own destiny is directed toward the most intensive
living. The formation and cultivation of the new earth is a beginning that
is rich with significant consequences. The alchemists speak of a maidenly
earth or a flaky white earth (i.e., crystalline) as a certain stage in the
work. This is probably the stage that we are examining now, the stage of
the new, still undeveloped earth that is now to be organized (according to
the conceived ideal). The soil is crystalline because the old earth was
dissolved and has been freshly formed from the solution. The
crystallization corresponds to regeneration. The "white earth" probably
corresponds to the "white stone," which is the first stage of completion
after the blacks (first mystical death, putrefaction, trituration, or
contrition). In the white earth a seed is sown. We shall hear of it later.

If the work is not to make men unserviceable and is not again to bring
them into conflict with the demands of life, so that all the effort would
have been fruitless, the new world must be organized in such a way that it
is compatible with the demands of real life. In other words, the ideal
that regulates the new world must be an ethical one. The mystic who wishes
to be freed from contradictions will have to follow his conscience as a
guide, and not the unexplored but the explored conscience. He cannot
escape it in the long run (the magicians that defy it are, as the legend
informs us, finally torn to pieces by the devil); it is better for him to
get upon its side and so turn the conflict in his favor. It appears that
this manly attitude would have a marvelous inner concord as a result and
outwardly, a remarkable firmness of character. It is not my object to
decide what metaphysical significance the strengthening through mysticism
of the ideal (God in me) may have.

"Take, O soul, not the unworthy and common as a model, for such use and
word will adhere to thee finally as a nature opposed to thine own. By this
means, however, the strong impulse itself towards union with thy nature
and to the return into thy home goes astray. Know that the exalted and
majestic Originator of things, is himself the noblest of all things. Take
then the noble things as a model, in order by that means to get nearer thy
Creator on the path of elective affinity. And know that the noble attaches
itself to the noble and the vulgar to the common." (Fleischer, Herm. a. d.
Seele, p. 18.)

What is to be sown in the new earth is generally called love. A crop of
love is to arise; with love will the new world be saturated; its laws will
be the laws of love. By love a transmutation of the subject is to take
place. One alchemist (quoted in H. A., pp. 133 ff.) writes as follows:

"I find the nature of Divine Love to be a perfect unity and simplicity.
There is nothing more one, undivided, simple, pure, unmixed and
uncompounded than Love....

"In the second place I find Love to be the most perfect and absolute
liberty. Nothing can move Love, but Love; nothing touch Love, but Love;
nor nothing constrain Love, but Love. It is free from all things; itself
only gives laws to itself, and those laws are the laws of Liberty; for
nothing acts more freely than Love, because it always acts from itself,
and is moved by itself, by which prerogatives Love shows itself to be
allied to the Divine Nature, yea, to be God himself.

"Thirdly, Love is all strength and power. Make a diligent search through
Heaven and Earth, and you will find nothing so powerful as Love. What is
stronger than Hell and Death? Yet Love is the triumphant conqueror of
both. What more formidable than the wrath of God? Yet Love overcomes it,
and dissolves and changes it into itself. In a word, nothing can withstand
the prevailing strength of Love: it is the strength of Mount Zion, which
can never be moved.

"In the fourth place: Love is of a transmuting and transforming nature.
The great effect of Love is to turn all things into its own nature, which
is all goodness, sweetness, and perfection. This is that Divine power
which turns water into wine; sorrow and anguish into exulting and
triumphant joy; and curses into blessings. Where it meets with a barren
and heathy desert, it transmutes it into a paradise of delights; yea, it
changeth evil into good, and all imperfection into perfection. It restores
that which is fallen and degenerated to its primary beauty, excellence and
perfection. It is the Divine Stone, the White Stone with the name written
upon it, which no one knows but he that hath it. [Cf. Rev. II, 17. 'He
that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To
him that overcometh will I give to eat [nutritio] of the hidden manna, and
will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.' Also III, 12: 'Him that
overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go
no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of
heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.' Cf. also XIX,
12, and XXI, 2. The White Stone with the new name is also joined with the
new earth. Because of this it is important that the new Jerusalem is
'prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.'] In a word, it is the
Divine Nature, it is God himself, whose essential property it is to
assimilate all things with himself; or [if you will have it in the
scripture phrase] to reconcile all things to himself, whether they be in
Heaven or in Earth; and all by means of this Divine Elixir, whose
transforming power and efficacy nothing can withstand...." (H. A., pp. 133
ff.)

At the end of the work there ensues the union of sun and moon, typifying
God and man. As in the Vedanta the teaching of the holy books of India,
the Upanishads, so in alchemy, the difference between the one soul and the
All Soul is of no importance. For every one who succeeds in overcoming the
fundamental error, in which we are all implicated, the difference
vanishes, and the two things previously separated coalesce. In reality
there is only the one thing: God.

Irenæus writes: "... The fire of nature assimilates all that it nourishes
to its own likeness, and then our mercury or menstruum vanishes, that is,
it is swallowed by the solar nature [The soul of man dissolves and is
taken up by the divine or All Soul] and all together make but one
universal mercury [All Soul] by intimate union. And this mercury is the
material principle of the Stone; for formerly, when it was compounded of
three mercuries, [namely, when they thought they had to distinguish
spirit, soul and body, or some other division in it] then Soul, world and
God were, for example, to be thought of, or as they are called in
Soeta-svatara-Upanishad V, Enjoyer, Object of Enjoyment, and Inciter.


    As eternal cause contains that trinity.
    Whoever finds in it the Brahma as the kernel,
    Resolves himself in it as a goal, and is freed from birth."


Cf. also Deussen, Syst. d. Ved., p. 232, and Sutr. d. Ved., pp. 541 ff.:
"Frequently we are told of the connection of the highest with the
individual soul, and then again of a splitting up [conditioned by them]
inside the Brahma, by virtue of which their two parts are mutually opposed
and limited. Both of these things happen, however, only from the
standpoint of the distinctions [upadhi].... There were two which were
superficial (in that they formed an unjustified opposition) and the third
essential to Sol and Luna only, not to the Stone; for nature would produce
these two out of it by artificial decoction.... [These distinctions depend
on ignorance, after throwing off which the individual is one with the
highest. The connection of the individual soul with Brahman is in truth
its entering into its own self, and the division in Brahma is as unreal as
that between space in general and space within the body.] But when the two
perfect bodies are dissolved [prepared for the mystical work] they are
transmuted with the mercury that dissolved them, and then there is no more
repugnancy in it; then there is no longer a distinction between
superficial and essential. And this is that one matter of the stone, that
one thing which is the subject of all wonders. When thou art come to this
then shalt thou no more discern a distinction between the Dissolver [God]
and the dissolved [soul] ... and the color of the ripe sulphur [the divine
nature] inseparably united to it will tinge your water [soul]." Irenæus
says that the two bodies, Sol and Luna, are compared by the alchemists to
two mountains, first because they are found in mountains, and second by
way of opposition: "For where mountains are highest above ground, there
they lie deepest underground," and he adds: "The name is not of so much
consequence, take the body which is gold [i.e., here the consummate man]
and throw it into mercury, such a mercury as is bottomless [infinite],
that is, whose center it can never find but by discovering its own." (H.
A., 283 ff.)

In reference to these and similar expressions of the alchemists, Hitchcock
rightly calls our attention to Plotinus, who writes, for example (Enn.,
VI, 9, 10): "We must comprehend God with our whole being, so that we no
longer have in us a single part that is not dependent upon God. Then we
may see him and ourselves as it beseems us to see, in radiant beams,
filled with spiritual light, or rather as pure light itself [notice this
fullness of light] without weight, imponderable, become God or rather
being God. Our life's flame is then kindled; but if we sink down into the
world of sense, it is as if extinguished.... Whoever has thus seen himself
will, then, when he looks, see himself as one who has become unified, or
rather he will be united to himself as such a one and feel himself as
such. Possibly one should not in this case speak of seeing. But as regards
the seen, if we can indeed distinguish the seeing and the seen, and not
rather have to describe both as one, which is, to be sure, a bold
statement, then the seeing really does not see in this condition, nor does
he differentiate two things, nor has he the idea of two things. He is, as
it were, another; he ceases to be himself, he belongs no longer to
himself; arriving there, he has ascended unto God and has become one with
him, as a center that coincides with another center; the two coinciding
things are here one, and only two when they are separated. In this sense
we speak of the soul's being another than God."

I recall also the passage in Amor Proximi where it is said that the earth
will again be placed in Solis punctum. The center of the sun [God] is to
be seen in the symbol [Symbol: Gold]. We now understand the mystical
difference between the hieroglyphs [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Alum],
between gold and alum. In order to express in the mercury symbol [Symbol:
Mercury] the accomplished union (represented by +) of [Symbol: Gold] and
[Symbol: Silver], which takes place through the newly discovered central
point, the symbol [Symbol: Mercury] is also used.

I have mentioned the vedantic teachings, whose agreement with alchemy has
also been noticed by Hitchcock. It takes emphatically the point of view of
the "non-existence of a second." Multiplicity is appearance; the
difference between the individual soul and the All Soul depends upon an
error which we can overcome. The goal of salvation is the ascent into the
universal spirit Brahma (in the nirvana of the Buddhists there is the same
thought). Whoever has entered into the highest spirit, there is no longer
any "other" for him. Brhadaranyaka-Upanishad, IV, 3: (23) "If he does not
then [The man in the deep sleep (susupti),] see, he is yet seeing although
he sees not, for there is no interruption of vision for the seeing,
because he is imperishable; but there is no second beside him, no other
different from him that he could see. (24.) If he does not smell, he is
yet smelling although he smells not, for there is for the smelling
[person] no interruption of smelling because he is imperishable; but there
is no second thing beside him, no other thing different from him that he
could smell.... (32.) He stands like water [i.e., so pure] seer alone and
without a second ... he whose world is Brahm. This is his highest goal,
this is his highest fortune, this is his highest world, this is his
highest joy; through a minute particle of only this joy the other
creatures have their life."

If I compare the hermetic teachings on the one hand with the vedanta, and
on the other with the Samkhya-Yoga, I do not lose sight of the fundamental
antagonism of both--Vedanta is monistic, Samkhya is dualistic--but in
appreciation of the doctrine of salvation which is common to both. That
the mystic finds the same germ in both systems is shown by the
Bhagavad-Gita. For him the theoretical difference is trivial, whether the
materia is dissolved as mere illusion, when he has attained his mystic
goal, or whether, as an eternal substance, it is as something overcome,
simply withdrawn, never more to be seen. According to the Samkhya
doctrine, too, the saved soul enters into its own being, and every
connection with objects of knowledge ceases.

In Yogavasistha it is written: "So serene as would the light appear if all
that is illumined, i.e., space, earth, ether, did not exist, such is the
isolated state of the seer, of the pure self, when the threefold world,
you and I, in brief, all that is visible, is gone. As the state of a
mirror is, in which no reflection falls, neither of statues nor of
anything else--only representing in itself the being [of the mirror]--such
is the isolation of the seer, who remains without seeing, after the jumble
of phenomena, I, you, the world, etc., has vanished." (Garbe,
Samkhya-Phil., p. 326.)

In the materia (prakri) of the Samkhya system reside the three qualities
or constituents already familiar to us, Rajas, Tamas, and Sattva. Whoever
unmasks these as the play of qualities, raises himself above the world
impulses. For him, as he is freed from antagonisms, the play ceases. When
a soul is satiated with the activity of matter and turns away from it with
disdain, then matter ceases its activity for this soul with the thought,
"I am discovered." It has performed what it was destined to perform, and
withdraws from the soul that has attained the highest goal, as a dancing
girl stops dancing when she has performed her task and the spectators have
enough. But in one respect matter is unlike the dancing girl or actress;
for while they repeat their performance at request, matter "is tenderly
disposed like a woman of good family," who, if she is seen by a man,
modestly does not display herself again to his view. This last simile is
facilitated in the original texts by the fact that the Sanskrit for soul
and man has the same phonetic notation (pums, purusa). (Garbe, l. c., pp.
165 ff.)

In comparing the common mystic content of Vedanta and Samkhya-Yoga with
alchemy, I avoid the difficulty involved in establishing a detailed
concordance of the hermetic philosophy with one or another system. An
inquiry into this topic would result differently according to which
hermetic authors we should particularly consider.

It is probably worthy of notice that the Yoga-Mystics, like the
alchemists, are acquainted with the idea of the union of the sun and the
moon. Two breath or life currents are to be united, one of which
corresponds to the sun, the other to the moon. The expression Hathayoga
(where hatha = mighty effort. Cf. Garbe, Samkhya and Yoga, p. 43) will
also be interpreted so that Ha = sun, tha = moon, their union = the yoga
leading to salvation. (Cf. Hatha-Yoga-Prad., p. 1.)

The union of two things, the sun with the moon, the soul with God, the
seer with the seen, etc., is also taught by the image of the connection of
man and woman. That is the mystic marriage (Hieros gamos), a universally
widespread symbol of quite supreme importance. In alchemy the last
process, i.e., according to the viewpoint of representation, the
tincturing or the unification, is quite frequently represented in the
guise of a marriage--sometimes of a king and a queen. We cannot interchange
this final process with the initial one of introversion, which (as a
seeking for the uterus for the purpose of a rebirth) is likewise readily
conceived of as a sexual union. If the symbol of coitus was conceivable
there, so here, too, the same symbol is appropriate for the representation
of the definite union with the object longed for.

It is quite suggestive to associate the anagogic idea of the _Unio
mystica_, precisely on account of the erotic allegory, with the primal
motive of sexual union (with the mother) instead of with the wish to die,
as I have done at another place. It may be that the primal erotic power
supplies something for the accomplishment of this last purpose; it may be
that all powers must coöperate. If I now still abide by my original
exposition, this happens because it appears to me that the symbolism
emphasizes the going over of the one into the other more than the
attainment of the sexual goal; and even in the cases where the unio
mystica is described as a sexual union. We should not forget that the
sexual gratification is to be regarded also as a kind of annihilation. It
is a condition of intoxication and of oblivion or perishing. It is this
side of the sexual procedure that the symbolism of the unio mystica
particularly emphasizes.

Brhadaranyaka-Upanisad, IV, 3, 21: "... For even as one embraced by a
beloved woman has no consciousness of what is within or without, so the
spirit, embraced by the most percipient self (prajena almana, i.e., the
Brahm), has no knowledge of that which is external or internal. That is
its form of existence, in which it is characterized by stilled desire,
even its own desire is without desire and separated from sorrow." This
passage treats of the deep sleep (susupti) which is regarded as a passing
union with the highest spirit, and so, as essentially the same as the
definitive _unificatio_. Sleep is the brother of death. Susupti is,
furthermore, conceived only as a preliminary; a German mystic would call
it a foretaste of the definitive ascent into Brahm.

In the parable the unio mystica appears twice represented, once in that
the king and queen are represented as the bridal couple, and the second
time when the king, i.e., God, takes the wanderer up into his kingdom.

The attainment of an inner harmony, of a serene peace, is what, as it
seems to me, is most clearly brought out as the characteristic of the
final unificatio--not merely by the Hindus or Neoplatonists, but also by
the Christian mystics and by the alchemists.

Artephius is quoted by H. A., p. 86, as follows: "... This water [water of
life] causes the dead body to vegetate, increase and spring forth, and to
rise from death to life by being dissolved first, and then sublimed. And
in doing this the body is converted into a spirit, and the spirit
afterwards into a body; and then is effected the amity, the peace, the
concord and the union of the contraries."

Similarly Ripley (H. A., p. 245): "This is the highest perfection to which
any sublunary body can be brought, by which we know that God is one, for
God is perfection; to which, whenever any creature arrives in its kind
[according to its nature], it rejoiceth in unity, in which there is no
division nor alterity, but peace and rest without contention."

The final character of the completed philosopher's stone makes it
conceivable, that, as the hermetic masters say, it is made only once by a
man and then not again. The Stone is an absolutely imperishable Good; but
if it should be lost it is surely not the right stone.

I have now to offer some conjectures regarding further interpretations of
the two and the three principles [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver],
namely [Symbol: Sulfur] [Symbol: Mercury] [Symbol: Salt]. We are aware of
a general difference. I add now first the remark of Hitchcock that the
"two" things are to be regarded as an antithesis: _natura naturans_ and
_natura naturata_. We might intellectually conceive the [Symbol: Mercury]
(mercury) given by many writers at the beginning of the work as a double
one, on the one hand as nature and on the other as our world picture. We
cause it to work on our [Symbol: Sulphur] (sulphur), i.e., on our
affectivity by which the [Symbol: Sulphur] is purified and dissolved, for
it is compelled to adapt itself to the requirements of the world laws. But
by this means a new world picture is produced, for the former had been
influenced by the unclarified [Symbol: Sulphur]; our affective life limits
our intellectual. The new world picture or the newly gained [Symbol:
Mercury] we combine with our [Symbol: Sulfur] and so on, until finally
after a gradual clarification nature and our world picture harmonize. Then
there are no longer two mercuries but only one; and the sulphur, our
completed subject, has become more or less a unity. Now we may advance to
the unification of the two clarified things, which in this stage are
called [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver]. Now subject and object are
bound together and man enters, as is so wonderfully expressed in
Chandogya-Upanisad, VIII, 13, as a being adapted into the unadapted
(uncreated-primordial) world of Brahma. [Symbol: Sol] and [Symbol: Luna]
may, to be sure, be conceived also as the love of God towards man and the
love of man towards God. The different masters of the art are the same in
different ways in that the one sees more the intellectual, the other the
emotional. They describe different sides or aspects of the same process,
for which we do not indeed possess appropriate concepts, and whose best
form of expression is through symbols. The sign [Symbol: Sol] is then
neither = subject nor love but just = [Symbol: Sol], i.e., a thing to
which we may approximate nearest by a form of integration of all partial
meanings. In view of the fact that [Symbol: Sulfur] and [Symbol: Mercury]
are contrasted at the beginning of the process also as body and soul, we
can, by making [Symbol: Sulfur] = passions and [Symbol: Mercury] =
knowledge (reason) conceive the rest thus: [Symbol: Sulfur] is to be
purified by an exalted [Symbol: Mercury] (in distinction from the common
[Symbol: Mercury], called also "our" [Symbol: Mercury]), and so to be
purified by a higher knowledge. From [Symbol: Sulfur] is developed (i.e.,
it unmasks itself to the initiated as) [Symbol: Luna], i.e., Maya, the
object, that in its difference from the subject is mere illusion; and from
[Symbol: Mercury] comes [Symbol: Sol], the Brahm or subject, and now the
_unio mystica_ can take place. Another use of symbolism is the one by
which we are able to concoct gold out of sulphur; from the affects we
derive, through purification, love (toward God). The spirit [Symbol:
Mercury] exalts [raises] the antithesis [Symbol: Sol] and [Symbol: Luna]
(soul and body) in such a way that finally it simply opposes itself as
subject and object. (Cf. H. A., pp. 143 ff.)

Sometimes the making of gold is described as an amalgamation; from the raw
material, [Symbol: Sol] is derived by an amalgamation with [Symbol:
Mercury] [quicksilver]. That naturally signifies the search for the Atman
or highest spirit in man by means of contemplation, which belongs to
[Symbol: Mercury], the [act of] knowing.

With regard to the trinity [Symbol: Sol] [Symbol: Luna] [Symbol: Mercury]:
The solar divinity [creating, impregnating] in man is [Symbol: Sulfur]
that by its triangle moreover marks the fiery nature [Symbol: Sulfur];
that which is comprised in the bodily nature, the terrestrial is [Symbol:
Salt] salt, which is also represented as a cube, like the element earth.
The two can be called [Symbol: Sol], anima, and [Symbol: Luna], corpus.
The celestial messenger who appears as a mediator for the antithesis is
the conscience [Symbol: Mercury], who has his constant influx from God,
the real [Symbol: Sol], and is therefore a divine spirit. We have then the
triad Spiritus, anima, corpus [[Symbol: Mercury] [Symbol: Sol] [Symbol:
Luna]] or, because [Symbol: Mercury] is to be regarded as a mediator,
[Symbol: Sol] [Symbol: Mercury] [Symbol: Luna]. The intervention of the
[Symbol: Mercury] effects the previously mentioned exaltation of [Symbol:
Sol] and [Symbol: Luna] or of [Symbol: Sulfur] and [Symbol: Mercury]
(crude state) to [Symbol: Sol] and [Symbol: Luna].

In view of the difficulty of the mystic work that attempts to accomplish a
sheerly superhuman task, it is not surprising that it cannot be finished
in one attempt but requires time. It necessitates great persistence. In
the life of the mystic the states of love and aspiration for God alternate
with those of spiritual helplessness and barrenness. (Horten, Myst., I, p.
9.)

Arabi sings in his ode on man's becoming godlike: "[1] O thou ancient
temple. A light has arisen for thee (you) that gleams in our hearts. [2]
To thee I lament the wilderness that I have traversed, and in which I have
poured forth an unlimited flood of tears. [3] Neither at dawn nor at dusk
do I get repose. From morning until evening I fare on my way without
ceasing. [4] The camels go forth on their journey at night; even if they
have injured their feet, they still hasten. [5] These (mighty) riding
camels bore us to you (probably God) with passionate longing, although
they did not hope to attain the goal...." The riding camels signify the
longing of the mystics for God. "It seeks and strives ceaselessly,
although its powers are drained by the difficulties of the search."
(Horten, l. c., p. 16 ff.)

Many degrees or stations are to be gone over on the difficult way, yet
zeal is to abide constant in all circumstances. [The idea of the ladder
set up to heaven, of steps, etc., is universal in religions.] In general
seven such steps are distinguished. In Khunrath, e.g., the citadel of
Pallas has seven steps. Paracelsus (De Natura Rerum, VIII), following a
favorite custom, gives seven operations of the work. "... It is now
necessary to know the degrees and steps to transmutation, and how many
they are. These steps are then no more than seven. Although some count
still more, it should not be so. For the most important steps are seven.
The further ones, however, which might be reckoned as steps are comprised
under the others, which are as follows: calcination [sublimation],
dissolution, putrefaction, distillation, coagulation, and tincturing.
Whoever passes over these seven steps and degrees comes to such a
marvelous place, where he sees much mystery and attains the transmutation
of all natural things." In the "Rosarium" of Johannes Daustenius [Chap.
XVII] the seven steps are represented as follows: "And then the corpus [1]
is a cause that the water is retained. The water [2] is the cause of
preserving the oil so that it is not ignited on the fire, and the oil [3]
is the cause of retaining the tincture, and the tincture [4] is a cause of
the colors appearing, and the color [5] is a cause of showing the white,
and the white [6] is a cause of keeping every volatile thing [7] from
being no longer volatile." It amounts to the same thing when Bonaventura
describes septem gradus contemplationis [seven steps of contemplation],
and David of Augsburg [13th century] the "seven steps of prayer." Boehme
recognizes 7 fountain spirits that constitute a certain gradation and in
the yoga we also find 7 steps, which are described in the "Yoga Vasistha"
(cf. Hath. Prad., pp. 2 ff). It may easily happen that the domination of
the number 7 is to be derived from the infusion of the scientific
doctrines (7 planets, 7 metals, 7 tones in the diatonic scale) and yet it
may depend on an actual correspondence in the human psyche with nature--who
can tell? Most significant is the connection of the 7 steps of development
with the infusion of the nature myth in the alchemistic theories of
"rotations." For the perfection of the Stone, rotations (i.e., cycles) are
required by many authors, in which the materia (and so the soul) pass
through the spheres of all the planets. They have to be subjected
successively to the domination (the regimen) of all seven planets. This is
related to the ideas of those neoplatonists and gnostics according to
which the soul must, on its way (anodos) to its heavenly home, i.e., to
its celestial goal, pass through all the planetary spheres and through the
animal cycle. (Cf. Bousset, Hauptpr. d. G., pp. 11 and 321.) I observe,
moreover, a thoroughly vivid representation of this very theme in the good
old Mosheim, Ketzergesch., p. 89 ff. Also in the life of the world, if it
is completely lived, man passes through, according to the ideas of the old
mystery teachings, the domination of the seven planets.

The anagogic meaning of rotation may be that of a collection of all
available (seven in number) powers, in order finally to rise as a whole,
to God.

More important, or at any rate more easily comprehensible, appears to me
the trichotomy necessarily resulting from the course of the mystical work,
a triplicate division that results in the three main phases, black, white,
and red. The black corresponds to introversion and to the first [mystic]
death, the white to the "new earth," to freedom or innocence, red to love,
which completes the work. This general arrangement does not prevent the
symbols from being often confused by the alchemistic authors. There are
gradations between the main colors, all kinds of color play; in particular
the so-called peacock's tail appears, which comes before the stable white
to indicate the characteristic gayness of color of visionary experiences,
and which marks the stage of introversion.

If one put into the center of vision, as goal of the work, the recovery of
the harmonious state of the soul, one might express oneself about the
three primary colors as follows: The paradisical state demands absolute
freedom from conflict. We can attain this only by completely withdrawing
from the external world whatever causes conflict in connection with the
external world, so that there comes to pass with regard to it, a
thorough-going indifference. This indifference is the black. The freedom
from conflict (guiltlessness) in the now newly beginning life is the
white. Previously, at the disintegration (rotting) of the material, one
constituent part was removed and taken away. That is, the libido becomes
free (love). It is gradually alloyed with the white material, which is dry
(thirsty without thirst); sown in the white ground. Life is without
conflict now drenched with love, red. This true red thus attained is
permanent because it is produced [in contrast to mere instruction] from
the heart of hearts, the roots of innermost feeling, which is subjected to
no usury.

The mystical procedure can be realized in different degrees of intensity.
The lowest degree is as a program with the mere result of a stimulation;
the highest degree is a final transmutation of the psyche. If this goal is
attained in life, we have acquired the terrestrial stone. In contrast, the
celestial stone belongs with the eschatological concepts and the celestial
tincture is the apokatastasis.

It is an interesting question whether the resolution of conflicts, with
evasion of the process in the outer world, cannot be accomplished
subjectively, by battles with symbols (personifications) and in symbols,
thus amounting to an abbreviation of the process. Theoretically this is
not impossible, for the conflicts do not indeed lie in the external world,
but in our emotional disposition towards it; if we change this disposition
by an inner development, the external world has a different value for the
libido.

"The projection into the cosmic is the primal privilege of the libido, for
it naturally enters into our perception through the gates of all the
senses and apparently from without, and actually, in the form of the
pleasure and pain qualities of perception. These, as we all know, we
attribute without further deliberation to the object, and their cause, in
spite of philosophical deliberation, we are continually inclined to look
for in the object, while the object is often hopelessly innocent of it."
(Jung, in Jb. ps. F., III, p. 222; with which compare the Freudian
transference concept and Ferenczi's essay on "Introjektion und
Ubertragung," in Jb. ps. F., I, p. 422.) Jung calls attention to the
frequently described immediate projection of the libido in love poetry, as
in the following example from the Edda (H. Gering):


    "In Gymer's Courtyard I saw walking
    The maiden, dear to me;
    From the brightness of her arms glowed the heavens,
    And all the eternal sea."


The mystic looks for the conflicts that he desires to do away with, in
man, the place where they really exist. With this theoretical presumption
the possible objection against all mysticism is averted, namely that it is
valueless because it rests merely upon imagined experiences, upon
fanaticism. This objection, though not to be overlooked, does not apply to
mysticism, which accomplishes an actual ethical work of enduring value--but
to the other path that issues from introversion, namely magic (not to
mention physical and spiritual suicide). This is nicely expressed, too, in
an allegorical way by saying that magically-made gold melts, as the story
goes, or turns into mud (i.e., the pretended value vanishes in the face of
actuality) while "our" alchemistic gold is an everlasting good. The yoga
doctrine, too, describes Siddhi (those imaginary wonders in which the
visionary loses himself) as transitory, only salvation alone, i.e., the
mystical goal being imperishable.

As for the metaphysical import of the mystical doctrine, I might maintain
that the psychoanalytic unmasking of the impelling powers cannot prejudice
its value. I do not venture at all upon this valuation; but for the very
purpose of bringing into prominence a separate philosophical problem, I
must emphatically declare that if psychoanalysis makes it conceivable that
we men, impelled by this and that "titanic" primal power, are necessitated
to hit upon this or that idea, then even if it is made clear what causes
us to light upon it, still nothing is as yet settled as to the value for
knowledge of the thing discovered.

I am so far from wishing to derive a critique of the metaphysical import
of the doctrine from psychoanalytic grounds alone, that I felt called upon
to make claim only to a synthesis for the merely psychological
understanding of mystic symbolism, a synthesis which I have attempted to
block out as well as I was able in the present Part III of my book.


                               Section III.


The Royal Art.


It has been mentioned that the work of perfecting mankind might be
realized in different degrees of intensity, which might extend from
complete living realization to mere sympathy without any clear
comprehension. The psychic types in which the realization is achieved are,
it may be said, identical.

These typical groups of symbols that the mystic [I draw a certain
distinction between the mystes and the mystic. The latter is a mystes who
makes a system of what he has realized.] produces as a functional
expression of his subjective transformation, can be thought of as an
educational method applied to arouse the same reactions in other men. In
the group of symbols are contained more or less clearly the already
mentioned elementary types as they are common to all men; they strike the
same chords in all men. Symbolism is for this very reason the most
universal language that can be conceived. It is also the only language
that is adapted to the various degrees of intensity as well as to the
different levels of the intro-determination of living experience without
requiring therefore a different means of expression; for what it contains
and works with are the elementary types themselves [or symbols which are
as adequate as possible to them] which, as we have seen, represent a
permanent element in the stream of change. This series of symbols is quite
as useful to the neophyte as to the one who is near to perfection; every
one will find in the symbols something that touches him closely; and what
must be particularly emphasized is that the individual at every spiritual
advance that he makes, will always find something new in the symbols
already familiar to him, and therefore something to learn. To be sure,
this new revelation is founded in himself; but there results for the
uncritical mind (mythological level) the illusion that the symbols (e.g.,
those of the holy scripture) are endowed with a miraculous power which
implies a divine revelation. [Cf. the concept of the origin of the symbol
in my essay, Phant. u. Myth.] Because of a similar illusion, e.g.,
Jamblichus posits demons between gods and men, who make comprehensible to
the latter the utterances of the gods; the demons, he thinks, are servants
of the gods and execute their will. They make visible to men in works and
words the invisible and inexpressible things of the gods; the formless
they reveal in forms and they reveal in concepts what transcends all
concepts. From the gods they receive all the good of which they are
capable, partially or according to their nature, and share it again with
the races that stand below them.

I said above, every one will find something appropriate to himself in the
symbols, and I emphasized the great constancy of the types fast rooted in
the unconscious, types which impart to them a universal validity. The
divine is revealed "only objectively different according to the
disposition of the vessel into which it falls, to one one way, another to
another. To the rich poetical genius it is revealed preeminently in the
activity of his imagination; to the philosophical understanding as the
scheme of a harmonious system. It sinks into the depths of the soul of the
religious, and exalts the strong constructive will like a divine power.
And so the divine is honored differently by each one." (Ennemoser, Gesch.
d. M., p. 109.) "The spiritual element of the inheritance handed down by
our fathers works out vigorously in the once for all established style....
On the dark background of the soul stand, as it were, the magic symbols in
definite types, and it requires but an inner or outer touch [E.g., by
religious observances.] to make them kindle and become active." (Ib., p.
274.) "The unconscious is common to all mankind in an infinitely greater
degree than the content of the individual consciousness, for it is the
condensation of the historically average and oft-repeated." (Jung, Jb. ps.
F., III, pp. 169 ff.)

Whoever allows the educative symbols to work upon him, whether he sees
only darkly the ethical applications typified in them, or clearly
perceives them, or completely realizes them in himself, in any case he
will be able to enjoy a satisfying sense of purification for his earnest
endeavor in an ethical direction. The just mentioned dim perception
(probably the most frequent case), does not exclude the existence of very
clear ideas in consciousness; the person in question generally considers
his ideas, although they are only masks in front of the absolute ideal, as
the ultimate sense of the symbol, thus accepting one degree of
significance for the complete meaning. Every one approximates the ideal as
he can; the absolute ideal through his ephemeral, but attainable ideal.
The highest being speaks in the inexhaustible Bhagavad-Gita:


    "More trouble have they who devote themselves to the invisible;
    By physical beings the invisible goal is attained only with
                difficulty.
    [XII, 5.]

    God is the all. Hard is it to find the noble man who recognizes
                this.
    Those whom greed robs of knowledge go to other gods,
    Cleave to many rulers--their own nature rules them,
    And whatsoever divinity one strives to honor in belief,
    I respect his belief and direct him to the right place.
    If he strives in firm belief towards his divinity's favor and
                grace,
    Then shall he in part get what he wants, for I gladly put good in
                his way.
    Yet the result is but limited in the case of those of limited
                sensibility.
    He finds the gods who honors them. Who honors me, attains to me."
    [VII, 19-23.]


If above I derived the instructive group of symbols from a mystic, that is
not to say that it must be precisely so. I brought out this case among
possible cases only for the reason that the mystic is the one who carries
out most strenuously the ethical work of purification, and under such
conditions as are most favorable to a suggestive group of symbols, and in
particular those rich in characteristic types. Bear in mind the founders
of religion. (They do not always have to be individuals--schools, myths.)
There are, however, others than the religiously inspired natures, who are
preëminently endowed to produce suggestive symbol groups with anagogic
value; the artists. I suspect that it would prove that the purifying
(cathartic) action of a work of art is the greater the more strongly the
anagogic symbolism (the groups of types that carry it) is developed, or in
other words, the more they express a tendency to a broadening of the
personality. This tendency, to which belong the motives of the denial of
the selfish will (father figure) of the love that is connected with
sacrifice (incest motive, regeneration) of the devotion to an ideal
(longing for death), etc., is manifested in the artist as also in the
devout observer of the work of art in his very devotion to it. Being lost
in a work of art appears to me essentially related both to introversion
and to the unio mystica.

I have already spoken of the creations of the myth forming imagination and
its anagogic import. In alchemy, to which I wish now to return, the
mythical and the individual images meet in the most vivid way, without
destroying each other.

In regard to the high ethical aspirations of alchemy, we understand that
as a mystic art it preserves those attributes of a royal art which it
seems to have had at first merely as gold making and magic. In fact what
art may more justly be called royal than that of the perfection of
mankind, that art which turns the dependent into the independent, the
slave into a master? The freeing of the will in the mystic (and in every
ethical) process has already, I believe, been commented on enough to be
comprehensible. And the power of rule that has been extolled as a magical
effect of the Philosopher's Stone lies in the harmonizing of the
individual will with that of the world or with God's will. In the new
birth--so remarks Jane Leade casually--we acquire a magic power; this occurs
"through faith, that is, through the harmony of our will with the divine
will. For faith puts the world in our power, inasmuch as the harmony of
our will with the divine has the result of making everything ours or
obedient to us. The will of the soul, when it accords wholly with the
divine, is no longer a naked will lacking its raiment, power, but brings
with it an invincible omnipotence."

To-day, too, there is a royal art. Freemasonry bears this name. Not only
the name but its ethical ideal connects it with the spirit of the old
alchemy. This statement will probably be contradicted and meet the same
denial as did once the ideas of Kernning [J. Krebs], although I think I am
on different ground from that of this poetic but, in my eyes, all too
uncritical author. Keep in mind the historical treatment mentioned in Part
I, Section 4, and furthermore do not forget the psychological basis of our
present modes of viewing things.

[If I wished to compare the ethical aims of both in general terms, I
should run the risk of unduly expatiating on what is easily understood.
Robert Fischer describes freemasonry as a society of men who have set
themselves the severe task of a wise life and labor as the most difficult
task, of self-knowledge, self-mastery and self-improvement,--tasks that are
not finished in this life but only through death prepare us for the stage
where the true consummation begins. These beautiful and straightforward
words could just as well stand in an alchemistic discussion on the
terrestrial and celestial. But this will suffice.]

And now permit me to present the following portrayals by Jane Leade
[English mystic of the 17th century. She belonged to the philadelphian
society founded by Pordage.] which I reproduce here with a few words of
comment, and take them as an illustration of the beautiful spiritual union
of the serious hermetic with the new royal art. The reader can draw his
own conclusions. The passages are taken from Leade's "Garten-Brunn" (L. G.
B.). References to Wirth are to the "Symbolisme Hermétique" (W. S. H.) of
this modern author.

This mystic who is sunk in deep meditation on the noble Stone of divine
Wisdom, has a vision of Sophia (Wisdom) at which she is startled. "Soon
came the voice and said: Behold I am God's everlasting handmaid of wisdom,
whom thou hast sought. I am now here to unseal for thee the treasures of
the deepest wisdom of God, and to be to thee even that which Rebecca was
to her son Jacob, namely, a true, natural mother. For from my body and
womb shalt thou be born, conceived and reborn." (L. G. B., I, p. 14.)

Leade is much rejoiced that the "morning star from on high" has sought
her, and secludes herself for the following days to await further
developments. She has still more visions of the crowned queen of heaven
and was asked whether she had the desire to be taken up into the celestial
company. She proves herself of constantly devoted will and from this time
wisdom speaks to her as an inner illumination. (L. G. B., I, p. 15 ff.)

[Retirement is a precondition of introversion and of withdrawal into
oneself. The uninitiated who is to be admitted is, to use the language of
alchemy, the subjectum, in whom the process of purification is to be
perfected. The alchemists put the subjectum into a narrow vessel so as to
be hermetically sealed from the outer world. There it is subjected to
putrefaction as in a grave. Introversion leads into the depths of one's
very heart. "Where were you formed?" "In my heart [or inner man]." "Where
after this?" "In the Way to the Lodge." "What determined you...?" "My own
free and unconstrained will." The uninitiated are recommended to take
counsel seriously with regard to their important resolution. "Why are
you...?" "Because I was in darkness and desired light." The death symbol
in the sch. K. is later to be considered. I can naturally go into a few
only of the analogies. The informed reader will largely increase the
number of parallels very easily.]

Jane Leade seeks in the spirit for the key that can open the entrance into
the great secret that lies deep hidden within her. Her effort to reach the
holy city is great but at first ineffectual. [One is not admitted without
further effort.] She wanders around the city and finds no entrance. [Way
to the Lodge--"Why have they not led you the nearest way to the Lodge?" "In
order to acquaint me with the difficulties and troubles that one must
first overcome before one finds the way of virtue."] She is apprehensive
that she must, lacking the wonderful key, now grope all her days in
darkness ... never find the gate. "While I, now overpowered with fear and
horror at all this, was plunged [Symbols and processes in the sch. K. Roll
of the terrible Br. It is probably well founded psychologically, a fact
that I should like to emphasize in opposition to Fischer, Kat. Erl., I, on
Question 7.] into a deep silence and stillness, the word of wisdom itself
was revealed to me and said: 'O deeply searching spirit, be not surprised
that you have not realized your hopes for so long a time. So far you have
been with many others caught in a great error, yet as you know and are
sorry for your error, I will apprize you what sort of a key it must be....
And although this wonderful Key of Wisdom is a free gift, it will yet come
to be of high value to you, O searching spirit, when once you obtain
it.' " Nevertheless wisdom goes about and looks for those who deserve it,
[Nothing being made of nothing, the point of departure of the philosophic
work is the finding and choice of the subject. The material to work upon,
say the alchemists, is quite common and is met with everywhere. It is
necessary only to know how to distinguish it, and that is where all the
difficulty lies. We continually experience it in masonry, for we often
initiate the profane, whom we should have rejected had we been
sufficiently clear sighted. Not all material is good to make a mercury.
The work can succeed only if we succeed in finding a suitable subject; so
masonry makes many inquiries before admitting a candidate to the tests.
(W. S. H., p. 87.)] She does this so as to write herself on the inner
walls of their hearts and in each and every one meet their thoughts which
wait upon her laws and counsel, [Obedience of apprentices. The laws of
wisdom are meant.] and brings a kingdom with it which will be well worth
sacrificing everything for. [Laying aside of all metal. The newly admitted
brother is "through his unclothing" (which probably belongs here) to
represent mankind symbolically, as he comes from the hand of nature, and
to remind us that the freemason, in order to be continuously mindful of
the fulfillment of his duty must be able to rid himself of all fortuitous
externalities. See Note H at end.] But the greatest and most distinguished
master work, says wisdom, consists alone in your keeping your spirit
disciplined and learned, and making it a skilled worker or artist, to give
it knowledge of what material, as well as in what number, weight and
measure [Surveying, geometry.] to make this pure key, which [material] is
the bright pure divinity in the number three, the mighty in truth.... It
is distinguished as a surpassingly mighty glory and lordliness which sits
in a circle of heaven within the hearts of men. [The connection of circle
(doubly significant) and heart is interesting. As is well known the circle
is placed on the bleeding left breast. In the old English ritual the
touching with the point of an instrument (sword or the like) is proved
"Because the left breast is nearest to the heart, so that it may be so
much the more a prick in my conscience as it then pricked my skin."] It
does with the plumbline of its power measure the temple and inner court
with those who worship there. [The line in connection with the temple: the
"binding" on a carpet; an image of the curtain string in the holy of
holies in Solomon's temple. "Just as this ribbon holds and closes the
curtain, so an indissoluble bond unites and holds together all free and
accepted Masonic brothers (also those who worship therein)." This is
wisdom's key [Surveying, Geometry.] which will make our hands drop with
sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the lock (Solomon's Song, V, 5).
When now I opened your secret gate with this key, my soul failed within me
and I had no strength in me, the sun of reason and the moon of my extended
senses were confounded and vanished. I knew nothing by myself of the
active properties of nature and the creature. "What have you seen as ...?"
"Nothing that reason can grasp."] The wheel of motion stood still and
something else was moved by a central fire, so that I felt myself turned
into a bright flame. Whereupon this word came to me: This is nothing else
than the gate of my everlasting depths; can you stay in this fiery region,
which is wisdom's dwelling and abode, in which it meets holy remote
spirits and gives them a fiery principle? For if thou canst take heed such
that thou comest hither at its order; then no secret shall be kept from
thee. So far I have been permitted to approach the entrance to your house,
where I must still stay until I hear further from you what is to be done.
(L. G. B., I, pp. 17-19.)

[As we hear it is therefore right to keep the spirit corrected and
disciplined. "Why came ye ... to subdue my passions--to subject my
will...." We see two triads. A divine three (3 great lights), and then
sun, moon and central fire, which second three can be called the lesser
lights, as the "M. v. St." appears as a central fire. If we remember that
the didactic voice proceeds, according to this symbolism, from a fire or
light (Wisdom), this light is identical with the M. v. St. in the
function, and it is determined by exactly that. The central fire is
naturally also the blazing star. This stands on the tapis between sun and
moon and it is designed to illuminate the innermost space of the temple.
From alchemy we are well acquainted with [Symbol: Sun], [Symbol: Moon] and
an intermediate and mediating light, namely [Symbol: Mercury]. This light
can be also symbolized as [Symbol: Star of David]. To the alchemistic
point of view correspond quite closely the three great lights of the
Freiburg Ritual, God, man and St. John's light. This (the [Symbol:
mercury]) is the intelligence and the talent in men which creates all
science and shows us the truth. It is "the only authority that the
freemason has to recognize unconditionally, namely, the divine ordinance
in his own heart, the celestial fire in his ego."]

Several weeks later Leade hears again the voice of wisdom. It said to her:
"Separate thyself and withdraw from thy animal sensuous life, it is too
coarse. I cannot appear till that is completely lost and vanished." [The
alchemistic separation (separatio) and the masonic taking off of parts of
their clothing. I have already made the most necessary remarks about it.
We have to be freed from the things which, as in the eclectic ritual "much
retard the soaring of the spirit and chain man to the earth." It has an
expressly programmatical meaning (anticipating a later phase) when, e.g.,
the system of the Grand Lodge goes back, for the deprivation from the
metal, to "the temple of Solomon that was built of fully prepared stones,
just as they were brought, etc.," so that no metal work was needed.] A
short time after Leade is again driven to search after the secret being.
Wisdom requires it to know itself apart from its creature existence.
"Whereupon I was surrounded by gently burning flames that consumed and
burned all thistles, thorns and accursed fluxes [the 'superfluities' of
alchemy] which would put themselves forward.... Therefore Wisdom let her
voice be heard and said: 'O thou troubled spirit, I am now come to tell
thee what was required of thee, as I have not refrained from saying to
thee, even at the beginning of my discourse with thee, what it would cost
thee to attain this key. [First programmatically shown. The actual process
will then follow.] I say to thee, God requires a sacrifice of thee.
Understand me then, thou hast an earthly element that has spread and
covered [Like a garment.] thee, and consequently has got the upper hand
and mastery of thee; these thrones and powers [king or father figure]
must, however, be overthrown and their place found no more. Thou hast
deeply mourned that thou hadst to do without the ever near communion or
union with God thy Creator, [Only the masters sit near the sun.] but be
not surprised at that. The cause lies here in complete extinction because
you are not yet deceased and dead completely in the mystical manner.
[Complete extinction first results in the third degree.] This is the first
baptism that you must experience, but ah, how many have rushed into this
too abruptly, because they have not given their earthly selfishness a
single mortal blow right to the heart. [The circle or sword placed on the
left breast alludes merely to the process of the clearing of conscience.
Here the whole ego is not yet annihilated.] So I recommend to thee my
flaming sword. Be courageous and let it achieve complete execution in the
field of nature [The weed in the field is exterminated where, as Jane
Leade frequently says, ears of corn are to grow.] or banish completely all
young or old, and turn from life toward death whatever in you does not
bear my mark and name that is my image.' " [From this the psychological
sense of the countersign is recognized. In connection with the field we
are reminded especially of Shibboleth (Judges XIII, 6: The Ephraimites who
could not speak it had to die). Leade often mentions the Ephraimites.
Directly pertinent to the above passage is, of course, Revelations,
passim.] (L. G. B., I, pp. 21 ff.) The earthly is, as it were, to be
sacrificed to God as a burnt offering or melted away in a fiery furnace,
in a vessel of the purest metal. [Probably it will not be superfluous to
remark that in the Bible the first worker in all kinds of metal was Tubal
Cain, whose name is a password.] Jane Leade finds "the conditions or
circumstances which thou [Wisdom] requirest of me to be very hard;
especially do I find myself still dwelling in the offspring of a mortal
shadow, where whole millions of spirits tempt me and employ all their
ability and strength to hinder and hold me back from the high and noble
exaltation and aspiration, [The seductive and restraining voices in the
circuitous way or on the way to the Lodge according to the eclectic
ritual. The band corresponds to the mortal shadow.] while I, alone and
seeing the receptacle and fire before me, stood in thought about it and
pondered the matter, and was willing, like Isaac, to ask, But where is the
lamb? [The apron is of lamb's fleece.] She [Sophia = Wisdom] answered my
unspoken question with these words: You yourself must be the paschal lamb
that shall be slain. Thereupon I was instructed to say or to beg: Then
give yet this life pulse a stroke so that it may completely return. And as
I stretched out my neck, so to speak, to the love flaming sword, I felt
that a separation or beheading had taken place. [Note the baring of the
neck, the guttural and its meaning given according to the content of the
old form of oath. The fate of the traitor befalls the man who is slain at
this point; he has been a traitor to the inner true man. It is here the
place to bear in mind the descending scale of marks (guttural, pectoral,
stomachal). Man is to be transmuted on rectangular principles, or in the
language of alchemy, is to be tinctured with the divine tincture. This
tincturing seizes first the most spiritual and advances steadily until the
whole man is transformed. The trichotomy corresponds to the Platonic (and
alchemistic) tripartite division of the powers of the soul. Plato
distinguishes the reasoning soul, which he places in the head, the
intellectual in the breast, and the affective in the abdomen. The entire
soul, even the vegetative, is to be illuminated by the highest light. If
we assume that it is more than a pretty picture, Staudenmaier's view
becomes of interest, namely that man may have an extraordinary spiritual
perfection in bestowing consciousness through practice upon the centers
that ordinarily work vegetatively without consciousness. In this way he
gains power over a whole army of working powers that otherwise escape him.
Staudenmaier's own experiences teach that all the dangers of introversion
are connected with such a training, and it may easily happen that we are
defeated by the spirits that we invoke, instead of becoming their masters.
The absolute mastery of the rational ego is, however, evidently the
foundation of the ethical work of perfection. Kenning's doctrine is
related to the theories of Staudenmaier.] Oh, how sweet and pleasant it is
to perceive the life blood flowing into the fountain of the same divinity
from which it came." Whereupon wisdom opened more of her secrets to her.
(L. G. B., I, p. 24.)

It may be that this is the most suitable place to mention another series
of visions (apropos of the building of the tabernacle, L. G. B., I, pp. 24
ff.): "It [the holy ark] is an impregnable fortress and tower, so go thou
not out [so says Wisdom], but bind thyself and ally thyself here as a
disciple, to hold out to the end, then thou wilt be learned in the lofty
spiritual art of the everlasting mystery, and be instructed how this
incomparable composition or medicine of the healing elixir and balsam of
life is prepared. Above all thou must enter a bond of silence and vow to
reveal it to no one outside of your fellow learners, who are called
together near and with you, to work at this very art. [I hardly need to
mention the duty under oath, but will only call attention to the group of
the three virtues of the newly entering: attentiveness, silence,
fidelity.] Further thou must completely bide the definite time and year of
it, in all fidelity and patience indefatigable, until thou succeedest in
making this oil as well, and preserve it in the beautiful snow-white
alabaster box of consummate nature, and art as fit and perfect as thy
instructress."

I continue in the earlier series of forms. Jane Leade is required by
wisdom to follow her. "But all of a sudden I was surprised by a mighty
enemy, who pressed me hard while he accused and complained that I was
breaking the laws of nature, to which I was still bound because I had an
external body, for whose elemental wants I must take reasonable care, ...
as all my neighbors in the world did, who were under the rule of the grand
monarch of the [worldly calculating] reason, under whose scepter
everything must mortify what lives in the sensual animal life...." [The
man who lives only for the satisfaction of physical needs cannot serve our
purpose.... There is a higher life than that to which millions are chained
like an animal. To this higher life the Master is to devote himself, and
to it he is metaphorically initiated in the admission. Common nature, the
prince of this world, strives against these requirements.] "Yes," says the
prince of the earthly life, "how wilt thou turn aside from my laws and
throw thy brother's yoke from thy neck?" Leade turns to her mother,
Wisdom, who promises her to take God's advice how the enemy could be
driven away. The proof should be that they were traitors to the crown, to
honor, and to the lordship of the lamb; they would soon be handed over to
justice. (L. G. B., I, pp. 27 ff.) [Cf. on the one hand, in connection
with "accused and complained," think of the murderer of the royal
architect. As this is the inner man, both belong together. The "prince of
this world" turns the tables on his accusation; psychologically quite
justifiably.]

After various exhortations Jane Leade receives from Wisdom a book which
she, Wisdom, must read from, "in order to explain to you one letter after
another, [Spelling.], especially you do not yet know the number which
makes up your new name. And as long as you do not see that, what kind of
right and title can you advance for the rest of the entire mastery that is
developed there?" (L. G. B., I, p. 36.) It refers to a transmutation of
the man, which cannot happen all at once; "so highly important a change,
that it could not take place without a passing through many distant
degrees." (L. G. B., II, p. 78.)

We come to a section that is inscribed, "The Magic Journeys." [Probably I
shall hardly need now to refer to the meaning of the journey.] It contains
all the other phases of the mystical work. "During my spiritual journey to
the land of all blessed abundance, a magic outline of it was placed before
my eyes, while I was brought to a door which was so low and narrow that I
could enter it only by creeping through on my knees, so that it also
required great effort and trouble. [Obstacle of the door.] And so I was
led farther till, after some time, I came to another door, which was
indeed narrow enough but somewhat more comfortable to go through than the
first. As I thus proceeded, I came finally to a door that had two valves,
one of which opened itself, and was quite right in height and width for my
size, and also admitted me to a place of which I could find neither
beginning nor end. And I said, 'What am I doing here alone?' Whereupon my
invisible guide who had led me through these three doors or gates replied
that still others would come after me, when they should hear that there
was anywhere so great a country that was to be possessed by new
inhabitants, and that should be filled and blessed also with all kinds of
goods." (L. G. B., I, p. 40.) [The three gates refer not merely to the
three degrees, but have still for themselves another analogue in the
initiation. In the old English system the aspirant knocks, because the
door offers him a resistance, on the backs of the three officials. They
are, as it were, the spiritual doors of the brotherhood. The resistance,
and how it is gradually presented in Leade's description, is readily
understood psychologically; the nature of the aspirant is the more adapted
the further he advances on his work.]

"This idea and apparition and the account and explanation following
thereupon were very powerful; so that I entered into the thoughts of it
ever deeper, ... so that I ... also might perceive the explanation and
meaning of the gates. For although my spirit saw naught but an infinite
spaciousness [compare previous pages] I perceived and felt [Infinite
spread of the lodge in accordance with the examination.] still the blowing
of so fragrant and refreshing a breeze, as if all kinds of flowers
actually stood blooming there. [Does the question as to the mason's wind
belong here psychologically? In any case the pleasant breeze comes from
the east. Jane Leade often describes her flower garden as oriental.
Psychologically and mythologically the breeze has the value of a spermatic
symbol. Anagogically it is concerned with the bestowing of a power or (to
retain the procreation metaphor) the impregnation with such a power.]
Therefore this word was revealed and spoken to me: 'This is space and
place where the love realm is to arise and become verdant with its natural
inhabitants, who have laid aside their crass self-love [selfishness] and
left it behind them, as it might not come here; even as it is the one
which makes the entrance so narrow and crowded....' Hereupon I saw in my
spirit unexpectedly different persons, modified out of measure in their
bodies, and they were so highly versed in this mystery that they breathed
forth such a spirit from them that they could give being and existence to
everything that they willed and desired. At times they spread golden tents
and went in and out of them, at other times in places that appeared to be
quite waste and desolate they made wonderful plants and trees to grow up,
which actually offered their perfect fruit that appeared in a bright
golden radiance; of which it was related that they were the magical
nourishment and food on which the inhabitants of this land were supposed
to live." [We may also say the masters of the art cultivate an
uncultivated people, and provide spiritual nourishment at the drawing
table.] "And although at my first entrance here it seemed that I saw
nothing, yet I did see after a few moments this whole spacious place
filled with spirits of so high a degree that they attracted me at once.
Thereupon they set me divers philosophical questions [Catechizing.] which
I did not understand. So one of them in a very friendly manner offered to
instruct and teach me; said further that he would teach me the secret of
their art.... Accordingly he brought me into a magnificent tent, and
requested me to wait there so that I might advance into the pure acts or
works of faith, because I would succeed thereby in becoming an adept in
this high philosophy. Now when, thereupon, Wisdom herself appeared to me,
I asked her who it was that had set me the philosophical questions?
Whereupon she answered me that they were the old and last living worthies,
and they were the believing holy ones, taught by her in her inward and
outward divine magic stone; and that the time was coming in which she
desired to make new artists and poets in this theosophic wisdom, who
should give a form to the things that had been so odiously disgraced and
lay under a cloud of contempt, ignorance and disgrace. Especially, no
other way besides this could be found than that the deep mine, in which
the treasure had lain hidden so long, should be broken open and unsealed.
[The lost that must be found again is called in freemasonry the master
word. The master wandering has the object of seeking what was lost there
[in the East] and has [partly] been found again.] Hereupon the apostle
John [Well beloved] spoke to me, to whom the secret was well known, and
who was the person who had spoken so kindly to me before, with these
words: 'Just as a natural stone, so is there also a spiritual stone which
is the root and the foundation of all that the sons of art have brought
visibly into being and into the light. And just as the external is
corporeal, and consists in work of the hands, and consumes a great amount
of time before it can be brought to perfection, so also is the internal
elaborated from degree to degree....' Therefore I begged and asked the
angel John in what manner I might go to work, to work out the same?" The
"angel John" accorded her the permission. Just as a furnace is used for a
chemical preparation, so also a furnace is necessary for the preparation
of the spiritual Philosopher's Stone. This outer furnace is, however, the
corporeal man, in which "the fire seeds of pure divinity itself are
kindled by the essence of the soul, when he finds for it a hallowed and
properly prepared vessel. The materia in which one must labor or work is
the divine salt, which is placed in a pure clear crystalline glass, the
pure spirit. Further shouldst thou know, that this divine salt is
concealed in all men." (L. G. B., I, pp. 40-43.)

Here I must insert the discussion of the salt (also salt stone) and its
effect. We must understand clearly that the salt stone of this symbolism
is the same as the cubical stone of the masonics. That the salt is
hieroglyphically represented by a cube, I have already shown. The concept
stone is the parting of the ways for two symbol groups of similar meaning,
both of which Jane Leade uses. The one group is the chemical preparation,
as the angel John just now described it; the other is the treatment of the
stone as a building stone (which is to be dressed, etc.) found in other
passages from Jane Leade, namely, in connection with the building of a
temple, a sanctuary, the New Jerusalem. Important use is made of men as
building stones preëminently in her "Revelation of Revelations." This one
passage from L. G. B. (II, p. 138) may be quoted: "Who will now blow this
trumpet of mine that they may break loose from their iron yokes and bonds
and come hither, so that they may become worthy to be built in as well-cut
pillars for the temple of wisdom." The quadrangular form is several times
mentioned also. Jane Leade is quite right when she says that the divine
salt, the cubic stone, lies concealed in all men; the unprepared man is
the crude stone and in him lies to be developed (potentially not actually)
the cubic. In the preparation of the stone, the alchemistic as well as the
building stone, it depends on the clearing away of the disturbing
elements, not on ornamentation. The purification (rectificatio,
purificatio, etc.) of the alchemistic stone exactly corresponds to the
working over the raw stone with the pick. Crystallization produces the
regular form; fixation, the density. The projection corresponds to the
employment in the building of the temple (which appears infrequently in
symbolism). Probably the most appropriate place for these passages (L. G.
B., I, pp. 131 ff.) is in connection with this mention of building. "Only
have faith, so I will go before you and reveal my name and show you the
foundation of it [the city], wherefrom your strength increases and your
victorious power shall be known. But who must be your architect to
instruct you in this foundation work of yours but this Wisdom who was with
the great God Jehovah from eternity, who gave you existence and being from
the breath of the eternal Will? Therefore thus and in such manner the
motivating power of the will must result and proceed.... Come therefore to
me and I will show you where all these foundation stones lie. Look and see
the material of the treasure in the circumference of your new earth....
Here you might spy out or find this foundation, [Cf. what was said
previously about the new earth], for which purpose will be given to you
the golden measuring line, or the plummet of my spirit." [The master
stands on the pillar of strength. Jehovah was the last master word.]

We stopped where the angel John says we should know that the divine salt
is hidden in all men. It goes on: "but it has lost its power and savor,
and such is the principle of light that includes all other principles,
because man, although quite unknown to himself, is an abstract and concept
in brief of all worlds. Therefore he may find in himself all that he
seeks; only it cannot happen before the salt alone, which has lain as
dead, has been again raised to life through Christ the Freestone (who
calcines the black to a jasper brilliance and to a beautiful whiteness).
This is the true theosophic medicine, which indeed gradually, or little by
little, works out of itself, from itself, and into itself, even as a grain
of wheat which when it is sown does, by the coöperation of the sun and the
outer planets, forms itself into a body. Only one has to watch and pay
attention so that no birds of prey come and pick it up [Cf. Figure 3, p.
199] before it comes to its maturity and full time. For just such a state
[as with the grain of wheat] exists in the case of the gold stone, which
lies hidden in the foundation of nature, is nourished by the warm fiery
influence of the divine sun and through the moist seeds of the spiritual
Luna [sperma luna] is watered, which makes it grow through the inner
penetration and union of the planetary powers of the higher order, which
draw the weaker and lower into themselves, impregnate and swallow them.
Whereby the mastery is obtained over all that is astral and elemental. In
this manner the beloved John revealed to me the nature of the royal stone,
as it was revealed to him in the island of Patmos (there by him was
brought forth what he possessed in the spirit). And he told me further
concerning this: that where the universal or general love is born in any
one, such would be the true signature and token that this seraphic stone
would there be formed and take to itself a bodily shape." (L. G. B., I, p.
44).

[Here we meet clearly the trinity [Symbol: Sun] [Symbol: Philosopher's
Stone] [Symbol: Moon], sun, moon, and as an outgrowth of both the [Symbol:
Philosopher's Stone] gold stone, the Philosopher's Stone, which unites in
itself the [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver] or which is the same
[Symbol: Fire] and [Symbol: Water]. It is therefore not at all a mistake
to see in the [Symbol: Water] a union of action and reaction. The G must
be conceived in the anagogic sense, as the genesis of the Philosopher's
Stone or as regeneration.] In L. G. B., I, p. 147, I find also this
remarkable passage: "The word of Jesus was revealed to me in the following
manner: O you that wait upon Jerusalem. Through what gate have you
entered? And what have you seen here that you are so desirous of living
here? Have you not been taken in by the fire flaming eye? [The eye is the
flaming star. In L. G. B., I, p. 196, is found the representation of a
face that is equivalent to the eye. A moon is added to it. The eye
[Symbol: Gold] is, as it were, the sun to this moon.] so that you intend
not to go out again from here, till you get another heart [The pectoral
learns who approaches to the flaming star.] which never could be
completely changed?... O then be therefore wise, and await your nuptial
spirit [Genesis] and the garment of the power unfailing. [i. i. d. St.] No
one can ever get that outside of this treasure city, for in this Zion all
must be born anew...." [Oswald Wirth regards the alchemistic concept Rebis
as the expression of the perfect degree of community. "The initiated, who
becomes in some way androgynous, because he unites the virile energy with
the feminine sensitiveness, is represented in alchemy by the Rebis [from
res bina, the double thing]. This substance, at once male and female, is a
mercury [Symbol: Mercury] animated by its sulphur [Symbol: Sulphur] and
transformed by this act into Azoth [Symbol: Mercury], i.e., into this
quintessence of the elements [fifth essence] of which the flaming star is
the symbol. It should be noted that this star is always placed in such a
way that it receives the double radiation of the male sun [Symbol: Gold]
and the female moon [Symbol: Moon]; its light is thus of a bisexual
nature, androgynous or hermaphrodite. The Rebis corresponds otherwise to
the matter prepared by the final work, otherwise called the journeyman who
has been made worthy to be raised to the mastery." (W. S. H., p.99.)]

But to return to Jane Leade's magical journey. "Hereupon I was moved
(because I well knew and was certain that this heavenly stone already had
its birth and growth in me) [Rebirth = the cubical stone's change from
potentiality to actuality] with great frankness to ask whether my external
furnace [her own body] would keep so long, and not perish [die] before the
stone would have attained its perfection. Whereupon this dear saint [John]
said to me in answer: Worry and trouble not yourself about this but be
only patient in hope; for the true philosophic tree is grown and in a fair
way to produce ripe fruit." (L. G. B., I, pp. 44 ff.) The preparation of
the stone is now described by John according to the well known outlines.
For "said Wisdom and the apostle John to me: Henceforth you shall be
brought to the old worthy heroes of the faith who have [The masters too.]
effected projection with the stone [= the work of transmutation]. And
after I was brought there I saw the patriarchs or arch fathers and all the
great philosophers, who had been taught by God himself both in the earlier
and in the later times. After that I was led into a darkness and gloom,
which was of itself changed by a magic power into a clear silver light."
(L. G. B., I, p. 46.) Several other allegories follow for the changing
activity, as described already (L. G. B., I, p. 41). John explains that
all the wonders were accomplished with the stone of wisdom and that
whoever has worked out this stone in himself is marked as one sealed
[Sigillum, Hermetes, Sealing with the Trowel, mark of salvation, Mark
Mason.] of God with the power from above.

A further communication of the preceding vision [sc. Magic Journey] gives
the following additional information: "The Word came to me and said: The
love bond between God and thee must not be loosened but tightly knotted.
Meanwhile the spirit is the only eternal substance and property in which
thou must labor and toil. That it may then cling to you so fast and
strongly that it may draw thee quite closely to it and may establish thee
within the circle of the immeasurable love; from which enmity is sundered,
and the curse of the elements is separated and wholly taken away. O go in,
go, I say, into it, for this is the infinite space, that thou hast seen,
and which is to be found inside the third door. [Does this need any
explanation?] This invisible love bond will perfect thee through the first
gate, which is so narrow and low, and therefore also through the other two
gates; in case that thou wilt yield everything in thee completely in all
its length and breadth so that it may be able quickly to raise thee. For,
dear one, what is to return thee so mightily to the desired enjoyment of
all abundance and good as the love of God? Therefore be strong and
courageous in love, in going through these divers gates, and fear not any
attack of the adversary till thou hast entered this hallowed country and
art wedded therein to thy beloved."

A complaint that was made of Wisdom by her pilgrim: "Meanwhile as I lay in
my deep struggle, came there a spirit of prayer down, who made an earnest
supplication and unutterable sighing, rise towards heaven, [The
lamentation at the grave of the Master.] which as I felt most clearly,
penetrated and broke through the gate of the eternal profound, so that my
spirit had an entrance to the secret chamber of pure godhead, wherein I
had audience and complete freedom to pour out my lamentations and show my
wounds and tell who had pierced me. For each and every hand was against
me, let fly their stinging arrows at me, and burdened and oppressed still
more that which hung already, dropping blood, upon the cross, and cried
and said, Crucify, crucify her, make her really feel death in the
dying.... I was in violent birth travail. All woes and onsets, however,
made a greater opening for the birth of life, and gave me an entrance into
the holy place, wherein first I heard the eternal tones. And then after
this, as I gained the strength to be in a pleasant quiet, I was in a clear
water, [Tears.], in which no mud nor any refuse arose; also no implement
was lifted to any work there, nor was any noise nor uproar heard." [Just
as in the building of Solomon's temple.] (L. G. B., I, p. 48.)

Now Leade hears the comforting voice of the "Bridegroom" (the unio
mystica) which brings to her view the perfection she has striven for, and
commands her to touch no unclean spirits of this world. [Gloves.] Only
what is detached from sin may come near him. The bridegroom is answered by
Leade's soul-spirit: "Lord, how can this be done? For although I have had
a great longing towards this ministration [the holy service] that I might
be ever near thee, the spirit of this world [See previous.] has made claim
to this shell or body of mine, and says that I have not yet stepped out
the bounds and sphere of his dominion. The external man is encompassed by
hunger and thirst, heat and cold [antitheses of the Hindu philosophy],
which are wont to entangle his external senses in such things as are
external, in such a way that no one can live in such pure abstraction and
seclusion, until he is relieved of and freed from all care for the
external body. This is what I bewailed with tears, and expressly asked God
whether it was not possible for the eternal mind and spirit to supply all
necessaries for the bodily part without aid of the spirit of reason, who
is king in that realm where malediction rules?" [In other words, whether
it was not possible in the living life to be released from contradiction
(as it is called in the Bhagavad-Gita), to quite tear away the bonds of
animal sensuous being, and definitively allow the eternal principles to be
active. The question is whether the terrestrial stone is, in its complete
perfection, on the whole possible, whether the ethical ideal in absolute
purity can be pragmatically realized.]

"Whereupon after a short blocking and stilling of my external senses, I
received this answer [of the Bridegroom]; that this could not be until a
complete death of the body of sin was suffered, showing me that which is
written in the 6th verse of the seventh chapter of Romans, that after that
was perished and dead, wherein we were held, we should serve God in
newness of spirit." (L. G. B., I, pp. 50 ff.)

[Here we have then the requirement to become wholly dead to the realm of
sin, in order to be able to rise fully to the ethical ideal. The question
whether this is possible in life remains open, to be sure. In symbolism
this mystical death and the union with the highest spirit was represented
symbolically in the highest degree of freemasonry. The representative of
the Highest is the Master degree of the M. v. St. and he fills the dead,
as it were, with his life, as the raising takes place (H in H, F against
F, K against K, etc.), like the reviving of the child by Elijah (I Kings
XVIII, 21). As for the necessary decay of the body before the raising
("The skin leaves," etc.) let us quote the passage, L. G. B., I, pp. 271
ff.: [the divine word speaks] "Know ... that I have not left thee without
a potent and rich talent which lies in thine own keeping, although deep
hidden and covered with a threefold covering (Exod., XXXIX 34, Num. IV, 5,
6), which must be removed before thou canst see this costly garment. The
first covering is the coarse dark appearance of this earthly realm ... the
second is the fast-binding [directed upon the mundane] reason ... the
third is the baser natural senses.... Provided that thou thoroughly
determine with the firm resolution to break through these three obstacles,
thou wilt come to the golden mass.... While it is given to ye then to know
where the treasure really lies [Seeking out of the grave. The three
murderers, who have hidden the corpse, are these very 'three obstacles.']
and you have my spirit on this, which will not alone seek for it but will
with the hand of its strength strongly coöperate with you; [To revive the
mystical dead.] so resolve as united in the spirit ... to break through
that and to break it up, which lies as a covering over this princely
being.... Pray and do not only wait [no idle mysticism] but struggle and
work until you have released, set free and liberated this power hidden in
a prison; which may be exalted upon the throne of empire, since in truth
my spirit as well as yours has hitherto not been displaced from its
kingdom except by force and unrighteousness." [With reference to the
raising (cf. L. G. B., III, pp. 87, 91); in that place three degrees of
mystical development are described in the similitude of three altars.
Under the last altar, which is built of quadrangular stones, in which one
can see his own face as in mirrors, lies the life trampled to death, which
will again be wakened.]

"Knowest thou not, I was asked, that the law of sin has the mastery as
long as it [the body with its selfish tendencies] lives? So that the
spirit clearly bore witness and gave me to understand that nothing could
make me worthy of this marriage with the Lamb [unio mystica] except an
absolute death, since he wedded only the maidenly spirit, to be one flesh
with him, [H in H, F against F, etc.] and by so doing changed it into his
own pure manhood. [Humanity.] And this is the generation or birth to an
actively self-sufficient being, which rises out of the old one. For just
as the grain of wheat perishes or dies in the earth and comes into a new
life, just so it goes also with the arising and the growing up of the new
creation, which in truth is Christ our life, whose appearance will put an
end to the sins in us. For, dear one, what has brought on the curse, care,
trouble, misery, weaknesses, which press and torture the poor man in this
fallen state of his but the departing from God? And as long as he is in
this condition, he is a debtor to sin and under its dominion; which
subjects him to all affliction and misery, which are wont to follow the
footsteps of those who live in the elemental flesh. Now without doubt it
is good and joyful tidings to hear of a possibility of drawing out and
putting off this body of sins; and in truth the prophet who has arisen in
me has prophesied that such a day was at hand. Be dismayed at it, ye that
are the wounders and despisers of this grace; which I see is now near
being revealed, for the bridal garments are being prepared ... [Cf. the
end of the parable.] O Wisdom, the preparation and ordering of the bridal
garments is given in charge to you alone, which shall be of divers colors,
with which the king's daughter, [Analogue of the king's son, the improved
son figure of the parable.] who is entrusted to thy teaching and
instruction, may be distinguished from all others, and known [as
redeemed]." (L. G. B., I, pp. 51 ff., wherewith the magic journey is
ended.)

Thus there is a confident tone, a hope in that which loses itself in the
infinite. But Leade suspects that it is an unattainable ideal and knows
what regulative import it has: "Ah, who up to this hour has traveled so
far, and what are all our realized gifts until we have reached this goal
[union with the Divinity]. Can our plummet even sound it and explore in
the deep abyss, the matchless wonder of the immeasurable being? And
because the revolving wheel of my spirit has found no rest in all that it
has seen, known, possessed and enjoyed, it stretched its errant senses
continuously towards what was still held back, and kept, by the strong
rock of omnipotence; to struggle towards which with a fresh attack I
resolutely determined, and would be sent away with nothing less than the
kingdom and the ruling power of the Holy Ghost." (L. G. B., I, p. 87.)

In a parallel between the old and new royal art, I cannot overlook the
French masonic writer Oswald Wirth, who has worked in the same province. I
agree with him in general; although much of his method of interpretation
seems to me too arbitrary. I have already called attention to several
passages from W. S. H. on the preparation of the subject [i.e., the
uninitiated]. I will endeavor to outline the contents of the rest of the
work according to the ideas of Wirth.

Having given up himself, the Subjectum is overcome in the philosophic egg
[preparation chamber, i.e., sch. K.] by sadness and suffering. His
strength ebbs away, the decomposition begins; the subtle is separated from
the coarse. [Smaragdine tablet.] That is the first phase of the air test.
After descending to the center of the earth [Visita interiora terrae,
etc.--Smaragdine tablet, 6, 8.] where the roots of all individuality meet,
the spirit rises up again [Smaragdine tablet, 10.] released from the caput
mortuum, which is blacked on the floor of the hermetic receptacle. The
residuum is represented by the cast-off raiment of the novice. Laboriously
now, he toils forward in the darkness; the heights draw him on; escaping
hell he will attain to heaven. His ascent up the holy mountain is hindered
by a violent storm; he is thrown into the depths by the tempest: a symbol
of circulation in the closed vessel of the alchemists, which vessel
corresponds to the protected lodge. During the circulation the volatile
parts rise and fall again like rain, which is symbolized by the tears upon
the walls. To be sure, it is not here that the neophyte is subjected to
the water test, and if a confusion is possible on this point it comes from
the fact that all the operations of the great work go on in one vessel,
while the masonic initiation is completed in a suite of different rooms,
so that the symbolic series here suffers disintegration. The circulating
water, which soaks into the pores of the earthly parts of the subject,
purifies it more and more, so that it goes from gray through a series of
colors (peacock's tail) to white. In this stage the material corresponds
to the wise man who knows how to resist all seduction. Yet we are not to
be satisfied with this negative virtue; the fire test (we should remember
that the four tests by the elements were to be found in the parable also)
is still to be gone through, the calcination, which burns everything
combustible. After the calcination there is a perfectly purified salt
[Symbol: Salt] of absolute transparence. So long as the novice has not
attained this moral clearness, the light cannot be vouchsafed to him. In
brief, in the first degree, the main thing is the comprehensive
purification. The salt layers must be made crystal clear, that surround
the inner sulphur [Symbol: Sulphur] like a crust and hinder it from its
free radiation. Sulphur is to be regarded as a symbol of the expansive
power, as individual initiative, as will. Mercury stands opposite to it as
woman does to man, as that which goes to the subject from without, or as
absolute receptivity. Salt is midway between both; in it the equilibrium
between [Symbol: Sulphur] and [Symbol: Mercury] is found. It is a symbol
of what appears as the stable being of man. In the first degree the
purification of the salt is worked out for the release of the sulphur. The
red column J corresponds to the red sulphur, by which symbolically the
novices get their reward. For the rest, the first degree is satisfied with
getting the novices to see the universal light (the blazing star). (W. S.
H., pp. 88-92.)

The fire test takes place in the second degree. The fiery sulphur must be
worked out or rather sent out and used for work. The field of activity of
the member proportions itself, as it were, according to the expansion or
range of its sulphurous radiation. At this time the member enters into a
relation of such intensified activity with the world that the intellectual
grasp [which corresponds to the [Symbol: Mercury] = principal] acquires
from it a new illumination [blazing star], and breaks away for a
connection of the will, which was at first merely individual, with the
collectivity. To me at least that appears to be the sense of the
figurative but not quite clear exposition of W. S. H., pp. 952-962, which
I have, for the sake of exactness, given in the original text. [See
Appendix, Note I.] As soon as the crude stone is cut and polished we have
no longer to work inward but outward. What we are to accomplish so
creatively would be insignificant if we did not know the secret of
borrowing power from a power that apparently lies without us. Where do
these mysterious powers work if not at the pillar B, whose name means: i.
i. d. St.? In the north directed on the contrary towards the moon, whose
soft feminine light it reflects, it corresponds to [Symbol: Mercury],
which unceasingly flows towards all being, in order to support its central
fire, [Symbol: Fire]. The exaltation of the latter leads to the fire test,
the idea of which Wirth seems to take in strictly occult form, in the
manner of Eliphas Levi. Finally, a circulation takes place, in that the
individual will seeks like a magnet to draw the divine will, always falls
down again, rises, however, and so on in cycles, till both meet in the
"philosophical fire." It is the cycle of which we read in the Smaragdine
Tablet. The incombustible essence that comes forth from the fire test is
the phoenix (a figure much used by the alchemists). The member has the task
of changing himself into the phoenix. Not only [Symbol: Fire] belongs to
the work, however, but also the act must be guided by intelligence;
activity and receptivity must complement each other. Therefore the member
has to know both pillars thoroughly. And therefore he becomes also the
already mentioned androgynous material, Rebis. That is only to be attained
when the elemental propensities are overcome, therefore the figure Rebis
is represented as standing on the dragon. (W. S. H., pp. 96-101.)

What will the master do now? He will identify himself with the Master
Builder of all worlds, in order to work in him and through him. When any
one says that that is mysticism, he is not wrong. Being developed on the
three successive ways of purgatio, illuminatio, and unio, this mysticism
is no less logical than the religious mysticism that with its
mortifications, if it were only rightly understood, would accomplish the
same purpose. Mortification is, as the word itself says, the endeavor for
a certain kind of death. Twice is the mason enjoined to die; at the
beginning in the preparation room and at the end at the final initiation
into the inmost chamber. The second death corresponds to the perfection of
the grand mastery. It signifies the complete sacrifice of his personality,
the renunciation of every personal desire. It is the effacement of that
radical egotism that caused the fall of Adam, in that he dragged down
spirituality into corporeality. The narrow pusillanimous ego melts into
nothing before the high impersonal self, symbolized by Hiram. The mythical
sins of the eternal universal human Adam are thus expatiated. The
architect of the temple is to the Grand Master Builder of All Worlds (G.
B. a. W.) just what in Christian symbolism the Word become flesh is to the
Eternal Father. In order to carry on the work of the universal structure
with advantage the Master must enter into the closest union of the will
with God. No longer a slave in anything he is the more a master of all,
the more his will works in harmony with the one that rules the universe.
"Placed between the abstract and the concrete, between the creative
intelligence and the objective creation, man thus conceived, appears like
the mediator par excellence, or the veritable Demiurge of the gnostics."
Yet it is not enough that he gets light from its original source, he must
also be bound by endless activity to those whom he is to lead. The
necessary bond is sympathy, love. "The master must make himself loved and
he can only succeed by himself loving with all the warmth of a generosity
extending even to absolute devotion, even to the sacrifice of himself."
The pelican [We are already acquainted with this hermetic bird.] is the
hieroglyph for this loving sacrifice without which every effort remains
vain. (W. S. H., p. 105.)

The master's degree, this necessarily last degree, corresponds to an ideal
that is set us as a task: we must strive towards it even if its
realization is beyond our powers. Our temple will never be finished, and
no one expects to see the true eternal Hiram arise in himself. (W. S. H.,
p. 94.)

We find also in Wirth, how the work is divided into three main steps,
which begin with the purifying, turn towards the inner soul, and end with
the death-resembling Unio Mystica; here we find, too, in the last degree
the unattainable ideal, which like a star in heaven shall give a sure
course to the voyage of our life. The viewing of the exalted anagogic
conception as a perspective vanishing point, makes allowance for the
possible errors of superposition in the anagogic aspect of the elementary
types.

The tripartite division, which we meet in the great work, shows the
frequently doubted inner qualification of the three degrees of
freemasonry. As they answer a need, they have again prevailed, although
they were not existent in the masonic form of the royal art at the
beginning (about two centuries ago); I say "again," because similar needs
have already earlier produced similar forms. (Cf. L. Keller's writings.)
Whether we consider ethical education in general or the intensive
(introversion) form of it, mysticism, we have in either case a process of
development, and degrees are necessary to express it symbolically. The
effort, appearing from time to time, to multiply the degrees has been
justified. We can divide what is divided into three sections into seven
also (7 operations in alchemy, 7 levels of contemplation, 7 ordinations,
etc.), although it is not really needed. But the idea of abolishing the
three degrees can only arise from a misapprehension of the value of the
existing symbolism. That masonry is a union of equal rights is not
affected by the presence of the degrees, provided that their symbolic
significance is not overstepped. The degrees form a constituent part of
the symbolic custom itself and like it are to be intangible.

The symbols of all the lofty spiritual religious communities, for which
the royal art presents itself as a paradigm or exemplar, put before us, as
it were, types of truth. Single facts which the symbols may signify (or
that could be read into the symbols) are not the most important, but
rather the totality of all these meanings. The totality (which can be
acquired only by a sort of integration) is something inexpressible; and if
it also succeeded in expressing this inexpressible, the words of the
expression would be incomprehensible to any finite spirit, as the
individual facts are.

The symbols are the unchangeable, the individual meanings are the
variegated and the changeable. [As for the masonic symbolism in
particular, I am in agreement with Robert Fischer (Kat. Erl., III, fin.).
"Freemasonry rests on symbols and ceremonies; in that lies its superior
title to continued existence. They are created for eternal verities and
peculiarly adapted thereto; they are fitted to every grade of culture,
indeed to every time, and do not fall like other products of the time, a
sacrifice to time itself.... Therefore a complete abolition of our symbols
can meet with assent as little as an enfeeblement of them can be desired.
Much more must we strive in order that a clear understanding may sift out
the abstract, corresponding to our spiritual eye, from the concrete
necessary for our physical eye, so that the combined pictures shall be
resolved in the simple fundamental truths. By this means the symbols
attain life and motion and cannot be put down for things that decay with
time."] Therefore the symbols should never be changed in favor of a
particular meaning, which becomes the fashion (or be brought closer to it
over and above the given relation). What is to be maintained through
variations of meaning, is not the meanings but the symbols themselves.

To each person symbols represent his own truth. To every one they speak a
different language. No one exhausts them. Every one seeks his ideal
chiefly in the unknown. It matters not so much what ideal he seeks, but
only that he does seek one. Effort itself, not the object of effort, forms
the basis of development. No seeker begins his journey with full knowledge
of the goal. Only after much circulation in the philosophic egg and only
after much passing through the prism of colors does that light dawn which
gives us the faint intimation of the outline of the prototype of all
lesser ideals. Whoever desires hope of a successful issue to this progress
must not forget a certain gentle fire that must operate from the beginning
to the end, namely Love.


    Whom these teachings cheer not,
    Deserves not to be a man.


NOTES.


Note A (80). I put here not merely those comparisons of motives which are
alike at the beginning, but also those that are important for our further
consideration. My rendering of them is partly abridged. Signs of
similarity are, as Stucken explains, not employed to express an absolute
congruence, but predominantly in the sense of "belongs with" or "or is the
alternate of." Stucken's comparison I, A, goes: Moses in the ark = spark
of fire in the ark = Pandora's books = Eve's apple; I, B: Moses in the ark
= the exposed = the fatherless = the persecuted = the deluge hero [the one
floating in the ark]. II, A: Eve's apple = Moses in the ark = Onan's seed
= fire = soma = draught of knowledge, etc. III, B: Tearing open of the
womb = decapitation or dismemberment = exposure = separation of the first
parents. IV, B: The dismembered [man or woman] = the rejuvenated = the
reborn [m. or w.]. VI, A: Potiphar motive = separation of first parents =
Onan motive. VII, A: The wicked stepmother = Potiphar's wife = man eater.
VII, B: Flight from the "man eater" = flight from Potiphar's wife = flight
from the wicked stepmother = separation of the first parents = magic
flight. IX, A: The first parents = magic flight. IX, A: The killed ram =
Thor's ram = Thyestes' meal = soma. XIII, A: The exposed = the persecuted
= the dismembered child = the slain ram--the helpful animal. XIX: The Uriah
letter = the changed letter = word violence [curse = blessing]. XX:
Scapegoat = ark. XXVIII: Wrestling match = rape of women = rape of soma =
opening of the chest [opening of the hole] = rape of the garments [of the
bathing swan ladies]. XXIX: Castration = tearing asunder [consuming] of
the mother's body = the final conflagration = the deluge. XXXIII, A:
Dragonfight = wrestling match = winning of the offered king's daughter =
rape of the women = rape of fire = deluge. XL, A: Incest motive = Potiphar
motive. XL, B: Incest = violation of a [moral] prohibition. XL, C: Seducer
[male or female] to incest = "man-eater." XLIV, A: The father who rejects
the daughter = "man eater." XLIV, B: Separation of the first parents =
refusal of the daughter [refusal of the "king's daughter" promised to the
dragon fighter] = substitution. XLV, A: Sodomy = substitution = rape =
parthenogenesis = marriage of mortal with the immortal = seduction =
adultery = incest = love = embraces of the first parents = wrestling
match. Otherwise is marriage of mortal with the immortal = incest =
separation of the first parents. (SAM Book 5.)

Note B (128). That the ideas of gold and offal lie very near each other is
shown in numerous forms and variations in myth, fairy tale and popular
superstition. I mention above all the figure of the ducat or gold-dropper
which has probably been attenuated from a superstition to a joke, and
around it are gathered such expressions as "he has gold like muck," "he
must have a gold dropper at his house"; then the description of bloody
hemorrhoids as golden veins; the fabulous animals that produce as
excrement gold and precious things. Here belong also the golden ass [K. H.
M., No. 36], which at the word "Bricklebrit" begins "to spew gold from
before and behind," or [Pentam., No. 1], at the command, "arre cacaure,"
gives forth gold, pearls and diamonds as a priceless diarrhea. [Arre is a
word of encouragement like our get-up; cacuare is derived naturally from
cacare, kacken = to cack, perhaps with an echo of aurum, oro, gold.] It
occurs frequently in sagas that animal dung, e.g., horse manure, is
changed into gold as, inversely, gold sent by evil spirits is easily
turned [again] into dung. Gold is, in the ancient Babylonian way of
thinking, which passes over into many myths, muck of hell or the under
world. If a man buried a treasure so that no one should find it, he does
well to plant a cactus on the covered [treasure] as a guardian of the
gold, according to an old magical custom. An attenuation of the comparison
dung = gold seems to be coal = gold. In Stucken we find the comparison
excrement = Rheingold = sperm [S. A. M., p. 262] and connected with it
[pp. 266 ff.] a mass of material mythologically connected with it. I
mention the similar parallels derived from dream analysis (Stekel, Spr. d.
Tr., passim), further in particular the psychologically interesting
contributions of Freud on "Anal character" (Kl. Schr., pp. 132 ff.) like
Rank's contribution. (Jb. ps. F., IV, pp. 55 ff.)

Note C (280). According to Jung it is a characteristic of the totality of
the sun myth which relates that the "fundamental basis of the 'incestuous'
desire is not equivalent to cohabitation, but to the peculiar idea of
becoming a child again, to return to the parents' protection, to get back
into the mother again in order to be born again by the mother. On the way
to this goal stands incest, however, i.e., necessity in some way to get
back into the uterus again. One of the simplest ways was to fructify the
mother and procreate oneself again. Here the prohibition against incest
steps in, so now the sun myths and rebirth myths teem with all possible
proposals as to how one could encompass incest. A very significant way of
encompassing it is to change the mother into another being or rejuvenate
her, in order to make her vanish after the resulting birth [respective
propagation], i.e., to cause her to change herself back. It is not
incestuous cohabitation that is sought, but rebirth, to which one might
attain quickest by cohabitation. This, however, is not the only way,
although perhaps the original one." (Jung, Jb. ps. F., IV, pp. 266 ff.) In
another place it is said: The separation of the son from the mother
signifies the separation of man from the pairing consciousness of animals,
from the lack of individual consciousness characteristic of infantile
archaic thought. "First by the force of the incest prohibition could a
self-conscious individual be produced, who had before been, thoughtlessly
one with the genus, and only so first could the idea of the individual and
conclusive death be rendered possible. So came, as it were, death into the
world through Adam's sin. The neurotic who cannot leave his mother has
good reason; fear of death holds him there. It appears that there is no
concept and no word strong enough to express the meaning of this conflict.
Whole religions are built to give value to the magnitude of this conflict.
This struggle for expression, enduring thousands of years, cannot have the
source of its power in the condition which is quite too narrowly conceived
by the common idea of incest; much more apparently must we conceive the
law that expresses itself first and last as a prohibition against incest
as a compulsion toward domestication, and describe the religious system as
an institution that most of all takes up the cultural aims of the not
immediately serviceable impulsive powers of the animal nature, organizes
them and gradually makes them capable of sublimated employment." (Jb. ps.
F., IV, pp. 314 ff.)

Note D (274). Jung divides the libido into two currents lengthwise, one
directed forward, the other backward: "As the normal libido is like a
constant stream, which pours its waters into the world of reality, so the
resistance, dynamically regarded, is not like a rock raised in the river
bed, which is flowed over and around by the stream, but like a back
current flowing towards the source instead of towards the mouth. A part of
the soul probably wants the external object, another part, however,
prefers to return to the subjective world, whither the airy and easily
built palaces of the phantasy beckon. We could assume this duality of
human will, for which Bleuler from his psychiatric standpoint has coined
the word ambitendency, as something everywhere and always existing, and
recall that even the most primitive of all motor impulses are already
contradictory as where, e.g., in the act of extension, the flexor muscles
are innervated." (Jb. ps. F., IV, p. 218.)

Note E (279). Of the wonderful abilities that pass current as fruits of
the yoga practice, the eight grand powers [Maha-siddhi] are generally
mentioned: 1. To make oneself small or invisible [animan], 2, 3. to
acquire the uttermost lightness or heaviness [laghiman, gariman], 4. to
increase to the size of a monster and to reach everything even the most
distant, as e.g., to the moon with the tips of the fingers [mahiman or
prapti], 5. unobstructed fulfillment of all wishes, e.g., the wish to sink
into the earth as into water and to emerge again [prakamya], 6. perfect
control over the body and the internal organs [isitva], 7. the ability to
change the course of nature [vasitva], and 8. by mere act of will to place
oneself anywhere [yatra kamavasayitva]. Besides these eight marvelous
powers many others might be named, which are partly included in the above;
such an exaltation of sensitiveness that the most remote and imperceptible
images, the happenings in other worlds on planets and stars, as also the
goings on in one's own interior and in other men's are perceived by the
senses; the knowledge of the past and the future, of previous existences
and of the hour of death; understanding the language of animals, the
ability to summon the dead, etc. These miraculous powers, however, suffer
from the disadvantages of being transitory, like everything else won by
man through his merit--with the exception of salvation. (Garbe, Samkhya and
Yoga, p. 46.)

Note F (305). Jung (Jb., Ill, p. 171) refers to Maeterlinck's "inconscient
supérieur" (in "La Sagesse et la Destinée") as a prospective potentiality
of subliminal combinations. He comments on it as follows: "I shall not be
spared the reproach of mysticism. Perhaps the matter should none the less
be pondered: doubtless the unconscious contains the psychological
combinations that do not reach the liminal value of consciousness.
Analysis resolves these combinations into their historical determinants
for that is one of the essential tasks of analysis, i.e., to render
powerless by disconnecting them, the obsessions of the complexes that are
concurrent with the purposeful conduct of life. History is ignorant of two
kinds of things: what is hidden in the past and what is hidden in the
future. Both are probably to be attained with a certain measure of
probability, the former as a postulate, the latter as a historical
prognosis. In so far as to-morrow is contained in to-day, and all the warp
of the future already laid, a deepened knowledge of the present could make
possible a more or less wide-reaching and sure prognosis of the future. If
we transfer this reasoning, as Kant has already done, to the psychologic,
the following things must result; just as memory traces, which have
demonstrably become subliminal, are still accessible to the unconscious,
so also are certain very fine subliminal combinations showing a forward
tendency, which are of the greatest possible significance for future
occurrences in so far as the latter are conditioned by our psychology. But
just as the science of history troubles itself little about the future
combinations which are rather the object of politics, just so little are
the psychological combinations the object of the analysis, but would be
rather the object of an infinitely refined psychological synthesis, which
should know how to follow the natural currents of the libido. We cannot do
this, but probably the unconscious can, for the process takes place there,
and it appears as if from time to time in certain cases significant
fragments of this work, at least in dreams, come to light, whence came the
prophetic interpretation of dreams long claimed by superstition. The
aversion of the exact [sciences] of to-day against that sort of
thought-process which is hardly to be called phantastic is only an
overcompensation of the thousands of years old but all too great
inclination of man to believe in soothsaying."

Note G (317). The umbilical region plays no small part as a localization
point for the first inner sensations in mystic introversion practices. The
accounts of the Hindu Yoga doctrine harmonize with the experiences of the
omphalopsychites. Staudenmaier thinks that he has, in his investigations
into magic, which partly terminated in the calling up of extremely
significant hallucinations, observed that realistic heavenly or religious
hallucinations take place only if the "specific" nerve complexes [of the
vegetative system] are stimulated as far down as the peripheral tracts in
the region of the small intestine. (Magie als exp. Naturw., p. 123.) Many
visionary authors know how to relate marvels of power to the region of the
stomach and of the solar plexus. In an essay on the seat of the soul, J.
B. van Helmont assures us that there is a stronger feeling in the upper
orifice of the stomach than in the eye itself, etc.; that the solar plexus
is the most essential organ of the soul. He recounts the following
experience. In order to make an experiment on poisonous herbs he made a
preparation of the root of aconite [Aconitum napellus] and only tasted it
with the tip of his tongue without swallowing any of it. "Immediately," he
says, "my skin seemed to be constricted as with a bandage, and soon after,
there occurred an extraordinary thing, the like of which I had never
experienced before. I noticed with astonishment that I felt, perceived and
thought no longer with my head, but in the region of my stomach, as if
knowledge had taken its seat in the stomach. Amazed at this unusual
phenomenon, I questioned myself and examined myself carefully. I merely
convinced myself that my power of perception was now much stronger and
more comprehensive. The spiritual clearness was coupled with great
pleasure. I did not sleep nor dream, I was still temperate and my health
perfect. I was at times in raptures, but they had nothing in common with
the fact of feeling with the stomach, which excluded all coöperation with
the head. Meantime my joy was interrupted by the anxiety that this might
even bring on some derangement. Only my belief in God and my resignation
to his will soon destroyed this fear. This condition lasted two hours,
after which I had several attacks of giddiness. I have since often tried
to taste of aconite, but I could not get the same result." (Van Helmont,
Ortus Medic, p. 171, tr. Ennemoser, Gesch. d. Mag., p. 913.)

Note H (381). For the old as for the new royal art the material is man, as
man freed from all framework. "Not man of the conventional social life,
but man as the equally entitled and equally obligated being of divine
creation, enters the temple of humanity with the obligation always to
remain conscious of his duty and to put aside everything that comes up to
hinder the fulfillment of the highest duty." (R. Fischer.) Compare with
this what Hitchcock says of the material of the Philosopher's Stone:
"Although men are of diverse dispositions ... yet the alchemists insist
... that all the nations of men are of one blood, that is, of one nature;
and that character in man, by which he is one nature, it is the special
object of alchemy to bring into life and action, by means of which, if it
could universally prevail, mankind would be constituted into a
brotherhood." (H. A., pp. 48 ff.) [The tests] ... "begin with the
stripping of the metals. Now alchemy recommends, once the propitious
matter is seen, carefully examined and recognized, to clean it externally
for the purpose of freeing it of every foreign body that could adhere
accidentally to its surface. The matter, in fine, should be reduced to
itself. Now it is an absolutely analogous matter that the candidate is
called to strip himself of everything that he possesses artificially; both
it and he ought to be reduced strictly to themselves. In this state of
primitive innocence, of philosophic candor retrieved, the subject is
imprisoned in a narrow retreat where no external light can penetrate. This
is the chamber of meditation which corresponds to the matras of the
alchemist, to his philosophic egg hermetically sealed. The uninitiated
finds there a dark tomb where he must voluntarily die to his former
existence. By decomposing the integuments that are opposed to the true
expansion of the germ of individuality, this symbolic death precedes the
birth of the new being who is to be initiated." (W. S. H., pp. 87 ff.)

Note I (411). As to the Chamber of the Companion hung in red, it
represents the sphere of action of our individuality, measured by the
extent of our sulphurous radiation. This radiation produces a kind of
refractive [refringent] medium, which refracts the surrounding diffused
light [[Symbol: Mercury] is meant] to concentrate it on the spiritual
nucleus of the subject. Such is the mechanism of the illumination, by
which those benefit who have seen the blazing star shine. Every being
bears in himself this mysterious star, but too often in the condition of a
dim spark hardly perceptible. It is the philosophic child, the immanent
Logos or the Christ incarnate, which legend represents as born obscurely
in the midst of the filth of a cave serving as a stable. The initiation
becomes the vestal of this inner fire [Symbol: Sulfur]; archetype or
principle of all individuality. She knows how to care for it as long as it
is brooded in the ashes. Then she devotes herself to nourishing it
judiciously, to render it keen for the moment when it finally should
overcome the obstacles that imprison it and seek to hold it in isolation.
It means, as a matter of fact, that the Son is put en rapport with the
external [Symbol: Mercury], or in other words, that the individual enters
into communion with the collectivity from which he comes.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


OLD. (Before 1800.)

Agrippa ab Nettesheym, Henricus Cornelius, Opera.

Alchemisten, Griechische, v. Berthelot, Hoefer (moderne).

"Allgemeine (und General-) Reformation der gantzen (weiten) Welt" vide
"Fama."

"Amor proximi" ("Das Buch Amor Proximi Geflossen aus dem Oehl der
Göttlichen Barmhertzigkeit ...") Ans tag-licht gegeben per Anonymum.
Franckfurt und Leipzig, 1746.

(Andreae, Valentin) Anonym, Chymische Hochzeit Christiani Rosencreutz.
Anno 1459. Gedruckt zuerst zu Strassburg bey Lazari Zetzners seel. Erben
MDCXVI. Regenspurg, MDCCLXXXI (eigentlich Berlin, bei Nicolai).

Arabi v. Horten (mod.).

Arnaldus de Villa Nova, Chymische Schrifften. Aus dem Latein übersetzet
durch Joh. Hoppodamum. Frankfurt und Hamburg, 1683.

Badarayana v. Deussen (mod.).

Basile, Giambattista v. mod.

"Bauer" ("Der grosse und der kleine Bauer"). Zwey Philosophische und
Chymische Tractate. Leipzig, 1744.

Beaumont, Iohann, Historisch-Physiologisch- und Theologischer Tractat von
Geistern. Aus der Englischen Sprache in die Teutsche mit Fleiss übersetzt
von Theodor Arnold. Halle im Magdeburgischen, 1721.

Bekker, Balthasar, Die Bezauberte Welt. Amsterdam, 1693.

Bernhard, Graf von der Mark und Tervis, Abhandlung von der Natur des
(philosophischen) Eyes. Hildesheim, 1780.

"Bhagavad-Gîta" v. Schlegel, Schroeder (mod.).

Boehme, Jacob, Schriften. Gesammtausgabe von Johan Georg Gichtel. 2 Bde.
1715.

Bonaventura, Opera.

Booz, Ada Mah (Dr. Adam Michael Birkholz), Die sieben heiligen Grundsäulen
der Ewigkeit und Zeit. Leipzig, 1783.

"Confessio" (der Fraternität R. C.) v. "Fama."

Dastyn, John (Ioannes Daustenius), Rosarium, Visio. Vide "Sieben-Gestirn."

Eisenmenger, Johann Andreä, Entdecktes Judenthum. 2 Tle. Königsberg, 1711.

Eleazar, R. Abraham, R. Abrahami Eleazaris Uraltes Chymisches Werk. In II
Theilen zum öffentlichen Druck befördert durch Julium Gervasium
Schwartzburgicum. Erfurt, MDCCXXXV.

"Fama Fraternitatis oder Entdeckung der Bruderschafft dess löblichen
Ordens dess Rosen-Creutzes, Beneben der Confession Oder Bekanntnuss
derselben Fraternitet ... Sampt einem Discurs von allgemeiner Reformation
der gantzen Welt." Franckfurt am Mayn, M.DC.XV.

Fictuld, Hermann, Des ... Chymisch-Philosophischen Probier-Steins Erste
Classe, in welcher der wahren und ächten Adeptorum ... Schrifften nach
ihrem innerlichen Gehalt und Werth vorgestellt ... worden. Dritte Auflage.
Dresden, 1784.

"Figuren der Rosenkreuzer." ("Geheime--aus dem 16-ten und 17-ten
Jahrhundert.") Drei Hefte. Altona, 1785ff.--Titel der einzelnen Hefte: I.
AVREVM SECVLVM REDIVIVVM. Henricus Madathanus, Theosophus. II. Ein
güldener Tractat vom Philosophischen Steine. Von einem noch Lebenden, doch
vngenanten Philosopho ... beschrieben. Anno M.DC.XXV. III. Einfältig A B C
Büchlein für junge Schüler so sich taglich fleissig üben in der Schule des
H. Geistes ... Von einem Bruder der Fraternitet CHRISTI des Rosenkreuzes
P. F.--Auf dem Titelblatt der ersten beiden Hefte heisst es: "Aus einem
alten Mscpt zum erstenmal ans Licht gestellt." In jedem Heft folgt dem
Text eine Reihe von farbigen Tafeln.

Flamellus, Nicolaus, Chymische Werke. In das Teutsche übersetzt von J. L.
M. C. Anno MDCCLI.

Fludd, Robert, alias de Fluctibus (auch Otreb), Clavis Philosophiae et
Alchymiae Fluddanae. Francofurti, MDCXXXIII.

---- Sophiae cum Moria Certamen. M DC XXIX.

---- Tractatus theologico-philosophicus in libros tres distributus, quorum
I de Vita, II de Morte, III de Resurrectione. Oppenheim, 1617.

---- Schutzschrift für die Aechtheit der Rosenkreuzergesellschaft.
Übersetzt von Ada Mah Booz (Dr. A. M. Birkholz). Leipzig, 1782.

Frizius, Ioachimus, Summum Bonum, quod est verum Magiae, Cabalae,
Alchymiae verae Subjectum Fratrum Roseae Crucis verorum. (Frankfurt),
M.DC.XXIX.

Helmont, Ioan. Baptista van, Ortus Medicinae. Ed. IV. Lugduni, M.DC.LXVII.

Henoch v. Dillmann (mod.).

Hermes v. Fleischer, Reitzenstein (mod.).

I. C. H., Des Hermes Trismegists wahrer alter Naturweg. Herausgegeben von
einem ächten Freymäurer I. C. H. Leipzig, 1782.

"Kabbala Denudata seu Doctrina Hebraeorum transcendentalis et metaphysica
atque theologica." 2 Bde. Sulzbach, 1677; Frankfurt, 1684. (Herausgeber
Knorr von Rosenroth.)

Khunrath, Heinrich, Amphitheatrum Sapientiae Aeternae, solius verae,
Christiano-Kabalisticum, Divino-Magicum, Tertriunum, Catholicon. Hanoviae,
MDCIX.

---- Tractat von den ersten Elementen. (Beygefüget: Unterricht für den
Adeptengrad.) Herausgegeben von einem Verehrer der edlen Schmelzund
Maurerkunst. Leipzig, 1784.

---- Wahrhafter Bericht vom philosophischen Athanor. Leipzig, 1783.

Lacinius, Janus, Praeciosa ac nobilissima artis chymiae collectanea.
Norimbergae, M.D.LIIII.

---- Pretiosa Margarita novella de Thesauro, ac pretiosissimo
Philosophorum Lapide. Venetiis, 1546.

Leade, Jane, Der Baum des Glaubens (beigebunden den "Offenbarungen, die
letzten Zeiten betreffend." Strassburg, 1807).

---- Ein Garten-Brunn gewässert durch die Ströhme der göttlichen
Lustbarkeit, und hervorgrünend in mannichfaltigem Unterschiede geistlicher
Pflanzen. Amsterdam, 1697-1700. 3 Tle. (L G B)

---- Offenbahrung der Offenbahrungen. Amsterdam, 1695.

Limitibus, Philoteus de, Allgemeine Abbildung der ganzen Schöpfung. Aus
dem Lateinischen übersezt und mit Anmerkungen begleitet von J. J.
Grienstein. Philadelphia, 1792.

---- Das Hermetische Triklinium oder drei Gespräche vom Stein der Weisen.
Aus dem Lateinischen übersezt und mit Anmerkung begleitet von J. J.
Grienstein. Philadelphia, 1792.

Maier, Michael, Arcana Arcanissima. (ca. 1616.)

---- Atalanta Fugiens. Oppenheimii, 1618.

---- Cantilenae intellectuales de Phoenice redivivo. Traduites en François
... par M. L. L. M. Paris, M.DCC.LVIII.

---- Symbola Aureae Mensae duodecim nationum. Francof, 1617.

---- Tripus Aureus, hoc est, tres tractatus chymici selecti. Francofurti,
1678.

Mangetus, Jo. Jacobus, Bibliotheca chemica curiosa. Genevae, M.DCC.II. 2
Bde.

"Manresa" v. mod.

Mosheim, Johann Lorenz, Versuch einer unpartheiischen und gründlichen
Ketzergeschichte. Helmstaedt, 1746.

Mothe-Guyon, La Vie de Madame J. M. B. de la Mothe-Guyon, écrite par
elle-même. Paris, M.DCC.XC. 3 Bde.

"Musaeum hermeticum reformatum et amplificatum, omnes sophospagyricae
artis discipulos fidelissime erudiens." Francofurti, 1749.

Mystiker, Deutsche, des XIV. Jahrhunderts, v. Pfeiffer (mod.).

Nicolai, Friedrich, Versuch über die Beschuldigungen welche dem
Tempelherrenorden gemacht worden, und über dessen Geheimniss; nebst einem
Anhange über das Entstehen der Freimaurergesellschaft. 2 Tle. Berlin und
Stettin, 1782.

Otreb v. Fludd.

Paracelsus (A. Ph. Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim), Werke. 4o-Ausg.
Huser, Basel, 1589-90. 10 Bde. Fol.-Ausg. Strassburg, 1603 u. 1616-18. 2
Bde.

Patanjali v. mod.

Pernety, Dom Antoine-Joseph, Dictionnaire mytho-hermétique. Paris,
M.DCC.LVIII.

---- Les Fables Egyptiennes et Grecques dévoilées & réduites au même
principe. Paris, M.DCC.LXXXVI. 2 Bde.

Philaletha, Des Hochgelehrten Philalethae und anderer auserlesene
Chymische Tractätlein ... ins Teutsche übersetzet von Johann Langen.
Wienn, 1749.

Philaletha, Eugenius (Thomas Vaughan), Lumen de Lumine. Ins Teutsche
übersetzet von I. R. S. M. C. Hof, 1750.

---- Magia Adamica oder das Alterthum der Magie. Amsterdam, 1704.

Pistorius, Ioannes, Artis Cabalisticae, hoc est, reconditae theologiae et
philosophiae, scriptorum Tomus I. Basileae, MDXIIIC.

Platon, Werke.

Plotinus v. Kiefer (mod.).

Pordage, John (Johann Pordädsch), Göttliche und Wahre Metaphysica.
Franckfurt und Leipzig, M DCC XV. 3 Bde.

---- Gründlich Philosophisch Sendschreiben, Ein, vom rechten und wahren
Steine der Weissheit. Amsterdam, 1698.

---- Sophia, das ist, Die Holdseelige ewige Jungfrau der Göttlichen
Weisheit. Amsterdam, 1699.

---- Theologia Mystica. Amsterdam, 1698.

---- Vier Tractätlein des Seeligen Johannes Pordädschens M. D. in
Manuschriptis hinterlassen. Amsterdam, 1704.

Reuchlin, Ioannes, De Arte Cabalistica libri tres.--De Verbo Mirifico libri
III. Basileae, M.D.LXI.

Riplaeus, Georgius (George Ripley), Chymische Schriften.

Ins Teutsche übersetzet durch Benjamin Roth-Scholtzen. Wienn. 1756.

Rulandus, Martinus, Lexicon Alchemiae. In libera Francofurtensium Repub. M
D C XII.

Ruysbroeck, Johann van, v. mod.

Samkara v. Deussen (mod.).

S(chröder), Neue Alchymistische Bibliothek für den Naturkundiger unsers
Jahrhunderts ausgesucht. 4 Sammlgn in 2 Bdn. Frankf. u. Leipz. 1772.

Sendivogius, Michael, Chymische Schriften. Nebst einem kurzen Vor-bericht
ans Liecht gestellet durch Friedrich Roth-Scholtzen. Wienn, 1750.

"Sieben-Gestirn, Alchimistisch, Das ist, Sieben schöne und auserlesene
Tractätlein vom Stein der Weisen." Frankfurt am Main, 1756.

Sperber, Julius, Mysterium magnum. Amsterdam, 1660.

---- Tractatus, Ein Feiner, von vielerley wunderbarlichen ... Dingen.
Amsterdam, 1662.

(Starck, Johann August) Anonym, Ueber die alten und neuen Mysterien.
Berlin, 1782.

Svatmaram Svami v. mod.

Tauler, Joannes, Predig, fast fruchtbar zu eim recht christlichen leben.
Basel, M.D.XXII.

Tausendeine Nacht v. Erzählungen (mod.).

Theatrum Chemicum, praecipuos selectorum auctorum tractatus de chemiae et
lapidis philosophici antiquitate, veritate ... continens. Argentorati,
M.DC.LIX-M.DC.-LXI. 6 Bde.

Valentinus, Basilius, Chymische Schriften. In drey Theile verfasset, samt
einer neuen Vorrede ... von Bened. Nic. Petraeo. Leipzig, 1769.

Villars, Abbe de, Le Comte des Gabalis, ou Entretiens sur les Sciences
Secrètes. Londres, M.DCC.XLII.

"Wasserstein der Weisen." Vormahlen durch Lucas Jennis ausgegeben,
nunmehro aber wiederum neu aufgelegt ... von dem F.R.C. Frankfurt und
Leipzig, 1760.

Welling, Georgius, Opus mago-cabbalisticum et theosophicum. Darinnen der
Ursprung, Natur, ... des Saltzes, Schwefels und Mercurii in dreyen Theilen
beschrieben ... wird. Homburg vor der Höhe, 1735.

"Zohar" v. de Pauly (mod.).

Zosimos v. Berthelot, Hoefer (mod.).

MODERN. (From 1800 on.)

Abraham, Dr. Karl, Traum und Mythus. Leipzig und Wien, 1909. English
Translation.

Adler, Dr. Alfred, Uber den nervösen Charakter. Wiesbaden, 1912. English
Translation.

---- Die psychische Behandlung der Trigeminusneuralgie. Zentralbl. f.
Psych., I., Heft 1/2.

---- Der psychische Hermaphroditismus in Leben und in der
Neurose.--Fortschritte der Medizin, Leipzig, 1910, Heft 16.

Basile, Giambattista, Das Märchen aller Märchen oder das Pentameron. Neu
bearb. von Hans Floerke. 2 Bde. München u. Leipzig, 1909.

Bastian, Adolf, Der Mensch in der Geschichte. 3 Bde. Leipzig, 1860.

Bauer, Prof. A., Chemie und Alchymie in Osterreich bis zum beginnenden
XIX. Jahrhundert. Wien, 1883.

Baur, Dr. Ferdinand Christian, Die christliche Gnosis. Tübingen, 1835.

Berthelot, Marcellin, Collection des anciens Alchimistes Grecs, texte et
traduction. Avec la collaboration de Ch.-M. Ruello. Paris, 1887 à 1888. 3
vols.

---- Introduction à l'Etude de la Chimie des anciens et du moyen-âge.
Paris, 1889.

---- Les Origines de l'Alchimie. Paris, 1885.

---- Die Chemie im Altertum und im Mittelalter. Ubertragen von Emma
Kalliwoda. Mit Anmerkungen von Dr. Franz Strunz. Leipzig und Wien, 1909.

Besetzny, Dr. Emil, Die Sphinx. Freimaur. Taschenbuch. Wien, 1873.

Bischoff, Dr. Erich, Die Kabbalah. Leipzig, 1903.

Blau, Dr. Ludwig, Das altjüdische Zauberwesen. Strassburg i. E., 1898.

Boas, Franz, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen Küste Amerikas.
Berlin, 1895.

Bousset, Dr. Wilhelm, Hauptprobleme der Gnosis. Göttingen, 1907.

Brabbée, Gustav, Sub Rosa. Vertrauliche Mitteilungen aus dem maurerischen
Leben unserer Grossväter. Wien, 1879.

Brandeis, J., Sippurim. 2 Aufl. Prag, 1889.

Brandt, Wilhelm, Mandäische Schriften. Göttingen, 1893.

Brugsch, Heinrich, Religion und Mythologie der alten Agypter. 2. verm.
Ausg. Leipzig, 1891.

Buhle, Johann Gottlieb, Über den Ursprung und die vornehmsten Schicksale
der Orden der Rosenkreuzer und Freymaurer Göttingen, 1804.

Comenius-Gesellschaft, Monatshefte der C.-G. für Kultur und Geistesleben.
Herausgegeben von Ludwig Keller (Berlin). Jena.

Creuzer, Dr. Friedrich, Symbolik und Mythologie der alten Völker. 2. Aufl.
6 Bde. Leipzig und Darmstadt, 1819ff.

Deussen, Dr. Paul, Allgemeine Geschichte der Philosophie, Leipzig.

---- Sechzig Upanishad's des Veda. 2. Aufl. Leipzig, 1905.

---- Das System des Vedânta. Nach den Brahma-Sûtra's des Bâdarâyana und
dem Kommentare des Çankara über dieselben. 2. Aufl. Leipzig, 1906.

---- Die Sûtra's des Vedânta ... nebst dem vollständigen Commentare des
Çankara. Leipzig, 1887.

Dieterich, Albrecht, Mutter Erde. Leipzig, 1905.

Dillmann, Dr. A., Das Buch Henoch. Leipzig, 1853.

Dulaure, Jacques-Antoine, Die Zeugung in Glauben, Sitten und Bräuchen der
Völker. Verdeutscht und ergänzt von Friedrich S. Krauss und Karl Reiskel.
Leipzig, 1909.

Ehrenreich, Paul, Die allgemeine Mythologie und ihre ethnologischen
Grundlagen. Leipzig, 1910.

Ennemoser, Dr. Joseph, Geschichte der Magie. Leipzig, 1844.

Erman, Adolf, Die Agyptische Religion. Berlin, 1905.

"Erzählungen aus den Tausend und ein Nächten," Die. Ausgabe Felix Paul
Greve. Leipzig, MDCCCCVII-MDCCCCVIII. 12 Bde.

Ferenczy, Dr. Sándor, Introjektion und Übertragung. Jb. ps. F. I. 2.
English Translation.

---- Symbolische Darstellung des Lust-und Realitätsprinzips im
Oedipus-Mythos. Imago, I. 3.

Ferrero, Guillaume, Les Lois psychologiques du Symbolisme. Paris, 1895.

Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, Die Anweisung zum seeligen Leben. Berlin, 1806.

Findel, J. G., Geschichte der Freimaurerei. 3. Aufl. Leipzig, 1870.

Fischer, Robert, Erläuterung der Katechismen der Joh.-Freimaurerei. I-IV.

Fleischer, Prof. Dr. H. L., Hermes Trismegistus an die menschliche Seele.
Leipzig, 1870.

Flournoy, Th., Des Indes à la Planète Mars. 4. éd. Paris.

Franck, Ad., La Kabbale. Paris, 1892.

Freimark, Hans, Moderne Theosophen und ihre Theosophie. Leipz., 1912.

---- Okkultismus und Sexualität. Leipzig, 1909.

---- Okkultistische Bewegung, Die. Leipzig, 1912.

Freud, Prof. Dr. Sigmund, Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie. Leipzig und
Wien, 1905. English Translation.

---- Dynamik der Ubertragung, Zur. Zentralbl. f. Psych. II. 4.

---- Formulierungen über die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen Geschehens.
Jb. ps. F. III. 1.

---- Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens, Zur. 3. Aufl. Berlin, 1910.
English Translation.

---- Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre. 2 Bde. Leipzig und
Wien, 1906, 1909.

---- Traumdeutung, Die 3. Aufl. Leipzig und Wien, 1911. English
Translation.

---- Wahn, Der, und die Träume in W. Jensens "Gradiva." Leipzig und Wien,
1907. English Translation.

Frobenius, Leo, Das Zeitalter des Sonnengottes. I. Bd. Berlin, 1904.

Furtmüller, Dr. Karl, Psychoanalyse und Ethik. München, 1912.

Garbe, Richard, Die Samkhya-Philosophie. Leipzig, 1894.

---- Samkhya und Yoga. Grundriss der Indo-Arischen Philologie,
herausgegeben von Georg Bühler, III. 4. Strassburg, 1896.

Gneiting, J. M. (J. Krebs), Maurerische Mitteilungen. 4 Bändchen.
Stuttgart, 1831-1833.

Goldziher, Ignaz, Der Mythus bei den Hebräern. Leipzig, 1876.

Görres, J., Die christliche Mystik. 4 Bde. Regensburg, 1836-1842.

Grimm, Brüder, Deutsche Sagen (D S).

---- Kinder- und Hausmärchen (KHM).

---- Jacob, Deutsche Mythologie. 4. Ausg., von Elard Hugo Meyer. 3 Bde.
Gütersloh, 1876-1878.

Haltrich, Josef, Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in
Siebenbürgen. 4. Aufl. Wien, Hermannstadt, 1885. (Siebenbg.-deutsche
Volksbücher, Bd. II.)

Hartmann, Dr. Franz, Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians. Boston, 1888.
(Eine mangelhafte englische Wiedergabe des deutschen Werkes: "Geheime
Figuren der Rosenkreuzer.")

Havelock Ellis, Die Welt der Träume. Deutsche Ausgabe von Dr. Hans
Kurella. Würzburg, 1911.

(Hitchcock Ethan Allen) Anonym, The Story of the Red Book of Appin. (Als
Vervollständigung dazu:) Appendix to the Story ... (Beides:) New York,
1863.

---- Remarks upon Alchemy and the Alchemists. Boston, 1857. (HA)

---- Swedenborg, a Hermetic Philosopher. Being a sequel to "Remarks on
Alchemy and the Alchemists." New York, 1858.

---- Das rote Buch von Appin. Übertr. von Sir Galahad. Leipzig, 1910.

Hoefer, Ferdinand, Histoire de la Chimie. 2 vols. Paris, 1842-1844.

Höhler, Wilhelm, Hermetische Philosophie und Freimaurerei. Ludwigshafen am
Rhein, 1905.

Hossbach, Wilhelm, Johann Valentin Andreä und sein Zeitalter. Berlin,
1819.

Horst, Georg Conrad, Dämonomagie, oder Geschichte des Glaubens an
Zauberei. 2 Tle. Frankfurt a. M., 1818.

---- Deuteroskopie. 2 Bdchen. Frankfurt a. M., 1830.

---- Zauber-Bibliothek. 6 Bde. Mainz, 1821 ff.

Horten, M., Mystische Texte aus dem Islam. Drei Gedichte des Arabi 1240.
Kleine Texte f. Vorlesgn. u. Übgn., herausg. von Hans Lietzmann, Nr. 105.
Bonn, 1912.

"Imago," Zeitschrift für Anwendung der Psychoanalyse auf mund Freud. Wien,
1912f. See Psychoanalytic Review.

Inman, Thomas M. D., Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism. 4. ed.
New York, 1884.

Janet, Pierre, L'Automatisme Psychologique. Paris, 1889.

---- Les Névroses. Paris, 1910.

"Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen."
Herausgegeben von Prof. Dr. E. Bleuler und Prof. Dr. S. Freud. Leipzig und
Wien, 1909ff. (Jb. ps. F.) See Psychoanalytic Review.

Jeremias, Alfred, Alte Testament, Das, im Lichte des Alten Orients. 2.
Aufl. Leipzig, 1906.

---- Babylonisch-assyrischen Vorstellungen vom Leben nach dem Tode, Die.
Leipzig, 1887.

Jodl, Friedrich, Geschichte der Ethik. 2 Bde. 2. Aufl. Stuttgart und
Berlin, 1906, 1912.

Jung, Dr. C. G., Bedeutung des Vaters für das Schicksal des Einzelnen,
Die. Jb. ps. F. I. 2. English Translation.

---- Konflikte der kindlichen Seele, Über. Jb. ps. F. II. 1. English
Translation.

---- Psychologie und Pathologie sogenannter occulter Phänomene, Zur.
Leipzig, 1902. English Translation.

---- Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido. Beiträge zur
Entwicklungsgeschichte des Denkens. Jb. ps. F. III.-IV. English
Translation.

Katsch, Dr. Ferdinand, Die Entstehung und der wahre Endzweck der
Freimaurerei. Berlin, 1897.

Keller, Dr. Ludwig, Anfänge der Renaissance, Die, und die
Kultgesellschaften des Humanismus im XIII. und XIV. Jahrhundert. Leipzig
und Jena, 1903.

---- Bibel, Winkelmass und Zirkel. Jena, 1910.

---- Geistigen Grundlagen der Freimaurerei, Die, und das öffentliche
Leben. Jena, 1911.

Keller, Dr. Ludwig, Geschichte der Bauhütten und der Hüttengeheimnisse,
Zur. Leipzig und Jena, 1898.

---- Grossloge Indissolubilis, Die, und andere Grosslogensysteme des 16.,
17. und 18. Jahrhunderts. Jena, 1908.

---- Heiligen Zahlen, Die, und die Symbolik der Katakomben. Leipzig und
Jena, 1906.

---- Idee der Humanität, Die, und die Comenius-Gesellschaft. Jena, 1908.

---- Italienischen Akademien des 18. Jahrhunderts, Die, und die Anfänge
des Maurerbundes in den romanischen und den nordischen Ländern. Leipzig
und Jena, 1905.

---- Latomien und Loggien in alter Zeit. Leipzig und Jena, 1906.

---- Römische Akademie, Die, und die altchristlichen Katakomben im
Zeitalter der Renaissance. Leipzig und Jena, 1899.

---- Sozietäten des Humanismus und die Sprachgesellschaften, Die. Jena,
1909.

---- Tempelherren, Die, und die Freimaurer. Leipzig und Jena, 1905.

Kernning, J. (J. Krebs), Schlüssel zur Geisterwelt oder die Kunst des
Lebens. Neue Auflage. Stuttgart, 1855.

Kiefer, Otto: Plotin, Enneaden. In Auswahl. 2 Bde. Jena u. Leipz., 1905.

Kiesewetter, Carl, Die Geheimwissenschaften. Leipzig, 1895.

Kleinpaul, Dr. Rudolf, Das Leben der Sprache und ihre Weltstellung. 3 Bde.
Leipzig, 1893.

---- Die Lebendigen und die Toten in Volksglauben, Religion und Sage.
Leipzig, 1898.

"Kloster" v. Scheible.

Knight, Richard Payne, The symbolical Language of ancient Art. New ed. New
York, 1892.

---- Le Culte de Priape et ses Rapports avec la Théologie mystique des
Anciens ... Traduits de l'anglais par E. W. Bruxelles, 1883.

Kopp, Hermann, Die Alchemie in älterer und neuerer Zeit. 2 Tle.
Heidelberg, 1886.

---- Geschichte der Chemie. 4 Tle. Braunschweig, 1843-1847.

---- Beiträge zur. 3 Stücke. Braunschweig, 1869 und 1875.

Krause, Karl Christian Friedrich, Die drei ältesten Kunsturkunden der
Freimaurerbrüderschaft. 2 (4) Bde. Dresden, 1820-1821.

Krauss, Dr. Friedrich S. Jahrbücher für folkloristische Erhebungen und
Forschungen zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der geschlechtlichen Moral. Bisher
9 Bände. Leipzig.

Kuhn, Adalbert, Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks. Berlin,
1859.

Laistner, Ludwig, Das Rätsel der Sphinx. 2 Bde. Berlin, 1889.

Lehmann, Dr. Alfred, Aberglaube und Zauberei. Deutsche Ausg. v. Dr.
Petersen. Stuttgart, 1898.

Lenning, C. (Hesse) und Fr(iedrich) M(ossdorf), Encyklopädie der
Freimaurerei. III. Auflage = Allgemeines Handbuch der Freimaurerei. 2 Bde.
Leipzig, 1900-1901.

Lessmann, Heinrich, Aufgaben und Ziele der vergleichenden Mythenforschung.
Leipzig, 1908.

Lévi, Eliphas, Histoire de la Magie. Nouvelle éd. Paris, 1892.

Lipps, G. F., Mythenbildung und Erkenntnis, Leipzig und Berlin, 1907.

Lisco, D. Friedrich Gustav, Die Heilslehre der Theologia deutsch.
Stuttgart, 1857.

Lorenz, Dr. Emil, Das Titanen-Motiv in der allgemeinen Mythologie. Imago,
II. 1.

Mackenzie, Kenneth R.H., The Royal Masonic Cyclopaedia. London, 1877.

Maeder, Dr. A., Über die Funktion des Traumes. Jb. ps. F. IV. 2. English
Translation.

Maimon, Salomon, Lebensgeschichte. Herausg. von Dr. Jakob Fromer. München,
1911.

Mannhardt, Wilhelm, Germanische Mythen. 2 Bde. Berlin, 1858.

"Manresa" oder die geistlichen Übungen des heiligen Ignatius. Nach dem
Französischen, von Franz A. Schmid. 6. Aufl. Regensburg, 1903.

Marchand, R. F., Über die Alchemie. Halle, 1847.

Müller, Dr. Friedrich, Siebenbürgische Sagen. 2. Aufl. Wien, Hermannstadt,
1885. (Siebenbg.-deutsche Volksbücher, Bd. I.)

---- Karl Otfried, Prolegomena einer wissenschaftlichen Mythologie.
Göttingen, 1825.

Nettelbladt, C. C. F. W. Freih. von, Geschichte der freimaurerischen
Systeme. Berlin, 1879.

Nietzsche, Werke. Leipzig.

Nork, F., Mythologie der Volkssagen und Volksmärchen. Stuttgart, 1848.
(Kloster, Bd. IX.)

---- Sitten und Gebräuche der Deutschen und ihrer Nachbarvölker, Die.
Stuttgart, 1849. (Kloster, Bd. XII.)

Patanjali, Yoga-Sutra. Translation with introduction, appendix, and notes
by Manilal Nabubhai Dvivedi. Bombay, 1890.

Papus (Dr. Gérard Encausse), Traité élémentaire de Magie Pratique. Paris,
1906.

Pauly, Jean de, Sepher ha-Zohar (Le Livre de la Splendeur). Publié par les
soins de Emile Lafuma-Giraud. Paris, 1906ff. 6 (7) Bde.

Pfeiffer, Franz, Deutsche Mystiker des vierzehnten Jahrhunderts. 2 Bde.
Leipzig, 1845, 1857.

---- Theologia deutsch. 2. Aufl. Stuttgart, 1855.

Pfister, Dr. Oskar, Die Frömmigkeit des Grafen Ludwig von Zinzendorf.
Leipzig und Wien, 1910.

Poisson, Albert, Théories et Symboles des Alchimistes. Paris, 1891.

Prasád, Ráma, Nature's Finer Forces. London, 1890.

Rank, Dr. Otto, Inzest-Motiv in Dichtung und Sage, Das. Leipzig und Wien,
1912.

---- Künstler, Der. Wien, 1907.

---- Mythus von der Geburt des Helden, Der. Leipzig und Wien, 1909.
English Translation.

---- Lohengrinsage, Die. Leipzig und Wien, 1911.

---- Symbolschichtung im Wecktraum, Die, und ihre Wiederkehr im mythischen
Denken. Jb. ps. F. IV. 1.

---- Völkerpsychologische Parallelen zu den infantilen Sexualtheorien.
Zentralbl. f. Psych. II. 7-8.

Reitzenstein, R., Hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen, Die. Leipzig, 1910.

---- Poimandres. Leipzig, 1904.

Riklin, Dr. Franz, Wunscherfüllung und Symbolik im Märchen. Leipzig und
Wien, 1908. English Translation.

---- (Vorträge). Zentralbl. f. Psychoanalyse III. 2., pag. 103ff., 113ft.

Roscher, W.H., Ausführliches Lexikon der Griechischen und Römischen
Mythologie. Leipzig, 1884 ff.

Ruysbroeck, Johann van, Drei Schriften. Aus dem Vlämischen von Franz A.
Lambert. Leipzig.

Scheible, J., Das Kloster. Meist aus der ältern deutschen Volks-, Wunder-,
Curiositäten-, und vorzugsweise komischen Literatur. 12 Bde. Stuttgart,
1845-1849.

Scherner, R.A., Das Leben des Traums. Berlin, 1861.

Schiffmann, G.A., Die Freimaurerei in Frankreich in der ersten Hälfte des
XVIII. Jahrhunderts. Leipzig, 1881.

Schlegel, Aug. Guil. a, Bhagavad-Gita id est Thespesion Melos ... Editio
altera, cura Christiani Lasseni. Bonnae, MDCCCXLVI.

Schmieder, Karl Christoph, Geschichte der Alchemie Halle, 1832.

Schmidt, Richard, Fakire und Fakirtum im alten und modernen Indien.
Berlin, 1908.

Schneider, Hermann, Kultur und Denken der alten Agypter. Leipzig, 1907.

Schopenhauer, Werke.

Schroeder, Leopold von, Bhagavad-Gita. Des Erhabenen Sang. Jena, 1912.

Schubert, Dr. G.H. von, Die Symbolik des Traumes. 3. Aufl. Leipzig, 1840.

Silberer, Herbert, Charakteristik des lekanomantischen Schauens, Zur.
Zentralbl. f. Psych. III. 2-3.

---- Kategorien der Symbolik, Von den. Zentralbl. f. Psych. II. 4.

---- Lekanomantische Versuche. Zentralbl. f. Psych. II. 7-10.

---- Mantik und Psychanalyse. Zentralbl. f. Psych. II. 2.

---- Phantasie und Mythos. Vornehmlich vorn Gesichtspunkte der
funktionalen Kategorie aus betrachtet. Jb. ps. F. II. 2.

----  Prinzipielle Anregung, Eine. Jb. ps. F. IV. 2.

----  Spermatozoenträume, Zur Frage der. Jb. ps. F. IV. 2.

----  Symbolbildung. Jb. ps. F. III. 2., IV. 2.

---- Symbolik des Erwachens und Schwellensymbolik überhaupt. Jb. ps. F.
III. 2.

Soldan, Geschichte der Hexenprozesse. Neu bearbeitet von Dr. Heinrich
Heppe. 2 Bde. Stuttgart, 1880.

Spielrein, Dr. Sabina, Über den psychologischen Inhalt eines Falles von
Schizophrenie (Dementia praecox). Jb. ps. F. III. 1.

---- Die Destruktion als Ursache des Werdens. Jb. ps. F. IV. 1.

Starcke, Dr. C. N., Freimaurerei als Lebenskunst. Berlin, 1911.

Staudenmaier, Dr. Ludwig, Die Magie als experimentelle Naturwissenschaft.
Leipzig, 1912.

Stekel, Dr. Wilhelm, Nervöse Angstzustände und ihre Behandlung. 2. Aufl.
Berlin und Wien, 1912.

---- Sprache des Traumes, Die. Wiesbaden, 1911.

---- Traumdeutung, Fortschritte in der. Zentralbl. f. Psych. III.

---- Träume der Dichter, Die. Wiesbaden, 1912.

Strunz, Dr. Franz, Naturbetrachtung und Naturerkenntnis im Altertum.
Hamburg und Leipzig, 1904.

---- Theophrastus Paracelsus. Jena, 1903.

Stucken, Eduard, Astralmythen. Religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen.
Leipzig, 1907. (S A M)

Svatmaram Svami, Hatha-Yoga Pradipika. Translated by Shrinivas Iyangar.
Published by Tookaram Tatya. Bombay, 1885.

(Wirth, Oswald) Anonym, Le Livre de l'Apprenti. Nouv. éd. Publié par la L.
Travail & Vrais Amis Fidèles. Paris, 1898.

---- Le Symbolisme Hermétique dans ses Rapports avec la Franc-Maçonnerie.
Paris, 1909. (W S H)

Wundt, Wilhelm, Völkerpsychologie (Mythus und Religion). 3 Tle. Leipzig,
1910 (1. Teil, 2. Aufl.), 1906, 1909. English Translation.

Zeitschrift für ärztliche Psychoanalyse, Internationale. Herausg. von
Prof. Dr. Sigmund Freud. Leipzig und Wien, 1913. See Psychoanalytic
Review.

Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse. Bd. I-II, herausg. von. Prof. Dr. Freud.
Bd. IIIf. von Dr. Wilhelm Stekel.

Wiesbaden, 1910ff. (Zb. f. Ps.) See Psychoanalytic Review.

Note. The works of Freud, Adler, Jung, Rank, and Ricklin, are to be found
in English Translations. See Psychoanalytic Review, N.Y., Nervous and
Mental Disease Monograph Series and lists, Moffat, Yard & Co., N. Y.


INDEX.


A

Abraham, 36

Abudad, 71

Adam, 75
  and Eve, 75

Aeson, 10

Affects in dream, 33

Air, 106, 127

Alchemistic, 16

Alchemy, 16, 112
  definition, 169

Alum, 144

Amniotic fluid, 103

Anagogic, 241
  aspect, 263

Animals, 66, 67

Annihilation, 259

Antæus, 271

Anubis, 77

Anus, 135

Anxiety, 261
  in dreams, 48

Apple, 77

Argentum, vivum, 161

Art, hermetic, 16
  royal, 16

Askesis, 292

Astral content, 61

Astrology, 176
  planets, 267

Astronomical interpretation, 218

Atman, 167

B

Basilisk, 139

Bath, 123

Bear, 66

Beast, 250

Beja, 134

Bhagavad-Gita, 280

Biblical parallels, 163

Bibliography, 427

Birth dreams, 91, 92
  phantasy, 107
  theories, 76

Bisexual, 131

Black, 131
  and death, 102
  white and red, 368

Blood, 56, 106, 124, 131
  of lion, 212

Blowing, 135

Boehme, J., 170

Bones, 56, 82, 85

Boy, 225

Breaking bones, 85

Bride and bridegroom, 8, 11

Buddha, 211

Building lodges, 176

Bull, 250

C

Cabala, 176, 271

Camel, 66

Carpet, 224

Castration, 201

Catharsis, 377

Celestial Stone, 164

Censor, 24

Chemical science, 150

Christ, 165, 171

Christianity, early, 182

Circle, 185

Circumcision, 162

Cloth, 84

Clouds, 106, 124

Coitus, 99
  and grinding, 97
  and milling, 77

Color, 136
  symbols, 368

"Complexes," pathogenic, 26

Concentration, 290

Condensation, 31, 239

Confession, 174

Conscience, 155

Cooking, 143

Corruption, 163

Cross, 188

Crystal gazing, 247

D

Dasas, 66

Defecation, 106, 124

Deluge, 105

Dementia precox, 243

Desire, 344

Dew, 106, 124

Diabolic mysticism, 287

Dirt, 90

Dirty feet, 214
  work, 90

Dismemberment, 82, 83, 85, 200

Displacements, 31, 51, 55

Distillation, 152

Dogs, 250

Dragon, 51, 128, 143, 200, 211
  fight, 85

Dream, 14, 19
  and myth, 36

Dreams as wish phantasies, 23

Dream disfigurement, 24
  (unction), 305
  interpretation, 19
  logic of, 22

Dry, 167

Duality, 185

Dying, 298

E

Earth, 94

Education of will, 290

Egg, 116

Egyptian myths, 73
  stone, 116

Elders, 7

Emasculation, 74

Ethical gymnastics, 292

Ethics and psychoanalysis, 281

Eve, 75

Examination, 64, 87
  dreams, 49

Excreta, 106, 124

Exhibitionism, 57, 104

F

Face, 130

Fairy stories, 36
  tales, 246

Fama, 174

Family romance, 85, 109, 217

Father symbols, 60, 70

Feces and gold, 418

Feet, 214

Female and silver, 121

Fermentation, 152

Fire, 104, 130, 187

Flatus, 106

Flood, 105, 201, 320

Fludd, Robert, 175

Flying, 86

Folklore, psychoanalytical interpretation of, 45

Fornication, 97

Forty, 11, 140

Fountains, 89, 95

Four, 187

Freemasonry, 17, 173
  origin of, 175

Freud, 19, 23, 34

Frizius, 177

Frog, 225

Function of symbols, 234

G

Gabricum, 134

Garden, 5, 88, 96

Gäyömard, 71

Gestation, 108

Giants, 65

Gold, 149, 209
  and offal, 418
  and male, 121
  and silver, 164
  crosser, 174
  in alchemy, 113

Graduation dreams, 50

Grand lodge, 193, 200

Grave, 94, 130

Great work, 121

Green, 127
  lion, 127

Grinding and coitus, 97

Guild symbolism, 183

H

Hapso, 160

Hat, 87

Hate and love, 217

Head, 130

Hermes, 113

Hermetic, 16, 43
  art, 146
  interpretation, 119
  solution, 17

Hespendis, 128

Hesychiasts, 317

Hieroglyphic solution, 17

Hitchcock, Ethan Allen, 151

Homosexual, 57
  component, unconscious, 29

Homosexuality, 29

Homunculus, 124

Horse's belly, 140

Horus, 79

House, 93

I

Ibn Sina, 121

Imago, 224

Impotence, 65, 87, 90

Impregnation, metals, 121

Incest, 8, 58, 129

Incubus, 65

Indolence, 274

Infantile forms of sexuality, 34
  in dream, 34
  sexual theories, 76, 143
  sexual theories in alchemy, 137

Inquisitioness, 268

Interaction, 121

Intoxication, 250

Into-determination, 233, 241

Introversion, 233, 243
  effects of, 269
  neuroses, 243
  results of, 280

Iranæus, 166

Iranian myths, 71

Isis, 77

J

Jason, 66

Jesus, 165

Joshua, 66

Jumping, 86

Juniper tree, 82

K

Kabala--see Cabala

Kalevala, 81

Key to alchemy, 123

Killing as opposite of procreation, 99

King, 13

Knights of Red Cross, 174

Kronos, 74

Kundalini, 276

L

Latent dream content, 31

Lead, 114, 129, 180

Leade, Jane, 379

Lecanomancy, 247

Left, 52, 86

Libido, 204

Light, 318

Lion fight, 127

Lion, 3, 8, 85

Locked door, 130

Lohengrin, 217

Loss of paradise, 63

Love and hate, 217

Luna, 158

M

Magic, 16
  natural, 3

Magician, 288

Magnesia, 122

Mahlen, 99

Maier, Michael, 175

Male and gold, 121

Mandrahe, 144

Man eaters, 65

Manifest dream content, 31

Manure, 107, 124, 140

Marduk, 72

Marriage and milling, 98

Masonic symbolism, 201

Mass, 165

Masters, 115, 146

Masturbation, 88, 89

Meadow of felicity, 2

Mechthildis of Magdeburg, 316

Medea, 10, 128

Medical staff, 129

Mercurius, 131

Mercury, 115, 155

Mill, 7, 97, 98

Mill symbolisms, 99

Miller, 97, 98

Miracles, 224

Mithra, 72

Molere, 99

Moon, 188

Moon spittle, 165

Money, 106, 124

Morality, 290

Moral dispositions, 292

Mother earth, 94

Mucus, 106, 124

Multiple interpretation, 209

Myths, 15, 36, 328

Myth and dream, 36
  interpretation, 17, 19
  making, 81

Mystes, 373

Mysticism, 18, 164
  diabolic, 287

Mystics, 164

N

Nicodemus, 308

Nietzsche, 35

Nine, 108, 124, 130, 189

Number symbolisms, 184

O

Obstruction, 130

Odor, 215

OEdipus complex, 37, 226
  myth, 331

Omphalopsychites, 317

One, 185

Opposites, 344

Osiris, 77

Overdetermination, 32

P

Packing, 93

Palingenesis, 142

Parabola, 1

Parable, 14, 19
  origin of, 210
  psychoanalytic interpretation of, 43

Paracelsus, 117, 138, 171

Paradise, 73

Peacock, 125, 136

Pederasty, 144

Pelican, 213

Pelops, 83

Phallus, 130

Philosopher's egg, 16

Philosopher's stone, 114, 126

Planets, 118

Plotinus, 356

Poison, 106, 156

Pordage, 172

Pratum felicitatis, 2, 20, 47

Prima materia, 124, 152

Prison, 133

Procreation, 137
  and killing, 99
  charms, 99
  of metals, 115

