Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

       *       *       *       *       *


{357}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 207.]
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 15. 1853.
[Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition 5d.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                   Page

  Notes on Midland County Minstrelsy, by C. Clifton Barry     357
  Comet Superstitions in 1853                                 358
  The Old English Word "Belike"                               358
  Druses, by. T. J. Buckton                                   360
  FOLK LORE:--Legends of the County Clare                     360
  Shakspeare Correspondence, by Thomas Keightley, &c.         361
  Death on the Fingers                                        362

  MINOR NOTES:--On a "Custom of y^e Englyshe"--Epitaph
  at Crayford--The Font at Islip--"As good
  as a Play"                                                  363

  QUERIES:--

  Lovett of Astwell                                           363
  Oaths                                                       364
  The Electric Telegraph                                      364

  MINOR QUERIES:--Queries relating to the Porter
  Family--Lord Ball of Bagshot--Marcarnes--The
  Claymore--Sir William Chester, Kt.--Canning on
  the Treaty of 1824 between the Netherlands and
  Great Britain--Ireland a bastinadoed Elephant--Memorial
  Lines by Thomas Aquinas--"Johnson's
  turgid style"--Meaning of "Lane," &c.--Theobald
  le Botiller--William, fifth Lord Harrington--Singular
  Discovery of a Cannon-ball--Scottish Castles--Sneezing--
  Spenser's "Fairy Queen"--Poema del Cid--The Brazen Head     364

  MINOR QUERIES WITH ANSWERS:--"The Basilics"--Fire
  at Houlton--Michaelmas Goose                                367

  REPLIES:--

  Portraits of Hobbes and Letters of Hollar, by S. W.
  Singer                                                      368
  Parochial Libraries, by the Rev. Thos. Corser               369
  Battle of Villers en Couché, by H. L. Mansel, B.D., &c.     370
  Attainment of Majority, by Russell Gole and Professor
    De Morgan                                                 371
  Similarity of Idea in St. Luke and Juvenal                  372

  PHOTOGRAPHIC CORRESPONDENCE:--Mr. Sisson's developing
  Fluid--Dr. Diamond's Process for Albumenized
  Paper--Mr. Lyte's New Process                               373

  REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES:--Derivation of the Word
  "Island"--"Pætus and Arria"--"That Swinney"--The
  Six Gates of Troy--Milton's Widow--Boom--"Nugget"
  not an American Term--Soke Mill--Binometrical
  Verse--Watch-paper Inscription--Dotinchem--Reversible
  Names and Words--Detached Church Towers--Bishop
  Ferrar--"They shot him by the nine stone rig"--Punning
  Devices--Ashman's Park--"Crowns have their compass,"
  &c.--Ampers and--Throwing Old Shoes for Luck--Ennui         374

  MISCELLANEOUS:--

  Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                377
  Notices to Correspondents                                   377
  Advertisements                                              378

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes.

Notes on Midland County Minstrelsy.

It has often occurred to me that the old country folk-songs are as worthy
of a niche in your mausoleum as the more prosy lore to which you allot a
separate division. Why does not some one write a Minstrelsy of the Midland
Counties? There is ample material to work upon, and not yet spoiled by
dry-as-dust-ism. It would be vain, perhaps, to emulate the achievements of
the Scottish antiquary; but surely something might be done better than the
county _Garlands_, which, with a few honorable exceptions, are sad
abortions, mere channels for rhyme-struck editors. There is one peculiarity
of the midland songs and ballads which I do not remember to have seen
noticed, viz. their singular affinity to those of Scotland, as exhibited in
the collections of Scott and Motherwell. I have repeatedly noticed this,
even so far south as Gloucestershire. Of the old Staffordshire ballad which
appeared in your columns some months ago, I remember to have heard two
distinct versions in Warwickshire, all approaching more or less to the
Scottish type:

 "Hame came our gude man at e'en."

Now whence this curious similarity in the vernacular ideology of districts
so remote? Are all the versions from one original, distributed by the
wandering minstrels, and in course of time adapted to new localities and
dialects? and, if so, whence came the original, from England or Scotland?
Here is a nut for DR. RIMBAULT, or some of your other correspondents
learned in popular poetry. Another instance also occurs to me. Most of your
readers are doubtless familiar with the pretty little ballad of "Lady Anne"
in the _Border Minstrelsy_, which relates so plaintively the murder of the
two innocent babes, and the ghostly retribution to the guilty mother. Other
versions are given by Kinloch in his _Ancient Scottish Ballads_, and by
Buchan in the _Songs of the North_, the former laying the scene in London:

 "There lived a ladye in London,
    All alone and alonie,
  She's gane wi' bairn to the clerk's son,
    Down by the green-wood side sae bonny."

{358}

And the latter across the Atlantic:

 "The minister's daughter of New York,
    Hey with the rose and the Lindie, O,
  Has fa'en in love wi' her father's clerk,
    A' by the green burn sidie, O."

A Warwickshire version, on the contrary, places the scene on our own
"native leas:"

 "There was a lady lived on lea,
    All alone, alone O,
  Down the greenwood side went she,
    Down the greenwood side, O.

 "She set her foot all on a thorn[1],
    Down the greenwood side, O,
  There she had two babies born,
    All alone, alone O.

 "O she had nothing to lap them in,
    All alone, alone O,
  But a white appurn and that was thin,
    Down the greenwood side, O," &c.

Here there are no less than four versions of the same ballad, each
differing materially from the other, but all bearing unmistakeable marks of
a common origin. It would be interesting to know the process by which this
was managed.

C. CLIFTON BARRY.

[Footnote 1: In one of the Scottish ballads the same idea is more prettily
expressed "leaned until a brier."]

       *       *       *       *       *

COMET SUPERSTITIONS IN 1853.

From the 19th of August to the present time that brilliant comet, which was
first seen by M. Klinkerfues, at Göttingen, on the 10th of June last, has
been distinctly visible here, and among the ignorant classes its appearance
has caused no little alarm. The reason of this we shall briefly explain.

During the past fifty-five years the Maltese have grievously suffered on
three different occasions; firstly, by the revolution of 1798, which was
followed by the plague in 1813; and lastly, by the cholera in 1837. In
these visitations, all of which are in the recollection of the oldest
inhabitants, thirty thousand persons are supposed to have perished.

Mindful as these aged people are of these sad bereavements, and declaring
as they do that they were all preceded by some "curious signs" in the
heavens which foretold their approach, men's minds have become excited,
and, reason as one may, still the impression now existing that some fatal
harm is shortly to follow will not be removed.

A few of the inhabitants, more terrified than their neighbours, have
fancied the comet's tail to be a fiery sword, and therefore predict a
general war in Europe, and consequent fall of the Ottoman Empire. But as
this statement is evidently erroneous, we still live in great hopes,
notwithstanding all previous predictions and "curious signs," that the
comet will pass away without bringing in its train any grievous calamity.

By the following extracts, taken from some leading journals of the day, it
will be seen that the Maltese are not alone in entertaining a superstitious
dread of a comet's appearance. The Americans, Prussians, Spaniards, and
Turks come in the same list, which perhaps may be increased by your
correspondents:

    "The Madrid journals announce that the appearance of the comet has
    excited great alarm in that city, as it is considered a symptom of
    divine wrath, and a presage of war, pestilence, and affliction for
    humanity."--Vide _Galignani's Messenger_ of August 31, 1853.

    "The entire appearance (of the comet) is brilliant and dazzling; and
    while it engrosses the attention and investigation of the scientific,
    it excites the alarm of the superstitious, who, as in ancient times,
    regard it as the concomitant of pestilence and the herald of
    war."--Vide New York correspondence of _The Sun_, Aug. 24, 1853.

    "The splendid comet now visible after sun-set on the western horizon,
    has attracted the attention of every body here. The public impression
    is, that this celestial phenomenon is to be considered as a sign of
    war; and their astrologers, to whom appeal is made for an
    interpretation, make the most absurd declarations: and I have been
    laughed at by very intelligent Turks, when I ventured to persuade them
    that great Nature's laws do not care about troubles here below."--Vide
    Turkish correspondence of _The Herald_, Aug. 25, 1853.

    "The comet which has lately been visible has served a priest not far
    from Warsaw with materials for a very curious sermon. After having
    summoned his congregation together, although it was neither Sunday nor
    festival, and shown them the comet, he informed them that this was the
    same star that had appeared to the Magi at the birth of our Saviour,
    and that it was only visible now in the Russian empire. Its appearance
    on this occasion was to intimate to the Russian eagle, that the time
    was now come for it to spread out its wings, and embrace all mankind in
    one orthodox and sanctifying church. He showed them the star now
    standing immediately over Constantinople, and explained that the dull
    light of the nucleus indicated its sorrow at the delay of the Russian
    army in proceeding to its destination."--Vide Berlin correspondence of
    _The Times_.

W. W.

Malta.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OLD ENGLISH WORD "BELIKE."

The word _belike_, much used by old writers, but now almost obsolete, even
among the poor, seems to have been but very imperfectly understood--as far
as regards its original meaning and derivation. Most persons understand it
to be equivalent, or nearly so, to _very likely_, _in all likelihood_,
_perhaps_, or, ironically, _forsooth_; and in that {359} opinion they are
not far wrong. It occurs in this sense in numerous passages in Shakspeare;
for instance:

 "Some merry mocking lord, _belike_."--_Love's Labour's Lost._

 "O then, _belike_, she was old and gentle."--_Henry V._

 "_Belike_, this show imports the argument."--_Hamlet._

Such also was Johnson's opinion of the word, for he represents it to be
"from _like_, as by _likelihood_;" and assigns to it the meanings of
"probably, likely, perhaps." However, I venture to say, in opposition to so
great an authority, that there is no immediate connexion whatever between
the words _belike_ and _likely_, with the exception of the accidental
similarity in the syllable _like_.

We find three different meanings attached to the same form _like_ in
English, viz. _like_, similis; _to like_, i. e. to be pleased with; and the
present word _belike_, whose real meaning I propose to explain.

The first is from the A.-S. _lic_, _gelic_; Low Germ. _lick_; Dutch
_gelyk_; Dan. _lig_ (which is said to take its meaning from _lic_, a
corpse, _i. e._ an essence), which word also forms our English termination
-_ly_, sometimes preserving its old form _like_; as _manly_ or _manlike_,
_Godly_ or _Godlike_; A.-S. _werlic_, _Godlic_; to which the Teut.
adjectival termination _lich_ is analogous.

The second form, _to like_, i. e. to be pleased with, is quite distinct
from the former (though it has been thought akin to it on the ground that
_simili similis placet_); and is derived from the A.-S. _lician_, which is
from _lic_, or _lac_, a gift; Low Germ. _licon_; Dutch _lyken_.

The third form, the compound term _belike_ (mostly used adverbially) is
from the A.-S. _licgan_, _belicgan_, which means, to lie by, near, or
around; to attend, accompany; Low Germ. and Dutch, _liggen_; Germ.
_liegen_. In the old German, we have _licken_, _ligin_, _liggen_--_jacere_;
and _geliggen_--_se habere_; which last seems to be the exact counterpart
of our old English _belike_; and this it was which first suggested to me
what I conceive to be its true meaning. We find the simple and compound
words in juxtaposition in _Otfridi Evang._, lib. i. cap. 23. 110. in vol.
i. p. 221. of Schilter's _Thes. Teut._:


 "Thoh er nu biliban si,
    Farames thoh thar er si
  Zi thiu'z nu sar giligge,
    Thoh er bigraben ligge."

 "Etsi vero is (Lazarus) jam mortuus est,
    Eamus tamen ubi is sit,
  Quomodo id jam se habeat (quo in statu sint res ejus),
    Etiamsi jam sepultus jaceat."


On which Schilter remarks:

    "Zi thiu'z nu sar giligge quomodo se res habeat, hodie _standi_ verbo
    utimur,--wie es stehe, zustehe."

We thus see that the radical meaning of the word _belike_ is to lie or be
near, to attend; from which it came to express the _simple condition_, or
_state of a thing_: and it is in this latter sense that the word is used as
an adverbial or rather an interjectional expression, when it may be
rendered, _it may be so_, _so it is_, _is it so_, &c. Sometimes ironically,
sometimes expressing chance, &c.; in the course of time it became
superseded by the more modern term _perhaps_. Instances of similar
elliptical expressions are common at the present day, and will readily
suggest themselves: the modern _please_, used for entreaty, is analogous.

It is not a little singular that this account of the word _belike_ enables
us to understand a passage in _Macbeth_, which has been unintelligible to
all the commentators and readers of Shakspeare down to the present day. I
allude to the following, which stands in my first folio, Act IV. Sc. 3.,
thus:

 "    .    .    .    .     What I am truly
  Is thine, and my poor countries, to command:
  Whither indeed before they heere approach,
  Old Seyward, with ten thousand warlike men,
  Already at a point, was setting foorth:
  Now we'll together, and the chance of goodnesse
  Be like our warranted quarrel."

Now it is not easy to see why Malcolm should wish that "chance" should "be
_like_," i. e. similar to, their "warranted quarrel;" inasmuch as that
quarrel was most unfortunate and disastrous. Chance is either fortunate or
unfortunate. The epithet _just_, which might apply to the quarrel in
question, is utterly irreconcilable with _chance_. Still this sense has
pleased the editors, and they have made "of goodnesse" a precatory and
interjectional expression. Surely it is far more probable that the poet
wrote _belike_ (_belicgan_, _geliggen_) as one word, and that the meaning
of the passage is simply "May good fortune attend our enterprise." MR.
COLLIER'S old corrector passes over this difficulty in silence, doubtless
owing to the circumstance that the word was well understood in his time.

I have alluded to the word _like_ as expressive in the English language of
three distinct ideas, and in the A.-S. of at least four; is it not possible
that these meanings, which, as we find the words used, are undoubtedly
widely distinct, having travelled to us by separate channels, may
nevertheless have had originally one and the same source? I should be glad
to elicit the opinion of some one of your more learned correspondents as to
whether the unused Hebrew [Hebrew: YLN] may not be that source.

H. C. K.

---- Rectory, Hereford.

       *       *       *       *       *

{360}

DRUSES.

Comparing the initiatory undertaking or covenant of the Druses, as
represented by Col. Churchill in his very important disclosures (_Lebanon_,
ii. 244.), with the original Arabic, and the German translation of Eichhorn
(_Repertorium für Bibl. und Morgenland_, lib. xii. 222.), I find that the
following additions made by Col. Churchill (or De Sacy, whom he follows)
are not in the Arabic, but appear to be glosses or amplifications. For
example:

    "I put my trust and confidence in our Lord Hakem, the One, the Eternal,
    without attribute and without number."

    "That in serving Him he will serve no other, whether past, present, or
    to come."

    "To the observance of which he sacredly binds himself by the present
    contract and engagement, should he ever reveal the least portion of it
    to others."

    "The most High, King of Kings, [the creator] of the heaven and the
    earth."

    "Mighty and irresistible [force]."

Col. Churchill, although furnishing the amplest account which has yet
appeared of the Druse religion, secretly held under the colour of
Mahometanism, has referred very sparingly to the catechisms of this sect,
which, being for the especial instruction of the two degrees of
monotheists, constitute the most authentic source of accurate knowledge of
their faith and practices, and which are to be found in the original
Arabic, with a German translation in Eichhorn's _Repertorium_ (xii. 155.
202.). In the same work (xiv. 1., xvii. 27.), Bruns (Kennicott's colleague)
has furnished from Abulfaragius a biography of the Hakem; and Adler (xv.
265.) has extracted, from various oriental sources, historical notices of
the founder of the Druses.

The subject is peculiarly interesting at the present juncture, as it is
probable that the Chinese religious movement, partaking of a peculiar kind
of Christianity, may have originated amongst the Druses, who appear from
Col. Churchill to have been in expectation of some such movement in India
or China in connexion with a re-appearance of the Hakem.

T. J. BUCKTON.

Birmingham.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLK LORE.

_Legends of the County Clare._--_How Ussheen_ (_Ossian_) _visited the Land
of_ "_Thiernah Ogieh_" (_the Country of perpetual Youth_).--Once upon a
time, when Ussheen was in the full vigour of his youth, it happened that,
fatigued with the chace, and separated from his companions, he stretched
himself under a tree to rest, and soon fell asleep. "Awaking with a start,"
he saw a lady, richly clothed and of more than mortal beauty, gazing on
him; nor was it long until she made him understand that a warmer feeling
than mere curiosity had attracted her; nor was Ussheen long in responding
to it. The lady then explained that she was not of mortal birth, and that
he who wooed an immortal bride must be prepared to encounter dangers such
as would appal the ordinary race of men. Ussheen, without hesitation,
declared his readiness to encounter any foe, mortal or immortal, that might
be opposed to him in her service. The lady then declared herself to be the
queen of "Thiernah Ogieh," and invited him to accompany her thither and
share her throne. They then set out on their journey, one in all respects
similar to that undertaken by Thomas the Rhymer and the queen of Faerie,
and having overcome all obstacles, arrived at "the land of perpetual
youth," where all the delights of the terrestrial paradise were thrown open
to Ussheen, to be enjoyed with only one restriction. A broad flat stone was
pointed out to him in one part of the palace garden, on which he was
forbidden to stand, under penalty of the heaviest misfortune. One day,
however, finding himself near the fatal stone, the temptation to stand on
it became irresistible, and he yielded to it, and immediately found himself
in full view of his native land, the existence of which he had forgotten
from the moment he had entered the kingdom of Thiernah Ogieh. But alas! how
was it changed from that country he had left only a few days since, for
"the strong had become weak," and "the brave become cowards," while
oppression and violence held undisputed sway through land. Overcome with
grief, he hastened to the the queen to beg that he might be restored to his
country without delay, that he might endeavour to apply some remedy to its
misfortunes. The queen's prophetic skill made her aware of Ussheen's
transgression of her commands before he spoke, and she exerted all her
persuasive powers to prevail upon him to give up his desire to return to
Erin, but in vain. She then asked him how long he supposed he had been
absent from his native land, and on his answering "thrice seven days," she
amazed him by declaring that three times thrice seven years had elapsed
since his arrival at the kingdom of Thiernah Ogieh; and though Time had no
power to enter that land, it would immediately assert its dominion over him
if he left it. At length she persuaded him to promise that he would return
to his country for only one day, and then come back to dwell with her for
ever; and she gave him a jet-black horse of surpassing beauty, from whose
back she charged him on no account to alight, or at all events not to allow
the bridle to fall from his hand. She farther endued him with wisdom and
knowledge far surpassing that of men. Having mounted his fairy steed, he
soon found himself approaching his former home; and as he journeyed he met
a man {361} driving before him a horse, across whose back was thrown a sack
of corn: the sack having fallen a little to one side, the man asked Ussheen
to assist him in balancing it properly; Ussheen instantly stooped from his
horse, and catching the sack in his right hand, gave it such a heave that
it fell over on the other side. Annoyed at his mistake, he forgot the
injunctions of his bride, and sprung from his horse to lift the sack from
the ground, letting the bridle fall from his hand at the same time:
instantly the horse struck fire from the ground with his hoofs, and
uttering a neigh louder than thunder, vanished; at the same instant his
curling locks fell from Ussheen's head, darkness closed over his beaming
eyes, the more than mortal strength forsook his limbs, and, a feeble
helpless old man, he stretched forth his hands seeking some one to lead
him: but the mental gifts bestowed on him by his immortal bride did not
leave him, and, though unable to serve his countrymen with his sword, he
bestowed upon them the advice and instruction which flowed from wisdom
greater than that of mortals.

FRANCIS ROBERT DAVIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHAKSPEARE CORRESPONDENCE.

_On "Run-awayes" in Romeo and Juliet._--

 "Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steedes,
  Towards Phoebus' lodging such a wagoner
  As Phaeton would whip you to the west,
  And bring in cloudie night immediately.
  Spred thy close curtaine, Love-performing night,
  That run-awayes eyes may wincke, and Romeo
  Leape to these armes, vntalkt of and vnseene."

Your readers will no doubt exclaim, is not this question already settled
for ever, if not by MR. SINGER'S substitution of _rumourer's_, at least by
that of R. H. C., viz. _rude day's_? I must confess that I thought the
former so good, when it first appeared in these pages, that nothing more
was wanted; yet this is surpassed by the suggestion of R. H. C. As
conjectural emendations, they may rank with any that Shakspeare's text has
been favoured with; in short, the poet might undoubtedly have written
either the one or the other.

But this is not the question. The question is, did he write the passage as
it stands in the first folio, which I have copied above? Subsequent
consideration has satisfied me that he did. I find the following passage in
the _Merchant of Venice_, Act II. Sc. 6.:

             "---- but come at once,
  For the close night doth play the run-away,
  And we are staid for at Bassanio's feast."

Is it very difficult to believe that the poet who called the departing
_night_ a _run-away_ would apply the same term to the _day_ under similar
circumstances?

Surely the first folio is a much more correctly printed book than many of
Shakspeare's editors and critics would have us believe.

H. C. K.

---- Rectory, Hereford.

The Word "_clamour" in "The Winter's Tale_."--MR. KEIGHTLEY complains (Vol
viii., p. 241.) that some observations of mine (p. 169.) on the word
_clamour_, in _The Winter's Tale_, are precisely similar to his own in Vol.
vii., p. 615. Had they been so in reality, I presume our Editor would not
have inserted them; but I think they contain something farther, suggesting,
as they do, the A.-S. origin of the word, and going far to prove that our
modern _calm_, the older _clame_, the Shakspearian _clamour_, the more
frequent _clem_, Chaucer's _clum_, &c., all of them spring from the same
source, viz. the A.-S. _clam_ or _clom_, which means a band, clasp,
bandage, chain, prison; from which substantive comes the verb _clæmian_, to
clam, to stick or glue together, to bind, to imprison.

If I passed over in silence those points on which MR. KEIGHTLEY and myself
agreed, I need scarcely assure him that it was for the sake of brevity, and
not from any want of respect to him.

I may remark, by the way, on a conjecture of MR. KEIGHTLEY'S (Vol. vii., p.
615.), that perhaps, in _Macbeth_, Act V. Sc. 5., Shakspeare might have
written "till famine _clem_ thee," and not, as it stands in the first
folio, "till famine _cling_ thee," that he is indeed, as he says, "in the
region of conjecture:" _cling_ is purely A.-S., as he will find in
Bosworth, "_Clingan_, to wither, pine, to cling or shrink up; marcescere."

H. C. K.

---- Rectory, Hereford.

_Three Passages in "Measure for Measure._"--H. C. K. has a treacherous
memory, or rather, what I believe to be the truth, he, like myself, has not
a complete Shakspeare apparatus. COLLIER'S first edition surely cannot be
in his library, or he would have known that Warburton, long ago, read
_seared_ for _feared_, and that the same word appears in Lord Ellesmere's
copy of the first folio, the correction having been made, as MR. COLLIER
remarks, while the sheet was at press. I however assure H. C. K. that I
regard his correction as perfectly original. Still I have my doubts if
_seared_ be the poet's word, for I have never met it but in connexion with
hot iron; and I should be inclined to prefer _sear_ or _sere_; but this
again is always physically _dry_, and not metaphorically so, and I fear
that the true word is not to be recovered.

I cannot consent to go back with H. C. K. to the Anglo-Saxon for a sense of
_building_, which I do not think it ever bore, at least not in our poet's
time. His quotation from the "Jewel House," &c. is not to the point, for
the context shows that "a building word" is a word or promise that will
{362} set me a-building, _i. e._ writing. After all I see no difficulty in
"the _all-building_ law;" it means the law that builds, maintains, and
repairs the whole social edifice, and is well suited to Angelo, whose
object was to enhance the favour he proposed to grant.

Again, if H. C. K. had looked at COLLIER'S edit., he would have seen that
in Act I. Sc. 2., _princely_ is the reading of the second folio, and not a
modern conjecture. If he rejects this authority, he must read a little
farther on _perjury_ for _penury_. As to the Italian _prenze_, I cannot
receive it. I very much doubt Shakspeare's knowledge of Italian, and am
sure that he would not, if he understood the word, use it as an adjective.
MR. COLLIER'S famed corrector reads with Warburton _priestly_, and
substitutes _garb_ for _guards_, a change which convinces me (if proof were
wanting) that he was only a guesser like ourselves, for it is plain, from
the previous use of the word _living_, that _guards_ is the right word.

THOS. KEIGHTLEY.

_Shakspeare's Works with a Digest of all the Readings_ (Vol. viii., pp. 74,
170.).--I fully concur with your correspondent's suggestion, and beg to
suggest to MR. HALLIWELL that his splendid monograph edition would be
greatly improved if he would undertake the task. As his first volume
contains but one play (_Tempest_), it may not be too late to adopt the
suggestion, so that every variation of the text (in the briefest possible
form) might be seen at a glance.

ESTE.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEATH ON THE FINGERS.

    "Isaac saith, I am old, and I know not the day of my death (_Gen._
    xxvii. 2.); no more doth any, though never so young. As soon (saith the
    proverb) goes the _lamb's_ skin to the market as that of the _old
    sheep_; and the Hebrew saying is, There be as many _young_ skulls in
    Golgotha as _old_; young men _may_ die (for none have or can make any
    agreement with the grave, or any covenant with death, _Isa._ xxviii.
    15. 18.), but old men _must_ die. 'Tis the grant statute of heaven
    (_Heb._ ix. 27.). _Senex quasi seminex_, an old man is half dead; yea,
    now, at fifty years old, we are accounted three parts dead; this lesson
    we may learn from our fingers' ends, the dimensions whereof demonstrate
    this to us, beginning at the end of the little finger, representing our
    childhood, rising up to a little higher at the end of the ring-finger,
    which betokens our youth; from it to the top of the middle finger,
    which is the highest point of our elevated hand, and so most aptly
    represents our middle age, when we come to our [Greek: akmê], or height
    of stature and strength; then begins our declining age, from thence to
    the end of our forefinger which amounts to a little fall, but from
    thence to the end of the thumb there is a great fall, to show, when man
    goes down (in his old age) he falls fast and far, and breaks (as we
    say) with a witness. Now, if our very fingers' end do read us such a
    divine lecture of mortality, oh, that we could take it out, and have it
    perfect (as we say) on our fingers' end, &c.

    "To old men death is _præ januis_, stands before their door, &c. Old
    men have (_pedem in cymbâ Charonis_) one foot in the grave already; and
    the Greek word [Greek: gêrôn] (an old man) is derived from [Greek: para
    to eis gên oran], which signifies a looking towards the ground;
    decrepit age goes stooping and grovelling, as groaning to the grave. It
    doth not only expect death, but oft solicits it."--Christ. Ness's
    _Compleat History and Mystery of the Old and New Test._, fol. Lond.
    1690, chap. xii. p. 227.

From _The Barren Tree_, a sermon on Luke xiii. 7., preached at Paul's
Cross, Oct. 26, 1623, by Thos. Adams:

    "Our bells ring, our chimneis smoake, our fields rejoice, our children
    dance, ourselues sing and play, _Jovis omnia plena_. But when
    righteousnesse hath sowne and comes to reape, here is no haruest;
    [Greek: ouk euriskô], I finde none. And as there was neuer lesse
    wisdome in Greece then in time of the Seven Wise Men, so neuer lesse
    pietie among vs, then now, when vpon good cause most is expected. When
    the sunne is brightest the stars be darkest: so the cleerer our light,
    the more gloomy our life with the deeds of darkness. The Cimerians,
    that live in a perpetuall mist, though they deny a sunne, are not
    condemned of impietie; but Anaxogoras, that saw the sunne and yet
    denied it, is not condemned of ignorance, but of impietie. Former times
    were like Leah, bleare-eyed, but fruitful; the present, like Rachel,
    faire, but barren. We give such acclamation to the Gospell, that we
    quite forget to observe the law. As vpon some solenne festivall, the
    bells are rung in all steeples, but then the clocks are tyed vp: there
    is a great vntun'd confusion and clangor, but no man knowes how the
    time passeth. So in this vniuersall allowance of libertie by the
    Gospell (which indeed rejoyceth our hearts, had we the grace of sober
    vsage), the clocks that tel vs how the time passes, Truth and
    Conscience, that show the bounded vse and decent forme of things, are
    tyed vp, and cannot be heard. Still _Fructum non invenio_, I finde no
    fruits. I am sorry to passe the fig-tree in this plight: but as I finde
    it, so I must leave it, till the Lord mend it."--Pp. 39, 40., 4to.
    Lond. 1623.

BALLIOLENSIS.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Notes.

_On a "Custom of y^e Englyshe._"--When a more than ordinarily doubtful
matter is offered us for credence, we are apt to inquire of the teller if
he "sees any green" in our optics, accompanying the query by an elevation
of the right eyelid with the forefinger. Now, regarding this merely as a
"fast" custom, I marvelled greatly at finding a similar action noted by
worthy Master Blunt, as conveying to his mind an analogous meaning. I can
scarcely credit its antiquity; but what other meaning can I understand from
the episode he {363} relates? He had been trying to pass himself off as a
native, but--

    "The third day, in the morning, I, prying up and down alone, met a
    Turke, who, in Italian, told me--Ah! are you an Englishman, and with a
    _kind of malicious posture laying his forefinger under his eye_,
    methought he had the lookes of a designe."--_Voyage in the Levant,
    performed by Mr. Henry Blunt_, p. 60.: Lond. 1650.

--a silent, but expressive, "posture," tending to eradicate any previously
formed opinion of the verdantness of Mussulmans!

R. C. WARDE.

Kidderminster.

_Epitaph at Crayford._--I send the following lines, if you think them
worthy an insertion in your Epitaphiana: a friend saw them in the
churchyard of Crayford, Kent.

    "To the Memory of PETER IZOD, who was thirty-five years clerk of this
    parish, and always proved himself a pious and mirthful man.

     "The life of this clerk was just three score and ten,
      During half of which time he had sung out Amen.
      He married when young, like other young men;
      His wife died one day, so he chaunted Amen.
      A second he took, she departed,--what then?
      He married, and buried a third with Amen.
      Thus his joys and his sorrows were treble, but then
      His voice was deep bass, as he chaunted Amen.
      On the horn he could blow as well as most men,
      But his horn was exalted in blowing Amen.
      He lost all his wind after threescore and ten,
      And here with three wives he waits till again
      The trumpet shall rouse him to sing out Amen."

Tradition reports these verses to have been composed by some curate of the
parish.

QUÆSTOR.

_The Font at Islip._--

    "In the garden is placed a relic of some interest--the font in which it
    is said King Edward the Confessor was baptised at Islip. The block of
    stone in which the basin of immersion is excavated, is unusually massy.
    It is of an octangular shape, and the outside is adorned by tracery
    work. The interior diameter of the basin is thirty inches, and the
    depth twenty. The whole, with the pedestal, which is of a piece with
    the rest, is five feet high, and bears the following imperfect
    inscription:

     'This sacred Font Saint Edward first _receavd_,
        From Womb to Grace, from Grace to Glory went,
      His virtuous life. To this _fayre_ Isle _beqveth'd_,
        _Prase_ ... and to _vs_ but lent.
      Let this remaine, the Trophies of his Fame,
      A King baptizd from hence a Saint became.'

    "Then is inscribed:

     'This Fonte came from the Kings Chapel_l_ in Islip.'"--Extracted from
         the _Beauties of England and Wales_, title "Oxfordshire," p. 454.

In the gardens at Kiddington there--

    "was an old font wherein it is said Edward the Confessor was baptized,
    being brought thither from an old decayed chapel at Islip (the
    birth-place of that religious prince), where it had been put up to an
    indecent use, as well as the chapel."--Extracted from _The English
    Baronets, being a Historical and Genealogical Account of their
    Families_, published 1727.

The Viscounts Montague, and consequently the Brownes of Kiddington, traced
their descent from this king through Joan de Beaufort, daughter of John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.

C. B.

"_As good as a Play._"--I note this very ordinary phrase as having royal
origin or, at least, authority. It was a remark of King Charles II., when
he revived a practice of his predecessors, and attended the sittings of the
House of Lords.

The particular occasion was the debate, then interesting to him, on Lord
Roos' Divorce Bill.

W. T. M.

Hong Kong.

       *       *       *       *       *


Queries.

LOVETT OF ASTWELL.

